April 1988
Number 46

FEATURES
The Boys of Spring

12

A Computer Sports Survey / David & Johnny Wilson

Dungeon Master

18

FTL's Adventure Game Reviewed / Hosea Battles Jr.

World Games

20

Spanning the Globe . / James Trunzo

Police Quest

22

Dusting the Death Angel / Michael S. Chaut

Fog of War

24

Designers Discuss Fog of War in Computer Games

Ferrari Formula One

28

A Sneak Preview / Russell Sipe

Sherlock

30

Scorpion's Tale Looks at Infocom's Latest / Scorpia

Skate or Die!

34

Sidewalk Surfin' Safari / Yung Min Choi

Strike Fleet

36

The Naval Task Force Simulation / M. Evan Brooks

Ramparts and Rodents

40

Demon Stalkers and Gauntlet Reviewed / Yung Min Choi

Sons of Liberty

42

SSI's Revolutionary War Game Reviewed / Wyatt Lee

Deathlord

44

Deathlord Meets Scorpia / Scorpia

Knight Orc

46

An Adventure Game from Rainbird / Alan Roberts

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek
Letters
Inside The Industry
Reader Input Device
CGW Hall of Fame
Game Ratings

4
7
8
55
55
56

TAKING A PEEK
Accolade
20813 Stevens Creek Blvd
Cupertino, CA 95014

power). C-64/128 ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #1.

POWER AT SEA: In simulating
the Battle of Leyte Gulf (October 2327, 1944), Accolade has chosen to
use a hybrid action/strategy approach. The large U. S. fleet has
been abstracted into three ships (battleship, carrier, and troop carrier). Action sequences allow players to fly
fighter missions, engage in
ship-to-ship surface combat, man antiaircraft guns, and use the ship's
main guns to bombard enemy
bases. Strategy sequences involve
monitoring communications, navigating, and determining optimal battle
plans (i.e. use of air power or surface

Cosmi
415 N. Figueroa
Wilmington, CA 90744
SUPER HUEY II: This sequel to
the realistic Super Huey offers six
scenarios which use the versatile
helicopter in distinctive ways. These
include combat scenarios where the
player must dogfight against another
copter or engage surface ships in
the Middle East; fight brush fires in
Southern California or become the
chopper pilot version of Red Adair
during an oil blaze; or experience the
bizarre atmosphere of the Bermuda

Triangle. C-64/128 ($19.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #2.
Data East
470 Needles Drive
San Jose, CA 95112
Q*BERT: Poor Q*bert, he has successfully made the switch from coinop arcade to home computer, but
still has to face those "@!#?&"
snakes, marbles, and beasties. At a
budget price, he may be changing
the colors of pyramids on your computer screen in the near future. C64/128 ($9.95). Circle Reader Service Card #3.
TNK III: From the arcade screen to
your screen, another budget-priced
coin-op conversion puts the player
in charge of an experimental super
tank. As an armored juggernaut, the
(Continued on page 6)

(Continued from page 4)

TAKING A
PEEK
player can crunch enemy tanks, antitank guns, and guerilla infantry. C64/128 ($9.95). Circle Reader Service Card #4.
DataSoft
19808 Nordhoff Place
Chatsworth, CA 91311
HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER:
Navigate "Gorshkov's Railroad" and
attempt to evade detection by both
NATO and Soviet forces in this computer game based on Tom Clancy's
bestselling novel. The graphics, particularly the contour map of the

seabed which represents a sonargenerated map, are pleasant and the
icon-driven menu is user-friendly.
Weapon choices, sonar activity,
analysis of hydrophonics, choices of
route, use of periscope and ESM
(Electronic Surveillance Manual) to
gather intelligence, and power/drive
options provide the decision points.
Amiga, Atari ST and IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #5.
Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404
RETURN TO ATLANTIS: This
long-awaited adventure game combines elements of the Atlantis
mythos, "Sea Hunt," and "James
Bond" in its storyline. The player becomes an agent of "The Foundation," a group that functions like
Greenpeace with teeth. Agents are
(Continued on page 51)

HARDENING OF
THE ART OF WAR
Thank you for publishing
your recent review of the Ancient Art of War at Sea by
Regan Carey. I am pleased
to find that he enjoyed the
product. I am writing to address an issue that he raised
in reference to the lack of
hard disk support by Broderbund, specifically for this
product.

Ancient Art of War/War at
Sea floppy disk is in drive A
and the C prompt is displayed on the screen (if it
isn't, type C: and press
ENTER, then type WAR or
WAS and press ENTER.
The copy protection
scheme for the Ancient Art

cept for adventure and wargames, are for the C-64.
You may not know this, but
the Apple versions of some
games do differ from the C64.
Another thing, whatever
happened to good old
"reviews?" You know, the

Atari 1040 ST do not play
on the Mega ST (according
to some of our readers).
Should we have Apple II
with speed-up card
reviews? There are simply
too many variations out
there for a non-machine
specific magazine to cover.

Both the Ancient Art of
War at Sea and its predecessor, the Ancient Art of War,
can be installed on a hard
disk by the user. Through
an oversight, we did not include the instructions for
this procedure in the
manual, so I can understand how a user might assume that the program does
not support the hard disk.
To remedy this, we are including an addendum to
both manuals describing the
hard disk installation procedure in every new package
that is being shipped. The
following is the text for the
addendum (combined here
for both versions):
INSTRUCTIONS
FOR HARD DISK
INSTALLATION
If your computer has a
hard disk, you can install
the Ancient Art of War/War
at Sea on it by performing
the following steps:
1. Start up your computer
using DOS 2.0 or higher.
2. Set your active drive and
the current working directory to the location where
you would like to install the
Ancient Art of War/War at
Sea (for example C:\AAW or
C:\AAWS). If you need more
information on creating or
using directories, please consult your DOS manual.
3. Insert the Ancient Art of
War/War at Sea disk in drive
A and close the drive door.
4. Type COPY A:*.* and
press ENTER. This will copy
all of the files from the Ancient Art of War/War at Sea
disk onto your hard disk.
To run the program from
the hard disk, make sure the

machine categories themselves. Should we have an
IBM with CGA card
column, IBM with EGA
column, and IBM with VGA
column? Some games
which play on the Amiga
1000 do not work with the
Amiga 2000 and some
games which play on the

Further, while our mix of
coverage is not perfect, we
do not review C-64 games
to the exclusion of others.

of War/War at Sea requires
that the original floppy disk
be in drive A when the
program initially starts up.
Once the title page is displayed, you may remove the
floppy disk from drive A.
Ed Badasov
Broderbund Software
San Rafael, CA

Too Much is Not
Enough
I am extremely disappointed in the last several issues of COW. They have all
been very dull. Each issue always has the same things in
it: a several page review of
at least two wargames and a
several page review of an adventure game, such as the
three page review of
Wizard's Crown II [Eternal
Dagger] in the October '87
issue. That large review
gave away many things that
are fun for players to discover on their own.
I'm disappointed that the
machine specific columns
are gone. You say that
games are now released on
four or more machines, but
all the reviews you print, ex-

two or three paragraphs that
gave the plot, graphic and
sound quality, and whether
the game was good or bad.
All this magazine has is two
to three page reviews that
tell too much! The increase
in price has not brought an
increase in quality.
Bill Elvey
Grand Rapids, MI

We believe that our
audience is composed of
wargamers, strategy
garners, adventure gamers,
and action gamers. You are
correct to note that we try
to have a similar mix of
long reviews in each issue.
That is part of our editorial
policy in an attempt to
meet all of our subscribers'
needs, regardless of what

the "theme" of the issue is.
You are also correct that

we do not intend to revive
the machine specific
columns. To do so would
steal space from those who
are more interested in
game concept, content,
strategy, and design than
appearance, sound, and interface. We really do know
that games play with slight
differences from machine to
machine, but they also play
differently within the

As for "good old reviews,"
we simply do not believe
that two to three
paragraphs is adequate
coverage on most games
(although that may be all
we have room for in some
of our survey articles). As
for giving too much away,
we really do try to warn
readers when we are getting into hint territory. In
fact, "Scorpion's Tale" and
"Scorpion's Mail" are both
hint columns with no apol-

ogy offered.

More Filling,
Looks Great!
I am a loyal reader of Computer Gaming World and I
think it is the best computer
magazine on the market
today. This is probably a little late, but the cover looks
great! Although I was a little
surprised when the price
went up, it didn't stop me
from the buying of your
magazine. I make nearly
99.9% of my game purchases after reading about it
in a review or article. And I
always find that the games
are as good as the review
says it is.
Eric Campbell
Altamont, NY

Thanks, Eric. It's nice to
be able to balance the negative with the positive.

INSIDE THE
INDUSTRY
News, Notes and Quotes From the Computer Entertainment Industry
"The Print Shop"
Passes Million
Mark
Broderbund Software
has officially announced that
The Print Shop, the genrecreating graphics program
has sold more than one million copies. Gary Carlston,
vice-president of the company, believes that the
product foreshadowed
desktop publishing. According to the software
publisher, the average sales
of this one title comprised
4% of the entire U.S.
software market in 1987.

LATEST VIRAL
STRAINS HIT
THE COMPUTER
WORLD
Last December the IBM
world was invaded by a computer virus which accessed
the address files in the personal computers of which
accessed IBM's worldwide
network. Designed as a
Christmas greeting, the insidious routine allegedly
turned the computers into
an electronic chain letter
producers which provided
users with enough
Christmas tree graphics to
deluge the network and
slow productivity to a snail's
crawl.
The Amiga world has also
been infected by a similar
but more destructive prank.
The Amiga virus, a worm or
"Trojan horse" program
which allegedly originated in
Europe, writes code to the
first block on an Amiga disk.
The disk appears to operate
normally, but transfers the

"infection" routine into
memory. The virus has been
reported to occasionally
print the message, "Something wonderful has happened. Your AMIGA is alive!
And, even better, some of
your disks are infected by a
VIRUS!" After the virus has
been introduced to memory,
any unprotected Workbench
disk will catch the virus.
Public domain programs are
especially susceptible to the
virus, but the South County
Amiga Club (in Southern
Los Angeles County) discovered after a recent
Amiga exposition that the
virus can be found on commercial disks, as well.
Commodore's customer
support network has the
details about diagnosing this
ailment and curing it for
those who have "infected"
computers. Meanwhile, the
safest plan is to "cold boot"
rather than use the "warm
boot" procedure.
On March 2, 1988, a new
strain of Macvirus is expected to hit the Macintosh
world (on the anniversary of
the Macintosh). The Macvirus is supposed to carry a
message of "World Peace"
and is attributed to MacMag, a Canadian publication hitherto unconnected
to terrorist activity.

Datasoft President
Denies Alternate
Reality Demise
In response to allegations
made over the GEnie Information Network by Phil
Price (designer of Alternate
Reality: The City) that Alternate Reality: The Dungeon
would be the last release in

the series, Datasoft President Samuel Poole denied
the assertion. In a recent interview with CGW, the executive alluded to Price's claim
that Poole had stated that
computer role playing
games would be passe' by
1989 as both false and absurd. Poole stated that he
had not talked with Price in
over a year. As for the
series, Poole stated that the
company is going ahead
with Alternate Reality: The
Arena. The product is
designed and ready for
programming. He asserted
that the only thing that
would prevent the release
of AR: The Arena would
be interference from the
licensors, Paradise
Programming.
In other news, Poole
revealed that the Commodore 64/128, Amiga
and ST versions of Global
Commander should be
out by second quarter of
1988, with the IBM and
Atari 8-bit to follow in that
quarter. Global Commander is the geopolitical
game which forces players
to act as diplomat and
supreme military commander for their country
during a global power play.

MICROPROSE
HEARING STILL
STALLED IN
WEST GERMANY
Microprose is still awaiting
its "day in court" with regard
to the ban of some of its titles under the "Law Against
Publication and Distribution
of Products and Media That
Corrupt the Young". The
long-anticipated December

"The Bard's
Tale" Developers
Affiliate with
Activision
Brian Fargo, President of
Interplay Productions
(developers of The Bard's
Tale series, Wasteland, Borrowed Time, and others)
have joined the Affiliated
Publishers ranks at Activision. According to
Fargo, the company's first
project under the new agreement will be based on William Gibson's Neuromancer.
It will be a skill-based roleplaying game and features a
soundtrack by DEVO.
Another product will be the
company's first Amiga
original. Fargo noted that Interplay will be doing one
other original product for
Electronic Arts, as well as
complete several conversions for EA.

10, 1987 hearing (reported
in COW #42) was, once
again, inconclusive. The
Gunship decision has been
postponed, but the commission (Bundesprufstelle Fur
Jugendgefahrdende Schriften (BPS)/"Federal Office for
Examination of Harmful
Publications") has indicated
that they are looking into
the difference between arcade and simulation games.
This may be extremely difficult as none of the BPS officials is computer literate.
The BPS claimed on October 1, 1987 that the time
wasted by computer failures
and technical difficulties
during demonstrations of

A

t press time, a plethora of rumors
concerning the relationship between Infocom and its parent company, Activision, garnered the attention of CGW. Rumor: There was considerable innuendo that the Infocom
division had become a dumping
ground for unwanted Activision
projects. As a case in point, the move
of lnfocomics from Activision's
provenance to that of
Infocom's supervision was
cited. The suggestion was
made that there were
problems between Tom
Snyder and Activision which
lead to the move. Response:
A contract was originally
signed between Activision,
under then president James
Levy, and Tom Snyder
Productions for the two companies to develop the product
which has become lnfocomics. However, a product
development decision was
made to move all story-telling projects
to Infocom, early on in Bruce Davis' administration. Tom Snyder, whose company is geographically located less
than a mile from Infocom's headquarters, was delighted with the
change. He noted that the only
problems they had in working with Activision were logistic problems in that
the companies were located a continent apart. He further stated, "Our
relationship with Infocom is the best
we've ever had with any publisher."
Bruce Davis, Activision President,
stated unequivocally that "Nothing was
shunted off on anybody" and
responded to the charge that Infocom
was being forced to work on secondary
projects by insisting "Infocom is an A+
line, not a B line!"

Response: Infocom realized early on
that the broad base of testers used to
playtest their interactive fiction games
would not be useful in testing this new
genre. This was because these testers
had little in common with the target
audience on the new product. Therefore, the company had to build a new
base of testers. Nevertheless, Infocom
President Joel Berez insists that the

have a greater impact on the bottom
line for the fourth quarter. These
would be: a) Activision's Nintendo
products, b) Activision's Hypercard line,
c) British Telcom's Firebird products,
and d) the success of Triton Products
(the mail order merchandising
division). If all four of these areas meet
expectations, the financial outlook for
Activision could be exceptional.
Rumor: CGW was told that
Activision was forcing Infocom to produce a Wizardry
clone. Response: Neither
Berez nor Davis will talk to
CGW about unannounced
products. However, Berez
waxed philosophical in
response to this question, explaining "Infocom's role in life
is to become the master
storyteller and that includes
products begun on the West
Coast." In fact, Berez noted
that Infocom has recently
hired their first producer to acquire outside products. This is consistent with
Davis' presentation at the Activision
Press Conference in Las Vegas where
he divided the corporation's entertainment emphases into three basic areas
with Infocom's responsibilities being in
the area of storytelling.

Rumored Activision/Infocom Rift
Unfounded

Rumor: It was suggested to CGW
that Activision felt that lnfocomics were
not good enough from a technical
standpoint and that the parent company was not pleased with the product.
Fact: Activision's president has personally boosted lnfocomics more than
any other products in recent appearances. Rumor: An assertion that lnfocomics had not been tested adequately came to CGW's attention.

the product did not allow
sufficient time to examine
the case in its totality. It appears that the committee
has no intention of resolving the question expeditiously.

products were "extensively tested." This
is confirmed by Tom Snyder who notes
that "We had to learn how to test a
product of this nature."
Rumor: CGW was presented with an
allegation that Infocom was told that
they needed to sell 50,000 units of lnfocomics prior to March 31, 1988 (end
of Activision's fourth fiscal quarter) in
order for the company to break even.
Response: Knowing that publicly held
Activision must be very concerned
about its financial image during this fiscal year of turn around, this charge
had to be addressed. Bruce Davis
responded to CGW's query with a
chuckle. He suggested that the company would make less than $6.00 on
each Infocomic unit sold and dismissed any suggestion that less than
$300,000 worth of business would
make the difference in a given fiscal
quarter. "If less than $300,000 makes
that much of a difference, we're in real
trouble," scoffed Davis. Joel Berez was
more serious and emphatically denied
that Infocom needed to sell 50,000
units to make or break their division's
financial outlook for the fourth quarter.
Loretta Stagnitto of Activision suggested that four other divisions would

In addition, Microprose intends to appeal the finalized
ban on Silent Service
through the West German
judiciary system. This
process may take as long as

Rumor: Several sources have indicated that there are projects currently
underway to put graphics in Infocom's
traditional interactive fiction games.
Response: Infocom is attempting to
find appropriate ways to use graphics
in all their new products. Berez contends that this is not an attempt to
"colorize" the classic Infocom games
with graphics, but an attempt in the
new products " . . . to renew excitement in the field of interactive fiction
and introduce new consumers to the
games." Recognizing that some purists
will resent these changes, Berez suggested that there would possibly be an
option to toggle the graphics off. He
also admitted, "This is where it gets
really hard, because we have to make
sure when we add in the new elements
that everything that used to be there is
still there."

seven years to resolve and
will possibly take the case
through the Higher Administrative Court of
Munster and the Federal Administrative Court in Berlin.

Polarware Brings
Spy in for the Gold
Polarware, Inc., publishers
of the educational and entertaining The Spy's Adven-

tures Around the World
series, has been presented

with a Parents' Choice
Gold Award for both the
educational adventure series
and the Sesame Street
Crayon Series. The
Parents' Choice Foundation annually publishes the
winners selected by a panel
of parents, children,
educators, and computer experts. The Spy's Adventures
... are family-oriented
games for players over eight
years old. They are graphic
adventures which are particularly useful in teaching
geography (see the review in
CGW #42, p. 35). The

Sesame Street Crayon
Series, developed in conjunction with Children's
Television Workshop, includes: Letters for You,
Numbers Count, and Op-

posites Attract.
Corporate Profits in
Computer Industry
Surging Upward
Commodore Intemation-

the entertainment companies increased their total
number of employees
during 1987. The table in
the previous column gives a
rundown by company:

MasterPlay
Announces
First Product

al Limited reported a profit
of $6.3 million dollars ($.20
per share) on revenues of
$173.9 million for its first fiscal quarter (ending on
9/30/87). The company confirms that this is a 70% increase over the same period
in the last fiscal year. C.E.O.
Irving Gould stated that the
profits result from higher
unit volumes in the Amiga
product line. 'This is attributable to the successful
introduction of the Commodore Amiga 500 and the
Commodore Amiga 2000
during the June quarter."

Activision, Inc. experienced
a 30% increase in revenues
during its second fiscal
quarter. The company
earned a $1.5 million profit
($.04 per share) on
revenues of $11.3 million
for the quarter. Further,
Electronic Arts concluded
its best-ever fiscal year in
1987 with net revenue of
more than $30 million.
Another indication of
health in the entertainment
software industry is the percentage increase of
employees hired by the
software publishers. Most of

The new company formed
by Andrew Greenberg,
author of Wizardry, has announced that their initial
release will be entitled Star-

saga 1: Beyond the Boundary. The game will attempt
to use a combination of
board-computer-role playing
concepts and forge a new
genre, tentatively titled "Participation Drama." The
game should be versatile
enough to accommodate
one to six players with a
total of one to six characters. The company's plan is
to release Starsaga ll within
another year and Starsaga
III within two years.

hose gentle breezes and bright
warm days may be upon us, but
some of these spring days will
have enough April showers to keep us
inside until the May flowers. That's when
it's nice to be able to lean back, boot up
your favorite sports simulation, and compete in a computerized version of that
athletic event you
would like to be playing or you would like
to be better at. Your
computer screen can
become your fields of
glory—day or night,
rain or shine.

T

No Missing
Links (Golf)

tance tees and the beginner level (i.e.
the computer acts as caddy to recommend the best club). The beginner
automatically gets perfect aim, but the
program is very unforgiving for the experienced player.
A vertical power gauge is employed to

as opposed to the three on the Mean 18
disks. Comparable to Mean 18, WCLB allows from one to a foursome to compete. The graphics on the C-64 are marvelous and the sound of a ball hitting a
tree is very authentic (and we know from
experience).The product also advertises
a Course Editor, but unlike the Course
Architect in Mean 18
which allows players
to design their own
courses, this program
only allows players to
rearrange the holes
which already exist on
the disk. The game
supports Apple II and
C-64 ($39.95) with
IBM promised soon.

THE BOYS
OF SPRING
A Computer Sports Survey

Mean 18 (Accolade): This may be
the ultimate professional golf simulation.
Outstanding graphics
and sound are its
hallmarks. Players
view themselves from
an oblique overhead
perspective behind
the animated character. The program also
offers an overview
perspective of the
hole with graphic representations of each
shot to that point
(and a fabulous
sound effect, too!).
Mean 18 comes
packaged with Pebble
Beach, St. Andrews,
Augusta National golf
courses, as well as a
by David M. and Johnny L. Wilson
Course Architect
program for designing
one's own course. Three additional
set the backswing and address the ball.
course disks ($19.95 each) enable one
Strategy involves aim and club selection.
to play, in Volume II, Inverness Club
Putting requires the same timing, but
(Ohio), Turnberry (Scotland), and Harthe strategy is restricted to reading the
bour Town (South Carolina); in Volume
green and estimating one's stroke.
III, Las Colinas (Texas), Olympic Club
World Class Leader Board (Access):
(San Francisco), and Muirfield (ScotThis
game offers a similar perspective to
land); and in Volume IV, Castle Pines
Mean 18. It involves a vertical power
(Colorado), Doral Country Club (Florida),
graph and offers the same overhead obliand Kapalua (Hawaii). The game supque perspective. In common with the
ports IBM ($39.95), Apple IIGS, Amiga,
former, it offers St. Andrews and Doral
and Atari ST ($44.95).
Country Clubs, while adding Cypress
One to four players can compete on
Creek with its thick forested rough
these famous courses without worrying
(some players will spend as much time
about having to let anyone play
in the trees as Paul Bunyan) and a ficthrough. Better players may handicap
tional course called The Gauntlet. Like
themselves by using professional disMean 18, World Class Leader Board
tance tees and/or experienced level.
(WCLB) also offers course disks at
Poorer players may use regulation dis$19.95. These only contain two courses

The major difference
between Mean 18 and
WCLB is the way the
program handles putting on the professional level. WCLB
does not show the
player how much
force is being applied
on the power graph.
Instead, the professional player is expected to have an intuitive grasp of the extent of his stroke. This
is a very challenging
facet of the game.
World Tour Golf
(Electronic Arts):
The split-screen
perspective of this
game offers both a
bird's-eye view of each
hole and the same
overhead oblique
perspective of the
other two games. The
mechanics involve a
circular power gauge
for setting the backswing and addressing the ball. Less experienced players (or
those with poor dexterity) may simply
choose the amount of power desired
and the program will assume the ball
has been addressed squarely. Unlike
Mean 18 and WCLB, World Tour Golf
(WTG) does not contain complete courses on the game disk. Instead, the most
challenging holes from 17 different courses and five fictional holes are included.
There are no additional course disks
available. The game supports the C-64
($29.95), Apple IIGS, and IBM ($39.95).
Like Mean 18, there is a construction
set included. Unlike the products mentioned earlier where the golfers have
identical characteristics, WTG players
must design a player (or use the built-in

Jack Snicklaus) with attributes for: drive
distance (strength), drive accuracy (consistency), drive tendency (to hook or
slice), and recovery skill (ability to get
out of bad lies). IBM owners with CGA
used to have to play with magenta trees
and blue fairways, but a
revision has corrected that aesthetic problem and supports
EGA, as well. The EGA version still offers only the four
best colors, however.

begins with a stirring version of
"Chariots of Fire" and offers six Olympicstyle events: swimming, skeet shooting,
long horse, archery, triple jump, and
weightlifting. Each event is played in the
order listed above and must be success-

Body and Seoul
(Summer Olympics)
If you cannot go for the gold
in Seoul, Korea, this summer,
you can certainly enter the arcade versions of several Olympic events. Both of the following games offer superb graphics and
sound, are as close to their coin-op
predecessors as it is possible to be, and
provide an outstanding value at $14.95.
The games support the Apple II and C64.
Hypersports (Konami): The game

fully completed in succession in order to
continue on to the next event. This may
be challenging, but since tastes and
abilities differ, a menu approach would
have been more user-friendly and a practice option would have been most welcome. Nevertheless, the game is a fastpaced joystick buster which will delight

arcade fanatics. Four of the six events
are built around quick left and right
movements of the joystick. The other
two, archery and triple jump, rely on
timing.
Track and Field (Konami):
Like its sister game, this
product also offers six Olympicstyle events: 100 Meter Dash,
Long Jump, Javelin Throw,
110 Meter Hurdles, Hammer
Throw, and High Jump. Once
again, players must qualify in
each event in order to proceed
to the next event. However,
Track and Field does allow
players to select and practice
in a single event. The game
also allows the player to select
from four different difficulty
levels (unlike Hypersports).
Also, while Hypersports is a
solitaire game, Track and Field allows
from one to four players to compete.
Again, the game is primarily a joystick
buster. All of the events require swift
and intense left-right movement to build
up speed, but most require a precision
timing in addition to that action. The
timing involves holding down the fire

button until the split-second when the
optimal angles of "attack" are set (a la
Microsoft's out-of-print Olympic Decathlon.

Pixel Pugilists (Boxing)
Star Rank Boxing ll Activision
(Gamestar): This sequel to Star Rank
Boxing is visually more attractive than the original
release (even the IBM in
CGA mode looks good)
and offers improved joystick control over the
original. Winning or
losing the game is primarily dependent upon one's
hand-eye coordination,
but there are more
strategic decision points
than in many actionoriented sports games.
Players create a boxer
from random statistics,
select the training
regimen in three areas
(speedbag, heavy bag,
sparring, and running).
Speedbag training increases accuracy, heavy
bag improves strength,
sparring time improves
strategy, and road work
improves strength and
agility. The game supports the C-64 ($29.95),
Apple II and IBM ($39.95).
Players fight by positioning their joysticks according to the eight switch
positions on the stick.
There are five offensive
positions (left hook, jab,
right cross, body shot, and uppercut)
and three defensive maneuvers (duck,
lean, and cover up). To win, players
must use appropriate defensive strategy
to counter their opponent's punches
and take offensive action, as well as
keep tabs on the knockout indicator. All
of this happens with such speed and
facility that the fight takes on all the intensity of a real bout for the player(s).

When Life Is The Pits
(Motor Sports)
In addition to Ferrari Formula One
which is previewed elsewhere in this
issue, there are several motor sports
games on the market. Most are simply
arcade entities like Pole Position, Speed
Buggy, or Outrun, however. If one likes
arcade racing, Epyx' Supercycle for the

Atari ST and C-64/128 ($39.95) is a
pleasing translation of the coin-op
motorcycle racing hit. If you would
rather race over authentic courses,
Broderbund's Superbike Challenge
(Atari ST, C-64, IBM - $19.95) features
12 authentic courses (including Bugatti,
Misano, Salzburgring, and Silverstone
among others) and three difficulty levels.

ignition and supercharger pressure
without changing the engine. Likewise,
TFC offers a choice of fuel mixtures, but
TFE offers a choice with an explanation.
TFC offers a choice of tires, TFE allows
the player to know what those different
tires accomplish. Both games allow
clutch adjustments, but TFE offers a
wing adjustment to improve the amount
of drag. Of the two
games, one must
- note that TFE is more
user-friendly. Whereas
TFC simply notes the
player's failures, TFE offers a full-scale evaluation
of every qualifying run.
Finally, TFC offers fullscreen graphics, while
TFE uses a split-screen
with the course on top
and the cockpit view on
the bottom.

Love is a Losing
Proposition
(Tennis)

If you prefer a thinking man's simulation, two drag racing products might
meet your needs. Cosmi offers Shirley
Muldowney's Top Fuel Challenge (TFC)
for the C-64/128 ($24.95) and
Activision's Gamestar division
publishes Top Fuel Eliminator (TFE) for
the Apple II and C-64/128 ($29.95).
Both games allow the player to compete
in series of championship competitions
beginning with the Winternationals in
Pomona and both claim to require the
player to make strategic decisions based
on track conditions. However, TFC's version of track conditions involves wins,
losses, and crashes. TFE's version involves surface and air temperature,
humidity, elevation, and traction. Both
games suggest the ability to adjust the
dragster. With TFC, one must change
the entire engine to improve performance, but with TFE one can adjust the

Grand Slam Tennis Infinity Software: Grand
Slam Tennis allows
players to simulate professional tennis matches in
the French Open,
Wimbledon, U. S. Open,
and Australian Open. The
game is available for the
Amiga with 512K and the
Macintosh and retails for
$49.95. The company
also advertises an enhanced version for the
Amiga which offers two
person and modem play
and retails for $59.95. In
addition, both versions of the program
have several extras like the "Tournament" option which allows the player to
compete in a tournament format and a
"Protest" option when the player doesn't
like a line call (No, you don't have to
curse like a recent U. S. superstar.). The
Amiga speech synthesizer is used to give
the score and make the linesman's calls.
The graphics, with the exception of very
fluid animation, are average for the
Amiga and the color palette is extremely
understated for an Amiga product.
Nevertheless, the action is where it is
at and Grand Slam Tennis is an action
game which is sophisticated enough to
know that position is truly important in
tennis. If the player can utilize the
mouse to get the player into position for
a return, the program assumes that the

(Continued on page 16)

The Boys Of Spring
(Continued from page 14)

player's caricature on-screen has a
smooth enough forehand or backhand
to successfully return the volley. The
other factor, admittedly obvious, deals
with timing. Positioning determines
whether your ground stroke will be a
cross-court shot or a down the line shot.
Additionally, one can use
simply key strokes to set
up a slice, lob, or smash,
as well as use topspin, hit
harder, hit softer, and adjust racquet speed. All the
elements of the sport are
well-simulated in this
product.

version, but it has some fine-tuning
which the Amiga does not have. In the
current Amiga version, the outfielders
race to the ball and all outfielders
release the ball almost instantly. In the
IBM version, outfielders with better arms
have a quicker release than those with

Grand Slam Baseball
(Cosmi): Steve Garvey
and Jose Canseco are the
licensees for this release,
so one would expect that
this program's emphasis
is on hitting rather than
strategy. That is correct!
The program offers a visiting and home team lineup with major league all
star names, but it doesn't
really matter what names
you have out there if you
are not personally handy
with a joystick. The
program is available for
the C-64/128 and retails
for $24.95. The graphics
make excellent use of
color, but the characters
and animation is more
reminiscent of older
cartridge games than any
recent releases.

Who's On First?
(Baseball)
A more complete listing
of baseball programs is
available in CGW #36
(April, 1987), but it is
necessary to update one's
references from time to
time.

Earl Weaver Baseball
(Electronic Arts): CGW's
Game of the Year in
1987, Earl Weaver
Baseball is now available
in both the Amiga and
IBM formats. It is still the
ultimate sports simulation
in terms of versatility, chrome, statistics,
and action. A caveat should be placed
here, however. The IBM version had
some serious stat-handling problems
when it was first released. It was easy for
players to end up with a pitching staff
full of 99.99 earned run averages. The
folks at EA believe they have found the
problem, so send in $10.00 and the
original disk in order to get the corrected version. Of course, some IBM
owners have complained that the
program can, from time to time fail to
retire a side after three outs. This is not
a programming bug. This is using one's
security codewheel incorrectly. The
protection scheme of EWB requires you
to input data from a codewheel. If wrong
data is input at the start of the game,
the program allows you to play normally
long enough to get the feel of the game
and then goes haywire. That may induce
some of the pirates to actually purchase
a copy. The IBM may not have the
sound or extensive color of the Amiga

Full Count Baseball (Lance Haffner):
Received too late for inclusion in last
year's survey, this text-heavy statisticsbased baseball simulation offers extremely accurate replays. It is available for
Apple, C-64, and IBM ($39.95). Features
include availability of a 28 man roster,
text description of each play (a la EA's
Radio Baseball), statistics compiler for
league play, ability to save several team
lineups on a disk (so starting lineups
need not be input each game), and consideration of ball park effects (a la EWB).
See CGW #37 for a brief
! review and 1986 World
Series Replay.

Pure-Stat Baseball
average or lesser arms and is therefore
more realistic.
These details, notwithstanding, EWB
still has it all: 1) statistical compilation
for league play; 2) general manager
function for league trading; 3) ability to
customize your own stadium and team
colors; 4) instant replay and slow motion
replay; and 5) ability to print out lineups
according to Weaver's own model. As
we go to press for this issue the Computer Gaming World Baseball League is
preparing to use an upcoming EWB addon, a Manager's Tools Disk which will
have a number of features including stat
editing, schedule generation, and a nice
drafting program (ie. the tool kit can be
used to run your league draft). To top
all of this off, remember that wind, ball
and player speed, and playing surface
can all affect a given play's result. To
offer all this and the ability to play in
both strategy/action and strategy only
mode is simply awesome.

(Software Simulations): Basically the
same game as reviewed in our previous
survey, the big news for C-64 owners is
that the current version of this graphically depicted statistics-based game does
not have the statistics handling
problems of the earlier version (e.g.
giving credit for only three RBIs to the
slugger who belts a grand slam home
run). The game is now available for
Apple II, C-64/128, and IBM for $39.95.
Further, the designers have added the
ability to change player's subjective
ratings for range, throwing ability, base
running ability, bunting and sacrifice.
The graphics routines (with their annoying flip-flop of the stadium perspective)
still tend to slow play down, but the
game is still significant because of the
number of offensive choices available
(seven relate to the batter and seven to
the baserunner) and defensive options
provided (four for the pitcher and five for
the fielders). Extras available separately
include a Stadium and Classic Team

Disk (with all 26 current stadiums plus
10 classic teams), a 1986 Team Disk,
and a 1987 Team Disk ($19.95 each).
StatManager (Software Simulations)
is a sports utility program. In addition to
basic batting statistics, the program
enables coaches, managers, and statisticians to call up split-stats (averages vs.
right or left-handed pitchers), types of
outs (double plays, fly outs, line outs,
ground outs), sacrifice attempts and successes, stolen base attempts and successes, clutch average, and tendency to hit
to right or left field. Reports on pitchers
may include split-stats, types of outs,
total pitches thrown, strikes and balls
thrown, pitchouts, and stolen bases
against, in addition to standard statistics
like won-loss or earned run average. It is
available for Apple II, C-64/128, and IBM
for $39.95.

Gym Dandy Selection
In short, there are plenty of interesting
sports simulations available to keep computer game enthusiasts from climbing
the walls during those April showers.

In The Eye of a
Beholder!
A Look at FTL's "Dungeon Master"
by Hosea Battles, Jr.

Z

ed didn't feel much like a duke as he zeroed in
the sights of his crossbow on the mummy.
Perspiration dribbled down the side of his face,
in spite of the dungeon's chill, as Zed released the
bolt at the monster. His aim was true. The blow
would have killed a human,
but the bandaged corpse
continued toward them.

SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:

PUBLISHER:

A scene like that is the best
one can do in trying to
describe what playing Dungeon Master is like. The
graphics in Dungeon Master
are so splendid that players
can not only see the detailing (right down to the cracks
in the wall and floor), but
practically feel the damp chill
of the dungeons portrayed.
There is even slime on the
walls. Certain walls have hidden levers or buttons that
must be pressed. The
graphics, as you would
suspect, are very clear and
detailed in order to see them
Even the outlines of traps
can be seen. Monsters are
graphically detailed right
down to the gleaming teeth!
The Blue Ogres even change
facial expression as they hack
away at your characters.
Beyond this, the game has
digitized sound effects and
makes use of all available colors on
Dungeon Master
the ST. On top of this, one's
Atari ST
adrenalin really flows because the
Solitaire
game is in real time. There is no stop
$39.95
Doug Bell
ping to figure out a move. Everything
Mike Newton
is constantly moving and the clock alDennis Walker
FTL
ways runs. It is non-stop action all the
San Diego, CA
way. Game control is by extensive USE
of the mouse. It works extremely well
in this game where looking for the right key press
could spell certain doom in most situations.

Reckless, Tough Champions
Players take on the role of Theron, an apprentice
to The Grey Lord, a renowned wizard. In the Grey
Lord's attempt to get the Power Gem, time and
space was ruptured. This split him in two pieces,
Librasulus (Restorer of Order, now in Limbo) and

his evil counterpart Chaos (now sending evil in the
countryside). Theron was sent into a ghostly existence. His present task is to prevent Chaos from obtaining the Power Gem by getting the Firestaff for
Librasulus. To do this, he will control four champions who will enter Chaos' dungeon. These champions come from the Hall of Mirrors on the first level
of the dungeon. There are twenty four champions
who have been imprisoned in mirrors by Chaos. You
have the power to resurrect them or use their life forces to create your own champions. Champions can
be male or female, and can be of several races
(Elves, Humans, others). Once restored, they will
have all attributes and weapons they possessed
when imprisoned.
To fully equip the champions, you will have to find
objects in the dungeon. Some will be easy to get,
other items you will have to fight for. Almost every
standard fantasy game weapon is included (bows, arrows, axes, swords, magic weapons, and throwing
stars). Armor includes mail, leather, shields, and helmets. Further, magic potions, magic scrolls and
clothes can be found in the dungeon itself.

Manual Austerity
One important matter for any complex computer
game is documentation. Though this manual is well
written, explains in detail the mechanics of playing
the game, and even includes a short story that sets
the premise for the game play, it lacks an important
feature. During game play, monsters are not identified by name. The manual is not helpful on this
score, so one needs to drag out those Dungeons
and Dragons Monster Manuals to help identify
monsters and their characteristics (The reviewer purchased two of them for purposes of the game).

The Casting Crouch
No fantasy game is complete without magic and
this game use magic in innovative ways. The two
magic character classes are typical, Wizard and
Priest, but the mechanism is different. In most
games, the character finds a magic scroll, reads it,
and the magic is cast. In this game, scrolls give you
the symbols of a spell. To cast a spell requires two
or more of these symbols, Power, Elemental, Form
or Class Alignment. In the beginning, your characters may have no spells, so you must find scrolls.
When you find a scroll, write down the name of the
spell, the casting symbols, and what the spell does,
on a separate sheet of paper. This allows you to
leave the scroll where you found it, giving your
character more room to carry more important items.
Potions are also made the same way and require an
empty flask in which to cast them. A good trick in
casting a spell is to pick all symbols on the control
line of a character and leave them there. When you
need to cast it in the heat of battle, all you have to
do is click on the control line.
Characters can be of four classes, Fighter, Ninja,
Wizard (in this game it includes females), and Priest.

A character can obtain levels in all four of these classes. Character attributes are shown by three status
lines representing Hit Points (Health), Stamina, and
Manta (Magic Ability). When a character's hit points
reach zero he dies and a pile of bones appears on
the floor. Fortunately, there are resurrection altars
scattered throughout the dungeon levels.
Food and water play important parts in the game.
Although food and water is consumed slowly, in my
opinion, they are not consumed slowly enough.
This is where I have a complaint about the game.
There is not enough food or water scattered in the
dungeons. You can find food or water on a level,
but rarely do you find both. Also, food and water are
scattered on every other level. Some creatures can
be killed and used as food, but there are not
enough of them on some levels. Because of the extensive length of some levels, it is frustrating to get
to the next level running low on food and water and
find none, then have to retrace your steps back up
a level to find food or water.

Mummy Fear List
There are Mummies, Giant Wasps, Ghosts,
Screamer Slices (food), Purple Worms (food), armed
Skeletons, Rock Piles (creature resembling pile of
rocks), Flying Snakes, Beholders, Ogres, a Poison
Tree (tree that shoots poison), and more, in the dungeon. Each require different tactics to defeat. The
most dangerous for a novice player are the Rock
Pile, Purple Worms, Flying Snakes, and Poison Tree
because they are poisonous. Here are some hints to
defeating them: A Rock Pile is slow moving, so hit
and run tactics work. Put the two strongest fighters
up front with heavy cut (sword or axe) or bash (club,
mace) weapons. Advance, hit the creature, then
back up, wait a few seconds, and repeat. This creature can take a lot of punishment, so be patient and
keep doing this until the creature is defeated and
you are rewarded with a pile of rocks. Purple Worms
are fast, but the Box technique works. Lure creatures to an area with plenty of room all around. Wait
until the worms are directly in front of the characters
and use cut or bash weapons. Don't waste missile
weapons on them. Side step one step to the right,
move forward two steps, turn left, move forward one
step, and turn left. You should be behind the worms
and able to get at least three or four good hits on
them. This requires fast reflexes on your part in
using the mouse. Repeat these steps as the worms
turn toward you and you will be rewarded with worm
for food. It works to start the process with a side
step to the left, too. Flying Snakes and the Poison
Tree are both fast and deadly, but can be dispatched using the same technique. In this case,
however, throw missile weapons until they are within
one space of your characters. Have the magic user's
command line ready with a Poison or Poison Cloud
spell. Have plenty of Cure Poison Potion handy and
watch out for the Tree firing poison bolts. Cast the
spells, have two strongest fighters up front to hack
and chop with cut weapons, and continue to use
missile weapons. You will be rewarded fairly quickly
with their demise.

Of Traps, Maps, and Claps
No fantasy game is complete without puzzles and
traps. This game has plenty of both, including
teleportation
areas, Blue
Waterfalls. This
is where the
game makes
use of an important feature you
don't often see
used in fantasy
games,
SOUND! There
is nothing more
unnerving
during game
play, than the
sound of a trap
you just set off!
Sound also
gives clues to the location of secret doors, many of
which would not be found except for the clanking
sound of the door
chains.
Unfortunately,
there are no mapping spells, maps,
or any other items
that will display a
map of the dungeon level. Because of the
length, complexity,
and non-stop action, it is extremely
difficult to map the
dungeon levels. I
would liked to
have seen the inclusion of maps or
map spells in the
game. Those who
subscribe to GEnie Information Network can
download maps of many of the early levels. This can
help eliminate
some of the
tedium.
FTL is working
on a new scenario
for the game
which would be
purchased
separately (using
the current game
as a master disk).
This game is fantastic! It is a welcome addition to
any fantasy players
library. Those who
want a good fantasy/role playing
game with excellent graphics will love this one.

SPANNING THE
GLOBE...
Epyx' "World Games" Explored
by James Trunzo
t is hard to imagine a computer owner who is
not familiar with Epyx' line of sports games.
From the moment Summer Games and Winter
Games, for instance, made their appearance on the
software
marketplace,
they drew accolades for
both their challenge and
graphics.
Newer products
from Epyx have
built upon
these
I prototypes,
retaining the
theme of multiple sporting
events built
around Olympian themes.

I

World Games,
based upon
! eight internat
tional—and
I somewhat
esoteric—contests, has made
a very successful transfer to
I the Apple IIGS
(as well as the
Amiga and
Atari ST).

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

World Games
features such
unusual and
delightful
events as log rolling in Canada, barWorld Games
rel jumping in Germany, and caber
Amiga, Apple IIGS
Atari ST, IBM,
tossing in Scotland; such exotic conApple II, C-64/128
tests as cliff diving in Mexico and
1-8
$34.95
sumo wrestling in Japan; and such
Designer Software Co.
traditional events as weight lifting in
Epyx
Russia and slalom skiing in France.
Redwood City, CA
Bull riding in the good old United
States completes the sporting eight-pack.
World Games and the 16-bit machines were made
for each other. Epyx takes advantage of the advanced graphics and sound capabilities of these
machines by exploiting the possibilities of the
program's theme. Before each event, a colorful and
informative history of the event (presented in the
form of a travelogue) provides background, while a
detailed spinning globe rotates above. Watch the
globe carefully and you will discover a blinking white

dot, indicating the country of origin for the particular
event selected.
Once the event begins, appropriate background
music helps create atmosphere, with each song ethnically oriented to the country hosting the event.
Basso oom-pah-pahs reverberate from the computer
when in Germany and digitized flamenco guitars
strum forth tunes to accompany the sound of waves
breaking against the rocks when cliff diving in
Acapulco.
Graphic depiction of the events themselves vary
from very good to outstanding. Many of the events
are three-quarter screen, while the remainder are
either horizontally or vertically split-screened. It is
worth noting the backgrounds of most events because they are real visual treats.
As usual, Epyx throws in numerous humorous
graphic touches. The weight lifter's face turns redder
and redder if you force him to hold too much weight
too long; the bull turns his face toward the screen
and snickers if he throws you; and 400 pound sumo
wrestlers grunt and groan as they smash into each
other, to name just a few.
Moving from graphics to mechanics of game play,
manipulating the contestants in each event can be
done via the keyboard or the joystick. Some events
lend themselves to the keyboard, while others
definitely are joystick oriented. A case in point, this
reviewer had little success using a joystick in trying
to get the caber tosser (a muscular Scottish gent,
carrying a 12 foot, 120 pound log which he must
fling!) to walk. However, switching to the keyboard, I
managed to get my computerized persona to waddle across the screen with ease! The events simulated in World Games contain enough variation that
none of them seem repetitive during the course of
play.
Additionally, because World Games, like previous
Epyx products of this sort, keeps track of the "World
Records" you establish with your best efforts, the
product has a built-in form of competition. Even if
you are playing the game alone, you can strive to
top the best previous effort and set a new standard.
Overall, World Games is a fine product and one
that does justice to the 16-bit machines. Game
players who enjoy products whose ingredients are
two parts action to one part strategy will find World
Games an enjoyable bit of diversion and one that
will retain interest over a long period of time. Even
garners who prefer more cerebral entertainment can
derive pleasure from the graphics and sound that
make up World Games. The bottom line reads fun
and that is what a game should be all about.

Dusting the
Death Angel
Sierra's New Police Adventure
by Michael S. Chaut
The

author of this review will not admit to
being a "game-aholic," but does confess to
owning over 275 games. playing through Sierra's
entire "Quest"
series, and ordering a color
monitor for
his PC,
primarily because of the
"Quest" adventures.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

The opening
sequence of
Police Quest
displays the
City of
Lytton's Police
Shield something a la
Dragnet. The
original music,
designed by
Margaret
Lowe, which
accompanies
that screen
would make
anyone want
to join the
ranks of Sgt.
Joe Friday.
The game
starts with
"our hero,"
Sonny Bonds,
standing in
the main
hallway of the Lytton Police Station.
Police Quest
At this point, players should do a litIBM
tle exploration of the station in order
Soon for: Atari ST, Mac,
to get their feet wet. As with all SierAmiga, Apple IIGS
$49.95
ra games, it is important to take,
Jim Walls
look, feel, touch, and smell everySierra
Coarsegold, CA
thing that can be seen. It is not wise
to explore too long, though, because one can miss the morning briefing (it's in the
room in the upper right-hand corner of the screen).
Then, before leaving the station, one should make
sure he checks his messages, reads the newspaper,
gets his radio and keys, and visits the locker room
to pick up his gear.
It soon becomes apparent that the ultimate mis-

sion in the game is to stop the flood of illegal drugs
into this quiet middle-American community. Police
Quest deals, however, not only with the "Dirty Harry"
aspects of being a cop, but also with the daily mundane routines such as dealing with traffic violations
and red tape at City Hall. Of course there are also
life-threatening situations where split second timing
and decisions will make the difference between life
or death. In fact, the biggest difference between this
game and real life, is that if one makes a mistake
and is killed, it is possible to go back to the last
saved game and try again.
Some of the graphic sequences in this game are
the most terrific this reviewer has ever seen. Some
may even want to save the game just before some
of the sequences and play them over again in slow
motion. For those that don't like all the usual typing
that comes with a Sierra game (i.e. look rock, take
rock, smell rock) Sierra has included in this game a
handy "action key" (for the MS-Dos version it is the
"F4" key.) It saves a lot of typing time by allowing
one to use the "F4" key to get into and drive the
patrol car. There is, of course, also the use of the
"F3" key to echo or repeat the last command. Other
action keys facilitate using weapons and the radio,
hitting the showers, and selecting from the three
driving speeds. These are:
Code 1 - Cruising (obeying the Traffic Code),
Code 2 - Faster (still obeying the Traffic Code), and
Code 3 - Emergency (red lights and siren, with no
Traffic Code).
Hints: Players should be sure to read the Lytton
Police Department Policeman's Indoctrination
Guide. It is a major source for clues during the
game. Players must know the correct police operating procedures for handcuffing, routine traffic stops,
felony traffic stops, arrests, intoxicated driver stops,
radio transmissions, and vehicle safety inspections. It
is also necessary to know driving codes, radio
codes, vehicle codes and some of the penal code.
Further, the map that comes with the game is very
helpful in finding certain places and remembering
where they are located.
It is also important to be very careful when driving
the patrol car. It may be wise to run the program at
the slow speed until one gets used to the "feel of
the wheel." It takes some time to get used to and
every time one hits a wall, a sidewalk, or another
car, it means death. This reviewer recommends that
players save the game with every new screen until
they get the hang of it. Of course, one learns a lot
quicker when driving in "Code 3" mode. (The siren
and red lights also are fun to play with!) Players on
patrol duty should make sure they observe everything (i.e. look for people who run red lights and
drunk drivers). When arresting suspects, players
must make sure they follow proper arrest procedures (i.e. search your suspects and their vehicles).
Players should question all suspects. If they seem
reluctant, they should be questioned again.
Players should not overlook using the evidence in
the evidence room, the computer, and the
telephone to help solve the case. It is even possible

to dial "411" for directory assistance. Pay close attention to the instructions given by fellow officers and
superiors. It may even help to write down their instructions. Sometimes, their words are clues to puzzles. In order to win this game with all possible
points, you will have to do some old fashioned
police work. As with all Sierra games, however, one
can win without getting the maximum number of
points.
It is important to mention that this "Quest" game
like, Leisure Suit Larry, comes with a Warning on
the label. The game does not contain anything that
is horrible or even that has more violence than you
would see on the evening news, but I do agree that
this game is not for real youngsters and "Parental
Guidance" should be used. I should also point out
that Police Quest is the first Sierra IBM release that
has been published without copy protection. Inside
sources say that this feature will serve as a test for future Sierra releases.
The game comes standard with three 5 1/4 inch
disks as well as one 3 1/2 inch disk for the PS/2. It
also has the Official Chamber of Commerce City of
Lytton Map, the Lytton Police Department
Policeman's Indoctrination Guide, Sierra's regular
MS-Dos Reference Card, a special Police Quest
Reference Card, and a How To Play Five Card Draw
Poker Reference Card.
Police Quest is a linear game. In order to win, one

does have to accomplish one task
after another. However, those who
miss something will be steered "back
on track" by the game. This "Quest"
game is straight forward. To this
reviewer, it seemed easier to play
than some of Sierra's earlier games,
but maybe that is because people
who like to read everything in the
manual have an advantage in this
game.
Written by Jim Walls, a veteran of
15 years with the California Highway
Patrol, Police Quest seems to have
an extra added element of realism and danger. The
overall design obviously stemmed
from Walls' experiences "on the job."
In any case, if you are a person who
has enjoyed any of the Sierra "Quest"
games in the past or if you are a
"gamer" who enjoys great graphics,
good puzzles, a good sense of
humor, and an overall great
gameplan, this game comes highly
recommended.
Remember, BE CAREFUL OUT
THERE!!!
Note:POLICE QUEST II is due out
in September.

A ROUND ROBIN LETTER ON "FOG OF WAR" AND
"LIMITED INTELLIGENCE' IN COMPUTER WARGAMES

"FOG OF WAR":
A Clearer View

S

ince there is a great deal of passion with regard to computer
wargame design and, particularly, with design features that simulate
"fog of war" and "limited intelligence,"
CGW thought it would be interesting to
start a round robin discussion about
these issues. This article contains the
first responses by designers to an introductory letter which suggested that extreme limited intelligence contributes to
a computer phobia. In that letter, we
suggested that carefully planned attacks with insurmountable odds which
are unsuccessful cause many to
wonder if the program failed to take
something into account. We noted
problems with subordinate commanders operated by the computer
which failed to obey orders. We also
suggested that it was unfortunate when
players could not tell why a given attack failed. Our solutions were to offer
a print-out or window with the exact
combat equation displayed; present an
approximate strength ratio (offense:
defense); or offer a chance to "reroll" an
attack.

Chris Crawford
Chris Crawford is the designer of
"Eastern Front," "Balance of Power,"
and "Trust and Betrayal: The Legacy of
Siboot."
I claim an unflattering priority in the
subject of this discussion: one of
the first instances
of the problem
discussed here
arose over my
game Tanktics.
In a review of
that game appearing in this
magazine, the reviewer roasted the
game for, among other faults, a fog of
war system that greatly detracted from
his enjoyment of the game. That was a
game first published in 1979!
I now perceive the problem to be a
matter of confusion on the part of the
consumer over the desirability of realism

Most players like to believe that their
games are realistic. Endless amounts of
hot air are exhausted debating the relative strengths and weaknesses of different game systems. Some players
seem to have a huge ego-investment in

fusing situation. Face it, folks, war is not
fun.
Who wants to pay good money to experience the same confusion and
chaos? Who wants to invest hours and
hours of his time setting up and carrying
out a plan, only to find out, as so many
military commanders have, that sometimes things just don't turn out the way
you have a right to expect them to turn
out? Most people don't buy wargames
to study military history, they buy them
to have fun, and when the games get
too realistic, they lose their appeal.
Players want control, the sense that
they are in charge of everything that's
happening. The popular wargames of
today have more in common with chess
than war.
So give wargamers what they want and
dump fog of war.

Steve Newberg
Stephen Newberg is president and
guiding light of Simulations Canada.
He is responsible for "Development" on
titles like "Fifth Eskadra," "Rommel at
Gazala," and "Long Lance.".
. . . The terms "fog of war" and "limited
intelligence" are often used interchangeably, but really, limited intelligence is
a subset of fog of war. Limited intelligence is itself a general term, encompassing two forms of limitation of information passed to the player (or unit
commanding officer, or overall commander of the depicted group).

the memorization of vast amounts of
utter trivia (Can you recall the muzzle
velocity of a KwK 42 L/70 gun?) Game
designers often take such talk too
seriously. They come to believe that
game players want realistic simulations
of warfare. No simulation of combat can
claim to be realis- tic if it doesn't include some
provision for the
chaos and confusion of the real
battlefield.
The problem, of
course, is that
chaos and confusion are not fun. Ask anybody who's
been there. Every military commander,
from the highest level to the lowest,
struggles against a maze of confusing,
limited, and often contradictory information. Their own lives, and/or the lives of
many others, depend on their ability to
make sense out of a fundamentally con-

The first limitation is that of observation. This is the more commonly
depicted form of limited intelligence in
that its primary effect is to reduce the
details available to the player (or CO) on
the status of the opposition. These information reductions can be done in two
principle areas: opposing strength and
opposing location.
The second limitation is that of organization. For simplicity, this can be
called "viewpoint." In any event, the commander is a particular person in a particular position and in any simulation
worthy of the term the player must represent that person (in general) and that
position (in particular).
While the effects of observational intelligence limitation are fairly obvious (not
knowing where the second enemy
division is, since it is no longer in the
combat line and air recon is shut in by
bad weather, or not knowing the
strength of the first enemy division except that it is beating back your current
attack with apparent ease), those of view-

point are less so, since they deal with information that will not be available for
reasons of structure (that is, the staff
people in your third battalion did not
mention in their daily report that 1/5 of
their men have
stomach flu . . .).
This, then,
brings us back to
"fog of war,"
which itself covers
all of the above,
as well as the
heart of affairs on
the battlefield as
described by von Clausewitz in his enduring classic, On War, namely "friction."

tion of an historical event, then perhaps
a bit of frustration is not out of place.
Do you really think that battles occur
as the commanders of the involved forces wish them to?
If so, you have
never read history. No battle
works as
planned. None
ever has and
none ever will. I
think it was one
of the Molkes
that talked about
no battle plan surviving contact with the
enemy. Well, when your carefully
planned attack goes wrong, welcome to
the real world. Do you really want to
know everything about your forces and
the enemy's? If so, why are you playing
a computer game? Board games are
great at letting you know pretty much
everything and they cost a lot less.

good glance at a board game situation
and the gamer has a grasp of the situation. I don't know of any computer wargames that offer this much information
so cleanly. This can be a rub and I don't
blame anyone from shying away from it.
A board gamer can change units, redo
moves, remove units, and even change
the rules on a mere whim. With a computer game, you're kind of stuck.
I think that, more to the point, what we
have here is the player expressing what
a wargame should do versus the desig-

. . . . So take your choice. But let's
stop the complaining if the ones that try
to take you a step into realistic shoes
also occasionally leave you confused or
frustrated ... .

Roger Damon
Roger Damon is the designer of
"Operation Whirlwind," "Held of Fire,"
"Wargame Construction Set," and most
recently, "Gone Fish'n."

Friction is the term used to cover everything that does not go as planned,
which is most everything in the average
battle. The actions of such friction on
the player are the center of the unhappiness of the introduction to this round
robin discussion on Fog of War. Well, I
have an answer. Tough!
Let's get down to hard facts here and
stop the nonsense. What do you want in
your computer game? Do you want a
simulation? Since all of these games
deal with some sort of historic topic and
most call themselves simulations, I will
assume you actually want history and
reality as major aspects, or we have
degenerated to hypocrisy. Do you want
to learn something about command?
Since I have yet to see a computer
game which makes the player a rifleman
just getting shot at while the computer
is his commanding officer, I will assume
that the buying public is not out to try
out being a grunt. Well, if you want a
commanding position in a realistic depic-

I have to wonder how much this "fogginess" attributed to computer wargames
actually keeps some garners from entering the realm. Anybody who has a fear
of playing a computer game because
the computer might screw up his brilliant strategy is in the wrong ballpark.. .
..
I've been a board wargamer for more
than 20 years, and if there are any
nightmares out there, they're lying in
wait amongst the
overwhelming
number of incomplete, unfriendly,
confusing, and
badly written rules
booklets that
come with these
games .....
Maybe the thread runs a little deeper.
Maybe the hesitation of the board wargamer centers on control. On a board
game, the player has complete control.
Especially if it's a solitaire run. Any unit
can be put anywhere and anything can
be done to it with a mild flick of the
hand. And, it's all there to see. One

ner imagining what he can do. I think
what's being asked is "Let's make these
games more friendly, more adaptable,
more easily manipulated by the player." I
say, I'm not sure that's in the same territory as the board wargames were. In
fact, to take a computer game to board
game flexibility
can become perverse. Let me cite
a real case I encountered.
In my games, a
unit is moved a
square at a time
by the joystick. If
a player makes a mistake, or sneezes
during movement, a unit may wind up
in an unintended spot. Fine, hit the
select key and he pops back to where
he started. But what if that unit already
assaulted and won, eliminating an
enemy unit? What if the sneeze caused
the unit to run out of movement by
entering dense terrain? As each "what if"

is encountered, it is dealt with by using
memory in the computer for more
program. Now, what if the player starts
moving another unit and decides the
previous unit is not where he wanted it?
Am I to have the program keep track of
each move, shoving more and more information into memory? . . . The more
we try to mimic the flexibility of a board
game, the less we have to make the
game a game. Why? . . . . [The
flexibility intrinsic to a board game] is
alien to the computer game. . . . Computers are dynamic systems. As one
progresses through a game, things are
destroyed as others are created. It is a
finite realm. What did I do in the above
case? Rather than cover each case accordingly and eat up tons of memory, I
simply allowed the player to put that unit
back in its original spot, no matter what
he did with it. Sure, he could cheat
doing this, but so what? The intention
was to allow the player to fix some of the
mistakes he may make.
So, I suggest that this lack of control
and lack of readily available information
compared to what printed cardboard
and paper gives us may be the real
reason many wargamers don't take the
plunge into computer wargames. They
look similar, but are apples and oranges.
. . . As I've said earlier, the board game
offers an incredible range of flexibility,
while the computer game offers little.
This is not to say that computer games
are lacking. They are useful in their own
realm. Maps may not be as graphically
pleasing as board games, but they are
much more flexible, with the ability to
change their look by the mere changing
of a number in memory. Computer
games come already set up; offer the
solitaire gamer a decent opponent; can
express "real time" combat; and on and
on. . . .
Perhaps, the heart of the matter here is
user friendliness. Fog of war is an intentional inclusion in computer wargames.
.. Fog of war is a vital and exciting part
of computer wargaming. It is moving a
Tiger platoon down a road like nobody's
business when ...crack! ... shots are
fired and the Tiger platoon is missing a
tank and scrambling for cover. Leaving
a player to wonder what happened to an
eliminated Tiger tank when all it underwent was machine gun fire, that's a user
friendliness problem (and a bug to boot).
User friendliness is an area of concern
for me. I've gone to some lengths to
make my programs user-friendly. Just
about anyone can pick them up with a
minimum of instruction and fare pretty
well. But there are mysteries, too. I've
hidden my combat algorithms in code.

Having been a board wargamer, I am
aware of the player who has an acute
fascination for the details of a game, but
I decided not to cater to that type. I
never held that fascination. Having
played wargames, I know what a Tiger
tank is and how it shapes up against,
say, a T34. I don't know this from examining combat results tables. I know
this from experiencing Tigers versus
T34s in a gaming environment.

reports from Placernoit (2,500 yards
away) on the French right were sketchy.
Napoleon's command control was, thus,
about a mile. Over five miles, his control
was as effective as if he had been on the
moon!
In early battles, smoke quickly
destroyed the ability of generals to see
what was happening. A general's last
real command was to order his troops

... In a design, I usually add features
to a basic system until memory is full or
the game is perfect. I've never had a perfect game, so I fill memory.
I can see stopping at a point and, instead of including a halftrack unit with
transport capabilities, I start writing code
that details the game play to the user as
things happen. Is this what you want? If
it is, it would be somewhat of a relief. It's
easier to write that kind of code than to
write code that covers transporting and
transported units, and all the gobble-degook that entails (e.g. can transported
units shoot? can they be separate targets? what if the halftrack gets blown
up? etc.).
In closing, ...I think computers are
something else entirely /than
boardgames] and computer wargame
designers should be exploring the differences as strengths. . . .

Dave Arneson
Dave Arneson is best known as the cocreator of "Dungeons and Dragons". He
also designed a computer game entitled "Battle of Britain." It should be
remembered that Arneson was a historical wargamer prior to the advent of
role playing games.
Creating an effective Fog of War is one
of the biggest "plus" factors in computer
simulations today. Not knowing what is
going on is certainly the most common
factor found in
wars throughout
history. On preelectronic age battlefields, the
general rarely
could determine
what was happening. For example,
during the Waterloo campaign, Napoleon did not know
the exact situation several times. He
never did know what happened at
Quatre Bras (8 miles from Ligny) or
Wavre (9 miles from Waterloo). At Waterloo, he did not know what was happening in front of Hougoumont (4,400
yards away) on the French left. Even

into battle. After that, control of the situation drops like a rock through the chain
of command. "Control" came down to
the battalion and company commanders. At best, the troops might ask
for reinforcements. At worst, the next
thing the General sees is his men running out of the smoke pursued by the
enemy!
In the era of sailing ship battles, the
Admiral's plan soon dissolved and the individual ship's captains took over the
conduct of their individual battles. All
shrouded in great rolling banks of pow, der smoke.
Air operations
consist of overall
planning with execution rapidly
falling to individual aircraft
playing "follow
the leader," if
they can see him! Your forces report
that all the enemy is eliminated and the
target is flattened. Only a thorough
debriefing uncovers the approximate
"truth" of what really happened.
On today's electronic battlefield, there
(Continued on page 52)

Sneak Preview

Ferrari
Formula One

A

sk the average European

sports fan who Don Mattingly
or John Elway is and you may
get a puzzled look. "John Elway, isn't
he that Irish flutist?". But ask him who
Alain Prost or Nigel Mansell is, and
you will probably get an immediate
answer. "Alain and Nigel? They're
simply the two best Grand Prix drivers
in the world!"
In 1986 there were 16 Grand Prix

events held in 15 countries (Italy
had two races). Take the World
Series, the Super Bowl, the college bowls, and Ringling Bros.
Barnum and Bailey Circus; roll
them up into one event and you
have a sense of how important a
Grand Prix race is for the host
country. Attendance at a Grand
Prix event can run 400,000 to
500,000! When a Grand Prix race
"rolls into town" the country takes
a holiday. Well, most of countries,
anyway. Detroit hosts the U.S.
Grand Prix, but when the world's
best Formula One drivers come to
Motor City in June, most U.S.
sports writers are more engrossed
by who baseball fans are voting
for the the All-Star balloting.
Well, Electronic Arts may singlehandedly spark a new interest in
Grand Prix racing among U.S.
sports fans. When I got my first
look at Ferrari Formula One I was
hooked. When I thought of auto
racing, my association had always
been to think of speedway racing
such as you find at the Indianapolis 500 or stock car
racing. You know what I mean, a
uniform oval track, where fast cars
go around, and around, and
around, and around . . . (you get
the idea). While that has its attractions for some, it did not interest
me. However, because of this new
program from EA, Grand Prix
racing has grabbed me.
Ferrari Formula One (Amiga with
planned ports to IBM and C-64) is
Electronic Arts second release in their
"Sports Legends" series. The first was
Earl Weaver Baseball which was
CGW's Game of the Year in 1987.
Ferrari Formula One is another winner
in terms of realism, excitement and

Grand Prix Racing Simulation
playability. It is an outstanding example of how action and strategy can
be combined to make an outstanding
game. The actual race events are
hand-eye coordination contests of
the very best design. On the other
side, the preparations for the race
and the guidance of your "team"
through the Grand Prix season are
challenges to delight all fans of
good strategic simulations.
The sixteen courses of the 1986
Grand Prix circuit are reproduced
in amazing detail and reality. The
background scenery drifts by
separately from, but in relationship
to the foreground, giving a 3-D
animated effect that must be seen
to be believed. You will spend a
good deal of time just learning the
various courses. But don't expect
this to be tedious. It was exciting
when, after numerous runs, I felt I
had the "Autodromo Internacional do
Rio de Janeiro" course down pat.
Time to go on to qualifying and ultimately the race!. But now a new
challenge confronts you. The opposing drivers! The program simulates
the racing styles of actual Grand Prix
drivers. They are all there, 1986
World Champion Alain Prost (France),
the 1987 World Champion Nelson Piquet (Brazil), Britain's Nigel Mansell,
Brazil's Ayrton Senna (winner of the
U.S. Grand Prix in 1986 and 1987),
and a host of other top Grand Prix
drivers. Well, they are there, sort of.
The program lists drivers initials and
car numbers instead of their names.
This was probably done to avoid royalty entanglements that could arise with
using the real names of drivers from
so many different countries (in Grand
Prix racing there is no mechanism for
collective bargaining on royalty rights
such as is found in U.S. professional
sports).

Auto race games are nothing new.
There have been dozens released in
the last several years. But Ferrari Formula One tops them all for the realis-

by Russell Sipe

pointed right of center and the terrain
coming up on the left is seen more
clearly. This feature will become a
new standard that future race games
will have to emulate.
Beyond the incredible racing sequence itself, Ferrari Formula One
is a detailed simulation of auto race
mechanics and race planning. You
will use the wind tunnel and dyno
room to experiment with various
systems on your car (fuel injection
computer ROM system, turbochargers, wing settings, suspension, etc.). You will have to learn
the various type of tires to use for
different events. Gear ratios must
be adjusted according to the type
course you will be racing.

tic feel of racing. Rick Koenig, Ferrari
Formula One's designer, has entered

new design territory with the
peripheral vision scanning that he has
incorporated into Ferrari Formula
One. For example, when you turn
your car to the left, your view pans
left so that the path of the car is

The 1986 Grand Prix season is
simulated in Ferrari Formula One.
The World Champion that year was
Alain Prost of France (who?). The
only U.S. Grand Prix driver in 1986
was Eddie Cheever (who?). These are
not exactly marketable names in the
U.S. So, unlike Earl Weaver Baseball
and the upcoming John Madden
Football, EA decided to go after an
auto maker to be associated with this
"Sports Legends" release instead of
an individual sportsman. Ferrari was a
natural choice of manufacturers. Rich
Hilleman of EA describes Ferrari as
the "N.Y. Yankees of Grand Prix
racing", pointing out that no auto
maker has won more World Championships. True, but there may be
another reason for going with Ferrari,
I mean, when you consider the alternative: "Williams-Honda Formula
One"?
I predict a grand reception for Ferran Formula One. Buckle up, and get
ready to lose some sleep!

S

Spring is with us once again (poor Fred, he
misses those long winter nights already);
time to put away the snow shovels and get
out the lawn mowers. While you're waiting
for the grass to grow high enough to cut, have a
seat and we'll talk about the good old days: hansom
cabs, gaslight, fog-shrouded streets, and Sherlock
Holmes.

This month, Sher-

lock: The Riddle of
the Crown Jewels

takes center stage as
adventuredom s four
star rated innkeeper
weaves her regular
tale of mystery and
suspense.

Right off, let me say that if you're a dyed-in-thewool Sherlock Holmes fan, you may not like this
game very
Watson solves the case, while Holmes spends most of the game trailing around after
him, doing very little of anything. In this respect,
Sherlock: The Riddle of the Crown Jewels is a misleading title. Holmes might almost not be in it at all,
considering the small part that he plays.
Sherlockians may also be unhappy over the
portrayal of Professor Moriarty (no relation to Brian)
as a taunting, teasing opponent, leaving cutesy
clues for Holmes to find throughout London. The
real Moriarty was a
serious criminal, who
never went in for cute
tricks; he went straight
for the jugular in a nononsense manner.
On the other hand,
those who do not take
their Holmes quite so
seriously may enjoy this
game, which is almost
pure puzzle-solving. It is
not a mystery along the
lines of, say, a Witness
or Suspect. There is no
evidence as such to collect for a prosecution
and few people that
you need to speak to.
"Crown Jewels" itself
is not a particularly
hard adventure, and no
one should have much
difficulty in solving it,
especially as the game
comes with built-in
answers (as did "Border
Zone" and "Nord and
Bert"). A couple of puzzles may tempt you to
look at the hints, but
overall it's pretty
straightforward going.
It all begins during
Jubilee Week, celebrating the fiftieth year of Queen Victoria's reign. While
most of Britain is caught up in the celebrations and
good times, Dr. Watson is summoned to 221B by
Mrs. Hudson, who has become increasingly alarmed
over Holmes° growing inactivity and moodiness.
Watson finds his old friend in a very black mood in-

deed, and it will take more than mere conversation
to rouse Holmes from his lethargy. An important
client is waiting downstairs, so there is no time to
lose. What is needed here is something unusual
and out of the ordinary, to capture Holmes' attention.
Once Holmes has snapped out of it, the client is
brought up by the landlady and relates shocking
news: the Crown Jewels have been stolen! Unless
they are found and returned by Monday morning, a
catastrophe of unimaginable proportions wil l befall
the Empire!
Naturally, Holmes and Watson aren't about to let
that happen. There are no clues to the thieves, but
left at the scene of the crime was a paper with some
poetic verses written on it. These verses are pointers
as to where to go next, and also contain a warning
for Holmes not to take on the case.
This is the time to get out the partial map of London that comes with the game. Holmes and Watson
can only visit those places which are on or near the
dark brown band that runs along some of the
streets; all the rest are inaccessible. That still leaves
a fair number of places to visit including Scotland
Yard, Trafalgar Square. Parliament, the Tower of
London, and Madame Tussaud's, among others (all
the tourist traps! grin).
While it is possible to walk around the streets,
most travelling should be done in a cab, which is
generally faster. Read the sample transcript in the
manual so you know how to call a cab, and which
one to call (Watson, by the way, is never asked for
payment by the cabbie; perhaps Holmes forks over
the charge).
I he first stop on the London tour is indicated by
the first verse on the paper. This is Westminster
Abbey, the burial site of British royalty for many cen
turies (I didn't like to say that right out, but there
was really no way around this one, and like most of
the verses, it's rather blatantly obvious).
You may want to make a map as you walk
through the Abbey, as, rather surprisingly, many of
the room descriptions do not give the exits. You will
have to try going in different directions from the
rooms to see if there are any other ways out. Fortunately, it isn't too large a place.
Since tombs are the main feature here, it's a logical assumption that the next three verses have
something to do with them, although finding out
what may be a puzzle. A careful survey of all the
rooms will definitely help, at least to some extent.
Still, Watson will be needing some outside assistance (not from Holmes, however), and a little research is in order here.
When this part has been properly unraveled,
several more verses will come to light, and these are
the heart of the game. All of them refer to various
places around London where Watson will find something. Obtaining these somethings and figuring out
their purpose is the major activity. Fortunately, there

is no specific sequence required. Watson can go
after the objects in any order, although the one in
the Tower of London will have to come last.
Most of the verses in this second set are so obvious (and in the case of London Bridge and the
Tower, explicit), that determining the locations to
visit will take hardly any effort at all; the only one
that may give people some pause for thought is the
"candle/chopper" verse, but that one can be figured
out simply by looking in on places not previously
visited.
While Watson will be doing a lot of cabbing
around, it's a good idea if he also takes a stroll
down the streets and byways of London. There are
some interesting people to meet, and items to be
obtained, which he'll never see unless he does
some moving around on his own two feet.
There is plenty of time for this, however. Watson
has forty-eight hours to recover the jewels, which is
more than enough (especially since he won't have
the chance to sleep). The only thing to be careful
about is that many of the buildings have definite
hours when they are open; so don't expect to be
able to get into them in the middle of the night.
It's rather difficult to give clues to the game here,
since (a) the game comes with clues and answers in
it, and (b) almost any clue would give away the locations to search in (although as I said before, the verses are simple to solve).
The puzzles themselves are also fairly simple,
provided that (in most cases) you have the proper
item or items with you. Even if you do get stuck, it's
likely that the first online hint will set you on the
road to the solution (try to avoid the temptation to
keep hitting N for the next one). Sometimes just
looking at the list of hint categories may be enough
to get you moving again.
Somewhere along the line, Holmes will be kidnapped. This is built-in and cannot be avoided, so
don't let it bother you (besides, he hasn't been
much help in the game, anyway). This doesn't
mean Watson will be alone, however, since he'll acquire a new companion in the person of Wiggins,
head of the Baker Street Irregulars (and there's even
a cameo appearance later by Mycroft, Sherlock's
brother).
Wiggins will trail along much as Holmes did, but
there are a couple of places where he will provide invaluable assistance (both before and after he becomes Watson's shadow), actually doing something
for you. However, at the end game portion, Wiggins
will slay behind, and Watson must go it alone into
Moriarty's Lair.
So, at last, Watson comes face to face with the
nefarious Napoleon of Crime. The Crown Jewels are
spread out on a table in front of him, glittering in
the gaslight. Holmes is nearby, securely tied to a
chair, and Moriarty's accomplice is at hand, to make
sure that Watson doesn't try anything.

Time is very short here. Watson has no more than
a few moves to subdue the criminals and save the
day for the British Empire. He will really need his
thinking cap for this one, and timing is critical (it's a
good idea to save the game soon after entering the
Lair, just in case).
Unfortunately, there is no way to bring Moriarty &
Co. to justice. They will escape to plot further underhanded doings. The
main thing is to get the
jewels to the palace on
time, of which by now
there is very little. A
quick cab ride should
just make it with scant
minutes to spare and a
very nasty situation will
have been averted. The
Queen, of course, will
be properly thankful.
The major problem
with this adventure is
the loose plotting. If
the purpose of the verses is to lead Holmes
into a trap (as Holmes
surmises very early on),
there is no real point to
his kidnapping later in
the game, since Watson is following up on
the clues very nicely.
On the other hand, if
Moriarty fears that Holmes won't fall for it, the
kidnapping makes
sense, but in that case,
why is Watson (who is
on the scene) not
taken as well? The kidnappers actually have
him and then let him
go. Of course, it is
necessary (in game
terms) for Watson to
remain at liberty, but
this part really ought to
have been better handled. It is best to play
this game for the puzzles, and not think too much
about the story line.
Well, it's about that time again, as I see by the invisible clock on the wall. Remember if you need
help with an adventure game, you can reach me in
the following ways: On Delphi, stop in at the
GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie, visit the Games RoundTable (type Scorpia to
reach the Games RT). On The Source, send SMail
to ST1030. By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed,
stamped envelope if you live in the US): Scorpia,
PO Box 338, Gracie Station, NY NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!

Jam, Joust, Jump and Jive

SIDEWALK
SURFIN'
SAFARI
by Yung Min Choi
Breezing through the back alley at 20 m.p.h.,
you suddenly realize that skateboards do not
have brakes and the chain link fence in front
of you is unavoidable. You brace yourself for the impact, but feel absolutely nothing as you pass
through the fence as easily as Casper the friendly
ghost passes
through walls.
The fence
shows no
damage
either. This is
all intensely
disorienting
until your
body falls into
nearly two
hundred tiny
pieces.

B

The scenario
depicted
above is only
one of the
ways skaters
"eat it" in

Skate or Die,

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:

PUBLISHER:

Skate or Die
C-64/128
1-8
$29.95
Michael Kosaka
Stephen Landrum, and
David Bunch
Electronic Arts
Redwood City . CA

a fast-moving
action game
based on the
skateboarding
subculture. In
fact, dying is
the main
thing the animated characters do
in this game. Nevertheless, players
will not experience too much pain
when their alter egos slam into the
ground because, when a character
crashes, it is always in a humorous
way.

The game begins in Rodney's
Skate Shop. It is easy to recognize the punked-out
proprietor ("Punked out? I never get no respect!").
At the skate shop, players choose to compete or
practice. Even the best joystick jockeys will need to
practice before competing. The action sequences
seem deceptively simple, but they still demand practice.

The downhill jam is an event where players zip
down a back alley in order to see how much destruction they can cause. Skaters smash soda cans and
bottles, lay flower pots to waste, and even try tripping one's opponent. Solitaire players and groups
with odd numbers may wind up skating against
Lester, Rodney's homely son and resident computer
opponent. He doesn't get any respect either, except
in the pool joust.
Speaking of the pool joust, this is an event in
which characters skate around in an empty pool
with a boffing stick and try to knock the other
character's for a loop. There are three opponents to
choose from, but the meanest of these is Lester.
Hint: Try to stay out of the corners of the pool in
order to stay alive in this event.
A quieter event involves a downhill race. Characters skate over, under, and around a number of
obstacles (Radical skaters consider these opportunities.). Gravel is the one to watch out for in this
competition. The game mechanics are nice because
you can either use the joystick normally or choose
to control it in a pattern as though it was your foot
and you were on the board itself.
If you want to demonstrate sheer guts, you will not
want to miss the high jump contest. In this competition, skaters skate up the ramp as fast as possible in
order to achieve the highest jump. If the player
clicks the button at just the right instant, it adds to
the score. If he clicks at the wrong instant, the
skater ends up as a black smudge at the bottom of
the ramp.
The final event is the freestyle ramp. This contest
allows Aerials, Ollies, and Rock-n-rolls, among
others. For the uninitiated, these are types of
skateboard tricks. An Aerial is any move which
causes all the wheels of the board to be off the
ground at the same time; an Ollie is an Aerial where
the skater does not grab the board with his hands;
and a Rock-n-Roll is a move which balances the
board on an object (usually, the side of a ramp or
pool) so that each pair of wheels is on a different
side of the object before the skater does a kickturn
and rides back. Those who try too hard to impress
their "Betties" (girls) can end up bouncing off the
bleachers and literally knocking one's socks off.
Other tricks include: Backside-air (an Aerial where
the skater faces the ground with his back to the
sky), Frontside-air (the same except the skater's
back is to the ground), Handplant (a one-handed
handstand where the skater holds the board to his
feet with the other hand), Kickturn (the basic move
with the board's tail down, nose up, and board turning), and Rail Slide (a Rock-n-Roll done while sliding
the board along the edge of the ramp).
Skate or Die is an enjoyable game for teenage
board freaks who cannot get enough radical action
on the cement or "over-the-hill" adults who don't
want to risk their lives and limbs to experience the
simulated thrill of this action sport. It might just save
a few skinned up knees and broken bones (not to
mention a few bucks at the emergency room) for a
lot of us. Action enthusiasts should get plenty of
satisfaction from Skate or Die.

Strike Fleet
by M. Evan Brooks

S

Strike Fleet is Lucasfilm Games' follow-on to
PHM Pegasus. While Pegasus had state-ofthe-art accuracy and graphics, this reviewer
noted "a certain sameness and/or lack of elan" (cf.
CGW, No. 39). Additional reflection over time has
yielded the conclusion that Pegasus was an interesting and well-executed simulation, but of a topic
which intrinsically was not
that exciting.
Happily,
Strike Fleet
does not have
a lack of excitement. Bearing the
graphics and
historical accuracy that
Pegasus possessed, this
production is
a more varied,
challenging
and enjoyable
simulation.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Modern
naval warfare
seems to be
the newest
cycle of simula
tion games
with
numerous titles on the subject due
Strike Fleet
for release in 1988. Strike Fleet has
C-64, Apple II
$29.95 (Commodore)
its emphasis on modern surface
$34.95 (Apple)
combat—an aspect virtually ignored
Noah Falstein,
both in the simulation industry and
Ken Macklin,
and Larry Holland
in the navy itself. Any discussion
Electronic Arts
with active duty Navy personnel will
San Mateo, CA
quickly yield the conclusion that the
movers and shakers are in the submarine and air
arms—not in the surface fleet. In fact, the only time
one really hears of the surface fleet is when it screws
up, a la Stark. The Surface Warriors, however, do
have a role in modern naval warfare, albeit not the
glorious one of a Nelson or Mahan.

Fresh as the Morning's Headlines
Strike Fleet offers numerous scenarios which are
topical and fresh. Beginning with the Stark reality,
one sails his frigate in the Persian Gulf. Obviously
bearing a close resemblance to history, standing orders are not to fire until fired upon (strategically,
there does not seem to be a purpose; however, that
fault lies in the Oval Office and not in the design
parameters). Watching a possible Iranian gunboat
and an lraqi jet close, one can feel a true sense of
queasiness. Who will fire first?—The answer is either
or both!

This scenario is a learning tool. Its only flaw is that
an American first fire immediately yields a loss.
However, a US warship would (or should) not allow
a possible enemy to close to engagement range.
Firing a shot across the bows is a time-tested Naval
version of establishing territoriality. Despite this, the
scenario succeeds in that one learns the system and
develops a true sense of paranoia at sea.
Later scenarios offer two British frigates hunting Argentine submarines and two undergunned British
warships engaging three Argentine frigates in the
Falklands War; escorting reflagged Kuwaiti tankers
into and out of the Persian Gulf; and finally—World
War III: surface, air and sub-hunting combat off
Iceland and Norway in five varied scenarios—of
which the last four scenarios can be linked into a
campaign game!

Mechanics and Tactics
Strike Fleet literally puts the user on the bridge.
After choosing a scenario, one can (and should)
tailor his force into an optimum mix. With helicopters, anti-ship/anti-air/anti-submarine missiles, torpedoes, chaff and phalanx systems, a relatively complete and varied weapons system is assembled and
ready for combat. One can shift the CIC (Command
Information Center) into three zoom positions, but
generally, most of the time will be spent on the
bridge. Here, navigation and warfare are brought to
a fine edge.
Helicopters are very important. Their ability to find
surface targets and remotely target them back to
their fleet offers a wider strike option. Against submarines, helicopters are the tool of preference.
While ship sonar is longer-ranged, the ships should
maintain a discreet distance from the subsurface forces. An incoming torpedo is almost impossible to
evade. Thus, the best way to combat submarines is
to find them and use the helicopter to fix and
destroy these insidious creatures of the deep.
Anti-ship missiles against warships are relatively
useless. While such a statement goes against Naval
sentiment, one can quickly see that the anti-air missiles usually neutralize the bulk of incoming antiship missiles until both sides are forced back to oldtime gunnery tactics.
The worst threat is a combined assault by air, surface and submarines. While radar can pick up the
first two threats, unless one is alert to proper use of
sonar, enemy submarines can penetrate the
perimeter and cause severe damage. Luckily, the
scenarios herein do not have a true combined arms
attack. Usually, one can beat off the surface fleet
and turn to the submarine threat. If a scenario offered a more cohesive submarine and surface assault, the American forces would have little chance
of survival in the hostile waters of the North Atlantic.
Often, long periods of ennui will be interspersed
with short spurts of intensive combat and terror.
Since one will often use time compression to speed
things along, the following tactical hint has been offered by EA: when using time compression, save the

game every 1-2 minutes. Then when an enemy submarine or surface vessel is encountered, go back to
the last save and slow down to realistic speeds. A
VERY artificial means, the fact remains that it does
work. Is it cheating? Look, the computer won't
make the accusation and who else is to know?

Naval Doctrine and Strike Fleet
Ever since 1890, Naval Strategy has been derived
from Alfred Mahan's The Influence of Seapower
Upon History. Perhaps the most critical (and most
misunderstood) concept of Mahan is that "it is the
possession of that overbearing power on the sea
which drives the enemy's flag from it . . . This overbearing power can only be exercised by great
navies". A literal application of such a principle
would lead to a reliance on surface and big ship
combatants. However, Mahan was referring to the
arm of decision in his era—the battleship (and later,
the dreadnought); the big navy (i.e. the battleship)
was superseded during World War II by the carrier ,
and in the modern world by the submarine. While
many will argue this last point, this reviewer feels
that the nuclear submarine is the capital ship of the
contemporary era.
With its weaponry and ability to penetrate surface
forces, the submarine is the weapon most to be
feared. Strike Fleet portrays this threat and the fact
that there is little defense against a modern submarine other than to find and destroy it before it
can engage.
The Maritime Strategy espoused by the United
States Navy envisages up to sixteen CAGs (Carrier
Air Groups) and the penetration of the Kola peninsula so that the Backfire bombers and nuclear submarines can be destroyed before they break out into
the Atlantic. Strike Fleet does not show the effect of
carrier air groups. In fact, the only real airpower in
the game consists of Soviet backfire bombers (Are
the designers trying to tell us something?). Nevertheless, the overall effect of a modified first strike into
the lion's den is sufficient to guarantee sleepless
nights for many a Navy captain.
Whether or not the carrier can survive in a modern
weapons intensive environment is a subject of
much debate. While Strike Fleet does not attempt to
answer this question, the sheer intensity and destructiveness of the World War III scenarios will give the
user much food for thought.

The Pluses
(1) Graphics are superbly executed;
(2) Weapons systems do seem to reflect reality.
One will note that generally, US missile systems require multiple strikes to sink Soviet vessels, while
Soviet missiles can generally sink American
destroyers and frigates with a single hit. This is
probably true—American Harpoon and Tomahawk
anti-ship missiles are much lighter than their Soviet
counterparts. While their technical superiority may
be greater, the magnitude does not appear to be of
a sufficient differential to make up for the weight
deficiency thereof.

(3) Remote Targeting is well done. Using the
LAMPS helicopters to remotely target enemy vessels
or naval vessels to remotely target enemy submarines for the helicopters is an accurate reflection
of modern surface warfare.
(4) Time compression is handled a la Pegasus, i.e. if little is
happening, time may be compressed up to 128 times real
speed. This allows one to avoid
long stretches of boredom followed by short periods of sheer
terror.
(5) Task Force Tailoring allows
one to develop optimal surface
fleets for the mission. For example, Scenario 9.7 has two US
frigates and a Spruace-class
destroyer attempting to defeat a
Soviet invasion of Norway.
Using the default task force is
an exercise in frustration. The destroyer only carries
8 anti-aircraft missiles, while the frigates carry 36
each. With the skies literally filled with anti-ship missiles from the larger Soviet fleet, the American
destroyer is relatively useless except as a target.
Since the destroyer has twice the point value of the
frigates, one would be better advised to substitute
two frigates for the destroyer and then engage the
Russian Bear.
(6) The Gun System is enjoyable. Given the smaller caliber of
the guns herein (generally 5inch), multiple hits are required
to sink an enemy vessel. This is
realistic and yields a sense of
combat on the high seas. See
Minuses, however.
(7) CIC/Bridge Interface allows
one to switch from the strategic
to the tactical aspect of the situation with a single keystroke.
(8) Sonar/Radar is well
presented in that active modes
are more effective, although
they also present one's own forces as a better target. The trade-off is for the user to decide upon.
(9) User Input may be done by joystick or
keyboard, or both. This allows maximum flexibility
for the user.

The Minuses
(1) The Bridge Interface: This aspect reflects a
deliberate design decision. In order to use the
weapons system from a particular ship, one must
switch to the bridge of that particular ship. With a
fleet of up to 17 ships, this bridge-switching is overly
artificial. A fleet commander cannot be physically
present on the bridges of all of his ships; yet, even
with the unrealism, one must admit that this does
yield a sense of combat confusion. While ships can
be maneuvered on automatic mode, weapons sys-

tems cannot; an automatic weapons employment
would have yielded a more realistic feel.
(2) The Gun System, while fun, is not realistic. The
Soviet gunnery is extremely inaccurate. Also, range-finding is
done by cross-hair targeting.
Often, one will discover that "one
up" is too high, and "one down"
is too low. One then has to wait
for the range to close or shift
speeds or targets. In reality, a
shot group as above would yield
a command of "Up (or down) onehalf, Fire for Effect".
(3) Chaff Defensive Systems
seem to be inefficient defensive
tools. This may be historically accurate, but additional background
information of employment and
efficiency would have been appreciated.
(4) Remote Targeting is sometimes unrealistic in
that LAMPS with a historical role of surface-searching can often pick up Soviet Backfire bombers at a
range of 300 km.
(5) Depth Warnings may prove fatal; certain Persian Gulf scenarios will warn one that certain ships
are entering shallow water. A strategic view will not

reveal the shoals, and it is sometimes impossible to
extricate a ship before it runs aground and/or sinks.
(6) Game Saves are easy; however, one may only
save one per pre-formatted disk. It would have been
nice to have an option to allow formatting within the
program, as do many SSI products.

The Might-Have-Beens
The following are not criticisms inasmuch as options that would have been appreciated:
(1) The ability to command from the Soviet side;
(2) A fuller design kit; with the ability to develop
task forces from the shipyard, a wider-ended option
would have permitted the user to develop his own
scenarios. The geographic areas are more than sufficient; all one would need is an ability to choose forces from both sides, set objectives and run.

Conclusions
Strike Fleet is a highly recommended product.
With its fine graphics, execution and sheer enjoyability, this view of surface naval warfare should
not be missed by anyone remotely interested in the
topic. Its negative aspects do not in any way
counteract the positive impact of this product.
(c) 1988 - M. Evan Brooks

RAMPARTS AND
RODENTS
A Look at Two Action Adventure
Dungeons
by Yung Min Choi
hough the dungeon had already netted buckof treasure for the warrior, he still wasn't
satisfied. He was elated when he spied yet
another treasure chest hidden behind a crumbling
wall. Once he determined
that there were no ghosts,
grunts, monsters, demons,
or traps in the small chamber, he lifted his battleaxe
and broke down the
remainder of the crumbling
wall.

T

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Demon Stalkers
C-64/128
1-2
$29.95
Micro Forte'
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

Stepping quickly into the
dark anteroom, he pulled a
key from among his possessions and pushed it into the
rusty padlock which held the
chest closed. He twisted the
key in the rusted padlock
and felt it give. Just as it finally sprung open, something
scurried across his feet. The
warrior grabbed his axe and
turned to face . . . a huge
sewer rat!

Both games discussed in this article
are part of the search-the-dungeon,
find-the-treasure, cast-the-spell, and
slay-the-monster genre of action
games. Gauntlet is based on the coinoperated arcade game developed and marketed by
Atari. Demon Stalkers (DS) is similar in design and
graphics. Both offer a multitude of dungeon levels.
DS has 100 levels on the original scenario disk and
players who utilize the construction set included with
the game can create an unlimited number of levels.
Players who complete the many levels of Gauntlet
will find the offer of 500 additional levels on
Mindscape's The Deeper Dungeons data disk to be
very attractive.

Characters and Caricatures
Gauntlet allows the choice of characters to play.
Choices include warriors, wizards, valkyrie, and elves.
In DS, the choice is more limited. Players in the latter game will either be the blue guy or the green
guy. This difference is not important because the
players only need to be able to discern their character from that of playing companions. All should

remember enough game etiquette to resist the
temptation to sit back and laugh while another
player's characters are pummeled to death. I
laughed at my spouse for not fighting back, only to
be rudely informed that it was my character that was
being slaughtered.
Monsters behave differently in each game. Most
monsters must make contact with the player's
character to do damage, but some monsters use
ranged weapons. For instance, Gauntlet's demons
shoot fireballs from their mouths. Talk about unholy
spit! In fact, Gauntlet's dungeon is packed full of
monsters from the beginning level onward. Players
have little choice but to wade into the pile of ghosts
and start slashing away. Gauntlet seemed to have
ten times more monsters than DS. Thus, despite
the similarities, Gauntlet is primarily an action game
and Demon Stalkers is a search game with action
thrown in.
One strategy which proved successful in both
games was retreat. Whenever it is possible to avoid
a conflict with monsters, players should choose to
avoid them. When this is impossible, try blasting the
monster generators before blasting the monsters.
Discerning players will discover that by concentrating on the monsters, the monster generators continue to manufacture monsters until the players find
themselves outnumbered. Monster generators are
piles of bones and square machines in Gauntlet and
bubble-like vortexes in DS.
One villain who should be avoided at any cost is
Gauntlet's "Death." This enemy's touch drains 200
health points at a shot. Also, players cannot destroy
him with physical attacks. The only type of attack
that "death" is vulnerable to is a magical attack.

Potions and Potables
Common to both games are keys and food. Keys
unlock both doors and treasure chests. Food restores lost health points. Gauntlet restores 100 points
for each plate of cold food or jug of cider ingested.
DS offers a variety of foods such as elf cakes, bread
and water, or banquets. Each type of food restores a
different number of health points. Players should par
take of as many meals as possible in the dungeons,
because the health points a player possesses is
proportional to the amount of time he is able to play
Other items found in Gauntlet's dungeons are potions that are collected to give players special bonus
powers. Potions include: extra armor to add protection, extra shot speed to allow a faster rate of
weapon fire, extra shot power to increase damage,
and extra fight power to increase hand-to-hand combat ability.
Demon Stalkers adds scrolls with messages on
them. These scrolls can give useful information, contain magic spells, or simply tease and tantalize
players. The scrolls also give occasional instructions
that are necessary for successful play, such as
"Players must open all chests before leaving this
level."

Exits and Excavations
The "Dungeon Construction Set" in DS adds to
the value of the game. It is simple to use. Apprentice dungeon designers use a joystick "point and
click" routine to add walls, traps, monsters,
treasures, or any of the other numerous options.
Players can build a small portion of a level and then,
playtest it to see if it will hold their interest. It is wise
to put only a few monsters in the first level of a
player design. I had to re-edit my first level because I
made it much too difficult. Also, the speed at which
the monster generating vortex functions is up to the
player in this mode, so be careful not to plan a vortex that functions too rapidly.
There are some differences between the two
programs. Gauntlet players will find that there is no
turning back once a level has been exited. DS
players will find that the game allows its players access to most levels. If a player awakens the sleeping
mutant plants in the little dungeon of horrors, for example, he can simply step back up the stairs to the
previous level. Even if he returns instantly, he will
find the plants have returned to sleep.
There are times between levels in Demon Stalkers
when players are given a portion of the story of Arthur and his companions who went into the dungeons to stop the demonic Calvrak. After the story

portion is told, a question
from that story is asked of
the players. No, the program
is not testing reading comprehension. Instead, it will
award a health bonus for a
correct answer. Further,
some of the levels in DS require Arthur's Magic Cipher,
the familiar codewheel copy
protection, in order to gain
access. Gauntlet does not
use this method.
Players who are undecided
about which game they
would rather spend their
money on can send two dollars to Electronic Arts for a
three level demonstration
disk of Demon Stalkers (see
CGW #44, February, p. 45
for details). In reality, players who
crave this type of action will not be
disappointed with either game.
Both games allow players the opportunity to go from . . . er .. .
rats to riches, a chance to go from
being waist deep in monsters to
waist deep in money.

TITLE: Gauntlet
SYSTEMS: Atari 8-bit, C-64/128
Atari ST
# PLAYERS:
1-2
PRICE:
$29.95
DESIGNER:
Atari Games Corporation
PUBLISHER:
Mindscape, Inc.
Northbrook, IL

THE WHITES
OF THEIR EYES
Strategic Simulations' American
Revolutionary War Release
Reviewed by Wyatt Lee
he hiss of the flashpans and the whoosh of
the musket balls become the center of focus
in Sons of Liberty (SOL), a new American
Revolutionary War simulation from Strategic

T

Simulations,
Inc.. The
game has the
look, feel, and
playability of
the company's
(and the
designers')
American Civil
War series,
but with subtle differences.
First, there
seems to be a
greater disparity in
morale between the welldisciplined
British troops
and the largely volunteer
army of the
fledgling
United States
than there
was between
Union and
Confederate
troops in the
previous
games (Rebel

Charge at

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE.
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Chickamauga
would be an
exception to
this, as the
South had
vastly superior
efficiency to
the North in
that simulation). This means, parSons of Liberty
ticularly in the Bunker Hill
Apple II (64K), C-64/128
scenario, that some units will im1-2
$39.95
mediately rout after they first underDavid Landrey arid
go casualties. This is not as likely
Chuck Kroegel
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
to happen in the Saratoga
Mountain View, CA
(Freeman's Farm) or Monmouth
scenarios, as they reflect a later
point in the war (and are closer to the ACW simulations in that regard). Second, because of the nature
of the British army as opposed to the rebel

American forces, it is next to impossible for the
Americans to win a melee combat. Third, the ranges are, of necessity, shorter to reflect the earlier
weaponry. Finally, SOL is not a simulation of one
particular battle. Rather, the game contains three dif
ferent battles (Bunker Hill, Monmouth, and
Saratoga) which require somewhat different approaches.
In a departure on the documentation, the game
comes with two different manuals and the three battle maps rather than the one large manual. The first
manual (Rule Book) simply deals with the
mechanics of play; and the second, the Historical
Reference Guide, offers a wealth of historical background, maps, data tables, and strategy notes (as
well as a historical narrative on Breed's Hill). Otherwise, the standard features of the system are all
here. Players still move units via the standard
keyboard configuration, units are still dependent
upon operations points to move and maneuver;
morale continues to be determined by efficiency
minus fatigue; game turns consistently represent an
hour of real time; the game still utilizes the same
unit symbols in the intermediate and advanced
games (although the icons for the basic game have
been redesigned); facing and flank attacks are
present in the two upper difficulty levels; and fortification building options and ammunition supply
rules are utilized in the advanced game.
SOL captures the flavor of the Revolutionary War
with regard to the more traditional battles which
took place in the north. No one has yet attempted
to simulate the glorious antics of "The Swamp Fox"
and his band of guerilla fighters (or even the more
set battles of King's Mountain, Cowpens, and Guilford Courthouse) in the south. These battles
depended heavily upon finding the right high
ground for effective artillery use and using terrain
and breastworks to full advantage in defense. The effective fire of American rifle units from long range
and the devastating British capacity for adjacent fire
(reflecting a greater discipline and cohesion) proves
most visible in the Saratoga scenario.

Bunker Hill (Breed's Hill)
When the computer plays the British side, the artificial intelligence routines almost always attempt to
flank Prescott's redoubt on top of Breed's Hill by
moving along the road which runs through 18,10.
This technique is effective because it keeps
Prescott's Thousand from firing upon the redcoats
until they are in a position to fire upon Prescott and
Brewer. In point of fact, this is also not a bad
strategy for human players to use when playing the
British side. Unfortunately, for those who prefer a
more historical approach, this means that the British
do not attempt to take the redoubt or storm the
fence (which is heavily manned, albeit by troops
with low morale) with the overconfidence of the historical troops. The American can almost always win
a major victory against the computer opponent, but
he must remain pretty much in place in order to accomplish this.
Because of this static defense, many human

players will not want to play the American side of
this scenario and will simply accept the default of
playing the British. However, if you do choose to
play the American side history can be emulated.
Remember that the fledgling army was not nearly as
effective in melee as the British line troops, so it was
important to inflict as much damage as possible
from a distance. This means that artillery is important, so the American player must keep that artillery
in position to be able to fire almost anywhere on the
field of battle. It also means that the infantry units
need to maintain their defensive positions as long
as possible and keep firing at the British at long
range. Remember that the revolutionary
sharpshooters were much more effective in ordinary
fire than the British regulars who, in actuality, fired
many rounds harmlessly over the rebel's heads. Conversely, the British will want to outflank the
Americans on that southern flank of Breed's Hill
and close upon the rebel units as swiftly as possible.

Monmouth
Monmouth begins with deceptive ease for the
American troops. The British player should not lose
heart, however, for the tide of battle switches quickly
enough. The historical situation involved the harassment of Clinton's retreat. The Americans were simply trying to inflict enough damage that Clinton could
not retreat in force. Instead, what began as a successful attack became a speedy withdrawal. British
reinforcements, which appear at the end of the
second turn in the scenario, proved superior to the
rebels and forced the U. S. forces back. Yet,
Washington was prepared for this, planned a
fallback position with artillery in position on a ridge
and was able to hold the center. The battle
degenerated into an artillery duel with Clinton eventually forced to withdraw.
This scenario follows the historical flow of battle extremely well. This reviewer tried several approaches
to holding a defensive line without retreating and
they were all to no avail. The British reinforcements
are simply too overwhelming. While it is true that
the city, Monmouth, does offer a protected defensive position, it is also true that it is impossible to
keep the British from eventually surrounding it and
devastating the troops inside. One can hold off the
inevitable only so long. Superior British forces and
efficiency force the American player to follow a historical strategy. Even if the American could hold off
the British until Green, Stirling, and Smallwood arrived on the scene, the reinforcements would be so
fatigued by the time they arrived that they would
rout after first combat.
It appears at the start that there are significantly
greater totals of American forces noted on the
menu screens and in the order of battle. Note,
however, that half of these total forces are American
reinforcements that will not arrive until the scenario
is half over.

Saratoga
Of the three scenarios, Saratoga this is probably

the best
balanced. The
British have a
slight advantage in
morale, while
the Americans
have a slight
advantage in
numbers. The
British have
the advantage
in artillery.
Nevertheless,
there are almost the same
number of victory point
squares for
both sides
which means
that there is
equal opportunity for offensive forays. In
fact, the
documentation
suggests three
different
strategies
which can
work for the
Americans in
this scenario.
Historically,
the terrain (particularly the woods) helped the Americans. That this
is true in the game may be reflected by the fact that
the British player is warned in the documentation
not to allow U. S. penetration too far into the woods
where General Burgoyne's reinforcement units enter
or the British player will be
forced to spend the rest of
the game trying to dig the
rebels out.

Incremental
Improvement
In summary, one must
note that each release in
the "American Civil War"
series showed refinements
over the previous game.
SOL is no exception. It combines the user-friendliness
and playability of the previous series with an understanding of the problems of
an earlier period's warfare and refinements to the
system, as well as careful scenario design, to capture the flavor of 18th Century warfare. Not only
does this reviewer heartily recommend SOL to all
who enjoyed the ACW series, but urges SSI to start
planning a sequel which emphasizes the southern
battles.

Deathlord
by Scorpia
n Deathlord, the major objective of the game is

I

to acquire five special artifacts, learn seven
magic words, and then, take your party down
into hell to battle it out with the Deathlord. In other
words, it's your typical CRPG scenario of locating
and destroying a central evil figure.

Land of the Setting Sun

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

You begin by creating a party of six characters,
choosing from among sixteen different professions
and eight races. All of
the professions and
most of the races have
Japanese or quasiJapanese names, but
it's easy to see that the
Kishi are Paladins;
Shizen are Druids;
Yabanjin are Barbarians; Yakuza are
thieves; Shisai are
Priests; and Ryoshi are
Rangers. Then, deciding on the actual party
makeup can be a bewildering task. There
are seven fighter types
(with no apparent
necessity for so many),
plus ninja, assassins,
thieves, four magicuser types, a hybrid
ninja/magic-user, and a
peasant (?). On top of
that, you choose from standard RPG
Deathlord
races. It takes a long time to wade
Apple II
through it all and get a party together.
$49.95
Al Escudero
and David Wong
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

Manual Austerity

The table in the manual which shows minimum attributes required for each class is often incorrect. Go
with what you see on your screen during the roll-up
phase. The manual also omits pertinent information
about some of the character classes. For example,
in addition to being fighters, the Kishi also cast
Priest spells. However, nowhere is it mentioned how
long it takes for the Kishi to obtain a new level of
spells (a very long time!). Kishi do not obtain
second-level spells until they are twelfth-level in experience, third-level spells at twenty-fourth level, and
fourth-level spells at level 40.
The weapons/armor tables are also inconsistent.
For instance, the table on page six tells you that
Mahotsukai and Genkai can wear no armor and use
no weapons. The table on page nine tells you that

these same two classes can wear cloaks and use
daggers or staffs as weapons (this, by the way, is correct). Even worse, the table on page nine is by no
means clear about exactly what armor can be worn
by the various fighter classes (among others). Under
Samurai, for example, is listed Harame-do (leather).
Is this the most or the least he can wear? Probably
the latter, since Samurai are even capable of wearing plate mail. The only sure way to determine what
a character can wear or use is to trade items around
and check armor class.

No Class At All
Yakuza are relatively worthless. They not only go
up very slowly in level, but almost anyone in the
party can perform Yakuza functions such as picking
locks (with a lockpick), searching for traps and
secret doors, and disarming chests (automatic attempt upon opening). The Shizen is not an especially helpful class in most instances because many
Shizen spells function only outdoors. They do not
have decent offensive spells that work indoors or
out until fifth level. Unfortunately, you need a
Shizen because of three spells they, and only they,
have.
One tells how far down the party is in a dungeon.
The second locates land when you're at sea. The
third cures disease. Actually, the Shisai class should
be able to cure disease since the Shisai in the
temples can do so.

Out of Alignment
Having chosen race and profession, you decide on
the sex and alignment of your character. Neither
has any particular effect in the game (though some
classes have restrictions on alignment). Alignment
has little bearing on game play. One time, my party
of good characters deliberately, and without provocation, killed someone in a town.
Naturally all the guards came running, but after
they had been disposed of, all my good characters
were still listed as being of good alignment. Other
people would still talk to me and the merchants
would still buy and sell goods. So good, evil, or
neutral has no meaning here. Alignment seems to
have been added in imitation of other games, with
no thought to checks and effects.

Utility of Futility
Of course, after all you've been through, it would
be a good idea to back up the characters first .. .
just in case something unpleasant happens. This
can be difficult. Newly-created characters are placed
on a roster and you choose from this roster when
assembling a party (more than six characters are allowed on the roster ). When all party members have
been chosen, the team is given a name and saved
to disk.
There is a utility on the main disk that allows you

(Continued on page 48)

KNIGHT ORC
by Alan Roberts

y

You wake up with a splintering headache. Your
fellow orcs have abandoned you, you are tied
to a horse, and there's a knight over there
who's going to kill you in a few moments. You get
the feeling that this is not going to be one of your
better days.
So begins Knight Orc. It is primarily a text adventure, although all
but the Apple II version have pull
down graphics.
But don't get too
excited about the
graphics. I'll touch
on that later.
KnightOrc is
divided into three
adventures, in
which the gamer
plays the part of a
lowly orc with ambition. Part one is a
stand-alone adventure. In parts two
and three, players
can move from adventure to adventure at will, but it is
impossible to solve
either independently. Giving
the command
"Raise Visor,"
places one as a
robot in a futuristic
mirror-image of the
fantasy world in
part two (Those who've read Piers Anthony's Split Infinity may feel a certain deja vu). To return to Orc's
Head Tower, one merely puts the visor back on.

Title:
System:

Price:
Designer:
Publisher:

Knight Orc
Amiga, Atari ST,
IBM, Macintosh,
C-64/128, Apple II
$44.95 (16 bits)
$39.95 (8 bits)
Level 9 Computing
Firebird/Rainbird
Waldwick, NJ

brother orcs have demolished the only bridge across
the ravine ... .
Points are awarded for each ten-foot length of
rope you can lay your gauntlets on. For example,
take that Green Knight over there (Arthurian fans,
take note!). Surely you could talk him out of his
reigns. This is a good spot to save, by the way. The
first time you approach him, he is "cooperative."
After that, he's death on horseback. Other segments
can be found in the castle, tower, crossroads, well,
gibbet, clearing, fairgrounds, cave, and royal oak.
Find all ten to get full score, although you can
swing through with only nine.

A Kind of Magic (Stay for a Spell)
Having returned to Orc's Head Tower, you are
warmly greeted by your buddies, who take everything you pilfered in the previous section. As they
say, you can't take it with you. Of course, you have
more pressing concerns.
In part two, you have to find and master twentyone different spells. Generally, you'll recognize spells
because they're in upper case. The command "cast
]spell] on ]object]" will do the trick.
Begin by wandering around the ol' homestead.
This is where you'll find the first spell (it's hard to
miss). Your chief has something you need, but you'll
have to bargain for it. Next, visit the haunted house,
the rose garden, a forest clearing and the swamp.
Each location has spells you can pick up on your
own, the rest call for assistance. There are two spells
in the necropolis, but wait until you have some allies
before you go. Getting spells at the troll bridge and
at the castle are best left for the end of the game.

Hordes of the Mountain King
(Raw Recruits)
The object of this section is to make "friends". The
first item of business is to find the recruiting device.
You'll need an item from the haunted house to get
through.
Go back to part two and get as many spells as you
can before returning to part three. Gather all the allies you can (all four) and escape!

An Orc's-Eye View

(Beware: The following sections
have specific information regarding
the game. If readers wish to avoid
hints, they should skip to Inconclusive Conclusions.)

Loosed Orc
(At the end of your rope)
Soon after starting the game, the above-mentioned knight comes thundering at you. Tilt! Fortunately, the crowd leaves you for dead in a rubbish
heap. You are deep in enemy turf, and you'd better
get home before you're spotted. However, your

Here, There be Hints!
Don't bother with the loot, especially in part one.
It'll only get you killed by those mean ol' humans. If
you feel compelled to get all the treasure you come
across (old hobbits are hard to break) put them in a
container.
Read the novella that comes with the play guide.
There are some hints there.
The frog has a spell written on a smooth pebble.
Catching the mouse takes persistence (kind of like
getting a babel fish . . . ).
To get past the troll, gather every scrap of silver

you can find and let her follow you away from the
bridge, letting her steal one item at a time. After a
half)dozen such moves, drop the rest run to the
bridge, and break into her apartment. Save early
and save often. Random events can foul up your
plans.
If you've read Lord of the Rings, the ring shouldn't
be too hard to deal with.
Keep moving. If you wait in one place too long,
you'll be recognized and mugged.

Inconclusive Conclusions
(Or Death Where is Thy Sting?)
I have mixed feelings about some features. You
will die frequently in this game. However, in a few
turns, you will be thrown out of paradise and take
up where you left off. While encouraging more adventurous adventuring, death should be an end
rather than an irritation.
Throw away the paper and pencil. The territory
covered in this game is so large that mapping is almost impossible. However, the "go to
" command works on places you've never been to.
You can find things you've never seen, even if

they're hidden, with the "find
" command. This
is giving the players a break they don't deserve.
The digitized art work is a disappointment. It takes
up too much space (on the disks and on the
screen) and is not nearly as good as Firebird's Pawn
or Guild of Thieves. I turned the graphics off almost
immediately.
The puzzles are too uneven. Part
one can be finished off in an afternoon, while some puzzles in part two
will take that long even if you have
the hint sheet! When random bad
luck can spoil a well thought out
solution, it's hard to be sure if you're
on the right trail.
On the other hand, this game has
the best parser I've seen in a while.
Special options (available on the more powerful
computers) speed the game along. The "oops" command returns you to where you were before the last
move (you can keep using this command and move
backwards through the game!). RAM save makes life
easier, but with the "oops" command, it's almost
redundant.
Overall, the game rates a strong recommendation.
While it has negative points, it is certainly above
average.

Deathlord
(Continued from page 44)
to back up the roster of characters. It would be fine
except that characters in a party are not on the
roster! In other words, the very people you want to
back up cannot be backed up by the back-up utility.
However, all is not lost. The way to back up your
party is to make a complete copy of the scenario
disk (A or B) that they happen to be on. Another
utility on the main disk, "Make Scenario Disk," will
do this for you. Then, if something nasty occurs
(such as the party being wiped out), you can recopy from your backup to
the play disk.
You may be doing this fairly often in the early stages
of the game. Death comes
all too easily and resurrections are expensive. What
makes it worse is that as
soon as a character is killed
(or petrified), this fact is written immediately to the disk.
Turning off the computer in
the middle of combat is useless. When you reboot, that
character will still be dead.
So, you are forced into the
tedious practice of making
frequent total backups of
the play disk, as neither the
"save game" feature nor character backup utility is
of much use in saving your real position and party.

Ordinary People
When you are finally ready to adventure, you'll
notice that the graphics and basic play are definitely
Ultima-style. You move your party, represented by
the icon of the leader, by using the IJKM keys.
Arrow keys and joysticks are not supported. Additional similarity may be seen in picking up information
by talking to the people in various towns. The basic
command is "Orate" with its seven subcommands.
Essentially, you place your party next to a citizen
and initiate a conversation with Orate. From the
meager information gleaned by Chat and Talk, you
try to obtain more details with Inquire. Often, you
get nothing more than you already have. A typical
conversation might run like this: Party Chats, Citizen
responds "Find Senju". Party Inquires "Senju,"
Citizen states "I don't know!". You will see lots of this.
Some of the citizens do have important clues, but
are often lurking in out-of-the-way places or behind
secret doors. Much time must be spent in tedious
searching for them. This is very boring, especially in
towns with a lot of shrubbery.
You can alleviate some of this boredom by breaking into people's homes (either picking the lock with

a lockpick or simply smashing open the door).
There is no option for politely knocking. Good or
evil, you have to break in. The occupants are usually not thrilled to have you enter in this fashion.
Many times, they come out ready for a fight (you
can hardly blame them), so here's a handy trick for
you. Let them get in the first shot. After that, you
can wipe them out and the guards won't bother you.
Really. Whatever you're up against in a town, always let the opponents start combat. Presumably
it's okay to defend yourself (even if you're in the
wrong). Further, not everyone will attack after
you've broken through the door. Some people may,
at times, have little bits of information for you.
There's no way of telling beforehand, so you simply
have to break in and hope for the best.
Major combat activity takes place in the outdoors
or in dungeons. The first three party members are
the front line and are the only ones who can use
weapons. The last three either use spells or pass
their turns. Spellcasters having the worst armor,
keep them in the rear of the group when possible.
The combat display is split among three screens
and can be confusing to follow. The graphic display
shows only an icon of the monsters being fought,
plus the icon of the character whose turn it currently is (thus cycling through the icons of the entire
group, one by one). Below this is a small window,
the combat input screen, where battle commands
are entered for each character in sequence. To the
right is a larger screen, where the results of the
character's actions and the actions and results of
the monsters' attacks are displayed. Trying to follow
all three of these can give you eyestrain.
Of the variety of weapons used in the game, bows
are among the best (those armed with a bow get
two chances to hit per round, instead of one).
Samurai armed with katanas (long swords) also get
to hit twice per round. Get bows for your people up
front as soon as you can afford it, and katanas for
the Samurai (if any) when you find a place that sells
them. Amazing as it may sound, though, even
armed with a bow, those in the rear cannot fight.

Only Experienced Need Apply
The game neither displays the experience level of
the characters nor how much experience is gained
from killing particular creatures, so there is no way
of knowing how close or far a character is from the
next level up. The only way to know a gain in level
can be achieved is when a plus mark appears next
to that character on the display. This means the
character can go up to the next level, as soon as
training is bought (no training, no new level).
Experience appears to come only from killing
monsters, so fighters go up in level much faster
than spellcasters. Once the mage types have some
decent offensive spells, their progress will be a bit
more rapid, but not by much. By the end of the
game, one of my Samurai was well over fiftieth
level, while the Mahotsukai was only somewhere
over thirtieth level and both had been in the party
from the beginning.

One of the more important things in the game is
getting that Mahotsukai up to level 24. This brings
seventh-level spells, including Unpan (which, except
in Hell, teleports the party up or down in the dungeon, up to four levels at a time. This is a great
time and frustration saver, especially in the dungeon
behind the Red Shogun's palace.
This dungeon is seven levels deep, full of doors,
and one of the most idiotic dungeons ever. Imagine
a whole dungeon level with nothing but doors
which have to be lockpicked or smashed to be
opened. To top it all off, some of the doors aren't
real and cannot be opened at all. Some people may
think this is fun, interesting, or challenging, but I'm
not one of them. When you get to this dungeon,
head down to the bottom level with Unpan. You'll
be glad you did.
The dungeons in general are tedious exercises in
mapping, made worse by the absence of any sort of
coordinate system. You may know how far down
you are, but not exactly where in relation to anything else. This, in turn, makes it rather difficult to
know just where to start your map when you reach
a new level. You really won't know, until you've
moved around a bit, by which time your map may
be going off one edge of the paper. Careful mapping is necessary, too, or you may miss secret doors
or illusionary walls in caverns (they look like real
walls, but you can walk right through them).
There is also a great deal of travelling to be done
in this game, much of it by ship as you try to find all
the other islands. Five are shown on the map on
the inside front cover of the package. You will
probably never see a more misleading map.
Kodan, your starting point, is shown in the center.
Off to the northeast is Chikagu (Chicago?), to the
northwest is Nyuku (New York?), to the southeast is
Akmihr, and to the southwest is Asagata. Now, from
looking at the map and the island positions, you
would think that by sailing due east from the top of
Kodan you would come to Chikagu, or by sailing
due west, you would come to Nyuku. In actuality,
going in either direction will only bring you right
back where you started from. Those islands are
much further away than the map would have you
believe. The same is true for the two southern islands.
This means that you are going to spend a lot of
time sailing around the oceans, looking for these
and other islands and is why having a Shizen in the
party is so important. The land detection spell saves
many hours of fruitless searching on empty seas.
Even with the spell it isn't easy to locate these
places, but some of the search time is cut down.
Earlier, a quest for seven magic words was mentioned. These are hidden in various dungeons (one
word per dungeon, always on the bottom levels).
Since there are many more than seven dungeons, it
is of extreme importance that you know which ones
have words and which don't. Thorough questioning
in towns and villages is necessary or you may find
yourself searching a dungeon for something that
isn't there. The other dungeons simply provide gold
and experience.

Speaking of gold, all money found after a combat
or other activity goes to the party leader. A character
can carry a maximum of ten thousand gold, so it's a
good idea to share the wealth every now and then.
Otherwise, when the leader is at the maximum, new
gold found will be lost.
One of the great oddities in this game is the ability
to disperse your party, anytime, anywhere. When
you do this, the team is "disassembled," and all
characters (along with their
equipment and money) go
back on the roster, from
which they can be reassembled into another team.
This facility can get you out
of any dungeon with a minimum of fuss and trouble.
The one drawback is that
you will be back in Kodan
again when the team is
reformed, and if you were
on an island other than
Kodan, you will have to buy
another ship (which costs
an even ten thousand gold).
It is more than a little
strange that the authors
would put in such a facility, when at the same the
time they are so adamant about making sure your
dead characters stay dead by writing to disk (which
in itself is a useless gesture, given backup ability).

Do You Believe in Magic?
The magic system in
general is typical of most
games: the spellcaster
automatically learns new
spells at the appropriate
level, and the level of the
spell determines the
amount of power needed to
cast it. Thus a first-level
spell (of any kind) uses one
point of power, a third-level
spell uses three points, and
so on. Power expended in
spell-casting renews itself
slowly as time passes in the
game.
All spells have Japanesetype names. Therefore, you'll find it necessary to
keep the manual handy, since you must type in the
entire name of a spell to cast it (no shortened versions or mnemonics). The manual is also unclear
on the duration of some of the spells and it is difficult (if not impossible) to gauge how long a spell
lasts in combat.
There are no real puzzles in the Deathlord; some
dungeons may require a bit of tricky maneuvering
to get around certain spots, but otherwise there is
relatively little for you to figure out. The descent into
Hell, the final dungeon, is no different from any
other, and in some respects easier than a few of

Deathlord
them (always keeping in mind, of course, that good mapping is
a must).
Speaking of Hell, one thing to be careful about down there is
the use of the emerald rod (invulnerability to acid) and ruby
ring (invulnerability to fire). The effects of these items lasts only
a VERY short time; you must remember to stop and use them
every few moves. This is both silly and annoying. At the very
least, the effects of those artifacts should endure for a more
reasonable period, say an hour of game time.
Considering the amount of time and effort needed to finish
the game, the ending is disappointingly bland. A simple graphic
screen comes up, along with some congratulatory text, and
then it's over. Since you've just eliminated the major source of
evil in the world, you'd expect something a bit more spectacular
and appropriate to your accomplishments.
Overall, no attempt has been made to draw on the rich
folklore and mythology of Japan with its interesting situations
and monsters. Rather, the authors have created a compendium
of standard CRPG features glossed over with a tinge of
pseudo-Orientalism by pasting Japanese names on as much as they
could. While it purports to be "the next step in role-playing
games," there is nothing really new or noteworthy about it.
Along with a manual replete with typos, omissions, inaccuracies, and contradictions, this makes Deathlord a game for
the serious player to avoid.
Bottom line: A mediocre effort at best.
Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

(Continued from page 6)

TAKING A
PEEK
essentially assigned to protect the
ecosystem (and hence, the world) in
these fourteen inter-related and sequentially more difficult assignments.
Amiga ($49.95). Circle Reader Service Card #6.
Interstel Corporation
P. 0. Box 57825
Webster, TX 77568
FIRST EXPEDITION: Braun is a
descendent of an ancient civilization
which has been divided by terror and
superstition. Yet, there is no hope of
survival unless someone finds and
replaces the three Sun Spheres,
which generate the protective energy
shield, before the comet Halistrom
returns. All he has is an ancient
nautical chart, star chart, and compass as his tools in accomplishing
this. Each player takes on the role of
Braun, but in a unique twist, if Braun
is unable to complete the quest,
players take on the role of his rescuer. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service Card #7.

tionally involved boyfriend trying to
rescue his girlfriend from her abductors. The game takes the player into
inner city subcultures with vivid
characterization in order to gain the
clues which might lead to a rescue.
Since the graphics are optional, interactive text adventure fans don't have
to bother, but those who want to
read and see have the opportunity.
IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader Service
#9.
Rainbird Software
2350 Bayshore Parkway
Mountain View, CA 94043
JINXTER: The folks at Magnetic
Scrolls are determined to keep their
fans off guard. Those who chuckled
as they read through "Guild of
Thieves" will enjoy the avant-garde
humor in this pun-filled game which
hitchhikes its way into the kind of
zaniness found in another galaxy.
The picture is from the Commodore
version. Amiga, Atari ST, IBM, and
Mac ($39.95), Apple II (Text only) and
C-64/128 ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #10.
Spectrum Holobyte
2061 Challenger Drive
Alameda, CA 94501

Paragon Software Corporation
600 Rugh Street
Greensburg, PA 15601

TETRIS: Part of the company's
new international series, this
Soviet/Hungarian import is one of
the most addictive games around.
The simple principle involves varying
shapes falling from the top of the
screen and the player moving and
rotating them in order to fill the
blank shaft in the middle of the
screen with a perfect combination of
shapes. Of course, the faster the
shapes fall, the more difficult it is to
maneuver them and the more points
players amass per building block. C64/128 ($24.95) and IBM ($34.95).
Circle Reader Service #11.

TWILIGHT'S RANSOM: As topical as recent headlines, this daring
text adventure augmented by
graphics deals with terrorism and kidnapping. Players become an emo-

ZIG-ZAG: This is another game in
the international series, but rather
than being a puzzle game like "SokoBan" or "Tetris," this British import involves the flight of a star fighter

GONE FISH'N: A bass fishing
simulation, this unique idea involves
scheduling, selecting locations and
lures, casting, reeling, and of course,
catching fish. Once the player spots
a fish in the underwater view, he still
has to hook him and retrieve him. Experienced players get to participate
in tournaments against random computer catches. Atari ST ($44.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #8.

through the so-called Matrix of Zog
in order to find the Eight Crystals of
Zog. Players must navigate narrow
passageways, disappearing barriers,
traps and timelocks in order to succeed. C-64/128 ($24.95). Circle
Reader Service #12.
THUNDER MOUNTAIN
P. 0. BOX 1167
Northbrook, IL 60065-1167
WINTER CHALLENGE: Here is a
European import (Tynesoft) for all
those frustrated with the United
States' paucity of Olympic medals in
the recent winter games at Calgary.
These challenging arcade sequences
include ski jump, downhill racing,
bobsled competition, giant slalom,
and biathlon. One to six players may
compete. C-64/128 ($9.95)
Circle Reader Service #13

CONVERSIONS
RECEIVED
For the Amiga:

Jet (subLogic)
For the Apple IIGS:

Blackjack Academy (Micronlusions)
For the Atari 8-bit:
Saracen (Datasoft)
For the Atari ST:

Alien Fires 2199 A.D. (Paragon)
For the IBM:

Blackjack Academy (Microil
lusions)
Into the Eagle's Nest (Mindscape)
Pinball Wizard (Accolade)

(Continued from page 26)

"FOG OF WAR"
A Clearer View
is plenty of information, but no time to
analyze it. Orders can be issued to all
within seconds, but the squad will do
what the sergeant says, not the general.
Most modern generals forget that all
electronic transmissions are subject to
being jammed. Command control is a
nebulous beast, at best. Fortunately, for
most generals, most subordinates will do
their best to carry out orders.
A real boon in tactical computer
games is that observation is easily
figured out by the computer. There are
no arguments about what "line of sight"
was. No one ever knows exactly what
the enemy is up to. If you could, there
would be no "surprises." The guys on
the front line will know that "Kraut"
tanks are rolling over their foxholes, but
not know exactly how many there are or
where they are going. . .
What about general tactical situation
reports? When attacked, the reports
need only indicate that "We are under
attack." The blank stating
that the attack is light, medium, or
heavy. For the right flavor, perhaps, "My
Gawd, it's the whole (Enemy country
name here) (army or fleet here).!"
Computers are also excellent at determining "hidden" movement. Whether it
is Siberian troops saving Moscow or a
German counter-attack through the Ardennes, war is full of such unpleasant
surprises and a computer seems to
make that much more frightening.
Players could be presented with several
different ways to gather information. Be
it from scouting, aerial recon, or spies.
Each has its limitations. The spy in the
enemy general's staff may warn the
player about which area will be attacked
next turn, but has no idea about its tactical nature, etc.
Players should have to plan and order
attacks ahead of time. Such a delay is
needed to allow the enemy scouts a
chance to find out about the attack and
do something about it. Then, the enemy
can commit reserves to the threatened
sector.
What about reserves? These are units
uncommitted to any other duty that can
be moved immediately to meet enemy
threats or exploit his weakness. That is

why you have designated units in
reserve, not just units that happen to be
unengaged. In most games, the enemy
will almost always be able to plug the
hole before it is your turn again, even in
a "real time" game. Thus, pointing up
the need to have operations planned in
advance.

In the bad old days of board wargaming, attempts to recreate the fog of war
were usually so cumbersome that they
detracted more from the game than they
added. Inverted counters, "hidden movement" via off-board record keeping, and
even duplicate boards separated by a
screen were tried. Only the last achieved
any real success.
In the brave new world of computer

Ever get the feeling that the computer
has access to data when making its
move that you don't have? A game's
documentation must "reassure" the
player as to what is happening. I don't
think that there needs to be access to
the exact figures. Such a solution would
"bog" the game down. Players need to
know or have a way of testing the "Why"
that goes into a computer's move. Most
of the games I have seen have very poor
documentation. It borders on being nonexistent or even, misleading.
A program should have an "After Action Report." This would allow players to
see what happened that he couldn't see
during the game. If the battle was one
of the new "build your own" games,
many might want to have a record of
their campaign.
What about games where the tactical
commanders change your attack orders.
Players need to know why and how
often these things happen. Are the changes random or what? Shouldn't players
be able to count on certain units to "perform" in a pinch if the unit is "elite."
Sometimes, the general could have
noticed these changes in orders, sometimes not. If the change in orders was
noticeable, I certainly think that the
general should have the option to
change commanders.
Subordinates should have minds of
their own. History is full of examples
where individual initiative won or lost the
battle. But let players know who is doing
what. Then, a player can promote good
performers before the next battle or dismiss, shoot, or hang the Burnsides and
suffer the political consequences. . . .

Ed Bever
Ed Bever is best noted for his work on
Microprose's "Command Series"

wargaming, designers have set off to rectify this situation with a vengeance. Now,
units appear and disappear like phantoms; enemy strength estimates fluctuate according to hidden algorithmic
tides; and the opposing commander is
an inscrutable machine, wordlessly executing its programmed logic while displaying the ultimate poker face.
While I like and respect many of the
computer wargame designs that have appeared in the last years, I think that
most, including the Command Series
that I helped design, have gone too far
in attempting to recreate the fog of war.
In my reading of military history, commanders seem to have been hindered
far less by limited intelligence than by excessive intelligence. In very few instances that I can think of, has one side
been completely unwarned of what the
other was up to. Far more often, the
problem was exactly the opposite: there
were so many indications of so many
possible enemy actions that the intelligence machinery got clogged or, even
worse, the commander simply accepted
the reading that confirmed his precon-

ceptions or validated his already chosen
course of action.
When British paratroopers dropped
into Arnhem, for example, they were
surprised by and ultimately overwhelmed
by the remnants
of two SS Panzer
divisions that had
concentrated
there to lick their
wounds after the
retreat from
France. Their
presence was treated afterwards as an
unfortunate surprise, but, in fact, there
were numerous indications that they
were there before the paratroopers were
committed to battle. Unfortunately, there
were other places they were reported to
be and there were indications that they
had completely disintegrated, as well.
The real problem was that
Montgomery's staff was so infatuated
with the Market-Garden plan that they
chose to ignore the ominous indications
and subscribe instead to the interpretation that validated their preference. The
price was paid by the poor, bloody infantrymen.

Similarly, the cross-channel attack a
few months before had surprised the
Germans, not because they had no
warning of it, but because they were unsure of where it would come. Hitler held
back the Panzers
for the first crucial
hours because he
feared the invasion was a
feint. Then, he
kept numerous infantry divisions
tied down along the channel coast for
months because he remained convinced
that the real blow would come across at
the Pas de Calais. Hitler maintained this
misconception because the Allies
deliberately fostered it, not by hiding
away thousands of troops and tanks,
but by displaying a phony army, a cadre
of soldiers armed with an arsenal of
props along the coast opposite Calais.
This deception suggests an important
element in the fog of war that is often
missed in computer game designs, as
well as a way that it can be incorporated
into them. The players should be able to

deliberately deploy fake units in order to
confuse the opponent. Hiding units
should be possible—after all, the Germans did manage to achieve a high degree of secrecy before the Battle of the
Bulge—but this should be more difficult
to achieve and more fragile to maintain
than deploying a few extra units that
turn out to really be phantoms. This is a
system that was occasionally used along
with inverted counters in boardgames
and it could easily be followed and expanded in the computer format.
Computer wargames can achieve a
higher degree of realism, then, when
they present the player, like a real commander, with plentiful intelligence, intelligence so plentiful that the problem becomes one of sifting through the possibilities in order to determine what is
real and what only appears to be real.
The danger in war comes more often
not from what you don't see, but from
what you think you see or what you
want to see. Ultimately, the fog of war exists not on the battlefield, but in the
commander's head. It is as much a
product of information as ignorance.

Reader Input Device #46
On this page, a number of games and articles are listed for
evaluation, as well as some general interest questions. For each
game which you have played or article which you have read,
place a 1 (terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next to the appropriate number.

The Computer Gaming World Hall of
Fame honors those games that over the
course of time have proven themselves
to be top rated games by the readers of
CGW. Members of the CGW Hall of
Fame are chosen by the staff of COW.
Once inducted into the Hall, the game
will be retired from the current Game
Ratings List. As a consumer you can be
assured that any game in the CGW
Hall of Fame is an all-time favorite.

Game Ratings
There was plenty of movement on the strategy side
during the February rating period. As noted in COW
#45, "Empire" was indeed reconnoitering the top spot
and the aliens have taken "Gettysburg" (which should
be a big shock to Mr. Lincoln). Further, "Earl Weaver
Baseball" didn't even need extra innings to move ahead

of "Battle of Antietam" in the standings.
On the Action/Adventure side, the established titles
haven't established firm radar contact on "Stealth
Fighter," but "StarFlight" accelerated the warp drive to
jump past "Gunship" and gain some ground on the
leader's electromagnetic profile. Werdna continued to
exact revenge on his rivals as "Return of Werdna"
slipped into fifth position and Microillusions used "Faery
Tale Adventure" to enchant our readers and reach the
top ten for the first time.

