July/August 1990

Number 73

Features
Scorpia Traces the "Circuit's Edge"

10

Broderbund's "WolfPack"

Special Report: New Computer Games 11

"Conflict" For Interest

The Latest News From The Consumer Electronics Show

An Entertaining Wargame From Mastertronic / Alan Emrich

Sneak Preview: "Search for the King"

16

"Waterloo"

38
40

Strategic Simulation's New Command Study /M. Evan Brooks

Accolade's First Graphic Adventure /Johnny L. Wilson

Strategy For Railroad Tycoons

36

A Look At The Action-Strategy Game /M. Evan Brooks

Game Hints for Infocom's Latest Adventure / Scorpia

24

Interview With George Alec Effinger

46

Behind The Scenes In The Budayeen

A 'Tooter" For MicroProse's Railroad Game

Departments
A Second Look At "Second Front"

27

Notes On Strategy / Alan Emrich & Tom Hughes

"Chamber of the Sci-Mutant Priestess"
A Unique Adventure From Data East / Allen Greenberg

35

Taking A Peek
Editorial
The Rumor Bag
Game Ratings Chart
Reader Input Device
Scorpion's View (Conquests of Camelot, Loom)
Conversions Received

6
8
14
32
47
48
50

I

I

Taking A Peek

Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404
ESCAPE FROM HELL: "Filmed entirely
on location", Hell is a "nice" place to
visit, but you wouldn't want to spend an
eternity there. This fine looking adventure/quest game is possessed (forgive
the pun) with devilishly delightful humor
as the player attempts to rescue his
buddy from the crags and brimstone of
Dante's depths. The characters and encounters are delightful as you party with
Genghis Khan, parley with Al Capone,
catch Hitler trying to take over. Ultimately, the player must confront Satan himself (the trick, of course, is living to tell
about it). This game is hot in more ways
than one. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service #1.
Fanfare
A Division of Britannica Software, Inc.
345 4th Street
San Francisco, CA 94107
TASK FORCE: This is a solid, stand up
arcade game pitting one against the hordes of evil and nastiness. This time, the
mob, the skinheads and the drug lords
have united under the UBG (Ultimate
Bad Guy) Hector Vasquez and are out to
take over the United States. The player
(or players, as two can play, one or both

using the keyboard) are special FBI
agents with a dirty job to do and inadequate weapons and ammunition to do it
(guess where the players get the good
weapons and ammo from). The graphics
and sound throughout the five US cities
which must be cleaned up are outstanding, pushing the Apple IIGS to new
heights. ($39.95). Circle #2.

these two games are included and the opportunities for player improvement is
there. A fine, integrated package with
real casino rules. IBM ($45.00). Circle
Reader Service #3.

GopherBroke Publishing
8635 W. Sahara Ave. 1/505
Las Vegas, NV 89117

EARTHRISE: This is a large adventure
game where the player is the top trouble
shooter for the asteroid mining guild. It
seems that an asteroid hurling towardsEarth cannot be stopped because the station built there with the reverse thrusters
has been overrun by alien life forms. The
player has to solve the mystery with
limited resources (the company which
sends the player is basically cheap). 2.2
meg of memory was required to store
this baby, and extensive mapping and

FAT CAT CASINO: Any casino
software package that includes in its
documentation Las Vegas style "How to
Play / How to Win" booklets for craps
and blackjack can't be all bad. While the
video keno and poker games are virtual
casino clones (as they should be),
players can really improve their gaming
skills with the craps and blackjack
games. The subtleties and nuances of

Interstel
PO Box 57825
Webster, TX 77598

Continued on page 69

Editorial

For Mature Audiences Only
Dr. Johnny L. Wilson
Computer Gaming World Editor

he

State of the Industry: Entertainment is a tricky business. That
which seems to be harmless fun to
some viewers, listeners, readers or
players may be dangerous, irresponsible
or irreverent to others. That which functions as a warning or exhortation to
some functions as insidious propaganda
to others. Many computer game designers are currently examining the ethical
and philosophical implications of what
they place in games and are trying to discover a plan of action in dealing with
reality without excluding younger gamers
or individuals with strong feelings about
propriety.

T

For instance, a game designer who is
working on a fantasy game wanted to
know how I, as an evangelical minister,
justified the use of "magic" in a fantasy
universe when most evangelicals seemed
to automatically place even imaginary
"magic" under the rubric of Satanic
power. He knew that believers like
Tolkien, C. S. Lewis, Charles Williams,
and George MacDonald used "magic" in
their worlds and wondered how that was
proper. In a long, convoluted and somewhat esoteric answer, I essentially stated
my belief that "good magic" was being
used as both an analogue for "faith" (in
antithesis to the empiricism of the
modern age which asserts that everything can be tested and repeated) and
"bad magic" as a paradigm for the "occult" desires for power, influence and control over everything which tends to
enslave and destroy the quality of life.
Therefore, I confidently asserted, whether
"magic" is appropriate in a film, story or
computer game depends on how it is
used and portrayed. Yet, in spite of my
position, there will be people who will
criticize him for using "magic" in his
universe for any purpose whatsoever.
Wilson's First Homily on Computer
Gaming Propriety, then, is that whether
something is "evil" or not depends on
how one intends the gamer (reader,
viewer or listener in other art forms) to
use it. (Gee, I wonder if Stewart Alsop
got started this way!)
A publisher recently tried to avert con

troversy (or, some have contended, add
marketing spin) by placing a warning
label on the package which indicates that
partial nudity, offensive language and occult symbols appear in the game. Before
the game is prematurely judged, however, let me note that all of the action in
this game takes place in the theological
dimension of eternal punishment. Criticizing a designer, whatever his taste in subject matter, for placing occult symbols in
"hell" may be something like my own experience of directing Jean-Paul Sartre's
"No Exit" as a drama project at a Baptist
college. Some were offended because
there was an adulteress and a
homosexual in the play. "I don't understand the problem," I answered with the
emphatic sense of being right that seems
to have an inverse relationship with the
aging process, "they are, after all, in
hell!" Although I might not be quite that
indelicate during my present state of
editorial wisdom, Wilson's Second Homily on Computer Game Propriety is that offensive words, actions, mannerisms or
depictions need to fit the subject matter
they are portraying.
Another example for this second homily
was provided by Lord British. It seems
that there is a bawdy song in Ultima VI
that has raised a few eyebrows. Some
have suggested that it is inappropriate
for Lord British, who has personally
championed the presentation of virtue in
role-playing games, to include such
ribald matter. Such a charge is somewhat unfair. After all, Middle English poet
Geoffrey Chaucer (writing in a similar culture to that Britannia which is depicted in
the Ultima series) included both "allegro" tales of ribald behavior and reference with sermonic "intermezzos" of
authentic theology. The bawdy song
seems to follow my second homily.
Still another issue was recently brought
to our attention when viewing an unfinished adventure game. In a seedy underworld locale, there is an incredible
animation of an adult-oriented nightclub
dance being performed on-stage. It fits
the setting, sets the mood and is unquestionably suggestive. The producer correct-

ly allowed the scene to remain in the
game. However, in a dialogue in the
same nightclub scene, a seedy character
uses a mild expletive. The writer of the
script received an admonishment for
using the expletive and was told to
remove the word and substitute a
euphemism (a euphemism which does
not ring true to the character).
This brings us to Wilson's Third (and
perhaps, most controversial) Homily on
Computer Game Propriety. While we
need to reach the point where the art of
computer game design is not bound by
fear of vigilante vigilance over the transgressions of straitjacketed virtue and
reduced to the lowest common
denominator, we still need to find some
balance between what is meaningful and
what is gratuitous. We still need some
kind of standardized labeling that tells
customers exactly what might be considered offensive in a particular product
(language, violence, nudity, belief systems, etc.).
State of the Magazine: Alert readers
of CGW have probably already noticed
the July/August date on the cover of this
issue. This does not mean, however, that
we are going to shortchange our readers
(or advertisers) by an issue. There will
still be twelve full issues of CGW during
calendar year, 1990. The fact is, the September issue of CGW will go on-sale in
mid-August. We had to change our cover
date to reflect expanded and more aggressive distribution through Kable
News, one of the country's largest national distributors. In short, we will have nearly tripled our circulation by the time you
read the next issue and you should be
seeing us in more stores. Publisher,
Founder and Editor-in-Chief Sipe and I
firmly believe that Computer Gaming
World's commitment to covering the
world of computer entertainment as adult
gamers writing to mature garners will be
as well-received in the mass market as it
has in a more niche market.

Game Hints

Scorpion's Tale
Circuit's Edge
As Told By Scorpia

arning: Although "The Scorpion's Tale" is a warm and
comfortable tavern of the mind with a nice cozy fire
of vibrant images, our resident storyteller conjures up
illuminating hints about games. If the gentle reader eschews
hints, let him beware!

W

Well, well, here we are in July already. The year certainly
seems to be moving along at a good clip... As usual, Fred is
looking forward to the annual Grues Convention in the Dark
Room of Colossal Cave, so he may be a little absent-minded
about orders right now. As long as he doesn't mistake your hand
for a snack, though, everything should be all right. If he should
happen to nosh on your knuckles, however, no problem; a quick
trip to the medical clinic in the Budayeen will set things to rights.
The Budayeen is the setting for Circuit's Edge, written by
George Alec Effinger and based on characters from his science
fiction books When Gravity Fails and A Fire in The Sun. You
do not, however, need to read them in order to play the game,
as the action in Edge takes place between them, so to speak.
You might learn a bit more about the characters, but it won't
help to solve the mystery.
Anything can happen in the Budayeen, and usually does. It is a
walled-off slum sector of an unnamed Arab city. Crime of all
kinds is rampant. Anything—from weapons to sex to the body
beautiful—can be bought for a price. This delightful place is overseen by Friedlander Bey, popularly called "Papa", a man of great
wealth and power.
Papa, however, has a problem. Someone walked off with a
notebook of his, and he wants it back very badly. He has hired
Marid Audran, a sometimes private investigator, to retrieve it.
The twisting trail of treachery, bodies and even more unpleasant
things that leads to this notebook makes up the action of the
game.
It is a sort of mystery, then, although not of the usual variety.
You don't have to worry about collecting a bunch of clues for the
police. Papa could care less about that. All you have to do is find
the notebook and bring it to him. Should you need to kill a person or two along the way, well, business is business (and action
is action!). As long as you have Papa on your side, the police are
the least of your worries.
There are some nice features here, and one that will set your
teeth on edge. Mapping is a breeze. The Budayeen is small,
being only sixteen blocks wide, so you can't get lost. You can

call up an overall map of the place at any time to see your exact
location (there is also a map in the game booklet). A little map
box in the lower right shows your location and direction while
you're walking around. So you can put away your graph paper
for this one.
Another neat thing is Marid's ability to "recall events". Choosing
this from the menu (everything except movement is menudriven) allows you to scroll back through the last fifty events of
importance in the game. The only drawback is that you have to
go through them one by one, starting with the most recent; you
can't pick and choose. However, if you didn't take good notes
(for shame!), you can use this feature to refresh your memory.
Saving the game is another matter. You can save only in
Marid's apartment, and you get only one save position. Why only
one (especially when the save file is very small) is a mystery that
you won't be able to solve. . . just keep it in mind. On the bright
side, you can restore your position from almost anywhere in the
game; you don't have to be "at home" to do this.
Money is important in this game. Marid needs it to buy various
items, hand out bribes, and eat a meal now and then. He starts
with some, but it isn't much. Papa will provide some kiam (the
unit of currency in the game), and Marid can run a few errands
for a couple of the merchants to make more.
The quickest way to build up cash, however, is to gamble at
either baccarat or roulette. I preferred baccarat, as it played
faster, and you can make higher bets (the games, as far as I
could tell, were honest). Naturally, you should save before you
start a gambling session, in case you have a run of bad luck.
However, with a little good luck and some patience, you can
build up your initial two hundred or so kiam into quite a tidy sum.
Since the game is set in the future (although not too far), you
(Continued on page 22)

C.E.S. Report

O

nce upon a time, there
were four very different
markets for computer
entertainment. First, there was
the United States market which
was floppy disk-based, made
up of sophisticated game
players from young adulthood
on up and fairly limited in
terms of gross sales revenue.
Second, there was the
European market. This market
was largely composed of
younger garners who managed
to get hold of lower end
machines, depended on tape
storage and purchased lowerpriced, shorter games that
tended to hit the market and
disappear faster than last
month's hit record on the
Billboard charts. Next, there
was the Japanese market. This
market emphasized glossy
graphics, intense action sequences, cinematic sound and incredible marketing campaigns
waged by prodigious conglomerates such as those of us
in the United States are only
used to seeing in the film industry.
Finally, there was the
videogame market. Largely
composed of children, pre- and
early teens (predominantly
male), this market was highly
peer-influenced, geared to the
"twitch and flex" of pure reflex
games, insensitive to the unrealistic use of violence in a
massive percentage of these
games and tremendously susceptible to the mechanizations
of mass merchandising. It was
an accepted piece of industry
wisdom that these four different worlds would never meet.
Yet, over the course of the
last two years, in particular, we
have seen these worlds coming
together. There are so many
overlapping spheres of influence between these worlds
that some of our favorite
axioms are melting away
before our eyes. No longer are
we able to flatly state that "We
cover computer games, not
video games". We would
sound nescient (to say it gently) and ignorant (to say it bluntly) to continue to assert that
"European games and video
games do not have the depth
which our portion of the entertainment industry's product
have". Indeed, "the times they
are a'changin'" and while there
may still be a kernel of truth in
what has, heretofore, been
CGW's position (and particularly, its present editor), this is no
longer entirely true.

The Maturation of Computer
Entertainment:

Warming The
Global Village

The Times, They
Are A'Changin'
For example, Spectrum
HoloByte scored a critical,
commercial and popular success with Tetris. So many new
computer users became addicted to this fascinating puzzle
game that it not only spawned
sequels from the same designer (last year's Welltris and
this year's Faces . . . TRIS III),
but a host of imitators who, in
turn, added their own spin to
the concept. California
Dreams publishes Block Out,
a three-dimensional action/strategy puzzle game that
originally appeared in this
country before Welltris (3-D
Tetris) and also appears in a
coin-op version. UbiSoft is
working on an action puzzle
using flaming orbs and steel
balls which seems a lot like a
"lightning round" of Tetris.
Taito has a fast-moving puzzle
game called Puzznik which advances beyond the pure Tetris
concept by including many
types of action puzzles, but
which was undoubtedly inspired by the Soviet game. The
afore-mentioned Faces .. .
TRIS III is Tetris, using portions of the faces of famous
characters (real and fictitious)
as the building blocks in trying
to form both familiar and unfamiliar faces.

However, the most intricately
crafted approach to the Tetrisstyle game which was displayed at the show was
Columns, a Sega Genesis
product using colorful jewels
as the building blocks and allowing players to score via
diagonals, verticals and 5shapes, as well as the traditional horizontal wall seen in the
original Tetris. Another example of this merging industry
phenomenon may be seen in
sports games. TV Sports: Football on the NEC TurboGrafx
16 may not have all the
chrome and depth of the
Cinemaware versions (no halftime show, roster editors or
statistical summaries), but it
plays twice as fast as the computer versions and allows
up-to-five players to compete by
using one of the TurboGrafx's
many hardware enhancements.
Sega's Super Monaco Grand
Prix may not have the detailed
polygon-filled backgrounds of
Electronic Arts' state-of-theart Indianapolis 500: The
Simulation (much less offer
the realistic physical model running underneath the EA
game), but the bit-mapped
graphics on the car itself are
getting there and Spectrum
HoloByte's Vette! looks like
it's going to give Sega a
legitimate racing simulation on
the Genesis platform.

Meanwhile, the traditional Nintendo Entertainment System seems to be discovering
game depth as Data East's Al
Unser Jr. Turbo Racing offers
an extremely balanced blend
of race/car strategy and flatout "pedal to the metal" action.
The times, they are a'changin'.
To be sure, video game
manufacturers tend to pitch
their games in the buzz words
of a younger audience: "boss
monsters with larger sprites";
"awesome sounds the other
guys can't touch"; "ability to target on multiple-scrolling axes"
and "really, cool action". Yet,
the introduction of third party
developers from the floppydisk based world of computing
cannot help but introduce new
ideas of "gameplay" and
"depth" into the overall equation. Games like: Electronic
Arts' Populous, Accolade's
Ishido: The Way of the
Stones and MicroProse's F-15
Strike Eagle II on the
Genesis; Koei's Genghis
Khan and Bandit Kings of Ancient China, as well as
Electronic Arts' new "Michael
Jordan" sports games under
development on the NES, and
ICOM's Sherlock Holmes Consulting Detective game on the
TurboGrafx 16 with CD-ROM
cannot help but advance the
idea of gameplay on the video
game front.

CD Or Not TV
One technological advancement that is sure to affect all
four worlds of computer entertainment (as well as bring
them together) is compact disc
storage. Commodore hosted a
press conference in the worldfamous Wrigley Building to officially announce CDTV (Commodore Dynamic Total Vision).
Expected to be on the market
before the end of the year with,
at least, 100 computer entertainment, education and reference titles and supporting the
anticipated 300+ Compact
Disc Plus Graphics (CD+G) of
the music industry, CDTV
looks potentially viable. In fact,
the only disparaging words to
be heard concerning the
machine had to do with
Commodore's abysmal record
of customer and technical support in the past.
Commodore has already
started to address these issues
with its Commodore Express
program of 24-hour telephone
support and the willingness to
have Federal Express pick up

one's malfunctioning machine
and send it to the factory service center on a priority basis.
This support system is already
in place for the Amiga and will
be utilized for CDTV, as well.
CDTV is basically an Amiga
500 with one megabyte of
RAM. It has no keyboard, but
has a Compact Disc drive that
can read ISO 9660 standard
computer data, as well as the
CD+G standards. It is operated
with an infrared remote controller and is designed so that it
can be operated from across
the room, just like one accesses the television, VCR or CD
player. If so desired, one can
add a disk drive, keyboard and
mouse in the future in order to
use the machine as both a
CDTV and Amiga 500. Nolan
Bushnell, credited by many as
the father of the video game industry, believes that CDTV will
really become the information
center for the home of the future that many people had
hoped the personal computer
would be.
Development of entertainment products for the CDTV is
well under way. Since Interplay has already developed
Battlechess on a CD (with
literally thousands of animations) for the FM-Towns
machine, they will be releasing
a similar Battlechess CD for
the new Commodore machine
seems a certainty.
Cinemaware has already
placed a version of Defender
of the Crown on CD-ROM and
expects to place that version
on CD for the new machine, as
well. However, the CD version
of TV Sports: Football for the
new machine is expected to be
a new, full-blown program. Accolade is expected to offer a
Jack Nicklaus program that
will feature real scenery and up
to 8,000 photos. In addition,
one can expect that programs
being prepared for other CD
platforms, such as
Activision's Cosmic Osmo,
Maxis' SimCity, Three-Sixty's
Harpoon and ICOM's Sherlock Holmes Consulting
Detective will soon be converted.
Those who do not wish to
wait for compact disc entertainment products have two current options. Those who can afford the price of a standard CDROM drive for the IBM will find
that Software Toolworks and
Access Software have enlarged your potential library of
CD-ROM games by putting out
game packs of several classic

titles. The Access involvement
with CDs is exceptional news
because they can take the
audio signals (DSP files) off
CD tracks and convert them to
RealSound code. In addition,
Sierra unveiled two CD-ROM
titles for MS-DOS machines
that had tremendous potential.
Mixed-Up Mother Goose CDROM uses the extremely effective technique of digitizing
backgrounds from colorful
paintings (as in Keeping Up
With Jones. It is basically the
same game as before, except
that it has enhanced graphics
and a neat surprise with regard
to the voicetrack. Mixed-Up
Mother Goose comes with
both an English and Japanese
voicetrack on the same CD.
Don't expect the Japanese
voicetrack to come across as a
poorly dubbed, B-movie, however. Both versions have the
voices synchronized with the
animation. Sierra plans to
release multiple language versions of future CD products, as
well (English, Japanese,
French and German). King's
Quest V will be released in CDROM format, too. It uses the
same type of painted background look and a full
cinematic perspective. With
multiple language versions,
three of the four worlds of computer entertainment come even
closer together.
Yet another indication of how
the four worlds are coming
together is the TurboGrafx CDROM drive which is currently
on-sale. Cinemaware's It
Came From The Desert with
digitized film footage (of live actors) is nearing completion on
that format and ICOM's impressive version of Sherlock Holmes Consulting Detective
(complete with digitized
footage and sound) looks like
it will be ready by Fall, 1990.
In the meantime, one of
Japan's hottest action/adventures, Ys (both volumes one
and two), is now available for
the TurboGrafx 16 on one compact disc.
As noted in CGW's report on
the Winter Consumer
Electronics Show, the TurboGrafx 16 CD-ROM device plays
CD+G discs, as well. This is
very significant because the
company has just signed a
major development deal with
Warner New Media to create
products which utilize the
CD+G technology to create interactive entertainment. For example, one could use a menu(Continued on page 41)

Review

t was a mob scene at
Chicago's Meigs Field. An
aviation museum was
sponsoring an auction of
vintage aircraft in order to
sustain its operations and I
wasn't about to miss any of
it, even if I didn't have the
hundred thousand dollar
deposit required for buyers to
attend the auction.

I

The
Rumor
Bag

So, I merely appropriated a
pair of overalls with an appropriate aviation service's
name emblazoned on the
back and hopped a fence
separating the airport and
the museum proper. I duckby "Pappy" Doolittle
ed into the hangar closest to
the auction, intending to find
a window close enough to
see and hear what was going
and I couldn't stand the suspense, so I
on. Of course, I wasn't expecting to
looked into the bomb bay of the mothcome face-to-prop with a B-52E, reminisballed bomber. I noticed a strange piece
cent of the one in Dale Brown's Flight of
of machinery inside. Since I'd just talked
the Old Dog. It reminded me that Threeto Anita Sinclair of Magnetic Scrolls
Sixty is planning to publish a game
about her father's role in getting the Enigbased on the Dale Brown novel.
ma machine (codenamed "Ultra") which
cracked the Axis' coded signals during
I was lovingly admiring her fuselage
World War II, I wondered if this machine
when I heard the first plane going under
had a similar purpose. I fed some cryptic
the gavel. I tiptoed over to the window
messages I'd palmed in the Silicon Valley
and listened as the auctioneer began his
through it and came up with several
spiel for a Grumman-built F4F-4 Wildcat.
preposterous rumors. According to the
I could just imagine the plane taking off
machine, one note said that Three-Sixty
from a carrier deck during some of the
was planning to publish a World War II
action in the Pacific. In fact, I vowed quiet
version of Harpoon, another indicated
ly to myself that I would be more careful
that SSG was planning to release a 16with such magnificent planes during my
bit version of Russia, called Barbarossa,
next session of Strategic Studies
by September and Operation Overlord
Group's Carriers At War. I still play the
(based on the Barbarossa system) by
Apple II version, but I'm really excited
late July; and still another indicated an
about the much enhanced IBM version
August ship date on Interceptor, the first
due prior to the end of the year. Besides
Renegade Legion game from Strategic
having an improved artificial opponent, I
Simulations, Inc..
can't wait to see the enhanced graphics.
A fellow who looked amazingly like
Wild Bill Stealey was bidding on a P-51

In fact, I would probably still be there,
frantically breaking cyphers from
Mediagenic's industrial espionage ... er
. . . marketing department, except that
two beer-bellied ex-linebackers (otherwise
known as security guards (otherwise
known as "rent-a-cops")) crashed through
a hangar door and told me to "reach for
the sky", an aerobics exercise which is
not fun anywhere, much less inside a B52 bomber.
They frisked me, handcuffed me and,
just between us, beat me about the head
a bit. Good thing that bag I wear has padding, huh? They asked me what I was
doing there and I admitted that I had
trespassed long enough to see the auction. They asked me what I was doing in
the B-52 and I explained that I was trying
to get the facts about BattleTech II. Talk
about breaking a code! These guys loved
both BattleTech and MechWarrior and

couldn't wait to hear about
the: 256 color palette, AdLib
and Roland sound support,
addition of more than 50 new
types of 'mechs, use of air
units and infantry support,
and capacity for commanding up to twelve combat units.
I almost convinced them to
unlock my handcuffs and let
me go when I told them that
BattleTech II would include
20 different scenarios, each
one building on the ones
before. They were practically
salivating when I told them
that the play is balanced so
that the game begins with
one-on-one command,
moves to multiple unit command and finishes up in a
strategy game where
resource allocation between units forms
the difference between winning and
losing.
Then, their supervisor stepped in. Even
in plain clothes, he looked like your typical spook (a spy by any other name).
"So, this is the perpetrator?" he asked.
The others quickly affirmed my guilt. He
turned to me and demanded information.
"What did you see?" he shouted.
"Well," I answered, rather intimidated, "I
saw some of the notes for Accolade's Altered Destiny. Apparently, some guy
named P.J. Barrett gets sucked into his
television set and finds an alternate world
with all sorts of weird and twisted locations like The Forest of Dreams, The
Floating Island, The Caverns of Fear, The
Caves of Death and Yula Graveyard.
Only an ex-Infocom designer could come
up with such strangeness."
"I'm talking about real life!" he challenged me.
"Well, I do know that MicroProse's
Covert Action, their long-awaited spy
game is nearing completion." His eyes lit
up and I knew I had his attention. "I think
they're really planning to do some interesting things with the non-player characters."
He was obviously waiting for me to go
on, but I couldn't go on. The only other
product I could have mentioned was
MicroProse's space game, but I didn't
know exactly what they were going to do
with it. So, I did something atypical. I
kept my mouth shut.
He turned to the other guards. "Let him
go," he commanded, "if we don't let him
get to CES, we'll never find out about
some of these games." He shook his
head and walked out as I thanked my
lucky stars for having such a great job.

Sneak Preview

SEARCH FOR THE KING
Accolade Unleashes Graphic
Adventures
by Johnny L. Wilson

ccolade' s

new series of graphic adventure games is
the culmination of two dreams. Both lead designers,
Steve Cartwright with Search for the King and Mike Berlyn with Altered Destiny, envisioned a technological achievement that would enhance their ability to tell stories on the
computer.

A

Dream, Dream, Dream
For Steve Cartwright, best known for a wellspring of action
games created during his Activision years, the dream was to
create a set of tools for developing graphic adventures. The
dream began back in the James Levy days of Activision
when a team looked at what other companies were doing in
terms of graphic adventures. Cartwright was so impressed
with what Sierra had developed for programmers to use that
he longed to develop similar tools and even improve on
them. He was unable to do so at Activision, but his move to
Accolade allowed him enough reign to work on the graphics
enhancements for the "engine" which drives Accolade's new
line.
The biggest difference between Accolade's new line and
many of the current adventure game products on the market
is that the older tools still use many "line and fill" routines.
Cartwright wanted to get away from this classic, but unsatisfying method, and include more bit-mapped graphics which
could, in turn, be combined with more animation and even
some digitization to create more realistic action on the screen.
For Michael Berlyn, Infocom alumnus (Suspended,
Cutthroats and Infidel) and science fiction author (The Eternal Enemy), the dream has been to create the ultimate parser. As he told CGW as early as 1987, "We [Mike and his
wife, Muffy] have developed our own engine for adventures
that will enable us to release our products in six or seven formats simultaneously." The first such product, intended to be
a text adventure in the classic Infocom style, never really appeared in the form which was intended. Nevertheless,
Berlyn's desire to create a parser which would be far superior
to any on the market has continued. Some of his efforts
could be seen in Dr. Dumont's Wild P.A.R.T.I. for First Row
Software (a game which may never gain the attention it
deserves because of its avant-garde subject matter), but the
parser in Accolade's new line far exceeds that effort. In addition to a larger total vocabulary, the new parser allows the
use of adjectives without locking up, understands many incomplete sentences and isn't often sidetracked by slightly
misspelled words.
Together, the two experienced designers hope they have
created a set of graphic adventure tools that will enable the in-

terface to become more transparent than ever. With hotter
graphics, a more sophisticated parser and two distinctively different stories, they believe Accolade's new graphic adventure
line will be a contender for industry leader.

More Music and Les Manley
The protagonist of Cartwright's game, Search for the King,
is almost certain to remind one of Les Nessman (of the old
"WKRP in Cincinnati" television series) minus the band-aids
and without the paranoia. Coincidentally enough, Les Manley
works at television station WILL and gets even less respect
than Nessman did. Indeed, just as Jennifer on the television
series was the only one who seemed to respect that Les, Stella seems to be the only one at WILL who respects this Les.
The major difference between the two is that Les Manley is
extremely competent at his job. He just has to prove it.
This is where the player comes in. By means of a marvelous cinematic sequence, WILL announces a contest where
the winner gets a million dollars for finding the "King" of rock
and roll. The television executives figure that, since rumors of
appearances of the former "King" get plenty of attention and
the "King" is not really alive, they will get lots of publicity, but
never have to pay. Les figures otherwise. He wants to show
them up by finding the "King" and forcing them to pay. After
all, he has his entire lunch hour to do so.
Now, the game proper begins. Of course, the cinematic ef-

I

fects are not over.
In order to have
realistic animation
of the beautiful
secretary (love interest), Steve
videotaped an attractive Accolade
employee and
digitized the sequence where she
walks to the water
cooler. These artistic details are further enhanced by
occasional "cutscenes" that personalize some of
the action and conversations and fullscreen oblique
perspectives providing a larger geography for the scene
than the traditional
room-by-room ap
-proach.
The versatility of the parser can be demonstrated in an
early scene where Les needs to get a set of keys from his
boss's desk. Normally, one would expect to spend a great
deal of time trying to guess the right words to navigate
through the conversation. In Search for the King, the player
merely types, "Ask for a raise" and the program launches
into a complete, humorous and insightful interaction between
Les and his boss. The player is privileged to watch some of
the game unfold without having to feel responsible for advancing the conversation. This is not simply chrome, however.
The fact is that there is a verbal clue within the conversation
that tips one off on how to solve the pending puzzle.
In fact, the two designers are so confident of their improved
parser with its ability to understand specific verbs that they
even have a little fun at the expense of the competition. For
example, if one happens to utilize the generic, universal verb
"use", one receives a tongue-in-cheek admonition that asks if
the player thought he/she were playing one of those halfdome adventure games. Hmm! Wonder which company near
Yosemite National Park they could possibly be referring to?
The parser knows if the player has been "bad" or "good", too.
Players who use suggestive language may have some rather
intriguing responses thrown back at them!

Some of the versatility of the
graphics can be
seen when Les
walks down the
street and visits the
circus (complete
with carnival
freaks). This scene
has two animated
amusement rides
and a half dozen independently
animated characters ("characters"
being the operative
word). In fact, the
player will want to
be careful not to
think any of these
characters are
"beneath" his notice.
Those who enjoy
the delicate curves
of the fairer sex will
be ecstatic with the
swimming pool sequence in Las Vegas, a beautiful bonanza
of blonde babes. If that doesn't happen to be enough, the
desert pay-phone sequence leads to a "romantic" cut-scene
where Stella reveals her true feelings for Les in full-screen
animated splendor. For those who like the more humorous
moments in a story, the animation surrounding a certain
"King Impersonator" contest is hilarious and engaging.
Throughout the product, the graphics attempt to fit the emotion.

Who Will Answer?
Although many designers have opted for a "simpler is better" perspective with regard to developing puzzles, Cartwright
and Berlyn have decided that they will stick to creating some
challenging and surprising puzzles. Like the Infocom games
of an earlier epoch, the puzzles in the Accolade line will always be entertaining, even if they are not always logical.
Players who are tired of having the puzzles handed to them
on a silver platter should enjoy the subtle challenges to be
found in the new series. So, players will have to be sure they
add those strange items to their inventories. One never
knows when dental floss and free tickets may come in handy.

I Believe
No Business Like Show Business
Like most first-line products in today's computer entertainment industry, Accolade's new line will use VGA resolution
and an extended palette to convey some of the excitement of
the story. In addition, the designers have independently
joined a recent movement in adventure games of opening
the visual vistas of the story through different sized figures,
scenes and perspectives in order to get away from the traditional (and sometimes claustrophobic) equivalent
location-by-equivalent location schemata of some adventure games.
Cinematic influences are no longer restricted to particular
software publishers, but are pervading the entire genre.

Accolade's Search for the King offers an unusual story,
challenging puzzles, impressive graphics, friendly interface
and plenty of surprises. It is probably the best "first effort"
we've seen from a company publishing a genre product.
Where one generally expects to be more lenient in an appraisal of a "first effort", Cartwright and Berlyn have parlayed
their disparate experiences as game designers into products
which will push the envelope of adventure gaming. Frankly,
"first effort" or not, this game will play in Poughkeepsie.
Long live the King!

wince. Get used to these gruesome descriptions, because there
are more to come.
(Continued from page 10)
need to become familiar with "moddies" and "daddies". These are
little chips that Marid can plug directly into his skull. They provide him with skills and knowledge he doesn't have on his own,
and also have effects (good and bad) on his physical attributes.
Moddies provide special skills, and minor personality changes.
They are very minor; Marid never forgets who he is, or what he's
doing. He does get some odd thoughts and impulses from time
to time, however. Daddies can also provide skills, or do other
things such as monitor body functions or project the current time
on his vision. My favorites to have chipped in were Kung Fu
Master (a moddy) and Alpine Jack (a daddy) which did very
nice things for Marid's stats, as well as making him a darn good
fighter (which is handy when jumped by muggers).

The Story So Far
So here's Marid just hanging out in his apartment when his
good buddy Saied calls and asks him to pick up a package. The
package business is just to get Marid out of the house and into
the game. Shortly after he finishes this little task, the real action
begins when he's directed by Papa to see a man about a
notebook.
Unfortunately, the man is dead (very dead). Not only dead, but
horribly mutilated in a way that would make Jack the Ripper

Naturally, at this moment, a cop walks in the door, and things
look bleak for our boy Marid. But he has Papa on his side, so he
doesn't get arrested after all. Instead, he ends up taking a trip to
see Papa in person and getting some background info on his assignment.
Now it's time for some detective work. Marid has a few clues to
work with, and the police will cooperate (if reluctantly) to a point,
by providing Marid with a couple of items.
After a little work on his part, Marid's got an answering chip but
no answering machine to play it on, a holodisk, and a pawn ticket for a shop that went out of business. Terrific stuff, eh? Well,
there's a place you can view the holo, and it wouldn't hurt to ask
around about Mustafa's.
It wouldn't hurt to ask people about other things, either, like certain names you've come across. This is something that's very important in the game; often Marid will pick up interesting or important information by questioning others. Check out the street
dealers, too; sometimes they have interesting items for sale.
While Marid's making the rounds, a hooker will ask for his
phone number. She has other things on her mind than the usual,
however, so it might be a good idea to find out what she's up to.
Sooner or later she calls and tells you where to meet her.
Guess what you'll find when you get there? Right, another
corpse, in just as delightful a condition as the last one. No items
to grab this time, but you need to take a closer look (though
your stomach may protest) at the body for a clue.
You may have noticed a computer in the police station (and
been kicked off when you tried to use it). You need something official before you can go snooping into the files. When you have
it, pay attention to what you see on the screen.
By this time, Marid should have bought the answering machine
and discovered, not surprisingly, that it's in a language he can't
understand. Well, there's one person in the Budayeen with skills
for sale, so you might want to ask there. Of course, you have to
know what language you want. Did you look at the holodisk?

Ring of Truth
So, now Marid is set on a different path, tracking down a thief.
This is a long trail, that leads from place to place (all of them obvious, once you get started with the right one) until it ends at a
warehouse, with (of course) another body in extremely unpleasant condition. (Boy, the population of the Budayeen is certainly thinning out fast).
The only object to be found here is half of a ring. It would be
nice if Marid had the other half. Come to think of it, he should
have the other half, too. In that case, you know when and where
Marid needs to be, so be there.
It wouldn't hurt to show that half ring to a few people, either.
Someone might recognize it. Marid might even learn something
helpful. Too bad that when he tries to use the computer again,
he's recognized and tossed out of the police station. Ah, well.
Tough luck, Marid, but you're a canny guy and you have other
ways of getting on that machine.
Finally, Marid has tracked down the thief (yeah, another body,
but at least this one is in decent condition for a change) and gets
the language chip he needs, although whether or not the message is really helpful is another matter. There isn't time to worry
about that, however, because, soon afterwards, a frantic call
comes in from Muhammad.
(Continued on page 58)

Strategy

Tycoon "Tooter"
"Constructive" Tips for Beginning a
Game of Railroad Tycoon

T

he path to the

Presidency (or
Prime Ministership) is seldom smooth.
In Microprose's Sid
Meier's Railroad
Tycoon, in fact, it often
has a 4.0% grade, a 9%
interest rate and needs
to be double tracked.
With no "quick and dirty
guide" available to Robber Baronhood, we offer
the following tips and
techniques to players of
Sid Meier's latest simulation.

The most important aspect of assuring
one's future in railroading is the correct
placing of the initial line. It is here where
the player must develop an understanding of "economic geography", as
well as geographic topography. The object of studying the Regional Display is
to find an initial line which will not only
provide good early growth, but is also
well positioned for long term growth. The
best method for doing this is to pluck up
large tracts of land using the Area Display (F2) and pondering the placement
of cities and resources thereon.

If building a tunnel sounds like a slick
idea for an initial line, be warned: it usually isn't. A player's initial line tends to be
the central part of his burgeoning empire
and, therefore, has a tendency to become double tracked early on in the
game. With a tunnel (especially a long
one) at the heart of one's railroad empire, it can often become a choke point
(and thus a real liability later in the
game).

The Fat Of The Land
The "cream" from a milk run is in multi
convertible cargoes. In Europe, for example, this means a run that picks up
coal, converts it to steel (ringing up the
cash register in the process), takes this
recently smelted steel to be converted
into arms (more money for the till), and
finally hauls these new arms to a fort or
port ("ching, ching"). This is making optimal use of a freight train! In the United
States, one easily finds the old livestock
to stockyard to city milk run, in England
its hops to beer to villages, etc.

There's More to
a Survey Than
Hitting the F10
Key
After determining
which map to play on
and what will define
"reality" in the game
(i.e. what size the pond
will be and how
dangerous the fish are
in it), the Regional Display (Fl) is presented for the player's initial survey. It might be a good idea to do
two things before really viewing this map.
First, call up the Game menu and set the
speed to "Frozen" so ample time will be
available to study it. Second, call up the
Display menu, go to Options, and activate the "Resource Map" feature.

Going In The Hole With
Tunnels

To get the most cream from these
types of milk runs, one should look for
the largest suppliers of the initial
resource. In the first example, one should
find the largest concentration of coal
mines available and place them under
one station. In this manner, freight trains
utilizing that station will always be quick
to fill with full consists (thus generating
maximum revenues at each stop from
these "slow freight" cargoes).

Dairy Delight
Exactly what a player is looking for is a
"milk run". Three important features are
critical to a successful initial line and the
establishing of a highly profitable milk
run. First, at least two cities must be involved (the larger the better) between
which will move highly profitable mail
and passenger consists. Second, resources must be nearby, as well as destinations which require or convert those
resources into other products (and, ultimately, with one's initial cities as the
likely end consumers of these products).
Finally, zoom down to the Detail Display
(F4) and check out the lay of the land. If
proposed rail line is too rugged or has
too many tight turns, trains will move too
slowly along it.

Station-To-Station For
Collect Calls
Assuming that the perfect chunk of real
estate is found (or, more likely, the best
compromise location is determined), an
important decision must be made before
laying any down track. Knowing which
two cities will serve as the initial hubs of
one's empire is one thing; seeing where
and how future hubs might be connected
is another. Through some foresight early
on, the "angle" of the track laid into each
station will help to point it in the right
direction for expanding towards planned
future stations. Since the human player
in a game of Railroad Tycoon has to
worry about placing stations on a section
of straight track without "switches",
positioning can be critical (especially
when building stations near bends in
rivers). Try to think of the "flow" of the
line's future connections when determin(Continued on page 63)

Game Hints

A Second Look at "Second Front"
An Analysis of SSI's "Second Front"
By Alan Emrich and Tom Hughes

A

s

computer wargamers know, often
documentation leaves a good many
questions unanswered, especially
with the more complex and detailed wargames. With the massive design effort that
clearly went into Second Front, it is no
wonder that some things slipped through
the cracks. It is the purpose of this article
to present Second Front players with the
strategies and game notes which will help
march them to victory.

Delousing
Mr. Grigsby has promised to deliver a 1.1
version of the game which will address most
of these problems. (Don't start calling SSI
about it—it will be announced). Here are the
1.0 version bugs being corrected:
In the 1941 Campaign Scenario, the German objective of Gorki may become Kazan
(this is currently under playtest).
In the 1942 Campaign Scenario, German
FW190A's are inadvertently Fighter-Bombers
(FB), rather than pure Fighters (F), which
makes a difference in their intercept limits.
"Fighter Sweeps" are also unintentional.
This is where fighters can keep flying solo
missions and drawing out enemy fighters
forever. Note that FBs have a one time escort/intercept capacity each player turn,
while "pure" fighters can intercept many
times (and should be allowed to escort only as long as their are bombers going off on missions from the fighter's base).
Fighters may also "stage" an unlimited number of times to different
bases and be used offensively at each one. Additionally, aircraft experience could never go over 91% on the Russian Front.
The remaining bugs concern production. In the 1941 Campaign
game, the Russians can only move four factories to Siberia! (All but
four "spaces" in Siberia were already allotted for reinforcement industries).
Also, Soviet industries are inadvertently allowed to produce
Western Allied equipment. This is a one-way switch (along with TB-3
bombers), and factories producing these units cannot be switched
back.
Finally, if a player accidently switches a factory to a unit type
which won't appear soon, it cannot be taken off Research & Development and changed back into production.

Those Aren't Bugs, They're "Features"
Designer Gary Grigsby states that the EVEN play balance setting is
for human vs. human or computer vs. computer play only. When
playing against the computer, it should be given some, if not maximum help (the computer Al attempts to act fairly historically and will
not do such "human" things as optimize leader placement, move Rus
sian industries, or envelope units efficiently).
The Combat Values (CVs) on the screen are only one tenth of the

actual Combat Value of the unit (the German
player must realize he has ten times the garrison strength showing on the Western and
Italian Fronts).
For those with a quibble about the values
for the various tanks and aircraft, designer
Grigsby says they reflect his subjective
opinion.
Divisions and air groups may be transferred into and out of Finland at will.
Sometimes bombers won't fly a given mission. This is correct, with the designer indicating that such missions are "aborted" (bad
weather is the usual culprit). However, an
aborted mission allows the bombers to attempt another mission that turn (or even try
the same mission again—over and over, if
desired, until it is fulfilled).
Factory growth is optimized at fifteen. Once
the fifteen level is reached, the chance for additional growth is reduced by 90%. Furthermore, what your factories make may be
changed by the computer according to an
historical timetable (whether the player likes
it or not, but the Al usually works re-tooling
to the player's benefit). Granted, these re-toolings only take a week, but changing them
back to what the player originally wanted
takes several weeks.
The actual factory growth formula is: Total
Heavy Industry, divided by factory's current
unit production cost, equals percentage
chance for growth. (For example, with a total
Heavy Industry of 100, a 3 production cost unit factory has a 33%
chance for a factory to grow, while a 5 production cost unit factory
has only a 20% chance).
When resource and oil bearing cities change hands, their value is
reduced by one each time. Every city permanently loses all of its
population when captured (they are deported or shot, says Grigsby),
which effects replacement squads.

What The Documentation Didn't Tell You,
Or—README2
This is the "secret formula" section. One will find many features
which would be difficult to know since they happen in the programming "where the players cannot see them."
To begin with, the README file mentions "Reserve Corps". There is
no such thing. These are, in fact, regular corps. Also, the SS corps
appear randomly, if an HQ is created anytime from 1943 on. Again,
it is a regular corps, unless the computer is playing the Germans, in
which case the Al will fill it with SS units only.
Here's a note of major consequence: Units may be plotted with
a 'B' (Bombardment) command, similar to an 'S' (Static Attack)
command (i.e., it consumes a second plot). A Bombardment Attack
is like a Static Attack (no movement) using only the attacker's artillery. No losses are inflicted upon the attacker (unless the enemy has
aircraft participating in the defense). For example, an armored corps
with an enemy unit next to it in direction '3' could plot: "3B3B3",

thus softening up the unit twice with bombardments before actually
assaulting the hex. (Remember, the effects of Static and Bombardment Attacks are applied when the number is plotted, not the letter)
Bombardment attacks are always shown as "Odds: 0".
All fighters based at the OKH, Western and Italian Front HQs have
double their ranges (which is handy for combatting Allied bombing
of Germany).
Fighter-Bombers (FBs) have a smaller chance of intercepting
enemy missions than pure fighters do. Also, FBs can only perform
one escort mission for attacking bombers.
TANK BATTALION REPLACEMENT MAXIMUMS
Russian
Tank
65

Russian
SPA Rgt.
21

German
Tank
70

German
Jpzl/Stug
40

Some units may start the game with more than this, but they must
be depleted below this number before they will receive any replacements.
Jpz-I's, Marders, Nashorns and SU76's do not attack. These tank
destroyers only fire back in defense! When attacking, none of these
vehicles will be lost.
New combat units may not be created, no matter how many
squads, tanks, planes, guns, etc. are stockpiled. New divisions, etc.
arrive on a historical timetable.

if the unit's Leadership Value +1 makes its percentile roll. (Thus, our
7 value Leader would have a 64% chance of saving the unready
boys in a retreat).
Throughout the war, during the Anti-Tank Combat Phases, losses inflicted by the Axis upon the Russians are doubled (due to the superiority of German tactics, says Grigsby). In the clear weather turns of
1941, the Axis inflict even greater Anti-Tank causalities while defending against Russian attack (due to inept Russian handling of tanks
during this period of the war).
The Russians are hindered by an "Artificial Stupidity" rule during
the clear weather turns of 1941 (except on the Maximum Help Russians setting). This means that during first pulse (number zero), units
have a 10% chance of actually executing their orders, dropping by
1% per additional pulse. Therefore, the Russians will be virtually unable to cut off Axis units or launch coordinated attacks against them.
The Anti-Tank (AT) formulas are incomplete, so an explanation is
in order. The AT Fire phases are the phases where tanks are
destroyed (except through direct air bombardment). In the subsequent Combat Firing phases, no tanks are destroyed, and every
surviving tank is considered "one tank" regardless of its type. In the
AT Fire phases, tanks actually use their various attack and defense
strengths, infantry squads are considered to have a (minimal) AntiTank value, and Tank Destroyer aircraft, Fighter-Bombers and Dive
Bombers have their cannon ratings multiplied by five, three and
three (respectively) and added to the number of AT guns present.
For the Germans, when calculating the "Average AT" value, add
the total number of attack points plus the total number of Flak guns,
then divide by the number of platforms (AT guns + tanks). Thus, if
the Germans have few platforms, Flak will do in a pinch.

NEW UNIT EXPERIENCE LEVEL TABLE
Year
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
Elite*
*Elite

Germans
Axis
& Finns
Russians
Minors
80
50
20
75
55
20
70
60
20
65
65
20
60
60
20
90
80
(no change)
units are the German SS and Russian Guards

Also, when replacement pools get large enough to reach certain
thresholds, all units get replaced with that type of element at 100%,
regardless of its headquarters' replacement level.
The computer upgrades units as follows: German SS and other
elite units first (Gross Deutchland, etc.). Other German and all Russian units receive the new, improved weaponry from the pools based
on the unit's divisional numerical order (i.e., 1st Panzer receives
priority over 24th Panzer, etc.).
Russian tank divisions become tank corps in May, 1942 and, starting in 1943, certain German tanks get converted automatically to improved types.

ANTI-TANK VALUE TABLE
Year
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945

AT Value
6
9
12
15
18

All artillery and flak guns retain a value of one throughout the war
(note that German flak has an Anti-Tank value). Each "Artillery" factory point produces two artillery, two anti-tank and one flak per week.
Oil centers may be strategically bombed. Damage from these
bombings to a level of five are permanent (below five, they have a
slight chance to increase in value back up to five).
After Italy surrenders, their factories start making Marders. This
production still cannot be altered.
If a factory is assigned to Research & Development, it ceases to be
able to increase in value. Its value is rolled against a D-100 (percentile) each week. If the roll is less than or equal to the factory's value,
then the availability date for the item being researched is advanced
by one week.

When the program makes a "Leader Roll" (i.e., checks to see if a
unit's leadership effects a battle's progress or results), there are two
types of rolls. One is the Leader's value vs. a D-10 (a 7 value leader
would have a 70% chance of positively effecting the outcome); the
other is a the Leaders value squared vs. a percentile (D-100) roll
(i.e., that same 7 value Leader would only have a 49% chance of
positively effecting the outcome).
The combat phases are sequential as follows:
Attacker Bombards
Defender Bombards
Defender Anti-Tank
Attacker Anti-Tank
Defender Combat Fire
Attacker Combat Fire
Losses from each of these six segments are sequentially applied.
Furthermore, if a unit retreats, it will suffer additional losses of up to
50% of its unready troops. These retreat losses are reduced by 75%

Continued on Page 57

Computer Gaming World's
See Reader Input Device on page 47

The Categories
Strategy (S7): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first person perspectives of
real world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take your alter ego
through a storyline or series
of events.
Role-Playing Adventures (RP):
Adventure games that are based
on character development
(usually involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.
Games are often listed in more
than one category. In this case,
the first listed category is
considered primary. In order to
be recognized as the "Top
Game" in a given category, a
game must be listed as being
primarily of this specific type.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games In
CGW's Hall Of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated By
Our Readers
Over Time.
They Are Worthy
Of Play By All.

Review

N

apoleon once wrote: "There
! come quite unnerving for any
is no place in a fanatic's
neighbors who might be
head where reason can
eavesdropping.
enter." Certain fanatics may be
When Raven interacts with
without reason, but they also conanother character, a window
stitute some of the most delightful
slides or materializes into place,
and murderous gaming adverdisplaying a close-up animation of
saries an adventurer could hope
that character. This is accomto encounter.
panied by the sounds of
Chamber of the Sci-Mutant
humanoid squeaks and rumblings
Priestess is an adventure game in
which make the encounter either
which a group of such fanatics,
more realistic or just more bizarre.
by Allen Greenberg
who call themselves the
These encounters may also inProtozorqs, are challenged by the
clude some highly animated complayer in the role of Raven the
bat, the results of which are strictTuner. A "Tuner" is a sort of
ly controlled by the program.
telepath; Protozorqs are zealous
There is no arcade interaction in
followers of the god Zorq.
Chamber of the Sci-Mutant Priestess.
Somewhere in a parallel
universe Raven's beloved, a
In addition to the scenery, the
woman with the evocative name
Chamber screen is rich in equally
"Sci Fi," has been captured by the
strange-looking icons. It is entirely
TITLE:
Chamber of the
Protozorqs. Because these
through these icons that comSci-Mutant Priestess
fanatics believe themselves to be
mands in the game are given.
SYSTEMS: Amiga, Atari ST, IBM
the favored of their god, all other
REVIEWED ON: Amiga
The Amiga and ST versions use
# OF PLAYERS: 1
races are considered by them as
the mouse to its fullest potential
$44.95
PRICE:
mere barnyard fodder and desigto manipulate Raven and select
PUBLISHER:
Infogrames
DISTRIBUTOR: Data East
nated as "Offa." However, even
his options. IBM users without
San Jose, CA
an Offa may serve Zorq by facing
that digital rodent must pound
and surviving the five ordeals.
their keyboards instead. For each
That survivor becomes a "Divo."
decision Raven must make, a
With Divo-hood comes a reward
• very graphic representation of his
of dubious merit which a sensible
brain (from the stem, looking up)
Offa may or may not wish to claim.
appears on screen, adorned with "action bubbles." By selecting a
bubble with the curser, Raven is made to choose that action.
In Chamber, Raven must decide how (or even if), he wishes to
face the ordeals. His main concern is the rescue of his beloved
Tuning Into Triumph (Hints)
and their escape from the temple of the Protozorqs. It is a quest
made up of puzzles, most of which are set out to be solved intuiThe documentation's clever fiction suggests that Raven may not
tively rather than intellectually. The puzzles are not particularly difneed to complete the five ordeals in order to rescue Sci Fi. This
ficult to solve, but they are quite imaginative. The entire advenwas not the present reviewer's experience. Instead, Raven and Sci
ture has an ethereal and seductive quality which make the story
Fi were not able to escape from the temple when Raven had not
a joy to participate in.
solved the five ordeals.
Raven's adventures take place in real-time. The Protozorqs have
Also, Raven should be discreet in using his awesome Tunergiven him only one hour in which to face the five ordeals and
talents while solving the five ordeals. The energy to use these
they will adhere to that schedule. Should the temple guards betalents is not without limit and Raven will need all he can salvage
come aware that Raven is working on anything other than his five
once he goes off on his own to search for his beloved.
challenges, the place quickly becomes more dangerous than a
convenience store after midnight.
Tuning Out The Troubles (Complaints)
The fact that Raven is a "Tuner" gives him some interesting
talents. Among these is the ability to manipulate small objects
The story is a good one but it ends rather abruptly. The
from a distance or propel himself into a berserk rage for the purelaborate presentation of the program (not to mention its hefty
pose of committing extreme violence against his enemies. Unforprice tag) seem to demand a longer, more convoluted plot. Since
tunately, almost everyone hates a Tuner and would love to see
the program fits onto only one (Amiga) disk, there was certainly
one dead.
room for more adventure.
Another item in the endless list of oddities to be found in ChamSome players will also be unhappy to discover that the copyber is Raven's Foetus. The Foetus holds some authority with the
protected disk must be write-enabled in order to run properly or
Tuners, but he and Raven are at the moment not on the best of
to save a game in progress. The susceptibility to damage of a
terms. Nevertheless, the Foetus stays perched at the top of the
disk which is both copy-protected and write-enabled make it a
graphic screen, providing hints and advice filled with gratuitous
poor choice for any program. Perhaps Data East will reconsider
misspellings.
and avoid using it in the future.
Chamber includes some of the most interesting sounds and
graphics yet to be found in an adventure game program. The
Devoted Observations (Conclusions)
three-dimensional views of the temple rooms and hallways are
Chamber of the Sci-Mutant Priestess is an imaginative advenfilled with sculpted mystic missives and obscure objects of faith.
ture game in which the sounds and graphics deserve special
Color, depth and detail are abundant. When Raven moves or
merit. Fans of puzzle-based adventures will find it enjoyable, if not
manipulates one of the strange objects, the walls resound with a
terribly difficult. Only the story's relative brevity separates it from
convincing and appropriate echo. At times, however, the demonic
perfection.
chants and inhuman sounds produced by the program may be-

Boy Gets Girl
Data East's "Chamber of
the Sci-Mutant Priestess"

Review

W

olfPack is a "simulation" of the submarine wars in the Atlantic Ocean during World
War II. The documentation
notes that it "is a precise
simulation ... With attention
to detail and interactivity exceeding that of other current
implementations ... [T]he
game offers you the unprecedented realism of a full-scale,
real-time, strategic encounter"
(cf. Manual, page 10). In fact,
WolfPack is a game "dressed
up" as a simulation, but
which, in fact, offers little historical accuracy. This is not to
say that WolfPack is a failure
as a design—it can be fun to
play, but it is a fact that there
is little to learn from this
product in a historical sense.

incapable of High Seas performance with the Imperial Battle Fleets.
Also, the scenarios note the
"Happy Time" as occurring off
the English Coast (1939). Historically, the "Happy Time"
was the period immediately
after U.S. entry into World
War II (January - June 1942)
wherein the German submarines lurking off the East
Coast had easy pickings,
since the Americans had
failed to institute convoy procedures or blackouts along
the seaboard cities (in effect,
highlighting the merchant targets for the U-Boats).
Finally, the icons used to represent the German submarines are in fact historical,
although this is not mentioned in the manual. The
icons represent the named
vessel, but it would have been
nice to see the historical background of such vessel. There
was an error, in that the U124 uses a "Green Frog" icon
while this was actually
Kapitanleutnant Mohr's personal insignia. The ship actually used the Edelweiss (thus,
both symbols were used).

The product is, in fact, two
games. That is, one may
choose to either captain the Uboat(s) or the surface vessels.
Most prior releases have concentrated on one aspect exclusively; Broderbund's game
allows either perspective.
Finally, the "Mission Creation"
allows one to recreate his own
scenarios in a readily-accessible format.

Under the Sea
Broderbund's Wolfpack
by M. Evan Brooks

TITLE:
SYSTEM:

# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Wolfpack
IBM
VGA Graphics Support
AdLib and SoundBlaster Support
0-2
$54.95
John Garcia
Broderbund
San Rafael, CA

Submarine Shorthand (Documentation)

The Seaweed Is Always Greener (Graphics)

The documentation is professionally produced and yields a
clear understanding of the game mechanics. However, the instructions for loading scenarios are somewhat ambiguous. While the
mechanics are theoretically explained in the "Mission Creation"
portion of the manual, a player attempting to load the pre-existing scenarios is likely to be easily confused as to the loading
mechanics.

Billed as "Supporting VGA Graphics", WolfPack uses a full VGA
color display in the opening screens. Thereafter, it resembles a
super-EGA type standard. The graphics are well-done a la 688 Attack Sub, but they are not of VGA quality throughout. Also, the
ship sinkings and the sea itself assume a certain "chunkiness" in
display terms.

In terms of historical background, the manual is limited to four
pages and, at that, some of the facts therein are incorrect! The
manual notes the historical threat as having inspired Jellicoe's
famous "turn-away command" during World War l's Battle of Jutland. In fact, the actual torpedo threat was from destroyer
squadrons and not submarines. The World War I submarine was

The ship instrumentation is easy-to-read, although the strategic
map can often become confusing. The normal instrumentation
screen is easy to use, and periscope viewing can be switched
180 degrees by the touch of a button. However, fine adjustments
can be harder to achieve.
Sound boards are supported, and the implementation is well-

Beware of enemy merchant gunners. While historical merchant
shipping had atrocious gunnery (the merchant marine was not
known for its time engaged in target acquisition and engagement), the computer gunners are deadly accurate. Depth charges by the destroyers are generally set for the correct depth.
Thus, unless one can quickly escape the surface ships and
destroy them piecemeal, the scenarios usually wind up with a Uboat defeat.

done. The opening theme yields a proper aura of depth and
foreboding. Even on the internal speaker, it sounds interesting.

Game Play
In terms of historical accuracy, at least, game play is the main
failing of WolfPack. The packaged scenarios are ahistorical and
generally start out with contact already achieved. Yet, no distinction is made between steam and electric torpedoes (and there
does not seem to be a minimum range), while the surface fleet is
composed of merchant shipping and a Fletcher-class destroyer.
Historically, most convoys were protected by DEs (destroyer escorts) and corvettes.
Input may be made via joystick, mouse and/or keyboard. A
nice touch is that often, multiple methods are available to switch
from various game areas. Thus, the gamer has a choice of accessibility paths. Scoring is done via zero-sum, i.e. the victory points
for destroyed ships are weighted so that each side constitutes
50%. Time compression (1-64 times normal) permits one to
quickly pass over periods of non-contact, although there is a
danger that too much can happen too quickly unless the player
is alert.
WolfPack's game mechanics involve shifting from bridge to
bridge (a la Strike Fleet), during which time the other vessels
may continue on pre-set orders or be left to the orders of the
computer Al captains (who may be relentless, resourceful,
cautious or by-the-book). The best that can be said of the Als is
that they can be depended on to do the wrong thing at the
wrong time (except for the by-the-book types, who never do anything). Standing orders may be given (U-Boat—Anchor, Shadow,
Patrol; Destroyer—Anchor, Convoy, Patrol; Merchant Shipping—
Anchor, Join Convoy, Act as Convoy Leader).

The documentation notes that engaging an oncoming-escort
"down-the-throat" is an effective tactic. Generally, such a
maneuver is risky in the extreme—the destroyer presents its smallest target and the submarine cannot dive deeply enough to escape if it misses. Sam "Down-the-Throat" Dealey won the Medal
of Honor for his actions in the Pacific using this tactic, however,
his boat was also lost with all hands.
The surface commander will engage in "sprint and drift" tactics.
Instrumentation is quickly understood and one can understand
the frustration of the hunter-killer teams—finding, fixing and
destroying an enemy submarine can be an exercise in frustration
and patience. Depth charges are usually the weapon of choice,
because hedgehogs have to be in very close proximity to the
enemy submarine in order to effect any substantive damage.
The pre-built scenarios are generally inadequate. They involve
little of the stalk, but rather involve one directly in the kill—and,
too often, the kill can be on the wrong side unless one is quick!
The Mission Generator is easy to use, and one can achieve more
accurate scenarios. The manual warns that the greater the number of ships, the slower the processing speed of the computer.
Thus, slower machines should design smaller scenarios.

Conclusions
There have been too many compromises with reality for this to
constitute a "precise simulation". In terms of "look and feel", WolfPack is analogous to 688 Attack Sub in that both products offered fine graphics and entertainment, but neither is accurate. In
fact, WolfPack may be more reminiscent of a modern submarine
simulation than a World War II era exercise, since one can
engage targets without utilizing the periscope. WolfPack may actually garner some of the commercial success which attended
688 Attack Sub. However, with the increasing number of
products available for the consumer, this reviewer does not consider WolfPack to have any real long-term sustainability. Although WolfPack lacks realism as a simulation, it can still be enjoyed as a game. The sounds and the graphics can be fun, albeit
ahistorical.
(c) 1990 All Rights Reserved

Depth Charges (Criticisms)
The two player mode uses an innovative feature where the submarine screen appears for a set period, following which the view
switches to the surface player. While adequate warning time is
provided, the entire play sequence did not allow this reviewer to
place a consistent and coherent offensive/defensive plan in operation. Perhaps, it will take a true modem-to-modem interface to
achieve the ideal in this regard.
During play, target acquisition can be made by the submarine
without using the periscope. Lead is automatically computed (no
angle-on-the-bow estimates for an accurate firing solution), but
there is no layered-on complexity (except for time of day, with
night visibility offering more limited target acquisition). Often, a
target will appear in one's periscope, but the message reads "No
Target". This is "an undocumented feature" (known as a bug to
the general public). Fortunately, it is not fatal, since even such a
target can still be sunk by torpedoes.

Recommended Reading
The documentation cites two references, although it is clear
that heavy reliance was placed on Robert C. Stern's U-Boats
in Action.
Also recommended are:
Michael Gannon, Operation Drumbeat, the history of the
German submarine offensive against the United States in
early 1942;
Nicholas Monsarrat, The Cruel Sea, an excellent fictionalized
treatment of a British corvette during World War II;
Peter Cremer, U-Boat Commander, the memoirs of a German submarine captain.

Review

ell, things haven't
been going so well in
the world of Conflict,
the new "psychopolitical cold
war" game from Virgin
Mastertronic. The Israeli
Prime Minister was just assassinated and guess who got
his job. Oh, don't worry
about the flying insults, it's
the flying bombers that'll do
the job. The secret is to be
ready to rock when the tanks
start to roll because this very
Cold War is enough to make
one shivah.

W

The Valley of
the Shadow of
Conflict
by Alan Emrich

The objective is straightforward enough. Just get every
neighboring country to collapse. Fortunately, Saudi
Arabia is too rich to jeopardize itself as an imperialist
stooge of the Superpowers,
and is therefore "out of the
game". Naturally, in the best
traditions of national self interest, the ends always justify
the means. Consequently, if
this means rolling over
Lebanon under the pretext of
the invasion being "just a
training exercise", then so be
it.
Players read the headlines
from the various newspapers
to commence each month.
Naturally, the radical Arab
papers just don't see the issues quite the same way as
the Tel Aviv Times, so the
headlines not only make for
some amusing reading, but
reading between the lines
can explain a good deal
about the underlying political
stances of neighboring governments. Often, however, the
newspapers are white, the print is black, and the journalism is yellow.
Now, let's see. First things first. What's in the morning papers?
Oh, yes, the old Prime Minister was assassinated. Like Reagan, he
forgot to duck. Hmm, Iran and Iraq are warring with each other
this month. Better find out what Mossad (Israeli Secret Service)
has on that. Here's an interesting tidbit, a nuclear reactor is being
built in Egypt. Well, not for long!
After setting down the papers (recycling some and burning
others), it's off to the War Room to study the situation map. It is
here that the hawks, vultures, sharks and piranha (which constitute the player's Cabinet) gather to urge you forward for
Greater Israel. A simple graphic interface allows one to examine,
country by country, the status of each nation, as well as its current diplomatic posture towards The Holy Land (i.e., are their armies ready to maneuver in Megiddo, or should the IDF start issuing travel brochures to Syria?).
It is here in the War Room where the player is reminded by the
opposition party of the government's present international prestige. This is a barometer which is easily altered. Assert Israel's

military or political strength
and woosh! (Time to call for
new elections, right?—Fortunately for the player, there
are no elections in Conflict,
so one is blessed, or cursed,
with this job until victory or
death). If a player shows the
slightest signs of compromise
or willingness to negotiate a
settlement, then zoom! (Normally, one would need to
keep an eye open for a
military coup d'etat, but they
do not exist in Conflict,
either, so one's back is always covered from internal
politics. Too bad, though, because internal Israeli politics
would make a great game in
and of itself!).
Finally, the end of world is
nigh (and the "nuclear clock"
begins to strike midnight) as
the ectotensions of Israel are
revealed. Or, to put it another
way, standing in a pool of
gasoline, it can be difficult to
find a place to put out one's
cigarette (smoking, after all,
is bad for one's health). It is
at moments like this where a
player must consider his options for the month.

Fortunately, Mossad raises
the term "cloak and dagger"
beyond a mere fashion stateTITLE:
Conflict
SYSTEM:
IBM
ment. They can turn the
PRICE:
$9.95
enemy's rabble into rebels,
DESIGNER:
David Eastman
create emergency insurgenPUBLISHER:
Virgin Mastertronic
Irvine, CA
cies, do coups, and won't
hesitate to assassinate.
Remember, one overthrow
can ruin a neighbor's whole
day (and takes them out of
the game permanently, just the same as a full scale military invasion might).
Hmm, Let's see. Egypt's getting a little uppity with that nuclear
reactor. Better launch a strike on that. Just in case, let's start
courting Libya in hopes of drawing Egyptian eyes westward.
Lebanon is ripe, but Jordan won't sit still if the Star of David
starts flying over Beirut. Syria is friendly today ... Okay, send a
brigade to the Lebanese border to heat up tensions, bomb Egypt,
woo Libya and start undermining the Iranian government, just for
laughs.
When the going gets tough, however, the tough go shopping.
Thanks to several U.S. Grants (i.e. the face on the $50 bill), Israel
has got to chips needed to buy those warlike "super-destructive"
procurers of peace, arms. With one's advisors egging the player
on, the player sees what is offered by the United States, Britain,
France and the "independent" arms dealers this month. Of
course, the selection improves from a supplier if the player
proves a steady customer, but America tends to have the best
overall selection (albeit at premium prices). Techno-toys include
bombers, strike aircraft and helicopter gunships, surface-to-air mis(Continued on page 52)

Review

WATERLOO

W

The British Take Us Back To The Battlefield
Review by M. Evan Brooks

aterloo is a radical departure
from the normal wargame
genre. Covering the most
famous battle in history (one whose
name alone has passed into the
English language as symbolic of
strategic defeat), the simulation offers a
perspective more akin to that of the battlefield commander than heretofore
seen.

tinue on or is his offensive capability at
an end?)
When commands are typed in, any
error will be quickly displayed. Also,
there is some confusion as to why certain orders are not recognized. Some or
ders will not be recognized at one
point, only to be allowed later in time.
Only repeated play will reveal these
command opportunities.

Released initially in England by PSS,
the game has been slightly revised. Instead of seeing the entire battlefield,
the player can only see what the historical commander could see (although a
much appreciated option allows one to
view the battlefield from other locations).

The "Background and History" is well
written, with this portion of the
documentation giving a detailed history
of Napoleonic warfare and an excellent
account of the battle itself.

Line of Sight (Graphics)
The graphics of Waterloo are very
good. Based on a ground-level perspective, one sees what was historically
present from the chosen vantage point.
Units are portrayed as domino-like
blocks, with commanders and dispatch
riders displayed somewhat less impressively as Gumby-like stick figures. However, the overall impression is still impressive. While one may question the
block-like figures, anyone who has
seen the movie Waterloo (starring Rod
Steiger as a somewhat dyspeptic
Napoleon) will quickly acknowledge
the accuracy of the battlefield portrait.

Message From The
Courier, Sir
(Documentation)
The documentation succinctly
delineates the game mechanics. One
literally types in his orders to his subordinate commanders, who generally attempt to carry them out. The various
commands are explained and examples are provided in an appendix.
While most of the orders are self-explanatory, the attack and defense line
orders could have benefited from more
detail as to their effect. Similarly, combat results are never explained, which
often raises a question as to what happens when a subordinate commander
achieves his objective (Is he able to con-

NAME:
SYSTEM:

WATERLOO
IBM/Atari ST/Amiga

However, Waterloo frequently
"redraws" the battlefield. While the time
lag is not overly disturbing on a fast
machine, it does become burdensome on
slower machines. Also, choosing the "cannon fire" option does not yield much in

Warming
(

dreamland which combines action and problem-solving into
an interesting hybrid and the
as yet unnamed Tetris-style
game mentioned earlier).

Continued from page 12)

driven interface to interview
one's favorite rock star; select
portions of one's favorite song
to isolate and listen to; or create one's own music video. No
specific artists have been announced for this
PlatinumTRAX series, but
more than thirty are expected
to participate over the course
of the first wave of products.

In order to distribute their
products aggressively in the
United States, UbiSoft joined
Electronic Arts Distribution.

Not So Revolting
Development
Another way in which the
four worlds have come
together is in the role of
European developers. Just a
couple of years ago, European
developers were looked upon
as useful for converting the
most successful programs sold
in the U.S. from one format
and/or market to another. No
one seemed very interested in
seeing European product unless it could be marketed as
part of a budget line or could

fill the gaps caused by a publisher's own products slipping
into a later time frame. Now,
European products (particularly on disk-based format) are
pushing the U.S. market and
European publishers are entering the U.S. market aggressively in their own right.
In 1990, French developer
UbiSoft not only introduced

their own products (Iron Lord,
Pro Tennis Tour and Puffy's
Saga) under their own label,
but have a full pipeline of
potential releases in the works
(B.A.T - a futuristic action/adventure that offers impressive
graphics, challenging puzzles
and an intriguing atmosphere,
Unreal - a strange adventure
through one's subconscious

They were not the only
European publisher to take this
leap across the Atlantic.
Ocean, once known primarily
in the United States as the
developer of many Data East
games (the Batman games
and Platoon for instance), has
joined EAD in order to
promote The Untouchables
and Nightbreed (both based
on the successful films). The
company is still signed to do
conversion and development
work for Data East on the
NES and former Data East executive Ray Musci is a major
player in trying to bring action
games like Billy the Kid, a
one or two player action/strategy game based on
the wild west, and Lost Patrol,
described in CGW 1172's "Over
(Continued on page 43)

return. The artillery fires are brief and do
not give the impressive sound and fury
of a massed Napoleonic Grand Battery.
Finally, there is no sound whatsoever in
the program. While this is not a major
liability, the crackling of the musketry
and the deeper throated roar of the artillery would have been appreciated.

Headquarters (Game Play)
By its very nature, Waterloo differs
from the usual wargame. One quickly
learns that issuing massive sets of orders
only leads to massive confusion. Like
Napoleon, one must give general directives and leave the execution thereof to
the subordinate commanders. Thankfully,
Marshal Ney is absent. Appointed by
Napoleon as the battlefield commander,
Ney's performance may have been
heroic from the perspective of an individual warrior, but was severely deficient as a higher commander.

various historians), Napoleon's tactical expertise at Waterloo was mediocre. While
strategically stealing a march on the
British in order to split the British and
Prussians (as Wellington said, "Bah,
Napoleon has humbugged me!"), his appointment of commanders for this campaign was questionable. Recently appointed Marshal Grouchy was a good
cavalry commander, but not a leader for
independent command. Marshal Ney's
mental adroitness had been questionable
since the Russian Campaign. Marshal
Davout, appointed to head the War Ministry and Paris, noted that his tenure would
be superfluous if Napoleon was defeated,
but his services would be of more assistance to the Field Army. Marshal Soult
was appointed as Chief of Staff (since
Berthier's lamentable "fall from grace" a
few months earlier) and his expertise was
lacking in such a sphere of responsibility.
Tactically, the British position at Waterloo was unbalanced, with the right flank

Regrettably, battlefield smoke has been
omitted. Given the camouflage opportunities that smoke often offered on a
Napoleonic battlefield, this is a somewhat
questionable call. In attempting to mask
the British fires from Hougoumont, for example, a Napoleonic battery could well
have offered concealment (if not cover)
for Reille's II Corps to advance on LaHaiae-Saint.
Issuing commands is raised to an art
form in Waterloo. However, care should
be taken to avoid relative commands,
i.e., a command to move 1/4 mile south
of Hougoumont should be rephrased for
the moving unit to "move 1/4 mile north
(of its present position). Relative commands can be executed, but the problem
is that the artificial intelligence has some
problems executing relative commands
consistently. Thus, the direct command
should be executed if at all possible.
Insofar as history is concerned, there is
no dispute that the Napoleon of 1815
was not the Napoleon of 1805. Despite
his brilliant defensive operations in 18131814, the Emperor no longer possessed
his physical or mental steadfastness of
prior times. Many historians feel that the
Napoleonic method failed because troop
density/strength outgrew the capabilities
of a single commander. Martin van
Crevald suggests that the maximum
troop strength one man can handle may
well be under 100,000. At Austerlitz
(1805), Napoleon handled 85,000 men
well; at Jena-Auerstadt (1806), he lost
control of up to one-third of his 150,000
man army (cf. COMMAND IN WAR,
Cambridge, 1985, page 104). Whether
the Emperor suffered from hemorrhoids,
stomach cancer, syphilis or dysentery
(all of which have been postulated by

the entire battlefield topography was
modified. Finally, this reviewer would
note that much of the terrain at Waterloo
seems to be composed of clay with
rather large air pockets—terrain inimical
to cavalry. No historian seems to have
mentioned this, and possibly the terrain
characteristics have been changed in the
last century. If the terrain is still similar,
however, then this is another explanation
of why the French cavalry could only be
employed at certain areas of the battlefield.
But even the historian, familiar with the
actual battlefield, will often become confused in Waterloo. Wargaming, as most
gaming grognards know, is not a true
test of battlefield decision. Instead, it is a
detailed historical staff study. Generally,
one has more information (regarding
order of battle, combat results and terrain) than any historical commander. In
fact, when wargames exemplify enemy
order of battle uncertainty, the basic offensive mindset of most players rapidly
decreases.
"...[W]hen war games are held with all
participants gathered in a comfortable
room—under such conditions it is almost
inevitable that the real nature of war as
the most confused and confusing of all
human activities will be lost sight of and
command come to be regarded mainly
as the regular unfolding of carefully laid
plans." Martin van Crevald, COMMAND
IN WAR, pp. 151-152.

being understrength. Napoleon's intended diversion at Hougoumont (which
was translated by his brother into a bullheaded direct assault, which disrupted
the French II Corps) followed by an assault up through La-Haiae-Saint was an
acceptable maneuver, although it did not
emulate the ideal Napoleonic concept of
the flank attack. Still, the French Army of
1815 was less well-trained than the
French Army of 1807 (due to a decade
of casualties) and its tactical execution
suffered.
It is interesting to note that Wellington's
position revealed much more of the battlefield than Napoleon's. This was a
direct function of his selection of that particular area for defense. Today, if one
visits the battlefield, he will be most impressed by the virtual flatness of the terrain. The minor folds of the terrain appear minimal, yet to the trained military
officer, these proved of immense significance.
Also, in 1912, the Belgian Government
erected the Lion Hill, a large hill which
overlooks the battlefield from the British
position; the problem is that by excavating the nearby terrain to erect the hill,

Victory or Defeat?
(Conclusions)
Waterloo is a radical departure from
most wargaming. Its ground perspective
and issuance of orders places the player
in the role of the battlefield commander—
with the disadvantages inherent in such
position. The simulation will rapidly teach
the user why commanders have difficulty
in achieving battlefield success and why
we compensate generals so well.
Waterloo tends, at times, to offer more
substance than "entertainment". For example, one is never sure as to the status
of his subordinates and one often reinforces failure rather than rewards success in
the course of gameplay. The user will
rapidly learn that orders, once given, are
difficult to withdraw and that subordinate
commanders may have a different (and
indeed more accurate) understanding of
their duty. To a wargamer familiar with
the American "standard" (i.e. overhead
hexagon-type movement), Waterloo's 3D command perspective can prove a
frustrating experience or an exciting one,
depending on one's perspective. Also,
Continued on page 54

Warming
(Continued from page 41)
There" column, to market.
Data East and Ocean are also
co-licensees on RoboCop 2, expected to be a first quarter
product in 1991.
After seeing Bullfrog's
(Populous) latest product
(Warmonger in the U.K.,
Powermonger in the U.S.),
one cannot help but wonder
how long it will be before they
join the ranks of full-fledged
publishers. Powermonger is a
real-time strategy/wargame
using the familiar three-dimensional perspective of Populous.
There are some significant
refinements, however. The
graphics are more detailed,
have lost that "Lego"-style
brick look, involve cascading
waterfalls and provide realistic
looking trees, shrubs, villages,
etc. The game model includes
regionalized weather which
players do not control, microeconomic sequences where
one sends his/her villagers out
to forage for raw materials and

into the workshop to "Invent"
plows, weapons, vehicles, etc.,
which end up advancing the
civilization and accelerating its
growth. Up to four different
player civilizations can compete simultaneously via a serial
connection. The game is due
to be released in the Fall.
Infogrames and Mirrorsoft
are two other European publishers to keep one's eyes on. The
former were developers of Full
Metal Planet for Data East (as
well as Mindscape's Captain
Blood and Data East's Chamber of the Sci-Mutant Priestess and Drakkhen). Based on
a French boardgame, Full
Metal Planet is a fast-moving
strategy/wargame game set in
a futuristic setting. In addition
to strategy and resource
management, players will have
to learn how to deal with the
severe tidal systems which are
almost unpredictable and
upset the military balance significantly from time to time.
The Atari ST version of this 1-4
player game has been extremely well-received in France and
the Amiga/PC versions should
be very successful in the U.S.

Mirrorsoft will have just completed Flight of the Intruder
for Spectrum HoloByte by
the time this report hits the
stands. Based on the best-selling novel by Stephen Coonts,
this A-6 Intruder/F-4 Phantom
simulation will feature 16-color
VGA graphics. The game will
be mission-based, using "actual" encounters from Vietnam
veterans. In a CES press conference, Coonts noted that
many of the encounters found
in the book were based on personal experiences, but most of
those which were not happened to be based on the experiences of his colleagues.
The product is expected to
handle the rules
of engagement and personalities of the
pilots in an authentic manner.
Finally, Spectrum HoloByte is
not the only country with
development occurring behind
what was once "The Iron Curtain". California Dreams has
their programming done in Warsaw, Poland and their
developers are planning to
produce a game based on Eastern European politics and

economics. The global community just keeps coming
closer together.

VGA Standard
In order to stay ahead of the
16-bit graphics used in NEC's
TurboGrafx 16 (the graphics,
not the CPU) and Sega
Genesis, disk-based publishers
are continuing to push the
graphics technology. Lucasfilm Games has entered into a
promotional agreement with
Western Digital, makers of
the Paradise VGA boards. Indeed, a purchaser of a
Paradise VGA board in the
next few months will receive a
free copy of the VGA upgrade
of Indiana Jones and the
Last Crusade: The Graphic
Adventure. Lucasfilm also
plans to ship Secret Weapons
of the Luftwaffe with a VGA
mode. Access Software is
determined to push the window even further. They are
preparing 8514 versions of
their future games for those
who can afford the circa
$1,000 needed to purchase

that Paradise board (256
colors with 1024 x 768 resolution).
In the meantime, a host of
other products offer VGA
resolution. For example, New
World's King's Bounty, an action/strategy game with completely revamped graphics
from the Apple version uses
VGA resolution. Also, ThreeSixty's core products for the
fall line all feature 256 color
palettes and VGA resolution.
These include: MegaFortress
(their "Flight of the Old Dog"
game), a World War II submarine game (tentatively
called Das Boot) and Ace of
Aces II. It is no surprise that
Sierra's own label will sport
graphics with superb resolution
in King's Quest V, Space
Quest IV: Roger Wilco and
the Time Rippers, Oil's Well
(an arcade-style oil-drilling
game), and Mixed-Up Mother
Goose. The Dynamix label
uses 256 colors and VGA
resolution in their Red Baron,
Stellar 7 (an updated version
of their classic, science fiction
arcade adventure), Rise of the

Dragon (a point and click interactive adventure) and Heart of
China (a point and click adventure game in a different artistic
style than Rise of the Dragon)
games. Virgin Mastertronic's
Wonderland makes exquisite
use of both the full VGA
palette and resolution. The
same is true of Origin's
Wingleader and Worlds of Ultima: Savage Empire. Finally,
Interplay's exquisitely
rendered BattleChess II:
Chinese Chess and Lord of
the Rings role-playing game
both use the full 256 color
palette and resolution.

Sound and Fury
Signifying
Something
Another major step in the
use of sound for computer
games has just been taken.
Contrary to Macbeth (and
maybe William Faulkner), who
felt that sound and fury had
nothing to really communicate,
Origin Systems believes that
sound is very significant. Now,

using a software-driven "tension meter" with branching
musical phrases driven by
software sequencing commands, they have unveiled
SoundTrax. This phenomenal
approach emulates the
cinematic experience of having
the music in the soundtrack fit
the emotions of the on-screen
action. CGW Editor-in-Chief
Sipe calls this advancement in
computer game soundtracks,
"interfacing at a subliminal
level". Both Fall releases for
Origin, Wingleader (a threedimensional, polygon-filled
space action shoot'em-up with
over 60 missions of advancing
difficulty and a cinematic style
wrapper of dramatic cut
scenes/animations) and
Savage Empire (a classic pulp
adventure story using the Ultima VI interface) will use the
new technique in conjunction
with two original soundtracks
by George "The Fat Man"
Sanger (Loom composer).

Film At Eleven
The world of computer enter-

tainment never stands still. In
many ways, the Fall products
for 1990 are predominantly
consolidating the technological
advances of the last twelve
months. In terms of game
play, value, story and depth, it
appears that they will surpass
their immediate predecessors.
One fact seems certain, four
worlds of computer entertainment are converging on the
adult market of computer
gamers. It now seems that
more of a coalescence than collision will occur, but the good
news is that new relationships,
understandings and creative undertakings are likely to take
place.
Culturally and economically
speaking, the four worlds are
definitely coming together in
technological interaction and interpersonal communication.
Next month, CGW's report on
the Summer Consumer
Electronics Show continues
with a summary of simulations,
role-playing, strategy and action games.

Interview

BEHIND THE
BUDAYEEN
An Interview with George Alec Effinger

C

Mr. Effinger is a science fiction author who has created a fictitious
universe that became the setting for Infocom's Circuit's Edge.

GW: First of all, we want to ask a few questions about the
books which form the background of Circuit's Edge. For
instance, how did the books come to reflect Islamic cul-

ture?
Effinger: Actually, When Gravity Fails is based on the French
Quarter in New Orleans, but it has been transmogrified into the
Budayeen. In general, I wanted to avoid the Japanese-dominated
future described by William Gibson in his books, Neuromancer,
Count Zero and Mona Lisa Overdrive, and Lucien Shepherd
had already staked out Central America for his dark future, I
decided that the Islamic world offered the best potential for merging a lesser known culture with an advanced future.
CGW: There is one particularly unique facet about your world
in both the books and the game. We're talking about the sexual
crossovers. Was there a social agenda in depicting characters
with switches in sexual identity? In fact, doesn't Marid seem to
prefer people who have changed their sexual identities?
Effinger: I don't know exactly how it happened, but I was
trying to create a world where people could not pigeonhole
others based on sexual identity. Once I had created the world,
having Marid be completely heterosexual would have been
cowardly. I think you'll like the third book of the series. It has
kind of a soap opera between Yasmin (Marid's former lover), the
widow, and Marid.
CGW: Now, to be a little more relevant to the game itself, what
was your involvement with the game?
Effinger: Basically, I demanded a certain degree of control in
order to be certain that the on-screen messages would appear in
my style. I wrote almost all the messages that appear on the
screen. In fact, I probably wrote about 75% of everything on the
screen. There are only a couple of side-plots that I didn't see.
Beyond that, I provided Westwood Associates [Ed: The
developer used by Infocom in producing the game.]) with a
list of all the characters and places in gravity and fire and they
placed them the way they wanted.

CGW: Your books have some pretty mature themes in them
with plenty of sex and violence. Was there any problem in transforming your fiction into a computer game?
Effinger: Actually, references to sex and drugs were a problem. I wrote the sex scenes in a tasteful way, but the drug stuff
had to go. Mediagenic didn't want any references to drugs. Personally, I don't want to be supporting drug use or anything like
that, because in the books, whenever Marid uses drugs he gets
punished in some way or another.

I also don't know why Mediagenic took the condoms out. I was
trying to say something positive by mentioning them.

CGW: Getting into the fiction a little bit, if you could have the
kind of "moddie" (a personality modification chip which plugs
into the brain and enables one to take on the personality characteristics of either a real or fictitious character) you describe in the
book, what moddie would you most like to use?
Effinger: Lou Gehrig, probably, I'm the biggest baseball fan in
the world. Of course, it would be great to experience Bob Feller.
I'm a long-time Cleveland Indians fan.
COW: We understand. Some of us like the Chicago Cubs. Getting back to the game, though, we wonder about the amount of
violence in your books, as well as the game. For example, your
short story, "No Prisoners", seems to justify war as an instrument
of social policy.
Effinger: I'm actually anti-war in my philosophy, just on this
side of being a pacifist. With regard to "No Prisoners", I believe
that war can be like surgery in a World War II setting with clearcut villains. However, if you were born in an Islamic country, war
would be understood differently. Frankly, I think one of the
reasons we have difficulty in dealing with Islamic countries is because we know as little about them as we did about the Vietnamese. We don't know what is important to them and we are ignorant of what motivates them, even trying to convert them by
force.

CGW: Do you think that the study of Islam in preparation for
writing the books and the game has changed you yourself in any
way?
Effinger: Well, Islam has, basically, fivee pillars that the devout
follower tries to keep: testify to one god with Mohammed as his
prophet, pray fivee times a day, make pilgrimage to Mecca, keep
Ramadan and give to the poor. That last pillar has probably
changed my attitude the most. I've learned to be more generous.
Did you know that there are documented tales of one beggar
passing another on the way home and giving his alms to the
other?
COW: No, but we were impressed with how Marid learned to be
more generous in A Fire in the Sun.
Effinger: In fact, Marid is almost completely autobiographical.
Many of the gorier things in "Gravity" were actually witnessed by
me at one time or another. I have sort of a fascination with the
way things are in the lower rungs of society. In fact, I've probably
done a lot of foolish things, but I've got a writer's curiosity about
(Continued on page 62)

Reader Input Device

Scorpia's Column

Scorpion's View
"Conquests of Camelot" and "Loom"

S

corpia is an experienced and
respected adventure game expert. CGW is pleased to be able
to provide this forum for her distinctive
and, sometimes, controversial perspective.
This time around, as I gaze into my
crystal ball, two images form in the glass.
No, this isn't double vision; it just means
that the column covers two games instead of the usual one.

The Latest Defender of
Camelot
Conquests of Camelot is Sierra's
latest adventure game, set during the
reign of King Arthur, and focuses on the
search for the Holy Grail. It takes a few
liberties with Arthurian and Grail legends,

but unless you're a scholar of these subjects, it won't matter very much.
Three of the best Knights of the
Roundtable—Lancelot, Gawain, and
Galahad—have gone off in search of the
Grail. None have returned, and time is
running out. The healing and restorative
powers of the Grail are sorely needed in
England, which is currently in bad shape
and getting worse. Thus, King Arthur
decides to seek the Grail himself.
Except in the matter of travelling
around Britain (which is done by choosing a specific point on a full-screen map,
reminiscent in some ways of Manhunterstyle travel), this is your typical
graphic-with-parser Sierra adventure. The
graphics, however, are rather sub-standard for a Sierra game. In EGA mode,
they are somewhat grainy, with large
pixels that reminded me of nothing so
much as tapioca pudding. After the

beautiful look of King's Quest IV and,
especially, Hero's Quest I, this is a letdown for anyone expecting pretty pictures.
Arcade-game haters will be saddened to
learn that there are several action sequen
ces in the game, including killing off a
few wild boars, jousting with the Black
Knight, and an elaborate sword fight with
a Saracen near the end. Of course, since
knights were famed above all else for
their fighting prowess, these sequences
should not be entirely unexpected. Be
grateful there weren't more of them.
Fortunately, for those who prefer getting past such things quickly, there is an
arcade setting that allows you to choose
difficulty levels for these events. I definitely recommend "Easy" if you aren't
thrilled by arcade combat in adventure
games.

(Continued from page 48)

Unfortunately, there isn't much you can
do about the frozen lake. Here, you must
tip-toe across four screens' worth of thin
ice, and fast response is necessary to
keep Arthur from plunging through to a
wet and frigid death. A certain object
(when activated) will help a little bit, but
it is still a tedious and frustrating experience. "Save often, save Arthur"
should be your motto while crossing the
lake.
There is also a rather mercenary aspect
to the game. Almost everyone, be they
human, god, or spirit, seems to have a
hand out for money. Arthur will definitely
need a full purse for his travels both in
England and abroad.
The game begins with Arthur standing
on a stylized floor plan of his castle.
From there, he can move around quickly
to different rooms, enter them to talk to
people, pick up items and equipment,
etc. It's a great time-saver, especially as
you don't have to enter every room (and
Merlin will tell you so).
Speaking of Merlin, you not only have
to talk to him, there is an object of critical importance in his room that you absolutely must get. It is not used until al-

most the very end of the game, when
you're in the catacombs, but without it,
you cannot finish.
This comes under the heading of what I
call "Dirty Tricks". You need this item,
and there is no way to get it, except by
restoring the game, possibly pretty far
back. Then, of course, you're stuck with
having to replay from that point on, perhaps through a substantial part of the adventure. And, if you should happen not
to have any saves from the England part
of the game ... you would have to
replay the whole thing. So, make certain
you leave Camelot with a lodestone in
your pocket.
After Arthur has talked to everyone,
and picked up everything he needs, it's
time to for him to start out on his journeys. Essentially, he is following the
paths taken by his three knights, one at
a time, his first stop being Glastonbury
Tor.
This is reached through the Forest
Perilous, where Arthur will encounter the
above-mentioned boars and Black
Knight, among other things. There are
really no puzzles here except figuring out
what the hag wants, and answering the

Aquanaut (Miles Computing) Atari ST
Centauri Alliance (Broderbund) C64
Champions of Krynn (SSI) Amiga
Decisive Battles of American Civil War
(SSG) IBM
European Challenge (Accolade) C64
F/16 Combat Pilot (EA) C64
Fire King (SSG) IBM
Gold of the Americas (SSG) Atari ST
HardBall II (Accolade) Amiga
Heat Wave (Accolade) Amiga
Hero's Quest (Sierra) Amiga

conundrums posed by the riddle stones
guarding the entry to the Tor.
There are five stones, and each asks a
riddle taken at random from a pool of
twenty-five. All five must be answered correctly before you can pass. There are no
separate clues or hints to the solutions;
you just have to figure them out on your
own. For most, this will probably be the
hardest part of the game, so save after
you do the hag. If one or more riddles
prove too tough, restore to that point
and try again. Eventually, you should get
five riddles you can answer.
At the Tor, Arthur must deal with the
Mad Monk, and then find a way of breaking the spell that keeps him trapped in
the ruins. Neither of these is especially difficult to accomplish, particularly if you
keep that strange altar in mind.
From the Tor, Arthur visits the Lady of
The Lake (the same lake that is now
frozen over), where he must pass a test
of Flower Language in order to save both
himself and Lancelot. This test is extremely easy, since all the answers are in the
game manual (indeed, there are a number of tests that require having the docs,
so keep them handy!).

Jack Nicklaus Championship Courses
1989 (Accolade) Mac
Jack Nicklaus Greatest 18 Holes (Accolade) Mac
Jack Nicklaus International Course Disk
(Accolade) Mac
Manhunter 2: San Francisco (Sierra)
Amiga
Out Run (Sega) Amiga
Panzer Battles (SSG) Mac
Sword of Aragon (SSI) Amiga
Their Finest Hour (LucasFilm) Amiga

Finally, Arthur sets out on the third
path, leading to the middle east, and
eventually, the Grail. He should certainly
talk to Al-Sirat before going on through
the desert to Jerusalem. The desert, by
the way, is tricky. If you don't find the
correct path through, you will wander,
probably forever, among the dunes. On
the other hand, the true way passes
through no more than three screens from
the pool. Keep that in mind.
In Jerusalem, Arthur has plenty to do
before he can reach the Grail (this is the
most active part of the game). However,
while he will be busy, none of his tasks
are particularly hard. All that's involved is
a little thought, some money, and a fair
amount of running back and forth. There
are also two more tests (sometimes, I felt
like I was back in school, with all these
tests to pass), after which Arthur can
move on to the catacombs.
These, again, present little difficulty for
the most part. Everything needed to
solve the puzzles (such as they are) is
close at hand. All you have to do is be
careful on your way out.
Once out of the catacombs, it is wise to
save the game right there, as the battle

with the Saracen is imminent. He is not
in that screen, but close enough, and
you'll happen on him sooner or later
(probably sooner). This fight is more
realistic than any others in the game, so
be sure you're familiar with the necessary keys. There is no way to practice
beforehand, either; you just have to go in
and do your best.
After the combat, Arthur faces one
more puzzle/riddle, the solution of which
will lead him to the hiding place of the
Grail. The riddle may sound confusing,
but if you keep in mind that a left-hand
spiral goes counterclockwise, it's really
simple.
In fact, the whole game is rather
simple. Except for some of the riddles at
the riddle stones, crossing the frozen
lake, and the action sequences, there's
nothing in the game to slow down the experienced adventurer. Arthur must do
other things besides solving painfully obvious puzzles to prove himself worthy of
the Grail, but the correct actions are
equally evident: Arthur need only behave
as your typical Ultima IV Avatar in all
situations.

done) a fair amount of historical research
was done in preparation for Camelot.
Most of it, however, seems to have been
used more for copy protection than anything else. There were only three instances in the game where I felt the "historical flavor" come through: the joust with
the Black Knight, in the bazaar in
Jerusalem, and standing among the
ruins of Aphrodite's temple.
Essentially then, Camelot is a game
more for the beginning adventure gamer,
rather than the experienced one. Those
who prefer adventures requiring some
heavy mental effort will probably want to
skip this one.

Loom Entombed
Loom is even more of a beginner's
game (Camelot seems almost hard by
comparison). Rigidly structured and totally linear, Loom is designed on the "no
loss" principle: there is no way to
progress until you have done everything
necessary for the next step.
In one sense, this is good, as it
prevents a common problem in games

Judging by the manual (which is nicely
(Continued on page 63)

Valley of Conflict
(continued from page 38)

sites plus light and heavy tanks. Like many other controlled substances, one simply cannot get enough (the "doves" who play
this game will probably start a "Just say no to Helicopter Gunships" campaign). Fortunately, the French don't seem to care too
much about who they sell to, so you can always run up a debit
with them and buy in lower quantities than from the other dealers
Well, now. Let's order some heavy tanks from the US, a Nimrod
spyplane from Britain, and some Mirage Fighters from France.
Full price? You want us to pay full price?! Look, buddy, we gotta
haggle ...
A good recipe for winning Conflict, however, requires stirring the
pot. One cannot let sleeping camels lie. Instead, one must get on
the hump and make them flea because a single hair's brush from
a hostile Arab neighbor could be one's doom. Fortunately, picking fights is much easier than picking horses, and tensions can always be artificially raised by a few surgical air strikes in the
enemy's heartland or the sudden, unexplained mobilization on the
enemy border ("Who? Those guys? Oh, they're just the border
fruit inspectors. You know, those Mediterranean fruit flies? No
need to worry about them, Mr. Ambassador.").
Soon the tension level rises and the troops start to tango. The
trick here is not to let things get too tense, or those United Nations "do-gooders" might intercede and blow the whole war by
sticking a peacekeeping force in the middle of it. Worse yet, a

wimpy faction of liberal U.S. Senators might start an arms embargo! (How is one supposed to test their new weapons systems for
them if they don't supply them?).
Dealing with the Palestinian homeland problem, keeping tensions in the region manageable, picking "winnable" fights and
developing Israel's nuclear capability are all part of the tightrope
act at which a player must become proficient. Did someone say
nukes? Of course, everything is publicly denied, but when a
nuclear reactor appears in a neighboring country, one must be
quick to scramble the strikefighters, because Israel will either be a
sole nuclear power or a large, Arab parking lot. The trouble is,
that your strikefighters have too short a range to hit non-adjacent
countries, so when Iraq, Iran and Libya start developing nukes,
the end is pretty well nigh. (Naturally, Dr. Strangelove is still
making Superpower policy, so one little nuclear matchstick going
off in the Middle East destroys the entire planet. Sheeze! Those
guys have no sense of humor!).
Here is one final word of advice, Mr. Prime Minister. "Your arm's
too short to box with Egypt." Change the word Sinai to Waterloo
and one gets a good idea as to what's in store for a premature
bout with Pharaoh. The player must keep his Red Sea
pedestrians safe behind the correct side of the Don't Walk sign
(either that or start taking pyramid building lessons again).
Conflict is not striving to be a realistic simulation. It is meant to
be an amusing exercise in cold war politics set in a futuristic Middle East environment. It is fast-playing, easy to learn, entertaining
and not to be taken too seriously. Besides, for less than ten dollars ($9.95), it's such a deal!

Review

Continued from page 42

one is never sure as to how, when and
where combat units have been committed; combat results are not revealed,
and it is difficult to determine when the
vagaries of combat have contributed to a
combat failure rather than the failure of
command itself.
However, this reviewer maintains that a
wargame of this genre be considered

RECOMMENDED READING
For a product with such an extensive
"Background and History" section, the lack
of a bibliography is surprising. This reviewer
would suggest the following:
Chalfont, Lord, ed., WATERLOO (New
York, 1980): A superb history of the Battle,
written by three authors (English, French,
Prussian). This book includes a tour of the
battlefield site, Waterloo in literature, a
detailed order of battle, pictures of the battlefield (then and now) and the French orders and dispatches. HIGHLY RECOMMENDED!
Chandler, David G., THE CAMPAIGNS OF

mandatory for the serious user. Having
written his Command & General Staff College treatise on Napoleon's mistakes at
Waterloo, having personally traversed the
battlefield, and having played over ten
(10) separate Waterloo simulations, this
reviewer found Waterloo to give a more
accurate rendition of the challenges
facing the respective commanders. Victory is not readily achievable, confusion
is rampant. Still, the historian will learn

NAPOLEON (New York, 1966): THE classic
Napoleonic reference.
Esposito, Vincent J. and J.R. Elting, A
MILITARY HISTORY AND ATLAS OF THE
NAPOLEONIC WARS (New York, 1968): An
essential reference for anyone having a deep
interest in the period.
Howarth, David, WATERLOO: Day of Battle (New York, 1968): A popular and wellwritten history of the Battle, although geared
for the generalist.
Keegan, John, THE FACE OF BATTLE
(New York, 1976): A military classic, involving studies of the Battles of Agincourt, Waterloo and the Somme from the viewpoint of
the individual.

much from this product. Hopefully, the
"next generation" of this genre will offer
an optional "eagle-eye" (or traditional)
view, so that garners could learn the actual effect of their orders and profit from
their errors; as the user grows to understand the military ramifications of his orders and the success ratio, his reliance
on this crutch will diminish.

Lachouque, Comandant Henry, WATERLOO (London, 1972): A lavishly-illustrated
treatment of the Battle.
Quimby, R.S., THE BACKGROUND OF
NAPOLEONIC WARFARE (New York,
1957): Sadly out of print, this text is a
detailed analysis of the genesis of the
Napoleonic method.
Seymour, William, YOURS TO REASON
WHY (New York, 1982): A treatise on
numerous battles, with the reader being able
to choose a different course of action at the
critical points, and the author explaining the
ramifications of the different courses of action.

A Second Look
(continued from Page 30)

Sound Gaming Strategy And Tactics
At the beginning of the game, feel free to strip units out of your
supreme Headquarters unit. These "at start reserves" should be assigned as needed.
Leadership is vital to prevent the shattering of troops under adverse
conditions and to transfer reserve divisions (on a Leader Value vs. D10 roll) and add readiness to units (up to a maximum of 25% increase per unit on a Leader Value squared vs. D-100 roll) at the critical moment of combat. Consequently, players will find a great
benefit to sending divisions back to their Army HQs. Therefore,
make sure that the best Leaders are serving on the front lines at all
times.
The Germans should also rotate troops and planes with their Fronts
(Western and Italian). In this way, the "rested" troops from those sectors can serve to shore up the lines on the Eastern Front, while the
shattered troops from the East can recover and regain experience
and equipment while "resting" in the West.
When attacking, always look for overextended enemies in bad supply situations for targets. These units are far more vulnerable to losses
since they will have a tendency to shatter or surrender if forced to
retreat.
A good way to do this is to make small pockets with armor on the
first three to four movement plots and, with the pockets closed and
the enemies surrounded, assault on the last plotted moves. Smaller
pockets tend to work better than larger ones because it is easier for
the attacker to maintain supply integrity (and not leave his armor
overextended, isolated and vulnerable to counterattack).
Another good way for the attacker to keep his losses down is to
concentrate armor and launch a coordinated attack en masse
against a single enemy unit. This will reduce tank losses since AT
Fire casualties are determined independent of the number of attacking tanks. (Thus, 10 Anti-Tank guns would kill the same number of
tanks, whether 50 were attacking them, or 5,000). This is what the
Germans called "schwerpunkt" or "spearpoint" tactics. Note that
corps with a lot of bombardment fire power (artillery and bombers)
will reduced enemy anti-tank guns before they have a chance to fire
at all due to the sequence of combat.

Weaseling Advice To Exploit The
Programming
The German player should send cheap fighters and tanks to his
two Front Headquarters. When calculating the formula against the
Western Allies, the computer considers tanks and planes as digits in
its formula, regardless of their combat factors or cost to build. Thus,
one's older units should be rotated to the West, or replacement pool
substitutions can be made manually by the player. In either case,
keep an eye on the troops stationed there because the computer has
a tendency to upgrade them on its own!
For the Germans, you can try the old "Out of Africa" technique.
Pull all the troops out of Africa, let it surrender, and then replace
them all again in Italy. In this way, they will not all be lost when
PanzerArmee Afrika surrenders (by evacuating them, they live to
fight another day). Try to time this maneuver carefully!
About The Authors
Alan Emrich is a 17 year wargaming veteran and has
worked on projects for most of the major board wargaming
companies. Currently assistant editor of CGW, he has been a
game reviewer and analyst for the past 15 years.
Tom Hughes, a wargamer for 23 years, is a programmer/analyst working with Cray Supercomputers. Tom knows
his way around the types of formulas and routines which
make up the "working innards" of Second Front.

Scorpion's Tale

Still, blowing off the door may take a little skill (and something
that goes "boom!"). Has Marid been showing things around?

(Continued from page 22)

After a quick dash around the Budayeen to buy a few needed
items, the door is history, and so is the kidnapper (okay, so you
have to fight him again; this time he won't get away). Abdul is
rescued, and you get a couple of things from a grateful Muhammad. Now what?

It looks like somebody just kidnapped Abdul-Hassan and wants
a pile of kiam for his return. That midnight deadline is a real
DEADline, and the boy will certainly be killed unless he's found
in time.
Ah, poor Marid. He's done so much, yet he seems farther than
ever from that elusive notebook. Every time he turns around,
something else happens. Hey, at least it's an interesting life.
Anyway, time to track down Abdul. The ransom note is a good
place to start. Interesting scent it has. Of course, Marid doesn't
know much about such things, but there could be a place or two
where he might learn more.
After a little breaking and entering, then, before long, Marid
gets a call. The suspect only left a phone number. Why not call
it? Maybe it's not what you're expecting, but going there and asking a few questions can't hurt.
Following up on this lead nets Marid the advice that he has to
come "very close to death". Gee, hasn't he been there since almost the start of the game? Well, in this instance, you want a
place, not a condition. There're only two places that fit the bill; if
one doesn't pan out, try the other.
Hah! Nasty fight, although the guy got away before you could
finish him off. Fortunately, he left a clue behind. This is pretty
easy, especially if you have the right item from Electroniques.

Well, you never were able to track down Tamara, right? Moved,
no forwarding address, and all that? Although, if you played the
holo and talked to the landlord, you should know pretty well
what it was that Tamara had in mind to do. And there's only one
place in the Budayeen for to do that.
However, Marid will have to run one more errand before he gets
the information he wants. Luckily, this is pretty simple, and there
are no bodies to worry about (for a change). Just a few questions on the street, and a certain purchase (did you read the
description of the jewelry carefully?), and at last, Marid gets to
talk to the very elusive Tamara.
As they say, "It ain't over 'til the fat lady sings", and the fat lady
hasn't even opened her mouth yet! Once again, Marid has to
wait for a phone call telling him where to go (heh). When he gets
there, he finds. . . a note. Surprise! (You were expecting another
body, right).? Well, if you don't go where the note directs you,
there just might be another one.
Finally, Marid is face to face with the perpetrator of these outrageous murders. In the time-honored fashion of all villains at
these penultimate moments, he gloats over his victory, and adds
(Continued on page 62)

Scorpion's Tate
(Continued from page 58)

a little more information for Marid's benefit. He then goes on to
explain, in disgusting detail, exactly what he plans to do to the
helpless Tamara, who is tied to a torture machine.
There is only one thing to do, which is to kill this despicable person, so don't waste any time about it (why do you think you
were given the gun?). However, before he dies, he starts his infernal machine. Boy Marid, I sure hope you have the black key, because there isn't much time to free Tamara. If you don't have it,
you better move fast to get it.
Whew! Tamara is saved, the notebook (at last!) is found, and
Marid is Papa's fair-haired boy, at least for the moment. Take a little rest, Marid, you've certainly earned it (and you'll want to get
your strength up for the promised sequel).
Well, I see by the old invisible clock on the wall that it's that
time again. If you need help with an adventure game, you can
reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG (under the Groups and Clubs
menu). On Genie: Visit the Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia to
reach the Games RT). By US Mail (remember to enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338 Gracie Station, New York NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1990 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

BUDAYEEN
(Continued from page 46)

the lower depths of society. The main story in "Gravity" was
based on a transvestite dancer I knew that was murdered.
The police in the real city didn't do anything about the crime.
They didn't care about those people and felt like they had gotten what was coming to them. The ending, by the way, was
true.
CGW: So, you transformed the story and set it in the
Budayeen? Are there other times you've drawn from real life?
Effinger: Well, "Fire" is based on another true story. Paul
Jaworski is the name of the man who really killed my
grandfather. In 1928, my grandfather was killed in the line of
duty. He was always a big hero in my family and is still
honored in a station house in Cleveland.
CGW: How was working on the game compared to writing
science fiction novels?
Effinger: Actually, I found working on the game much
tougher than I thought it was going to be. I was very proud
when Infocom asked me to work on the project and it was
more work than I thought it was going to be. Working with
the Westwood people and the Infocom people, has been a
real pleasure. The parts of the game I've played, I've enjoyed
very much.

Scorpion's View

is limited, it generally takes little time to
discern the correct melody.

(Continued from page 51)

There is only one instance in the game
that might give anyone trouble, and that
occurs in the city of glass. In one room,
Bobbin must be invisible, but he can't
play the necessary draft before entering.
The solution to this is not obvious, nor is
it very logical, since the song needs to be
played on a place, not himself.

of this type: arriving at the end only to
find you lack a critical item from earlier
in the adventure (note Camelot above
on this point). This is always a terrible
moment in a linear game, as you have
no way of going back and are usually
forced to restore and replay from a much
earlier position.
Loom does away with this, but at a
very high price: an almost complete lack
of freedom of movement. The game is
set up as a series of locales, each containing only a few screens. You can't
move from one locale to another until
the puzzles are solved. If, for some
reason, you are stymied by one, you are
stuck in that location until you figure it
out. You can't drop it for the time being
and go do something else.
For that reason, the majority of puzzles
(or possibly situations is a more accurate
description) are on a very basic level.
Bobbin Threadbare, the hero, has practically no inventory beyond his magic
drafts (i.e. tunes), so in most cases it is
only a matter of figuring out which tunes
in his repertoire are necessary to pass an
obstacle. As the number of these songs

Tycoon "Tooter"
(Continued from page 24)

The storyline of the game is excellent,
yet I can't help thinking that the marvelous concepts of the Weavers, the
Loom, and the magical drafts should
have been given an epic treatment, not
watered down to fit a game as simple as
this one. The end of the game hints at a
sequel; if there is one, perhaps it will be
more developed and more challenging.
Loom was designed to be non-frustrating, to have no dead ends, and be
capable of completion by anyone. That
goal has, without question, been
achieved. The veriest novice at adventure
games will have little trouble in finishing
it.

Expert players will whiz right through, although they may need to exercise a bit
of care: so many solutions are so obvious, they can be overlooked for that
very reason.

will be able to service new routes on the
line's extremities. Also, this Engine Shop
doubles as a Maintenance Shop, so
every train pulling in or blowing its
whistle through this initial station has its

ing the location and facing of each
station.

Central Planning
Another equally vital decision is
where to place one's initial station.
This must be the one which will be
closest to the center of the envisioned sprawling railroad empire.
The reason for this is one's initial
station always includes an Engine
Shop (with its inherent $100,000
cost). All new locomotives will be
built at this location (unless the
player cares to shell out those big
bucks again to create another Engine Shop, which is probably not
likely during the critical early years of
game play), therefore, the more centrally
located it is, the quicker new locomotives

maintenance costs for the two-year fiscal
period reduced by 75% (a savings which
is often considerable).

This all sounds as though I didn't like it.
Well, I was certainly disappointed at how
easy the game was. Even though I knew
it wasn't going to be on the same level
as Beyond Zork (done by the same
author), I did expect something a little
tougher. On the other hand, aside from
that one instance in the glass city, the
game is put together well, and everything
fits in very smoothly with the story line.
So I liked it for its construction and concepts (yes, and the graphics!), but as an
adventure game, it is just too lightweight.
Well, the crystal has clouded over for
another month. Hopefully, we will have
something a little meatier to view next
time. Until then, if you need help with an
adventure game, you can reach me in
the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie:
Stop by the Games RoundTable (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US
Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped
envelope if you live in the United States):
Scorpia, PO Box 338 Gracie Station
New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1990 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Leaving The Station
There is much to know once the first
trains start to run; dispatching as an art
form, avoiding having one's throat slit by
the competition, bleeding red ink,
bankruptcy and how to wage "total
war" in a rate war are all subjects
for a future article. In the mean
time, though, here is one last tip.
When starting a train for passenger
service on a new route, just put one
car on it for its first run and have
that baby move as fast as its mutlitubular boilers and forced air compression can haul it. In this way, the
chances of setting a speed record
are vastly improved, and the train
will earn a "name" for itself. Named
trains, remember, generate an additional 25% bonus for passenger cargoes, so try to get every passenger
train you run to earn a name for itself.
Until the whistle blows again, keep on
highballing!

Taking A Peek

Peek
(Continued from page 6)

command word typing will keep the adventure gamer literate for a long time to
come. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #4.
Konami, Inc.
900 Deerfield Parkway
Buffalo Grove, IL 60089-4510
BLADES OF STEEL: The tremendously
successful Nintendo game has arrived in
a disk-based format that is both more
colorful and faster-paced than the
original. "Blades of Steel" is an action
game with the emphasis on action.
Rather than simply presenting cinematic
insets of fighting and penalty shots,
"Blades" lets the players control the fighting (and the loser gets a 30 second penalty) and either the shooter or goalie
during a penalty shot. The colors are not
NHL standard and statistics do not factor
in, but the play value is definitely there
for joystick jockeys. Amiga ($44.95), C64/128 ($29.95), IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #5.

CASTLEVANIA: The arcade maze
game meets Dracula. This hard-to-find
Nintendo hit has been beautifully converted to the disk-based format. The
player grinds through the castle, zapping
a variety of vicious vampire vermin right
out of the Hollywood horror hopper.
Naturally, there are handy implements of
destruction to pick up along the way.
Pure action garners may feel that the
somewhat slow pace is taking a bite out
of them, but it's a popular game nonetheless. Amiga ($44.95), C-64/128 ($29.95),
IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #6.
MicroProse
180 Lakefront Drive
Hunt Valley, MD 21030
SID MEIER'S RAILROAD TYCOON:
With four maps to build upon, 100 years
to do it in, and three vicious competitors
breathing down the player's neck, the
gang from Microprose has really outdone
themselves with this one. Some have
called it "the SimCity of railroading", but
its effects speak better than any made
up subtitle. Role-players and joystick jockeys, wargamers and Nintendo buffs have
all dropped their other games to pull all
nighters playing "Railroad Tycoon". This
game is on track and building up steam.
When it pulls into your town, get aboard.
IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #7.

Mindcraft Software, Inc.
2341 205th Street #102
Torrance, CA 90501

Virgin Mastertronic
18001 Cowan, Suite A
Irving, CA 92714

THE KEYS TO MARAMON: Not as involved or epic in scope such that a
major lifetime commitment must be
made to finish it (like many RPGs of
similar price), "Keys to Maramon" has all
of the classic RPG elements and has a
quick to learn, easy to play format with a
solid story line and plenty of action.
One's single character must save the island city by exploring both city and dungeons. Very solid. C-64/128 ($39.95),
IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #8.

MEGA PACK: This is an attractive collection of ten arcade favorites placed
together in one package. Games included are Bulldog, Jack the Nipper II,
North Star, The Thing Bounces Back,
Monty On The Run, Rebounder,
Trailblazer, Krackout, Cosmic Causeway,
and Future Knight. Pull into port with
your joystick, because no quarters are required to stay in this arcade. C-64/128.
Circle Reader Service #10.

Strategic Simulations, Inc.
675 Almanor Avenue
Sunnyvale, CA 94086

SHARK ATTACK: This worthy addition
to one's computer golfing game library is
named after Australia's Greg Norman
(known as "The Great White Shark").
Some of its interesting features include
an on screen ability to design a golf
swing (were it only this easy to fix our
real golf swings!), adjusting the club
face, and a 360 degree rotating 3-D
perspective available for each lie. Nothing to get teed off about, one won't have
a stroke when puttering about with
"Shark Attack", a simulator with teeth.
IBM, Amiga ($39.99). Circle Reader Service #11.

DRAGONSTRIKE: (not pictured) As
described in CGW #71's Sneak Preview,
this is a dragon flight/combat simulator
that combines the feel of the Dragonriders of Pern with the ease of game play
and depth of role-playing universes one
associates with TSR. It offers a hot
graphic appeal and solid game play, as
well. IBM ($49.95). Circle #9.

■

