,

Game Playing Aids from Computer Gaming World

COSMIC BALANCE SHIPYARD DISK
Contains over 20 ships that competed in the CGW COSMIC BALANCE SHIP
DESIGN CONTEST. Included are Avenger, the tournament winner; Blaze,
Mongoose, and MKVP6, the judge's ships. These ships are ideal for the gamer
who cannot find enough competition or wants to study the ship designs of
other gamers around the country. SSI's The Cosmic Balance is required to use
the shipyard disk.
PLEASE SPECIFY APPLE, ATARI OR C-64 VERSION WHEN ORDERING. $15.00.

ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT DISKS
Diskette #1 contains the source code for the twelve entrants in CGW's Second Annual Robotwar Tournament. Diskette #2 contains the seventeen entrants in the Third Annual Robotwar Tournament. Muse Software's
ROBTWA`"requidtoshke.Plaspcifywhdketn
ordering. $15.00 each or $25.00 for both.

Vol. 4 No. 6

December 1984
Features
CARRIER FORCE REPLAY
The Midway Scenario

WHEN SUPERPOWERS COLLIDE
An Overview

MAIL ORDER GAMES
A Visit to the Classifieds

STRATEGICALLY SPEAKING

10
Floyd Mathews
18
Jay Selover
22
John Besnard
26

Our New Strategy Tips Column

PANZER-JAGD
Review

GOING Berserk
Galactic Gladiators Scenarios

30
Jeff Seiken
34
Johnny L. Wilson

Departments
TAKING A PEEK

6

Screen Photos & Brief Comments

SCORPION'S TALE
Cutthroat Hints

NAME OF THE GAME
Should You Turn Pro?

COMMODORE KEY
Adventure Games

MICRO-REVIEWS

13
Scorpia
16
Jon Freeman
33
Roy Wagner
36

Return of Heracles
After Pearl
Dreadnoughts
Breakthrough The Ardennes
F-15 Strike Eagle

DISPATCHES
Porting

READER INPUT DEVICE
GAME RATINGS

40
Dan Bunten
46
47

Access Software
925 East 900 South

Salt Lake City, UT 84105
THE SCROLLS OF ABADON: Billed as
an "arcade adventure", TSOA utilizes the
3D view found in such games as Realm of
Impossibility (ex-Zombies), Jupiter 1999,
and Space Cowboy. You must clear each
level of jewels as you wander through enchanted chambers. You discover scrolls
that aid you. For example, after picking up
a jewel an arrow appears which limits the
direction in which you can traverse that
"square". However, you may find a scroll
that shows you how to overcome this travel
limitation. Off course, there is a stable of
nasties that attempt to thwart your progress. C-64 and Atari.
Activision Inc.
2350 Bayshore Frontage Rd.
Mountain View, CA 94043
GHOSTBUSTERS: Based on the movie,
GB showcases the graphics and sound
capabilities of the C-64. You are granted a
Ghostbusters franchise. You use your initial
$2000 to purchase a vehicle and equip it
with ghostbusting hardware. The program

is well executed and will appeal to those
that have seen the movie. C-64.
PARK PATROL: Arcade game in which
you, as the park ranger, keep the park clean
and safe. You must battle giant ants,
poisonous snakes, deadly swamps, and
killer turtles, not to mention litter. Atari,
C-64.
SPACE SHUTTLE: A pilot's seat view
greets you in SS as you blast off in a nice
launch sequence. Once in space you dock
with a satellite. Then you return to earth
and land your craft on a desert runway. OK
as an arcade game, but not as realistic or
educational as RENDEZVOUS by EduWare/Peachtree. C-64.
RIVER RAID: Commodore disk version
of Activision's popular strafing arcade
game. Destroy enemy tankers, helicopters,
fuel depots, jets, hot-air balloons and
bridges before your jet crashed or runs out
of fuel.
ZENJI: This is the most interesting title in
the Activision group for strategy gamers.
The theme is loosely based on Eastern
religion or mysticisim. You must turn
various elements (which create pathways)
in such a way that all paths are connected.

Then you will have achieved Zenji. Off
course the things of "this world" (flames
of desire and illusions) hinder you. The
game is an interesting combination of
mental exercise (figuring how to aline the
sections) and arcade reflexes (avoiding the
desires and illusions). C-64.
ZONE RANGER: Based on the old
Asteroids theme but with a lot more detail.
In addition to a variety of enemy vessels
and the ubiquitous asteroids, there are
blackholes that transport you to new locations and mazes. C-64.
Avalon Hill Game Company
4517 Harford Rd.
Baltimore, MD 21214
CLEAR FOR ACTION: A game from the
age of fighting sail. Up to eight ships can
be in a game. Each ship can have its own
captain. Highly playable, this is one Avalon
Hill's best releases. Atari.
EPYX 1043
Kiel Court
Sunnyvale, CA 94089
BREAKDANCE: All right guys and gals,
you finally get to figure out how they do the
moonwalk! Here's a "fresh" game that lets
you "boogaloo" by the bytes. Three games

are included: Hot Feet Dance Contest, Battle the Rocket Crew, and Perfections Dance
Puzzle. Additionally you can choreograph
your own dance and play it back on the
computer. And if you are really bold, you
are given the instructions on how to perform the steps in actual breakdancing.
Here's the editor of CGW moonwalking
around the Consumer Electronics Show;
fresh, man, fresh. C-64.
MONTY PLAYS SCRABBLE: From one
to four can play in this computer version
of the board game classic. Monty (the computer player) can be set at one of four skill
levels. The game is by Leisure Genius but
is distributed by Epyx. C-64.
PITSTOP II: Exciting racing game that
pits you against a friend or against the
computer. The split-screen gives separate
views for each driver. C-64.
WORLD'S GREATEST BASEBALL
GAME: With a title like that, you're just
asking to get shot down. Ok, bang! What is
billed as a statistics baseball game is, in
reality a close cousin to the pure arcade
STAR LEAGUE BASEBALL(SLB). The
only stats that are considered for batters
are batting average and home runs. For
pitchers, all that is considered is W/L
record and ERA.
As a stat game WGBG is disappointing.
But as an arcade game it is on par with

SLB. Both look and play similar and good
entries in the "beer and pretzel" league.
First Star Software 18 East 41st St. New
York, NY 10017
SPY VS. SPY: MAD Magazine's famous
spies battle it out in a split level game in
which you and your opponent set traps for
one another. Using what First Star calls
Simulvision® and Simulplay® , players
each play on their own screen
simultaneously. For one or two covert
agents. The one player version features five
separate levels of computer intelligence.
C-64.
Gambit
P.O. Box 70858
Houston, TX 77270-0858
WEREWOLF!!: A hi-res adventure game
with animation. Speech and sound
enhanced if you are using a
Mockingboard® . Written by the author of
Expedition Amazon, Werewolf incorporates Pythonish humor. Apple.
Gamestar, Inc.
1302 State St.
Santa Barbara, CA 93101
ON-COURT TENNIS: Very nicely done
tennis game for the C-64. You can choose
one of four basic tennis players (who are
loosely modeled after famous pros). You
also choose court type (grass, clay, hard).
Play against the computer or another per-

son. The game has a realistic feel to it. Just
the thing if your real match is rained out.
Lance Haffner Games
P.O. Box 100594
Nashville, TN 37210
3 IN 1 FOOTBALL: A text-only simulation
of college and pro football. The game
comes with 95 college teams from '83, 18
teams from the '83 USFL, and 28 teams
from the '83 NFL. The '84 college and pro
teams will be available by Christmas ($12).
The offense has 12 plays plus the kicking game to choose from. The defense can
choose from six formations. A scouting
report allows you to see the strengths and
weaknesses of the teams. The end game
stats are very detailed and can be sent to
the screen or a printer. You can play against
a human or against the computer (however,
the computer coach isn't all that bright). We
would have liked to see a probabilities chart
as was included in COMPUTER
QUARTERBACK. However, at $24.99 this
Apple game is not a bad buy (especially as
a two-player game).
Infocom
55 Wheeler St.
Cambridge, MA 02138
CUTTHROATS: Another exciting game
from Infocom (see Scorpion's Tale in this

issue for tips on Cutthroats). Infocom has
always been known for their innovative
packaging. However if you own more than
a couple of their games you know what a
pain it is to store those multi-shaped and
sized products. (Has anyone found a decent way to store Starcross?). With Cutthroats, Infocom has gone to a new booklike packaging that we applaud. The
package is small and compact (compared
to their old products). Zork, Starcross, and
Suspended are all in the new packaging.
Before the end of the year the entire product line will be be "converted". Where do
we send our old games to get the updated
version of the package (hehe)?

Motivated Software Inc.
80 Rancho Dr.
Mill Valley, CA 94941
Can
anything good come out of Marin County?
Yes! And one of them is this initial release
from Motivated Software. CK is a detailed
game of karate which will delight karate
fans(?) as well as provide a good game for
those of us a bit more sedentary.
COMPETITION KARATE:

CK is a role-playing strategy/action game
that allows you to create teams of progressing fighters. The game includes multiplayer participation, realistic combat,
work-outs with instructors (to improve one
or more of you nine rated characteristics),
five martial arts styles, belt rank promotions, four tournament divisions, etc.
A sequel is in the works that will permit
retired red belts to play in a personal quest
adventure game. CK is the best initial
release from a small company that we have
seen in awhile. A review is forthcoming in
our next issue. Apple. $34.95. C - 64 in the
works.

Signal Computer Consultants, Ltd.
P.O. Box 18222
Pittsburgh, PA 15236
SONAR SEARCH: A strategy-action
game based on the battle of the North
Atlantic shipping lanes during WWII. The
player directs a search and destroy mission
against five enemy submarines (using three
destroyers). There are five play levels. An
average game lasts 15 to 30 minutes. C-64.
$29.95.
TRAIN DISPATCHER: A game that
simulates control of railroad operations
over a 150 mile territory. The player, as
Dispatcher) must, during his eight hour
shift in the Centralized Traffic Control Office, maneuver up to 12 trains across the
territory and into yards at each end. C-64.
Windcrest Software
P.O. Box 423
Waynesboro, PA 17268
BASEBALL'S BEST`. An Atari stat-based
baseball game with interesting graphics.
Hit a deep fly and the "camera" switches
to a side view of the fielders racing back to
play the ball. Steal a base and the dust flys
as the player slides in.
Stats are based upon defensive rating,
batting average, basic control
probailty(fches),avrg(wichte
ratio of total bases to total outs), and probability of outs (for pitchers). Atari $29.95.
PANZER WAR: Basically a tank arcade
game, PW adds the twist of a strategic map.
Move your forces on the strategic map in
monthly turns. When units end the
strategic move next to one another an arcade battle begins. Four scenarios. One or
two players. Atari. $29.95.

CARRIER FORCE:

Midway Replay
by Floyd Mathews

Using SSI's Carrier Force, I recently
replayed the Midway scenario solitaire against
the computer at level three with random setup.
This scenario is probably more similar to the
actual battle in solitaire play than in the twoplayer mode: The program usually follows the
historical IJN plan for a dawn air launch
against Midway on June 4, 1942, but a player
might not make this air strike.
I recorded most positions, and after the
game, I loaded the saved positions in the twoplayer mode in order to use "hindsight" to
analyze the replay.
• PRE-GAME PLAN
The USN player has the advantage of surprise — I know the computer-controlled
Japanese player will probably attack Midway,
but it does not "know" that I have carriers near
Midway. This is historically accurate, as the
US had cracked the Japanese code and
seaplanes from Midway had sighted the approaching transports on the previous day of
June 3.
I planned two main attacks:
1) Launch a major strike at dawn on June 4
before my seaplanes could spot the enemy. I
hope to hit the enemy carriers first while they
are readying aircraft or retrieving their Midway strike. If there are no targets within range,
I can recover my strike in safety.
2) Detach seven cruisers and send them
westward to hunt the Japanese transports.
There is a risk of encountering Japanese battleships, but I will rely on seaplanes to search
ahead of my CA's.
I doubted that I could hold Midway.
However, I hoped to sink two Japanese CV's,
then retire my own CV's east. I planned to use
Midway as an advance base, and shuttle air-

craft between Midway and my retreating CV's.
The IJN Vals and Kates are very accurate,
but also very weak against fighter attack. I
planned to combine all three of my CV's into
one task force to maximize flak. I would keep
lots of fighters readied, and rely on radar to
warn of incoming strikes. This meant that my
own strike missions would have to go out with
fewer fighter escorts, but the SBD dive
bombers are relatively tough against Zekes. I
planned to use small missions of about 14 aircraft each in order to maximize range. The
TBD's are weak and inaccurate, therefore I
would not send them out except in a desperate
situation, or to finish off cripples. The land aircraft based at Midway are also weak, but since
I expected to lose Midway eventually, I
planned to send them out with my own launch
on June 4.
I would concentrate my submarines at Midway where they should eventually find lots of
targets.
• THE REPLAY
On the first game turn, 500 hours June 4,
both of my carrier task forces are located at
22,15 with the wind from the NE. I reform the
seven CAs into TF13 (task force 13), which
turns west to hunt the transports. I concentrate the three CV's, all the DD's and Atlanta
into TF12. My subs turn toward Midway. Midway launches seven seaplanes, and readies all
aircraft except the weak LSB2U's. TF12
readies 88 SBD's and 20 F4's.
After the game, using "hindsight" from the
saved game position, I see that the Japanese on
this turn readied a massive air strike for its
dawn launch against Midway.
On the next turn, 600 June 4, TF12 launches
eight missions comprising 108 aircraft, and

readies all remaining SBD's plus 55 F4's. Midway launches everything except the LSB2U's,
the LF2's and the remaining seaplanes. My
seaplanes search the critical hexes located
three to five hexes west of Midway. They find
four CV's with escorts at 17,18 and one CV
with escorts at 16,18.
Figure 1 shows the position of all TF's at the
conclusion of the 600 turn. The encircled area
marks the area searched by my seaplanes. I
did not spot TF3 until it reached Midway on
June 5.
On the 700 June 4 turn, the IJN air strike hits
Midway with 3( damage and destroys all
seaplanes on the ground. TF12 launches the
last 21 SBD's with only 3 F4's for escort. The
level bombers from Midway and about 30
SBD's find and attack the IJN CV's at 17,18.
Unfortunately, they report only three bomb

hits. With hindsight, I see that Kaga was hit
with 22% damage and a fire raging out of control at level 12. The IJN search planes sight
TF12, and all the enemy bombers are rearmed
with anti-ship ordnance.
On the 800 turn, TF12 is at 23,15, six hexes
from the enemy CV's. About 60 SBD's make
their attacks on the enemy CV's at 17,18 and
claim ten bomb hits! I get confirmed sightings
of many enemy transports at 17,19.
On the next turn, 21 SBD's claim three more
hits on the IJN CV's at 17,18. They report that
two CV's are severely damaged, with a third
lightly damaged. I now believe that I have virtually accomplished my major objective of
sinking two IJN CV's, therefore I plan to
retreat my own CV's to the NE. If the enemy
fleet withdraws, my CV's can return to finish
off any cripples. Using hindsight after the
game, I discovered that my pilots had actually
inflicted more damage than they claimed:
Akagi-31% damage, fire level 10
Kaga-91% damage, fire level 25
Zuiho-76% damage, fire level 21
Hiryu-24% damage.
Soryu was unhurt, as well as Hosho, which
remained undetected with TF3 to the north.
On the 1000 turn, TF12 is hit by about 30 IJN
bombers. They claim two torpedo hits and two
bomb hits. Hornet receives only 2% damage,
but Yorktown has 26% damage with speed

reduced to 22. I abandon Yorktown into a new
TF16 in order not to slow the retreat of TF12.
Ironically, the technological "advantage" of
radar contributed to the crippling of Yorktown.
On the previous turn I received a false radar
report of an incoming air raid on Midway. I
diverted 36 F4's from TF12 toward Midway,
and these fighters were unable to intercept the
attack on Yorktown. Unfortunately, this game
has no option for court-martialing radar
operators!
Most of my returning morning strike make
forced landings at Midway, but about 24 aircraft make it back to TF12. The Midway airbase is now operational again, and I plan to
continue the air battle from Midway while my
own CV's escape.
Beginning at 1200, Midway and TF12
launch my afternoon air attack of over 140 aircraft, again divided into many small missions
of about 14 aircraft each. During the afternoon, they claim six bomb hits on the remaining CV's still located at 17,18, plus one hit on
a BB and two hits on a CA. A second, very
small, IJN air strike on TF12 scores no hits.
The first surface gunnery battle occurs at
1200 in 20,17 when TF13 collides with the fast
IJN cruisers of TF4. I claim eight gun hits to
their seven, but hindsight shows that my CA's
took the worst of it. Two IJN CAs have 25%
damage but no speed loss. Both Astoria and

ERRATA: We apologize to Jim McPher
son for failing to give him credit on a
review in our last issue. Jim wrote the
LORDINGS OF YORE review on page
38 of the October issue.

Pensacola have heavy damage, fires, and speed
reduced to 22. I evacuate both ships in a new
TF17 in order not to slow TF13, which continues to hunt the transports. During the afternoon, the IJN makes two small air attacks on
TF17, and scores two bomb hits on the
stricken Astoria. By 1600, TF12 is safely at
26,13, eight hexes from the IJN CV's. My
returning afternoon air attack begins landing
at Midway. It is now a race to see whether I
can shuttle the carrier planes from Midway to
TF12 before the IJN BB's plaster the airbase.
I lose the race. At 1600 the IJN begins the first
of many devastating bombardments of Midway. Midway damage is 48%, and ten aircraft
are destroyed on the ground. I can continue
to land aircraft, but non can launch from Midway unless I can repair the airbase. Except for
about 20 TBD's on TF12, my entire bomber
force is now trapped at Midway until the base
is repaired.
On the positive side, the IJN only made four
relatively weak air attacks against my ships on
June 4. By 1800 I am beginning to suspect that
I may have crippled most of the IJN CV's. For
the night, I decide that TF13 will continue the
risky business of hunting transports. I will station TF12 about five hexes east of Midway. If
the enemy fleet retires, TF12 will be in a good
position to recover the carrier aircraft from
Midway, and pursue the enemy. However, if
Midway falls during the night, TF12 can run
eastward on June 5. The crippling of Yorktown
is less significant now; with my heavy aircraft
losses I now no longer need a third CV.

At 1800 on June 4 TF13 catches transport
TF6 at 19,18 and a second surface gun battle
erupts. I claim 41 gun hits on transports, and
13 more on destroyers. The IJN claims two gun
hits and two torpedo hits on my CAs. Portland
has significant damage, but I cannot detach
her as I am running short on extra TF's in
memory. I estimate that I sank ten ships. For
the first time, I begin to think there may be a
chance to save Midway if I can sink more
transports.
Figure 2 shows the position of all TF's at
2000 on June 4. Hindsight reveals that Kaga
and Zuiho have sunk, and Akagi and Hiryu are
crippled. Soryu is operational, but has 9%
damage. Little Hosho is the only undamaged
IJN CV.
At 2200 on June 4 my subs make their first
attack on the IJN ship. In this replay they made
a total of 19 attacks on various ships, but
claimed only four torpedo hits. The subs were
not a major factor in the replay, but none were
lost.
TF13 overtakes transport TF's 5 and 9 at
21,17 at 100 on June 5, only one hex short of
Midway. In a night gunnery battle, I claim 51
hits on various transports, plus 16 hits on
escorts, including a light cruiser. I estimate
that I destroyed at least ten more transports.
The IJN claims ten gun hits and two torpedo
hits on my CAs. Minneapolis and Northampton are badly damaged, so I detach them in a
new TF18 which turns SE for Pearl. TF13,

now with only three CAs left, continues to
search south of Midway for a few more hours.
Before dawn, TF13 turns east to retreat.
The Japanese bombarded Midway
sporadically throughout the night of June 4-5
and the next day, and destroyed about 30 more
aircraft on the ground. But they landed a total
of only 14 assault points.
One hour before dawn on June 5, TF12 at
25,16 begins launching ten search missions of
one F4 or TBF each. I fear enemy battleships
may be hunting my CV's, so my primary
search is around TF12. Later, I extend the
search over a wide area to the west and south
of Midway. At 700 I find all of the IJN surface
fleet at Midway. They remained at Midway
throughout June 5 and most of June 6.
Yorktown exits the main map to safety at 700
June 5.
At 900 an IJN air raid on TF12 claims two
bomb hits, and Enterprise has 18% damage.
My plan now is to retreat all surface ships SE
away from Midway. I am unable to strike back
as Midway is unoperational, and TF12 has
only F4's and the weak TBD's. New Orleans
and Vincennes join TF12 at 26,16 at 1800.
Portland's speed is 27, but there is no memory
space for her in TF12, so she continues SE
alone in TF13. Pensacola's speed is now zero,
a sitting duck. I abandon her in a new TF19,
my last available number. If there are any
future cripples, I will have to begin scuffling

ships in order to avoid slowing the retreat of
TF12.
At 1500 on June 5, the IJN has apparently
expended all of its bombardment ammunition. The Midway airbase is operational again!
Midway launches 36 SBD's with other
assorted aircraft which claim four bomb hits
on the IJN CV's at Midway. At 1600 the last
IJN air strike of this replay claims two bomb
hits on Hornet, but she shows only 6%
damage. Hindsight reveals that the IJN now has
no capability to launch aircraft.
After sunset on June 5, TF12 at 27,17 readies
its TBD's and F4's for nighttime shuttle to
Midway. The IJN is apparently unable to capture the island. I plan to continue the air battle from Midway on June 6, while my surface
ships retreat SE.
At dawn on June 6 Midway launches many
B17 search missions plus 33 SBD's. They
claim three bomb hits on IJN CV's still resting
at Midway. TF's 12, 13 and 17 exit the map to
safety on the morning of June 6.
At 900 the IJN finally commences a slow
retreat NW away from Midway. Later air
strikes from Midway claim four more bomb
hits, and the TBD's claim one torpedo hit.
Figure 3 shows the position of all TF's at 1800
June 6. The game terminated automatically at
2100 June 6.
Continued on page 42

When you get there, you might as well sit
down and wait awhile (there's a lot of waiting
in this game, so get used to it). If it happens
that Weasel doesn't show up, you made a
mistake back in your room. Think about the
various items you found there, and see if that
gives you any ideas. Oh, and keep an eye on the
time; that's important! If anything strange happens around 8:20, you probably forgot to do
something when you woke up.
So, Weasel arrives, but now it looks like
there's a change in meeting places, and you'll
have to trek off to another spot on the island
(of course, you ARE mapping this out, aren't
you?). The one thing to watch out for is
McGinty; he can really louse things up for you
if you aren't careful. I'll give you this bit of advice: remember that he can see everything you
carry, except the money in your pocket.
CUTTHROATS

As told by Scorpia

WARNING! Scorpion's Tale contains hints on
solving computer adventure games. If you
don't want help, don't read on. You've been
warned, friend!
Holiday season is here! The time when Santa leaves all those little diskettes full of fun
under your Christmas tree, and friends and
family gather in front of a warm computer, to
play adventure games! Santa visits us here at
the Tale, too, but he's always been a little puzzled by Fred; he can't understand why Fred
always asks for broken lightbulbs.
Ah well, time to get on with the business at
hand, so settle into your favorite chair by the
fire, and we'll talk about treasure-hunting in
the deep blue sea! Ready? Then let's dive into
Cutthroats!
The first thing to do is open up your little
book of shipwrecks, and look at the map. You'll
see four wrecks are marked off, but that's
something of a red herring. There's really only
two of them that you can explore, and which
one you get is determined randomly by the
program. Still, you DO get two ships to play
around in, and that should keep you busy for
awhile.
When you boot up the game, you have to sit
through a long explanation of how you came
to own the book. There isn't any way around
this, it will just come scrolling out every time,
so be prepared for that.
So, here you are, expert deep-sea diver, in a
dingy hotel room, on the equally-dingy Hardscrabble Island. What next? Well, it would be
a good idea to check out what's in the room,
and what you may have on you at the time.
Reading the note is also helpful; it tells you
where to go next.

Well, here you are at the new meeting place,
and you'll have to wait some more until
everyone shows up. At last, everyone gets
there, and you finally find out which wreck
you're diving for! Johnny will show you an
item. Quick reference to the shipwreck book
(the one that came with the game) should tell
you which ship it's from. Saving the game
from this point on will keep the wreck the
same, and it's a good idea to save here, anyway.
Just in case you make a mistake later.
However, you're not quite ready to dive yet!
Johnny wants some proof that you're really in
on this deal, and you'll have to go get it. And
you'll have to meet him again in yet another
spot. Which means (you guessed it!) more
waiting. But, all things come to those who
wait, and after meeting Johnny again, you
finally go to the Outfitter's to do some
shopping.
This is the time to look at the tide table/price
list that comes with the game. There's quite a
few things on it, but you won't need most of
them. What you will buy depends on which
ship you're diving for, but in any case, you'll
have enough to get what you need. Read the
list carefully, and do some thinking.
Now, it just so happens that McGinty will be
there when you arrive. What you do while he's
around is very important; doing the wrong
thing can blow the game right there. Be
patient, and choose your actions wisely.
All right! You've bought everything you'll
need (or think you'll need!), and you don't have
to get to the boat right away. What to do?
Hmmmm...maybe you should take a stroll
around the island, and visit a few places you
haven't been to yet. Never know what you
might see!
When you get to the boat, there will be some
more waiting to do. The delivery boy has to
come by with the supplies, and the rest of the
crew has to arrive, as well. While you're
waiting, you may as well poke around the boat
and see what's there. There is also a certain
item you may want to put somewhere for safe-

keeping, and this is a good time to find a place
for it.
Once Johnny is on board, you can give him
the coordinates of the ship, and then you'll be
off. Take a nap, and by the time you wake up,
you'll be at the dive site. Since there are two
wrecks, one that requires scuba gear, and one
that requires deep-sea gear, we'll look at them
one at a time, scuba gear first (oh yes, if there's
anything special you want Johnny to know, this
is a good time for it).
Once you're all decked out in your scuba
gear, and you're sure you have everything, dive
in. Splash! Just keep swimming down, until
you reach the wrecked ship. Along the way,
you may find yourself bothered by a fishy
nuisance, but the right item will take care of
that.
Getting into the wreck is easy; just go into
the hole. You might want to save the game
here, and just look around the ship to see
where everything is, and map it out. In one
room, you'll find breathable air; remember
where that is, it's important.
Sooner or later, you'll find a door with a sign
on it. Take a good look at that sign, it says the
room beyond is a. . . mine locker? Gulp!
However, it's quite safe to open the door and
go in. Just be very careful about what you
touch in there, and how you touch it.
Look around in there, and everything seems
to be ok, except for one mine that's loose, and
floating in front of a hole in the ceiling (don't
ask how that happened without the mine going off?). The trick is to get the mine away from
the hole, without blowing yourself to tiny bits.
If you remember what mines are made of, the
solution should come to you sooner or later.
It's an attractive one.
After that, it won't take you too long to find
the safe, and remove the contents. Now comes
the fun part. The case is starting to fill with
water, and the contents will be ruined if the
water level gets too high. What to do? Well, you
better get that case out of the water, pronto!
And then you have to get the water out of the
case. Too bad that crack is so small; if it was
a bit larger, you could probably pour the water
out.. .
And that's pretty much it for this wreck; the
other one is a bit more interesting! Also more
dangerous, because you can't just swim
around, you have to walk around in the diving
suit, with an air hose trailing behind you. If
anything happens to that hose, you won't be
coming back up again.
As with the other wreck, you just keep going down till you reach bottom. When you
reach the wreck, go through the hole as you
did with the other one. Crash! Oops, looks like
the ladder broke... and you can't just swim up.
Well, maybe you'll find a way out later. For
now, just go along through the ship.
Continued on page 43

THE NAME OF
THE GAME

SHOULD YOU
TURN PRO?
Jon Freeman
If you are even a half-serious gamer, you
have probably thought about developing your
own games, but how seriously have you considered doing it professionally? Seriously
enough to ponder nuts-and-bolts stuff like cash
flow, hours, working conditions, tax deductions, development time, and the like?
While career choices are complicated by
questions of talent, temperament, background,
inclination, and financial and marital status,
some answers are obvious. There are people
who spend a week cracking a protection
scheme because they "can't afford" $40 for a
game. This is silly. Who can afford to work for
$1 an hour? If you have the skills — and the
patience —to foil today's elaborate software
safeguards, you can find a greater challenge,
far more money, and a less (shall we say) ambiguous moral climate by working for or with
a publisher to create copy-protection methods
the next person cannot break.

Q: What kind of royalties should I expect from
a game?
A: Expectations can be dangerous! I suspect
the median royalty for all published games is
around $1000, but that's just a guess. Most
games die in infancy. Those that survive may
sell 5000 copies. Really successful games can
sell tens of thousands of copies, and a few
games are reputed to have exceeded the
100,000 mark. Multiply any of these figures by
$2 or $3 apiece (half if you're not designer and
programmer) to calculate a ballpark royalty.

Don't forget the time problem. Wizardry and
Skyfox took years to develop, and any
reasonable game takes at least six months.
Even that pace is impossible to maintain; putting out a game every 9-12 months is pretty
good. And it will be a good six months after
the game is published before you see your first
royalty check.

The rest of you may have questions that are
harder to answer, but let's give them a try.

game.

Q: Am I better off getting a job with a game
publisher or staying independent?
A: Reread my last answer — and the 2nd
paragraph of this column. If you are interested
in working on utilities, development systems,
and the latest hardware, go with an established
company (if you can). On the other hand, I
firmly believe that, with few exceptions, the
best games are not created by employees. (Certainly, most good writers, screenwriters, composers, etc. are not employees of their
publishers/studios). If you're looking for "job
security" (a concept I find laughable, find
another industry; if not, I think game
designers are better off self-employed.
Q: Why
A: All the usual reasons: Artistic freedom.
No office politics. No artificial restrictions. You
can set your own hours, stay up all night, go
to work in your bathrobe (or your bathing suit).

Q: Are computer games the way to fame and
fortune?
A: No. Not unless your idea of fame is having your name recognized by one or two astute
individuals at Origins. As for fortune, consider
movies and TV — and the odds. Most
members of the Screen Actors Guild (ostensibly a group of successful thespians) make
less money (at least from acting) than you do;
most wait tables and pump gas. Making a
million dollars from a computer game may not
be impossible, but it's close. Far more
reasonable amounts are not all that common.
Q: I have heard that some people are now getting $10,000 a year in game royalties. Is this
possible? Can you make a living designing
games?
A: Certainly. I've been making a living (after
a fashion) designing games for most of the last
six years. I wouldn't recommend it for someone with a weak heart or a large appetite,
though. (Around here, 10K a year won't pay the
rent.) The hardest part for most would-be
careerists is coming up with their second

software companies — and nearly all new
ones — will be unable to get shelf space this
Christmas. No shelf space means no sales —
and no royalties. And Chapter 11 (bankruptcy)
by spring. The Great Software Shakeout will
get worse before it gets better.

Q: Sounds like heaven.
A: Or hell. If it's not ideal, it's impossible. If
you can't meet deadlines (yes deadlines), if you
can't push yourself to work long hours (not just
40 hours a week, either) day in and day out,
you'll starve. No product, no income. If your
game doesn't please a publisher — and
thousands of gamers— you'll go broke. Pronto.

Q:Is the field easier or harder to break into
these days?
A: Harder. (No question). Not impossible;
just much harder. The good, successful companies — the ones who could help your game
sell — are reluctant to gamble on an unknown
(i.e., you). Generally, if a company is interested
despite your lack of a track record, you
shouldn't be interested in them. Most game

Q: Could I deduct the cost of my computer
from my taxes?
A: You bet your ASCII! As a professional
game designer or programmer, you can
deduct your computer, disk drives, printer,
TV/monitor, desk, chair, and so forth. Actually, the normal procedure is to depreciate such
things over five years (i.e., to write off a portion
of the cost each year), which also allows you
Continued on page 42

WHEN
SUPERPOWERS
COLLIDE:
A Survey
by Jay Selover

game. For instance, the American forces include air cavalry units (helicopters) which the
Russians don't have, while the Russians have
mobile Katushka rocket batteries in addition
to regular artillery. The graphics and maps in
the games deserve special mention - they are
very well done. The screen presents only
about ten percent of the map at any time; the
screen can be scrolled or jumped to various
spots on the map in order to see all of your
forces. The hi-res graphics differentiate nicely
between the eight or nine different types of
terrain in each game and the seven or eight different unit types possessed by each side.
• THE GAME SYSTEM

In 1981, SSI came out with Germany 1985,
designed by Roger Keating. This game was
billed as the first scenario of a new series
called "When Superpowers Collide", and subsequent games with the same system were
promised. Sure enough, two more releases
have come along RDF 1985 and Baltic 1985 and
we are told to watch for the fourth, Norway
1985, in December. Since we are about to enter
the fateful year in question, you might like to
know what Roger foresees in these games.

The "1985" series of games all detail small
elements of a hypothetical conflict between
NATO and the Warsaw Pact in the immediate
future. Each one is a tactical wargame which
explores a potential battle which might occur.
Although the Designer's Notes talk about
NATO forces, the "Superpowers" mentioned
in the banner are the United States and Russia
(no allies). Germany 1985, the first game in the
series, gives the opening battle of the war, as
Russian troops move across the border into
West Germany with the Americans defending.
The next game, RDF 1985, switches to the Persian Gulf. Keating postulates a Russian force
moving into seize the oilfields. The game
centers on our "Rapid Deployment Force"
(RDF), which must land and retake the area.
Finally, Baltic 1985 supposes that the Russian
drive in Southern Germany has been stalled,
and that the Americans decide to launch a
swift assault through Northern East Germany

to relieve the bypassed and besieged garrison
in Berlin:
Germany 1985 represented the state-of-theart in computer wargames when it first came
out; and despite the fact that the later games
are basically "scenario variants", they are still
leaders in player options, graphics, and speed
of program execution. The complexity of the
three games is fairly high, yet they can look
deceptively easy. When you first sit down to
play one, the many "automatic" functions and
orders allow you to let the computer do much
of the "work" for you during your turn. Also,
the terse nature of the rules presentation encourages you to learn the system as you play,
rather than sit down and study it first. In order
to get better with each game, you really do
need to understand what is going on behind
the scenes, and a player who stays on
"automatic" will ultimately be frustrated by his
lack of understanding.
Each of the three games includes a game
disk and a reference map of the battle area.
Beyond the physical components, the three
games share many common features. All three
are fought on a 39-by-28 hexgrid with each unit
representing a battalion. The time scale is the
same (four hours per turn), but the distance
scales vary (from one mile per hex in Germany
1985 to three miles per hex in Baltic 1984).
Also, the same kinds of units are used in each

All three games use a game system which
we might as well call the "1985" system. Each
game is fifteen to twenty turns long with alternating player-turns. During your turn, you do
not make all of your moves and then execute
all combats. Instead, you move and fight with
one unit until you are finished with it, and
then go on to move and fight with another.
Once you have selected a unit and are ready
to do something with it, there are several more
things to consider than just "where shall I
move it?" The computer keeps you updated on
the current strength and efficiency of the unit,
the distance to the divisional headquarters
unit, and also of its mode. A unit can be in any
one of eight different modes: normal, attack,
defensive, support, transport, fire (for artillery
and ranged weapons), river (for crossing
them), or reorganize. Each mode has specific
strengths and weaknesses for attacking, defending, moving and acquiring replacements.
One of the more subtle aspects of the system
is learning how to use the right mode at the
right time.
Once you have checked all the aspects of a
unit, you need to decide what to do with it.
Using a tank battalion as an example, you
might move to and attack an enemy unit, or
enter defensive mode, or call in friendly artillery support, or enter support mode in order
to assist the combat of a nearby unit, or enter
fire mode and execute long range fire (kind of
a short range barrage by the tanks), or you
might even give a "delayed attack" order
which saves any unused movement points
until your opponent's turn. Then, as your opponent moves his units, the computer might
decide that your unit has spotted an enemy

unit and automatically move it up and attack
the triggering enemy unit in the middle of its
movement. This example shows just some of
the choices which you must make for each
unit each turn.
The movement system reflects common
sense. A unit in transport mode on a road can
move very fast (it is also very vulnerable to
enemy attack), a unit in normal mode is
slower, and a unit in defensive mode can not
move at all. One interesting feature of the
movement system is the concept of "sighting
enemy units" (SEU), which are those enemy
units which are able to "see" your unit as it
moves. The cost to enter a hex during movement is based on a value for the hex plus the
number of SEU's. In other words, the more
enemy units that can see you, the more
cautiously you must move. This concept certainly makes sense, but has almost never been
implemented in wargames because of the
bookkeeping involved. The computer can
handle it, though, and constantly keeps you informed of the number of enemy units which
can spot your unit as it moves.
The combat system is the heart of any
wargame, and the "1985" system is an interesting "mixed bag" of pluses and minuses.
Combat is initiated automatically whenever
you move a unit adjacent to an enemy unit
(you also have the option to initiate combat

against an enemy unit if you start the turn adjacent to it). The combat is resolved with a
combat differential system; an attack value of
the attacking unit is compared to a defense
value of the defending unit and the difference
determines the losses to each unit. The attack
and defense values are based on the strengths,
efficiencies, and modes of the units, the
presence of nearby units in support mode, the
proximity of the divisional headquarters unit,
the terrain in the defender's hex, the number
of other sighting units in the area, and
preparatory artillery fire. In each combat, both
the attacker and defender generally lose some
strength and efficiency (in a very strong or
weak attack, one or the other might be completely eliminated). Also, the defender might
be forced to retreat several hexes (the computer
determines all retreat paths for you).
The best thing about the combat system is
that it takes into account the many external
factors which do influence combat (such as
nearby units in support mode). The worst
thing about the combat system is the same
thing, that it uses much more than just the
strengths of the two units involved. The combat system does give an accurate presentation
of the factors involved in modern combat, but
it will take a while for players to comprehend
exactly how best to utilize their assets when
attacking. The appendix in the main rulebook
is absolutely required reading if you want to

succeed in combat; it gives information on
how much influence any one factor has in
determining the outcome of an attack. Since
the game system involves moves and attacks
by individual units, you can not move three
units adjacent to an enemy and then execute
a "3:1" attack. You must decide whether to attack with each unit individually or to put two
of the units into support mode and try to nail
the enemy with one well-supported attack.
There are always several ways to conduct an
attack (or defense), and learning to optimize
combat results is one of the major challenges
of the system.
• WEAK POINTS
As long as we have mentioned the combat
system, let me use it to illustrate the one major
weakness of the "1985" games. Let us suppose
that there is one enemy unit that you wish to
attack, and you must choose one of these two
options: 1)Attack with a full-strength tank unit
(15 strength points), or 2)Attack with a slightly weakened tank unit (12 strength points remaining), but with another unit (a shattered
remnant with only 1 strength point remaining)
in support mode three hexes away from the
tanks. It might surprise you to find that the second case does better, much better! The
significant effect of friendly units in support
Continued on page 42

MAIL ORDER GAMES
A Visit to the Classified Ads

John Besnard
During the past year, a number of the major software magazines have
introduced Classified Advertising sections. Once again, the opportunity
emerged for the little guy to start his own software publishing company.
For about $100 he could run a ten line ad and reach more than 50,000
potential customers. Well, they reached me! I bought 'em all. I decided
in January that I would take a chance and buy every game advertised
in the classifieds that cost under $20.00. I'd like to share my experiences
in purchasing five of these games.

• TRIVIA PYRAMID by Mark Whitehurst, 2538 Westbrook Drive,
Franklin Park, Il 60131. — This game begins with a brief tune, followed
by an even briefer menu. You can either choose to play or to create your
own games. The game exploits the current trivia craze and contains over
1000 questions on a double sided disk. The basic play mechanic has you
answer a trivia question from one of eight categories (history, languages,
science, literature, TV & movies, geography, sports and miscellaneous).
You can also choose to exclude specified categories before each game.

All of these games have the following characteristics in common:
1. They run on the Apple II computer series (48K w/ disk).
2. They cost under $20.00 each.
3. At best, they come packaged in zip-lock bags.
4. You've probably never heard of them before and you certainly can't
test them before you buy them.

It takes twelve advances to reach the top of the pyramid. For each correct answer, the play may advance once or choose to risk his advance
by trying a bonus question from the category of his choice. If you answer
the bonus question correctly, you make two advances. Miss it, and stay
where you started. Two to four players may participate in each game,
with one player's spot optionally taken by the computer, so that a sort
of solitaire is possible. The game is cute and the questions all appear
to be original. Spelling is, unfortunately, very important. I missed
"HOMERUN" as an answer because I entered "HOME RUN" with a
space. It seems that the author just forgot to include it, because for each
question you enter in the game creation mode, you may include as many
answers as you can fit in 38 characters (separated by exclamation points).
If you ever wanted to make your own trivia game, this one's for you.

In general, the games all came without any major bugs or glitches.
They all booted up the first time I tried. Some of the games started with
a title page and demo. Most, however, simply asked if the player wanted
to play or to read instructions first. Well, let's get on with it and see what
you can get for $20.00.

• CARCADE by Steve Walloch, 9733 52nd Street W, #252, Tacoma,
WA 98467. — Carcade is the result of a lot of very good programming.
It consists of no less than eleven different arcade style games. Each of
them is loosely tied together by a "car" at the bottom of the screen where
the player affects his control over the various tasks. The disk boots and
simply asks if you want instructions or want to go right into the games.
Unless you care about the strange way the game is scored, just go for
it. I always have fun trying to guess the rules of a game by playing it
without looking at the directions. A few of these games really put by
creativity to the test.
Although the games are unnamed, I chose to call them names, a few
of which are unprintable. My favorite was The Spinning Bat where you
shoot a ball into a pair of parallel lines (the bat), causing it to rotate as
if the ball added weight to it The closer to the end, the more the weight
affects the structure. You have to use this bat to hit a bouncing ball
through a moving opening. Yes, its as tough as it sounds. The game
allows from one to four players and keeps high scores on the disk. As
I mentioned, the scoring is, well. . . let's call it "different" for want of
a better definition. Points are only scored in the eleventh game, Bombs,
in which you shoot at bombs with burning fuses while trying to avoid
contact with them. The points scored for each bomb are based upon
the scores you made playing the first ten games. The animation is very
smooth. The graphics are very sharp, and if you're looking for a bargain,
eleven games for $15.00 is hard to pass up.
• MINI GRAPHIC GAMES by Alan Foxx, 28090 Tavistock,
Southfield, MI 48034. — This disk is probably the most professionally
presented of the bunch, with good music and very well done title and
menu pages. It comes on a two sided disk. (There's an ad on the back

for other Foxx products). The games themselves aren't, however, all that
spectacular. Three of the four games are arcade type games, but use only
the lo-res capabilities of the Apple. That fact, in and of itself, wouldn't
be so bad were it not that the response to the joystick is so awkward. The
games all involve moving a yellow spot to capture green spots, while
avoiding dark blue spots.
The fourth game on the disk is fortunately good enough to make me
glad I spent the overly grand sum of $4.95. This game is called Word
Guess and vaguely resembles Mastermind. Guessing a three letter word
is the task. The computer informs you if the word you guessed is
alphabetically higher or lower than the selected word, and how many
of the letters you chose are correct. The addiction of the game is in trying to come up with a strategy to guess any selected word in as few
guesses as possible.
• X*Bert by Dave Harper, 1088 Browning Avenue South, Salem, OR
97302.
Guess what this game is like! Sure is. It loads with a title page and
goes into a demo mode on the first keypress. The game has absolutely
no options. Just press another key to begin. Control little X*Bert around
the pyramid of cubes and avoid the bouncing balls. The "A', "Z", ";" and
"." keys are the only ones you need. Although very similar to the coinop, there are a few differences that were either programming considerations or an attempt to make it "copyright-wise" different. The balls that
bounce down the screen are always white, those that move left to right
are blue and those that go right to left are red. The character that passes
for 'Golly' looks a bit like a soft boiled egg with shades, sitting in an egg
cup. "Like cool, man, really cool." My only substantive complaint is in
the starting position of the balls. They begin right on top of the board
without warning. And Coily doesn't hatch, he just appears at the bottom of the screen and then comes after you.
• THE RUINS OF KELEDOOR by Mark Whitehurst, 2538
Westbrook Drive, Franklin Park, IL 60131. — A member of the fantasy

playing game genre, The Ruins of Keledoor is similar to an adventure
game, but with hit points. The opening sequence is animated and
depicts your approach to the underground city of Keledoor. The objective is to find and recover five treasures while dispatching various inhabitants of the ruins. It has hi-res pictures of each room and accepts
a fair amount of the two word commands like a number of other adventure games. Vocabulary, however, isn't its strong point. It differs from
other adventure games by always showing the room from the player's
point of view The actual direction you are facing is shown at the bottom of the screen. It also makes nice use of sound. For example, the
doors squeak on their hinges when you open or close them.
I've played a number of games of this type before, but this one, for
some reason, was the first that had me questioning the "realities" of Fantasy Role Playing games. You see, now I'm not at all sure what there is
in these ruins to keep so many monsters alive. They must feed on the
anticipations of scrounding new adventurers. You can anticipate getting zapped many times as you wander these halls. The final difference
between TROK and most other adventure games is a true boon to the
poor typist. Game play is divided into commands or moves. Pressing
the 'ESC' key switches between these two modes. In the move mode,
moves are made by pressing only a single key.
Just like any other adventure game, save and restore functions are
mandatory and are provided.. Unlike other dungeon games, TROK
comes with hints and a complete map of level one is supplied. Very
civilized for $14.95!
Although none of the games I've reviewed here are likely to be published by one of the major software houses and probably will never make
the top ten, I enjoyed getting and playing each of them. Especially as
it made me feel like the good old days of computer games were back.
I can't really believe that those "good old days" were only two years ago.
Long live the rugged individualists who make and sell their own products! Care to join me in the under $30 search through the classifieds
in 1985?
John Besnard's designs include PENSATE and ARCADE BOOT CAMP
from Penguin Software.

STRATEGICALLY
SPEAKING

road to St. Lo wide open. This only
seems to happen when I land just a U.S.
cavalry unit to oppose it.
But you only have June 6 and June 8
turns to take advantage of this since
heavy German reinforcements arrive
on June 10. You can get into St. Lo in the
two turns, but remember to advance
supply units or holding the town may
pose a more difficult task.
Larry Brown, Atwater, OH
❑

Strategically Speaking is our column
of strategy game tips. This includes
wargames, sports games, economic and
other "real life" simulations, and classic
style games.
DISCLAIMER: The tips printed in
SS are those of the authors. We try to
avoid printing tips that don't work, but
we cannot playtest all, or even most, of
them. So, let the player beware.
Tips can be mailed to Strategically
Speaking, do Computer Gaming World,
P.O. Box 4566, Anaheim, CA
92803-4566. Try to keep tips under 250
words if possible. Payments for tips and
strategies used in CGW will be two
issues of CGW. Please specify if you are
already a subscriber when sending
your tips.

❑
• BATTLE FOR NORMANDY
Since playing two different computer
versions of SSI's Battle for Normandy,
I noted an interesting computer German strategy in solitaire play. It will
very often pull the German infantry
division off Omaha Beach and leave the

❑

111

• M.U.L.E.
Here are some tips for M.U.L.E.:
1)In tournament play, go for the
crystite. Food, energy, and Smithore
may appear to have equal or greater
pay-off in the early rounds, but none
provide the return on investment that
Crystite provides.
2)Don't sell energy to your opponent.
Get up for a drink of water or say you
forgot. Without energy, their production
shrinks to little or nothing!
3) If you get good position early on in
the game, keep the price of land high so
that your opponents will not be able to
buy choice plots that may be randomly selected by the computer. To do this,
push the Mechtron (when it is willing
to bid) as high as it will go.
4)Do not select the Packer as a
character. The Packer on the main
screen has a hole in the center that
sometimes makes catching the Wumpus difficult.
Dave Stone, Santa Ana, CA

❑
STAR LEAGUE BASEBALL
When playing against the computer,
take advantage of its conservative

fielding habits. Learning to steal second
base is a must as the computer is excellent at turning the double play on
ground balls. Take your runner exactly
two steps off first base. If the pitcher
tosses over, you still have sufficient time
to easily return to the bag. If trapped off
the bag, run toward second until the
first baseman throws to second. Then
stop! The shortstop will not attempt
to run down your man, thus allowing
you to safely return to first.
after a few throws to first, the pitcher
will make the pitch. You must run as
soon as the ball is released, but with the
proper jump, you will always be safe at
second unless against "Heat" with his
fast ball. If you are not sure about making second, hold up. The catcher always
throws to second and again the fielder
there will merely hold the ball until you
retreat to first.
Try to "run with the pitch". I will
often take a fast ball strike, especially
when ahead of the count, waiting for a
slow curve of change-up. This slow
pitch takes longer to reach the plate,
thus allowing my lead runner more
steps toward his next base. This is most
effective with a runner on second who
then has a better chance of scoring on
a single.
If you need base runners (as you are
behind several runs) try this trick. With
a man on second, bunt a high strike
pitch, which will roll down the third
base line. The pitcher will throw to
third even though there is no force play
on. By holding up your lead runner, you

end up with a fielder's choice and two
men on, although now in a force
situation.
Usually, aggressive base running is
best. However, if you have a runner
about to easily cross the plate after a hit,
try holding him up intentionally a few
steps from home. This will draw the
computer's throw to the plate, letting
your next lead runner occasionally advance an extra base on the play.
Rik Fontana, Lombard, IL

• NORTH ATLANTIC CONVOY
RAIDER
Do not be fooled by going after the
convoys. Stick to the task of taking on all
the British Ships of the Line. After they
have been destroyed, then (if you have
time) go after the convoys as there will
be many of them from which to choose.
Since you are now committed to taking on the British Ships of the Line, stay
in the upper half of the screen, and near
your Norwegian bases for refueling. Let
the British come to you. When they do
come near, use the fog banks and haze
from which to attack. Pay close attention to the conditions of the day and
night. After you steam out to attack
from the fog banks, retreat, then turn
again to the attack. Remember that the
Bismarck's gunners were the best of the
German Navy, so use them to the fullest.
In using this tactic, I have been successful 95% of the time with a kill ration
of 200 + points to the British's 50 points.
I was able to sink all four of the British
ships easily; the Victorious was hard to
catch, but it also fell to my gunners. I
have used the above strategy with six
ships and have been successful 75% of
the time.
G. Dwight Barber, Ashland, OR

• EASTERN FRONT—WINTER
In Chris Crawford's EASTERN
FRONT, the Germans must boldly advance deep into Russian territory early
in the game. Their success must be
rapid and dramatic during the summer.
But, once the weather turns, negates
mobility, and units become depleted,
the advance stops.
If they had a successful summer, the
Germans will be besieging Leningrad,
approaching Moscow, and entrenching
along the Donets. They will be facing

the remaining Soviet armies at
something close to parity. The Soviet
armies will be much stronger individually than were the units the Germans overran earlier. That, combines
with restricted mobility, will force the
Germans to abandon their reckless
tactics.
During MUD, the Germans should
concentrate on positioning their forces
for a winter offensive. And, when the
snows finally come, the Germans can
begin their offensive in earnest. The
snows will make any large encirclements more difficult and the
stronger Russian units will exact a
heavy toll from the German attackers.
But, as the overall number of surviving
Soviet units should be manageable, the
Germans can afford to become more
systematic in their advance. German
units should surround individual units
and small groups but not attack immediately. The unsupplied Russians
should be allowed to winter for a turn
before the actual battle takes place. This
tactic makes ever the most powerful
Russian groups easy to eliminate.
R. F. Thuriot, Racine, WI

TIPS FOR COSMIC BALANCE
When designing ships be sure to include armor. An armor level of at least
16% is best, with an upper limit of
20%. This will keep damage from a
burst of fire to about 3% of your ship
no matter how much damage
penetrated the shields. When firing at
armored ships, break your firing into
two or three time points for maximum
effect so that each burst can penetrate
the shields causing at least 12 points
of damage.
Keith Brors, SSI

QUESTRON
Ask questions first, fight later.
Chests hold the keys to. . . success.
Music soothes the savage fog. Match
your weapon to the monster. If one
weapon does not work, try another.
If you find a hole that has no rope, use
a rope of your own. Feeling closed in?
Running into closed doors? Have a
refreshing drink. Flattery will get you
nowhere, but thievery will get you
everywhere. Anyone who accepts
your gold will have something.
Mike Kawahara, SSI

I

I
I
I

PANZER-JAGD REVIEWED
by Jeff Seiken

BASIC INFORMATION
Name:
Type:
System:
#Players:
Price:
Author:
Publisher:

Panzer-Jagd
Wargame
Atari, C-64
One
$25 cassette, $30 disk
Richard W. Scorupski
Avalon Hill
Baltimore, MD

The Eastern Front. For aficionados, no need
exists to qualify the phrase with reference to
a particular war or time frame. It can refer only to one topic, the titanic clash of the Russian
and German military machines between the
years 1941-1945. For sheer significance, the
Eastern European Theatre of WW II ranks as
one of the most important campaigns of
modern times; for sheer drama, few subjects
present richer possibilities.
• Panzer-Jagd (PJ), one of Avalon Hill's
latest offerings in its line of Microcomputer
Games, is set in the middle year of the war,
1943. Billed as a game of tactical combat, PJ
enlists the player as the German commander,
with the computer serving as the Russian
leader. Playing time varies between one to four
hours, and the Atari version also contains a
simplified variation which can be played to
conclusion in about half an hour. On a complexity scale of 1 to 10 (10 being the highest),

map with an unseen square grid. The battlefield includes woods (approximately 34
heavy woods, open ground, a town, and a selfcontained stream of rather humorous dimensions which simply begins, runs straight for
five squares, and then just as abruptly terminates. The German commander's objective
is simple: he must clear the map of enemy
units within 19, 22, or 25 turns, depending on
the difficulty level selected. This can be accomplished through either the elimination of
all of the Russians or the capture of the town,
in which case the remaining Russians will
conduct a fighting withdrawal off-screen.
Once the player captures a map sector, the
computer will generate a new map and a new
complement of Russian units (bolstered by any
that successfully retreated off of the previous
screen) to contest the German advance.
Against this fresh commitment of enemy
troops, the German commander receives only those units which survived the previous battle, without reinforcement. At the top of the
screen, the computer displays a running total
of the player's score at the end of each turn,
based on the number of sectors cleared,
friendly and enemy units eliminated, and
turns elapsed. Total victory remains an ever
elusive goal for the German commander, as
the computer will endlessly create new maps
and enemies until the German platoons are
ground into the dust; in other words, play continues until the player no longer has any units
remaining. Thus, the enjoyment of PJ requires
the adoption of sort of an arcade mentality, for
the challenge lies in attaining a high score and
then attempting to better it during repeated
playings.
Units are rated for strength, range and
movement. Strength can be whittled down
through combat and when reduced to zero,
the unit is eliminated. German tank platoons
also possess a fuel allowance: a platoon expends varying amounts of fuel per turn depending on the distance moved and the terrain
type entered. After clearing a map sector,
however, each platoon receives a fresh allotment of fuel.

Avalon Hill rates PI as a 4. While also available
on the Atari, this review is based on the C-64
version of Pf.
The basic situation is abstract. The player
has at his disposal 12 platoons of Panther
(Pzkwvd) tanks, four Panzer III platoons, and
nine infantry platoons, plus some artillery
support. The inclusion of the diminutive
Panzer III alongside the Panther, the pride of
German tank design, seems like an odd combination; even the historical notes in the
rulebook admit that by 1943 the Panzer III was
obsolete and that production had ceased the
previous year. Perhaps the designer wished to
include a light vehicle that would be used
more for reconnaissance purposes than for
combat, as well as to add some variety to the
German attack force. Matched against this
assortment are four T-34/85 platoons, three
45mm anti-tank batteries, and three infantry
platoons. The two combatants maneuver and
fight across a randomly generated, rectangular

Tactically, much of the challenge of PI stems
from the Russian hidden unit capability. The
computer initially deploys all Russian in hidden status. The Russians do not appear on the
map screen until they enter open terrain or
become spotted. A unit is spotted when it fires
or an enemy unit moves adjacent to its location. German units also have spotted/unspotted status, which means that the
computer will plot the Russian moves as if it
did not see the unspotted German platoons.

PJ is a colorful game, but one must get accustomed to the unit symbolization. A rotund
armor silhouette represents the German tank
platoons, with the Panthers and Panzer III's
differentiated by the length of a gun barrel. Additionally, units are color-coded according to
status, but the light shading of Russian infantry platoons in the open and of unspotted German infantry platoons sometimes makes it difficult to distinguish between the two Problems
of this type, however, disappear after one or
two playings. On the positive side, PJ does contain some clever audio visual effects. When a
tank or anti-tank gun fires, a loud report
sounds and a tiny projectile flies from the
firing unit to the target, landing with a flashing
explosion and little cloud of smoke. Infantry
fire follows the same sequence, except that the
chatter of small arms replaces the first report.
Although all of this has no real bearing on the
game, it does contribute a nice bit of flavor to
the game.
With the Russians initially outnumbered
2.5:1, the player's first impulse is to the send
the German tanks forward in a wave, simply
overwhelming everything in their path. While
this approach will carry the Germans through
the first sector, the heavy casualties likely to be
incurred will be sufficient to leave the player
with a greatly depleted attack force for which
to clear the subsequent sectors. Ambushes are
particularly deadly, due to the sequence of
play. For example, during the Fire Execution
Phase, a previously hidden Russian tank platoon opens fire on an exposed platoon of Panthers. Since the Panther's movement has
already been plotted, the ambushed platoon
in the ensuing Movement Execution Phase
will continue along its previously determined
path, often directly towards the woods that
shield the Russian tank unit. Although the
Panthers can return fire the next turn, the Russian tank will still usually get the first shot,
which means that the German unit will be hit
twice before getting the opportunity to respond (assuming it survives). Similarly,
although the platoon can instead try to move
out of harm's way, the Russian will still get in
that second shot as all combat is resolved
before movement. A much better, more
economical strategy involves a slow, deliberate
advance. Try to ensure that no unit ends its
move in open ground; furthermore, keep platoons within supporting distance of each
other so that if one gets fired upon, one or two
others will be in position to return fire. When
friendly forces must cross an expanse of open
terrain, use your artillery to canvas the wood
squares that border the open area. Be careful,
though, that you do not send your units blithely into the path of your own artillery rounds
(the old "friendly fire" syndrome—it can happen). And, while each elapsed turn results in
the subtraction of a point from your score, the
lower casualties and the correspondingly
greater ability of your surviving units to capture additional sectors will more than offset
these point losses. The hide-and-seek nature
of combat helps to maintain player interest,
but even this aspect of PJ cannot prevent play

from becoming stereotyped before long. The
map screens lack variety and tactics quickly
degenerate into a matter of waiting for a Russian platoon to reveal itself and then hitting the
exposed unit with everything in range. As a
token gesture towards unit differentiation, the
effects of armor fire against infantry and artillery fire against armor are reduced, but this
is not enough. Anti-tank and infantry platoons
behave to much like tank platoons except for
the slower movement rates and reduced
ranges. Combined arms is a term that will
never enter the vocabulary of a PT player.
Moreover, since PJ's basic premise requires
the player to continue attacking till the point
of total elimination, even the most well-fought
of games always end on a Pyrrhic note. Variety
could easily have been introduced through the
inclusion of more distinctive terrain features,
such as a stream of realistic proportions that
winds its way across part of the screen with
bridges at one or two locations. Greater variations in the amount of forested terrain per
sector would further help to create a little uniqueness in the map screens. Specific unit
capabilities, such as armor overrun attacks
against units in the open could be added, too.
This would all not be asking too much of a
product that sells for $30.00 (disk), even one of
moderate complexity. As the game stands now,
Panzer-Jagd simulates tactical combat about as
well as Electronic Battleship portrays naval
warfare. Garners interested in tactical warfare
would be better advised to spend an additional
$10 or AH's TAC for SSI's Combat Leader.

PANZER-JAGD: ANOTHER VIEW
by Matthew Costello
Ed.: We received a second review of P1.
And they were so different in their final
analysis that we thought you might like
to see both. Matthew Costello covers
some of the same descriptive material as
Jeff which we, therefore omit. However
his evaluation differs so we thought you
might like to have it for comparison:
I'll admit that the lure of computer
games has, for me, worn off. There's a
sameness that touches each game and
a sterility that sends me running happily back to my boardgames.
Still there are exceptions, and
Panzer-Jgdismotflyne.Thisgam
of hide-and-seek tank conflict is engaging and entertaining.
The game is one of increasing tension. Your forces are getting whittled
away, while each new sector starts
fresh. As your orders are to go as far as
you can, you push your tank platoons
ever forward until you finally reach the
sector where the enemy overwhelms
you. The fact that the Russian forces are
hidden makes the game very similar to
Victory Games' Ambush. You are
always getting surprised and then trying to fight your way out. In the beginning, this is quite easy. Later on, it
becomes wiser to sneak the tanks into
town while using artillery to harass the
enemy.
In short, Panzer-Jagd is an exciting
computer simulation, with fuel requirements and tank specifications
playing an important role. With so
many of my games gathering dust on
my shelves, this one stays in my mind
as I look forward to one more armored
romp on the Eastern Front.

THE
COMMODORE
KEY
ADVENTURE GAMES

Roy Wagner

While Roy's column is directed to C-64 owners,
this particular installment will also be of interest
to all adventure gamers regardless of your
machine.

"You are standing at the end of a road before
a small brick building. Around you is a forest.
A small stream flows out of the building down
a valley.." — COLOSSAL CAVE
"You are standing in an open field west of a
white house, with a boarded front door. There
is a small mailbox here..." — HOUSE OF
BANSHI
• THE PAST
And so begins two of the best known computer adventure games. These games were
originally coded and played on large university computers. They were created by college
students "playing" with their campus computers, using the latest state-of-art coding.
From such "play" came a whole new genre of
computer games.
For those readers who don't know what an
adventure game is, I will offer a brief explanation, and thereby limit my discussion. Adventure games had their origins in DUNGEON
AND DRAGONS and similar role-playing
games. These were lead by a "master" who
created the world that others explored through
trial and error "movements" of characters.
These adventures gave the players the opportunity to explore the world of "make believe",
to encounter imaginative creatures of all kinds
and resolve challenging situations.

For the players of these games a vicarious
adventure could be experienced and challenging problems could be solved by groups of
players. To be good, these adventures required
a good master directing the adventure.
Expanding on this idea, Don Wood and Will
Crowthers created an adventure world and
put it into a computer program. In the program, two word commands from the player,
such as "GO NORTH", "GET SWORD", and
"CLIMB TREE", were used to interact with
the situation. These word combinations were
made up of verb and noun. The program contained a limited vocabulary. With each word
combination entered, you received a descriptive response. If the program did not understand your entry, you were told so.
This program was named the COLOSSAL
CAVE, but as it circulated from one college
campus and industrial computer to another,
it came to be known as ADVENTURE. About
this time one campus was working with a
computerized language parser. (A parser
breaks a sentence into its parts, and with these
parts interpret meaning.) The students used
this parser to create their own adventure, expanding on many of the original ideas from
COLOSSAL CAVE. This program, with its
sentence parser, was known as the HOUSE
OF BANSHI on Compuserve. It was originally
named from a nonsense word used at the MIT
Lab for Computer Science. This all-purpose
interjection was "Zork".
A young programming analyst who was
quite enthralled with the ADVENTURE program wanted to translate this concept to his
microcomputer (a TRS-80 with 16K). Scott
Adams succeeded in doing so and has, to date,
programmed and marketed 14 adventures for
the TRS-80, Apple, and Commodore 64. He
has also programmed graphic and
graphic/sound versions of these games. His
adventures still use the original verb-noun
parser.
• THE PRESENT
I do not know what ever became of Woods
and Crowthers, but their adventure game lives
on. A somewhat abridged version is available
for Commodore computers from most large
User Groups or mail order services that
distribute public domain software. This
original ADVENTURE game was converted
to our machine by Jim Butterfield, a recognized Commodore expert/guru.
Many commercial adventures have been
marketed using the two-word convention.
Most have not stood the test of time. They were
found awkward to communicate with due to
a limited vocabulary (you kept guessing words
hoping to find the correct combination of verb
and noun used by the programmer). Many required you to find a way out of complex
puzzles, situations, and circumstances.
Without hints, these became a quick lesson in
frustration and futility. An exception to these
frustrating adventures are those by Scott
Adams from ADVENTURES INTERNATIONAL. There are 14 available all programmed by Scott for several different
machines.

Marc Blank and Tim Anderson went on
from their friendship at MIT in 1977 to
become the founders of INFOCOM. Their
first release was a three part microcomputer
version of ZORK, their first adventure. The
original required nearly a megabyte (1 million
bytes) of memory on the mainframe computer.
The three part micro version has about twice
the material and uses only about one quarter
of a megabyte.
INFOCOM has set the highest standard for
"text only adventures" or "interactive fiction"
as it has come to be called. In these, you are
able to use complete and compound sentences
to communicate your movements and actions.
These adventures encompass several areas of
interest: pure adventure (Zork series), wizardry/fantasy (ENCHANTER and SORCERER,
also known as Zork IV and V), science fiction
(PLANETFALL, SUSPENDED, STARCROSS), mystery (DEADLINE and
WITNESS) and sea tales (SEASTALKER for
beginners or those 9 years and up, and CUTTHROAT for experienced adventurers). They
are challenging and backed with pleasant
humor. The documentation for each game is
sensational and very thorough. Hint books are
available for an extra cost and I highly recommend them. The hint books relieve nagging
frustrations and offer helpful clues. They suggest things to try that are not necessary for
completion, but add more fun to the game.
The INFOCOM parser is the best currently
available and continues to improve. The
vocabulary for their adventures is now over
1000 words per game. As a result, there is less
difficulty in communication, as the games
recognize synonyms.
Another type of adventure that is common
is one that uses graphics along with text interaction. Some simply use graphics to illustrate the scene, while other use graphics to
provide clues not expressed in the text, or provide animation to add excitement. Most "real
adventurers" feel that graphics take away from
what the imagination creates without them.
Graphics, however, use large amounts of
disk and internal memory. Disk accesses are
frequent and these take time away from actual
game play. This is a time when a picture is not
worth the words it takes to describe the scene.
What you see is often NOT what you can GET
or to which you can GO. Make sure any
graphic adventure you buy has the option to
turn off the graphic displays, as after the first
few times, the pictures are not worth the wait.
In my limited exposure to these, my favorite
one is Datasoft's DALLAS (based on the TV
series). It is all for fun, with great sound,
graphics, and animation.
• WHAT'S NEW
Scott Adams has written a new parser called
SAGA (Scott Adams Graphic Adventures)
which is being used to improve all of his
previous adventures and has been used to produce a new Questprobe series. This latter
series will give us specific adventures using
Continued on page 43

GOING BERSERK WITH
GALACTIC GLADIATORS
Johnny L. Wilson
One of the best selling series of sci-fi short
story anthologies is Fred Saberhagen's
Berserker series. In the first book of the series
there are two stories, in particular, that seemed like potentially good Galactic Gladiators
(GG) scenarios. The first one was "Stone
Place," which involved an assault on one of the
"Berserker" vessels. The attack plan called for
ramming the "Berserker" ship with an assault
ship and invading the enemy ship with the intent of reaching and destroying the central
"brain" of the robot vessel and destroying the
artificial intelligence. When the plan was first
attempted (at "Stone Place"), it was successful
in spite of the fact that the soldiers of Esteel
and Venus were opposed by numerous robots
within the maze of the "Berserker" vessel.
Johann Karlsen, brother to the charismatic
dictator (Nogara), was in high command of the
assault fleet and the Venerian Admiral Kemal
was the second-in-command. Karlsen's
paramour, Christina de Dulcin, was a prisoner
of war during the battle, so she is included in
the scenario as Chris, an unarmed civilian to
get in the assault team's way. In the story, the
soldiers used laser rifles to fight off the robots
but,as this is not possible in GG (since phaser
rifles cannot damage robots in GG), the teams
in both scenarios will be limited to gapers and
gemstones. In the "Stone Place" scenario, the
objective of the Berserker team is to protect the
artificial intelligence (the cursor position). The
cursor should be placed within the room on
the right side of the screen which has two entrances and a partial block in the upper left
hand corner of the chamber. The object of the
assault team is, of course, to reach and maintain control of the cursor position.

Below are the rosters for the two teams.
• The abbreviations are: St = Strength;
Dx = Dexterity; En = Endurance;
Sp = Speed; PR = Phaser Rifle; LS = Laser
Sword; Dr = Disrupter; HA = Heavy Armor;
LA = Light Armor; NA = No Armor;
Gs = Gemstone; Ga = Gaper; Ha = Hands;
h = human; w = Wodanite
BERSERKER TEAM
ALPHA:
BETA:
GAMMA:

St-27; Dx-9; En-27
Sp-5; PR; Dr; HA
St-26; Dx-11; En-26
Sp-5; PR; Dr; HA
St-25; Dx-9; En-27
Sp-5; PR; Dr; HA
ASSAULT TEAM

BROOM:
CHRIS:
HEMPHILL:
JOHANN:
KEMAL:
MITCH:
SALVADOR:

St-14; Dx-12; En-7
Sp-4; Gs; Gs; LA; h
St-13; Dx-12; En-6
Sp-4; Ga; Ha; NA; h
St-14; Dx-14; En-7
Sp-4; Gs; Gs; LA; h
St-14; Dx-13; En-8
Sp-4; Gs; Gs; LA; h
St-17; Dx-9; En-6
Sp-4; Gs; Ga; LA; w
St-14; Dx-12; En-6
Sp-4; Gs; Gs; LA; h
St-15; Dx-10; En-6
Sp-4; Gs; Gs; LA; w

While the scenario may seem to be onesided in favor of the "assault" team at first
glance, this is not true. Even if the "assault"
player is playing against the computer and is
continually being reminded that the robot
team is "'Trying to get out of this one alive,"

he/she should remember that the phasers
belonging to the robots have an unlimited
supply of ammunition, while the gemstones
of the humans and Wodanites have to have
maximum effect in order for the "assault"
team to win. The scenario is at its most interesting level when both teams are operated
by human opponents, and the solitaire player
should be warned that he/she is in for a long
night if the computer runs the "assault" team.
This is due to the fact that computer doesn't
seem to know when it's wise to retreat an
unarmed soldier who has expended all of his
ammo. Game play is slowed considerably
when the computer directs the larger team in
either of these scenarios.

The second scenario is derived from the
story, "THE MASQUE OF THE RED SHIFT'
In this story, Janda is a prisoner of war taken
by the "BERSERKER" ship and subsequently transformed into an assassin machine.
The primary objective of the machine Janda is to affirm and guarantee the death of
Johann Karlsen, the war hero and bane of the
robots. The battlefield is the great hall of
Karlsen's brother, Norara, the dictator of Esteel
and its empire. Nogara has turned his
brother's wake into a sort of state dinner.
Nogara and Governor Mical of Flamland,
Jamy (Nogara's official torturer and interrogator), and two guards (named Ander and
Berly for the sake of the scenario) are the only
ones armed. Normally, one would expect the
luminaries to be armed with ceremonial
swords alone, but in the interest of balance of
play (for the same reasons cited above) they are
given gemstones. The sole exception is Lucinda, the sister of the REAL Janda. In the story,
Continued on page 43

Name:
Type:
System:
Price:
Author:
Publisher:

Return of Heracles
Adventure
Apple, Atari, C-64
$32.95
Stuart Smith
Quality Software
Imagine, if you will, a game that encapsulates almost all of Greek mythology in one
colorful, fast-moving, joy-stick controlled
graphic adventure. Said game also has multivoice music, text, hi-res graphics effects,
animation, and the ability to save the game to
disk at will. Such a paragon exists, and is currently my favorite computer game despite
some flaws that I will point out later.
RETURN OF HERACLES (ROH) is a game
with many strengths and a few weaknesses.
The setting is mythological Greece in the time
of the Heroes and the Trojan War. The country and all the lands about are overrun with
supernatural menaces and monsters. Zeus,
King of the Olympian Gods, has decreed that
these menaces—such as the Nemean Lion, the
Calydonian Boar, and the immortal Hydra—
be destroyed. You enter, controlling one or
more heroes (as many as you want up to the
total number possible) to get the job done. Your
characters, whether they be Achilles, Jason,
Odysseus, or one of a host of others, move
about the countryside fighting, collecting
treasures, buying supplies and getting advanced training. If all goes well, you and your
friends will accomplish the 12 labors of Zeus
and get a fabulous reward. If not, you will all
die. I think you'll agree that's a fair set of alternatives for a computer game.
The game is transparent. The rules explain
themselves. Although documentation comes
with it, you'll never have to read it. You can
play poorly, but there is no way to do anything
wrong. And, unlike certain text adventures
where you have to find the right words or you
get nowhere, you will always be accomplishing
something as long as you just move the
characters.
The multiple screens with animated sprite
graphics (in the Atari version) and
accompanying music are strong aspects in
ROH. I counted over 30 different sprites
(player missiles) involved in the game, and
most of them are animated. Incidentally, your
foes are controlled by the computer, and they
are also animated, both in terms of moving on
screen and in seeming to act with purpose.
Having numerical attributes such as
strength, vigor, speed, wealth, armor, weapons,
the characters also have histories and per-

sonalities, allowing the player the true joy of
role-playing with them. Although the same
sprite is used to represent both Achilles and
Odysseus, the two heroes behave in entirely
different manners. I tend to get emotionally attached to the wily Ithakan, and try to save him,
but I use Achilles as a superhero and just
throw him into combat anywhere at any time.
Finally, the game teaches Greek mythology.
Before you are finished you participate in the
Founding of Thebes, the Sack of Roy, and explore the Labyrinth of Crete. You visit the Temple of Apollo at Delphi and climb the slopes
of Olympus. You earn either the favor or
disfavor of various gods. You have to solve the
riddle of the Sphynx.
I'd like to say this was a perfect game, but the
best I can say is that it's very good. There are
some weaknesses in it that slightly spoil it for
me. For the most part they seem to be failures
of imagination or minor errors in the research
of the game designer.
1. When you're dealing with gods, monsters,
dragons, lions, boars, hydras, and the like, you
don't need to use mice, rats, blobs, and
boulders as part of your monster menagerie.
Theseus didn't have to kill rats to make his way
through the Labyrinth of the Minotaur, nor did
he have to dispose of any blobs. For the same
amount of programming effort, Smith, could
have included wolves and chimerae as additional monsters; both of which would be truer
to Greek mythology and to the game's theme
of heroism.
2. There are a few errors in the text that are
totally unnecessary. Achilles gained his invulnerability from being dipped in the Styx,
not by being burned and then being restored
with ambrosia. If you're going to tell the myth
tell it right. Aeneas escaped from Troy so that
his descendants could found the city of Rome,
not Troy as is said in the text.
3. While Greek mythology is used as the
basis of the game, it is often portrayed inaccurately, and with scant attention to the importance of women in it. Helen of Troy and
Penelope of Ithaka are no better than puppets
waiting to be rescued. Major figures like
Medea and Ariadne don't appear at all. (Actually, Medea is in the game. You can talk to her
in Colchis, but she has no active role.) There
are plenty of other misconceptions and inaccuracies. Play it as a game, but don't think that
it substitutes for actually reading the myths
themselves.
A few other things should be mentioned.
Error-handling is superb. I couldn't make an
error with this game, except in judgement.
Documentation is excellent. Thirty-one pages
that thoroughly explain the game and the
unusual names that you will see throughout.
ROH will give many hours of playing pleasure,
as you can play the game again and All in all,
I highly recommend ROH to everyone who
would like a graphic role-playing adventure
with an unusual flavor to it.
Ken St. Andre

Name:
Type:
System:
#Players:
Price:
Author:
Publisher:

After Pearl
Wargame
Atari
1 or 2
$19.95
George Schwenk
SUPERware
Silver Spring, MD

How often can you find a 48K wargame
written in 100% machine-language for only
$20? After Pearl's price alone may, for some,
justify its purchase. However, before you
grab your checkbook, read on; you may find
that AFTER PEARL (AP) is not your cup of
tea.
AP is a World War II strategic-level
simulation of naval war in the Pacific
following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. It is joystick-controlled and played on
a large, scrolling map of the Pacific which
includes the major island bases from
Hawaii to Indonesia. Ships of the opposing
navies are represented by Red (Japanese)
flags or Blue (US) flags and the occupation
of island bases is represented by Red or Blue
anchors.
Three scenarios are included, but two of
them (Midway and Yamato) are introductory only and do not offer much play-value.
The third, WW II, is a 40-turn campaign in
which the objective is to accumulate 100 or
more points than the opponent by the end
of the game. This is accomplished by capturing and holding island bases.
When faced with overwhelming Japanese
numerical superiority in the beginning, this
may seem like a truly hopeless task for the
US player. If however, he can evade a major engagement with the enemy long
enough, reinforcements will begin to arrive
and, if properly deployed, will turn the tide
of war. Whether that happens soon enough
is the hinge upon which the future of the
Pacific swings.
AP is strictly an air/naval confrontation.
There are 113 ships in the game, representing the major US and Japanese aircraft carriers, battleships and cruisers of the war.
Among these, the most important are the
carriers. They are essential. Without the aircraft that the carriers transport you cannot
capture island bases and, without capturing
island bases, you cannot gain enough points
to win the war. Since the imperative here is
to capture and hold as many bases as possible for as long as possible, the capriciousness with which the computer decides

to allot carriers to you (the US player) can be
the determining factor in the game. The
Japanese build up such a huge lead in the
beginning of the game, that if the US player
hesitates too long (or receives too many battleships, instead of carriers, or has his
planes waste themselves in attacking inappropriate targets) it may be nearly impossible for him too overcome that lead by the
end of the game (even though by that time
he may control nearly every base on the map
except Japan itself, and may have destroyed
the entire Japanese navy).
It is here that some gamers may find AP
to be maddeningly restrictive. The computer makes all choices of reinforcement
schedules and nearly all choices pertaining
to target selection and the number of planes
to commit to a particular action (even
whether or not to attack). Virtually the only choices left for the player are what ships
to bring together, when, and where.
For those gamers who like greater control
over the actions of their pieces, AP will certainly prove to be too inflexible and with too
few factors (such a? weather, fuel, damage,
troops, supplies, etc.) influencing the outcome of engagements. However, for those
who are not dyed-in-the-wool wargamers,
and who simply enjoy strategic planning
and maneuvering without a lot of detail, this
game may prove to be a mental exercise in
the power of position. You certainly can't
beat the price.
Bob DeWitt

Name:
'Type:
System:
# Players:
Price:
Publisher:

Dreadnoughts
Wargame
Apple
1-2
$30.00
Avalon Hill Game Co.
Baltimore, MD

"Signal the Prinz Eugen to change course to
180:' ordered Admiral Gunther Lutjens. "If she

can sink the cruiser, we'll take on the King
George V. Tod fur der verdammt Englander."
("Death for the *0$-! English!")
Dreadnoughts provides an excellent opportunity for the player to attempt to perform better than the historical commander of the
Bismarck. Like its companion game, Under
Southern Skies, the solitaire version of the
game has a strategic display which portrays
the historical situation. The player attempts to
elude the famous "Swordfish Squadron" and
disrupt as much of the Allied shipping as
possible. Once the player's ships encounter

any Allied ship, the battle program is loaded
so that the tactical battle may be fought. Unlike
Under Southern Skies, there are no graphics
for the tactical display and the two player game
is entirely limited to the tactical display. The
strategic display is a map of the North Atlantic with terrain features that picture the
Norwegian, Spanish, French, German and
Greenlandish coastlines, as well as the United
Kingdom, Faeroes, and Iceland. The strategic
display is both esthetic and pragmatic. The
tactical program lacks the graphic embellishment of Under Southern Skies, but contains
much more information.
There are several frustrations that keep the
game from being as enjoyable as it could be.
First of all, the strategic game is extremely
slow during periods of poor visibility. Since
the human player has a battleship that can't
catch light cruisers, cruisers and destroyer
flotillas and the latter don't close range unless
a heavy cruiser or battleship has the Bismarck
in visual range, there is no real reason to give
a visual display after every minor contact.
Also, the artificial intelligence doesn't allow
the allies to fight unless they have numerical
superiority or are so close to the Germans
upon discovery that they can't escape. Nevertheless, the unnecessary visual displays and
the long wait for loading the tactical program
when not even one shot can be fired slows
down the game considerably and diminishes
the enjoyment of a potentially good game.
Another problem with the game occurs during the two player game. Occasionally, the program will delete superstructure damage and
the German has to start all over again (Note:
This happened twice during the same game.).
In spite of these flaws, there is much that is
pleasing about the game. It is extremely enjoyable to play against the computer and truly
experience (sometimes quite literally) the
"fog" of war. The hidden movement by the
Allies and the excellent use of weather, time
and visibility makes each game a real adventure. The decision on whether to break radio
silence or not when a floatplane is lost adds
an exciting dimension to the game. After playing the game several times, it appears that it
is better to lose a few floatplanes than to break
silence early in the game. The game is also
very satisfying to those of us who enjoy playing naval miniatures. The damage displays are
familiar to the miniatures buff and provide a
comfortable feeling when one first encounters
the game. Further, the rule book contains
some of the finest documentation available for
creating one's own scenarios using the battle
program. The rules themselves are clear and
concise and contain no ambiguities.
Since the game bears so much resemblance
to naval miniatures, the strategies are similar.
When there are capital ships on the tactical
display, it is usually better for the Bismarck to
make them her primary target. Since the Prinz
Eugen has a poorer chance of penetrating a
capital ships armor, it is usually better for her
to make a lighter ship her target. Further, I
recommend that both the Prinz Eugen and the
Bismarck use their secondary guns only on
destroyers and convoys. There are two reasons

for this suggestion. First of all, once the
Bismarck and Prinz Eugen are engaged in battle, they will tend to lose their secondary guns
first as they are more easily penetrated by
smaller shells. Therefore, the player should use
them while he has them. Second of all, once
the German ships engage Allied capital ships,
they will need all the primary gun ammo they
can get.
Another point to remember concerns the
strategic portion of the game. Note that when
the player attempts to take a short-cut and
head directly for the convoy routes, he is
almost certainly spotted by the famous
"Swordfish Patrol". However, if the player will
use the historical route printed on page six of
the documentation, he will often avoid baffling the "Swordfish Patrol" until later in the
game. In this way, victory points will be totalled up more swiftly.

Johnny L. Wilson

Name:
Type:
System:
#Players:
Author:
Price:
Publisher:

Breakthrough The
Ardennes
Wargame
Atari, C-64
1-2
David Landrey
Chuck Kroegel
$59.95
Strategic Simulations

• HISTORY
In mid-1944, Nazi Germany was on the
brink of defeat. Hitler needed something to
gain a more favorable position in the peace
negotiations. That something was a counterattack from the Ardennes with the objective
of capturing the port of Antwerp. The Ardennes area was not heavily defended and used
primarily as a resting place for worn out units
or a place to bring in new units.
Over the next few months, the Germans
secretly built up 13 Infantry and seven Panzer
Divisions along a narrow front. These forces
were opposed by five Infantry Divisions, three
Cavalry Regiments, and one Armored Division. On December 16th, 1944 the Germans
launched their offensive, commonly referred
to as The Battle of the Bulge.
• GAME PLAY
Breakthrough In The Ardennes (BIA) is the
simulation of the Battle of the Bulge from
Strategic Simulations Inc. It comes on both
sides of a standard ATARI disk with side one
being the set-up and side two the actual play
disk. BIA does not require BASIC and you do
not need a joystick to play. You may take the
German side against a computer American or

you may get a friend and chose your side.
There are three scenarios to chose from with
the longest one being the entire 12 days of the
battle and requiring about five hours to play.
The game comes with two plastic maps of the
Ardennes area. Flip the map over and on its
backside you will see the Ardennes area as it
would look in the middle of winter. Scenarios
one and three begin on December 16th, and
scenario two begins on December 21st.
BIA is played on a large scrolling map with
the top of the screen being East and the right
hand edge being North. It is a hex grid with
each hex representing two miles. Terrain includes woods, rivers, roads, rough ground, and
towns. Combat units are also represented by
symbols which differentiate between Infantry,
Airborne, Engineer, Armor, and Cavalry. Units
are further distinguished by Brigade, Division,
Battalion, or Regiment. Each unit also carries
it historical identification. The American
player may have fifty-seven units at any one
time while the German may have as many as
seventy units.
The game is considered to be at the advanced level and new computer wargamers
should allow extra time to become familiar
with the system. BIA is played in 12 phases
which constitute one turn or one day in the
battle. The phases simulate air missions, supply, reinforcement, organization, movement,
and combat. Both players have two movement
and combat phases.
The basic unit of measure is the operation
point. Units are given a certain number of
operation points each turn which are expended by performing actions. These actions
may include movement, changing to or from
travel mode, constructing or destroying
bridges, combat, and fortification. In addition
to operation points, players also receive air and
artillery points. The number of Air points is
determined by the current weather conditions
while artillery points are always the same for
each Divisional pool. You may then allocate artillery points from the Divisional pool to the
individual units. Air points may be used for
interdiction, ground attack support, or supply air drops. Artillery points simply beefup the
combat capability of the unit.
Supply plays a critical role in the game. To
be supplied, a unit must be able to trace a line
of supply no more than two hexes, unblocked
by enemy hexes, to a supplied road.
Another feature of BIA is the Unit
Organization Phase. In this phase you may
assign artillery, allocate replacements, destroy
or build bridges, make supply air drops, and
build-up or break-down Regiments and Divisions. The capability to re-organize your units
adds a new dimension to the play of the game.
• ANALYSIS
As an Advanced Level simulation, BIA
achieves all of its objectives. I like the way air,
artillery, supply, reinforcement, mobility, efficiency, and combat capability have been
blended. I especially like the build-up and
break-down capability of units. This game
gives a realistic feeling simulation of the Battle of the Bulge. On the negative side, I miss
using the joystick to select units and corn-

municate with the computer. Having to press
number or letter keys for each selection slows
the game down quite a bit. The build-up and
break-down of units could also be a little more
detailed and provide a little more control of
available unit organizations. Overall, SSI has
brought us another excellent simulation which
can provide a real challange for the computer
wargamer.
Mark Bausman

Name:
Type:
System:
#Players:
Author:
Publisher:

F-15 Strike Eagle
Arcade/Strategy
Atari, C-64
One
Sid Meier, Grant Irani
Microprose Software
Hunt Valley, MD

Having dispatched a Mig 21 over Syrian territory with a Short-Ranged Attack Missile
(SRAM), I continue flying toward my primary
target — Syrian Air Command Headquarters.
Radar picks up four surface-to-air missiles
(SAMS), and two enemy aircraft on an intercept course. Arming a medium ranged missile
(MRM), I fire at the first aircraft. Turning my
attention to the four SAMS, I dispatch two
flares and engage electronic counter measures
(ECM). Two missiles disappear from my radar
display. A third explodes on a flare. I watch as
my missile impacts the first aircraft and my
computer display flashes the message,
"Enemy Plane Hit". The target is rapidly approaching. Arming bombs, I dive toward my
target ignoring the last enemy aircraft and
SAM. Dropping the bombs, I pull up and see
on my computer display that the target is hit.
I immediately turn to line up a secondary
target, WHAM! WHAM! I'm hit by the last
SAM and an enemy SRAM from the last
enemy aircraft Pulling up out of the wild dive,
I'm treated with a hail of cannon fire from the
enemy aircraft. Too low to bail out, my mission
ends as I slam into the ground!!
This is the action in Microprose's newest
game F-15 STRIKE EAGLE. The action is fast
and furious. Not paying attention or, conversely, concentrating too hard on one target can
lead to disaster. The game has three levels of
play. The Arcade level is purposely simple, so
that you can get used to the game. It allows no
rolls. The Pilot level simulates the situation in
a real aircraft, with rolls, loops, etc. The Ace
level is the most difficult. In it the SAMS, heatseeking missiles, and enemy aircraft are hard
to avoid.

The graphics are excellent, considerably better than Microprose's MIG ALLEY ACE. The
game has a 3D display through the cockpit.
Not only are there air targets, but ground
targets as well. Bombing ground targets, while
dodging enemy aircraft and missiles, is your
primary goal. Unfortunately, the ground
targets are only triangles on the ground, not
the buildings I expected to see. This, however,
is minor and doesn't detract from the game.

As pilot, you're treated with a cockpit
display and a Heads Up Display (HUD). The
HUD includes a Navigational Chart display
which shows enemy positions, your base, and
your aircraft position; and a radar screen
which can be set to short, medium, or long
range. This display shows SAM launches,
enemy aircraft, and ground targets as they
come in view. Above the radar are four warning lights showing radar lock, infra-red heat
source lock, low altitude (below 600 ft), and
low fuel warning. And a weapons status
display (WSD) in the form of a picture of your
aircraft showing all weapons on your aircraft.
At the bottom center is the amount of fuel in
the tanks.
In the center is the cockpit view. On this are
pitch lines to show aircraft attitude, and an Air
to Air Reticle (put enemy aircraft in the center
of this to score gun hits). Also included is an
Air Target Designator box (showing where an
approaching enemy aircraft will appear), and
a Missile Designator Box (showing where an
approaching missile will appear). These boxes
move in relation to your aircraft and enemy
aircraft and missile movement.
A pilot can bank, roll, dive, and do other
maneuvers. You can do a Split S, an Immelman, Jinking, High/Low Speed Yoyos,
Loops, and any other combat maneuver you
deem necessary. All these are explained in the
excellent documentation included in the
game.
The only problem with the game is an omission in the documentation. The manual says
you have to return to the base after completing
a mission to rearm, refuel, and repair your aircraft. This means landing at your base. No
where in the documentation does it tell you
how to land. After several tries, and several
crashes, I found that you have to approach the
base at below 1000 ft and you are automatically landed.
F-15 has seven missions. Six are based on
historical situations, and one is hypothetical.
Mission selection is done only in the beginning of the game. The six historical missions
are Libya (1981), Egypt (1973), Haiphong (1972),
Syria (1984), Hanoi (1972), and Iraq (1981). The
hypothetical mission is the Persian Gulf (1984).
Overall, F-15 is an excellent simulation. If you
liked Mig Alley Ace, you will love F-15 !
Hosea Battles, Jr.

DISPATCHES
Insights From the
Strategy Game
Design Front

Dan Bunten
of Ozark Softscape
Conventional wisdom has it that to be successful, games should be
available in versions for all of the major home computers. The list of
target machines currently includes: the Apple II family, Atari (48K),
Commodore 64 and the IBM PC/PC Jr. Also to be considered as potential targets are the Macintosh and the Amiga (to be introduced by
Commodore).
Typically, a designer creates a design for a particular machine and
then converts that design to the other targets. The word port was derived
from portage to describe this process. Port can be a noun as in "we have
just finished the Apple port of Seven Cities," or it can be used as a verb
as in "we will port it to the IBM next."

Since each of the target machines have their own strengths and
weaknesses, it becomes very difficult to design a product that will run well
on all of them. One strategy for handling the problem of ports is to write
for the Lowest Common Denominator (LCD). The most obvious examples
of this approach are the "text only" games. Millionaire, and its sibling
games Baron and Tycoon, use the strategy to perfection. Not only are they
"text only" but they are also written in basic so that ports are a trivial
matter. The publisher can thus produce these games on any machine that
has a video screen, a keyboard and Basic (which includes the TRS-80 and
CP/M as well). Although I personally find Millionaire very boring and
tedious, the advantage of this approach is obvious.
Infocom has also bought the LCD strategy. They will typically introduce all versions of a particular product at one time because their ports
are so easy. I don't really disagree with their perception that text imagery can be as vivid as a hi-res screen. However, in reality, they do what
they do because it's very profitable in their particular niche.
There are other types of LCD approaches that include graphics and
sounds. These primarily revolve around designing games first on the
Apple II and then porting them to the other machines. This can be done
fairly successfully if the design is very strong or unique. Good examples
of this would include Pinball Construction Set and One on One. There
are, however, numerous bad examples of Apple programs ported to the
Atari/Commodore world (where more can be done with graphics and
sound than an Apple could not dream of). In general, if a design is built
around a limited machine you cannot take advantage of the more powerful features of another machine without a major re-write. Even with such
a revision, it is usually not possible to create a game that would handle
the intended theme as well as on original design for the high end
machine.
Another way to handle ports is simply not to do them. Some small
publishers have decided to concentrate on a single machine and not ever
attempt ports. For instance, Access — who produced Beach Head and
Raid Over Moscow for the C-64 — apparently have decided to specialize
on the graphic and sound features of that machine. But their products
look more like "demos" than detailed games. The short side of concentrating on a single machine is that experienced designers (who will
spend as much as a year on a single title) can't support themselves on
revenues from one machine. Thus, people like Access end up with great
graphics but weak game designs.
Faced with these problems, several groups (including Ozark Softscape
and Free Fall) have decided that we will design for the highest featured
machine of a group and then cut the design as needed to fit into the
other targets. We select either Atari or Commodore as our first machine
and then port the design to the rest. When we go to the Apple (or IBM)
port we give up our "extra" colors and use the built in ones. We also
reduce our sounds to only those absolutely necessary as sounds require
processor attention (a very scarce resource) and can only use one voice.
We replace sprites with "bit shapes" and just have to live with the reduced performance. Despite all of the compromises required, we still
end up with games that are well received on the Apple and IBM.
(Owners of those machines bought them fully aware of the graphic and
sound limitations.) The approach can be difficult to implement in some
cases (e.g. M.U.L.E. can't be done for an Apple). In general, porting
games in this way insures that the unique features of each machine are
utilized.
But there are always those petty detractors who will point out in
magazine reviews that the theme music on the Atari had four voices
while the Commodore only had three (and the Apple had none). Or that
the Commodore version takes almost four minutes to load. To them I
say "look at the hardware specs!" We aren't responsible for designing
hardware. We just write games!
Next time you pick up a game try to decide if the original was written of your machine or ported over. If it looks like a port but is still a
good game, then just enjoy it. If, however, it's a shabby "knock-off;' then
gripe to the publisher, write to computer magazines and let yourself be
heard. Sometimes you have to let people know where you draw the line!
Dan Bunten is the author of Computer Quarterback, Cartels & Cutthroats, and Cytron Masters—all available from Strategic Simulations. He
is the lead designer of the Ozark Softscape group which wrote M.U.L.E.
and Seven Cities Of Gold—both available from Electronic Arts.

REPLAY (cont.)

NAME GAME (cont.)

SUPERPOWERS (cont.)

The final net score was 1084, a decisive
USN victory:

an investment tax credit of 10% of the purchase price. (This is separate from the
depreciated amount and is applied directly
against the tax you would owe otherwise). If
your equipment investment is small, you can
simply write it off in one year, but you lose the
tax credit.
However, this is just the beginning. If you
work at home, you can deduct a portion of
your rent, power, heat, and telephone bills. (If
you rent a separate office, all the associated
costs are deductible). Games, joysticks, blank
disks, printer paper, COMPUTER GAMING
WORLD, lunch with a collaborator, trips to the
arcade, game conventions: all these are
deductible, as is driving there (@ $.21 a mile). If you
videotape your playtest sessions (which can be
very helpful in debugging), you can add a VCR
to the list. If (like us) you work better with
music or use it to drown out distractions, you
can write off your stereo system — or at least
that part of its cost that represents its business
use.

mode is not even hinted at in the body of the
rules. But, if you study the appendix and really
think about what you are reading, there it is.
The combat results are based on the difference
between the Attack Factor and the Defense
Factor of the two units involved. The contribution to the Attack Factor from the attacking
unit's strength is taken as the strength points
divided by four and truncated. Thus, both of
the tank units in the two cases above contribute three to the Attack Factor; they are
identical in combat. The presence of one unit
nearby in support mode (regardless of how
weak it is) in the second case gives a bonus of
three to the Attack Factor. The effect of that
one supporting unit is thus equivalent to
doubling the strength of the attacking tank
unit! I will not argue whether this is losing
touch with a true representation of modern
warfare, since my example would occur only
rarely (that remnant is dead meat if you are not
pulling it back to reorganize and rebuild).
Rather, I want to show that you can't just scan
the rules and sit down to play with any hope
of figuring out what is happening to you and
why.

Strategic
Ships Sunk
Ships Damaged

USN
99
1086
61

IJN
77
0
85

Total

1246

162

At the conclusion of the game, hindsight
reveals that I sank Akagi, Kaga, Soryu, Zuiho,
Jintsu, plus 5 DD's, 15 TR's, 3 APD's, 2 MSW's
and 1 DE. Hiryu had 30% damage. Hosho had
zero damage, but no surviving aircraft. The
following IJN ships had light to moderate
damage: battleship Kongo, 4 CAs, 2 DD's, 2
MSW's and 5 auxiliary ships.
No USN ships were sunk, but Yorktown was
crippled, and two other CV's lightly damaged.
Five USN CAs were badly damaged, and two
of these were dead in the water and burning
There were heavy aircraft losses on both sides
• CONCLUSIONS
The night offers the best concealment. You
should use the night turns to set up early morning surprises for the enemy. Hit and run with
your CV's. Position many air search missions
in the pre-dawn hours to hopefully spot the
enemy at daybreak, before they find you. In
general, by mid-morning the enemy will have
found your CV's, and this is not a good time
to be in range.
It is important to try to get the first air strike
against the enemy CV's before they hit your
CV's. If several IJN CV's are crippled early, the
program apparently concentrates on rotating
defensive fighter cover over its crippled CV's,
and does not ready many offensive strikes.
The program apparently neglects to cover its
transports with battleships, even when they
are very close to US warships. The USN
cruisers are a powerful force. The USN player
should send cruisers to hunt the transports. If
you sink enough transports, the IJN cannot
capture Midway. I doubt this tactic would
work against most players who would probably send BB's to cover the transports.
The program apparently advances the IJN
fleet to Midway even after it has no chance of
capturing Midway. It is slow to retreat even
after it loses most of its airpower.
I lost about 20 aircraft in ditchings at Midway or TF12. Most of these were due to my
carelessness, but some were due to my optimistic estimates of endurance and range. It
is important to try to make the first strike at
long range, even if you must sacrifice some
returning pilots.
Carrier Force is a superb game, but I would
like to see a second edition with improved
solitaire play for the Midway scenario.

Q: There must be a catch to this.
A: There are several. Since the IRS has a vast
bureaucracy to support and the CIA, the UN,
Social Security, a nuclear arsenal, foreign aid,
etc., etc., to pay for, it takes a dim view of any
procedure that might place any of your money
out of its reach. Therefore, you should get in
the habit of saving receipts, keeping records,
and making notes to prove expenditures and
show the business functions of trips and
meals. Second, all expenses must be
"reasonable and proper" — your definition
unless you're audited, theirs if you are. (Make
sure yours is defensible!) Finally, unless you
make money occasionally (two of five years is
the standard guideline) or can show that it's
really your primary occupation, they will call
it a "hobby" and throw out all your deductions.
Q: Should I turn pro?
A: Only you can answer that. If it's what you
really want to do, give it a try. If you simply
think it's an easy way to make a buck, try it,
anyway: it will be what Anne Westfall calls "a
learning experience".
Q: How do I go about it?
A: Play with your computer. Take classes.
Read books (not just computer books), see
movies, play games (and not just computer
games). Join users' groups. Talk. Play more
games: analyze them, enjoy them, criticize
them. Change the rules, experiment, improve
them. Spend every waking moment at your
computer — and as much time as possible
away from it. Find a good, original idea; take
the time to develop it properly; polish it until
it shines. When you're really satisfied with it,
show it to a successful publisher, and be
prepared to polish it until they are satisfied.
Whatever you do, don't leave your job — or
school — without cash in hand and money in
the bank.
Copyright © 1984 by Jon Freeman.

Perhaps "lack of documentation" is not the
right rap for the 1985" games; there are lots
and lots of games out with much worse
documentation. However, the rules for the
"1985" games are cursory and leave several
significant questions as to how to play well. I
know how to fire smoke with my artillery and
I can find the effect of smoke on movement,
but I can not find any effect on sighting
through smoke or conducting combat into or
out of smoke (could it be that we can see right
through it?). Is it possible that there is no blocking terrain for sighting purposes? I can find a
table which says that a unit in clear terrain can
be spotted from five hexes away, but I can not
find if it makes any difference whether the
four intervening hexes are clear or forest (that's
four miles of woods you are sighting through).
I could mention several other puzzlements I
still have about the games, but none of these
keep me from playing. I would just like to be
aware of the same details of the simulation
which Roger Keating certainly knew when he
programmed that computerized opponent
that I have so much trouble beating.
• FINAL NOTES
My gripes about documentation aside, the
three "1985" games are all worthwhile simulations. They will appeal mostly to the
"somewhat more serious" wargaming audience. Gamers with no experience beyond
Frogger will find them too complicated, while
hard-core students of current military science
will complain that they do not cover the subject in enough depth. If you want to try one,
start with Germany 1985. The three games are
similar enough that if you like it, you will also
like the other two. If you don't like it, there is
little chance that you would want the others
also.

SCORPION'S TALE (cont.)

KEY (cont.)

GLADIATORS (cont.)

One room that's interesting is the one with
the bars on the wall. Another place that bears
examining is the one with the piled-up bunks,
behind which is a door. Now, if you could just
get those bunks out of the way, you'd be able
to continue. Wonder how you could move
those bunks? And, even more important, keep
them out of the way?

the MARVEL COMIC BOOK HEROES (Hulk,
Spiderman, etc.). Commodore has licensed the
first four to be produced for the Commodore
64 before any other machine.

she picks up a table knife as her weapon. Unfortunately, as a vibro-knife (the closest GG
equivalent) will not affect a robot, she is armed
with a gaper in its place. The "Guests" should
defend the cursor position on the extreme
right side of the screen, behind the "coffin" of
Johann Karlsen.
The • Robot should read: JANDA: St-26;
Dx-10; En-26; Sp-5; PR; Dr; HA. The • Guests
roster (all human) follows:
ANDER:
St-14; Dx-14; En-7
Sp-4; Gs; Gs; LA
BERLY:
St-12; Dx-13; En-8
Sp-4; Gs; Gs; LA
CALI:
St-14; Dx-12; En-8
Sp-4; Ha; Ha; NA
DELILAH:
St-13; Dx-14; En-7
Sp-4; Ha; Ha; NA
ISIS:
St-12; Dx42; En-8
Sp-4; Ha; Ha; NA
JAMY:
St-14, Dx-13; En-8
Sp-4; Gs; Gs; LA
LUCINDA:
St-14; Dx-12; En-6
Sp-4; Ha; Ga; NA
MICAL:
St-13; Dx-14; En-7
Sp-4; LS, Gs, NA
NOGARA:
St-14; Dx-12; En-8
Sp-4; Ga, Gs, NA
THURMAN:
St-13; Dx-12; En-6
Sp-4; Ha, Ha, NA

Once you've done that, you can proceed to
the room beyond, which has a ladder going
down. Of course, you're a little nervous about
using it, considering what just happened with
the other one, but you don't have a choice, so
down you go! Crash! Talk about deja vu! Fortunately, this ladder isn't totally destroyed, but
you can't climb back up again. At least, not at
the moment.
So, you might as well go on. Err, well, maybe
you don't want to, since the next room houses
a giant, sleeping squid. Hmmmmm. Now
what? If you remember the saying about
"sleeping dogs", you shouldn't have a problem.
In the next room along, you find...a chest!
Wow! Could this be it? Maybe. Why not leave
it for now, and continue on? The next room
doesn't look too promising; all it has in it are
some skeletons. Still, best not to take anything
for granted here!

And in the last room is...another chest!
However, now you have a little problem. You
can only get one chest back to the ship above,
and you can bet your little pink diving booties
that only one of these chests has something
worthwhile in it. Which one? Well, there's the
hard way (trial and error), and the easy way (if
you have the right thing with you).
Once you know which chest is the right one,
you have to get it outside the ship. This is pretty easy, actually, just look around..but be very
careful! Now comes the hard part, getting
yourself out and back topside.
When you think about it, though, it really
isn't all that hard, after all. First you have to get
back up to the middle deck. The partly-broken
ladder is almost in reach; if you were just a little taller, I'll bet you could make it.
After that, you need to make your way up
where the other ladder used to be, the place
where the mast with the rope is. This one is
a little trickier. The ladder is gone, so you can't
use it at all. But, if you could do something
about that rope? However, the rope is a bit out
of reach. Still, if you looked carefully at
everything you saw along the way, you should
have an item with you that will help you now.
And once you're back on the top deck, you just
have to go up, and you're done! Congratulations, you can retire at an early age!
Until next time, happy adventuring!
The Scorpion's Tale is copyrighted © 1984 by
Scorpia, all rights reserved.

INFOCOM'S newest release is CUTTHROATS, an adventure wherein you seek to
find treasure from one of four possible sunken
ships. The ship you explore is randomly
selected each time you play. They will soon be
releasing an adventure based on the popular
book trilogy/radio show/TV production,
HITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAXY.
As to future INFOCOM releases, Michael
Berlyn has said they are working on a parser
that is "100 times smarter" for an adventure
that is "20 times the size of their current
releases.
A new direction in adventure games, of a
vein similar to the above mentioned AHGTTG,
has been released by TRILLIUM (related to
SPINNAKER). They have produced an entire
line of games produced in collaboration with
famous science fiction authors. These include:
FAHRENHEIT 451 by Ray Bradbury,
RENDEZVOUS WITH RAMA by Arthur
Clarke, AMAZON by Michael Crichton,
SHADOWKEEP by Alan Dean Foster, STARMAN JONES by Robert Heinlein, NINE
PRINCES IN AMBER by Roger Zelazny, and
THE GRAND ADVENTURE by Philip Jose
Farmer. (Quite a library of authors!) I am currently completing FAHRENHEIT 451. I find
it to be different from other adventures. It fills
a gap between the pure text and the graphictext adventures. It is a detailed adventure requiring a lot of work, some would call it
'tedious. It comes with excellent documentation (general instructions, a list of all
vocabulary, and some hints). The game uses
both sides of two disks and had a very
reasonable retail price of $32.95. A more complete review will appear in another issue of
this magazine.
• THE FUTURE
The future is very bright for adventure gaming. With several types of adventures from
which to choose, they appeal to all ages. Scott
Adams/COMMODORE, INFOCOM, AND
TRILLIUM along with several other software
companies are going to keep us well supplied
with new and different adventures. We should,
for instance, soon be seeing adventures released that interact with laser video disk
players.
For those needing some ideas about holiday
gifts for C-64 owners, this column recommends the following: adventures (any from
INFOCOM), role playing (Ultima II or III,
Questron), arcade (Jumpman, Lode Runner, or
any from ATARI, except Robotron), nonarcade like sports game (any from SSI, or
SUMMER GAMES), wargames (Combat
Leader or Operation Whirlwind), miscellaneous greats (Flight Simulator II, Pinball
Construction Set, Mule, Archon, Chess from
Odesta, Millionaire, and Relax!).
Let me know what you think of these and
other games that I haven't mentioned. Have a
fun and safe holiday season.

All right, you Saberhagen fans, Go
BERSERK!

I

There were 342 RIDs turned in by press time for this
issue.
Newly rated games and updated game ratings are
listed with bold type in the table on page 46. The
breakdown by machines was: Atari — 42%; Apple
33%; C-64 — 19%.
GAME RATINGS
The table on page 46 includes games evaluated by
our readers. For a game to be included in this listing
it must first have been offered for rating in our regular
R.I.D. rating system. Games offered for evaluation are
those covered in the magazine and/or those having a
good sales record during the time of evaluation. Once
offered for evaluation, the game must have been
evaluated by a sufficient number of readers to be included in the results. Any game not evaluated by at least
10% of the respondents was not included in the results.
Games were rated on a scale of 1 (terrible) to 9
(outstanding). Respondents were asked to consider
such things as PRESENTATION (graphics, sound,
packaging, documentation); GAME DESIGN (design,
playability, interesting?); LIFE (does the game wear
well?)
RID #17 (Use card provided)
On this page a number of games and articles are
listed for evaluation. Please take time to evaluate these
games and articles. Use the guidelines above for game
evaluation. Leave blank any game which you have not
played enough to have formed an opinion.

WRITING FOR
COMPUTER GAMING WORLD
Almost all of the articles appearing in CGW
come from active readers of the magazine. We
invite your submissions of articles, artwork,
humor, etc. Our standard pay is two cents per
word for copy, and artwork is negotiated on an
item by item basis.
REVIEWS
The majority of articles in CGW will be
reviews. These will fall into two categories: 1)
(i)micro-reviews(r) of 300 - 600 words; and 2)
(i)feature reviews(r) of about 1000 - 2000 words.
Micro-reviews should contain the following:
1) The information which goes into the Basic
Information Box (see this issue); 2) General
description of the fiction/background of the
game; 3) A more detailed description of the
graphics, documentation, and above all the
game design itself; 4) A discussion of the
strong and weak points of the game.
The strengths and weaknesses that you write
about should be those of that specific game,
not those of the game type; 5)Possibly include
some hints on playing the game well; 6) A
summary of the game which might suggest
what type of computer gamer will want to buy
this game and/or what type of gamer will want
to pass it by.
A micro-review cannot cover most games in
detail but can give an overview of the game to
a potential purchaser and, if appropriate, suggest some strategies for playing the game well.
Any game released in the past 12 months is
eligible for a micro-review if it has yet to be
covered in CGW.
A Feature Review will do everything that a
micro-review does but in greater detail. The
subject of a feature length review should be a
new game (again, released within the last 12
months). When appropriate, CGW will print
reviews of books, hardware, etc. as they relate
to the computer gaming field.

Please rate articles on the basis of the article itself,
not your opinion of the game being reviewed. Enter a
zero for any article that does not interest you.
PLEASE MAIL RID #17 CARD BEFORE JANUARY
1985.

STRATEGY AND TACTICS
While many reviews will contain suggestions on strategy and tactics, we also welcome
articles which are (i)primarily(r) strategy/tactics oriented. This type of article will go into
detail concerning what techniques provide
high scores or help a player better attain the
goal of the game.
SCENARIOS AND REPLAYS
Formal and informal scenarios can be
designed for some computer games. A formal
scenario is one which uses the scenario
designing routine of the game, as in SSI's
Galactic Gladiators. An informal scenario is
one in which the writer makes up an alternate
goal for the game with success being determined independently of the game's stated
scoring system. An example of this would be
the "Castle Wolfenstein Dash:' in which a
point is awarded for each room entered minus
one point for every guard killed.
Replays are reports of the action on a turn
by turn or other basis from a replaying of a
popular game which has been previously
reviewed. These should be written in such a
way as to give some idea of the feel and the
flow of the game .
FORMAT
The preferred format in which to send your

copy to us is via telecommunications to one of
the following addresses: on Compuserve via
email to 76703,622; on The Source via smail
to TCL920; and on MCI Mail to GAMING.
Copy can also be telecommunicated directly
to our offices with prior arrangement at (714)
776-4979.

If you do not have access to a modem or appropriate software, the following are our requirements for hard copy manuscripts:
1)All copy should be typed and at least double and preferably triple spaced with one inch
margins all around.
2) Avoid all upper-case printing if possible.
3) Use standard white paper of a
non-erasable type.
4) Type your name, address, and phone
number on the cover page. On all other pages
include the article name and page number.
5) PLEASE double-check the spelling, grammar, and punctuation.
6) If you wish the return of your manuscript,
please include a SASE.
RIGHTS
All submissions become the property of
Golden Empire Publications, Inc. Rights revert
to the author upon publication or rejection.
Specifically, our purchase is for First World
Rights.

R.I.D. was prepared with the help of SPEED STAT by SoftCorp International, Westerville, OH 800-543-1350

See page 46 for details on the Reader Input Device

