August 1988
Number 50

FEATURES
Fifty Issues and Proud of It

6

CGW Editor Sipe Reflects On Our History / Russell Sipe

Questron II

8

Scorpia Examines SSI's Popular Sequel

JET and F/A-18 Interceptor Compared

14

Two Fighter Simulations / Daniel Hockman

History of Computer Game Design

18

Another Look at the Early Years / Don Daglow

Win Money in the CGW Scavenger Hunt!

20

Trivia Questions That Can Be Profitable

Obliterator

23

Psygnosis' New Action-Adventure / Douglas Seacat

Stellar Crusade

24

An Overview of SSI's Space Strategy Game / Hosea Battles

The Most Humorous Thing . . .

26

Winners of the CGW Essay Contest

Strike Fleet Command Briefing

28

Tactical Tips for Fleet Commanders / Ronald F. Williams

The Three Stooges

30

Cinemaware "Nyuk"s It Up / David M. Wilson

Seven Spirits of Ra

32

Review of Sir Tech's Egyptian Adventure / Alan Roberts

Tobruk: The Clash of Armour

34

A Look at a Hybrid Arcade/Strategy Game / M. Evan Brooks

Scorpion's Mail

36

Scorpia Serves Welcome Hints to Adventure Games

Star Saga I

40

A Look at a Unique Type of Computer Game / W. Kritzen

DEPARTMENTS
Taking a Peek

4

Video Gaming World (Katz, Kunkel, Worley)

44

Reader Input Device

55

CGW Hall Of Fame

55

100 Games Rated

56

TAKING A PEEK
Accolade
550 S. Winchester Blvd. #200
San Jose, CA 95128

Arcadia
711 W. 17th St. Unit G9
Costa Mesa, CA 92627

BUBBLE GHOST: "I'm Forever Blowing Bubbles" would be a great theme
song for the protagonist in this unique
maze/chase game. Since the main
character is a ghost, players do not have
to worry about having their characters
"die" in this action game, but they do
have to attempt to keep that fragile bubble from popping as they travel through
36 levels of fans which cause turbulent
air; monsters who dislike ghostly frolicking; and burning candles which threaten
to turn the lights out on that poor bubble. Atari ST ($34.95). Circle Reader Service Card #1.

AWESOME ARCADE ACTION
PACK: This package contains three different action titles. "Sidewinder" (pictured
below) is a "Zaxxon"-type space game
which competed head-on in the arcades
with the more familiar title. "Xenon" is
another outer space shoot-'em-up which
offers a familiar feel and challenge to arcade fans. "Blastaball" is an outer space
"polo" or "hockey" game with a unique
twist. In "Blastaball," players pilot their
ships across a zero-G playing field and attempt to move the puck by means of
missile fire. Amiga ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #2.

California Dreams
c/o Logical Design Works
780 Montague Expwy, #403
San Jose, CA 95131
TRIANGO: Imagine an ancient and
popular game reborn on the computer
and you can visualize TrianGO. That's
right! The most recent release from
California Dreams is a modern variation
of the venerated oriental strategy game
of "Go." Further, it offers a computer opponent and "edit" function to enhance
one's enjoyment. IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #3.

CAPCOM U.S.A., Inc.
1283-C Mountain View/Alviso Rd.
Sunnyvale, CA 94089
STOCKER: For those who enjoy
movies like "Cannonball Run" and want
their opportunity to outwit and outrun
"Smokey" from coast to coast, this action

(Continued on page 10)

The Greatest Story
Ever Told
(Well, maybe not the greatest;
but it isn't bad)
by Russell Sipe
have not always been the publisher and
editor of Computer Gaming World. I used
to be a Southern Baptist minister. In 1979,
I made the hardest decision of my life and left
the ministry. The reasons were many, not the
least of which was my dissatisfaction with my
former denomination's accelerating "evolution"
into a narrow fundamentalism.

I

However, now, I find great joy and personal
satisfaction in my role as the publisher and
editor of Computer Gaming World.
For nearly eight years Computer Gaming
World has been a consistent and respected
voice in the dynamic, exciting, and volatile
world of computer entertainment. With the
publication of our Golden Fiftieth Issue, I
would like to share with you the history of the
birth and growth of CGW.
In the spring of 1981 (two years after leaving
the ministry) I was driving down the Orange
Freeway near Anaheim Stadium, thinking
about some problems that I had encountered
while playing SSI's Computer Air Combat
game.
I will never forget what happened next. It is as
clear in my mind now as it was then. While
passing Anaheim Stadium on the left I thought
to myself, "I sure would like to read up on this
game." However, it occurred to me that no
one was writing about computer games in any
detailed fashion. "Someone should start a
magazine on computer games" I thought to
myself.
Then a little voice spoke to me, "Why don't

you do it?". No, I thought to myself, I have no
experience in publishing. "So what? You can
learn!" replied the voice. Then, something I
read somewhere came to mind: the secret of a
successful business is to find a need and fill it.
If I personally felt the need for a computer
game magazine, surely there were others that
felt it as well. By the time I reached home, I
was getting excited. I felt I was on to something, but I knew that I needed to gather a lot
of information.
For the next two weeks, I talked with a lot of
people in the computer game industry as well
as small magazine publishers in the board
game field. During those two weeks, I put
together a plan of action to start a computer

game magazine. I knew that I didn't have the
money to start a business so I formed Golden
Empire Publications Inc. in June of 1981 and
took on a small group of investors drawn from
family and friends.
Now we needed a name for the magazine.
More than twenty titles were considered. These
included such candidates as The Computer
Gamer, The Floppy Gamer; Software Gamer
(these three sounded too much like a sci-fi
magazine entitled The Space Gamer which
was published by Steve Jackson Games from
Texas), Computer Games (simple yet elegant
and powerful); Computer Gaming (see immediately preceding comment); Wumpus;
Game Bits; Computer Game Review; Game
Software Review (now used by one of our advertisers); Software Wars; Run Games; and
Kilobaud Warrior. Computer Gaming World
was decided upon because it suggested that
we would do more than just review computer
games. We were interested in the whole world
of computer games. We were interested in the
strategies, in the design aspects of the games,
in the people behind the games, and in the
companies that produced the games. Computer Gaming World was conceived of as
more than a consumer oriented game review
magazine. We have always tried (we think with
success) to be something of a trade magazine,
as well. The positive feedback we get from
designers, publishers, and game distributors
are testimony to the fact that we have done
just that.
With a name and $6000 in the bank we
began to put together the first issue of CGW
which was slated for a November 1981 release.
By August we found out that we would be
having competition. Electronic Games (later
renamed Computer Entertainment) from
Reese Communications out of New York and
Softline (later renamed St. Game) out of North
Hollywood were also scheduled for Winter
1981 debuts. "Great!" I thought to myself "I've
not even printed an issue yet, and I have big
time competition!"
All three magazines debuted within days of
each other and the computer game magazine
industry was born.
As it turns out Al and Margot Comstock Tommervik (of Softalk and Softline) became my
good friends and were a source of help to me

on more than one occasion. The relationship
between the two companies was always warm.
Although I did not know Electronic Games
editor Arnie Katz back then, Arnie and I have
since become good friends and he is now a
regular contributor to CGW (along with his
partners Bill Kunkel and Joyce Worley).
By 1983, the arcade game fad was in high
swing and CGW had something on the order
of 18 competing titles on the newsstand. The
years 1983-1984 were trying times for us. We
had to compete with higher circulation
magazines for advertising dollars and
newsstand space. Nevertheless, our conservative business approach helped us weather the
storm. Then came the arcade game crash of
1984. It took down the majority of the computer game magazines with it. By the winter of
1984, only a few computer game magazines
remained. By summer 1985 CGW was the only
4-color computer game magazine left.
The manufacturers who survived the crash
and prospered were those companies that, for
the most part, targeted an older age group
(especially those consumers who were interested in strategy and adventure games as opposed to arcade action games). Fortunately for
COW, our readership has always been
dominated by the adult strategy/adventure
gamer; an audience that was not only interested in the games themselves, but also in the
personalities that designed the games and the
companies that manufactured them. COW
caters to this readership.
Currently a monthly, CGW began life as a bimonthly. Reader demand caused us to go to
a nine issue per year schedule with the
Jan/Feb 1986 issue. This schedule was maintained until fairly recently.
In Fall 1987 we started a second magazine
called Computer Game Forum. It was intended
to be a quarterly that was more gossip/news/humor oriented than CGW. Unfortunately, CGF did not attract the advertising interest of the manufacturers since it was perceived as being too similar to CGW to justify
the additional advertising expense. It was discontinued after two issues. However, some of
the style, humor, and content of CGF was carried over into COW. Additionally, with the
demise of CGF, CGW was transformed into a
monthly publication.
Now it is 1988 and the computer gaming
world is undergoing a resurgence. Sales are
up, numbers of releases are on the climb
again, and, best of all, the front line products
are getting better and better. I can't think of a
more positive atmosphere in which to
celebrate America's first, oldest, and best computer game magazine, Computer Gaming
World!.

game. Specific monsters inhabit specific terrain
types (grasslands, forests, mountains, swamps,
oceans, tombs, and dungeons), and will not be
found elsewhere. Wandering creatures (who can
show up anywhere except underground) may offer
you items, hit points, or information in exchange
for money. Better weapons and armor become
available in towns only over time, and slowly at
that. Most importantly, getting a good foothold in
the game is just as hard as it was before.

Censoring the "Evil
Book of Magic"
Reviewed by Scorpia
uestron 11 is the follow-up to the original
Questron. In the previous game, you
defeated the evil wizard Mantor and hence,
were left with his evil book of magic which had to
be destroyed. Destroying
the book forms the basis
of the plot for the current
adventure.

Q

The finished book is invulnerable to all damage,
so the only way to
eliminate the foul tome is
to wreck it before it's completed. Thus, the good
wizard Mesron sends you
back into the past, at
about the time the book is
nearing completion, and
you must make your way
to Mantor's secret lair to
destroy it.
However, going back in
time has its disadvantages:
you become weaker and
lose all the good stuff you
accumulated on your first
adventure. In fact,
Questron II is a stand
alone game in which you
must create a new character instead of bringing over
the one you had in
Questron. So if you can't
find your old Questron
disk, don't worry, you
won't need it.
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:

# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Questron II
Apple, Atari ST
C-64/128, & IBM
(Amiga and IIGS soon)
Solitaire
$39.95-$49.95
Charles Dougherty
John Dougherty,
Cyrus Harris, & C. MacDonald
Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

As in the first game, your
character comes with pre-assigned values for all attributes, so
character "creation" is simply a
matter of giving the character a
name, after which you're ready to
begin play.

Those who have done Questron (or even Legacy
of the Ancients) will find many similarities in this

You begin with very little: only cheap armor, a
dagger, some money, food, the evil book of magic
(which contains the destruction spell), and a gold
key. Monsters start showing up pretty quickly and
since some of them can be quite nasty, it's important to find a town with a healing shop as soon as
possible. Otherwise, you are stuck paying outrageous prices to wandering creatures for hit
points (if you can afford it). Saving the game frequently so progress won't be lost is a wise move.
Outdoor combat is pretty much the same as
before. Monsters seem to pop up out of nowhere
right next to you (once in awhile you know something is coming, but not too often), and fighting
begins. You can use hand weapons, or spells if
you have some. The "Sonic Whine" spell is particularly good against tough opponents (such as
venom ants), and "Time Sap" can freeze them if
you'd prefer to run away instead of fight.
You can also end up fighting the wandering creatures if you're not careful. When they appear with
an offer, they expect you to accept or reject it. If
you do anything else, they suddenly turn aggressive and attack. This can also happen if you're
travelling quickly along the countryside and try to
move away from them when they show up (which
can happen at any time). Fighting wandering creatures is not recommended, as they don't carry
much cash, and they can be difficult opponents.
Accepting their offers of weapons and armor isn't
recommended either, as they never have bargains.
Everything always costs more than you would pay
in town.
Your first task is a matt& of wandering around
the island, noting where the various towns and
cathedrals are, and locating the castle. Inside the
castle is a room where you can talk to Mesron,
who will, from time to time, raise you in level (as
well as send you on little errands). Level raises will
also increase some of your attributes. Unlike the
other games, however, there are no training areas
where attributes can be increased through arcade
skill games.
The towns have a variety of shops, but not all
towns have all shops, so it's important to make a
list of who has what (especially in regard to armor,
weapons, and spells, and the prices being charged
for these items). Money will not be easy to come
by at first, so you want to get the most for your
cash. Healing shops, for some reason, are not
labelled. You will have to look for an occupied
table with no sign, which is the usual indication of
a healer.
Information can be obtained from only two sources: from certain establishments in the towns, and

from wandering creatures outdoors. Inns, barbers,
and mystics will, for a small fee, give you a hint or
clue, one per town visit (note that inns only function as information centers; you can't really spend
the night in one of them to heal up). The people
who dance around inside the towns have nothing
valuable to tell you, and, in fact, have only a
limited number of stock phrases to say when you
talk to them.
The first island has only one dungeon, a tomb
below Riverside Cathedral. You must go through it
to obtain certain items. One of them is an object
that Mesron wants you to get. Another will let you
in to see the "Holy Ones", and there are others
which, when retrieved, will allow you to purchase
"breads of life" from the Holy Ones. These breads
of life are very important later on in the game, so
stock up on as many as you can. Of course, there
will also be chests of gold you can open and loot.
Since the view in the tombs is an overhead
perspective, monsters can be seen approaching
and occasionally, it is possible to outrun them,
especially if you are on your way out. However,
most of the time you have no option but to fight.
Spells will be more helpful then hand-to-hand combat, so make certain you have plenty before going
in. "Sonic Whine" does not work in the tombs, but
all other spells will.
As in both Questron and Legacy, you will have to
do some looting of the castle chests (both on this
island and the next) in order to obtain keys (and
possibly some money!). The guards, as usual, will
be tough and hit hard, so it's necessary to plan
looting expeditions in advance, and to come
prepared with a lot of spells.
Chests that are opened stay opened after you exit
the castle, so they do not provide an unlimited
supply of money. However, leaving the castle does
"turn off' the guards, and they will not chase you
when you come again (unless, that is, you start
opening chests again . . . grin). Naturally, any
guards you may have killed the last time will be
replaced the next time you enter.
Eventually, you will be ready to visit the second
(and last) island. For this, you must purchase a
ship, which is best done in Octapoint, and sail
north until you reach your destination. The second
island is much like the first, except that the
monsters here are more deadly. While many of
them seem the same, they will do more damage to
you, and will be harder to kill. In addition, there are
some new critters roaming the outdoors, and they
are very nasty indeed. Your best bet here is to find
the one town that sells trained eagles and use that
for your transportation. This will enable you to
avoid the majority of encounters.
This second island has one tomb and two dungeons. Fortunately, the "Twilight Tomb" is somewhat easier to get through than the other one.
There is a Hall of Maps in Mesron's castle on the
first island and paying a hefty fee will let you look
at the map of the twilight tomb. You can make a
copy of this with some tracing paper (held against
the monitor), and thus speed your trek through
this unwholesome place.

The dungeons are even easier than the tombs.
In the first dungeon, you can get a magic scroll
that does auto-mapping of each level as you go
through the dungeons (the scroll works only in
dungeons, not tombs). Since the dungeon levels
are fairly simple to begin with, the auto-map feature (once you have it) makes exploring pretty
much a breeze,
especially as the
maps for each
level are retained
when you go up
or down. Thus, remapping is not
necessary unless
you leave the
dungeon and
come back to it
later.
The dungeons
have a 3-D view,
and here, too,
you can usually
see monsters approaching (unless
they attack from
behind or the
sides). Running is
rather difficult, however, so you are pretty much
forced to fight it out. Spells tend to be more helpful than hand-to-hand combat. Some monsters
can damage weapons and armor, so bring a
couple of spares with you, just in case.
Scattered throughout the dungeons are various
chests, urns, and coffins. Chests generally hold
gold or weapons. Urns can increase your hitpoints,
although some are trapped and will cause
damage. The same is true of coffins.
Some passageways are
trapped, so it's
necessary to examine all corridors before walking through
them. Once exposed, a trap is
harmless and you
can pass it safely.
Traps stay exposed for as long
as you are in the
dungeon. Moving
between levels
will not reset the
traps.
In the first dungeon, you are looking for the key to open the door
of the second dungeon (which, by the way, you
can't enter even with the key unless you have
reached the level of Knight). As you might expect,
it will be somewhere on the eighth (and final) level.
The last dungeon leads, naturally, to Mantor's

(Continued on page 50)

TAKING A PEEK
(Continued from page 4)
game could be the answer. It takes 37
screens to get from Florida to California
in this game where drivers score points
for fast times, avoidance of tickets, and
not running out of gas. (Not pictured).C64/128 ($29.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #4.

Constellation Software
17 Saint Mary's Court
Brookline, MA 02146
CRYSTAL HAMMER: This European
import is an attractive "Arkanoids"-type
game offering 30 different screens. The
play is similar to the earlier game, but
adds "intelligent" enemies and "unhealthy" crystals. Amiga ($19.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #5.

LARRIE AND THE ROBBERY OF
THE ARDIES: This is a running, jumping, chase game where the player takes
on a "Tweedie Bird" type persona (a
seemingly helpless little bird that cannot
fly, but is pursued by persistent baddies).
Six different combat enhancements add
variety to the game. One or two players.
Amiga ($19.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #6.
MISSION ELEVATOR: An espionage
chase game, this product incorporates
ideas from several earlier action hits.
Players must fight their way through 62
levels of a grand European hotel in order
to foil the destructive plans of foreign
agents. Each level has a secret object to
be located before the counter-espionage
agent can move to the next level. Amiga
($19.95). Circle Reader Service Card #7.

Data East U.S.A., Inc.
470 Needles Drive
San Jose, CA 95112
KARNOV: Jinborov Karnovski is the

fire-breathing Russian portrayed in this
conversion of the popular coin-op game.
The djinn-like hero (actually, a former circus star) must locate and retrieve the
Treasure of Babylon from the evil dragon
(Ryu) who stole it from Karnov's village.
Ten different combat enhancements (including bombs, boots, and boomerangs)
are as indispensable to our hero as
Batman's utility belt is to him. Players
must defeat the Boss Enemy (Ryu's
strongest monster) on each level before
moving to the next. C-64/128 ($29.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #8.

Discovery Software International
163 Conduit Street
Annapolis, MD 21401
ZOOM: Think of "Pac-Man" in hyperspace and you have an idea of this
clever game. Each level offers a grid that
represents a plane or dimension in
space. The player must trace every line

(Continued on page 49)

Into The
Hornet's Nest
by Daniel Hockman

y

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

ou put on the soundtrack from TOP
GUN. You settle back in your chair
and close your eyes. The driving bass
notes that open "Danger Zone" hit your ears
and body. Suddenly you are
transported into
the cockpit of an F18. You jam the
throttles forward
to the stops. The
engines wind up
into a tremendous
roar and your craft
strains against its
restraints. You ask
your RIO if he is
ready. From the
rear seat he quips
"Let's boogie!" You
kick in the afterburner and signal
thumbs up to
catapult officer.
He salutes and
brings his yellow
wand down to the deck, and
F/A-18 Interceptor
Amiga
elevates it to point down the
Solitaire
runway. Your machine quivers
$49.95
Robert Dinnerman
at full power, the adrenaline
Electronic Arts
flows, your heart pounds . . .
San Mateo, CA
any second now . . . Wham!
The catapult fires. You are thrust back into
your seat as you rush
down the ramp. In two
and a half seconds you
and 16 tons of screaming
machine and deadly explosives dip off the end of
the carrier and struggle to
rise above the angry sea.
Forty feet, sixty, ninety, a
hundred . . . you stared
into the face of disaster
once more and have survived. You are on your
way. Its time to rock . . . and . . . roll!!!!
We often experience life vicariously through
our computer games. Never is this more true
than with jet fighter simulators. After seeing
Top Gun and reading books such as Stephen

Coonts' excellent Flight of the Intruder we
yearn for these experiences. Experiences that,
if unavailable in reality, we can have thanks to
such programs as EA's new F-18 Interceptor, SubLogic's JET, and Spectrum
Holobyte's award winning Falcon. Since Falcon was reviewed in the February 88 issue of
CGW (#44), we will not spend much time on
it here.
SubLogic's JET was introduced for the IBM
in June 1985. The Apple and C-64 versions
came out shortly thereafter. However, it was
the 68000 microprocessor versions of JET
that really knocked our socks off. The
graphics and sounds drew us in. We were in
the cockpit, our heart pounded faster as we
closed with the MIGs. We learned how difficult carrier landings could be.
Now comes F-18 Interceptor. Graphics that
surpass 68000 JET (and that is difficult to
do). And the sound! Wow! Talk about realistic
feel. Here it is!
As the pilot of an F/A-18 jet fighter you work
your way through a series of six combat missions in the San Francisco Bay Area. A training mission precedes the combat missions
and, if you wish, you can simply fly around
and explore the Bay Area in a MIG-free sky.
The combat missions are in an increasing
order of difficulty. After completing the final
mission, you can start the cycle again, only
this time the MIGs are meaner.
The sound is fantastic. You will hear the
scream of the jet engine; the explosion of missiles, the barrage of cannon fire; all sounding
very realistic.
Although there are no realistic air-to-ground
missions and thus no air-to-ground weapons,
you can fire your Sidewinders and Sparrow
missiles at ground targets. Missile strikes on
the ground appear as
craters and columns of
smoke (but you must be
in the immediate vicinity
to see these effects).
Missile strikes against certain buildings also
produce the smoke
columns. In particular the
Electronic Arts buildings
and nearby structures are
"live" targets. If for any
twisted surly reason, or simply because of
basic human destructiveness you feel the
need to demolish EA you can take off from
San Francisco International Airport, loop the
plane and head south. Seven miles southeast

of SFO you will see the intersection of Highways 101 and 92 (it looks like a giant X). Just
east and south of this intersection is a pair of
low triangular shaped buildings with a common parking lot. The northern structure contains the EA development group and the
southern structure contains EA Distribution.
Go ahead, make their day! By the way, the tall
building just to the east of the EA complex
contains the Ziff-Davis Publishing division
which produces A+ Magazine and MacUser
Magazine. It is not true that CGW Editor Russell Sipe asked me to let you know that his
"arch rival," Bob Lindstrom (who is the new
Editor at A+ Magazine), is located in the
southwest corner office of that building,
about 3/4th of the way up.
Both 68000 Jet and F-18 Interceptor are
very engaging products. So which is better?
Not a fair question for these two. For, as
similar as these two products are, they are different enough that picking one over the other
would be like asking which is better, an apple
or an orange?
To boil the comparison down into basics, F18 Interceptor is a "toy" in the most positive
sense of the word, while 68000 Jet is more of
a "game".
At a recent Writer's Symposium at
Electronic Arts Dan Bunten talked about the
difference between games and toys. A game
is a competition. Scores are kept, and can be
bettered. We interact with the environment of
the game in order to post a higher score than
our last effort or that of another person. Or,
we compete simultaneously with other people
to come out the highest score in the game at
hand. "Toys" on the other hand, are things
which we play with. You play a game, you
play with a toy.
In talking about software
"toys" Steve Linhart put it this way:
Toys are a good model
for computer entertainment. Children use toys
to create, learn, and explore; so do adults. There
are already many successful computer toys for
adults. These tend to be
simulations of existing
adult toys, such as sports
cars and planes.
The difference between
a toy and a game is that you don't
win [with] a toy. For example, life . .. is
a toy not a game because there is no
particular way to win, it's just something

you do. (The Journal of Computer Game
Design, June/July 1988; 5251 Sierra Rd. San
Jose, CA 95132).
In F-18 Interceptor you are playing with a
sophisticated flight simulator that adds the feature of hostile aircraft to the "world" you ultimately end up exploring. JET is also a
sophisticated flight simulator which provides
you with a world to explore as well, but the
emphasis is on getting a high score as you
shoot down MIGs and/or bomb
enemy targets.
We should mention that the
non-68000 versions of JET contains the same basic functions
as the 68000 JET. However,
not surprisingly, they fall far
short in terms of sound and
graphics. This writer finds the
enemy MIGs to be much more
deadly at lower levels in IBM
JET than in lower levels of the
68000 version. Hint for 68000
users: When you are about to
be hit by a missile which you
have determined you cannot
avoid, hold down the "5" key on
the keypad to dampen the degree to which the missile hit knocks
you off course.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:

To compare other features of the
DESIGNER:
two products: JET has a wellPUBLISHER:
developed air-to-ground combat
feature, while air-to-ground is
"tacked" on to Interceptor.
Interceptor's HUD display is more realistic
than Jet's display. Aerial dogfighting is easier
and perhaps more satisfying with Jet but
probably more realistic with Interceptor. Both
games allow land or sea based operations
and allow you to choose between an F-16 Falcon and an F-18 Hornet.
As in real life, carrier landings are difficult and require a lot of practice. Jet
allows you to load SubLogic Scenery Disks.
However in the 68000 version, your jet appears oversized when you land on
Scenery Disk runways.
Finally, 68000 Jet permits
a modem hook-up
- whereby you can fly in
tandem with a friend.
The bottom line? I like and recommend
both, but then again, I also like both apples
and oranges.

Jet
Apple, 064, IBM,
ST, Amiga, Mac
1-2
$39.95-$49.95
Charles Guy (IBM)
Chris Green (Amiga)
SubLogic Corp.
Champaign, IL

Where's
the River?
Somewhere in the timeless depths of the mid1960's somebody wrote
the first computer game.
Within 24 hours of this
earth-shaking event,
somebody else declared
it to be a waste of time,
electricity and gray matter.

Over the River
and Through
the Woods:

As I chronicled in "The
Dark Ages of Game
Design" (CGW #28, p.
12), the game designers
of the pre-Apple II days
were hobbyists. We
hoped to reach a small
audience of fellow
gamers around the
country who, like us,
used the late-night "offpeak" hours to sneak in
their game playing. In
our school, this was
necessitated by the fact
that until games were
kicked off the system,
they were eating over
50% of the computer
time many weekends.
After they were kicked
off they were impermissible and blasphemous,
and academic computing was once again pure.
The advent of the
Apple II in the late '70's
gave designers the
freedom to work on dedicated machines where
no one could tell us that
gaming was forbidden.
Apple Trek, Wumpus,
Eliza, Adventure, Rogue
and Zork all came from
mainframe games that
made the transition to
micros. It should be
noted that only in the
case of Zork did the
designers have the
foresight to maintain
control of their brainchild and successfully exploit it creatively and commercially.

The Changing Role of Computer
Game Designers

Not all of us were so insightful. In the
mid-seventies I had a fully-functioning
fantasy role-playing game on the PDP10, with both ranged and melee combat, lines of sight, auto-mapping and
NPC's with discrete Al. When I bought
my Apple, I went back to all my old
designs to pick the most promising one
to convert . . . and ignored my FRP.

By Don L. Daglow

Like I say, give the Zork guys credit.

This is the River and
I Think We're All Wet
By the summer of 1980, Mattel realized that the Intellivision video game's
success wasn't a single-season affair and
set out to hire an in-house game design
team. I was lucky enough to be one of
the original five programmers hired for

that team and eventually
ended up as Director of
Game Design for Intellivision. I sure as hell
didn't know what I was
getting myself into,
though.
Picture a building converted from an old Hot
Wheels factory with a
second floor added to
the interior to hold the
game designers—who
grew to a staff 110
strong. Look across its
expanses and your eyes
would scan a seemingly
endless sea of cubicles
beneath a corrugated
metal roof and exposed
air conditioning conduits. The walls and ceilings were painted white,
the cubicles a consistent
gray. There were no windows. It was the Big
Company style. It was
hardly a creative environment.
Within that environment, however, were
some of the most
talented game designers
you'd ever want to meet.
My own team included:
Eddie Dombrower, the
designer of Earl Weaver
Baseball; Rick Koenig,
author of Racing
Destruction Set and Ferrari Formula I; Connie
Goldman, who did
graphics for Rick's
projects and for Adventure Construction Set;
and Dave Warhol, whose
music and sound effects
have graced products
from several major
publishers. There were
several other real talents
who, discouraged by the
Cartridge Crash of '83,
left the business for safer
shores.

Life on our white and gray floor went
on in a high-security environment.
Guards at the front door checked for
properly coded security badges. An additional electronic card key was necessary
to enter the game design area. This had
the effect of cutting us off from almost
all outside input, leaving us in an ivory
tower where our only contact was with

(Continued on page 42)

T

hat's right, we'll pay $100.00 to
the reader with the highest score
in the following trivia quiz. We'll
even print your name in the magazine.
That's right fame and fortune. Enough
money for even Dennis Owens of Old
Towne, ME to subscribe to CGW for
over three years (see Greetings from
Paradise in
CGW #47,
p. 10).
Now's the
chance for
all you who
have been
claiming to
have been
readers from
the first issue
to prove it.
In case of a
tie, the
editors will
come up
with a special list of questions to determine a sole winner.

Game Design Contest" and what was his
prize?
13. In the March, 1988 (#45) issue,
one of the "Taking A Peek" descriptions
mentioned a " . . . totally radical warrior
ninja." What was the name of the game?
14. In which issue were CGW sub-

21. In which issue of CGW was a "Letter to the Editor" entitled, "Give Me That
On-Line Religion!"?
22. Who wrote the "Year In Review" for
CGW #33?
23. In which issue of CGW was the
Desktop Publishing System which we
use to
"layout" the
magazine pictured?

WIN ONE HUNDRED
DOLLARS IN CGW'S
SCAVENGER HUNT

24. Which
issue of
CGW was
the first
regular
theme issue?

25. "My
Other Boat
Is A High
Speed Combat Patrol Hydrofoil" was the subtitle to
what review?

For those who haven't been around
since our first issue, 1.1, note that threefourths of the questions will be from
more recent issues. The second prize is
a complimentary two year subscription
to CGW and the third prize is a one year
subscription.

26. Who wrote the two first person accounts based on 50 Mission Crush and
8-24?

Entries must be postmarked no
later than September 15, 1988.

28. In what issue were both Ultima V
and Wizardry IV: The Return of Werdna
first previewed?

27. What particular expertise did the
answer to question 26 have in order to
write those articles?

1. What is the score of the Dodger
baseball game in issue 5.3?

29. What is "The Learning Game?"
30. What was "Euclid vs. Patton" in
CGW #39?

2. Find the "Finkas" (artist's signature)
on the cover of 3.5.
3. What blooper can be found in the
table of contents of 2.6?

scribers offered free software and a one
month free subscription to Quantumlink?

4. Which issue was Vince DeNardo's
first issue as Art Director?

15. Who is the pilot pictured on page
23 of CGW #31?

5. What is the punchline of the Chip
and Ferb cartoon on page 33 of 4.3?

16. In a recent issue of CGW, what do
Douglas Adams, Isaac Asimov, Jerry
Pournelle, and Roger Zelazny have in
common?

6. In what issue did CGW print a fictional ad commenting negatively on the
televangelism scandals?
7. In what review did the section
header, "A Bier Less Filling," show up?
8. What page number of what issue
had only the word, "beep" on it?
9. Which issue of CGW heralded the
debut of Electronic Arts?
10. What was the name of the robot
who won CGW's very first Robotwar
Tournament?
11. According to 4.2 (April, 1984), who
was born on 1-27-84?
12. What reader won the "Generic

17. What CGW feature, which
originated in Computer Game Forum,
uses subtitles in parentheses as though
they were a description from a
restaurant's (or perhaps, tavern's) menu?
18. Which issue of CGW reviewed an
extremely realistic medical simulation
called Surgeon?
19. In which issue of CGW did we
satirize ourselves and the rest of the industry with columns like "Taking A
Puke," "Readers' Inkblot Device," and
"99/4 Boxes of Chips on the Wall?"
20. Who is pictured on page 17 of
CGW #32?

31. What do the section headers have
in common in the article entitled, "Ramparts and Rodents" in CGW #46?
32. In 1985, one article referenced
such games as "Bore in the East," "Blasto-Cremo," "Firing Squad," and "E.T. &
The Turbolaser." What was the title of
the article?
33. True or False - Broderbund is a
Swedish word according to CGW #40.
34. In the recent "Fog of War" article,
which game designer quoted von
Clausewitz?
35. According to CGW #46, which
entertainment software company had
the largest percentage growth in number of employees during 1987?
36. In what city and state did CGW
present its Game of the Year Awards in
1987?
37. What issue of CGW had the first
"Conversions Received" column?

38. In what setting did "The Rumor
Bag" take place in CGW #44?

44. What was "Titans of the Computer
Gaming World?"

39. What do the section headers have
in common in the article entitled,
"You've Come A Long Way, Baby" in
CGW #36?

45. Which issue of CGW featured "A
Buyer's Guide to Joysticks and Mice?"

40. What do the section headers have
in common in the "Uninvited" review in
CGW #39?
41. What is the current name of the
game reviewed on page 12 of CGW
#30?
42. What was the name of David
Cheng's ship which won the first CGW
"Cosmic Balance Ship Design Contest?"
43. What recent issue of CGW had a
chronological listing of SSI's games by
year published?

46. In Evan Brooks' Kampfgruppe
replay in CGW #25, is it the Germans
or Soviets that he suggests have an extremely poor set-up position?
47. Who was the cover artist on CGW
#29?
48. What modern aircraft was featured
on the cover of CGW #44 and why?
49. In CGW #43, Roger Bohn stated
that, in Mech Brigade, a good rule of
thumb is that 1.x units will be destroyed
per pulse of firing. Define x.
50. What was the "Unidentified Aircraft"
referred to in CGW #45?

Destruction
Unlimited
Psygnosis' "Obliterator"
by Douglas Seacat

O

bliterator is a nice name. It is descriptive, elo-

quent, and brutal. One thing I have always
noticed about Psygnosis games is that they
usually have appropriate titles. From such beginnings
as Barbarian, Arena, Deep Space, and Terrorpods
comes this new action game. As an adventure game
following the same format as Barbarian, Obliterator has
very nice graphics, a simple plot, and the capacity for
keeping the brain-work down to a minimum.
The game begins when a large, seemingly invincible
spacecraft moves into human space, completely
destroying the entire space fleet. Apparently, man has
been pursuing his reckless ways again and has created
quite a few enemies in his conquest of the galaxy. All
these nasty critters have gotten together and built the
previously mentioned spacecraft. Invincible against any
external threat, the Federation has decided to beam
someone inside the ship. They only have one chance
and can only send one person. That is where the
player comes in and assumes the mantle of the (trumpets, please) Last Obliterator!

weapons, as well as the ammunition to make them effective. One of the challenges in the game stems from
the fact that different creatures require different
weapons and the more powerful weapons can carry
only limited ammunition. The wise player will use the
weakest weapon possible to kill an opponent, saving
his more powerful weapons (and ammunition) for the
stronger aliens. The pistol works on most of the aliens
in the first section of the ship; the
rifle is effective against most of the
others; and the blaster should be
reserved for the rare four or five
creatures who are immune to anything else. Note that the bazooka
can kill anything, but should be
saved for a certain obstacle in the
middle of the game which cannot
be destroyed by the other weapons.
Players should be aware of the fact
that each room has its own distinctive set of monsters. Only a few creatures can be killed permanently,
with most reappearing upon reentry
into the room. While this "reincarnation" can be annoying, it does keep
the game challenging. To even
—
things up, however, the ammunition is
also replaced, so it is possible to stock
up on vital ammo by moving back and
forth between two rooms, picking up
ammo each time. Purists may claim that
this is cheating, but what's a little cheating in a suicide mission?

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Obliterator
Amiga, Atari ST
Solitaire
$39.95
Garvan Corbett
David H. Lawson
Psygnosis
Liverpool, UK

Naturally, it is a suicide mission, but as an elite commando, you are certain that you can persevere. Within
the enemy ship, it is necessary to: disable three vital
ship systems (engines, weapons, and shields), collect
an important data pack, and finally, steal a shuttle in
order to escape the crippled vessel right before it explodes. It goes without saying that the alien ship is
simply jam-packed with bug-eyed aliens, traps, and horrid defensive systems.

Technically, it is not really necessary to kill every
monster on every screen. Doing so is not only a waste
of time, but a waste of ammunition, as well. A useful
tactic is to hit the "Defense" key while running. This will
cause the Obliterator to roll, often right past his
enemies. This move not only works on most of the
creatures, but several of the traps, as well. However,
one should not use this technique in every situation because there is a good reason for killing most of the
creatures, the score.

Game mechanics are fairly smooth and efficient. The
game allows use of either joystick, mouse, or keyboard.
While playing with the joystick is permitted, this writer
cannot recommend it because several crucial commands cannot be executed from the joystick. Instead,
playing with the mouse-keyboard is suggested. The
various possible actions include: changing weapons
(choosing between four different kinds), moving in the
four cardinal directions, jumping, moving into a defensive posture, stopping, entering doorways, picking up
items, and of course, firing one's weapon.

Instead of having a simple intrinsic value, the score is
vital in Obliterator. Once all of the tasks have been
completed, a countdown to the ship's destruction will
begin. The length of this countdown is determined exclusively by the player's score. If the shuttle hasn't been
found and activated by the time one's score has
reached zero, the ship will explode with the Obliterator
on board. This countdown method can cause some disappointing final scores, but it is an ingenious method
of making sure the aliens are fought rather than simply
avoided.

It does not take long to become conversant with the
commands. Also, experience with the earlier game, Bar
barian, will speed the learning process considerably
(even though all of the commands are not the same).
Once this has been mastered, game-play should
proceed quickly. The game isn't difficult, although it is
fun. Basically, the Obliterator must roam the decks and
elevators of the alien ship, destroy the bulk of aliens en
countered, and find useful items.
Since the Obliterator starts the game with only a pistol, the first objective should be to procure other

All in all, I found myself enjoying Obliterator. The
game is neither particularly original nor extremely difficult, but the graphics are well-executed and the action
is plentiful. Pure strategists and exclusive adventure
garners should stay away, but those who like action or
want something colorful to showcase on their Amiga or
ST will find this game to be a good buy. In other
words, know what to expect and you will not be disappointed. After hours of conquest in obscure military
campaigns or long days in dungeon corridors, a few
minutes of Obliterator can be quite refreshing.

Jihad
Junction
SSI Invokes A "Stellar Crusade'
by Hosea Battles
n the 24th Century, both the Corporate League
(League) [Ed.: Unscrupulous capitalists.] and
the People's Holy Republic (P.H.R.) [Ed.:
Despotic communists.] wish to control the Kiffryn's
Cats Star Cluster. When the League began to
rapidly explore and
exploit planets, this
threatened the restrictive trade policies
and bureaucratic
oligarchy of the
People's Holy
Republic. Conflict
was inevitable and
Stellar Crusade is
the depiction of this
struggle.

I

In solitaire mode,
players must play as
strategic commander
of the League. In the
two player mode, of
course, one may play
either side. On the
ST, all game play is
mouse-controlled,
but the IBM version
is restricted to
keyboard moderation
via the numeric
keypad. Both versions utilize pull
down menus to enhance the interface.

Balanced
Budgets
for Defense
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

The key to this game is the fact
that it is a Strategic/Economic
Space Combat game. Economic
decisions are crucial to winning
the game. This is not the standard space shoot-'em-up. Unfortunately, this key area of
economic determination is also
the primary flaw in the documentation. Even
though the manual is organized into sections with

Stellar Crusade
Atari ST, IBM
1-2
$49.95 (IBM)
$54.95 (Atari ST)
Norman C. Koger, Jr.
SSI
Mountain View, CA

a heading to match nearly each function in the
game, it never clearly explains the economic principles of the game. The allocation of Production
Points, as well as the cogent use of Build Points, is
critical for fleet and colony maintenance. Yet, the
manual offers little guidance for interpreting even
basic information provided on the screen. As a
reviewer, this writer was forced to call SSI directly
in order to discover what the screen was trying to
tell me.
Even after reading the rules over and over again,
it was impossible to understand the "Research" option. The only reference to be found for this option
was one paragraph in the glossary under "Effectiveness." It did not explain how to allocate resources
to research, how much it costs to increase each effectiveness level, or how to find out if it is even possible to increase one's effectiveness level. Again, it
was necessary to call SSI, only to be told that any
unused "Production Points" go to "Research" and it
takes approximately 500 Production Points to increase one's level. Since the economic decisions
are so crucial to success in the game, one would
have hoped for better treatment in the manual.
The mechanics of play consist of two phases,
"Economics" and "Movement." It can be a very fastpaced game when combat takes place.
Throughout both phases, a three-dimensional map
of the quadrant is on the screen. The player can
turn this map on or off at will.
During the "Economics" phase, players allocate
"Production" and "Build Points" to factories and
starports in order to build ships and raw materials.
Food production is also handled in this phase.
One had best pay attention to this, because food
riots could occur on the player's planets and spoil
everything. Further, players must assign ships for
"Transport Duty" in the "Transportation Pool" and
"Escort" ships to protect them. Without escort
ships, transports make juicy targets for enemy
raiders. It is also necessary to allocate resources for
producing: spare parts (to repair ships), rations (to
feed soldiers), and armies (to recruit, equip, and
pay soldiers). Fortunately, there is an "Economic
Report" available to the player which includes a
graph on expenditures and suggestions for increasing production.

Command Performances
for State Security
During the movement phase, players perform
fleet movements, design spaceships, scrap old
ships, load/unload transports and assault ships, assign ships to a fleet, assign ships to a "Command,"
and assign "Commanders" to fleets. A player may
only have a maximum of 120 ships per side, a cap
of 36 separate fleets, and a limit of 20 ships per
fleet.
Players have a group of "Commanders" which
can be assigned to a given fleet. Those belonging
to the League, for example, have historic code
names such as Achilles or Patton. Those belonging to the P.H.R. are provided with biblical code
names such as David and Samson. Each com-

mander is rated on a scale of 1 (incompetent) to 5
(brilliant) for Attack/Defense/Assault. When a command ship is destroyed, the commander is
destroyed with it and a replacement is placed in
the "Commanders Pool." There are more than 36
commanders for each side. Nevertheless, it is important to assign the best commander to each particular command, because a commander's rating
considerably affects the outcome of space combat.
Once all fleet movements are completed and opposing fleets end up in the same system, combat
occurs. Combat involves both I weapons (warp
space) and R weapons (real space). Each can only
attack ships in their respective space. Most raiders,
for instance, attack from I space. When a weapon
is fired, it is destroyed and must be replaced with a
spare upon the completion of combat. As combat
occurs, explosions take place around the fleets,
ships disappear, and the count of weapons
diminishes.
If a defender loses space combat, surface combat
will commence. At this point, a small screen appears which shows a ship unloading combat
troops on the surface of the planet. Surface combat begins and a new combat resolutions screen
appears. On this screen is a list of attacking and
defending units. As units are destroyed, they disappear from the list. As reflects any type of warfare,
the longer the combat lasts, the more population
and factories are destroyed. It is, therefore, not unusual to conquer a planet only to discover that it is
barren due to the surface warfare.
Finally, repairs may be performed if spare parts
are available within the system. Without spare
parts, the best planned offensive will stall and become a defensive retreat.
One last point with regard to combat must be
the consideration of ship designs. In the design
mode, all basic ships look the same. However,
when one begins adding weapons, defenses, and
engines, the ships change shape. Players are given
the option of renaming their present ships and
christening the new ones they create. The design
screen is graphically detailed and extremely user
friendly.

Reviewer's Summary
for Executive Decision
Though there are not any fancy graphics in this
game, the game has an appropriate mix of
graphics and text so that it does not clutter the
screen. The bulk of the computer's power is utilized in keeping track of the decision points,
economic consequences, and strategic results in
the game rather than drawing pretty screens. Furthermore, the computer opponent is extremely
hard to beat, even on the easiest level of play.
The game offers seven different scenarios. The
smallest lasts 10 turns and the largest can last up
to 100 turns. Though there is no option for creating one's own scenarios, the scenarios provided
can keep any player busy for a long time. One
scenario is particularly important. This is the "Exploration Scenario." This teaches players how to es-

tablish a colony and build it up to a self-supporting
and material producing asset. Since the manual offers a set tutorial which takes a player through
three scenarios, it is highly advised that players follow the tutorial before beginning serious play.
There are two minor problems with version 1.0 of
the game (on the ST). Both are supposed to be
fixed in version
1.1. If the Operation Jericho
scenario does not
allow the P.H.R.
player to move
Task Force #22,
you have the old
1.0 version. The
game locks up at
that point and
the only way out
is to reboot. Also,
the earlier version
allows a sudden
appearance of
ghost ships
around turn 44 in
all scenarios.
Though these ships cannot be destroyed, they do
not hinder play. Players who have version 1.0
should contact SSI for a corrected disk.
Overall, once players understand the manual
(and that is a large undertaking), this can be a very
satisfying game. It is reminiscent of Imperium
Galactum, but offers more complexity. The
strategic and economic elements of the game
seem to be excellent in design, but the manual
does nothing to help players get into the game.
The game can be a worthy addition to any strategy
gamer's software library, but only if he is willing to
get beyond the early frustration level.

AND NOW,
FOR SOMETHING
COMPLETELY
DIFFERENT
Winners f th e CG W
Essay Contest.
CGW subscribers were asked to complete the sentence, "My most humorous experience while playing a computer game was . . ." The unanimous first
choice of the editors and winner of the two year
paid subscription to CGW is Steve DeWall of
Bethalto, IL. Second choice was Jayson Hogan of
Seattle, WA. who will receive a one year paid subscription. All other entrants will have an issue of
CGW added to 'their present subscription.

Editors'
Choice Award:
. . . the night my band of adventurers was about to enter another
dungeon and I heard a noise on the
basement steps behind me. It was
the baby's walker tumbling down.
"The baby is falling down the steps!"
I screamed. Fortunately, he had
pushed the walker down the steps
and was fine. I rushed up the steps
and picked him up. Just as we got
into the kitchen, my wife came
around the corner at full speed. She
was stark naked and covered with
soap. When wet soapy feet hit
lineoleum, disaster is inevitable. All
three of us ended up under the
kitchen table, a little shaken, but
unhurt.

Runner-Up:
. . . the time I was playing Dungeon Master and left the console
long enough to cross the room. I
noticed some movement on the
screen and yelled across the room
to my friend, "Kill that Beholder
before it kills my characters!" My
Mom, thought I was talking to her
and, never having used my computer or the mouse before, picked
up the mouse and attempted to kill
the monster by applying the mouse
directly to the screen and pressing
the button furiously. Needless to
say, the Beholder proceeded to kill
all of us, but it was hilarious to
watch Mom use that mouse.

"STRIKE FLEET"
COMMAND BRIEFING
by Ronald F. Williams
n this article, a CGW subscriber
shares his successful approach to
Electronic Arts' and Lucasfilm
Games' "Strike Fleet." As in our occasional "Strategically Speaking"
column of strategy tips, CGW cannot
playtest all the hints
received. Let the player beware.

keep it within 2000 meters of its mother
ship. Then, when the Russians fire on it
(1-5 missiles), manually fly it back to the
mother ship at full speed. Upon landing
the helicopter, the Russian missiles will
explode without damaging either the

TO:
All commanders
FROM:
CINCLANT-FLT

5. When facing enemy aircraft of the
Backfire Kingfish class, always wait until
the craft are within 28
kilometers before launching an anti-missile. In this
manner, the success probability for interception is
95% assured. The success
probability decreases
proportionally beyond this
range.
6. Commanders who
deploy more than one task
force in the Russian
scenarios and hence, encounter dual attacks (i.e.
surface and submarine)
during a battle, should
change all surface ships'
speed and direction in
order to stay out of gunnery range and concentrate on the submarine
threat.

SUBJECT: Tactical
Considerations
Evaluation of tactics utilized in recent engagements has resulted in the
following recommendations.
1. Create and use a
matrix of ship capabilities
(as in the sample printed
with this article) so you
know at a glance what
you have versus what you
are against. It will also assist you in selection of the
best ships to utilize in a
given situation.
Note that for most of the
Russian scenarios, a
preference for DDG Class
(Arleigh Burke, if possible)
is recommended. Two DDGs
carry more anti-missiles than a
single Ticonderoga. Spruance DDs are
to be avoided at all cost.

quantity of 12. Backfires always fire at
the flagship, so do not be caught unawares.

helicopter or ship. This is undoubtedly
not realistic, but it works!

The primary strategy should be
centered upon either launching a first
strike (targeting the Slava class as a top
priority, because of its matching gun distance) or intercepting Russian missiles
first, launching a limited counter-strike
by utilizing the Secret Helo Tactic (see
item 2, below) to help deplete their antimissiles, and finally, gunning them
down.

3. Utilize a quick ship change/anti-missile methodology. Track the first incoming missile from the Target Ship by
using the "M" key and launch an antimissile. Go to the next missile by means
of the "M" key, "Enlarge Map Range" to
a size that will include the next target
ship. Then, use the "C" key to toggle to
the targeted ship. Remember to keep
your anti-missile weapon highlighted.
The speed and ease of use will greatly
enhance a ship's potential for survival.

2. Use the Secret Helo Tactic to compensate for the Russian superiority in
anti-missiles. Launch a helicopter and

4. Commanders should change their
flagship whenever the current flagship's
anti-missile inventory is reduced below a

7. In terms of surface
combat, the doctrine
demands opening range. It
is sometimes effective to
close on the enemy and
alter speed in order to compensate for gun deflection,
but one should always
reverse direction before
entering the enemy gun
range. Further, when hits drop
enemy speed, one's own speed should
be dropped in order to continue
effective fire. 90% of the time, this is effective.

SUBJECT: Bugs and
Useful Pesticides
In the C-64/128 version, some
program errors and possible solutions
have been noted.
1. Scenario 9.3 ("The Road to Kuwait")
seems to have a map/location problem
when the location movement command
is used on the Fleet or Task Force Map.
The program has a tendency to use the
next lower map for reference. Consequently, if the player does not refer to

the lower level map, ships will usually
run aground.
Solution: Commanders should move
the ship slowly (four knots) into a position behind the next closest ship and follow until the Depth Warning disappears.
2. Scenario 9.8 ("Escape to New York")

does not provide the Arleigh Burke class
DDGs (if replacements for game default
ships) with the two LAMPS helicopters
that should be standard equipment.
Solution: Commanders should be certain that these ships are accompanied
by one equipped with helicopters.

3. Scenarios 9.8 and 9.9 do not allow
lock-in of the Sonar On command for
warships, nor does it allow non-combatants to permanently toggle Sonar On.
Solution: Commanders, particularly
those responsible for warships, should
consistently keep the sonar status as

Sonar On/Radar Off.

of the trio's films. Both versions, however, played
identically.

Yes, We Have No
Bananas!
Cinemaware's "The Three Stooges"
Reviewed by David M. Wilson
Either I had just put in the wrong disk, or
Cinemaware had put a Defender of the
Crown disk in a box labeled, The Three
Stooges. There, on my monitor for the entire world
to see was the
familiar Defender of
the Crown title
screen and the computer was loudly playing the rousing
Defender of the
Crown theme. Then,
suddenly, radio static
took over as these
three familiar stooges
marched out onto
the screen. Imagine
my shock when Larry
said, "This looks like
a kid's game." It was
really Larry's voice.
Moe said, "Shut up!"
and Curly barked viciously. This gave
way to the authentic
"Stooges" theme
music and the real
game began. Right
then I knew that I
was in for a slapstick
treat with
Cinemaware's latest
release. They had
captured the Three
1 Stooges mystic.

E

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:

PUBLISHER:

As the plot of the "game" unfolds, players discover that the wicked banker, I. Fleecem, is about
to foreclose on the orphanage's mortgage. Moe,
Larry, and Curly declare that they'll get the money
($5,000) necessary to keep the orphanage in the
good-hearted widow's hands. If players score exceptionally well (earning $7,500), they can even
provide those much-needed repairs to the house
which the widow has been putting off. If they want
to "marry" the widow's beautiful daughters, they
will need even more.
So, our boys are off and seeking odd jobs. This
is done by a moving hand at the top of the screen.
The hand moves between six different rectangles
(lined up like one side of a Monopoly game) and
the player tries to hit the joystick button when the
hand is on a good choice. The bad choices are
mousetraps, bankers, or any game segment that
the player hasn't mastered, yet. Selecting the
mousetraps causes the "guys" to lose a day while
they nurse Moe's hand. Stopping on the banker
will incur both charges (business license fees, back
taxes, etc.) and ridicule. Of course, players will try
to make good selections, but as the game progresses, the hand moves faster and faster.
One of the ways the boys earn money is simply
by finding money. They find wallets and money
bags all over the place. If only life were this simple.
Nevertheless, it is a real laugh to watch all three
bend over to pick up the wallet and bump their
heads together. Any Stoogephile knows what happens next. Moe slaps Curly and Larry (with appropriate sounds and exclamations).
Another method they use to earn money is by
serving pies, which naturally leads to a pie fight as
in the short subject, "Hoi Polloi." Players can enjoy
throwing pies without having the mess (or the
waste). $10.00 is paid for each pie "served" by
smacking a guest in the face. Throwing and ducking is not as easy as it sounds, however. Remember that players are using one joystick to control
three stooges.

Cinemaware's Three Stooges
game continues the company's
fine tradition of innovative games
with excellent graphics and sound.
Cinemaware calls their products
"interactive movies" rather than
"games" and in this product,
players will almost feel as if they
are watching one of the trio's popular short subjects when they watch the credit sequences.

The hospital always needs gurney pushers and
the stooges love to push gurneys. Therefore, in
the segment entitled "Doctors" (based on the
award winning short subject, "Men In Black,"
which, in turn, satirized the popular medical film,
"Men In White"), players collect money for each
hall they pass, while they bob, weave, and dodge
around nurses, wheelchairs, and patients on
crutches. The patients on crutches are, by far, the
most fun to knock down, but these collisions will
cost time, since the goal of the player is to reach
the operating room at hall 20 before the timer
runs out. The Amiga version adds points for catching flying medicine bottles and other supplies. The
C-64/128 version misses this extra feature.

There are, as one would expect, differences between the Amiga and C-64/128 versions. The
Amiga version has sharper and clearer imagery
and more clarity in the sound effects and digitized
voice tracks, but the Commodore's opening
screens were much more like the original opening

"Boxing" is based on "Punch Drunks" and the arcade game is an example of effective use of the
split screen. The screen is divided into three sections. In the upper left portion of the screen, Curly
is shown, in static images, boxing his life away. In
the upper right, the stopwatch which is being used

The Three Stooges
Amiga, C-64/128
Solitaire
$39.95
John Cutter
Timothy Skelly
David Thiel
Bill Zielinski
Cinemaware
Westlake Village, CA

to time the round is shown ticking away. The lower
portion of the screen is what is important to game
play, however. It seems that, as in the film, Curly
can only win the fight if he hears the tune, "Pop
Goes The Weasel." Just before the fight, however,
Larry sits on the violin that he was planning on
playing the tune upon. Now, Larry must rush into
town and get something to play the tune on,
either a violin or radio. He must avoid sleeping
dogs, wooden crates, open doors, streetlamps, and
ice blocks. The catch (which sometimes seems like
a Catch-22) is that he only has until the fifth round
to return. This is a difficult task to say the least.
In "Crackers," Curly tries to win the cracker eating
contest at the lodge. In this portion of the game
(the idea taken from the short subject, "Dutiful But
Dumb"), players wrangle with ornery oysters. They
grab the spoon. The screen digitized directly from
the film was the most impressive part of this segment.
Another arcade segment can be important to the
game. It is the slapfight. This segment will not
directly provide the stooges with any money, but it
helps to slow down the hand which selects the
game segments. The player becomes Moe and
must win this sadistic battle of nitwits with Larry
and Curly. Players who want to increase their chances of hitting will have to resort to faking by
moving Moe's hand repeatedly before striking. The

more hits Moe gives Larry and Curly, the slower
the hand used in selection will move. Hint: Curly
seems to be the biggest sucker in the slapfight.
Stoogephiles
who tire of
the arcade
elements in
the game
will enjoy
the Trivia
Contest. In
this event,
players
answer multiple choice
questions
about the
boys'
career.
Before playing the
game,
players
should read the documentation which details a lot
of the history of The Three Stooges. Anyone who
does not read the book, cannot expect to do well
in the Trivia contest. The C-64/128 version has
three questions at $200 each, but the Amiga offers
a larger prize and more animation/sound in these
sequences.
Okay, The
Three Stooges
game is not for
everybody, especially if you are
the kind of person who
doesn't want to
ever see
another The
Three Stooges
film, again. For
those of us
who remember
the boys from
our childhood
with a great
deal of fondness, however,
the game is
simultaneously
a delight and
piece of "living"
memorabilia. In
fact, this game
gave me the
courage to
watch a few
episodes. If you
are, or were, a
fan, you will
enjoy this game
for its fresh approach to some
old friends.

The Seven
Spirits of Ra
by Alan Roberts
f you've grown tired of the generic pseudomedieval fantasy games, come with me to the
deserts of Egypt. Here, since the dawn of civilization, the tale has been told of Osiris, the pharaoh
of the gods, and his murder, rebirth, and revenge.
The Seven Spirits of Ra is
arcade/adventure (80% arcade/20% adventure),
giving you the chance to
play the god Osiris. Some
may prefer more puzzlesolving, but the game is
certainly better than most
of the pure arcade games
on the market.

I

Getting Your
Just Deserts
(Game Objective)

title:
System:
Price:
Designer:
Publisher:

The goal of the game is
to return to the land of
the living. Rats, snakes,
bats, vultures, crocodiles,
ghosts, mummies, Seths
(demons) and the arch-villain Set will oppose this
quest. Each time you
"die" (a relative term in
the land of the dead), one
of your seven lives floats
away. Lose all and be cast
in the fiery lake of Abat.
Not all obstacles in the
game can be overcome
by combat. Physical
obstructions bar your way as well.
The Seven Spirits of Ra
Fortunately, each animal species is
IBM (5.25" disks,
ruled by a "Master," and once you
free exchange for 3.5")
$49.95
defeat the Master, you can transMacrocom, Inc.
form yourself into its shape, enaSir-Tech Software
bling you to bypass those
Ogdensburg, NY
obstacles. Even your fellow gods
will test you. The jackal-headed Anubis, the
crocodilian Sobek, the four-armed Sekhmet, and
your own wife Isis must be appeased. You must
pay attention to hints scattered throughout the
game. Also, you can regain lost health by finding
and eating food.

Ankh if you love Isis
(An Overview)
Let us embark on a brief tour of the game (those
of you who'd rather discover for yourselves what's

on the other side of the tomb may skip down to
the next section). You are on the royal barge when
treacherous guards pop up with swords drawn.
What happens? You get annihilated. Next thing
you know, you are in the Duad (the land of the
dead). There are three pyramids here and a section
of riverfront property infested with hostile wildlife.
The entrances to the pyramids are flashing
squares marked with ankhs (a cross with a loop at
the top). Notice that the door to the central
pyramid is out of reach.
Inside the pyramids you might find nourishment,
weapons, and treasure (who says you can't take it
with you?). Each pyramid hides the gateway to the
other realms (in the advanced game, which gate
leads to which land is randomly determined): the
Swamps of Sebat, the City of Tombs and the
Caverns of Isis. Somewhere in the caverns is the
portal to the Passage of Rebirth. After you answer
the questions of Isis, you will be reunited with any
lives you might have lost in combat. You'll need
them. As you pass through the gates of rebirth,
you are reincarnated as Horus, the avenger. In the
center of this swamp is the Stronghold of Set, who
can transform himself into any creature or guardian you have met. If you are victorious, you rise
into the heavens and ride the celestial barge with
Ra. A short optional philosophy lecture follows.

Undercurrents in the
Underworld (Complaints)
There should be some way to choose the
"silence" option before the introduction music
begins. Some of us must face the wrath of roommates or spouses who like to sleep undisturbed.
What makes an annoying situation worse is that
the only way to save a game is to quit and restart,
and, literally, "face the music" again.
Another problem deals with movement. As you
move Osiris, he goes to the edge of the screen.
The screen scrolls along as Osiris strolls along,
rarely allowing you to see trouble before you step
in it. The layout is awkward: while most keys used
in the game are sensibly near the left-hand "home
keys", one vital function is "p" for pick up (it would
have been more logical to use "g" for get). Even if
you have a joystick, you must use the keyboard periodically.
While it is very clear how much damage Osiris
has taken, one can only guess how much fight an
enemy has left. This is especially annoying with
Set. You find yourself wondering if he is just tough
or if a specific attack is a complete waste of time.
The game seems unevenly weighted in favor of
arcade sequences. Even when players must
answer a question, they have an unlimited number
of guesses (unless there is a pack of nasties hard
on their heels). This could use refinement.

Divine Aspirations (Compliments)
Although saving a game is not as painless as it
might be, you can save up to nine times per disk.
While the graphics themselves are not outstand-

ing, the colors in particular are brighter and offer
more variety than I've ever seen on a CGA screen.
The game also ran on my Hercules-compatible
Compaq screen. You must run the program from
a backup "play disk" or off the hard disk (the
original being used as a "keyed master disk").
There is no hint book, but the game is backed
by Sir- Tech's Hotline Hint Department and Disk
Repair Service. Also, with many adventure games,
once you've solved the game you might as well
reformat the disk. With the Seven Spirits, however,
there is an "advanced" game option. The monsters
are tougher, you can't regain strength by resting,
and the layout has had some minor changes. The
questions are the same, though.
Personally, I'm delighted with the idea of using
non-European mythology as a basis for an adventure game. The book that comes with the program
contains a short section on Egyptian religious
thought. This is the first game I've played all year
that actually taught me something.
Even though the game is not as tough as it
should be, the game is worthy of an above
average recommendation and it must be given an
extremely strong recommendation for arcade addicts and teachers.

All's Pharaoh
in Love and War (Hints)
[Ed.: Warning! The following material contains
specific hints and strategies.]
Your first item of business is to find the sword,
the only weapon you can get without transforming. Get the staff of fireballs and lightning bolts
ASAP. Learn to juggle these three weapons quickly, as some monsters are vulnerable to only one or
two attack forms.
Fireballs travel a short distance and explode,
while lightning bounces. Use caution; if your opponent is too close, you'll both take damage. Fight
ghosts in a large room (they are invulnerable when
walking through walls) and use the Staff of Fire (it
has a faster rate of fire). You can only have one
missile in the air at one time (from either staff), so
avoid using lightning in wide-open spaces unless
necessary. There is a patch of water in the
swamps. Lure your enemies here, where you can
maneuver (remember, you can only use weapons,
pick up or drop items in human form).
Also monsters and food are placed randomly. If
you don't like what you see when you cross
through a gate, back out and try again.

Tobruk: The
Clash of Armour

In solitaire mode, one may only choose German.
With two players, both German and British options
are available.

Review by M. Evan Brooks

Additionally, one may choose the arcade subgame option (on or off) and a previously-saved
game may be loaded for play.

T

Tobruk is played in discrete player turns. Each
isonefthwrmulaionscve- Tobruk
day consists
of two movement and assault phases
(Axis first) followed by resupply and the command
phase (air/engineer support).

ing desert warfare during World War II.
Datasoft has attempted to bridge the gap between arcade garners and strategy wargamers in
this release.

Look
and Feel:
Graphics and
Documentation
Tobruk's map and
character set are very
reminiscent of
Microprose's

Decision in the
Desert (Gazala
scenario), except the
former is not as crisp
or detailed. Since
Tobruk was released
in 1988 and
Decision in 1985,
this gives one pause
for thought.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUN.

levels. The only difference is that at the expert
level, the British computer opponent is more aggressive and mobile.

Tobruk: The Clash of Armour
C-64/128
1-2
$34.95
Steven R. Williams
Datasoft
Chatsworth, CA

The documentation
is adequate. The
rules are explained,
and a historical background briefing is
given. However, the
historical analysis is a
cursory "bare-bones"
narrative. No historical delineation of tactics or operational
strategy is given.

A brief bibliography is included.
For those interested in additional
background to the Gazala Campaign, this reviewer would suggest: Atlas of the Second World
War (ed. Peter Young), Panzer Battles (MG F.W.
von Mellenthin), Rommel (Desmond Young), or
The Desert Generals (Correlli Barnett).

The Play Is The Thing: Mechanics
Joystick operated, Tobruk is easy to use. Upon
booting, one may select either novice or expert

Movement next to an enemy unit initiates combat, and one may use the arcade option at this
time (assuming that at least one AFV [armored
fighting vehicle] is available).
During the command phase, one may utilize air
and engineer support. Air support consists of allocating assets between air superiority, air strike
and interdiction; engineer support consists of allocating "spanners" (the British term for wrenches,
showing Tobruk's British origins) between battlefield vehicle recovery, sabotage of enemy
vehicles or mine operations. This use of engineer
assets is an innovation and illustrates their importance. However, aside from the mine/countermine
operations, the engineer operations are "hidden"
from the user and their actual impact is difficult to
determine.
Strategically, control of Tobruk determines the
victor; alternatively, reducing the enemy to two
units will also yield victory.
Based upon the minefields, early operational
movement by the Axis is virtually pre-determined.
A flanking movement southwards should engage
Bir Hacheim (historically defended by elements of
the Free French and the Foreign Legion).
Countermine operations should seek a path
through the minefield in the region of "The
Cauldron". When the path is cleared, mobile elements should accelerate through the gap and
move onto Tobruk. The southern elements will assist in this operation, and depending upon tactical
finesse and expertise, Tobruk should fall without
any real problem.
The basic problem with the simulation is that alternative strategies are unavailable. The northern
Axis forces (Italian divisions) have a mobility factor
of "1"; since most German forces (which are located in the south) have a mobility factor of "6", it
does not take a Clausewitz to determine optimum
strategic maneuver.
Assuming that the Axis is careful to move his
supply dumps forward, the British computer opponent is easy to defeat. Attacks in the north are
wasteful for either player; mobility is lacking, and
the computer opponent leaves much of the British
force structure alone. Historically, the British
responded piecemeal and without any coherent
command strategy, but this did not have to occur.

(Continued on page 41)

W

ell, it's August, and Fred
is off at the annual Grues
Convention being held (as
usual) in the Dark Room of Colossal
Cave. I understand that this
year they're going
to try and get
Daylight Savings
Time repealed
(grin). Anyhow,
with Fred away
and the dog days
of summer upon
us, this is a good
time to trek into
the cool back
room and peek
into the (overflowing) mailbag.

back issues, or copies of articles
that appeared in previous issues, of
COW. You have to write directly to
the CGW address to order back is-

Wasteland (clues carefully irradiated over a glowing atomic pile):
A number of people are having
some problems with opening the
cylinders at Base
Cochise. What is
needed here are
some keys (NOT
secpasses); if you
don't have one for
each cylinder, it's
very likely that you
missed something
at the Citadel. Go
over each room
thoroughly. Also,
there is a pattern
involved here,
which can be
figured out only
by trial and error.

Scorpion's Mail

Before we get to
the letters,
though, I'd like to
remind everyone
that it really is
necessary, if you
live in the United
States, to enclose
a self-addressed,
stamped envelope
with your questions. Otherwise,
you aren't going
to get a reply (a
SASE is not
necessary if you
live outside the
US).
Also, I really do
try to get a reply
out the day after I
receive a letter,
and usually can
manage that.
However, mail service has been very
erratic lately.
Sometimes a letter can take as
much as a week
or more to reach
me, when another letter from someone else in the same state (or even
city) will arrive in my box in only a
couple of days. I have never figured
out why this is so, but it is. So when
you write, keep in mind that a
response could be delayed by the
vagaries of the US Postal Service.
Finally, I am not able to provide

Bard's Tale I
(answers served
"on the rocks"):
Some folks are
being puzzled by
the "one of cold"
riddle in
Kylearan's Tower.
This one is actually simple to
answer, if you've
paid enough
money to the bartenders at the
taverns.

sues (copies of individual articles are
not generally available). Check the
listing of back issues before ordering anything. Some back numbers
become sold out and if the issue
you want is not listed, it is no longer
available (photocopies of articles
from out of print issues run $1.00
each). Now, on to the games!

Bard's Tale III
(hints displayed
on a bed of
"iceberg" lettuce):
The Ice Keep in
Gelidia seems to
be a popular
problem these
days, specifically
getting past the
wards of the three
towers. If you
don't mind freezing a bit (or even
if you do), wander
around the outdoors until you locate
the hut. Inside you will find something to put you on the track of the
solution. Don't overlook the phrases
by the wards, and keep your manual
handy (you'll be referring to it often).
Beyond Zork (silken solutions
with a dash of color): Caterpillars

seem to be in short supply here
(grin). Most people know that these
are "baby butterflies", but they are
stuck on how to change the butterfly back to a caterpillar. This one is a
bit tricky, but with a little thought
and experimentation, you may be
able to grind out the answer.
Return of Werdna (pre-sliced advice in cube form): Several people
are getting a little ahead of themselves in this one by marching up into
the cube before finishing everything
below, especially Hell. Unless all the
puzzles (except the witch) are completed, going into the cosmic cube
isn't going to help you much, and
you certainly won't be able to get
out of it (this IS a one-way trip).
Take some time to get everything
else done first, so you can avoid
frustration.
Ultima V (a partial list of
dangerous food supplements): A
surprising number of people are

having trouble keeping up their
Avatar status. Usually this is a result
of taking things that don't belong to
them, especially crops from the
fields to supplement food supplies.
These crops aren't yours to take.
You really have to buy food in the
towns. Taking food from tables isn't
quite as bad, but should also be
avoided. Remember, Avatars are
good and good people don't steal.
However, it is ok to take things that
are in abandoned areas. Also, on a
different problem, before you enter
the final dungeon, do make sure
you have everything you need with
you. The entrance is strictly oneway. You can't change your mind
and go back out again.
Might & Magic (a savoury hint
roasted to a "golden" brown): A
bunch of folks have gotten pretty far
into the game, only to discover they
are lacking the gold key, and usually
because they forgot to search in a

certain stronghold. The only thing to
be done in this case is to go back
and re-do the first task of the game.
After its successful completion, revisit the stronghold and search at
the proper time.
That's about it for now. Remember
if you need help with an adventure
game, you can reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi: visit the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs
menu). On GEnie: stop by the
Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia
to reach the Games RT). On The
Source: Send SMail to ST1030. By
US Mail: (Don't forget the SASE if
you live in the US!): Scorpia, PO Box
338, Gracie Station, New York, NY
10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all
rights reserved.

The Stars...
My Destiny

The computer acts as a gamemaster throughout
the game by moderating combat, keeping track of
players' locations, handling trade transactions, and
updating personal possessions. It also directs the
players to the proper paragraphs to read, depending on their situation.

by William "Biff" Kritzen
n 2815 A.D., the majority of the human race is
afraid of space. They are cloistered in the Nine
Worlds (Earth and eight colonized planets) in a
region called the Galactic Fringe. Even though
space travel has been practical since the invention
of the dual-axis hyperdrive in 2257, humankind's
attempt to colonize "Beyond the Boundary" came
to an abrupt halt in 2490. The "Space Plague," a
gargantuan epidemic caused by an organism of
alien origin, killed more than half the humanoid
population of the galaxy, threatened the extinction
of civilization, and forever changed mankind's attitude towards space.

I

Now, a Space Patrol enforces the "Boundary,"
that one-way border around the Nine Worlds in
order to prevent anything like the "Space Plague"
from ever happening again. Now, anyone may
leave the area enclosed by the Boundary, but they
may not return.
Thus far, the Boundary has proven effective in
keeping ships from entering the Nine Worlds for
three centuries, keeping humanity safe from the
unknown. Of course, this does provide for a bit of
stagnation, as well. After all, no new discoveries,
no new challenges, and countless lost opportunities hardly seem compatible with a growing
standard of living. Finally, there are those who
sense that something is amiss .. .
STAR SAGA:ONE: Beyond The Boundary is the
brainchild of Andrew (Wizardry) Greenberg, Rick
Dutton, Walt Freitag, and Mike Massimilla. The first
science fiction, role playing, adventure game in a
planned trilogy, Star Saga is a genre-buster. It can
be compared to no other game on the market. The
best way to describe Star Saga's playing experience
is to compare it to participating in the Foundation
series of books by Isaac Asimov. We're talking
grand scale adventure here, folks.
From one to six can play the game. Each human
player takes the role of one of six characters. These
can be temporarily added or suspended as realtime situations require ("I can't game tonight, the
horses have cholic;" "Russell! Telephone!;" and "It's
two in the morning, I'm outta here!" are all situations that arose during our gaming sessions. Fortunately, the game is designed to make it convenient to simply suspend one character and continue play.).
The game is non-graphic and driven by text in
booklet form. There are lots and lots of paragraphs
(thirteen booklets of them to be exact). Each booklet is 48 pages long and there are 888 total entries.
Actually, you don't need to read all of them to successfully complete the game, but the richness of
the prose and the compelling story line will undoubtedly keep you exploring and experiencing all the
universe has to offer.

The game plays very smoothly and moves quickly,
although it takes around 60-80 hours to complete.
Each turn, a player has the option to pilot his ship
through space, land and explore planets, trade
cargo at planetary commodity exchanges, meet
with players to exchange cargo or secret information, or interact with any
non-player-characters that he may
meet on various planets. The
player inputs orders into the
computer and is, in turn,
directed to the appropriate
paragraph to read. These
paragraphs may lead to further options and paragraphs
or may cause the player's turn
to end, sometimes prematurely. (Meeting a space pirate
who cleans out your cargo
hold does put an unexpected
crimp in that shopping spree
you were going to have on
Rialla!) Since there are thirteen text booklets,
other players can input their
orders while you're reading
the results from your turn.
This keeps the game moving relativeTITLE:
ly quickly, once you get used to the
SYSTEMS:
system. It is rare for two people to
need the same booklet at the same
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
time.
DESIGNERS:

With all of the booklet shuffling and
PUBLISHER:
page turning going on, the room has
the decibel level of a library when the
game first starts. As the players
progress, though, they get negotiable commodities
such as iron, computers, fuel, weapons and most
importantly, information. This is when the interactivity of the game really comes into its own. Each
character starts the game with a set of goals to accomplish. This usually sends everyone out into the
void in different directions seeking their own
separate destinies. As they explore and gain information, there is a need to trade and interact with
the other players. The initial competition between
the characters eventually gives way to a mutual
cooperation. It's a big universe out there and it's
tough to tackle it alone. However, in spite of the
need for cooperation, there does seem to be a
place in this game for a personal grudge, or two.
In addition to the exploration aspects of Star
Saga there is an economic subgame that runs
through the main plot. Each player starts the game
with three of his ten cargo bays filled with goodies.
It is up to him to determine what and when to
trade. Most of the planets to be discovered will

Star Saga: One:
Beyond the Boundary
Apple II, JIGS,
and IBM
1-6
$79.95
Rick Dutton
Walt Freitag
Andrew Greenberg, and
Mike Massimilla
MasterPlay
Tampa, Ft

trade their products for items they can't naturally
produce. Sometimes, they'll trade three for one (if
you've got what they need). Knowing what
planetary exchanges offer, and what they need, is
one of the most valuable pieces of information in
the game. When you start the game your ship is
basically the stripped down, economy model. Your
personal armor and weapons consist of clothes and
hands. So to emulate the bug-busting marines in
the movie Aliens you'll need to upgrade just a bit.
Fortunately, there are several space docks and
weapons emporiums located in the galactic fringe.
Of course, finding them is
another matter. Consequently, the early portion of the
game finds everyone
crisscrossing their way
through space and cashing
in on whatever little milkrun
they've been able to set up.
Eventually, as their needs
and shopping lists expand,
the trading routes are also
enlarged and inter-player
trading begins to come into
the picture. Information now begins to become a
valuable trading commodity. Eventually, with the
right knowledge, and a little luck, (avoiding Silverbeard, the pirate), you can end up with a pretty hot
ship. Drone trading ships are really handy little
items to have. They can travel instantaneously to
any part of the galactic fringe, and handle most
trading transactions, leaving you free to carry on
with whatever business you're about. At the end of
your turn, the drone ship returns with your cargo,
ready for next turn's trading orders. Drone ships
come in three, four and five bay models, so you
can increase your cargo handling capacity by fifty
per cent. Also, if your ship is attacked by pirates,
anything on your drone is non-piratable. So you've
got your own untouchable stash! Everybody should
have one of these little babies, they're invaluable!
The combat subgame is handled completely by
the computer. It determines the combat situations
you encounter and picks the weapons and armor
you will use. There really is no tactical ability in the
game, but within the combat area, there is plenty
of room for maneuver. There are six categories in
both personal and ship-to-ship weaponry: three in
attack (contact, projectile, and special); and three
in defense (armor, mobility, and special). The computer determines the best ability you have in each
category (this will change depending on the opponent) and compares it to your opponent's best
abilities. This is translated into a numerical score
for both offense and defense. A total score of one
hundred is needed for success when attacking or
defending, so it is possible to successfully defend
against an opponent's attack, yet fail to press your
own attack home. This can result in no harm to
you, but an equally undaunted foe. So, whenever
possible, upgrade your combat capabilities. The
combat sequences seemed to bother some of our
more bloodthirsty players slightly, (our Traveller roleplaying group tends to lean more towards Aliens
than Starman) but the approach to combat integrated nicely with the rest of the game. It would

have been nice to have been able to choose some
of the combat options ourselves, though.
I don't want to go into anymore detail on the
game because part of the magic of Star Saga is
the sense of wonder that unfolds as you play. The
prose is as well-written as anything you'll find in the
science fiction section of your local bookstore and
the story line is tight and well-plotted. Each player
is free to do anything he wants all through the
game, yet behind it all is a gently guiding hand that
makes sure everyone gets where they should eventually go ["There's a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will." Hamlet(Act V, scene ii)].
Once the game is finished, the players can go
back and explore places they didn't have time to
visit initially. It is also possible to replay the game as
a different character, since each character has a different set of goals in the game and will undoubtedly experience different adventures along the way.
I've played the game completely through twice and
will probably run through once more before the sequel comes out. Unfortunately, that won't be until
next year. Waiting will be very difficult.
Star Saga:One Beyond The Boundary is probably
the most unique and well-written role-playing experience yet to appear in a computer game. It will
also stand up to any human-gamemastered roleplaying game on the market today. The people at
Masterplay have expanded the state-of-the-art in
computer storytelling to new extremes with this
product. Our entire play group was absolutely
blown away by it. It is humorous, challenging,
frustrating, exciting, and addictive. I can best sum it
up by describing the end of our first night's session
with the game.
Eyes glazed, Johnny Wilson looked at his watch
in disbelief.
"Biff, it's two in the morning!"
"Oh no, it can't be," I replied. "I've got to go feed
my animals."
"My wife's gonna kill me," whined Johnny, "I
was supposed to help the kids with their
homework!'"

I looked back at the computer screen. Johnny
looked at the booklet in his hand.
I looked again at Johnny, and he looked up at
me. We both looked at the screen.
"Just a couple more turns and then we'll go," I
hesitantly ventured.
"Move over," Johnny happily replied, "I need to
explore that subterranean passageway on Fiara."
"No, you fink! I haven't been there yet," I
responded.
My protestations were drowned out by his cackles as his fingers punched the computer. Anxiously awaiting my next turn at the keyboard, I
watched the clock tick towards three A.M.

Tobruk: The Clash
of Armour
(Continued from page 34)
In short, Tobruk recreates the Gazala Campaign,
but without the stress or alternate strategies available to either side.
When combat is initiated, one may choose to participate on an individual vehicle level. Enemy targets appear as vehicles or fortifications. One's tank
may close with the enemy, using fire and
maneuver. However, eventually, one's tank will be
destroyed; there is only so much that a single
vehicle can do in a maelstrom of combat.
That is the deficiency of the arcade option. No
real player gratification is achievable. While
Datasoft has assured this reviewer that the arcade
results figure into the overall resolution of the battle, it is obscured from the user, thereby rendering
the arcade option to a little-used variation.

Conclusions
Tobruk is an introductory-level game. It accomplishes what it sets out to do, but without any
real elan or joie de vivre. The use of engineer as-

sets is commendable, but their effect appears minimal.
Tobruk has strong competitors in the
marketplace. Decision in the Desert covers the
same situation and offers an additional four
scenarios, plus one can play
solitaire as either side and switch
from side to side in mid-game.
Game Designers Workshop's
Rommel: Battles For Tobruk is
based on the same campaign and
offers an extremely detailed simulation, albeit with crude graphic
portrayal. Rommel at Gazala from
Simulations Canada offers a command perspective from either side
sans graphics and Strategic
Studies Group has recently
released Rommel: Battles for North Africa which
utilizes the versatile Battlefront system for the
same subject. With so many choices, it will depend
on whether the consumer is looking for a wargame with arcade elements thrown in, a carefully
researched series of desert scenarios, a command
perspective, or detailed simulation.
Simulations should break new ground or cover
old ground in new and/or alternative conceptualizations. While Tobruk has an interesting operational
interface, it is not groundbreaking in either of the
above senses.

Over The River
(Continued from page 18)

each other and whomever we could talk
to in local stores. It was not a good way
to keep a finger on the pulse of the
market.
Senior executives made periodic forays
to check on our progress, wandering
from cubicle to cubicle to look at
games. Some were pleasant and made
reasonable comments. Others were
petty and dictatorial ("That background
ought to be blue. Change it."). In the
end the dictator types had less impact
than the others, since they never played
the games anyway and thus, had no
idea whether their orders had been carried out. Nevertheless, I spent a great
deal of time talking my best designers
out of quitting after being the targets of
such visits.
The cartridge era had four distinct
periods, each with its implications for
game designers. The first period, from
1978-1981, was the time of the Obvious
Design of the Obvious Product. The
proper route for a design was a straight
one: show the action, tally the score.
Sports games were the biggest sellers,
largely because buyers knew what they
were getting before they opened the
package.
Game designers of the time worked for
big companies (Atari, Mattel), drew
average programmer salaries (but not
royalties), and didn't have their names
on the products. Management regarded
their programming skills as the source
of their value and game design was
often snorted at as an illusory talent:
"Anybody coulda made that baseball
game, but I was the one who said we
oughta do it."
The second era, which ran from 198182, centered on the conversion of the
latest coin-op hits to the home
machines. The speed of development
now became absolutely critical, so a
game would be ready for the home
while it was still hot in the arcades.
The most visible symptom of that rush
was the VCS version of Pac-Man, a
cartridge awaited with such passion and
rushed to market so hurriedly that over
1,000,000 copies were sold in the first
few months of its life. Unfortunately, the
game was released before its time and
featured ghosts and a Pac Man that flickered irritatingly and game play that
didn't feel balanced. The game's sales
ground to a halt as its bad reputation

spread by word of mouth, and Atari had
to absorb huge losses on returns. Score
one for quality.
Ironically, it was during the third era, a
brief time in 1982-83, that game designers finally began to get some of their
just rewards. There is a story (perhaps
apocryphal) that Pac-Man was finished at
all only because of a special mid-project
"arrangement" for programmer royalties.
The success of Activision after being
founded by four former Atari game designers (including Alan Miller and Bob
Whitehead, who later left to found Accolade) led Atari, Mattel and Coleco to
take a second look at how they handled
their creative staffs.
Royalties of the time were in most
cases minuscule, but they nonetheless
began being paid. Names of designers
began to appear in small print on the
backs of packages and in manuals. In
fact, the companies began working overtime to recruit the best ones away from
their competitors.
Nevertheless, before the industry could
really mature, new voices sounded the
coming in 1983-84 of the fourth era—
and the cartridges' death knell. Dazzled
by the success of Atari, Mattel, Coleco
and Activision, hordes of imitators
jumped into the market. Quaker Oats
even founded a video game subsidiary!
In late 1982, the number of cartridges
manufactured by all these companies far
outstripped the demand. Many of the
games were absolutely awful, but
retailers, riding a 3-year sales burst, kept
ordering everything anyway.
Christmas, 1982 was a disappointment
and by early 1983, the game-playing
public had made the choices which the
manufacturers had refused to make.
Many of the games still sat on store shelves. Returns started rolling back in to
the publishers. Several companies went
under rapidly: Games by Apollo, Fox
Videogames, ❑.S. Games and others.
Further, once they were bankrupt, they
could no longer take returns from the
stores. Retailers cut their losses by cutting their prices and the $4.95 specials
we still see today appeared in a
marketplace where normal prices had
averaged $35. Surviving publishers with
large inventories started selling better
games at bargain prices to cut their losses. The $35 carts looked overpriced by
comparison, and even the best games'
sales slowed to a crawl as the $5 specials swallowed all remaining demand.
More bankruptcies followed, and Atari,
Mattel and Coleco disbanded their game
design staffs.
The first Cartridge Wars were over.

(I'm sure you've noticed that I've
made no reference to the Nintendo
craze that has repeated the Atari and
Mattel Phenomenon of 8 years ago.
That's because for American game
designers the Nintendo is a non-event:
virtually all the work to date has been
done in Japan. Only the future will tell
if the design process ever crosses the
Pacific as efficiently as the container
ships and the letters of credit now do.)

How Deep are the Woods?
While the big companies publishing
Coin-Op Conversions and sports games
were dominating the cartridge world,
small companies like Sirius, Broderbund, Infocom, Automated Simulations, SSI, On-Line Systems and
others were quietly building the home
computer game market.
Instead of large in-house staffs, these
companies usually combined a few
game designers who were employees
(often the founders themselves) with a
group of external programmers. These
independent designers had the same
relationship with the game companies
that book authors have with traditional
publishers: they submitted their games
for consideration, the publisher chose
the good ones, and the authors were
paid a royalty.
Authors' names appeared prominently
on these game packages long before
the practice infiltrated the cartridge
world. Names of that early era like Bill
Budge (Raster Blaster), Dan Bunten
(Computer Quarterback), Chris Crawford
(Eastern Front 1941), Jon Freeman
(Temple of Apshai), Dan Gorlin
(Choplifter) and Doug Smith (Lode Runner) became familiar to garners and
were associated with quality products.
Many of those same designers continue
as leaders of our industry today.
From 1978-82 most of the notoriety
outside the computer game world went
to the cartridge games. Yet, today's industry is directly based on the structure
that was evolving in the disk-based
world at the same time, the world which
Computer Gaming World chose to
cover when it first appeared in 1981.
The small publishers succeeded where
Atari, Mattel and Coleco had failed, and
a key element in that success was, and
is, their view of "Computer Game Designers" as special individuals with unique
talents who are worthy of all our
respect. I can think of no more appropriate conclusion to reach in an article to honor the fiftieth issue of Computer Gaming World.

Video Gaming World
By Arnie Katz, Bill Kunkel
and Joyce Worley

N

idea: a jumping/climbing/shooting game for
the Nintendo Entertainment
System!

Video
Gaming
World's
Newswire

When a consumer buys the
NES, he gets a free copy of
Super Mario Bros. packed inside. Video game designers
seem to believe, however, that
the user will thereafter be looking
for endless rehashes of that admittedly excellent game. Within
the past year, we've seen such
thinly-veiled SMB clones as
Ghosts 'n Goblins (CAPCOM),
Kid Niki, Radical Ninja and Karnov (Data East). Now that the
Nintendo game manufacturing
community has turned corporate
licensing eyes on the world of
old video and computer games,
guess which titles they find most
appealing? Why, jumping/climbing/shooting games, of course!

-Compiled by Joyce Worley
The glamor of soaring sales,
expected to hit $1.25 billion in
'88, is the name of the game.
Videogame experts estimate a
40% increase in hardware and
software sales for the current
year. Nintendo was the clear
winner in 1987, taking an estimated 65% share of market in
hardware sales. Atari's share of
the hardware market is estimated at 24%, Sega at 8%,
and other companies at 3%. ...
Atari has scheduled over 19
new games for the XE system
this year, most of which are highquality computer game conversions licensed from their original
publishers. Among them is the
award-winner, Into the Eagles
Nest, a classic high-action excursion into Hitler's stronghold .. .
Camerica's wireless, remote
control, infrared-system
Freedom Stick lets the player
move 20 feet away from the
screen, with either automatic
rapid fire or manual action. The
accessory is compatible with Nintendo, Sega, Atari, and Commodore.. . . Who ya' gonna'
call? Ghostbusters, of course,
coming this Autumn for NES
from Activision.. . . LJN Toys
crossed an invisible line in bad
taste with their latest NES game,
A Nightmare on Elm Street,
which actually casts the gamer
as Freddy Kruger and sends him
out to kill teenagers. Not nice!
Friday the 13th takes a more
heroic, if more scary, stance and
sends the gamer on a search for
Jason and his Zombies.. . . The

Battlefields of Napoleon
(Broderbund) lets NESers command the troops through simulations of eight of Napoleon's campaigns. Designed by the same
crew that produced the best-selling Deadly Towers . . . SNK
Corporation goes to war in
Iron Tank: The Invasion of Normandy, for NESers who have always wanted to spearhead an assault against German headquarters.. . . Video games in big

ow, here's an original

TITLE:
Super Pitfall
SYSTEM:
Nintendo
# PLAYERS:
1-2
PRICE:
$35.00-$40.00
DESIGNER:
Pony, Inc.
(from David Crane's original)
PUBLISHER:
Activision

biz: Acclaim Entertainment
has merged with Gamma Capital Corporation, making it a
public corporation.... CAPCOM USA will bring Willow
home from the movies, for the
NES, later this year.. . . The
Magic of Scheherazade (Culture Brain) is an Arabian Nights
fantasy, with magic, battlefields,
flying carpets, and a variety of
tools and weapons. It should be
available in January, 1989... .
NESers control style and direction of serves, rushing the net,
or playing the backcourt in Racket Attack (Jaleco. Specially
marked sweepstakes packages
give buyers a chance to win tennis equipment and lessons. ..
Sega is giving players a look at
their new games. The Sega
Games Preview VHS video tape
($7) shows sample levels of ten
games.. . . The hands across
the ocean most likely have joysticks in them. Palan Electronics
of London, England sold over
180,000 cartridges for Atari

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Jaws
Nintendo
1
$35.00-$40.00
LJN Toys, Ltd.

2600 in 1987 and expects the
total to reach one half million
pieces for this year. About 50%
of their sales go to Europe and
the rest are for English joystick
jockeys. 75% of the Palan
products are Activision titles,
but the company should have
ten original 16K Double Chip
games ready for the holiday
buying season. Top titles last
year were: Space Shuttle, Pitfall,
Hero, and Decathlon. This year
should include: Ghostbusters, Pitfall II, and River Raid. Lou Fine,
Managing Director of Palan, estimates that there are 7 million
Atari 2600 units worldwide and
of these, 1.5 million are in
England. The company is booming and, in fact, has openings for
Atari 2600 programmers. If you
think you have the Right Stuff,
write to Lou at: Palan
Electronics, Ltd., Prestwich
House, Brunswick Industrial
Park, Brunswick Way, London
N11 1HX, England, and tell him
we sent you.

Super Pitfall is a compendium
of images and characters taken
from the two Pitfall games
designed by David Crane for the
old Atari 2600. Shamefully,
Crane is not even mentioned
anywhere in the documentation.
These characters and images
were transformed by Pony, Inc.
into a SMB rehash that most
NES users will be able to play in
their sleep. Certainly, there is
nothing in the game itself to
keep them awake.
Super Pitfall centers around adventurer Pitfall Harry and the
search for a priceless diamond
that disappeared along with his
daughter (Rhonda) and Quickclaw the cowardly lion (How
many of you remember that Pitfall enjoyed a deservedly short
life as an animated TV series?).
The trio turned up missing just
before the game commences.
What Super Pitfall is really
about, of course, is jumping/climbing/shooting. Wherever
reality and the established SMB
play system come into conflict,
hackney triumphs. For example,
objects such as guns, medicine
and keys periodically appear on
the playfield, but since the designers want Pitfall Harry to jump
whenever possible, the objects
are suspended in mid-air, rather
than located on the ground.
Super Pitfall employs the same
macro-style side view as the
original Pitfall games. Harry and

his adversaries (snakes, scorpions, cavemen, etc.) are viewed
in side perspective, but more
than one level is visible on
screen simultaneously. While
Harry explores the surface, for example, subterranean levels can
be seen underneath him, providing a tantalizing look at treasures
and dangers to come.
Pony visually reshaped the
characters to look like the short,
squat beings seen in other SMB
clones. These characters move
in a slow-motion, floating style
that is at unsatisfying odds with
the action game format.
If you simply must have
another jumping/climbing/shooting game for your NES, Super
Pitfall is a cute enough entry. It
employs the Pitfall characters in
an appealing new scenario with
play mechanics that Nintendo
gamers will find comfortable, if
somewhat familiar.
—Bill Kunkel
now,
A And
for something
LJN
completely different .
Toys, a company previously best known for its WWF
Wrestling dolls, burst upon the
videogame software scene with
one of the most original, entertaining programs in the NES
universe. Jaws is a creative,
multi-phase action adventure in
which the player battles Universal Pictures' giant shark and a
whole cornucopia of his minions.
Jaws begins with the Map
Screen, rendered in an attractive
angled overhead perspective
rather than the flat 2-D most
maps display. This chart fills
several screens and the scrolling
is remarkably smooth.
The player's ship is docked
safely at a port until it's moved
to sea via the directional control
pad. The player continues to sail
until the ship strikes something.
This might be Jaws himself, represented on the Map Screen by
his trademark dorsal fin when he
is close to the player's ship or
some other form of undersea life
too small to visually register on
the map at all. A transmitter allows the player to keep track of
Jaws' position sonically.
The game advances to the
Side View scenario, a verticallyscrolling contest in which the
player shoots at a variety of targets from jellyfish and rays to
small sharks and even Big Bruce
himself. When hit, the rays and
jellyfish sometimes transform
into bonus objects to be collected by the diver to increase
his energy level, enhance his
speed, or acquire points. These

points can be used at the two
other available ports to pick up a
tracking transmitter or increase
energy level.
The higher the diver's energy
level, the more lethal his blasts,
but it takes a pretty heavy energy level to even put a dent in the
big guy.
Players who triumph on the
Side Screen scenario are periodically granted a bonus screen
in which they drop bombs on
scampering jellyfish from an
airplane that zips back and forth
across the
top of the
screen.
Once the
player sufficiently
builds his
own power
and
depletes
Jaws'
strength
level (displayed at
the bottom of the
screen), the game
TITLE:
moves to the Final
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
Scene. This gives
the player a first-per- PRICE:
PUBLISHER:
son view from the
front of his boat.
The shark-hunter must ram into
Jaws with the boat's prow to
finish him off.
Jaws is rich in the small details
that make a game playable over
long periods of time. The farther
one sails from the coast, for example, the deeper the water.
Take my word for it, you do not
want to confront Big Bruce in
the shallows!
The graphics, animations and
game play in Jaws are all first
rate. If this is any indication of
what LJN can produce in the
videogame theater, they should,
forget about the wrestling dolls
and buckle down to full-time
game design immediately!
—Bill Kunkel

nce again, Sega offers
home gamers an opportunity to stave off nuclear
devastation. Global Defense is
essentially a 2-D version of
Sega's 3-D hit, Missile Defense.
The player again represents
mankind's last hope of averting
a global holocaust.

O

The game is divided into offensive and defensive halves. In
fact, both phases feature offense
and defense in that the player
must attempt to obliterate incoming missiles launched "from
secret bases located all over the

galaxy." This must be coupled
with his other duty, to protect
the "Global Defense Satellite,"
the weapon with which the
player launches his anti-missile
assault.
In the offensive phase, the
GDS is seen from a side view (as
are missiles and other projectiles), whereas the Earth is
viewed from the upper edges of
the atmosphere. The player
manipulates the GDS with the
Sega controller while passing
high above the planet. One of
the action
buttons
provides
direct
guidance
of the
GDS and
the second
button
fires the
satellite's
laser cannon which
is aimed
via an
onscreen
cursor.

Global Defense
Sega
1-2 Players
$40.00
Sega

In addition to the
incoming missiles,
the GDS must also
deal with land bases
(which launch surface-to-air weapons), killer satellites, "crab ships," and attack
probes. Each time a missile or
other incoming weapon gets
past the GDS, a unit on the
player's "Damage Meter" lights
up. Direct hits obliterate the
GDS.

If the GDS successfully
negotiates its journey, a space
shuttle appears, scoops it up,
and carries it to the Defensive
phase, which is sort of a cross
between Missile Command
(Atari) and Space Invaders
(Taito). From far out in space
(so far that the curve of the
planet is clearly visible at the
base of the screen), the missiles
which slipped by during the first
phase now appear in the far distance. The projectiles pop over
the edge of the earth, continue
toward the top of the screen,
then arc slowly downscreen (following the curvature of the
planet) to move directly toward
the GDS and the player. Once
the missiles attain proximity to
the GDS, they hover briefly
before floating toward the bottom of the screen and earth's
helpless cities. The player,
employing the onscreen cursor
firing system, must destroy each
and every missile. If even a
single stray hits home, the game
is over.
Graphics and animations are

attractive and make for an exciting contest, but the mixed
perspectives (combining bird's
eye and side views on a single
playfield) are visually disconcerting. Moreover, the direction pad
controller is noticeably inferior to
tracball (or even, joystick) controllers in games where the cursor
must be moved rapidly around
the screen.
—Bill Kunkel

The Modern
Home Arcade
-by Bill Kunkel and Arnie Katz
Back in the late '70s, if you
asked a home videogame designer/programmer where he got
his ideas, he would probably
respond: "The arcades." At least,
that's what the most honest
ones said. Most video games
from this period were, in fact,
scaled-down and thinly-veiled
reproductions of classic coin-op
arcade games.
The battle for the lucrative
home market heated up by the
end of the decade. It was no
longer enough for a game to
simply look like, play like, and
contain most or all of the
original's elements. The previous
free-wheeling design style caused
legal complications, while also
failing to capitalize on the
popularity of the play-for-pay
hits. Publishers began actually
buying the rights to the coin-op
hits and, before long, it reached
a point where there was no arcade game so worthless that
someone wouldn't make an overvalued offer for its home marketing rights.
Today's home videogame
market is still driven by the arcade hits, but there are some significant differences from those
halcyon days. For one thing,
today's coin-op hits don't have
the media visibility of their precursors from the early '80s. Game
like: Space Invaders, Pacman,
Defender, and Berserk were
media sensations whose names
and graphics were universally
recognized by consumers. As a
result, those consumers frequently based the decision of which
videogame system to purchase
based on the availability of
specific titles within that system's
inventory.
Since none of the contemporary arcade hits command
that kind of recognition, the different systems on today's
market distinguish themselves in
terms of their style and intended
market position. Nintendo is
the "all family" system with a

(Continued on page 47)

(Continued from page 45)
vast library reflecting the tastes
of both youngsters (lots of jumping and climbing games with cartoon-like graphics) and adults
(sports titles and adventure
games). Sega, on the other
hand, is the "cool" system with
the "hot" graphics, appealing largely to teenagers and other arcade gunslingers. It offers sizzling visuals designed more for
realism than cuteness, plus an incredible 3-D system.
Atari, the only old-timer in the
current videogame picture,
seems to be positioning itself as
the "classics" company. The
lineup for its 7800 videogame
system emphasizes high quality
versions of early '80s arcade classics (Joust, Asteroids, Pole Position, etc.), while the XE catalog
consists mostly of home computer hits from the same period
(Archon, Lode Runner, David's
Midnight Magic, etc.).
The relationship between coinops and home video games has
also changed in another way.
While Atari was the only major
player of the early '80s, with
fingers in both the home and
coin-op markets, both of today's
big guns, Nintendo and Sega,
are established coin-op creators
with considerable credibility—
and vast product catalogs—in
the arcade universe.
Nintendo dominates the picture in terms of quantity. Not
only do they have access to the
inventory of former Nintendo
hits, but through licensing deals
with prolific coin-op producers
like Data East and Capcom, the
NES library is potentially almost
unlimited.
Ghosts 'n Goblins, a recent
release from Capcom, is an excellent example of what the Nintendo Entertainment System can
do. The game is, essentially, a
spooked-up version of Super
Mario Bros. with more shooting.
The player is cast as a brave
knight whose princess is captured by a winged demon during
the game's attractive animated
prelude.
In order to rescue her, the
player's knight must pass
through a series of seven gates
(a schematic map of these is displayed after each loss of a life).
When the player reaches the end
of each section, a key to the
next gate appears. Guarding
these portals are a rogues° gallery of zombies, ghosts, demons,
and assorted things that go
bump in the night. There is also
a series of jars. It seems these
demons are rather compulsive
about bottling up all captives

and treasures (Haven't they
heard about Tupperware?).
These urns contain new
weapons, as well as bonus
characters who bestow extra
points when rescued.
While hardly groundbreaking,
Ghosts 'n Goblins represents the
kind of game that made Nintendo famous. Similarly, Sega's
After Burner serves as a good ex-

Zone, the classic first-person
tank combat contest set in the
near-future.
This home version makes a
half-hearted effort to duplicate
the vector graphics which gave
the coin-op original its distinctive, crystalline look, but this
game's strength lies in a simple,
but powerful play mechanic. The
user is a tank command attempt-

computer chips. It may be tough
to find some of the new games
for the Nintendo this December.
In fact, a few of the titles
premiered at CES may not debut
in the stores until 1989. With
that small warning delivered, let's
preview the cartridges everyone
will be playing this winter and
beyond.

Licensing Line-up
After a lapse of several years,
publishers have returned to other
media as a source of inspiration
for new video games. More licenses are in active development
right now than in the previous
three years combined!

ample of the kind of game that
system strives to offer.
After Burner is the first game
that uses Sega's new 4MB technology and the enhanced
graphic capabilities this added
memory provides is abundantly
obvious. After Burner uses the
same pseudo-first person
perspective as most driving
games (Pole Position, Out Run,
etc.). The player's vehicle (in this
case, an F-14 Thunder Cat) appears in the center of the screen
as a visible guide. In addition,
The HUD (Head's Up Display) offers a small radar sight, as well
as a pair of target cursors (cannon and missile sights).
The landscape moves beneath
the F-14 like the surface of a rolling cylinder (one of the less
pleasing visual elements), but
the five different classes of
enemy aircraft are rendered in
remarkable detail. The action
scenes, the heart of the
program, look appropriately spectacular and the explosions are
some of the best effects ever
seen in a videogame.
The game's only real problem
is the use of twin sighting cursors in addition to the player's
on-screen vehicle serves as a
large cursor, a visual guide to
keep the player appraised of his
relative position. In After Burner,
the cannon sight often disappears against the large F-14 and
the player is forced to fire blind.
This game doesn't offer the
same kind of rich simulation experience provided by MicroProse or subLogic flight
simulators, but then, those
games don't have explosions like
After Burner!
Old-timers who decry the overreliance on hot graphics and the
lack of old-fashioned game
values can turn for solace to the
Atari XE and games like Battle-

ing to destroy an army of rebel
war machines with nothing but a
cannon and a crude radar display for allies.

Reggie Jackson Baseball and
Walter Payton Football (both
Sega) are both arcade-style
sports contests endorsed by
these all-time greats. They combine realistic graphics with lots
of player options for grandstand
managers and coaches. A star
of more recent vintage headlines, John Elway, has endorsed
John Elway's Quarterback
(Tradewest), a Nintendo
gridiron cartridge.

Whatever your taste in arcade
games, one thing is certain: the
world of home arcading has
never been richer. Home translations of arcade hits are virtually
indistinguishable from the
originals. What's more, these
translations reach the home
market much quicker than they
did in the "old days" (when coinop manufacturers were reluctant
to undercut future arcade earnings). Whatever your taste in arcade games, there is a
videogame system out there
that's got just what you're looking for . . . and no tokens or
coins are required!
—Bill Kunkel & Arnie Katz

Licensing comes to the golf
links with Lee Trevino's Fighting
Golf (SNK Corporation of
America) for the Nintendo. This
detailed simulation presents multiple views of 18 demanding
holes.

SPECIAL
REPORT:
Fall Video
Game Preview

Notable movie-based games include Robocop (Data East) and
Platoon (Sunsoft) for the Nintendo, as well as Rambo III for the
Sega system. All have non-stop
combat action and, in addition,
Rambo III has the kind of
frenetic pace which can really
give the light phaser a workout.

Publishers strut their software
at the Summer Consumer
Electronics Show in Chicago
-by Arnie Katz, Bill Kunkel,
and Joyce Worley
Everyone agreed it couldn't
happen. When the videogame
bubble burst in 1983, people assumed another fad had gone
bust, never to return.
The 1988 Summer Consumer
Electronics Show proved that
video games are back with a
bang. Huge hardware and
software sales gains and rosy
projections for the holiday
season sent optimism into the
stratosphere at the convention.
The only thing stopping even
faster growth is the shortage of

Hulkamania runs wild in
Wrestlemania (Acclaim). The arcade-style mat game features
Hulk Hogan, Andre the Giant,
Randy Savage, and other stars
of the World Wrestling Federation in real-time ring action.

Mindscape's first group of Nintendo releases include a game
based on the Road Runner cartoons. The player helps Road
Runner avoid trucks, falling
rocks, cannon balls, and the
tenacious clutches of Wile E.
Coyote.
GameTek will have an entire
Nintendo line based on wellknown T.V. game shows. Jeopardy and Wheel of Fortune, both
of which have all the visual frills
the shows' fans expect, are now
available. Coming soon are
Double Dare, Super Password,
Classic Concentration, Hollywood Squares, Card Sharks,
and "junior" editions of both
Jeopardy and Wheel of Fortune.

The whole family will enjoy
Monopoly (Sega) based on
Parker Brothers' durable money
game. Animated tokens and an
unusual pseudo-3-D perspective
pump fresh life into this classic.
Airwolf (Acclaim), based on
the television series, is a helicopter flight simulation for the Nintendo system. The player pilots
the super-chopper on a mission
to rescue hostages.

the best-selling Ultima 111 computer adventure to the Nintendo.
The player directs a four-character party against the villainy of
Exodus.
Shanghai (Sega) is certainly
the most unexpected videogame
of the year. Match pairs of delicately colored tiles in this
cerebral strategy contest which
seems light years away from
blowing up aliens.

Leaping from the pages of
their "ground level" comic book
to the video gaming screen are
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles
(Ultra). The solitaire gamer
fights "Foot" Clan Ninjitsu warriors in this martial arts epic.

Spy us. Spy on the same system, mixes two hot trends: It
was originally a computer game
and is, in turn, based on the
comic strip from Mad magazine.
One of two players search for
secret plans while harassing the
other agent with traps.

Coin-Ops
Come Home

California Games, Epyx's
computer hit, is going the
videogame route. The multievent action-sports title will be
published by Milton Bradley for
the Nintendo and by Sega for its
own system. Milton Bradley also
plans to release another Epyx
program, World Games for the
Nintendo.

During the videogame lull,
1984-1986, few arcade games
made a dent in the home
market. The typical computer
gamer is about two decades
older than the average arcader,
so computer entertainment
software stresses relatively complex and cerebral simulations.
The videogame and coin-op
audiences, however, overlap extensively. As a result, quite a few
hit quarter-snatchers will make
their debut for home systems
before the end of the year.
Promising a monstrously good
time is Rampage (Data East)
for the Nintendo. Based on the
Bally Midway coin-op,
Rampage casts the player as a
creature on the loose with 128
screens awaiting destruction.
Also from Data East is Cobra
Command, an enhanced version
of the 1985 helicopter rescue
game.
Paperboy (Mindscape), for
the Nintendo, is another coin-op
classic long overdue for a home
version. Bizarre obstacles
menace the heroic paperboy as
he makes his daily delivery.
Tensen is releasing one of the
few arcade games which lets
players cooperate against a common enemy in the Nintendo version of Gauntlet.
Further, Sega plans to turn
several of its recent arcade hits
into video games. Shinobi,
Thunderblade, and Double
Dragon will all be in stores for
holiday gift-giving. Tradewest
will issue a Nintendo edition of
Double Dragon.

Born on
the Computer
Ultima (FCI) brings a colorful,
if slightly streamlined, version of

Original Designs
Sega will enter the role-playing
arena with Phantasy Star, its
first 4 MB cartridge. The player
saves the Algol system in a
game which features both space
travel and multi-level threedimensional dungeon.
An adventure with a lighter
touch is Kid Kool (Vic Tokai)
for the Nintendo. The hero of
this arcade-style quest has three
days to find the nine wonder
herbs to save King Voldam.
For sophisticated Nintendo
players, Jaleco offers
Robowarrior. Its 27 stages of play are
crammed with action, but the
large number of weapons,
enemies, and puzzle rooms
provide plenty of opportunity to
exercise the gray matter.
720' from Mindscape is a
cross between a skateboarding
sports cartridge and an adventure. Waiting to test your abilities
are the local hotshots of Skate
City.

The Round-up
Even this lengthy survey can't
cover all the new titles for the
Nintendo and Sega, despite this
month's expanded Video
Gaming World. The safest
prediction is that the biggest
problem for video garners is likely to be how to make the budget
stretch far enough to get all the
hot cartridges.

(Continued from page 10)
in the grid before proceeding to the next
one. Nevertheless, there are enemies
which are designed to erase the player's
lines and enemies which "kill" the player's
icon with a mere touch. These enemies
offer enough of a challenge so that even
the programmers claim not to have been
able to advance beyond the 12th level in
this 50 level game. Amiga ($29.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #9.

Koei Corporation
20000 Mariner Avenue #100
Torrance, CA 90503
NOBUNAGA'S AMBITION: Another
beautifully crafted game from the makers
of "Romance of the Three Kingdoms"
(CGW #49, p. 39), this product offers 18 players the opportunity for military,

economic, and diplomatic conquest in
16th Century Japan. Although the game
mechanics and user interface is simple,
players will want to keep their von
Clausewitz "On War" and Sun Tzu's "The
Art of War" beside them in order to do
well in this fascinating wargame. IBM
($59.95). Circle Reader Service Card #10.

Mastertronic
711 W. 17th Street #G9
Costa Mesa, CA 92627
DEMON'S FORGE: A graphic adventure in the traditional sense of parserdriven, illustrated stories, this product
presents the saga of a renowned
gladiator struggling for his life. Sentenced to death, the gladiator has one
chance for survival. He must enter,
navigate, and safely exit "The Demon's
Forge," that infamous dungeon exit from
whence no hero hath escaped in centuries. Apple/IBM flippie in 5.25" ($9.99),
IBM in 3.5" ($12.99), both ($14.99).
Circle Reader Service Card #11.

KNIGHT GAMES: Remember the tournaments in "Ivanhoe" and "Robin Hood?"
This game offers many of the same individual combat competitions: archery,
axe duels, ball and chain flailing (morningstar combat?), crossbow competition, pikestaff contests, quarterstaff bashing, and sword fighting. C-64/128
($9.99). Circle Reader Service Card #12.
NINJA MISSION: The screens look
like several other martial arts games, but
there is a plot line to this action adventure. The player's ninja must enter the
evil tyrant Akuma's infamous fortress of
death and retrieve the invaluable "Shichi
Nin No Kami," seven jade idols with mystical powers which are vital to the survival
of a defenseless village. Naturally, the
seven jade idols are scattered throughout
the floors (levels) of the fortress. Amiga
($19.99), as "Ninja" for Atari 8-bit, C64/128, IBM in 5.25" ($9.99), IBM in 3.5"
($12.99). Circle Reader Service Card #13.
microillusions
17408 Chatsworth St.
Granada Hills, CA 91344
MAIN FRAME: The fiction behind this
game sounds like a tired sci-fi potboiler.
A massive computing system begins to
function independently and a hostile Al
is set loose upon civilization. Obviously,
the player is intended to stop this
nefarious and increasingly homicidal
matrix. There are plenty of different
screens and arcade sequences for the
character to conquer, however. In the air,
on the land, and under the sea, those
who want more action than story line will
like this adventure. C-64/128 ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #14.
SKY TRAVEL: While it is not a game,
this delightful astronomy/planetarium
program is certainly well-conceived and
documented. The program functions in
conjunction with the manual to offer
several planned planetarium-type experiences, but also offers enough "constructability" to create one's own
planetarium shows. Apple IIGS ($52.95),
C-64/128 ($49.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #15.
Microsoft Corporation
16011 NE 36th Way
Box 97017
Redmond, WA 98073
FLIGHT SIMULATOR III: The newest
version of the famous flight simulation
program is even better than its predecessors. The graphics on the IBM version (in
(Continued on page 53)

level. Eat all your breads before going down to the
last level (you won't have time once you're there!).
The ending (when the book is destroyed) is
nowhere near as grand as that of Questron. In
fact, it's pretty tame by comparison, since it is
mostly text with a few graphics thrown in, making
the end "reward' barely adequate to the task accomplished.

(Continued from page 9)
secret lair at the bottom. This lair (as in Questron)
is actually a castle level, chock full of guards. In addition, the moment you set foot on this level, Mantor will start hitting you with mind zaps every move
you make. Therefore, your time here is limited.
You must fight through the guards and find the
room where the book is being prepared as quickly
as possible, before you run out of hitpoints (and
no, you can't kill Mantor this time around).
This is where those breads of life are so important (you have been saving them up, I hope). Not
only do they restore lost points, they actually increase points. It is, therefore, possible (with
enough of them) to have thousands of hit points,
which you are certainly going to need on Mantor's

Aside from going into tombs and dungeons there
is little to do in the game except fight monsters
(and castle guards) to accumulate gold, and trek
around the towns looking for better weapons and
armor. Puzzles are virtually non-existent. Destroying the evil book of magic, when you finally reach
it, is extremely simple to do. Aside from the
guards, no one will try to stop you, so there is not
even a grand, climactic finish to the game.
The manual is not expansive, but is certainly adequate for the game. It contains enough to get you
started, including brief descriptions of the
monsters that inhabit various areas and dungeons,
as well as some background information on the
quest.
Bottom line: Not equal to the original; best for
the beginner, not the experienced.
Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all rights reserved

TAKING A PEEK
(Continued from page 49)
EGA or VGA mode) are as seductive as
those in the 68000 versions and the formation flying option, opportunity for
modem link-up, and use of pull-down
menus make this version a real jewel.
IBM ($39.99). Circle Reader Service Card
#16.

Mindscape
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, IL 60062
ROAD RUNNER: Life may not be like
a "Road Runner" cartoon, but this arcade
game certainly is. Not only does the
player get to flee Wile E. Coyote on foot,
but some of those wild inventions from
Acme come into play throughout the
game. A hierarchy of bonus points (for
everything from completing a level
without missing any birdseed to "destroying" Wile E.) adds to the challenge of this
game. (Not pictured). C-64/128 ($34.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #17.
WILLOW: True to the movie and, in
the EGA version, offering lovely graphics,
this action/adventure game uses seven
action sequences from the film to retell

the story. The first sequence begins with
the player trying to smuggle the baby
out of the castle. Then, the viewpoint
changes for the next sequence and
those of future sequences. IBM ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #18.

modern naval helicopter, but it is engaging (and addictive) on the order of
"Space Invaders." In fact, the feel of the
play is similar to that arcade classic.
Apple IIGS ($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card #21.

PBI SOFTWARE, INC.
1163 Triton Dr.
Foster City, CA 94404

Scorpion
19 Harbor Drive
Lake Hopatcong, NJ 07849

ALIEN MIND: Upon arriving at the Zekford Biological Research Space Station,
characters discover that all human life
has been eradicated. Instead, the heroes
of this action/adventure must face over
100 unique creatures in the course of exploring the five levels of the space station
and confronting the "Alien Mind." Apple
IIGS ($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#20.

BLACK SHADOW: The beautiful
graphics and two player competition
(using either mouse or joysticks) carry
this arcade product. The action screens
look like detailed versions of "Zaxxon,"
but they are wrapped by character
screens and other atmosphere sequences which offer something of a cinematic
quality to the opening of each "mission."
Amiga ($34.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #22.

MONTE CARLO: This gambling
casino simulation for the IIGS offers: Baccarat, Blackjack, Craps, Poker, Roulette,
Slot Machines, and Trente-et-Quarante.
Play is completely mouse-driven and the
documentation clearly defines all of the
options available.(Not pictured). Apple
IIGS ($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#20.
SEA STRIKE: This arcade game
provides plenty of action, great sound,
and finely-etched graphics. It is hardly a
realistic depiction of the capabilities of a

FOUNDATION'S WASTE: This is
another arcade spaceship shoot-'em-up
with that three-dimensional feel. The
game offers four long levels of arcade
combat, an upbeat soundtrack, and an
animated finale. Atari ST ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #23.

Simon & Schuster Software
1 Gulf and Western Plaza
New York, NY 10023
NOT A PENNY MORE, NOT A
PENNY LESS: This parser-driven
graphic adventure is based on the novel
by Jeffrey Archer. The protagonist is an
American professor engaged in post-doctoral work at Oxford University. Having
been bilked by a wealthy con-man, the
object of the game is to accomplish a
countersting and get your $1,000,000
back. The Atari ST version uses a
speech synthesizer for the various characters in the novel/game, but the C-64 version lacks this feature. Atari ST ($39.95),
C-64/128 ($29.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #24.

Strategic Studies Group
P.O. Box 261
Drummoyne, 2047, AUSTRALIA
ROMMEL: BATTLES FOR NORTH
AFRICA: The "Battlefront" system, as
refined and enhanced through the
prolific sequels, has finally come to the
North African campaign. The command
point-of-view and limited intelligence associated with the system should be ideal
for this particular combat venue. The
variety of equipment utilized during these
battles can also serve as building blocks
for other scenarios. Apple, C-64/128
($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card #25.

Reader Input Device #50
this page, a number of games and articles are listed for
evaluation. Some general interest questions are provided, as
well. For each game you have played or article you have
read, place a 1 (terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next to the
appropriate number on the card provided opposite page 4.
On

The Computer Gaming World Hall of Fame
welcomes "Gettysburg," "Gunship," "Might 6
Magic," and "Starflight" into the ranks of
games which have proven themselves over
the course of time to be top-rated games.
After being rated a significant number of
times by our readers, members of the CGW
Hall of Fame are chosen by the staff of CGW.
Once inducted into the Hall, the game will be
retired from the current Game Ratings List.
As a consumer, you can be assured that any
game in the CGW Hall of Fame is an all-time
favorite.

Game Ratings
In terms of Action/Adventure, "Bard's III" seemed fated
to grab the top spot. Moving three titles to the Hall of
Fame allowed for plenty of movement on that side as:
"Ultima V" moved into fourth position with trumpets blaring "Hail, Britannia!;" "Questron II" eclipsed its predecessor by a tenth of a point; and "The Train" found itself

on track for a top 10 finish. "The Three Stooges" could
stumble into the top 10 during the next ratings period if
they are not pulled over by the blaring sirens of the fastmoving "Police Quest."
In the "Strategy Top 50," the declaration of "Gettysburg:
The Turning Point" as a national landmark (induction
into the CGW Hall of Fame) opened up room for
"Balance of Power" and "Colonial Conquest" to accuse
each other of imperialism by means of their triumphant
entries into the top 10.

