Number 31

Sept./Oct 1986

FEATURES
Wizard's Crown
A Review

Trinity
Playing Tips in Scorpion's Tale

Operation Keystone
A Review

Habitat
A New Online Game for Commodore Gamers

The Statkeeper Was A Computer
Baseball stat programs

Special Offer

16
Scorpia
18
Scorpia
22
Mark Bausman
26
Roy Wagner
32
James Trunzo
45

Free Software and Connect Time

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek

4

Screen Photos and Brief Comments

Macintosh Window
Grand Slam and Race Car Simulator

Amiga Preferences
Graphics, Music, Video programs

Sports Scoreboard
APBA Baseball, Spin Out, World Karate

Atari Playfield
Information for the Atari Gamer

Game Ratings
100 Games Rated

6
Frank Boosman
11
Roy Wagner
29
Rick Teverbaugh
35
Gregg Williams
48

Activision
2350 Bayshore Frontage Rd.
Mountain View, CA 94043
HACKER II: A strategy adventure sequel to Hacker. In
Hacker the computer user was
confronted with a simulated
computer malfunction which
lead to the break-in of a private computer system. Provided with no rules or clues
the player was challenged to
search and use information
found in the system. In
Hacker II You are asked to
electronically infiltrate a security complex in Siberia and
uncover The Doomsday Papers (which contains a plan to
bring the world to its knees).
As in the original game,
Hacker II comes with very
little instruction, you are on

your own. C64/128 ($34.95),
Apple ($39.95), and IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #1.
Avalon Hill Game Co.
4517 Harford Rd.
Baltimore, MD 21214
THUNDERHEAD: Mission on
Thunderhead is an action adventure game where you are a
member of the human resistance group fighting the evil
Eternals. The game contains
two scenarios. In Operation
Tempest you attempt to locate
the power source of Thunderhead and destroy it. In The
Final Appeal you, as a convicted agent, attempt to escape from the complex before
your sentence is carried out.
Over 50 rooms, four mazes,

100 variations and nine skill
levels. C-64 and Atari 8 bit.
Circle Reader Service #2.
Cygnus
P.O. Box 57825
Webster, TX 77598
QUIZAM!: OK, so it's another
computer trivia game! So
what! It's a good one! One to
eight players; eight different
playing "boards"; eight levels
of difficulty. The hi-res
playing "boards" are pleasing
and provide the strategic element missing from most computer trivia games. But what
really sets this one apart is the
ability to write your own
question diskettes. In addition
to coming up with your own
Continued on pg. 8

Macintosh Windows

Frank C. Boosman
Although it's September as you're reading this,
I'm sitting here at my Macintosh during the Fourth
of July weekend, trying to get ahead on my
column. Summer is the slow season for computer
games; game manufacturers know that consumers
are outside eating barbecue ribs and playing
softball, not indoors with their chips, soda, and
latest computer game... except for the dedicated of
us, that is. We'll have to wait a bit for the big
releases of the year, but I think I have plenty of
material to tide us over.
This month we have a tennis simulation up for
review. Grand Slam (GS) is the first offering from
Infinity, a new software company. And while we're
at it, we'll take a look at another sports simulation:
Race Car Simulator from Creative Solutions.

The Inner Game Of Tennis

Everything But Chris And Martina

male, and I'm sure women find the opposite true.
Of course, this is a problem in most computer
games, not just GS, and that's a shame. Tell you
what: I'll make a special mention in this column of
the first new Macintosh game I see with an onscreen female character.
The sound is another weakness in GS. Although
it has digitized sounds of the racquet hitting the
ball, and the crowd applauding, it needs more. For
example, I would have liked to hear the umpire call
"Out!," the announcer speak the score after every
point, or maybe even the players grunt and wheeze
after difficult shots.
Also, it might be cute to see on-screen players
hurl their racquets in the air after winning
matches--or even throw tantrums after losing close
calls. Shades of John McEnroe! Another feature
they might include would allow you to customize
your computer opponents' playing abilities. You
might define a particular opponent as having an
excellent serve, a devastating smash, but tiring
easily, and not playing well on clay courts. Then
you could simulate any player in the world, and say
things like, "I whipped Ivan Lendl in straight sets
today!" Now that would be fun.
GS is a good game. It will be even better when
Infinity adds some of the features I mentioned, as
well as others that are coming. For example, a
version of GS to be released later this year may
allow players to compete over modems or
AppleTalk, which would be great. Until then, I like
to think of GS as a diamond in the rough: pretty,
but even more so once it has been cut and polished.
GS retails for $49.95.

The name GS refers to the series of four
tournaments that form the Kentucky Derby of
tennis: the Australian, French, and U.S. Opens plus
Wimbledon. To win the game you'll have to win all
four tournaments, not an easy or quick task. After
entering your name and nationality, you'll be on
your way.
GS provides just about all of the options a
tennis game could: for starters, you can choose your
racket composition: wood, metal, or graphite. Then
decide how tightly you want your racket strung: 50,
60, 70, or 80 pounds of tension. Of course, you'll
have to decide which tournament you want to play
first. The French Open is a good choice; its clay
surface slows the game a bit. If Paris isn't your cup
of tea, try the U.S. Open, which is a bit faster and
more difficult. Wimbledon's grass playing field
makes it very fast, and the Australian Open is
probably the most difficult of all with its grass and
occasional bad bounces.
Now you should be ready to begin; so take a
look at the Tactics menu for hints on the stadium
you're playing in. Don't forget to scope out your
opponent; GS has a total of four: Demon, Warrior,
Chiphead, and Ace. If Demon is the computer
equivalent of Boris Becker, then I suppose Ace, at
the other end of the scale, is the computer
equivalent of... uh, me. You get the idea. To
receive your opponent's serve, click the mouse
button. Get yourself into position and return it!
You can lob the ball if you want, or smash it, spin
it, slice it (dice it?)...

That's GS for you. As you can tell, GS has a

large range of options, but it's not everything a
tennis game could be. The most glaring omission is
the lack of female on-screen players. I imagine I
would find it slightly disconcerting if my screen
representation was a female player instead of a
Red Line 7000?
A well-established genre in computer games is
the racing game. Go to an arcade with some older
game machines and you'll see racing games that
date back about as far as you can remember: before
Defender, before Asteroids, and yes, before Space
Invaders. Back then, auto race games used overhead
views of the track, and after a while, people tired
of seeing the same basic idea repeated over and
over. It took Pole Position to revitalize racing
games with its driver's-eye view of the road, an

idea that is now in wide use. Interestingly, Race
Car Simulator (RCS) offers both overhead and
driver's-eye views, as well as the ability to design
your own race tracks.
Getting behind the wheel in RCS is easy: start
the game, wait for the 3-D view and overhead view
windows to appear, move the cursor below the 3-D
window so that changes from an arrow to a steering
wheel, and press the mouse button. Now you're
accelerating from the start line at the Indy 500,
RCS's default track. Driving is simple: hold the
mouse button down to accelerate, press the space
bar to brake, and move the mouse from side to side
to steer. You'll hear the sound of the engine change
as you speed up and slow down.
To design your own tracks, click in the overhead
window, select New from the File menu, and draw
a polygon (a connected series of lines). If you've
used the Polygon tool in MacDraw or MacPaint,

you've done the same thing. Once you've completed
your track, you can fine-tune it. Select the track
width--narrow, normal, or wide--from the Edit
menu. Or move one of the points of your polygon
to adjust your track's path. When you're satisfied,
go back to the 3-D window and begin racing.
That's all there is to it. Of course, you can save
your tracks, or use one of RCS's built-in tracks:
Brands Hatch, Road America, Monaco, and Fuji
International. And you can customize the 3-D
background and hood of your car in MacPaint, a
nice touch.
Like Grand Slam, RCS is a good game, but
needs some additional features. First of all is the
sound: RCS doesn't take advantage of the Mac's
sound capabilities, and what it produces reminds
me of the sound on my old Atari VCS games. RCS
would really benefit from the addition of good
digitized sound. Listen to Microsoft's Flight
Simulator and you'll know what I mean when I say
that realistic sound adds a lot to the believability of
a simulation.
Also, when creating tracks, RCS doesn't allow
you to cross lines--that is, no intersections or
overpasses. Since the area you create tracks in is a
fixed, limited size, intersections could allow longer
tracks, which would be nice. Finally, since RCS is
limited to only one player on the track at a time,
all you can do are time trials. It would be nice if
there were computer-controlled drivers on the track
at the same time, to give the game the feel of a
real race: snaking between cars, slipstreaming, and
the like.
RCS hasn't been advertised that much, and is
hard to find: none of the mail-order firms or stores
I called carry it. But you can order it directly from
Creative Solutions for $39.95. Since it is so hard to
track down, I'll give you Creative Solutions'
number here: (301) 984-0262. Or circle Reader
Service #78.
Keeping In Touch
I encourage your comments--and thank those
readers who have already written for their
suggestions. You can help me make this column as
good as it can be by writing to me at: 4568 Georgia
St. #2, San Diego CA 92116. Or you can reach me
at the following electronic addresses:
MCI Mail: fboosman
BIX: frankb
Until next month, keep playing those games!

PEEK (Con.)

trivia categories you can personalize the game and make
up categories about family
members or friends. C-64
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #3.
Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Dr.
San Mateo, CA 94404
AGE OF ADVENTURE: This
is a repackaging of two popular graphic adventure games
(The Return of Heracles and
Ali Baba and the Forty

Thieves). Both games have
improved sound and graphics
and streamlined user controls.
In The Return of Heracles
you lead a band of mythical
heroes through Ancient
Greece as struggle to complete
the twelve Herculean tasks
(the game is based on the
classic mythological writings
of Robert Graves). In Ali
Baba and the Forty Thieves
you quest through Thieve's
Mountain in order to save the
Sultan's daughter. Both games
include a cooperative mode
that lets two or more players
assist one another during the

course of the game, with each
player commanding his or her
own character or group of
characters. Because of the
game's ability to randomize
play elements, each game is
different. At only $14.95 this
is a great buy. Apple. Atari
400/800 to come. Circle
Reader Service #4
Electric Transit
501 Marin St. Suite 116
Thousand Oaks, CA 91360
LUNAR EXPLORER: A
real-time simulation of lunar
Continued on pg. 47

AMIGA PREFERENCES

Roy Wagner
Game software for the Amiga has entered a
brief lull. Several new titles have just appeared and
will be reviewed in the next issue. These include
Little Computer People from Activision, Mynd
Walker from Commodore, and Marble Madness and
Adept from Electronic Arts. Of these, the long
awaited Marble Madness and Mynd Walker, are
enjoying great market success.
What we have seen over the pass few months are
items that use the graphic and sound features that
are so outstanding on the Amiga. These products
are the utilities and tools that are used in creating
the individual features that will produce a new
game or user program.

medium, or high resolution. Brushes can be created
using part of any drawing.
Images is also quite popular and is generally
bought as a bundled package with the Animator
which will be talked about later. This program has
certain features missing from Deluxe Paint like
pattern fills and dithering (creating shade gradations between colors).
In talking with several graphic artists, I have
generally found the they own both Deluxe Paint

Picture This
In the general area of paint programs, we have
Graphicraft from Commodore ($49.95), Deluxe
Paint from Electronic Arts ($99.95), and Images

from Aegis ($79.95).
Graphicraft was programmed for Commodore by
R.J. Mical the designer of the Amiga's programmer-user workbench interface known as Intuition.
Even though it was programmed it in just a few
weeks, it is quite powerful and easy to use when
compared to other similar programs for other nonCommodore computers. Its lower price is an attractive feature when compared to the other two Amiga
products.
Deluxe Paint is the most popular of the three

because it is the most user friendly, and it contains
nearly EVERY feature one could want and then
some. It features the option to create files in low,

and Images in order to have the full complement of
options available to them. All three programs create
a file using a common standard file format (IFF).
Both Electronic Arts and Aegis are planning product upgrades to add additional features.
Let's Have Some Action
Both Electronic Arts and Aegis have complemented their excellent drawing programs with
products that add movement and action to the display. These programs provide for titling, animation,
and video presentations that duplicate the output
from equipment and software that would normally
cost from $10,000 - $50,000.
Animator from Aegis ($139.95 which includes
Images) does some very creative processing using
drawings and a feature known as "tweening" to
create very fast and fluid animation. It is able to
use a minimum number of drawings, a given period
of time, and will gradually fill in missing drawings
in between. The drawings can even be quite different from one another and the program will perform a metamorphic transformation from one to the
other.
Deluxe Video from Electronic Arts ($99.95) is
Continued on pg. 14

Amiga Preferences (Cont.)

also a very capable program that uses drawings and
character fonts to provide excellent presentation
graphics. The full range of titling options resembles
opening movie credits. Sounds or music can also be
added along with the moving graphics. Its animation is limited to cell animation, but the result is
impressive.
Both of these products are equally impressive. If
you can only afford to buy one of them, take a
long look at their manuals before you decide.
Putting together an animated graphic presentation
with either is going to require some serious drawing
and planning on your part. The software makes it
easy to put it all together and modify, but you are
still going to need to do the preparation work.
Print It
When it comes to preparing signs, banners,
cards, posters and calendars, then Deluxe Print
from Electronic Arts ($99.95) is the only "game" in
town. Very similar to the very popular Print Shop
from Broderbund (which is NOT yet available for

the Amiga), this package offers some things beyond
that program. Image, Border and Text colors are all
independent from one another and can be easily

changed. If you do not have a color printer, the
various colors will be printed using different pat-

Continued on pg. 38

Wizard's

Crown

by Scorpia
A circlet of gold, studded with jewels, and surmounted by a brilliant crystal. A source of immense
power. The cause of a catastrophic civil war between wizards that laid waste to a city and brought
evil to the land. For five hundred years, the crown
has remained hidden in the stronghold of the
malevolent wizard Tarmon, whose lust for power
brought about the downfall of the Fellowship of
Wizards. Now, the time has come for the crown to
be returned to its rightful owner. The challenge has

been given; only the bravest and most resourceful
of adventurers will succeed in the quest. As dawn
comes to the town of Arghan, eight hardy souls
step forth from the Crossed Swords Inn to meet
that challenge. The quest begins....
A difficult quest, as they usually are. Starting
with the minor "monsters" of town thieves, muggers
and assassins, you progress to the great outdoors,
the ruins of the elder city, destroyed in the wizard's war, inhabited now only by creatures of evil
and darkness. Fighting your way through the endless hordes of monsters, you will explore the old
Thieve's Guild, the mansion of a long-dead (but
not departed) wizard, and, finally, somewhere in
the wilderness, the castle of Tarmon himself. It will
take awhile before the crown is safely returned to
the city.
You'll need both muscle and magic to see you
through, and fortunately they are available. Up to
eight characters can be in the party, and the full
complement is definitely recommended; a lot of
MEAN critters are roaming around out there. You
can form the group from the characters already included on the disk, or make your own, or any
combination. I found that the pre-formed party was
very well-balanced, and in fact I finished the game
with them instead of creating my own. Don't let
that stop you from experimenting with your own
characters, however; you could come up with come
very potent combinations.
Characters can be single or dual-classed, and it's
wise to have dual-class members in the party. They
won't advance quite so quickly, but they become
more and more valuable as time goes on. Classes
available are fighter, ranger, thief, priest, and sorcerer, and you can have a character with any combination of those, subject to minimum attribute requirements. You should have at least two priests
and one thief in the party; priests can heal wounds
and raise the dead (very important); thieves are
good at searching, disarming traps, and haggling for
good prices when you sell unwanted equipment.
The manual that comes with the game is brief
(only 27 pages), but is chockful of good information, and explains in detail how to create a character, giving a step-by-step description of how to do
it. Careful attention to this portion will insure that
you create good characters for your party.
In addition to the basic attributes of Strength,
Intelligence, and Dexterity, each character comes
with a set of skills for his or her profession(s). Not
every class has every skill. For instance, only
Fighters have skill in using a sword, while only
Priests and Rangers can administer first aid to the

injured. A Fighter-Priest, of course, would have
both. These skills (as well as the physical attributes)
can be increased during game play, either through
training or by the expenditure of experience points.
The maximum value for any skill is 250; for a
physical attribute, it is 30.
Another important part of the character is Life
Points. When these are reduced to zero, the character is dead. Life can be reduced in two ways: from
certain magical attacks, from poison, and from
bleeding. Yes, I said bleeding. Wizard's Crown has
a more realistic way of handling wounds than most
other games of this type. There are two categories
of wounds: injuries, which reduce the character's
skill efficiencies (temporarily), and bleeding, which
reduces the character's life points.
Both injuries and bleeding are further divided
into normal and serious. As you might expect, serious causes more trouble. Characters can often get
by with some minor injury, but serious injuries and
bleeding of any kind should be healed at once. This
is particularly important early in the game, when
your priests do not yet have the power to raise the
dead. Dead characters are not taken with you when
you leave camp, so if anyone dies, and can't be restored, that character is lost.
All this talk of injuries and bleeding brings
combat to mind, and here we have a unique dual
system of handling battles between your party and
monsters. At each encounter, you can choose to
have quick combat or detailed combat. In quick
combat, the computer does all the work, and resolves the actions in a remarkably short period of
time, in many cases fifteen seconds or less
(although it could be somewhat longer, depending
on what you're up against).
For this combat mode, a text screen comes up,
showing your party at the top, and the types and
number of monsters you're fighting. As battle proceeds, the numbers change, showing damage incurred by your party and (we hope) fewer and
fewer monsters, until they have all been killed.
During this phase, you can pause combat for a
better look at the figures, and if things look bad,
you may try to flee (doesn't always work). You can
also choose to use magic or not (you don't always
need it).
The drawback here, of course, is that you have
little control over the actions of the individual
party members. You cannot, for instance, direct
attacks at specific monsters, nor can you choose
what spells your sorcerer will cast. If a character
has a special magic item, it won't be used. But it's
certainly a fast method of combat, and against

weak monsters (weak is relative term; as your party
becomes more powerful, more monsters fall into
the weak category) it's a good way of fighting.
The second method is detailed combat. Here the
screen switches to up-close graphic representations
of your party, the monsters, and the surrounding
terrain (for instance, if you're fighting in the
woods, you'll see trees here and there). Each party
member is represented by a character icon (you
choose these when the character is created, and can
change them later if you like), and can be directed
to perform a variety of actions individually.
Unless the party has been ambushed, you are
allowed to set up the party members almost any
way you like, within a certain area, and if you
happen to ambush the monsters, you can put your
characters anywhere at all in the vicinity. In most
cases, I found that the following arrangement
worked pretty well: Lord Miles, Sir Col, Sir Frederick and Harold in the first rank; Lightfoot, Father John, and Folnar in the second rank (using
bows and spears); and Soul Wind (the sorcerer) as
far back as possible (he being the one with the
worst armor).
During combat, characters can advance, retreat,
attack, cast spells, scan for hidden enemies, switch
weapons, dodge, use a magic item, fall prone (to
avoid arrows), turn undead (priests only), and attempt to hide, among other things. How many actions a character can perform depends on what he's
doing, and what his dexterity rating is. For instance, a character switching weapons couldn't attack, but he could scan for enemies. All options
available to the individual are printed at the bottom
of the screen, so no guesswork is involved; you always know what the characters can do.
Usually, they will be swinging away at a monster. The target is selectable, depending on how
close it is, which way the character is facing, and
what weapon the character is using. A sword or
mace is useful only against a target in an adjacent
square, but spears can hit at something up to two
squares away, and bows (longbow or crossbow) can
shoot at any visible target.
In some ways, this form of combat resembles
that found in "Galactic Gladiators" and "Galactic
Adventures", but is actually much simpler, much
faster (because all commands are acted upon immediately), and not difficult to learn. It will take time
to become familiar with it, but you must do so, as
there are some monsters out there that you simply
do not want to fight in quick combat mode, at least
until your party becomes fairly powerful.
Continued on pg. 42

by Scorpia

Ah, I see you made it back from the depths of
space, after all! But I must say that you look a little
worn out, and a trifle green around the gills. Passing the Kobayashi test was a bit more than you
bargained for, eh? No matter, just sit right down in
your usual chair by the fire and listen to this: For
you (and I wouldn't do this for just ANYONE,
y'know!), I've arranged a little
get-away-from-it-all trip. Yes, a very nice $599, all-expenses-paid,
package tour of London, complete with some
VERY interesting side excursions (let's hope no one
asks why it's so cheap...it's only one-way, but we
won't mention that little detail, hehehe).
Trinity, from Infocom, starts in London but
takes you elsewhere pretty quickly. Although labeled 'Standard level', be aware that it does contain
a few very tricky puzzles, and you're apt to be
fooled by the ease with which you'll whip through
the opening segment. Keep the following in mind:
read the comic book carefully; it contains some
valuable clues. Read the prose with attention, and
remember that some objects you can pick up are
not necessarily evident at first glance. Mapping is
pretty straightforward, but do it with care.
I must also point out that this is not a game for
the squeamish. In order to complete Trinity, you
will have to perform some unpleasant actions. Although it does contain some humor, this is overall a
serious game, not a light-hearted one.
Ok, so here you are in London, on the last day
of your tour. Maybe the last day of your life, too,
since in a little while a nuclear device is going to
blow the place away. Unless, of course, you find a
way to safety before that happens. London is small,
and almost everything you find here is important.
In case you make a mistake (the game does take
awhile to load), you might want to have a first save
position right after bootup, as a time-saver in case
you make an error before leaving the city.
Wander around, and see what you can find.
Don't be in any hurry to feed the birds, but you
might want to examine that bag of crumbs a little
further. An abandoned pram, a soccer ball, a

gnomon, a graceful paper bird, an umbrella; all
have their little part to play in getting you to your
date with destiny. Just remember not to leave anything behind if you can possible help it.
Once you pass through the door over Long Water, the game proper begins. Take your time here,
and map out the area thoroughly. Do not go walking into dark places without a light source; you
may not come out again. Once you have the whole
place mapped out, you can begin putting the pieces
of the puzzle together.
Several of the problems here are really simple;
for instance, if it takes you more than two moves
to dispose of the giant bee, shame on you! And
getting across the Chasm's Brink is so obvious, it
almost hurts. In the barrow, the way out is right at
hand, all you need do is look for it. At the cottage,
keep your ears open and search everywhere.
The crater, however, is a bit more devious. You
do need to cool off that piece of metal. A little
fling in a walk-in freezer is helpful, although you
will have to make a quick side-trip on your way
back.
The sun dial at the top of the stairs is obviously
an important place. However, it seems your gnomon
doesn't quite fit in. Probably because it turns the
wrong way (you DID notice that, didn't you?).
Now, how can you reverse that, I wonder? You'll
probably be going up and around in circles before
you find the answer to this problem.
But, once that gnomon is in place, interesting
things start to happen, such as the lever that just
popped up. It wouldn't surprise me that there is a
connection between the lever and the dial (look
closely, now). There might even be a connection
between the dial and those crazy toadstools you noticed during your mapping expeditions. Experiment
a little, it isn't difficult.
Ah, now you're getting some ideas, eh? Well,
don't go running off through any doors just yet.
Some of them can have nasty surprises in store for
you! A good move would be to check that little
comic book again, and of course, you should, as
always, be prepared to do some waiting (just don't

fall asleep typing in all those z's!).
Now, those little toadstool doors take you to
different places (and, we hope, back again), where
you must do something or pick up important objects. For instance, there is a door that leads to an
underground tunnel. Here you find a walkie-talkie
and a cute little lizard, who manages to elude your
grasp, however hard you try to catch him. But
you're smart enough to outfox a simple skink,
aren't you? Especially when you have two light
sources at your disposal.
That was an easy one, and so is the desert island. Tiny place, with not much in the way of
scenery, and nothing nearby but a small islet
sporting a lone palm tree. Could you swim out
there? Maybe not, with crabs biting your toes, and
that ominous fin cutting the surface. But hey, it's
not really as bad as it looks! Remember, you have
fingers; just don't wait too long.
Returning from the beauties of the South Pacific, you go from one extreme to the other when
you now find yourself out somewhere on the
Siberian tundra. Cold, isn't it? And what are all
those rodents doing, rushing past you in a mindless
stampede? Maybe you should find out. Maybe you
could even take one home with you, if only you
had something to keep it in (it's just a bit too large
for your pocket).
After you've warmed up again, you can visit the
playground. Umm, oops, looks like the door isn't
on solid ground this time, though: you're up in
mid-air and falling fast, very fast indeed. You have
only one move between you and raspberry jam, so
think hard on what you can do to break your de-

scent. Ah, that opened up a new line of thought, I
see (Julie Andrews would be proud of you).
000F! A rough landing, but at least you (and
everything with you) is still in one piece. Looking
around, you notice that there aren't many places to
visit here. Just as well, since, for more reasons that
one, you stand out like a sore thumb. A quick trip
to the shelter nets you a spade, but little else. Wait,
here comes a little girl, and she seems fascinated by
a certain object. Considering where you are and
what's about to happen, why not be generous? Of
course, that isn't going to get you home again, but
what the heck! And come to think of it, how WILL
you get back to the door in the sky, some 1400 feet
over your head? This is a tough one! But....maybe
that girl can help you; did you check out the
building carefully?
That was close, and the next one is not going to
be a picnic, either. First, you don't want to go
walking through the door into outer space with no
protection; it does unpleasant things to your body.
That means you'll need to surround yourself with
some kind of protection. And you'll need to
breathe, too. I didn't come across any spacesuits,
and you won't, either. So you'll have to find something pretty big to hold you, don't you think? Too
bad this isn't Sorcerer; you could just wave a magic
wand and conjure up what you needed.
That's half of the problem. The other half is
getting back to the door again, after you have finished your really unpleasant task (I did NOT like
this part of the game, at all). The satellite that
floats into view is the key, if only you could somehow get near it or attract its attention in some way.

Now you're about ready for the big time,
namely crossing the River. 1'11 bet you tried before,
and got kicked out of the boat, huh? Well, you
must admit, you don't quite look like a corpse in
those nifty vacation shorts of yours. Maybe it's
time to do some grave-robbing (why not, it's your
own grave, after all). Just make sure you bring
something sturdy, and that you don't overlook
anything.
However, before you go sailing across the River
Styx, you might want to recall the sayings of the
magpie (if you haven't already). You've got everything you need, and there's only one logical place
to do it, so just get along and finish up this bit of
business.
And off you go, to the far shore, and the final
toadstool (you may wish to save the game before
you make the journey). This is the most complicated part of Trinity, and careful study of the map
provided will be of great help to you in figuring
out where to go and how to get there quickly; time,
as always, is limited. What you actually need to do
here will become apparent only after you have progressed well into this mini-scenario.
So you're in the tower (right next to the world's
very first A-bomb; aren't you excited?). Check out
the vicinity, and don't leave until it's safe. At the
bottom of the tower is a locked box, and you'll
have to get the key to that a little later (NO, it's
not the key from the barrow!). And look who's
here: your old pal, the roadrunner, who presents
you with the ruby. Do what needs to be done with
it (put it where the sun don't shine, hohoho), and
you're off.
mmm...off where? Good question, as there are
so many interesting places to go. Let's start off
with a jaunt towards point Able. Of course, you
don't want to get too close to it, but that abandoned jeep is worth looking at. Especially the radio.
Now that you can keep on top of things, it's
time to move along elsewhere. In fact, I'd say it's
about time for a visit to old McDonald's place (not
to be confused with a certain fast food franchise).
Most of the rooms are empty, but the kitchen
may be of interest, as well as the Assembly Room.
Err, well, there IS that rattlesnake, and he's a mean
one. Better get out of his sight, fast! Still, that's
only a temporary measure; the only way to get rid

of him is, well, I'm afraid it's time for another unpleasant action on your part. Yours IS the more important life here.
A visit to the windmill is in order, but I
wouldn't bring too much up there, if I were you.
You're going to end up all wet, and that's no fun at
all. But you do need those binoculars. A lighthearted swim, and they're all yours.
With the map as your guide, you can whiz over
the desert for a quick stop at point Baker. Careful
now, you don't want anyone to catch sight of you
(especially not the way you're dressed now!). There
isn't much to be seen, though; if only you could
somehow get a closer look at things. And don't
overlook your speedy friend, either.
Back at the tower, you unlock the mystery box,
and find all sorts of equipment inside, including a
breaker (this is another good place to save). Play
with it, by all means, but think about what you're

doing here, and listen carefully.
Sooner or later (probably sooner), you'll want to
climb back up the tower. Unfortunately, the spotlight makes this somewhat difficult, and in fact will
bring you (and many others) to a sorry end. Why
not visit point Pittsburg and see what you can do
about that light? Just don't wake up that German
Shepherd! And the roadrunner can be of immense
help here, if you can keep him temporarily occupied with something else while you go on to bigger
and better things.
So at last the ultimate moment arrives. You
stand next to the bomb, contemplating four wires,
as the countdown to detonation rings in your ears.
Choose the wrong wire, and it means disaster;
choose the right one, and, well, you'll find out. Not
exactly a happy ending, but it could have been
worse, much worse.

Ah well, I see by the invisible clock on the wall
that time is just about up for this issue. As always,
if you need assistance with an adventure game, you
can reach me in the following ways:
On GEnie: Visit the Games Roundtable (type:
SCORPIA to get there). On Delphi: Come by the
GameSIG (found under the Groups and Clubs
menu). On the Source: Send SMAIL to ST1030.
Via U.S. Mail: send your questions with a selfaddressed stamped envelope (no SASE, no reply;
SASE not required for correspondents outside the
US) to: Scorpia P.O. Box 338 Gracie Station New
York, NY 10028
Special note to Canadian readers: letters from
Canada are taking an average of a week or more to
reach me these days, so please be patient; I do get
replies off as quickly as I can.
See you all next issue!

by Mark Bausman
Name:
System:
Players:
Price:
Designer:
Publisher:

Operation Keystone
IBM
One
$69.00
T.J. Peto Jr.
Overt Strategic Simulations
PO BOX 66424
Los Angeles, CA 90066

Operation Keystone is a strong first entry from
a new strategic oriented game manufacturer: Overt
Strategic Simulations (Ed. Note: I think I will start

a new automobile company and call it "Really General Motors"). It is a submarine simulation in which
you command the Gato class submarine USS Tang
against various elements of the Japanese Navy. The
game comes packed in the ubiquitous IBM hard box
and sleeve. The documentation pages are made of
sturdy cardboard. In the back is a complete specifications list for the Tang, a quick reference guide
to the menus and displays, a cutout to lay over the
IBM function keys, and a cutout Target Indicator
which may be assembled and used as a playing aid
in tracking targets. The rest of the documentation
details each aspect of game play in an easily understood manner. As if this documentation is not
enough, most of the manual may be accessed online through the Tutorial menu option. Section two
of the manual takes you on a shakedown cruise
which guides you step-by-step through navigation,
target acquisition, and attack.
After selecting one of three play levels and one
of three naval ports, you start the game on the
playing area just outside the harbor. The playing
area is a dotted grid whose magnification may be
changed so that the distance between dots is either
100, 1100, or 4400 yards. Your submarine appears

as an "*" and enemy vessels appear as a letter identifying their type as Battleship, Aircraft Carrier,
Airplane, Destroyer, Patrol Boat, Supply ship, or
Enemy Submarine. The grid always stays on the
screen along with current status information, a list
of available play options, and additional information from whichever play option happens to be
current. The "Running" play option is displayed
first because it is from this menu that you may
turn on or off the engines, compressor, and generator, open the air vents, or obtain the amount of
air, fuel, ballast, and battery charge. When the engines are fired-up and a course and speed determined, your submarine begins moving over the
playing area. The grid will not change until you
move outside its boundaries. This severely limits
the usefulness of the 100 yard magnification because the closer you get to the edge the less you
can see on sonar. The grid boundary has no effect
on the periscope view and the sonar/radar will still
report the distance to the nearest target but it is
usually necessary to go to 1100 magnification to see
the targets on the grid.
After getting underway it is usually a good idea
to select the "Battle" play option and begin loading
of your tubes.
The Tang has six bow tubes which require 30
game seconds each to load. The torpedoes are steam
powered Mark 14's with a maximum range of 4500
yards. You get 22 of them and you may return to
port at any time to rearm or exchange some torps
for mines. Mines may be laid at any time and make
for some interesting attack options. Once the load is
underway it is not necessary to remain in the
"Battle" option as loading will complete automatically, however, I have noticed that the tubes
seem to load more quickly if you stay in the
"Battle" menu instead of jumping somewhere else.
With tubes loading, its time to locate the enemy

Continued on pg. 41

HABITAT
A Lucasfilm Ltd and QuantumLink Production

review by Roy Wagner

Habitat n. the place where a person is ordinarily
found.
- Webster's New World Dictionary
(Much of the following material comes from a
preliminary copy of THE OFFICIAL AVATAR
HANDBOOK that comes with each Habitat disk.)
HISTORY
At first, there was only the Oracle. Then came
the Avatars, and Habitat is their world. The Oracle
referred to time before the Habitat as "the Great
Boredom", but the world of the Avatars became one

QuantumLink is probably the largest
national telecommunication network
supporting only a single computer type, the
Commodore 64/128. Information, text files
and a special interest group (SIG) for the
Amiga are available, but direct online access
is not yet provided. QuantumLink is offered
by Quantum Computer Services which
manages its own network control center,
that utilizes state-of-the-art Stratus faulttolerant mainframes. Quantum plans to
eventually to offer access for the Amiga,
Apple and IBM.
It is one of the lowest priced national
networks. A flat monthly fee of $9.95
provides one hour of connect time and
several basic services (including an
encyclopedia, news, and computer
information). Additional online connect time
is billed at 6 cents per minute, which certainly one of the lowest per hour rates.
There is no extra charge for using 1200
baud. For most people, a local phone
number is used to connect with
QuantumLink which is located in Vienna,
Virginia. QuantumLink supports nearly all
modems available for the C64/128, including those using an RS-232 interface.
QuantumLink is very easy to use with
options selected from drop down menus

of adventure. The Oracle established a trust fund
for each and every Avatar to provide "life,
liberty,and the pursuit of quality leisure time".
Throughout the early years of Habitat the Avatars
sought and found adventure in various quests for
the good of all. Teleports were introduced, which
then offered an unlimited means of travel. All
forms of transportation became unnecessary. Only
skateboards were used and now only a few of those
are to be found. A bus route has been considered
for many years now, but its future is uncertain.
The Avatars share a rich social, intellectual and
cultural history. Early Avatars were great
adventurers like none other, but this spirit died in
them and they became content to do nothing. They
let themselves become lazy, and never let
themselves get out to see the world they lived in
because that would take too much effort. The
Oracle tired of seeing the Avatars just sitting in
front of a tube watching TV and eliminated it as a
means of passive entertainment.

using cursor and function keys. Users do
not need to memorize any commands or
special keywords. In addition, a toll-free
number to Customer Service is available and
an online staff of QGUIDEs, QHELPERs,
and SysOps can answer questions and make
sure you don't get confused or lost.
QuantumLink is the only network
marketed and supported by Commodore. It
provides an online hotline to Commodore
personnel, online information and user
group exchange. Conferences and forums
are regularly held online with Commodore
engineers, leading magazine personalities,
and key industry people.
QuantumLink is available from 6pm to
7am local time on weekdays and 24 hours
on weekends and national holidays. Eight
distinct areas each offer a wide range of
online activities and information. These
include: People Connection, Commodore
Information Network, Commodore Software
Showcase, News & Information, Just For
Fun, Learning Center, The Mall, and
Customer Service.
People Connection provides public and
private "rooms" where one may "talk" with
others or just "listen" in on the conversation
taking place. The Auditorium is used for
special events, speakers, and online classes.
Colorful online games complete with sound
can be played with other people. These
include: Chess, Checkers, Backgammon,

The Oracle also became quite bored and decided
to take some action. The choice was made to let
humans discover Habitat. In the image of Avatars,
humans were now permitted to enter Habitat. They
sought adventure, intrigue and danger. The true
Avatars saw this and they too regained their lost
spirit. Now Habitat is once again a great place of
unlimited adventure with new and old friends.
MODERN HISTORY
Habitat is a new interactive hi-res gaming
environment from Lucasfilm Games (Ballblazer,
Koronis Rift, Rescue on Fractalus!) and
QuantumLink, a national computer network
available to C64/128 owners through a local
telephone number (see The Commodore Connection
in this issue).
When playing Habitat you use one of your
QuantumLink online names. The name you use
should set you apart from the others, the more

Bridge, Four-in-a-Row, Hangman, Reversi,
and Sea Strike. If you want, you can just
watch a game rather than play.
Commodore Information Network
provides for all major Commodore special
interests by machine (C64, C128, and
Amiga) and special topics (GEOS,
Beginners, Games, Graphics, Music,
Applications, Telecommunications,
Programming, and Hardware). Questions,
Answers and Comments are regular posted.
Related public domain libraries, new
product information, and User Group and
GEOS Support are also in this area.
Commodore Software Showcase provides
catalogs and reviews. Preview, Public
Domain, and Educational software can be
downloaded.
News & Information provides the
Reuters News Center with headlines, news
items updated every ten minutes, weather
and financial news. Personal Finance, USA
Today Sports Report, Public Opinion
Surveys, Computer & Technology items,
Child Find for lost children, and
Auditorium Archives of special guest
conferences are also here.
Just For Fun provides: games and contest
information; a Photo Gallery for
printer/screen display; Cafe Bozart's "adult"
area; The Funny Bone humor center; QLink special interest clubs (Astronomy,
Chess, HAMshack, High Adventure Sports,

distinctive the better. Common names such as Jane,
Bob, Cindy, Eric, Laura and Bill are OUT and
inadvisable. Names like Cassandra, Phineas,
Veronique, Norbert, Millicent, and Cornelius are
IN and well accepted.
Before you first enter, you select the body
appearance of your Avatar from a limited number
of options. There are various body forms that make
your Avatar appear male or female. An Avatars
appearance may be changed in other ways once in
Habitat. For example, new clothing can be bought
at a store and changed whenever you like.
You first enter Habitat in your "Turf" or home.
It comes equipped with a minimum amount of
furniture, but more may be bought. You can read
mail from other Avatars in your turf and
communicate with others using Telepathy. Your
turf can be redecorated with various colors,
wallpaper, styles and furniture that suit your
personality. It can be decorated with artifacts from
your adventures or other items that you receive or

Hobby, Media, Phantasy, Sci-Fi, Camera,
Trivia, Cooking, Wines, and Geneology);
Rock music topics; Movies topic; and TV
topics (including soap opera summaries).
Learning Center provides free access to
the Academic American Encyclopedia which
can be saved to disk and printed on your
printer, the catalog of courses from the
Electronic University, Commodore
Educational Software for downloading, and
an Educational Resource Center that can
provide extensive material for educators and
parents.
The Mall provides the Q-Link Store
containing various key buys such as moderns
and software. A Software Finder service,
access to the Comp-U-Store's national
buying service, Easy Sabre Travel Service
which provides for air travel arrangements,
and a Classified Connection of online user
ads.
Customer Service provides all those items
that explain what is going on in all areas of
QuantumLink, as well as billing, service,
and pricing information. You may also offer
suggestions, create new user online names.
All of the above really only list a small
portion of what is available in each of many
of the above mentioned areas. QuantumLink
has been around for less than a year, but is
constantly changing to provide more and
better service for its customers. HABITAT
is just one of many new features.

buy. Each week you will receive the WEEKLY
RANT, the Habitat weekly newspaper, that tells of
various things occurring in Habitat and even the
new opportunities for adventure.
No Avatar has to work. A lifetime trust fund
provides you with a periodic allotment of tokens,
the monetary unit. These tokens are a result of the
interest on your trust fund and only the interest
may be spent. You can never be broke, only short
on cash, in Habitat. Credit cards are also available
for major purchases. You can also get tokens from
the pawn shop or even find "pennies", tokens left
laying on the ground in public places. Adventuring
is often quite lucrative, and an excellent way to
accumulate extra spending money.

object in a manner similar to GET.
DO performs an action with or to an object. In
this way you can use an object to accomplish a
given task. The action that occurs depends on
where your cursor is pointing. The object pointed
to will make the appropriate, though not always
expected, response. Pointing to a door will open or
close it. Pointing to a lamp will turn it on or off.
TALK directs a message to one or more other
Avatars. The message is typed in using the keyboard. Pressing the RETURN key sends the message to the Avatar to whom the cursor is pointed.
To talk to all Avatars on the current screen, the
cursor is pointed anywhere that there is not an
Avatar. Telepathic messages and letters can be sent
from nearly any screen to other Avatars in Habitat.

DOING YOUR OWN THING
Avatars understand and respond to five simple
joystick selected commands: GO, GET, PUT, DO,
and TALK.
GO directs your Avatar's movement. You move
the cursor to the location you wish to go and press
the joystick button. Then select the GO command
and release the button. Your Avatar will walk to
the location selected. In this way, you can explore
the area of a single screen, take a leisurely stroll, or
explore the never ending landscape of Habitat.
Seemingly finite at times, new areas to explore are
frequently discovered.

A "port" can be used to Teleport from one location to another. Any distance can be covered using
a port, for a nominal token value.
GET picks up objects you need or want. You
move the cursor to the object you wish to get, press
the button, select the GET command, and release
the button. You need not GO to the object first.
Simply use the GET command and your Avatar will
go to the object, bend over and get it.
You may only hold one object in your hand at
one time, but objects can be carried in various
containers using the PUT command. PUT drops an

Using the GO command and pointing to your
own Avatar controls body movements (standing or
sitting). Objects PUT into containers (each holding
a certain number of objects) can be removed using
GET. A list of the objects in the container is displayed and that object you want is selected. Newspapers and letters are read by pointing to them and
using the DO command.
Wandering about Habitat on your own or with
others is fine, but real adventuring with a purpose
(in search of intrigue, riches, and dangers) are what
Avatars love to do most. The Oracle, the all knowing being that controls life in the Habitat, sends
Avatars on quests and adventures. Some are filled
with danger and risk, others are safe, but challenging. Most adventures involve puzzle solving.
Some adventures can be done in an evening, others
may take several days, a week or even longer. Some
can be done alone, others require a group effort.
The Oracle also grants wishes, gives counsel, and
has been know to play a trick or two. As unpredictable as it is mysterious, the Oracle should never
be taken for granted.
When you chose to exit Habitat, your Avatar
turns to stone and is generally protected from any
harm. If you are away from Habitat for any great

Continued on pg. 44

SPORTS SCOREBOARD

Rick Teverbaugh

Apple owners can rejoice. Random
House's APBA Major League Player's
Baseball is finally available for your computer. Now even IBM owners can find
reason to smile, because the price of both
versions has dropped. The Master Edition
now sells for $59.95. Team data disks are
$19.95.
Before we get around to all the good
things about the game, let's talk about
some of the shortcomings, at least of the
Apple version. Not all Apple owners will
be able to play the game. It takes two disc
drives and at least 128K memory. If you
have an Apple IIc, you're home free. But if
you have an Apple IIe, you'll need an 80column card for the screen display.
Unlike the IBM version, the Apple
edition is monochrome. There also is no
ability to create your own teams and if
you want to do season replays, you must
keep your own stats as there is no compiler
utility.
And one final complaint. I'm worried
about the wear and tear on my disk drives
if I try to play an entire season. With each
hitter, each of the two drives makes a
minimum of two passes before the outcome
is revealed.
As a dye-in-the-wool sports fan, I find
text sports games, at least those with a
strong statistical base, to be more satisfying than those games who give away too
much memory to graphic presentations. To
that end, I like APBA enormously. The
action feels like baseball. All serious baseball fans have spent a lot of time in front
of the radio listening to games. What they
read on the APBA display screen is very
like what they're used to hearing. To visualize those descriptions is a prerequisite to
enjoying baseball on the radio. That ability to visualize is also important to get the
full enjoyment from APBA baseball.
I like the fact that APBA offers draft
league possibilities. Probably for draft,
head-to-head league play, there is no
better game on the market than APBA.
But since I like season replays and like
being in control over what teams I use, I
prefer other games more. Additionally,
mail leaguers are out in the cold because
there is no computer manager option.
So there you have the plusses and mi-

nuses. Choose to your own tastes, but at
least Apple owners now have a choice and
at a lower price.
Interstel (formerly Cygnus) has entered the sports realm with Spin Out. It
isn't a fancy game, but it doesn't have a
fancy price tag. It sells for $19.95 and
currently is only available for the Commodore 64/128 owners.
It is strictly man against the clock in
this outing. All drivers use the same car
and only one is on the track at the same
time. There are no other cars against
which you can compete. The only goal is

to finish with the best time on record.
The perspective is overhead rather
than through the windshield, but the
steering is done as though you were in the
car. If the vehicle needs to turn left, you
move the joystick left. The joystick button
acts as a brake.
Acceleration is handled in unique
fashion. Before you start your trip around
the track, there are two choices you must
make. The first is how many laps you want
to try and the second is how many gears
you want to have available. Gears are from
1-10. The more gears you use, the higher

the top speed of the car. The longer your
car runs parallel to the track, the closer it
comes to the top speed available at the
highest gear selected.
When I said that it's just you against
the clock, that wasn't quite accurate.
There are some trucks, cars and very lowflying planes that obviously are unaware of
your pursuit of the record. You must avoid
them at all costs. Should you run into one
or crash into something off the side of the
course, you'll see a fiery crash. A helicopter will come and carry you off to the
infield hospital and the race will be over.
You can abort the rescue sequence quite
easily, but you still have to start from
scratch on the course.
One of the more enjoyable aspects of
this game is the easy-to-use track construction utility. There are some real-life
tracks included and room on the disk for
about 50 tracks of your own creation. The
best time is saved to disk for each course.
It is possible when laying out the course to
have pieces cross over each other numerous times. But when you're out on the
course, these crossovers aren't displayed.
That makes for a disorienting feeling when
driving, but it opens a world of options for
designing a course. One detraction is that
you can't save creations to a blank disk, so
you can't swap creations with friends ala
Activision's Fast Tracks.
But overall, I like Spin Out for a enjoyable bare bones approach to auto racing.
Finally, there's World Karate Championship from Epyx. There are 16 moves
available for head-to-head or vs. computer
action. The graphics are enjoyable and
great attention to detail is evident. As you
get more accomplished at the game, you'll
advance from place to place around the
world and the background changes from
city to city revealing the area's most famous landmarks.
The top scores and belt color advancements are saved to disk along with
the initial of the competitor. When you get
in a really good shot at your opponent,
you'll see stars circle his unconscious form.
When you really polish him off with an especially good move, a hand salute will follow. Match scoring is done by a computercontrolled referee. There is constant music
throughout the program, but a simple
keystroke will silence all but the match
sounds.
Between matches, there are some skill
tests for bonus points. It is the only way
the novice can break bricks with his cranium without getting a headache.
The documentation is well-written and
illustrated just enough to make the rules
easy to follow. Epyx continues to take a
strong stand in the foreground of the arcade sports programs with World Karate
Championship. The game is currently only
available for Commodore 64/128 owners,
but in the fall, Apple and IBM owners will
get their due.

C

The Official
Statkeeper Was
A Computer
Baseball Statistics: The Utility Programs
by James Trunzo
When it comes to baseball software, the first
thing that most computer sports afficionados think
of are computer simulation games like SSI's Computer Baseball and MLSA's MicroLeague Baseball
or hi-res arcade baseball games like Accolade's
Hardball. However, like a slick shortstop sneaking
behind second for a pick-off play, a new category
of baseball software is quietly making its presence
felt. Suddenly, appearing in front of baseball fans
eyes are advertisements proclaiming the advent of
the electronic scorebook; ads boldly stating that
you'll never again have to figure out a batting average by hand; blurbs boastfully telling you that
now "even you" can analyze a player's performance
month-by-month or week-by-week, if you prefer.
It has happened... productivity software has invaded
the domain of the National Pastime!
Of the non-game baseball software now on the
market, most of which are statkeeping packages,
two products have come to the fore: Diamond from
Consistent Software and StatMaster I from TNA
Software. Both products are worthy of attention
and each has its strengths and weaknesses, though
the pros outweigh the cons by a considerable margin. The primary purpose of Diamond and StatMaster I is to compile the statistics that make baseball the fascinating sport that it is.
StatMaster I is the more versatile of the two,
being easily adapted to baseball board games as
well as to Little League, softball, or high school
baseball. StatMaster can maintain records for up to
40 teams in as many as 4 different leagues and allows you to assign up to 40 players to each team's
roster. For board gamers, it is important to note
that there are no restrictions to the positional
make-up of the rosters. Why this is a factor will
become clear later in the review.
Entering and editing data for either batters or
pitchers is a snap with StatMaster I. Those who are
familiar with the Apple ProDos Systems Master will
quickly realize the similarity of operation between

it and StatMaster I. No coincidence! The designer
of StatMaster is an ex-Apple employee who did the
majority of the work on the ProDos Systems disk.
Therefore, you can expect an easy menu-driven
approach to all modules contained in StatMaster I.
You can enter more than one game at a time if you
wish and either correct mistakes as you go or edit
them later.
StatMaster I will send formatted reports to either
the screen or a printer, arranging the stats by batting average for the hitters and ERA for the
pitchers. Reports include complete team totals as
well as individual player statistics. This reviewer
was truly impressed with the speed of StatMaster I's
report generator. It does a complete roster sort in
less than 20 seconds.
TNA Software has also released StatMaster Utilities as an enhancement to StatMaster I and the
utilities disk upgrades the product immensely.
While the utility disk does allow for more advanced
editing (changing team names, etc.), its major
function is to compile complete league statistics.
StatMaster Utilities will take your data disk and
produce league standings, team batting stats, team
pitching stats, Top Ten lists in ten hitting categories and Top Ten lists in ten pitching categories.
In minutes, the utility disk tells you every team's
won-lost record, its winning percentage and its
games-behind number; it shows you who's leading
your league in homers, average, slugging percentage, strikeouts, earned run average and more! And,
as mentioned, it does it in no time at all.
Finally, both of TNA's programs come with
clear and concise documentation, complete with illustrations. Weaknesses? Did I mention something
about weaknesses? Well, okay. StatMaster's major
drawback is its selectivity of categories. In order
to facilitate its printouts, StatMaster only allows for
the compilation of major categories. Such esoteric
statistics like the sacrifice fly and the wild pitch
cannot be tracked, nor can walks and strikeouts for
hitters. To be sure, most users will only be interested in the primary stats like RBI's or complete
games, but table top players may demand a little
more.
Diamond, produced by Consistent Software,
gives a little more... but not without a price (and I
don't mean money). Designed primarily for college,
high school or Little League teams, Diamond has a
multitude of modules. It's truly a database within a
database within a database! The program will arrange a car pool, keep track of your schedule and
equipment and even score your game automatically.
The latter function is especially useful if you can

take your computer with you to the game. Using a
single-keystroke entry system, Diamond will score
the game, print out a box score and update individual and team stats virtually all at the same time.
Some teams who do not have the luxury of a
portable computer system still use the scoring feature, simply rescoring the game from a traditional
scorebook. Their claim is that it's quicker to rescore
the game and let Diamond do all the work than it
is to compile the stats using a pencil and paper.
Diamond tracks a staggering number of statistics:
it maintains 28 offensive categories, 26 pitching
categories and even 7 defensive categories. Some
of these statistics are even user-definable, allowing
you to customize the program to fit your specific
needs.

Like StatMaster I, Diamond is easy to use once
you get familiar with it. The program provides online help, keyboard overlays and a well-written
manual and uses a form fill-in format for entering
and editing information; however, Diamond does
require a break-in period, especially if using the
scoring option. While it isn't a difficult program
by any means, it isn't as simple to use as StatMaster
I. Its method of inputting information isn't quite
as "clean" as StatMaster I and the entire program, it
must be said, is much slower than its competitor.
Diamond will generate either individual or team
reports in a variety of formats. It will not compile
standings or top tens,
but it must be remembered that Diamond is designed to be used by one team and one team only.
It can be adapted for table top use but if you are
considering doing so, be aware of some drawbacks.
While Diamond allows a roster of up to 30 players,
it will only permit ten of them to be pitchers. This
is usually inadequate for baseball board game
players, who use realistic up-down lists and exceed
the limit of ten pitchers during the course of a
season. Again, it must be emphasized that Diamond was not intended to be used as a board game
utility.
Both TNA and Consistent have new products in

the offing: TNA should have its Rotisserie disk
(available only for IBM or compatibles) ready by
the time this review sees print and Consistent is
preparing a special program that will address the
needs of table top gamers.
A third product that is of interest differs in intent from those already discussed but is, in its own
right, a fascinating piece of work that is aimed at
the real baseball statistics enthusiast. Scorecard
from The Scorecard Company is a labor of love
that evolved into from Jim Upchurch's (the one
man whirlwind behind the product) fanaticism for
baseball into a cottage industry success story.
Scorecard is a program designed to allow you to
type boxscores into your computer and later call
out any player or team stats over a given period of
time. For example, if you wanted to know how
Dale Murphy did in April, you would select the
correct prompt from the Main Menu and then answer the questions that follow, requesting the
player's name, starting date and ending date. Had
you done so last year, you'd have found that Murphy hit .380, smashed 9 home runs and driven in
29 RBI's!
However, the above example only scratches the
surface of what Scorecard can do. You can determine a team's performance against another team or
a player's performance against a specific team and
do so over any period of time designated. Bruce
Sutter vs the Astros from April, 1985 to May 1985?
He appeared in 3 games, pitched in 3 innings and
had an ERA of 6.00. Scorecard also tracks pinchhit appearances, won and lost records of the team
(showing how the team fared both with and without a selected player in the lineup), strikeouts and
walks per 9 innings, team record in a pitcher's no
decision games, and more.
Scorecard is set up in such a way that the input
corresponds almost identically to the daily boxscores in the paper, making it a simple task to
transpose the information from the paper to the
computer. Editing is possible but you have to be
careful about the order in which you respond to
prompts or you'll end up saving material before
you've completed your entries. A close reading of
the documentation (which comes on the disk and
can be printed out if a hardcopy is desirable... and
it is) overcomes any such problems, however.
Mr. Upchurch has been careful not to exclude
anybody from using his program. Scorecard, which
is, like the others, not copy-protected, contains instructions for installation onto a 3.5 Unidisk or a
hard disk and the program, while running, refreshes the screen as it reads the files, literally al-

lowing the user to watch hot streaks and slumps
occur right before one's eyes.
Scorecard, written entirely in Applesoft, is quite
slow at its best; and the more data needed to be
read, the slower the program seems. However,
because the accumulating of stats appears on screen
while it is taking place, there isn't the tedium or
boredom one might expect to occur while awaiting
final results.
Results of any search can be dumped to the
printer in one of several forms. An individual
player or team stats can be had or an entire
player-by-player report can be generated and printed in
columnar form.
While Scorecard is not a program for everyone,
it certainly is a useful tool for those who study the
game and are in love with baseball statistics. Be
forewarned, however, that the program can become
addicting once you start fooling around with all the
possible combinations available to you!
StatMaster I, Diamond and Scorecard hit home
runs each time they come up to bat in your computer. These products can truly add a new dimension to the hybrid world of computers and baseball.

StatMaster I
TNA Software
1266 White Oaks Drive, Suite 101
Campbell, CA 95008
Suggested Retail: $49.95/Utilities disk $19.95
IBM 128K and Apple II 64K
Circle Reader Service #76
Diamond
Consistent Software
1050 Duncan Avenue
Suite G. Department BA
Manhattan Beach, CA 90266
Suggested Retail: $69.96
Apple II 64K
Circle Reader Service #77
Scorecard
The Scorecard Company
3146 Thomas Avenue
Montgomery, AL 36106
Suggested Retail: $39.95
Apple II 64K
Circle Reader Service #78

The Atari Playfield

by Gregg Williams
Is this the end for Atari 800 games? It
certainly looks like it might be from where
I write (early July, 1986). The Consumer
Electronics Show came and went, and I've
heard of very little new Atari 800 software
The 520 ST fares somewhat better, and
you'll be hearing about its games in the
months that come. If you know of any new
(i.e., 1986) Atari 800 games, please let me
know.
Two from Antic Publishing
One company gloriously keeping the
Atari 800 alive is Antic Publishing, the
software sibling of Antic magazine. They
are finding good new pieces of Atari 800
software and publishing them at very reasonable prices. (Yes, they're doing Atari
ST software, but I haven't seen any yet.)
Their low price (usually $15.95 or less for
their games) has a dark side, though: the
documentation, which is usually rambling
and poorly organized, is on disk, and you
have to print it out or be willing to take
copious notes from the on-screen documentation.
Orbit--a Trip to the Moon, by John
D. Reagh, is a gem of a simulation that
should keep you busy for a long time; its
only problem is that it's an accurate
enough simulation to require a large
amount of time to master it. It contains
four scenarios: intercepting and destroying
a drone satellite; docking with an orbiting
space station; traveling to the moon; and
landing on the moon's Farside Station (a
real-time Lunar Lander).
I can't say much about the first three
scenarios. I spent at least two hours trying
to learn the basics of maneuvering your
ship around the Earth (your ship starts,
mercifully, in orbit)--then gave up. It's a
challenging task, made worse by six singlespaced pages of instructions just for these
three scenarios--nothing but text, incredibly boring and hard to read!--and over a
dozen functions tied to nothing but joystick control. It looks like it's reasonably
well designed, but it's not simple; and woe
be unto you if you don't have a printer.
Fortunately, you can skip to the Lunar
Lander scenario by pressing the Select
button at the beginning of the game (that
information was buried on page 7 of the
documentation). You'll see some garbage
as information loads into memory currently being used for video display, but
just wait for the return of a normal picture. The top half of the screen shows the
lunar landscape as seen from above; the
bottom half shows your control panel with
five dials: oxygen, fuel, attitude, altitude,
and position. When you're less than 20
miles from the surface, the top inch or so
of your screen shows a cross-section of the
lunar surface and a dot representing your
lander.
The game, like space itself, is not forgiving. You have enough oxygen for about
one orbit and not a drop of fuel to spare.
Your goal is not just to land on the moon-

-it's to land in one particular crater! With
your joystick you can adjust your lander's
attitude (the direction it's pointed) and
the amount and duration of your "burns."
I have landed correctly a few times,
and I recommend this scenario to beginners over the Earth-orbit and
Earth-to-Moon scenarios. My biggest objection to
this scenario is that the attitude points
opposite to the way I think it should be.
Maybe it's just me, but I have to mentally
rotate 180 degrees before I can start any
"burn"--and that's a luxury I can't afford
in a real-time game! Also, the game occasionally malfunctions when beginning your
third or fourth Lunar Lander scenario on
an Atari 800; it does not do it on an Atari
800 XL. I have no idea why this happens,
but it does; at least it has the grace to
crash between games, not in the middle of
one.
Colourspace
As you can tell from the spelling,
Colourspace is a British import, created by
a madman named Jeff Minter. I'm running
out of space, so I can't give this product
the description it deserves. To summarize,
this program is so awesome (in the original
sense of the word) and mind-blowing that
I can't decide whether or not I'd want to
meet its author. As my friend Rick put it,
"We have just entered another human
being's private universe...."
Colourspace is a joystick- and keyboard-controlled light show that creates a
seemingly endless number of beautiful
(sometimes bizarre) color effects. The best
way to learn the system is to start playing
with it and read the documentation as
your interest builds. To begin, press "A",
then "W", then hold down the button and
move the joystick. To get different effects,
hit any key except BREAK on the top row
of the keyboard. And, ohmigod, I just
found this--the author says he's planning
to get this working on the 520 ST....
Orbit and Colourspace are $15.95 each;
you can reach Antic at (415) 957-0886.
Star Raiders II
Let me squeeze this one in: if the origi-

nal Star Raiders rates (by today's standards, on a scale of 0-10) a 6 for graphics
and an 8.5 for game design, Star Raiders II
rates an 8.5 for graphics and a 4.5 for
game design. It's a shoot-em-up that is
visually breathtaking but gets repetitious
after a while. Zylon ships (three kinds) are
invading your solar system from theirs.
You have to wipe out all their ships and
the cities that produce more of them before they capture all your cities. Unlike SR
I, which called for some involved decision
making, SR H has as much strategy as
Missile Command.
Also, this game is like a bike with
training wheels--you think you're doing
something dangerous, but you're not. Two
examples: you have an energy gauge that
mustn't get to zero, but it decrements only
a small amount regardless of where you
warp to. Also, you have gauges that monitor gun temperature--but you can't overheat them even firing continuously on the
hardest level of the game! These are small
touches that, if added, would have contributed to the "richness" of the game. Oh
well, it's got impressive graphics and is
certainly worth its list price of $19.95.
In Brief
Activision's Music Studio (for the 800,
$34.95, and the ST, $59.95) is more for the
dabbler in music than the professional.
Both versions are pretty good buys for the
price but are visually "busy" and sometimes confusing to use.
Also, a German company called
"Tommysoftware" has created a nice entertainment called Puzzlepuzzle that I can
only call a recursive jigsaw puzzle; unfortunately, it works on the Atari ST
monochrome monitor only. They're asking
$10 for it (international money order or
equivalent); you can reach them at
Mainzer Landstr. 147/ 6000 Frankfurt,
M.1/ WEST GERMANY. It's very well
done, and they deserve your support.
Next Month
Who knows? Until then, remember:
there is nothing more frightening than ignorance in action.

Amiga Preferences (cont.)

(Cont. from pg. 14)
terns to provide sixteen shades of grey. The package comes with several nice examples and some clip
art. Over 300 clip art images are available.
This product can use medium resolution drawings from Deluxe Paint for both backgrounds
and/or clip art. This does require some pre-planning effort since most drawings in Deluxe Paint are
done in low resolution. All work can be saved to
disk for later use or printing. There are extensive
user options and a minimum number of frustrations
or deficiencies. This product is highly recommended.

What's That I Hear?
Without a doubt, the sound and music on the
Amiga has NO equal. Stereo with two independent
voices for each channel. Two new products are
available for the less serious and more playful music people. (Several very serious music programs are
also available, but will not be discussed here.) The
Music Studio from Activision ($59.95) is a very
comprehensive music construction set and Instant
Music from Electronic Arts ($49.95) is a very simple and fun way to build and play-along with the
music.
Music Studio comes with several songs of different musical styles and 15 instruments. Starting
with these and the tools provided to manipulate
them, the possibilities are unlimited. Any of a
number of MIDI interfaces can be purchased for
about $50. and are fully supported. Using a Casio
type keyboard, you can play the music through this
instrument. If you play the instrument, the notes
can be entered and saved to disk.
This product is very good. Unfortunately this
first release does not support digitally samples
sounds/music or save its music using the music file
standard format that has been established for the
Amiga. We hope to see these deficiencies corrected
in a future release.
Instant Music is fun! It is really designed for
those of us with NO music training. Those of us
that wish we could play an instrument along with a
song or just kind of throw together an original
composition without knowing musical notation. It
contains an extensive library of music, in all styles,
that uses four different instruments. One can select,
from many instruments, and using the mouse,

"play" along with the music. New instruments can
be selected for any of the four voices. Simple controls exist to modify the sound levels, beat, rhythm
and note duration.
It does not use standard musical notation, but
rather a simplified display of sound bars and positioning upon an open field rather than any formal
music staff. All actions are intuitive, rather than
trained. Playing along has to be experienced to be
realized how much fun it is. It's GREAT!
The music written using Instant Music can be
used with Deluxe Video and other Amiga programs.
For the sophisticated, Deluxe Music from Electronic Arts, Musicraft from Commodore, and
Soundscape (MIDI interface) from Mimetics will
soon be available.

Putting It All Together
That's it for Amiga productivity products. In
general, most of these products can share and work
with the files each of them create. This is a very
significant plus in the basic design of the Amiga.
Products can complement one another rather than
compete for a buyer and then lock that buyer into
one way of doing things.

and begin to plan their downfall. The "Navigate"
play option handles this function. From here you
may obtain a surface weather report and activate
the sonar and or radar. The immediate effect of
activating sonar is to have the designation letters of
enemy vessels suddenly appear on the grid. Your
objective convoy is never to far away so if it
doesn't show up right away then you may change to
a greater magnification and obtain their current
position. Enemy vessels have an uncanny knack of
detecting the fact that they are being pinged and
tracing the sound back to its source (i.e. you), so
sonar should be used sparingly unless you are
playing at the Novice level. Once the convoy has
been located, you may change heading and plan an
intercept.
The composition and starting point of the enemy
convoy is randomly determined for each game.
Sometimes you may have the luxury of cruising on
the surface and watching the enemy while other
times you may have to dive immediately and withdrawal to a vantage point in order to plan the intercept. When you have obtained about 4000 yards
to target you may come to firing depth and take a
shooting bearing through your periscope. Since the
enemy is not to keen on being sunk, the target will
change speed and heading quite often, making the
shooting bearing the hardest part of the game to
master. After some practice with turning the scope,
changing heading, and watching the enemy movement you will get the hang of it and know exactly
when to fire. You are very vulnerable when making
a shooting bearing and the enemy will often spot
your scope and begin a depth charge run. If you
are spotted, you will know it immediately as one or
more of the ships come charging straight at you
and then disappear from your scope. The next
sound you hear will be depth charges exploding
and, at the advanced level, that usually means
heavy damage or destruction.
To assess the damage from depth charge attack
the "Damage" play option is used. This option lists
the 10 ships components and tells you if they are
active or out of commission. Some of the ships
components may only be repaired in harbor while
others may be repaired by surfacing and using the
"Utility" play option to begin repairs. Surface repair
is extremely hazardous if the target convoy has an
aircraft carrier as attack on the surface by planes
spells destruction.
After all the ships in the convoy have been
sunk, you may return to harbor and meet a hero's
welcome. Actually, the game just tells you the

number of points you scored and some other stats
about your mission. The stats are stored and may be
reviewed at some later time. You may then start
another mission or turn the computer off and go
talk to your wife. If your wife wants to talk to you
before you have destroyed the convoy then you
may save the game and restart it at some later time.
This reviewer found Operation Keystone to be
an excellent game that maintains a good feel of
real-time combat activity. The only major drawback to this game is the fact that shooting bearings
are very hard to get and almost require two players,
one to plot and the other to execute heading
changes. Good luck, and happy hunting.

Wizard's
(cont. from pg. 17)

Crown

All monsters, of whatever type, fight to the
death. They never surrender, and they never retreat, no matter how badly things are going for
them. However, you can retreat your party out of
combat (one person at a time) if they get into serious trouble. You can only do this with living members, not dead ones; all dead characters will be left
behind.
Immediately after combat concludes, the party is
placed in camp mode. This is where you heal your
injured members, and look over whatever goodies
you took from the defeated monsters (if you ran
away from combat, there won't be any treasure).
Most items will be ordinary, but some will be special. The group's sorcerer is the one who evaluates
the objects, and special ones will have a star next
to them. These specials can be anything from rubies
and diamonds to magical weapons and armor, potions, rings of protection, or items with spell-casting abilities.
How much the party can take depends on how
many open slots they have (a maximum of 10 items
per person can be carried), and how large it is. A
character can carry more small objects than
medium or large ones. Of course, you can always
drop an item to make room for something better
(ditching an ordinary shield in favor of a shield+2,
for instance).
Also in camp you can save the game (but only
outdoors, not in a dungeon). This has a great advantage: the program does not wipe out your save
if you leave camp. Therefore, if some of your party
get killed, you can simply reboot and start over
again from your last saved position (this is automatic). Naturally, any experience or treasure found
since the save will be lost, but on the other hand,
you will have your party intact again.
In the dungeon, things are a little bit different.
It's all done close-up, like detailed combat, with
the individual party members represented by their
icons. And this is where a problem crops up. The
problem is movement. When you first enter a dungeon (or a new dungeon level), you choose the
party member who will be "active". This active
character is the one who will respond to the movement commands; all other party members will follow that one automatically. It sounds good, but often you will find party members getting stuck behind walls.
When this happens, the only thing you can do is

set everyone to "independent" status (meaning they
don't move at all), and set the stuck ones (one at a
time) to active status, and move them away from
the obstruction. You can end up doing a lot of
these maneuvers unless you're really careful.
Fortunately, when you go up or down a level in
a dungeon, everyone in the group goes along, regardless of what movement status they have. This is
helpful when travelling through known areas; you
make one member active, all the rest independent,
and then move the active one as quickly as possible
to the stairs. It's a great time-saver.
Another drawback to dungeons is the inability to
set up for combat. When an encounter occurs, it
happens right then, right there, and you must fight
as-is; you have no opportunity to change positions
until after the combat has started. This could be a
problem if your weaker members happen to be
bunched up near the front, and your fighters are in
the back.
Experience, is difficult to come by, and this
makes advancement slow, especially for dualclassed characters. There are no levels in the game,
just gradual improvement of skills and attributes (a
much more sensible way of doing things). Killing
monsters is the only way of gaining experience, and
you do need to waste a good many of them to get a
decent amount of points.
Each time you return to the Crossed Swords Inn,
you can exchange experience points for skill improvement. Each skill requires a certain number of
points, and the increase is randomly determined,
depending on how far you've advanced. For example, it costs four experience points to increase
sword skill. If the skill is currently under 100, the
increase will be somewhere between 1-8 points.
When the skill reaches 100, the increase will be
only 1-4 points. At ability 150, increase is only 12, and at 200, only 1 point.
Now let's take a look at the world. You begin at
the Crossed Swords, with either the original party
or one of your own design. Leaving the inn, you
find yourself in town, near the front gate, with a
small double-icon representing the party as a
whole. The icon can be moved in any of eight directions by pressing the appropriate number (a
small rosette is displayed at the lower right showing
which number corresponds to which direction).
The town has a number of establishments: temples, where priests can restore their karma (needed
for spells); shops that sell various items of equip-

ment; taverns, where you can pick up valuable info
and reduce morale loss; a market, where you sell
treasure; an armory, with weapons and armor (only
ordinary) for sale; a park; a cemetery; a wizard's
mansion (they will improve any magic item for a
fee); and a training ground for skill improvement.
Outside Arghan to the south are the ruins. Here
monsters abound, and encounters are frequent. The
further away from the gate you go, the nastier the
things you will come up against. Fortunately, there
are a few temples out there, where you can safely
stay for awhile and rest up, provided you know the
word that opens the door.
At the beginning, stay in town. You are no
match for the creatures roaming in the ruins. Most
especially, read the manual thoroughly. It contains
excellent advice, and you should pay attention to it;
you'll live longer that way. In fact, read the manual
a couple of times before you boot the game, so you
know what you're doing.
Combat is generally straightforward. Always
eliminate the more powerful monsters first. Usually
these will be enemy spell-casters, who can make
real trouble for you if you don't get to them fast.
When fighting at night, cast a Foxfire spell as soon
as possible; visibility is greatly reduced in the dark.
When you're up against the likes of Undead Warriors, always get off a Reveal Enemy spell; Warriors
are usually accompanied by ghosts and such who
will often be invisible at the start. Vampires are especially nasty, since they reduce life points directly
upon touch, and most of the time you'll have to
rely on your priests to get rid of them, although
they are killable (it takes awhile, tho).
The dungeon levels have set encounters. Monsters will be found in specific places, and once
killed, they will not reappear. This is handy, as the
dungeons are certainly the most difficult areas of
the game, and cleaning then out is a long and hard
task. Do one level at a time, and go back to town
in between. Remember that you still have to fight
your way back to Arghan, so don't use up all your
resources in the dungeon (no saving there!); you
may be too weak to survive in the wilderness. Also,
make sure you go over every spot on every level;
you will find some interesting items, and also pick
up some very valuable information.
Tarmon is exceptionally hard to kill. He is also
surrounded by a small army of demons, just to
make things more difficult for you. It is quite
likely that one or more of your party will die be-

fore you finish off Tarmon, so do your best to
keep at least one priest alive through the combat.
You should not attempt the final level of Tarmon's
stronghold until your party has the best possible
armor and weapons (but do NOT, under any circumstances, hit Tarmon with a magic weapon; it
will shatter), your sorcerer is at maximum power,
your priests at maximum karma, and your party
generally at maximum skill abilities.
My one quarrel with this game is that the emphasis is very heavy on hack and slash. The puzzles, such as they are, are pretty trivial. There is no
interaction to speak of between the party and any-

one else. In town, you either buy or sell, both of
which are mechanical actions; outdoors, everything
you come across is hostile and must be killed. It
does tend to get a little dull after awhile. Still, the
game has many interesting features of its own, and
should not be overlooked on that account.
Bottom line: Recommended, although a little less
hack and a little more puzzle would have been
better.
Copyright 1986 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

HABITAT
(cont. from pg. 28)
length of time, your Avatar may be returned to it's
turf.
If your Avatar should die, the situation may be
handled in a number of ways. In most cases, your
Avatar will just be reincarnated back in it's turf.
The Oracle is known for being rough on those who
are foolish enough to get themselves killed, and
may extract a payment of saving for the favor of
incarnating. The Oracle may even grant an exit interview which can be good, or may not be so good
based on the situation of your death.
An Avatar who has acted "evil", by the standards
of the Oracle, can receive a variety of sentences.
Some go through the next life with the head of a
goat or other animal. Some are required to pay a
heavy fine from the trust fund or are "grounded" to
their turf for a certain amount of time. Some may
even be banished forever from Habitat.
THE FUTURE
Habitat is an ever changing world. The program
disk that permits you online access to enter the
world of Habitat contains the necessary objects to
provide for many activities. New objects and things

needed to expand the Habitat can be easily downloaded to your Habitat or other disks. New theme
areas, western, space and others, may require the
purchase of new disks. But in the minds of Chip
Morningstar from Lucasfilm and Janet Hunter of
QuantumLink, and many others already associated
with Habitat, there is a long and prosperous future
in Habitat.
The future Avatars among us will find plenty of
fun and challenge in this first network-based,
graphics-oriented multi-player "world simulation".
The computer software will provide the sights and
sounds of a world that changes and evolves as
players communicate and interact with one another.
This game effectively optimizes the local storage, processing and graphics power of the low cost
Commodore 64/128 home computer that is in over
four million homes and the real-time,
person-to-person, interactivity made possible by a low cost
nationwide network that is accessible with a local
phone call.
In our next issue, the Commodore Key will provide a detailed walkthrough of an adventure in
Habitat. Until then, have fun and remember, it's
only a game.

PEEK (Con.)
flight from orbit to Moon
landing from the pilot's point
of view. Using keyboard or
joystick, you will learn to
master the forces of gravity
and inertial motion. Once you
have mastered the LLV controls you can investigate the
Moon on your own. Explore
rilles and craters; find the
Apollo 11 landing site; collect
ore canisters left on the surface by mining teams; etc.
Apple, IBM. Circle #5
Gerhardt Software
32600 Concord Dr. Dept. 401
Madison Heights, MI 48071
WARRIOR'S REALM: A
dungeon exploration adventure. You pick the number of
levels you wish to fight your
way through (1-9 levels for
novices; up to 99 levels if you
are feeling suicidal). The levels are randomly generated for
each game. Apple. $29.95.
Circle Reader Service #6
Great Game Products
8804 Chalon Dr.
Bethesda, MD 20817
PLAY BRIDGE WITH
SHEINWOLD: Test your declarer play at the bridge table
with deals designed by expert
Alfred Sheinwold. You play
these 91 deals in an
"Autobridge" manner, with
one to five tries to come with
the correct play each time it
is your turn to play from your
hand or the dummy. A book
explaining the proper play of
each deal is included. The
product won a 1985 Consumer
Electronics Show Award for
"Outstanding Innovative Programming". Apple, C-64,
IBM. 29.95. Circle #7
Infinity Systems International
P.O. Box 9964
Berkeley, CA 94709
ELECTRONIC GO BOARD:

We will never understand why
the USA, a nation that loves
to play games, has never
taken to the exquisite oriental
game of GO. It is easier to
learn than chess yet is more
intricate and it has an excellent system of handicapping
that permits people of differing abilities to compete
evenly. For those of you that
HAVE discovered GO and are
serious about becoming good
GO players there is Electronic
Go Board. More than just an
electronic GO board, EGB is
a tutor with numerous features of interest to students of
GO. Designed by two GO
aficionados, EGB will be of
interest to all GO players with
IBMs. $29.95. Circle #8
Mike & Jim Co.
P.O. Box 5513
Fort Wayne, IN 46895
PC-ARENA
(OTHELLO/CHESS): Not a
computer game as such, PC
Arena is a software package
that permits IBM owners to
play Othello and Chess via
modem. Communications,
scoring, player prompting,
move judging and board
maintenance are all managed
by the gaming system. $19.95.
Circle Reader Service #9
Origin Systems
340 Harvey Rd.
Manchester, NH 03103
OGRE: The long awaited
computer version of the very
popular OGRE board game
has arrived. The OGRE is a
21st century cybernetic tank
which is opposed by a roster
of smaller but more numerous
tank and antitank weapons.
The board game is great, we
think the computer version
will also rate highly. Check it
out. Apple II 64K. Circle #10

SubLogic Corp.
713 Edgebrook Dr.
Champaign, IL 61820
PURE-STAT BASEBALL: A
new stat based baseball game
that includes stat compiling
abilities along with hi-res
graphics. The game includes a
1985 team data disk. You can
form leagues, trade players,
draft new players, create your
own teams. The game can
track a team's season stats and
individual player year-to-date
stats. With the graphics display turned off you can play
a game in 2 1/2 minutes (an
ideal feature for season replays. C-64. Circle #11

The results of RID #30 are still being collected
and will appear in CGW #32. Please note that there
is not a new RID rating page for this issue. The
results below are as they appeared in RID #30 in
our August issue. Kampfgruppe (strategy) and
Ultima IV (adventure/action) are our top rated
games according to you, our readers.

