November 1990

Features
Christmas Buying Guide

A Surface Look at Silent Service II
8
16

War in GDW's Third Imperium / L.S. Lichtmann

Sneak Preview: Spellcasting 101

20

Game Tips: Star Control Tactics
Flight of the Intruder

27
28

Spectrum Holobyte's "Novel" 'Nam Game / Paul Rigby

New World's The King's Bounty

32

Recipe for Strategy Mixed with Adventure / Alan Emrich

Sneak Preview: The New Battle Tech

36

Infocom's BattleTech II: The Crescent Hawk's Revenge

Casino Plurale
CGW Surveys Casino Gambling Games / Alan Emrich

72

A Surreal Quest for Action/Adventure / Allen Greenberg

Special Cartridge Game Section

Details from the Designer / Paul Reiche

46

59

California Dreams' Street Rod / David Wilson

UbiSoft's Unreal

More Madness from Meretzky / Chris A. Lombardi

51

MicroProse Scores More Tonnage / Johnny L. Wilson

Amigan (and IBM) Graffiti

Software Stocking Stuffers for Silicon Santas

MegaTraveller 1: The Zhodani Conspiracy

Number 76

83

Nintendo, Sega, & TurboGrafx 16 CRPGs / Roe Adams

Departments
Taking A Peek
The Rumor Bag
Scorpion's Mail (Game Hints)
Scorpion's View (Opinion)
Game Ratings (100 Games Rated)
Hall of Fame
Over There (European Games Report)
Letters
Free-For-All (Win Prizes)
Reader Input Device
Editorial

8
10
30
44
56
57
64
60
96
102
112

Taking a Peek

Accolade
550 S. Winchester Blvd.
San Jose, CA 95128
lSHIDO: Strategy, Chance, Patience,

Intuition—the cornerstones of gaming—
and all elements of this pure strategy
game from the orient. Reminiscent of
dominoes, as well as Shanghai,
players must place stones so that they
create two-, three-, and four-way
matchups using both stone color and
tile design. This beautiful and elegantly
designed program can be played
solitaire, against the computer, in
cooperation with another, and can be
consulted as an oracle. IBM, Mac/II
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #1.

Cinemaware
4165 Thousand Oaks Blvd.
Westlake Village, CA 91362
ACTION PACK BRAIN BLASTER: If
there was ever a shining example of
truth in advertising, it would be the ad
copy on the back of this game box
that challenges players to scramble
their brains and challenge their
reflexes. The two games in this package, "Xenon 2" and "Bombuzal," are
both a couple of joystick-breaking arcade games. In "Xenon 2," the player

must scramble through time to find
five hidden time bombs which threaten
to destroy history. In "Bombuzal," an
assortment of bombs must be
detonated without the player getting
blown away, while the player
maneuvers around an ever-changing
board. IBM, Amiga ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #2.

Duggan DeZign Inc.
West Warwick, RI 02893
STIK-GRIPPER: This heavy-duty
hardware serves as a clamp for one's
favorite joystick. Joystick jockeys will
have no more sloppy-sticking once
they've latched their joysticks to the
edges of their computer desks with
this device. One size fits all standardsized, base-mounted joysticks. Circle
Reader Service #3.

Inline Design
5 West Mountain Road
Sharon, CT 06069
DARWIN'S DILEMMA: This cute spa(Continued on page 60)

Buying Guide

spacecraft into the void. See the strategy
article on page 27.
Wayne Gretzky Hockey 2 from
Bethesda Softworks (Amiga, IBM,
$54.95) is a new version (contact Bethesda for the upgrade policy) of the best-sell
ing hockey game. Now, the game will
constantly display a text line indicating
which player is handling the puck at a
particular moment and the model has become even richer and more detailed than
that in the previous product.
Cinemaware has just released Wings
(Amiga, IBM, $49.95), the long-awaited
action game which follows the diary of
an actual World War I pilot. The visual
perspective is different than the WWI avia
tion simulations being released this fall. It
features a camera angle behind the pilot,
no gauges (in fact, no console) and plenty of cinematic effect in the Cinemaware tradition. Even non-action garners
may want to consider this product, because it is a slower-paced set action
game in which, even when the pilot dies,
the player is able to continue forward
with the story. Time marches inexorably
on in this action-based story product.

GW's editorial department had to
climb into those abysmally hot
and ridiculous-looking elf suits
even earlier this year in order to publish
this "Fourth Annual Christmas Buying
Guide" in the November issue. The earlier schedule means that some products
which could already be on store shelves
by the time this issue arrives may have
not yet been received in the CGW offices. However, even some games we
haven't seen will be mentioned in each
category so that you can circle the titles
and hand the list to your personal Santa,
Father Christmas, sugar daddy, parents,
spouse or executive in charge of the office Christmas party. Since, as of press
time, many of these games have only
been handled in stages of partial completion, note that this guide is intended to
be a list of games which could potentially
be major hits this Christmas and not
CGWs final critical word on any of the
games.

Covert Action from MicroProse
($59.95) offers a hybrid style similar to
their award-winning Pirates! and the critically respected Sword of the Samurai.
This time, the subject is espionage and
the game combines action sequences
such as chase scenes with mental puzzles such as cryptography and wiretapping a phone. First looks at this game in
dictate that it may be more challenging
for the "strategist and role-player" than
either of its predecessors in style.

One of Michael Berlyn's novels, The Integrated Man, was exploring the dark
psyche that became the cyberpunk
genre before there was a cyberpunk
genre. Now, the game designer who
brought Infidel, Suspended and others
to adventure garners has teamed up with
Accolade to produce Altered Destiny
(IBM, $59.95). In Altered Destiny, the
graphics engine and parser introduced in
Search for the King have matured. The
introductory sequence seems like a
parody of Leisure Suit Larry being summoned Worlds of Ultima style through
the cathode-ray tube of his television set
and into a universe of the psyche where
he meets a powerful character that looks
vaguely like a past villain from Star Trek
gone awry. Fortunately, that's about the
last element in the plot that bears any
similarity to anything familiar. This looks
like a challenging game with considerable variety.

Star Control from Accolade (Amiga,
IBM, $49.95) is a different kind of hybrid
action game. It offers strategic value as
players plan for the colonization of
planets, exploitation of resources and construction of fortifications, and arcade action as differing vessels with distinctive
specialties try to zap the other player's

From France, BAT (the acronym
stands for "Bureau of Astral
Troubleshooters" in the U.S. version) is
UbiSoft's entry in the "point and click"
adventure sweepstakes (Amiga, Atari ST,
IBM, $49.95, C-64, $39.95). The artwork
for the game provides a menacing,
futuristic feel that is only slightly lighter

C

(Continued on page 24)

The Rumor Bag

The Rumor Bag
by Felix Ian Bond
n Milwaukee there is an industrial area
not far from the river which flows at a
near-glacial pace through the center of
downtown. About a block from the river's
bank, I located the object of my quest. I
noticed the parking lot, the searchlight playing against the side of a decaying
warehouse wall, pockmarked with powdery
mortar which looked like an irregular checkerboard of bat guano. The sign on the door
read, "International Imports and Exports,
Ltd." With visions of James Bond's "Universal Export" dancing in my head, I entered
the delivery door and was immediately confronted by a tall, blond male with that "special services" look. "May I help you, sir?"

I

I gave him the password and he immediately pressed a button which caused the
traditional bookcase to slide open and allow
access to a concrete passageway. A graffiti
artist had painted Suez '73 in large red letters along one wall. I realized that the word
must be getting out on Command Simulations' next computer wargame. It will be
similar to White Death, but the artificial opponent is supposed to be much better.
I reached the end of the tunnel and the apparent dead end quietly slid to one side,
depositing me at a secret bar. I was debating the propriety of ordering a martini with
a twist of lemon, shaken not stirred, when I
was the one who ended up being shaken.
"Felix, old boy," came a voice behind me,
"you're going to have to get rid of that
paper bag if you expect to travel incognito."
I turned to face my informant in time to
hear him ask, "Still driving the old AstonMartin? Jumped over any open
drawbridges lately?"
I assured him that I was, indeed, driving

the Aston and the only
stunt driving that I was willing to do, of late, is going
to take place in
Spectrum HoloByte's

just-released Stunt Driver
and Broderbund's just-announced Stunts (anticipated first-quarter
release). Both products
allow players to design
their own stunt tracks and
race against opponents
head-to-head.
Speaking of motor
sports, he told me he'd just gotten a peek
at Accolade's Test Drive III: The Passion
(anticipated October release) and found out
that there are three prototype automobiles
to be driven in the game: the Chevrolet
CERV III, Ferrari-based Pininfarina Mythos,
and Lamborghini Diablo. He said players
can back up on the road, go cross-country
and even "hide" in structures.
In return, I told him I'd heard from three
sources that Allen Varney, designer of the
Globbo pen and paper role-playing games
was forming his own company, Allen Varney Games. Of course, Allen is often the
butt of practical jokes, so I was pretty skeptical. My source was, too, but he gave me a
number to call. I entered a nearby phone
booth and inserted a quarter in the nearest
coin slot. Unfortunately, it was one of those
phone booths with a sound effects generator, so the party on the other end of the
phone heard a machine gun in the background as I asked if he had anything going
with Allen's alleged company. "No," said
my source, "but I heard that GEnie has
been negotiating agreements with Andon
Games, Reality Simulations and Flying
Buffalo, Inc. (all play-by-mail companies)
to do 100% computer-moderated versions
of Kings & Things, DuelMasters,
Hyborean War, and Starweb." He said
there was even a rumor that the first Starweb game might be a no-turn-fee game. He
hadn't heard of Allen Varney Games and
he never intended to play Globbo. "Maybe
you should check with Lord British," he said.
Feeling a call of nature, I decided to find a
rest room before attempting to find Lord
British. I opened the nearest men's room
door, only to discover that the doorway was
completely bricked up and had "Out of
Order" painted across the bricks. Carved
into the bricks was another, pardon the expression, cryptic note. It simply said, "The
Black Crypt." At the time, I figured it meant
that either a spy or another rumor bag guy
was buried alive in there. Later, I discovered
that The Black Crypt is an Amiga game
with graphics that rival Dungeon Master. It
was designed by some college students in

northern Wisconsin who
haven't found a publisher.
However, it was very well
received by gamers in the
computer room at GenCon.
I found another men's room
to take care of my vital "mission" and practically stepped
on Lord British's boots as I exited. "M'lord," I stuttered (Mr.
Sipe and Mr. Wilson have
drummed this nobility thing
into my head, in spite of the
thick bag), "dost thou know
anything of this Allen Varney
Games?"

Conqueror of the
marketplace and veteran of
hundreds of interviews, my
editors' liege lord confidently
stated, "I can neither confirm
nor deny any such rumors. In fact, even if
my kingdom should have mercantile dealings with such an alleged company, I
couldst neither confirm nor deny. However,
since thou art such a loyal subject, I can
tell thee that the second product in the
Worlds of Ultima series should be a Victorian-era Martian adventure with cameos
by historical figures."
I tried to confirm whether H. G. Wells, Alistair Crowley, Arthur Conan Doyle and the
like would be in the game, but his lordship
retreated to that stance of neither confirming nor denying. I bid a "Fare thee well!" to
Lord British and quickly entered another
phone booth. I quickly dropped a coin in
the slot and started to call another source.
Before I could dial, a voice on the other end
of the line commanded me to dial three
numbers. I did so and another wall slid to
the side revealing a down staircase.
I followed the staircase down past an interrogation room where I overheard a familiar
name. The victim was apparently undergoing a rigorous interrogation, but I stopped
dead when I recognized his voice through
the screams. It was Allen Varney, vehemently denying that he was starting his own
game company. I had to save him. I
entered the room and shouted for the torturers ... er ... investigators to stop. They
quickly bound me and placed me on the
"hot seat" next to Allen.
"What do you know about Sphere of Influence?" they demanded.
"I don't have any," I flippantly responded.
They brought in three of my favorite public
relations ladies and told me the gorgeous
women would never speak to me again if I
didn't tell the truth. I cracked. "It's a
geopolitical game of economics, politics
and military decision-making that's due out
from Spectrum HoloByte in the first
quarter of '91." The master interrogator's
face wrinkled obscenely into a cruel smile.
"That's not all we've been meaning to ask
you . . ."
(To be continued)

Review

MegaTraveller 1:
The Zhodani Conspiracy
Paragon Software's Computer Version of Game
Designers' Workshop's Renowned Traveller RPG
by L. S. Lichtmann

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:
DISTRIBUTOR:

MegaTraveller 1:
The Zhodani Conspiracy
IBM
$59.95
Paragon Software
Medalist International
Hunt Valley, MD

ame

Designers'
Workshop's Traveller
pen-and-paper roleplaying game (RPG) has
been the preeminent sciencefiction RPG since 1977,
thanks to its background
universe, its wealth of excellent support materials, and
the cutting-edge rules
revision (MegaTraveller)
done about three years back.
For those not familiar with
the Traveller universe, it postulates a time about 3500
years from now, when a
method of faster-than-light
travel, the Jump, has allowed
humanity to spread
throughout the nearby stars.

G

The greatest power in
known space is the Imperium, a human-dominated
empire owed allegiance by
thousands of worlds. Across
its frontier, in a region known
as the Spinward Marches, the
Imperium confronts another
human power, the Zhodani Consulate.
Relations with the Zhodani have been
bad for the better part of a millennium.
The last war between the powers was
less than 30 years ago, and there are
rumblings that a Fifth Frontier War may
be imminent...
The title is misleading. MegaTraveller
1: The Zhodani Conspiracy (MT1) is actually set in the days just before the
Fifth Frontier War, some years before
the wrenching changes in the Imperium
which transform the background of
Traveller into that of MegaTraveller.

An internal security agent
of Sharurshid, an Imperiumwide transportation/service
corporation, has found that
Sharurshid's local director,
Konrad Kiefer, is helping the
Zhodani smuggle arms into
the Imperium, in support of
local rebellions to be coordinated with a Zhodani invasion. The agent has
recruited the player's party of
ex-Imperial military, Scout,
and Merchant service
veterans to defeat Kiefer.

Gameplay
Frankly, MegaTraveller 1
has generated quite a
division of opinion. The vast
majority of garners hate the
combat system, to put it mildly (enough so that an update
with a completely different
combat system should be
available from Paragon by
the time this appears in
print). On the other hand,
this reviewer actually likes it
very much.
Since Traveller is an extraordinarily complex and activity-rich environment, even
for a pen-and-paper RPG, it is
surprising how many of the features of
the pen-and-paper game show up in
MT1 in one fashion or another.
Whatever else it may be, this is not a
routine RPG with the Traveller label
stuck on it as an afterthought! In part,
the result is a computer RPG with a
remarkably broad spectrum of activities
for the player, including character
design, personal combat, exploration,
ship-to-ship combat and trade. Experienced Traveller players, however,
should be aware that some of the features they may have been hoping to

Review

find, such as alien characters and starship design, have not been
included in MT1 because of space limitations. Such features may
be included in future products.
Traveller's philosophy of character generation calls for a
lengthy, somewhat tedious character generation process. Fortunately, MT1 has implemented a complete Traveller character
system and automated the procedure, transforming it from a
chore to a delight. Any character generated in MT1 could serve
credibly in a standard Traveller campaign. The original release
did not include a "Print Character" option, but this has been
remedied in the recent update.Therefore, assembling a strong
party for MegaTraveller 1 becomes an enjoyable game in itself.
Thus, the player is allowed to create a pool of up to 15 characters from which to form a five-character party. As characters are
killed in action, replacements may be drawn from the pool, but
the original population of the pool is all that you have to complete the adventure. Furthermore, to win, at least one of your
original five characters must have survived throughout the game.
This encourages the player to treat characters as assets rather
than cannon fodder, and enhances the role-playing aspects of
MT1.
Those who find the tightly-structured storylines of adventure
games to be their least interesting facet will probably find MT1 to
be one of the most successfully freeform computer RPGs this reviewer has
ever seen. The world of MT1 consists of
eight stellar systems, each with several
destination worlds (complete with their
own distinctive character). There are
"Non-Player Characters" (NPCs) to interact with in order to glean information
and rumors. The player determines the
order in which the party visits locations
and when.
The goal of the game is to defeat
Kiefer. To accomplish this, the party
must earn enough Credits to buy an improved space drive, one capable of carrying the ship to the system where a
second Sharurshid security agent
anxiously awaits delivery of three items vital to derailing Kiefer's
plot.
A commendable effort has been made to reproduce in MT1 the
variety of planetary environments possible in the Traveller system (another of Traveller's many strong points). Unfortunately,
this is somewhat diluted by the small size of the planetary exploration areas. From comments in the manual, this seems to
have been at least in part a design choice, to minimize the
amount of aimless wandering.
There are many ways of making money in MT1. There is the
usual RPG routine of stripping the corpses of one's slain foes and
selling the items found. In MT1, this is augmented by the circumstance that certain NPCs will pay inflated sums for specific
items.
A related source of funds is bounty hunting. While adventuring,
one encounters certain notorious and unpleasantly skillful gunfighters. Turning their IDs over to the appropriate officer at Imperial Security Headquarters (which you must locate) will net
highly useful sums of money.
Successful completion of the various sub-missions offered, such
as locating and recovering a religious icon from the nomads who
have stolen it, for instance, is the third way to acquire funds. It is

probably the most dangerous, as it is here you will encounter not
just the lone gunslinger, but groups of alert and deadly enemies.
MT1 implements a speculative trade system similar to, though
considerably simplified from, that of Traveller. Carrying the right
goods from world to world can improve one's financial status significantly. It takes some work, however. Experimentation and
record keeping are essential.
On top of personal combat, exploration, and trade, interplanetary and interstellar travel represent important activities in
MT1. In order to get to another world, one boards a ship and
maneuvers it to its destination. This means learning to use the
shipboard navigation system, at the very least, and using the
communications system to get vital information on the worlds
one travels to and the ships one encounters.
Beyond simple travel, MT1 has an extensive ship-to-ship combat system, with looting of cargo as the analog of corpse robbing
for greasing the mission's wheels. There is a set of shipboard armaments and equipment supporting the shipboard travel and
combat system in the same way that personal equipment and
arms support planetary exploration and personal combat.
A unique aspect of the system is the ship's computer. In order
to perform certain vital ship's functions, such as making an interstellar Jump, the appropriate software
must be loaded and running in the
ship's computer when such a function is
attempted. This would be a triviality, except that the Universal Law that
software expands to exceed available
memory operates in MegaTraveller 1
as in real life. The ship's computer does
not have enough space to store (or the
ability to run) all vital programs at once,
hence, software selection is as important in MT1 as play selection is in football.

Evaluation
Although CGA and VGA graphics are
supported, MT1's graphics are essentially EGA-quality. They are adequate to the task, but only impressive in the variety of screens available and the quantity of information packed into them.
For surface exploration and combat MT1 relies on an overhead
view of the surroundings rather than a party's-eye view. The
party appears either as a single figure for travel or broken down
into five individual figures for combat. NPC figures wander over
the screen under computer control, available for interaction with
the party.
Although MT1 supports a full set of keystrokes to control actions, the entire game can be played with the mouse, except for
a few activities concerning purchase and sale of equipment and
cargo. The mouse is somewhat poorly implemented, however, in
that one must run an obstacle course around the edges of the
combat screen in order to move from the menu portion of the
screen to the actual combat figures. Players possessing a mouse
will want to rely on it, except for combat, where the quick sequencing possible with keystrokes becomes important.
No aspect of MT1 has generated more complaints than the personal combat system. Many are disappointed because the
phased, tactical system of Traveller has been modified to have
arcade-game characteristics. How can a single player, controlling
(Continued on page 105)

Sneak Preview

Continuing Education for
the Adventure Gamer
Spellcasting 101: Sorcerers Get All The Girls
by Chris A. Lombardi

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PRODUCERS:
PUBLISHER:

eing an adventure game
aficionado has been rough going
these last few years. Since the
demise of the text adventure, and thus
the passing of the Golden Age of Adventure Gaming, people have tried,
with limited success, to find new and
different ways of telling a good story.
We've seen several attempts at mixed
text/graphic adventures and a rash of
the now-in-vogue Sierra-style games,
but nothing has yet approached the
charm and storytelling ability of the
classic Infocom games. There was
something about those classic adventures that could entertain the adventurer more successfully than anything
since.
Well, the time for bemoaning a lost
era may be over with the release of a

new line of products from Legend
Entertainment Group. From the
looks of Spellcasting 101: Sorcerers
Get All The Girls, the first release on
Legend's slate, adventure gaming in
the classic mode may get a much
needed kick in the pants.
Taken in parts, Spellcasting 101
does not do anything that hasn't been
tried before. The game offers partialscreen graphics, a keyword menu
selection system with mouse interface,
and niceties like compass-rose movement selection and mouse-responsive
graphics. Taken as a whole, one sees
that Legend has taken all the good
ideas poorly implemented in past efforts and has, finally, done the adventure game interface right. Add to this
the very important fact that Spellcast-

Spellcasting 101: Sorcerers Get All The Girls
IBM
559.95
Steve Meretzky
Bob Bates & Mike Verdu
Legend Entertainment Group
Chantilly, VA 22021

ing 101 is authored by Steve
Meretzky, whose game credits (Planetfall, Sorcerer, Hitchhiker's Guide to
the Galaxy, Leather Goddesses of
Phobos, and more) read like a "Best
Of" adventure gaming list and you'll
see why this "Raised-On-Grue-Meat" adventurer/reviewer is excited.

>REVIEWER, TELL ME
ABOUT THE STORY
Spellcasting 101 is a racy tale of adventure which some have called
Leather Goddesses of Phobos meets
Enchanter. The player assumes the
role of Ernie Eaglebeak, a dorky
young man who aspires to a life of
magic. Ernie's motives are honest and
clearly stated—he has always been interested in magic and, besides, sor-

Sneak Preview

cerers get all the girls. The player
leads Ernie on a bawdy romp from his
near escape of a life scooping dragon
dung through his days as a freshman
at Sorcerer U. to the eventual fulfillment of his birth prophesy, while
through it all "catering to the special
needs of women across the land." The
universe is Zorkesque in flavor, the
silly magic element is straight out of
the Enchanter series, and the clever
puzzles remind one of Zork Zero and
Nord and Bert. It's a wild ride scattered with sophomoric humor, adolescent sexual fantasy and sarcastic wit in
true Meretzkian form.

mistaken for VGA at first glance. The
artist, Tanya Isaacson, should get an
award for betwitching every newt's eye
of potential out of the EGA graphic
mode. This jaded reviewer is impressed by the manner in which the
graphics are handled in the game.
Rather than emphasizing the graphics
as in common adventures, the
graphics screens in Spellcasting 101
are gravy. They make no attempt to
show the entire location in one shot

>HIDE SOFTWARE FROM
JESSE HELMS
Spellcasting 101 is another
dangerous foray into the murky waters
of "adult" software. The game contains
adult situations, language and graphics
of scantily clad nymphs (reads like a
MPAA rating [gag]!). Those who have
seen an R-rated movie recently will
find nothing to shock them. However,
like Leather Goddesses of Phobos,
Spellcasting 101 has both "Naughty"
and "Nice" modes of play. The Nice
mode of play eliminates all of the situations, graphics, and language that
some might find offensive (and that
others might find fun) and plays a very
tame game. It's a shame that so much
work went into an option that will rarely be used, but one must assume that
this enables the game to meet some
community standards, somewhere. Unfortunately, unlike Leather Goddesses
of Phobos, Spellcasting 101 only offers a game from the male perspective. The energy used in programming
the "Nice" mode would more than likely have been better spent in creating a
female version of the game. T'will be
interesting to see how Scorpia
responds to the female exclusion.

>LOOK
Spellcasting 101 provides the player
several different ways to see and interact with the world. Although most
players will not want to miss the gorgeous EGA one-third screen graphics,
the game can be played as a pure text
game (one might want to do so for an
instant in the name of nostalgia). The
graphics are so good they are easily

nor all of the objects therein. They provide flavor, in a non-essential supporting role, for the well-written prose.
They are also interactive. What objects
do appear in the window can be clicked on once for an instant LOOK command or clicked twice to evoke an obvious operation like TAKE for objects
or OPEN for doors.
Another nice graphic and storytelling
touch is the division of the game into
chapters, each with an artsy chapterheading screen with baroque borders
and hilariously appropriate quotes
from the most quotable figures
(Ambrose Bierce and Yogi Berra
among them). It gives the game a
literary feel and gives one an added
feeling of accomplishment in addition
to the point-scoring system.
It's clear that the game's graphics
were developed around the story
rather than the converse, as in most
adventures. Rather than worrying
about memory limitations and artist
costs, this design philosophy would
seem to allow the designers more
flexibility and afford them the chance
to think story first, frills second. While
competing adventures sacrifice verbal
description for graphics, the Legend
people have not lost sight of the fact
that, in adventure games, words pack

more imagination-piquing punch than
pixels.

>PUT THE PRAISEWORTHY
PURPLE PARSER INTO THE
PUZZLING PROGRAM
Spellcasting 101 boasts a parser
that is leaps and bounds better than
anything currently on the market. Bob
Bates, producer and head cheese at
Legend has taken his experience
(though none of the code, he assures
us) with Infocom's excellent ZIL parser
system and has created an interpreter
with a lexicon and parsing ability that
blows away anything Sierra or Accolade is currently doing [Ed: Contact
Bob on this one. CGW does not need
to find itself in the middle of a parser war]. To aid the adventurer further, the game offers two ways to interact with the world. Players either type
commands in the usual manner, or
they can choose appropriate verbs,
prepositions, and nouns from an extensive menu of words.

>READ MENU AND ORDER
THE GRUE FLANK STEAK
This menu selection system is touted
as a great advance in the genre. I was
skeptical at first, however, fearing that
the menu system would limit players
to an oversimplified repertoire of corn(Continued on page 94)

(Continued from page 8)
than the film noir style in Dynamix'
Rise of the Dragon (IBM, $59.95). Both
games use interfaces where the player
touches a location portrayed on the
screen and clicks (on the mouse or keyboard) and the scene resolves into a new
perspective based on a subsequent location. If a player clicks on a door, for instance, the next view would likely be of a
room just entered. If a player clicks on
an object, that object may be seen in a
close-up view and/or manipulated by the
player. This "player as director"-style interface may be the wave of the future and
science fiction gamers should be very interested in both of these games. The
stories have some rich science fiction
conventions in them, as well.
Horror fans may prefer the "point and
click" B-movie thrills of Elvira, Mistress
of the Dark from Accolade (IBM,
Amiga, ST, $64.95). The game features
"real-time" hand-to-hand combat, but also
contains mental stimulation for more
traditional adventure garners, as well.

Players use a scroll of magical spells and
ingredients for potions (garnered
throughout the ancestral castle Elvira is
trying to renovate) in order to create
magical brews.
BattleTech: The Crescent Hawk's
Revenge from Infocom (see sneak
preview on p. 36) is the sequel to BattleTech: The Crescent Hawk's Inception. It
probably has more to offer to those who
like to play the BattleTech boardgame
from FASA than to narrative-oriented
role-playing enthusiasts.
SSI's Buck Rogers: Countdown to
Doomsday (IBM, Amiga, $49.95, C-64,
$39.95) appears to integrate story and
combat fairly successfully. Tactical wargamers, as well as hackers and slashers,
will probably enjoy the options to be
found in the new Buck Rogers combat
system more than any of the previous
gold box series from SSI and the
artwork in each of these games continues to offer more with every release.
Speaking of a game series where the
artwork continues to improve, Access
Software's Countdown (IBM with hard
(Continued on page 98)

Game Hints

!lthough it is unusual for COW
to print strategy articles before
actually reviewing a computer
game, we believe that Star Control is
exciting and challenging enough
that our readers will not want to
wait for these insightful observations
from the designer of the game.
This article provides Star Control
players with part one of a detailed
"How-To" guide for the ship-to-ship, tactical combat aspects of the game, as
well as some suggestions and recommendations for strategic play in the
Full Game. Star Control, published by
Accolade, is exactly what Fred Ford
and I set out to create 18 months ago,
a hybrid action-strategy game which
puts the squeeze on both your higher
brain and your adrenal glands.

Star Control Strategy and Tactics
by Paul Reiche III, Designer

For those of you familiar with my previous works (Archon, Adept, and Mail
Order Monsters), the basic design
goals in the creation of Star Control will
come as no great surprise; namely, to
combine and pace action with strategy
to give the player a "full-body" experience of facing conflict and overcoming challenges.
I am not one to over-analyze games,
especially my own. There are four principles that I want from games which I
design. First, that they be fun, with no
excuses about how the game simulates
the agony and dreariness of the real
world (as though this was somehow
good for you). Second, that they be challenging over a long period of time,
preferably with a few ability "plateaus"
that let me feel in control for a period of
time, then blow me out of the water.
Third, that they be attractive. I am a sucker for a nice illustration or a funky riff.
Finally, I want my games to be conceptually interesting and thought-provoking,
so one can discuss the game with an
adult and not feel silly.

Ship Tips
The Hierarchy and Alliance fleets are
not equal, though in the hands of an experienced player, they have equivalent
overall strength. In general, Hierarchy
ships are strong, slow, relatively simple
to use, and deadly at close range. On
the other hand, Alliance vessels tend to
be weaker in terms of crew and raw
firepower, but are more nimble and possess weapons/special ability combinations whose offense/defense capacities
are more flexible than their Hierarchy
counterparts. With either fleet, the key to
winning is to know the strengths of your

ships and the weaknesses of your
opponent's.

The Hierarchy Fleet
The Ur-Quan Dreadnought is the
strongest and most expensive ship in
the game. Don't ram it into a planet,
or close with a ship that has powerful
short-range weapons. In the Full
Game, you may want to keep the Dreadnought near or on a colony, so that it
can quickly restore any crew lost in battle.
Each fighter launched represents a
departing crew member, so don't send
off all but the last few of your crew if the
ship is crippled. Doing so risks defeat
through a single, lucky enemy shot. Also,
fighters expire if you don't let them
return to your ship. Thus, avoid highspeed chases or your fighters could be
left far behind. Finally, for experienced opponents, fighters are usually only a diversionary nuisance from long range. Use
fighters at short range, in concert with
your main weapon, for best results.
Against most ships, the Mycon Podship is a dead duck if it sits still. Once it
gets moving (a good Gravity Whip

works), its commander can kick back,
fire a plasma torpedo now and then, and
regenerate any damage that comes his
way. The most serious flaw to this tactic
is the presence of the planet. To give
yourself time to respond to an onrushing
celestial body, avoid diagonal whip trajectories.
One of the most serious threats to the
Mycon is its own weapon, the expanding
plasma cloud. Fast ships, like the Arilou,
Shofixti, or Syreen will try to lure the plasma weapon back upon the Mycon, especially if it is cooperating by staying in
one spot. Alternately, if the Mycon is
moving at or beyond its normal maximum velocity (due to a high-speed collision or a skillful Gravity Whip), it can
overrun its own weapon immediately
after launch, suffering grievous casual(Continued on page 58)

Review

Phantom II flight models. It is set in
the heated skies of Vietnam, just
before the Linebacker campaign in
1972 that took place over North
Vietnam. The object is to complete
assigned missions with minimum
loss. However, while previous
games allowed the player to simply look after his/her own survival,
Intruder forces the player to consider wingmen, as well as other
flights accompanying one on the
mission. In fact, players control
and direct up to eight aircraft in
any one mission. This is because
any combat mission, whether it be
over Vietnam or anywhere else,
needs support if it is to be successful. This is the area where Intruder
differs from the majority of flight
TITLE:
Flight of the Intruder
simulators. So, one flight (of two
SYSTEM:
IBM
aircraft) may be assigned the
$59.95
PRICE:
bomb run, another flight may be
DEVELOPER:
Rowan Software
PUBLISHER:
Spectrum HoloByte
anti-SAM, another anti-aircraft, esAlameda, CA
cort, etc. Getting one aircraft safely
home may be challenging enough
for some players, but juggling eight aircraft in the SAM / MiG /
AAA-filled skies of North Vietnam is a surefire recipe for an incredible challenge.

Spectrum HoloByte's Flight of the Intruder
by Paul Rigby

Upon loading (check out the magnificent carrier launch introductory sequence), Intruder offers the player a choice from
three distinct sections. The first area ("Scramble") offers a
chance to repeat the previous mission, a handy option for those
who may have just botched up an assignment, but don't want
the hassle of resetting the configuration, tactics, weapons, orders,
etc. in order to play it again. The next area is split into two and
will form the basis of most people's first look at the game
mechanics. Called "Phantom" and "Intruder Pilot Brief," these sections allow players to fly their first missions as a tutorial.

Carrier Pigeons (The Command Option)
However, the main section of Intruder is the "CAG" (Commander Air Group) option. On selection of this option, the player
becomes the CAG who, in turn, must choose a primary mission
(anything from attacking the dreaded Than Hoi bridge to hitting
torpedo boats). Then, a secondary mission is selected from
about six or seven sites around the main target. At this juncture,
the CAG designates the weapons for each flight and investigates
basic intelligence for any area on the game map of Vietnam.

"The impact of the Intruder upon the North Vietnamese was
significant. Some measure of the effectiveness of the new
airplane can be gained by a Radio Hanoi broadcast on April
20 1966 when the North Vietnamese hotly claimed that the
Americans were using B-52 heavy bombers against the population centers of the country. In truth, the strike [against the
Uong Bi power plant] was accomplished by two Intruders."
—Mersky& Polmar, The Naval Air War in Vietnam.

F

light of the Intruder, developed by UK software house
Rowan Software for Spectrum HoloByte, supports the
Grumman A-6 Intruder and McDonnell Douglas F-4B/J

It is also possible to change the crews of each aircraft. This is
an excellent feature which forces one into making personnel
management decisions—an essential responsibility of all CAGs.
So, one must be certain that each crew is up to the job assigned
to them by considering their individual ratings for such functions
as Wild Weasel (anti-SAM), fatigue factor, dogfighting, etc. One
has to take extra care of one's men, too, because Intruder
replaces lost personnel with green recruits.
Waypoints are extremely important in Intruder. They are the
hinge that can determine the success or failure of a mission in
both real life and the simulation—a pat on the back to Rowan
and Spectrum HoloByte for getting this right. In this case, the
CAG can tell each flight exactly when they can take off, what
course to take (right down to exact latitudes and longitudes),
(Continued on page 40)

Game Hints

Scorpion's Mail

ook at that, it's time to pop into
the back room again. Seems like
we were just here only a little
while ago. Ah well, they say time flies
when you're having fun (although I
have another way of describing being
buried under mail sacks, heh).

L

weapon skills have a limit (which
varies by weapon type and character
class). When you reach that limit, you
simply can't train any further in that
weapon. There are nine trainers in the
game: Brettle, the tower outside Brettle,
Htron (2), Shellernoon, the keep on the
Krell Way, Olanthen, the Kvlar forest,
and the Portal. If none of them will
train you in a weapon, it's time to
move on to another weapon. That's all
there is to it.

In addition to the usual requests for assistance with games, people have been
asking all sorts of (ahem) personal
questions. Such as: how many letters a
week do you get? Do you get paid for
answering them? When is CGW going
to give you a raise? Why don't they
print your picture with the column?

Dragon Wars: Some folks have been
wondering if it is possible to obtain all
the spells listed in the manual. The
answer is no, you can't. Most of them
you can get, but there are one or two
which just "ain't there." Don't worry
about it, though, you can complete the
game without them. Another problem
for some players relates to the frozen
Dwarves in the Dwarf Hall. Look closely: they've been petrified (stoned, in a
way). What do you suppose you could
do about that? (I'd give more of a hint,
but I'm not that soft).

I suppose they want answers (sigh).
Ok, here they are: I don't really count
the number of letters that come in, but
a rough estimate is between 40-60 a
month, a bit more when new games
come out, and a bit less at other times
(like the depths of summer, when nothing new is out). This summer, however,
has been out of the ordinary, with more
mail than usual.
No, I don't get paid for answering the
letters; it's something I do on my own,
to help out fellow garners. Yeah, when
is CGW gonna give me a raise? (Oh,
Russ .... ) . As for my picture, well, the
camera hasn't been made yet that could
survive the ordeal (grin).
Anyway, enough fluff, let's get down to
the real stuff.

Knights of Legend: Lately, people
have been writing and asking about training. Mainly, they want to increase
weapon skills, but can't find anyone to
train them. There's a reason for this: all

Indiana Jones & The Last
Crusade: The Graphic Adventure: It
seems that a few adventurers are
having difficulties in the catacombs
below Venice. Specifically, there is a
large area of water they'd like to get
past, but can't find a way to do so. Well,
you'll have to pull the plug from below.
(Continued on page 88)

Review

per week
(troops have
to be paid
each week)
and leadership (how
large the
units which
by Alan Emrich
the player
commands
can be).
Early on, leadership seems to be the key, because the battles often go to the side with more
"staying power" (or as the wargamers say, the
"bigger battalions"). While they all need to climb
the exact same set of stairs to reach the top,
each class uses different muscles along the way.

A Feast for Some
New World's King's Bounty

Setting Out, Oh Great Leader

S

ome people go to a new high-rise building and want to explore everything on every floor; some just want to go there
to conduct their business; and others just want to visit the
rooftop and see the view. It is for this latter group that King's
Bounty was designed by Jon Van Caneghem (of Might &
Magic fame). A straight-through adventure game, it is akin to
climbing a flight of stairs (with no turning to the left or right) in
order to reach the top and find oneself satisfied with the view.
More than simply a destination, however, King's Bounty is also
a lively, quick-paced journey for the strategy-minded adventure
gamer.

The Story So Far
Well, this time it's not all the Ultimate Bad Guy's (UBG's) fault.
Arech Dragonbreath is only one of 17 villains who stole the good
king's Sceptre of Order and buried it. Each of the villains has a
piece of the puzzle map to its secret location, but Dragonbreath
has the critical center piece. Without the retrieval of the Sceptre,
chaos, evil and nastiness will prevail throughout the land and,
worse yet, the player will lose the game.

Party Of Six? Forget It!
King's Bounty is a game of armies. The player has to recruit
soldiery from lands (where peasants, pikemen, knights, wolves,
barbarians and more can be found), hills (where orcs, dwarves,
giants, dragons and more dwell), forests (in search of elves,
trolls, etc.) and dungeons (where demons and undead abound).
There are no "adventures" in these areas, as they are presented
for recruitment only. A player maneuvers an army of five units,
where each unit consists of a number of troops of one type (for
example, 28 nomads is one unit), through numerous overland encounters and in "sieges" of upwards of 17 castles.

Heroes Wanted
King's Bounty offers but four character classes for the player
to choose from: Knight, Paladin, Barbarian and Sorceress. Each
is rated for speed of character advancement, maximum number
of spells the character may know, spell power, base commission

One's character starts out at the head of a
small army. Fortunately, the story is built in such
a way that lesser encounters occur first, with more
vicious ones undiscoverable early on. Players trash
countless wandering armies of bad guys across all
four continents of the realm, while exploring the
map (complete with a handy automapping feature)
in search of towns, castles, treasures and recruitment areas (each bearing its own rewards).
Towns offer a quick list of five items for a player to select from.
A player can pick up a "contract" to off the next villain in the line
of 17. Then, if that villain's castle is successfully besieged, the villain is captured, a piece of the map to the Sceptre is recovered
and the player earns megabooty. To go up a level, a character
must snag from 1-3 villains (depending on the character's class).
Subsequent levels require 5-8 more villains, with final advancement in another 10-14 captures. Captured castles may also be
"garrisoned" by one of the player's army units, which will
generate extra weekly income for the player.
Also at towns, players may hire the boat. The boat gets one's
forces across the waters and between the continents. It is very
practical (from a time standpoint, as this is a "race the clock"
game) to hire the boat. Towns might also know who lives in nearby castles and each town sells its distinctive "town spell" (one of
the 14 different spells in the game). Finally, the player can shell
out the big bucks to pick up siege equipment, allowing him to attack castles.

Storyline = Straightline + Punchline
The straight, linear storyline of King's Bounty is an easy and
familiar device (which was also recently used in Mindcraft's The
Keys To Maramon). While this will leave Ultima devotees
wondering where the challenge is, not everyone wants to play an
adventure of that scope every time they sit down at a computer.
This reviewer spent around six enjoyable hours climbing straight
up the stairs of its storyline and was rewarded with the "end
screen payoff." What keeps this game from becoming too
monotonous are these three elements: serious time pressure, nailbiting battles, and expanding megalomania.
The time pressure is inherent in the scenario. Chaos will come
upon the lands unless the player can unearth the Sceptre before
the requisite number of days passes. With each space entered
consuming a preset amount of time, every wasted move is paid
(Continued on page 78)

Sneak Preview

Sneak Preview:
Infocom's BattleTech: The Crescent Hawk's Revenge
by Wyatt Lee and J. D. Lambright
colorful static screens which feature fullscreen portraits of men, 'mechs and locations, along with short paragraphs of text
that advance the story. Hardcore 'mech
pilots can jump over these static screens
if they desire, so the primary focus of the
game is duplicating the multi-unit actions
of the boardgame on the computer
monitor.

Take Command
The game begins with a "story so far"
overview. Next, the player gets a choice
of four 'mechs from a pool of six different machines (a Wasp, Commando,
Hermes II, Phoenix Hawk, and a Griffin).
To insure flexibility, the player must
choose four different types from the six
'mechs available in this pool at the start
of the game.

acifica, October 3028: Jason
Youngblood, son of famed
Phoenix Hawk pilot Jeremiah
Youngblood, has just received word
that Morgan Kell (legendary leader of
the famed Kellhounds) has vital information concerning the whereabouts of
his father, a prisoner of war in the
Draconis Combine (House Kurita).
Jason, a MechWarrior trained in the
Lyran Commonwealth (House Steiner),
intends to land at the Kellhound base
and initiate his plans for a rescue mission.

p

Infocom's BattleTech: The Crescent
Hawk's Revenge sounds like a role-playing game, but is actually more like a tactical-level wargame with six scenarios
strung together via a storyline set in the
BattleTech universe (designed by FASA
for its boardgame and novels). Those

who are accustomed to playing the
boardgame or slugging it out in miniatures battles using the BattleTech rules
should feel right at home with this game.
Those who are looking forward to landing on planets, encountering fascinating
aliens, discovering unique artifacts and
solving puzzles had best stay away. The
story does not progress via conversational encounters, exploration or skill enhancement.
Rather, it consists of commanding
one's squad of 'mechs (those multi-ton
humanoid engines of destruction — inspired by Japanimation like Super
Dimension Fortress Macross and Fang
of the Sun Dougram — that look like
giant robots, but are piloted by a gifted
warrior elite) in firefights with differing
mixes of opposing 'mechs and combat
objectives. These battles alternate with

Controls are joystick, keyboard, or
mouse-driven using a cursor on the battlefield and menu on the side of the
screen. The player uses these controls to
direct movement, weapon fire, unit speed
and the entire squad's formation. The
controls are pretty similar to those utilized in BattleTech: The Crescent
Hawk's Inception (Inception), but
things can get fairly complicated when
the player is trying to control up to three
'mechs at a time. In the early versions
CGW received, one had to click onto a
specific unit (moving the cursor by joystick, keyboard or mouse), and then
move to the menu to command the unit.
This meant that the command sequence
would often be interrupted (slowed down)
when the battle got hot and the messages from other 'mechs started to come
in fast and furious.
There are some significant differences
between BattleTech: The Crescent
Hawk's Revenge (Revenge) and its
predecessor (Inception), however. Movement must consist of moving the cursor
and clicking on four different "legs" of
movement during the turn. In Inception,
the player had considerably more control
during each phased movement. If one is
not careful, particularly in the first
scenario, one can move past the target
'mech and miss the shot without realizing
it. Second, combat takes place in a realtime setting, unlike the phased move-

Sneak Preview

ment (preferable to role-players and wargarners) utilized in the first game. Third,
since the game does not emphasize the
"role-playing" experience of the game, it
does not offer the option of allowing the
computer to fight for the player which Inception provided. Fourth, Revenge is a
linear entertainment in which the
protagonist's goals are clearly outlined
for him. There is none of the "wasted
time" dedicated to discovery and exploration that was required in Inception. The
best news is that Revenge has superior
VGA graphics and characters that do not
look like cheap imitations of Japanime';
is much faster-paced than Inception; and
is the kind of game that offers
replayability where Inception did not.
Revenge also offers some on-screen
hints whenever the player fails.

off a larger force which includes a Whitworth and an APC, among others.
In the third scenario, the small 'mech
force faces a much larger force of three
Rommel tanks (extremely tough opponents) and a couple of 'mechs. By this
time, the player has learned one of the
most important lessons of the game, the
"good guys" are always outmanned and
outgunned. The primary objective of the
third scenario is to keep the tanks from

Verify Situation
Just before the action begins in
Revenge, Jason Youngblood's ship is
strafed by Kurita fighters and, as a result,
forced to crash land into a lake, rather
than reaching the Kellhound base he was
bound for. As Jason, the player finds
that two of his available 'mechs have already filled with water and sunk to the
bottom of the lake. So, he only has two
'mechs potentially available for his use.
While he is still trying to get out of the
water, he observes another 'mech who
has already been damaged by enemy
fire. Jason must help out the damaged
Jenner in his battle with a Kurita Locust,
because the Kurita 'mech will immediately start firing at Jason's ship, should
the Jenner be defeated. Should this
occur, the game is quickly and unsuccessfully completed. Thus, the basic challenge of the first scenario is to destroy
the Kurita 'mech or cause it to retreat.
Next, one offloads the two 'mechs from
the ship and attempts to secure the road
to the Kellhound base where are hero
originally intended to land. Now, the
player controls three 'mechs. Because of
the real-time constraints, however, he controls these 'mechs loosely. It is difficult to
get all three 'mechs to triangulate on one
target because, at least in the unfinished
version CGW was experimenting with,
the computer tends to "take over" command of those units one is not actively
commanding at a given time. Obviously,
this has both advantages and disadvantages. With the computer commanding the units, one can be relatively sure
that all units stay in the action, but coordination becomes a nightmare. Basically,
both the second and third scenarios are
essentially "run and gun" road battles to
protect the base. The "good guys" chase

crossing the bridge and reaching the
base.
The fourth scenario offers a slightly different challenge, an escort mission.
There are two essential phases to this
scenario. The hero begins in the city and
loads two different types of weapons into
his cargo carrier in order to deliver them
back to the base. One essentially controls two urban 'mechs in a running battle against Kurita infantry, while attempt-

ing to protect the delivery at any cost.
There is also a random encounter in
which the party can be strafed by Kurita
fighters. Finally, one has to drive past a
'mech guarding the city gate in order to
exit the city.
Unfortunately, the early draft of the
documentation does not delineate the
functions and characteristics of an urban
'mech, even though the player is required to command two of them in the
fourth scenario. This is somewhat
analogous to the fact that four of the six
'mechs in the player's starting pool have
"jump jet" capacity. Jump jets that would
enable the 'mechs to fly behind enemy
lines would have been extremely valuable in some scenarios. Nevertheless, the
program (at least, in our version) makes
no allowances for using them.
The fifth scenario is introduced via a
static-screen exposition of a huge party
where the hero and his fellow warriors
are the guests of the Kellhounds. Here,
the hero gets to meet the famous Morgan Kell. He also gets to thank "Grease
Anderson," the pilot of the damaged
'mech in the first scenario, for saving his
bolts in that scenario. All the
'mechwarriors have a good laugh at the
hero's expense, however, because
"Grease" turns out to have been a 'tech,
not a 'mech pilot. He simply jumped into
a 'mech at a crucial time in order to help
out. Right after the party, and a good
night's rest, Jason comes up with a
heroic plan. The Kellhounds help him salvage his two waterlogged 'mechs from
the bottom of the lake, so Jason volunteers to breach the Kurita lines and
march directly on the bad guys' mobile
headquarters. The commander has a better idea (and this means most players
will want to save the game here and
replay the scenario). The commander orders Youngblood to choose two light
'mechs (Javelins) to flank the Kurita
lines. Then, the other 'mechs are to attempt a frontal assault. In this way, one
group should be able to get through to
the mobile headquarters in fairly decent
shape. Players have the choice of commanding either group, so this is not only
an interesting scenario, but a double
scenario. "Road Run" gives the player a
chance to flank the enemy with the light
'mechs and "Gauntlet" gives the heavier
units a chance to breach the line and go
for the enemy's throat.
As a sideline, however, here is another
game universe anomaly. Prior to the fifth
scenario, the commander allows Jason
to have the missiles which he brought
(Continued on page 92)

CHASING DEMONS
. . . AND MIGS
(Continued from page 28)

what to do on the way there (fly in combat or cruise formation,
jink, etc), what height to fly at and what time they should reach
a particular waypoint. This means that
players should be able to coordinate an
attack that will flow like poetry in motion, with timed attacks right down to
the last second. Wonderful stuff.
Target information takes the form of
some basic data provided as to its position and description. Sometimes, the
player even gets a black & white photo
of the target. This can be very useful. It
might even prevent one from hitting the
wrong bridge during the heat of battle.

Phantom of the Flattop
(The Flight Model)
After taking off from the carrier, one
sees a wingman close up and get into formation. The other
flights will take off according to the timetable allotted them in the
command option (this section can be hurried along via an Accelerated Time feature). Once everybody's up and running, the
player has the option of easily switching between aircraft and
taking control. Since it is possible to do this at any time, one can
always manage to be in the thick of the action. In fact, it is neces-

For a flight simulation on the scale of the epic Vietnam conflict, research is paramount. Especially so, considering the tech
nology involved. To capture as realistic a feel for this era of
combat as possible, Rowan Software's project leader, Rod
Hyde, travelled to California.
"I spent three days with a chap called Norman Cosand who
flew as a back-seater in the Vietnam war on F-4s. He used to
fly it, too. The front seaters used to let the back-seaters fly on
the way to a mission and on the way back to give them some
experience and to give the chap in the front time to write his
notes up so he could go straight to the bar when he landed!"
According to Hyde, Cosand provided valuable information on
bomb runs and general aspects of flying the F-4 as well as the
tactics and maps. In addition, Norman supplied three audio
tapes of missions. A couple were missions he went on. The
other tape offered an example of some very dramatic action,
"In one case you can hear the last five or ten minutes of a F-4
pilot and co-pilot who'd got themselves a damaged plane. You
can hear the whole rescue system. Another F-4 comes up and
flies alongside and goes around giving him damage status.
This particular one is a sad sequence. In the very early F-4s, if
the back-seater punched out first, there was a pressure set-up
such that the front-seater couldn't punch out—and that's what
happened in this case. So they only got one of the chaps out."
Rod described a second sequence where an inexperienced
fighter pilot sees some MiGs below him. You can hear the chatter as he's trying to persuade his leader to let him go down.
The flight leader refuses permission as they are nothing to do

sary to do this if one wishes to take the maximum credit and
points for an operation. If one gains enough points, he/she is
awarded an operations badge for that strike. Medals are also possible if one has done enough to earn one. Naturally, the difficulty
factor increases depending upon the rank chosen by the player.
The flight models have been well implemented. The F-4 Phantom feels like a combat fighter. It produces and retains "energy"
or speed more successfully than the Intruder. The Intruder feels like a flying
whale at times and has a tendency to
stall. So, both "planes" offer distinctive
flight characteristics, quirks and authentic avionics in a commendable implementation. For example, the AIM-7
Sparrow air-to-air missile was in its initial
development cycle during Vietnam. It
was infamous for its lack of reliability.
Thus, the success-to-failure ratio for the
Sparrow reflects this unreliability. In addition, the software supplies a Rules of
Engagement option which submits
players to the same crippling flight conditions experienced by all US pilots in
Vietnam.
Other elements include the very smoky J79 engines on the F-4
Phantom. Check out the external viewpoints to see this feature
has been included. Also, watch the smoke disappear once the
afterburner is engaged—again, true to real life.
(Continued on page 48)

with the mission in hand. In the end it is just too great a temptation so he goes down, by himself, " ... you can hear that he is
suddenly outnumbered—and that's the end of him. You tend to
listen to these tapes in total silence."
Action sequences such as these provided much needed atmosphere and "real-life" details for the simulated "radio chatter"
for the program. During the multi-flight CAG option of Flight of
the Intruder, players will see lots of radio chatter (some of it
having no bearing on the player's aircraft).
Gilman Louie, Spectrum HoloByte's CEO was able to provide much of the information on the A-6 (performance and
weapon data, etc) along with direct help from Stephen Coonts
himself. Coonts was able to contribute help on bombing techniques and MIL depression advice for bombing.
One of the late additions to the Intruder was the rudder option, as Hyde notes: "It is not a full rudder implementation—
there's no effect on pitch, for example. It was something we
added right at the end to help in the carrier landings because,
as the carrier moves it is quite a difficult task to line yourself
up. The rudder is a heading change only.
"We really didn't want to put a rudder in Intruder as we felt
that a rudder is more important on a WW2 fighter than a Phantom. You'll find it very difficult to do a stall-turn in an F-4. Although you can tail-slide like the MiG-29 did at Farnborough."
Many players will find the rudder to be not only a useful addition while landing, but when lining up a target for attack, as
well. Attacking the Than Hoi bridge with Laser Guided Bombs,
for example, was eased by the rudder-based course changes.
But a tail-slide? Hmmm—that would take some doing!

Scorpia's Column

Scorpion's View
Are CRPGs Role-Playing Games?

A

couple of years or so ago (CGW
#38), I surveyed the computer roleplaying (CRPG) genre, from its inception to its current state. At that time, I came
to the conclusion that while the games
themselves had become more sophisticated
in many ways, they hadn't really changed
much since the early days. In particular, the
lack of true role-playing was evident.
Now, several years later, some progress
has been made, but role-playing remains a
limited feature. It is time to take an in-depth
look at why this is so, why role-playing is difficult to integrate into a CRPG, and why it is
unlikely that role-playing in CRPGs will
change very much in the near future.
First let's take a look at the live RPG. This
is played by a DM (there are many titles for
the person who runs things, but DM is the
best known) and a group of people, usually
somewhere between 5-10 in number, who
take on the roles of the player-characters,
or PCs (all other characters, as well as
monsters, being played by the DM).
One way or another (royal proclamations,
posted notices, mysterious persons at the
local tavern, etc.) the DM introduces the
PCs to the basic scenario and the action
begins. So far, this sounds pretty much like
a typical CRPG, with the program as DM
and one person (instead of many) playing
all the PCs. This similarity, however, is
deceptive.
PCs in an RPG are not just sets of ambulatory statistics, hacking their way past
all opposition to the ultimate goal. Rather,
each PC has a definite personality, complete with likes and dislikes, unique motivations, and his/her own perceptions of the
world. How these distinct individuals interact with each other and the world of the adventure is the basis for role-playing.
It is immediately obvious from this that
live games do not always run smoothly, as
far as progressing towards a common goal
is concerned. There will be arguments over
what course of action to take in particular
circumstances or how to treat certain NPCs
(non-player characters, run by the DM),
maybe even what way treasure is to be
shared among the party. Indeed, an entire
session could pass with little or no combat,
as the PCs engage in discussion, argument,
negotiation, diplomacy, bribery, gathering information, and sneaking around.
Further, it is usually the case that the PCs
will do something the DM has not expected
or allowed for, at which point the DM has to
do some fast thinking and decision-making.
Depending on the circumstances, the party
may find themselves with a completely new
adventure on their hands or the DM may

think of a way to fudge around the deviation and get the group back on track (or at
least prevent the campaign from coming to
an abrupt end [Ed. Note: I have a standard line I use in these situations: "Normally that would work. However...")).
Finally, most DMs write their own
scenarios. That is, even if they buy a
module (or "canned adventure") at the local
store, they will modify it as they see fit.
Thus, each scenario is individualized by the
DM to take into account the PCs personality quirks, abilities, and general style
of play, so that each adventure is customdesigned for a particular group of players.
Having had a look at some of the factors
in the "real thing," we can now go back and
examine how these factors are translated to
the CRPG. First, however large the adventuring party, the individual members are run
by one person. It's possible, of course, for
several people to gather round the monitor
and direct the actions of individual characters, but for the most part, CRPGs are a
solo endeavor.

"The golden mean for [NPC]
combat lies somewhere between
the rigid and the reckless."
Much of the role-playing element is lost
right there. As anyone with experience in
live gaming can tell you, a lot of the fun
comes from PC interaction. There is no
way, right now, that a CRPG can simulate
this with any reasonable degree of accuracy, for several reasons.
Constructing detailed personalities requires a lot of time, and time is often in
short supply. Further, there is no good way
to simulate any sort of realistic conversation. The Ultimas are the best of the lot,
and even there, the player does no more
than feed back key words to the various
NPCs who, in turn, provide whatever information they happen to have. Menu-ized conversations, with their "pick something to
say from the following list", are no better.
This is why, in one respect, the CRPGs
tend to have a mechanical feel to them.
The player, as he/she progresses through
the game, builds up a list of keywords and
tries them out on every NPC that comes
along. It becomes a rote action and, if there
are a lot of people to talk to, can descend
into tedium. Every conversation becomes
pretty much the same, a static exchange of
words that seems to go on forever.
Since this rules out conversation as a
medium of role-playing, the only thing left

is action and action is typically limited to
buying/selling items, stealing (or not stealing), and combat.
Dealing with merchants in most games is
routine. Prices are fixed for both new items
you purchase and used items you want to
sell. On occasion, it is possible to haggle a
little, but for the most part, buying and selling has nothing to do with role-playing.
Stealing (or not stealing) shows up in
some, although not all, games. It is, for instance, a prominent feature in the later
Ultimas, where your character's Avatar rating
goes up or down depending on whether or
not you're honest. People who want to play
dishonest characters tend to have a hard
time with the Ultimas, since it is necessary
to be "good" in order to finish.
In other games that allow pilfering, the
usual result is the immediate appearance of
several town guards who either throw you
in jail or attack on sight. Typically, nothing
else comes of theft or attempted theft, and
often, when you leave town and return
later, the guards have "forgotten" what you
did last time.
I mention this in particular because stealing is usually the only way in a CRPG the
player can be something other than "good"
(Exception: the Ultima series, where you
can also slaughter innocent people). Which
is not to say that everyone wants to be
"evil," but there are those who prefer to be
somewhere in-between, and most of the
time, there is no way to express this in the
game.
Combat, as such, has little to do with roleplaying, except, perhaps, in those cases
where you are given an options menu
before hostilities actually begin. Generally
such options give you a choice among running, fighting, talking, and bribing. In the
majority of CRPGs, however, the only
choice it between running or fighting. There
is no opportunity for peaceful (relatively
speaking) interaction.
All of this sounds rather dreary. You can't
really converse with anyone, you often
can't act the way you want (or envision
your character as wanting to act), and most
of the time, you end up fighting when you'd
prefer not to. Throw in the typical banal
plot ("You must stop Foozle the Evil Wizard
before he manages to destroy/subjugate
the world!"), and CRPGs appear to be in a
very sorry state indeed.
Well, it isn't quite so bad as all that. While
the ideal of true role-playing may not be attainable, there is still plenty of room for improvement, still many ways that a decent
semblance, at least, can be added to these
games.
One idea that is gaining popularity among
designers is autonomous combat by NPC
party members. Essentially, your character
(the lead PC) is controlled by you;
everyone else fights in a pre-programmed
way. Ultima V1 has this. You can pre-set
(Continued on page 70)

Gambling Games Survey

Wanna Bet?
(Where The Silicon
Meets The Sands)

craps game is a real pleasure. Basic strategies
for betting and taking odds are presented, but
the graphics make this particular craps game
absolutely compelling to play. It is a delightful
way to test out one's systems before the
casino crowds come crashing and rattle both
wits and chips. Only multi-player competition
could make this a stronger product.

Captain Video Poker

An Annotated Paiktography
("Game"ography)

nyone
A

by Alan Emrich

who has ever placed a bet
on the old gaming table has
probably taken at least a passing
interest in computer gambling games.
With the myriad of titles beckoning like
the glittering casinos of the Las Vegas
Strip itself, it is important to get a cursory insight into the various games of
chance offered for your home computer.
The reader should be aware that all of
the "intangibles" which makes a person
prefer one casino over another are just
as applicable when choosing one computer gambling game over another.
Therefore, the following survey should be
understood as purely the author's
opinion. Those who do not care for the
author's conclusions are welcome to challenge him at any of the various poker
tables in Las Vegas on any prearranged
weekend.
Casino gambling games are like
clothes; they come in many different
sizes, shapes and colors (and they don't
always fit!). Seeing a boxed game on the
shelf does not make it in itself any better
than the one which is not so widely distributed and packaged in a plastic bag.
The proof is in the playing. Here, then, is
a brief look at the gambling games found
our Computer Gaming World library.

That's The Fact, Blackjack
BlackJack Strategy (IBM, $15.00) by J. P.
Enterprises. This informative program underscores the quality potential of public-domain
software. Features include up to 6 positions, 110 decks of cards, variable house rules, counting aids and more. Easily useable as a quality
study in the game, one certainly receives
more then his money's worth with this one.
Casino Blackjack Counter/Tutor (IBM) by
Manhattan Software. Sort of a "Blackjack
101" course to help one learn his way around
the table, this program offers less bells and
whistles than many of the others, but is a
solid introductory primer. The handy splitting,
standing and doubling card is probably the
most important information the beginner can
hope to absorb with this product. Money

management and point counting are de-emphasized.
Beating The House At Blackjack (Apple)
by Applications Plus, Inc. While a bit difficult to wade through, the core education of
blackjack point counting, when to stand, etc.
are all here. This game stresses the basics, explaining the rationale and theory behind point
counting. The game presentation and graphics
are antiquated, but the value of the education
never changes.
Edward 0. Thorp's Real Blackjack (IBM)
by Villa Crespo Software, Inc. While stating
that this product is for beginners and intermediates, it is ahead of most of the competition in this category. Dr. Thorp invented the
point count systems commonly used today
and the software presents a rich, nearly
mindboggling, plethora of game analysis.
Strategy, card counting and money management are all given emphasis and players are
graded on their performances. Plus, players
have the capacity of setting the game
parameters so that they are aligned accurately
with the rules at their favorite casino.

Yakety, Yak! Let's Talk
Craps!
Casino Craps (IBM) by Manhattan
Software. This software package is like a
bowl of mush. Everything in it may be
nutritious, but the taste is bland with no
graphic spice whatsoever to recommend it.
One can learn the gist of the game from the
dot-matrix-printed rules booklet and watch the
program alter the hard-to-read faces on the
dice while the money flows in and out of one's
bank account, but the game is about as much
fun as waiting in a doctor's office.
Profe$$or Crap$ (IBM) by Scorpio Systems International, Inc. As the name implies, this is a detailed, tutorial program for the
serious student of the dice. Black and white
graphics depict a craps table, animated dice
roll around the table and bets are called as
they are paid and collected by the house. The
50+-page rules booklet is easy to digest and
very enlightening about the play of craps. Highly recommended.
Vegas Craps (Atari ST) by California
Dreams. By far the best-looking product of
this type with the easiest to use interface, this

Vegas Video Poker (Apple) by Applications Plus, Inc. Clean and simple, the clumsy
interface for this game is more than offset by
the clear-headed approach to educating the
player. The documentation explains the winning percentages like a friend might, with a
brief explanation of why one must do certain
things to up the winning percentages. It is this
insightful documentation which makes the
game, not the computer program itself.
Mike Caro's Video Poker (Apple) by
Arisoft. While this game does offer the unique function of "head to head" video poker
with a friend at the same computer ("poker
flurry"), the jackpot video poker feature is the
"same old, same old . .". No lessons are
taught in the documentation, and with the
green clubs, purple hearts, blue spades and
orange diamonds, the game greatly resembles
a bowl of Lucky Charms breakfast cereal.
Arcade Poker (IBM) by Cheapware. While
reasonably entertaining, this game gives the
player all the thrills of a "bar game" style of
video poker (with all its inherent limitations
and lack of interaction). No lessons or insights
are provided, just some tunes and cards while
the player competes for "points" rather than
simulated bucks. The object is to get the best
high score on the scoreboard.

Poker Chips And Dips
Poker Night (Apple) by Gerhardt
Software. This game recreates the type of action that one could find in a game of basement poker. The player sets the "house rules"
for betting limits, check and raise, etc. and
(Continued on page 54)

CHASING DEMONS
. . . AND MIGS
(Continued from page 40)

Flight aficionados may notice a realistic implementation of the
wing-over maneuver during the bomb-run approach. This has,
previously, been very difficult to program due to the large
amount of computational power required.

Joystick response is accurate as it is easy to spend all of your
time over-compensating if you are too heavy-handed. The
avionics fits in both aircraft have been well-integrated. The
Intruder's DIANE bombing/navigation system has been cleverly
programmed to give the "highway" in the sky.
Landing on a moving carrier deck is handled very realistically.
Not only must one utilize the correct angle of attack, but the carrier provides its own "meatball" guidance system which is visible
from the player's cockpit. Landings count, with points awarded
or deleted based on the quality of the
landing. Landing can be completed using
a handy rudder feature that enables a
"slip approach," using a standard joystick. However, the best response for this
area was found using the MAXX yoke
and pedals. The Advanced Gravis stick
was also found to enhance the illusion of
flight.
This review was based upon the prerelease version 1.1. The reviewer tried
the initial 1.0 version and found it to be
bug-ridden (the game froze more than a
few times, etc). No such occurrences
were found in version 1.1. Enhanced features of version 1.1 include a redesigned
joystick "feel," more sounds (via the PC
speaker and AdLib sound board) and support for two joysticks (e.g: analog joystick or yoke and pedals). Also, one must
only enter the program configuration
once. It will be saved to disk and automatically loaded from then onwards.
Other enhancements which would be
welcome in future versions would be: the
option of re-starting a tour of duty from
the menu rather than having to delete
files from DOS; having the program
default to mouse control during the
menu selection process instead of the
program retaining the slow joystick
mode after one finishes a mission (in
menu mode the joystick does "creep"
somewhat, too); and an immediate
response to show that Accelerated Mode
has been selected (rather than the
present 3-4 second time delay). Also, an
option to toggle the moving map/radar
when in "look-down-in-the-cockpit-view"
on the F-4 would be welcome.

Performance Evaluation
Overall, Flight of the Intruder is a tour
de force in simulation programming. The
program shows that care and attention
has been applied to the project. The 3D
graphics have been well programmed,
especially considering the amount of information on-screen at once. For the moment, at least, Flight of the Intruder is
the king of the flight simulations by offering a more varied and comprehensive approach to combat flight.

Review

"Down The Throat" and "Up The Kilt"
with MicroProse's Silent Service II
by Dr. Johnny L. Wilson

and seven different submarine classes (with more
than 100 actual ship
names assigned-them).
PUBLISHER:
Players can also command
for a single patrol (longer
scenarios) or a full war
career (campaign games, complete with promotions and
decorations), as opposed to the five specific patrol missions
utilized in the earlier game. The complete selection of submarine classes not only enables players to try their luck with
inferior equipment (especially the Old-S Class submarines
that were not present in the earlier games), but also means a
book like Richard Sheffield's 40 Great Submarine Simulator
War Adventures (Compute! Books, $14.95) becomes more
valuable in that one can select ships with the exact characteristics of the historical ships in order to successfully re-enact
the forty patrols from World War II depicted in that book.
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:

S

ubmarine service offers an romantic image of elite submariners for good reason. Submarine warfare involves use
of what the late Gordon W. Prange (in Pearl Harbor: The
Verdict Of History) called the only ocean-going craft capable of
operating efficiently " . . . even though its nation did not enjoy
command of the sea. Its very nature and purpose called for it to
foray into enemy waters." This shark-like quality of maneuvering
beneath the sea and surfacing from the depths with implements
of destruction offers a colorful canvas upon which would-be submarine commanders can paint their exploits of heroism.
Like no previous simulation, Silent Service II (SS2) allows the
computer gamer to vicariously experience both the near-invincible feeling of successful missions and the stark terror of near-impotence when one is being hunted by enemy sonar and tormented by exploding depth charges. Not only are the graphics
geometrically improved over the original Silent Service (both the
EGA and VGA/MCGA graphics are outstanding with digitized
ship photographs rather than blocky silhouettes), but the new
game features digitized speech, amazing sound support on both
the Ad Lib and Roland boards, eight scenarios based on classic
battles (instead of the maximum seven in the previous game)

Silent Service II
IBM
$59.95
Arnold Hendrick,
Roy Gibson and Sid Meier
MicroProse Software
Hunt Valley, MD

"Pinging" (Harsh Sounds of Criticism)
MicroProse Labs is to be commended for integrating the
seven submarines classes into the game in such a way that each
submarine functions with the performance characteristics of its
historical counterparts. It is a fascinating educational experience
to command an Old-S Class submarine on a war patrol and not
have to remember to refrain from using the stern tubes. Previously, historical gamers had to use their self-discipline to impose the limitations of inferior vessels on their game play. In
SS2, one doesn't have to remember, because there are no stern
tubes in an Old-S submarine. Note, however, that all submarines
in SS2 have a TDC (Torpedo Data Computer), even though the
"P" class was actually the first U.S. submarine class to possess
the analog targeting system. This critic, however, accepts this as
more of a "playing aid" than an anachronism.
(Continued on page 68)

Wanna Bet?

Friday Night Poker Club (IBM) by Spectre
Software. With only two games to offer (5card stud and draw) and four players at the
table, the selection is a bit too limited. The
other players can be computer-controlled,
each with their own personality/skill at the
game, and they each make distinctive quips
as the game plays, but Al remarks just don't
substitute for "action."

(Continued from page 46)
then fills the table with players. Action is
dealer's choice from among 20 different poker
games, including six variations of 5-card draw,
five of 7-card stud and many others. Poker
Night is a quaint addition to one's library, but
does not break any new ground.

Vegas Johnny's Dealer's Choice (IBM) by
Top Score Software. If there was an award
for best all-around poker game, this would win
it, hands down. About 20 parameters can be
set (betting limits, check and raise, etc.) and,
of the many games to choose from, each can
be played high, low, high-low split and
high-spade-in-the-hole. On-line advice and a table
for eight players combines with numerous
other aids and features to make this a game
to be studied. No tutorials are provided, but
this is the game where the sharks are
separated from the minnows!

Draw Poker (Apple) by Softape. This is an
oldie. The two-player, head-to-head five-card
draw poker game just doesn't have the glitz to
be attractive, nor the tools to be educational.
Discard and draw another game.
Amarillo Slim's Real Poker-5-Card Stud
(IBM) by Villa Crespo Software. While this
package strictly focuses on the one poker
game, it gives it such an intense examination
as to be the "master's" thesis on the game.
Slim is always right there to coach players on
improving their play by adapting his style. The
interface of controlling everything by function
keys is a bit clunky, but the statistics and advice provided during play at the 4-player table
make this an enlightening software package.
Aussie Joker Poker (Apple) by Joker
Software. This game of points and risk is a
far derivative from the standard fare of poker.
With no artificial intelligence, two or more
human players square off to play a game

which, at best, can be described: 'The variation as theme." Players may ask for continuous redeals of their poker hand until they
bust, thus risking everything on every draw.

Championship Poker (IBM) by Applications Plus, Inc. Texas Hold 'Em fanatics
won't want to miss this software package.
While there is nothing graphically remarkable
about the game, the manual is almost zen-like
in its analytical approach to this game of
poker. The big boys play for big bucks in
Vegas playing hold 'em, and this would be the
(Continued on page 62)

Computer Gaming World's
See Reader Input Device on page

The Categories
Strategy (SD: Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem-solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first-person perspectives of
real-world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take an alter ego
through a storyline or series of
events.
Role-Playing Adventure (RP):
Adventure games that are
based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.
Games are often listed in more
than one category. In this
case, the first listed category is
considered primary. In order
to be recognized as the "Top
Game" in a given category, a
game must be listed as being
primarily of that specific type.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games in
CGW's Hall of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated by
our Readers
over Time.
They are Worthy
of Play by All.

Blasting VUXs
(Continued from page 27)

ties. Solution: shoot backwards. In the
Full Game, Mycons are especially useful
for cleaning-up lone, vulnerable ships, because Mycons regenerate full crew between turns.
The Spathi Discriminator is most
dangerous when running from the
enemy, from which position it can launch
BUTT (Backward Utilized Tracking Torpedo) missiles directly into its enemy's
path. Thus, it behooves the Spathi commander to entice his opponent into chasing him. Taunts and jeers being one of
the Spathi commander's most important
tools, the design of a Spathi ship rewards
an experienced commander (that is to
say, one who knows which way is the
front). The otherwise ineffective "main
weapon" can become quite deadly with
practice. If you need to kill only a few
more crew for victory, as when fighting
an undamaged Arilou, don't shoot your
wad in a single facing. Instead, rotate as
you fire to increase your chance of a
lucky hit.

The Androsynth Guardian does the
most damage when hitting an enemy in
Blazer form, especially if it gets a lucky
"critical" strike, inflicting several rapid successive blows. To achieve maximum
damage, strike the enemy from the direction of least relative velocity (usually
from behind), so as to minimize the scattering effect. The more fuel you have
when you transform, the longer you stay
in Blazer form, but if you are very close
to your enemy, transform whenever possible. Such sporadic, lurching advances
are disconcerting to the enemy (hopefully screwing up his aim) and let you travel
faster than your normal maximum
velocity.
The Androsynth's molecular acid bubbles are useful both as a defensive shield
(the Androsynth ship cannot be hurt by
its own bubbles), and as an offensive
weapon, provided they are deployed en
masse in the path of a nearby enemy
vessel.
The VUX Intruder has the advantage
of always appearing nearby an enemy
vessel when combat begins. The VUX
commander must be ready to fire instant-

ly, and make course adjustments to keep
his laser on target. If the enemy escapes
and possesses any long or intermediate
range weapons, the VUX must immediately seek out the planet and engage in
a Gravity Whip. Once at a comfortable
cruising speed, the VUX can recharge its
huge batteries, and launch the occasional
limpet. If the enemy launches a seeking
weapon, don't forget to shoot at it as it
approaches. When the VUX nears its target, it should slow by rotating to face the
enemy and thrusting. Never engage your
enemy unless you have lots of fuel!
To make effective use of your limpets,
deploy them in a curtain, then turn and
thrust ahead of where your enemy must
flee to avoid them. Once a few limpets
have affixed themselves to enemy ship,
pour 'em on! When the enemy is really
gunked-up, and you are fully recharged,
go for the kill. Remember, though the
Yehat's shield is proof against your laser,
your limpets pass through its defenses
unaffected. There is nothing more rewarding than zapping an ever-so-invulnerable
Yehat ship which is floating dead in
space covered in green slime.
(Continued on page 76)

Review

California Dreams' Street Rod
By David M. Wilson

R

emember in

TITLE;

Street Rod

grade
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, C64/128, IBM
PRICE:
$34.95
school the
DESIGNER:
PZK Development
annual fall ritual of
PUBLISHER:
California Dreams
writing a composiSan Jose, CA
tion based one's
summer exploits?
California Dreams has produced a game package called Street Rod that just might offer something to write about (of course, no one guarantees
an "A" on that assignment!).
The player begins in the summer of 1963 with a
modest bankroll and proceeds the rigorous climb
up the social ladder towards becoming "The King"
of the street racing scene before school opens.

Getting Rolling
To begin, one carefully selects a rod within "his" (how many girls
raced street machines before Janet Guthrie came on the scene?)
means by checking out the used car section of the on-screen
newspaper (is this getting nostalgic yet?). Naturally, the player's first
car will have to be a low-end model (just short of a "clunker"). Immediately, one has the option to take his car to the garage and tune it
up. Just pop the hood and adjust the timing in an attempt to get the
greatest possible performance. (Note: The instructions in the manual
regarding tuning an engine seem misleading. We found lining the
timing mark up properly more effective than retarding the engine).
On the IBM version, the EGA graphics are executed well enough to
readily recognize all of the many different types of vehicles. The C-64
version is clean and clear, as well, but the Amiga version offers nice
artistic touches on every screen. On the IBM and C-64, the door
panel stickers on some of the cars are difficult to read (but so
what?). The roads themselves and various places of interest in the
game are real enough to keep it interesting and road racers will have
no problem with the scrolling and scenery graphics as the arrows indicate the direction of any upcoming curves, as well as any threatening collision with an unyielding telephone pole.
The documentation is decorated with slick glossy pictures of antique cars in a fancy nostalgic restaurant. It is as beautiful to look at
as it is well written. The exception is that the information regarding
tuning the engine is incorrect, but it is corrected on the game's reference card. While the reference card is thorough enough to allow
players to play a while, success will warrant reading the manual
before play!
After tuning up one's "heap," the player can cruise into town for
gas or check out the local action at the teen's social mecca, Bob's
Drive-In. Filling up with gas is important as a competitor will only
mock a challenger who has insufficient gas to run a race. New
players will not use "self-service" at the pumps because that keeps
their social status down (very uncool in '63). It is always best to sit
in the car and let the lethargic attendant pump the gas.
At the Drive-in, players have opportunity to challenge their opposition. A cagey racer will begin with a few simple drag races run "just
for kicks," rather than for wagers. Even the low-end cars can win a
race if they get the right jump and then stay in front of their rival
(often through "cheating" by cutting them off). After winning a few
races, the player can begin wagering with some confidence. A lot of
the guys at Bob's Drive-In refuse to compete in betting events unless
they are raced for "kicks" first.

Car Tunes
As soon as the player has won
enough funds, he may cruise back
to the garage and browse through
the paper for car parts. To win road
(as opposed to drag) races, cars
need to be modified. Wise players
will quickly buy the largest engine available, as well as a racing
manifold, dual racing carburetors, a racing transmission, and racing
slicks. It is difficult to win the longer road races without this specialized equipment (which costs plenty).
Once the player is confident that his car is "the ultimate," he can
begin running road races for money, kicks, or pink slips (ownership
papers). If he wins a car, he should consider "souping it up" and
racing it, too. Although the Corvettes seem to be the fastest cars, the
old Chevys and Oldsmobiles were easier to handle during the curve
filled road races. Players may want to keep this in mind.
"Save the game," veteran users often cry. They would be especially
right when playing Street Rod. Saving the game before road racing
for pink slips is a must. After all, who wants to work all summer
building up a incomparable race car, just to lose it because some
"punk" ran them off the road and into a nearby telephone pole, totaling their pride and joy?
When the player has a nice stable of cars assembled in his garage
and he believes he is ready to face "The King," they should sell a
couple of cars, buy a brand new Corvette, and head for the Drive-In.
Apparently, the Street Rod's designers have a GM preference as this
reviewer couldn't beat The King with anything but a souped up
Stingray.

End Of The Line
He that perseveres through to the end and triumphs will win not
only the Road race, but also the king's prize "Vette" and Becky Sue,
a prize babe. The designers of Street Rod have a lot to be proud of.
They have produced a game which is a reliable simulation of (somewhat stereotypical) early '60's life (be sure to read the newspaper
headlines in the game). It probably deserves a PG rating, however,
as some mild expletives and visuals of teenagers smoking in order to
look tough (correct for the period, but a negative symbol today) indicate that the game is for a more mature audience. The social commentary delivered when the player clicks on the beer bottle Icon,
however, is most welcome.
Street Rod is a fine nod to nostalgia with a wholesome mixture of
arcade action and strategy. By allowing the player the opportunity to
choose, paint, decorate, modify and equip his own vehicle, there is
even a real sense of driver/owner "pride" given to the player. Lovingly created, this game can be recommended for lovers of this era of
Americana.

Letters

Taking a Peek
(Continued from page 6)

Imperial Correction
It was nice to see another article about my
game Empire in the October issue of CGW. I
found the discussion and analysis quite interesting. However, I am afraid that I must disagree with the probabilities indicated by Mr.
Kenney. I find them to be somewhat in error.
The table presented below was created by
Kelly McCauley, after consulting with me, and
I believe it to be a more accurate representation.
Players should also recognize that, except
for some special rules listed in the documentation, the attackers does not have any advantage.
Mark Baldwin
Littleton, CO
The article on Empire strategy was based,
of course, on calculations from a player's
perspective and the writer indicated his procedure in creating his tables. We were, and
still are, impressed by his methodology.
Naturally, we also welcome this new and altered perspective from a designer's perspective. It all goes to show that Empire is still a
viable (and stimulating) product.

Industrial Waste
As usual, the September issue of CGW was
both inspiring and frustrating. I read CGW
from cover to cover each month for information about new games, the gaming industry,
and the gaming craft, but one must do a lot of
reading between the lines to find any hard
facts.
As a reader, a game player (novice), and
aspiring game creator (raw beginner), I would
like to see articles that give some hard data
regarding the computer game industry. For example; industry statistics, a perspective on
trends in game design, perhaps a summary of
landmark games and the lessons learned from
them, a little piece of prognostication about
where computer gaming is headed.
With regard to the CGD Conference, is there
no publication of the proceedings or papers
presented? I, and I'm sure many of your other
readers, cannot attend such gatherings, but
would dearly love to read the papers. One
item that interests me very much is a paper
reported to have been presented by Brenda
Laurel.

I would like to
see an opportunity for game
players to
respond to
some of the
ideology being
spouted by a
variety of
people in and
out of the
gaming industry. Does
anyone care
what the player
thinks, or is
voting with our wallet our only input? One
item from the CGD Conference comes to
mind. Alluquere Rosanne Stone is reported to
have taken the industry to task for reducing
females to "'adolescent boys' with a fuller figure". As a male game player, who happens to
like combat games, I have to say that females
do not have the attributes which help my
party survive all that well in combat. If the
game designer made them as strong as men
and gave them comparable hit points, endurance, strength, etc., then they would be as
handy as men in a party. Unfortunately, they
would no longer be true to our real-world experience of them. It is popular to stand up for
your sex or to denigrate the blood-and-guts
part of game playing as so much "macho" fantasy, but I have the impression that most
game players are men from adolescence
through maturity. If asked why I like the
games I like, I would have to say I like the fantasy, the challenge, the vicarious danger, and
the satisfaction of whipping the bad guys; yes,
and the blood and guts, too, that's why I play.
MUST I BE MADE TO FEEL GUILTY in service to someone else's need for perceived
equality? MUST I PRETEND that women are
men or that men are women?
Many thanks for a great mag,
Leonard Micko
Sunnyvale, CA
As a regular reader of CGW, you should
know that: a) we address the issues you
raise in editorials, CES reports, industry
news and special features like the Journal
of Computer Game Design abstracts and conference coverage. Both tapes and proceedings of the conference are available to subscribers of the journal (see CGW #70, p.42,
for details). Our answer to anti-violence sentiment was captured in CGW #71, p. 8. As
for charges of sexism, it seems your letter
confirms Ms. Stone's point. The industry
directs its characterizations of women as
the weaker sex because the games are
primarily combat-oriented. Surely, there is
room in the industry for games in which
the strengths of women (nurturing, relationships, intelligence, problem-solving, etc.) provide the impetus for the challenge. Maybe
not for people of your tastes, but in the
process of broadening the appeal of computer games.

tial strategy game is an interesting
diversion, but its mutated price tag
may make it unfit for survival in the
marketplace. Players move their Dr.
Darwin icon around the screen, pushing like creatures into one another to
form higher lifeforms and move up the
evolutionary chain. It's a party in the
primordial soup! Mac ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #4.
Lawrence Productions, Inc.

1800 South 35th Street
Galesburg, MS 49053-9687
KATIE'S FARM: The sequel to
"McGee," "Katie's Farm" takes McGee
to visit his cousin Katie out in the
country. This lapware for your tyke
(ages 2-6) features no text and a
mouse interface, so that your child can
operate the computer all by him- or
herself. The sound and graphics will
keep your youngster entertained again
and again (like their favorite videos do
now). Apple IIGS ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service 115.
Postcraft International, Inc.

27811 Avenue Hopkins, #6
Valencia, CA 91355
CITADEL: ADVENTURE OF THE
CRYSTAL KEEP: This is your basic fantasy role-playing adventure done right
for the Macintosh. The player manages
a party of six through the single dungeon, but the character generation system, the rune-based magical system
and intriguing combat system combine
with a solid maze/quest to make this
one worth a serious look. The combat
system is particularly interesting, as
players and characters maneuver
around in a "room" in a slow, "real
time" environment which the players
can manage. Character generation
from birth up is also intriguing. Mac
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #6.
UBI Soft

c/o Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA
SKATE WARS: Strap on your spikestudded joystick glove and get ready
for yet another bizarre futuristic arena
corn-ball game. Rollerball meets soccer
meets ice hockey on a rink littered
with ramps, jumps, and other nasties.
This product comes into a crowded
market of like games, and frankly, will
take a beating from the competition.
Circle Reader Service #7.

Wanna Bet?
(Continued from page 54)
right game to practice on before challenging
them.

Everything Under The
Lights: Casino Variety
Games
Card Sharks (Commodore 64/128) by Accolade. This game includes poker (5-card
draw, 7-card stud and hold 'em), blackjack
and hearts. Computer opponents, which include Gorbachev, Thatcher and Reagan, move
their mouths while cartoon balloons toss out
banter. While this quickly loses its appeal, the
games are solid, but not insightful, and the
play is slow at best.
Championship Gambler (Apple/Commodore 64) by Load 'N' Go! Software.
Three games are presented for each machine
(on either side of the disk); 5-card draw poker
(head-to-head against the "dealer"), blackjack
and one-armed bandit. None of these games
even begins to compare favorably with any of
the aforementioned newer computer titles on
specific gambling games. With three strikes,
this game would be out if it were not also the
absolutely least expensive (dare we say
"cheapest?") of the lot.

Casino (Apple) by Datamost. Five games
are offered on this disk, including: video
poker, blackjack, roulette, keno and baccarat.
This game is another old standby which time
has weighed heavily upon. While the variety is
there, none of the games really stands out as
compelling enough to merit more than a few
minute's play.
The Ultimate Casino Gambling Simulation
(IBM) by Capstone. Don't let the title fool
you; this game tries to cover a wide canvas
with a wide brush, but ends up doing quite a
bit of fingerpainting instead. The six games include blackjack, craps, keno, video poker,
roulette, and an assortment of slot machines.
Each pits the player against the house; thus
there is little table "action" going on. The
mouse interface is nice, but often the function
keys are easier to use. "Ultimate," perhaps in
scope, each of the various game selections is
just more of the same (done better, usually, in
programs dedicated to just the one game) and
may owe its title more to the Trump Castle
license than to its approach.
Vegas Casino 2 (IBM, Commodore 64) by
Mastertronic. Two games are offered in this
package; roulette and craps. While the
graphics are there and quite attractive, the
documentation could easily fit on a
matchbook cover (it looks like the rules were
printed on scratch paper or printed as one of

those ubiquitous "Guides to Casino Games"
given out free by the downtown Las Vegas
hotels). This game succeeds as a quick diversion, but will only hold one's interest for so
long before losing its challenge. Players had
better know the rules of the games going in
on this one.
Vegas Gambler (Atari ST) by California
Dreams. This quadrigame features slots,
blackjack, video poker and roulette. Each is
done with the kinds of graphics and sounds
the Atari ST and Amiga are known for, which
enhances the replay value of the game a great
deal. The simulation value is there also, along
with a bit of education and strategy in the
documentation. Overall, this is a well-balanced
casino game product.
Fat Cat Casino (IBM) by Gopher Broke
Software. In this casino package are four
games: video poker, keno, blackjack and
craps. The first two are average with EGA
graphics and are true to their genre. The latter
two, however, are more classroom-like, offering the player a real education and some insight into blackjack and craps. To this end,
Gopher Broke has even published and included in the game two booklets, CRAPS
(How to Play! How to Win!) and Winning
Blackjack. While not as pretty at Vegas
Gambler, there is more to learn in this package.

Foreign Correspondence

used to buy more chemicals for the
simulation area. Debut is available now
for Amiga and ST.

Over There
The Ultimate License
by Paul Rigby

hostbusters,

Superman, Batman,
Neuromancer, Shogun and more
coming all the time ... the computer games industry is filled with licenses. However, we have probably seen the
biggest, most dynamic license of them
all sneak in through the back door. I'm
talking about Him. Yes, simulators that
place the player in the role of Benevolent
Creator have become the talk of the industry. In fact, Sim City, Sim Earth,
Populous, and Balance of the Planet
are soon to be joined by Debut from UK
software house Pandora.

G

This particular planet simulation does
not take place on Earth, although
similarities exist. The aim of the game is
to stabilize the planet's ecosystem and environment. The goal is to rid the world of
pollution and create a planet suitable for
habitation. The people living in the
smoke-belching cities must be moved
out onto the planetary surface to live in
small, more manageable cities.
As "God," the player must manipulate
specific chemicals (i.e. orbiton, arsenic,
helium, etc.) to form chemical "recipes"
that perform specific jobs such as affecting clouds, the ozone, liquid and vapor
pollution and so on. All of the latter can
be affected by Alpha, Beta and Gamma
radiation which affect their relative
strengths, as well as mutating or changing it into another chemical. The player's
goal is to place man, animals and plants
in areas where they are likely to form a
successful food chain.
The second part of the game is an arcade sequence. This section takes place
within the four cities that are spreading
the pollution. One must infiltrate each
city and rescue the good citizens. Money
is also made in this area which can be

I have a book at home—well, a dossier,
really. Created by Dennis Wheatley and
Joe Links, it is called Murder Off Miami.
It's packed with letters, photographs and
"real" clues such as cigarette ends and a
piece of blood-stained curtain—a complete murder case between two covers, in
fact. One sifts through the info and after
determining "whodunnit," an envelope
found at the back of the dossier is
opened and one can discover where they
were right or wrong.
CRL, the UK software house, has taken
another case in the series, Herewith the
Clues, and turned it into a computer
game. The case asks players to find out
who killed Serge Orloff. Using a hypercard-type environment, information is accessed by mouse commands alone. The
game is a graphic database of information interlinked in an intuitive manner.
Thus, one simply reads a letter and
clicks on a name in the letter and voila,
the dossier and photo for that character
will be loaded for the perusal of computer detectives. Digitized sound effects
follow your actions. Produced for the
Amiga and ST (maybe PC too), the only
piece of game documentation that is
needed is an introductory card to the
game and a short letter from Commissioner Hodges, assigning the player to
the case.
In a desperate attempt to secure a
regular mention in this hallowed column,
Topologika has produced yet another
text-only PC adventure. Called The Last
Days of Doom, it tidily completes the
much vaunted Doom trilogy. For those
who were brought up on hyper-difficult Infocom games and have spurned everything else since (because they were "too
easy"), I'd advise you to check out the
Doom trilogy. Written by Peter Kilworth,
a theoretical research oceanographer,
Last Days is packed with 218 rooms
and an on-line help facility.
The story surrounds the dying planet
Doomawangara. Of course, the player
and his/her trusty robot must save it!
You will discover the purpose of the artifacts and why volcanos can exist so
close to glaciers; you will deal with
squashed spaceships, slow beings, time
travel and other really wild things. Complete with a free adventure, Hezarin, The
Last Days of Doom can be purchased
for 19.95 (inc P+P) from Topologika, PO
Box 39, Stilton, Peterborough, PE7 3RL.
Tel: 01144 733 244682 (Visa/Access accepted, 24 hours).

Foreign Correspondence

From Amazon Systems comes a book
which will be treasured by adventure
authors and heartily enjoyed by adventure players everywhere. Called Adventures—The Secret Art, and written by Gil
Williamson, it comprises 128 pages,
divided up into eleven chapters with a
number of appendices. Included within
the book are chapters discussing how a
designer should determine how a game
is to be presented (text or graphics?),
how to obtain game ideas (plot elements,
puzzles, weapons, apparel, mazes and so
on), discusses the style of images, text
and sound, and compares various game
systems. In addition, a later chapter talks
about publishing a game and features a
section on copy protection (without the
expense), self-publishing, going to an outside publisher and utilizing cheat protection. Anyone wishing to purchase this
book should contact Amazon Systems,
Merlewood, Lodge Hill RD, Farnham, Surrey, England, GU10 3RD. Price - 7.95 [Include £1.50 P+P. Telephone: 01144-252716-669].
p rom the same Amazon System outfit
comes two text adventures for the PC,

both created using the Adventure Game
Toolkit system and giving a very Infocomlike appearance to the presentation. The
first, Pork: The Great Underground
Sewer System is, not surprisingly, a
send-up of Infocom's Zork. The original
creator of Pork is, apparently, unknown
(although if he/she is reading this—write
in!), so David Malmberg enhanced and
converted it to conform to his Adventure
Game Toolkit system. All the usual Zork
characters and features are parodied
(white house, n'all).
The second Amazon adventure, written
by the Secret Art author Gil Williamson,
is called Sir Ramic Hobbs. This is a
humorous (of course) adventure based
around the rescue of a princess (Anne
de Pea) from the High Level Gorilla. It appears that the player's character agreed
to this task after a heavy bout of mead
slurping. Now, in the cold light of day,
there is something of a temptation
toward thinking that the whole idea
might best be laid to rest in the nearest
fish pond. Of course, then there wouldn't
be any real excitement, would there?
Pork and Sir Ramic Hobbs can be pur

chased from the Amazon address listed
above for 9.95 each (Access and Visa accepted).
Right, out of space again, I'm afraid.
Join me next month — why not book
the same seat? Until then, watch your six
and stay frosty.
NOTE: The above games, and any of
the other games mentioned in "Over
There" in past issues, can be obtained
from:
Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY.
Telephone: 01144-51-263-6306
SDC, 60 Boston Road, London,
England, W7 3TR.
Telephone: 01144-1-567-7621
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins Square,
Burnt Mills, Basildon, Essex, England,
SS13 1BJ.
Telephone: 01144-268-590-766
All of the above telephone numbers assume you can dial direct. If you have any
trouble, contact the international operator.

"Down the Throat"

(Continued from page 51)

Alas, the current technology forces a couple of disappointing
limitations on the simulation's ability to be faithfully historical.
First, the program still uses generic graphics (actually, those of a
Tench Class sub) to depict the bridge, binoculars, periscope and
gauges of all the submarines in the game. Perhaps the day of additional storage capacity (CD-ROM?) will enable specific graphics
for each submarine class. Second,
memory limitations also force the program to follow a routine of randomly assigning submarines to the player's command, according to submarine class.
These assignments add spice to the
game and really personalize each war
patrol or career, yet purists may be jolted
by anomalies such as starting a war
career in December of 1941 and being assigned S-38 out of Pearl Harbor. In point
of fact, that submarine was busy defending Lingayen Gulf in the Philippines
during that time period. It is better to
have such minor idiosyncrasies than to
lose the tremendous impact of having
random ships assigned from nearly the
full roster under ComSubPac.
The third disappointment with the technology will be minor to
some and major to others. The documentation warns (and it is
very correct) that using digitized speech, VGA/MCGA graphics
and sound board support use so much memory that the variety
of target ship graphics is significantly reduced or, as we noted on
one of our computers, can actually disappear from the screen(!),
but still appear on the Targeting Data Computer's gauges and,
more importantly, still fire at the submarine. Although the
digitized voice option is nice, it seems best to play the game a

couple of times with it and then, simply avoid the problem by
playing without digitized speech.

Down The Throat (Commendations)
"Down The Throat" is a submariner's term for a bow-on shot at
the target. This seems particularly effective when targeting a fast
escort ship, but is usually not the best choice for larger target vessels. This writer found the tactic to be the most gut-wrenching,
nerve-wracking and spine-tingling method of sinking enemy vessels. Heading directly into the target and
launching two or three quick torpedoes
before veering off (and hoping for the
best) does not lend itself to longevity in
one's war career, but it does offer a thrilling and spectacular view when one is successful. Note, however, that a spread of
torpedoes is particularly necessary with
this tactic, because a dud in this situation
can be fatal.
"Down The Throat" is also an apt
description of how SS2 caught this
reviewer. Improved graphics and sound
were to be expected, but the stronger
scenarios, addition of a full-fledged campaign option and improved play balance
virtually blew this jaded critic out of the
water (well, at least his chair). SS2 has torpedoed more hours of
this editor's free time than he has managed to accumulate tonnage of sunken Japanese vessels.
"Up The Kilt" is submariner slang for a stern-on shot at an
enemy vessel. Like "Down The Throat," it is not a high percentage tactic, but it is much safer initially for the submarine. After
all, there is more room to maneuver if the torpedoes are duds or
shots go awry. It is also an apt description of what can happen
to gamers who play MicroProse games without reading the carefully crafted and well-honed documentation (i.e., they can get
blind-sided).
In the case of SS2, one who does not
read the manual will miss out on instructions delineating using the TDC to maximum advantage; tips on using the deck
gun to improve one's patrol score (torpedoes, after all, are expensive); historical
notes on Japanese surface movements
that improve one's chances of acquiring a
worthwhile target. There are also fascinating annotations on the historical details of
the individual battles included in the game,
tactical advice for winning at each historical scenario and points of comparison to
enable players to judge their relative success for themselves.
In this reviewer's opinion, Silent Service
1I teaches historical lessons worthy of a
graduate seminar in modern American history while stimulating the player with
enough excitement to compare with reaching maximum "G"s on a mammoth rollercoaster. Combine this game (which is a
fabulous value in itself) with Sheffield's
book (as previously mentioned in this
review) and one has the capacity for a
decade's worth of entertainment.

Scorpia's Column

Scorpion's View
(Continued from page 44)
each party member to a certain combat
mode and they will act in that way when
fighting begins.
This takes some of the burden off the
player and gives the NPCs a veneer of individuality, but also has drawbacks. Once
set to a particular mode, the NPC stays
there. If lolo is set to be in the rear, then he
will stay there, no matter what happens. He
is unable to make independent judgments
about what is happening, and act on his
own. Which is why there is also a command mode, that brings the NPCs back
under the direct control of the player.
At the other extreme we have the NPCs of
SSI's "Gold Box" series (Pool of Radiance,
et. al.), who are virtually uncontrollable and
often tend to act in the worst possible ways.
NPC mages cast area spells with the party
in the radius of effect, and that can be disastrous. Or the NPC fighters go rushing into
the front line of the enemy, just as your
own PC-controlled mage lets loose with a
devastating fireball.
The golden mean for autonomous combat, therefore, lies somewhere between the
rigid and the reckless. That is what desig-

ners should be striving towards: a way of allowing the NPC party members to fight intelligently, based on the actual circumstances
of the combat, rather than limited, preprogrammed actions.
In terms of role-playing by the player,
scenario designs need to be loosened up to
allow for a variety of actions. Wizardry let
a character be good, neutral, or evil, but
these designations were essentially worthless. The game was played very much the
same whatever the alignment, and the conclusion was the same, as well.
Ultima gets a little closer: the character
can be honest or not, truthful or not, brave
or not, etc. and his actions do have an effect on the game and how people react to
him. However, since the Ultimas are
created on the principle that the Avatar is a
paragon of virtue, the player is eventually
forced into following "the correct path" in
order to complete the game.
What is needed, therefore, is a way to let
players act less than "good" and then, take
the "consequences" of it. They may win
through to victory, but it could be a hollow
one, or less than satisfactory, depending on
their behavior in the game. It is also an incentive to re-play the CRPG, if only to find
out what would happen if they had done
things differently.

Naturally, all of this requires a great deal
of time and effort on the part of the designers and programmers. Working up Al
routines to handle NPC combat, and divergent story-lines based on PC actions (never
mind the basic adventure itself!), is not
something done overnight.
On the other hand, as we've seen, some
work has already been done in these areas,
so at least the designers (or some of them)
are heading in the right direction. What
they need to do now is keep up the pace,
and work on refining, revising, and polishing the techniques. If they do this, then the
CRPGs that are produced over the next few
years will come closer to the "real thing."
Let's keep our fingers crossed for that.
In the meantime, while we wait for the
dawn of the next era of CRPGs, if you need
help with an adventure game, you can
reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit GameSIG (under the
Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie: Try
the Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia to
reach the Games RT). By US Mail: (Enclose
a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you
live in the US) Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie
Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1990 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Review

Unreality Check
UbiSoft's Unreal
by Allen L. Greenberg

Unreal
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
Amiga
PRICE:
$49.95
DEVELOPER:
Ordilogic
PUBLISHER:
UbiSoft
DISTRIBUTOR: Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

nce upon a fad, the bad guys always won. Space Invaders, Centipedes and those of their ilk were always
victorious against the outnumbered human defenders.
The creatures, as well as their programs, could play forever while
their joystick-fisted challengers could only play until dinner was
ready. In these more civilized days of simulated mayhem,
programmers have shown mercy by providing arcaders with
quests and missions, at the successful completion of which the
heavies may be considered fully dead and largely out of business.

O

Unreal is such a world, in which the player, aided by a flying
dragon, takes on a universe of nasties in order to rescue a princess from a flying fortress. Unreal is similar in many respects to
some of the (admittedly more difficult) Psygnosis arcade/quest
games such as Barbarian and Shadow of the Beast. These
games, including Unreal, are clearly designed for hard-core action fanatics. Those fanatics, however, are going to have to do
some exploration and object manipulation if they hope to succeed in their quests—those players who think only with their
reflexes may find themselves at a loss when it comes to certain
puzzling points in the game. Those who enjoy and appreciate adventure games may wish to give Unreal a try, but may find themselves constantly pondering the question: "Am I failing to make
progress because I have failed to solve some subtle problem or
because I have long since lost the circulation in my control hand
and my thumb is dead?"
Unreal is an eight-level game, five levels of which are
presented in a three-dimensional view. For these, the hero is
seated atop a flying dragon while the action unfolds "flightsimulator" style. Without any speed control, the hero must survive the onrushing landscape which is filled with dangerous ob-

jects to be avoided and rewards to be scooped up. By pressing
the joystick button, the player causes his mount to spew forth
the dragon-flames which are his only weapon. For each collision
the player fails to avoid, the dragon loses shield-energy. Should
this defensive energy run out, the game is over.
Scattered among the objects to be gathered are extra shield
power, as well as extra weapon-strength, brief bursts of invulnerability, and score bonuses. Also appearing in the sky are
hints which signal the hero to bear right, left, or get ready to
pick up a precious object.
The other three levels of the game are far more interesting
than the dragon-flight. These are two-dimensional views of the
hero without his dragon, attempting to survive while traveling
left-to-right across the world depicted on the monitor screen.
There is the traditional leaping and sword-play required here,
but there are also some impasses which require thought, planning and even puzzle-solving for the
player to overcome. These moments
clearly form the high points of the
game.
As is typical within the genre, players
may proceed to the next level of the
game only after successfully completing the prior level. However, there is
an appealing innovation called the
"Training Mode" included in Unreal.
Using this feature, players may return
to the beginning of the level in which
their game last ended as many times
as they wish, for study and practice purposes. Only after each level is
mastered need the player go back and
begin again with the first level in order
to advance in the game.
Unfortunately, the program will not save a game in progress (although the documentation seems to indicate otherwise), but will
save the highest level reached so that the player may return later
to "train" at the part which is causing the most trouble.
Graphically, Unreal is uneven. The opening screen features
some impressive ray-traced animation, but the flight of the
dragon in level one quickly loses much of the fine detail. Images
of moving creatures and flying scenery are certainly colorful, but
soft and vague in their overall effect. Some of this detail is
recovered in the wildly colorful two-dimensional sequences, but
there is trouble with the animation in these sequences and the unlucky hero becomes a bit clumsy to manipulate.
For an Amiga equipped with 1 Meg of RAM, there are sound effects abundant and in stereo. These include not only the moans
of the hero and his adversaries, but also the echoing cries of the
surrounding jungle. Machines with less memory will produce instead a pleasant background music.
Unreal is an ambitious arcade project with a slightly disappointing result. Certainly, the five dragon-flight levels could have
benefited from a greater variety of gameplay and more graphic
detail and even the two-dimensional sequences suffer from stiff
and awkward control of the main character. Overall, the effect is
that the game lacks polish. Potential players, therefore, may be
unwilling to invest their time and money in searching for the
game's "gems" which lie scattered in the raw. Unreal, however,
is far less demanding than the wrist-wrenching regime of the
Psygnosis games and may, therefore, appeal to players interested in preserving their hands. After all, you've only got two.

Blasting VUXs
(Continued from page 58)

In the Full Game, always attack with a
VUX first, if possible. If the VUX arrives in
mid-battle, his opponent will probably
have considerable velocity, and will move
out of laser range almost immediately.
The secret to using the Ilwrath
Avenger is to learn where it is when it is
invisible. Since the screen always
centers on the midpoint between the
two ships, the Ilwrath is always
diagonally opposite its opponent. This
means when your enemy gets near the
center of the screen, you must be there
too, so open fire! It is an unknown fact
that when you uncloak by firing your
hellblast, your ship is automatically
oriented to point at your opponent's ship!
Thus, if your enemy has maneuvered
around behind you, you can turn around
instantly by cloaking and immediately
firing your hellblast (and this is the recommended way to toast Arilou Skiffs).
When fighting Earthlings, simply close
(you are marginally faster) and breathe
fire continuously to intercept incoming
nukes.
Star Control Trivia #1: The name
"Ilwrath" comes from an envelope I
saw at the post office which was being
sent to a Ms. Mcllwrath in Glasgow,
Scotland. I didn't see the "Mc" at first,
and I swear, my first thought was that
they must be sending that envelope to
an alien. I am sure that somewhere
there is a nice little Scottish lady laughing and saying, "Oh those crazy
Americans! Here's one now calling me
an evil, giant, religiously-intolerant
space-spider—ha, ha, ha, how cute!"
Hmm. . . on second thought, if I am
ever found murdered, beaten with bagpipes, or poisoned with haggis, please
contact the authorities.
The Umgah Drone can defeat any
ship in the Alliance Fleet given just a few
seconds at close range — the trick being
to get those few seconds. A favorite
Umgah tactic is to zip backwards right
up next to its enemy. If the anti-matter
cone is up through the maneuver, there
is a chance of it grazing the enemy as
you zip past for a few bonus points of

damage (especially important against the
Arilou). For precision retro-movement,
thrust at the same time as you zip backwards. The result is a jerky, half-speed
maneuver which many commanders find
more useful than the normal mode.
The Umgah's anti-matter cone also
makes an effective shield against most Alliance missiles. Notable exceptions are
the Chenjesu's whole photon crystal and
the Earthlings' nuclear missile which
pass through the conical field unharmed.
The only reason not to keep the cone up
all the time is its negative impact on fuel,
which you need for retro-propulsion. Unlike all other vessels which regain fuel
continuously in small increments, the
Umgah receives all its power in one big
whack, after a considerable delay. Each
time the Umgah uses its anti-matter
cone, this delay is reset to maximum, so
if you keep the cone up, you will never
regain fuel.

The Tactical Analyzer
So, an Androsynth Guardian has just
made monatomic hydrogen gas out of
your Earthling Cruiser (bummer). All is
not lost! To determine what ship you
should pick to toast the pesky
Androsynth with, just consult your handy-

dandy Star Control(TM) Tactical Combat
Analyzer (a.k.a. the "Greg-o-Matic").
Find the Androsynth Guardian in the
Hierarchy Ship list, then look along the
line of boxes which indicate how it fares
against Alliance ships. Find where the
Androsynth's row intersects with the
Earthling's column, and observe the
provided data.
Ah-ha! You didn't have a prayer against
those clones with odds like 80/20
against! Looking at these statistics leads
you to the conclusion that the Syreen
Penetrator is your best bet, with a whopping 80/20 advantage. The percentages
listed assume that both combatants are
experienced with their ships, make use of
their respective special abilities, and use
the tactics suggested in the next chapter
of this article (yes, the Alliance Fleet ship
breakdowns and specialized tactics await
in next issue's installment). The computer opponent is especially good at
shooting long distances with great accuracy, and at maneuvering fast ships.
Consequently, when fighting a computercontrolled Ur-Quan, Androsynth, Spathi,
or Arilou, adjust the numbers in favor of
the computer, especially if it is set to the
"Awesome" skill level.

A Feast for Some
(Continued from page 32)
for by end-game pressure. Desert spaces, which dominate the
final continent, require a week per space unless a time spell is
cast (which cuts down travel to a day per space, which eats up
the calendar pretty quickly in its own right). Along the entire
quest, the player is taunted by signs reminding him of the time
constraints of the game. They mean it, too.
The battles are probably the most interesting part of the game,
which is good since the player
will be spending most his time
fighting them. Each of the up
to five units per side
maneuvers on a
five-space-by-six-space tactical battle map
and engages enemy units. In
combat, players must be concerned about proper tactics
and mixing combined arms.
An army with some missile
(arrow or spell casting) and
"tank" (knights and troll) units is a good combination. Using
many of the exotic unit types to their best advantage is an enjoyable learning experience and pinning the enemy's best units becomes a crucial combat tactic. Trying out different tactics and
techniques to use and counter the various kinds of units in the
game is an important element of the game's appeal.
The final intriguing element of King's Bounty is what this
reviewer calls expanding megalomania. There is some sort of intangible "charge" that comes out of seeing one's character become a more powerful warlord, leading bigger armies, gaining an
ever-increasing commission, subduing ever larger foes, and so
forth. While this is hardly an original concept (it dates back to
the first games of Dungeons & Dragons), it still holds an endearing appeal when done well. In King's Bounty, this "Monty Haul"
brand of adventuring is exquisitely executed, rewarding the
player with plenty of strokes on his way to finding the Sceptre.

King's Bounty, A Movable Feast?
Most adventure gamers who love epic games of the Bard's
Tale ilk had better be reminded of a few things. King's Bounty
is a quick, self-contained game of a far, far shorter duration then
the current epics available on the market today. Another thing
traditional adventure gamers should be reminded of is that
King's Bounty is an army game of large battles and sweeping
continents, not a six-characters-hit-the-dungeon variety of roleplaying game. If these garners feel cheated by games which are
of a more introductory calibre (e.g., if they thought SSI's Sword
of Aragon was too simple), they should avoid this one. If, however, quicker, cleaner, and simpler fantasy/strategy games are
one's forte, there is a feast of fun at the King's Bounty.

Advice And Hints
Don't recruit ghosts. They have a tendency to grow beyond a
player's control level and be the demise of one's own army!
Trolls are excellent "grunts" to put in the front lines, as they
regenerate all of their hit points during each round of combat. Be
sure to make a note where you can recruit them.
Elves are the best archers, and should be recruited to a player's
maximum limits whenever possible. They have plenty of shots
and can grind up huge units from afar.

Overview

Westward Ho!
(Toward Japan, That Is)
An Overview of the Evolution of
CRPGs on Dedicated Game Machines
by Roe R. Adams, III

machine. Yet, along came

Zelda, and in 1988 a Ninten-

S

erious game players, especially
CRPG players, have for years
looked down upon the dedicated
game machines as "mere arcade toys",
and for years they were right. Those
coin-ops without a coin slot did provide a lot of fun for people, but when
they wanted a real game, they turned
to their Apple II or Commodore (IBMs
were too snooty, in those days, to
stoop to having games on them).
Even when the Second Wave of game
machines debuted in 1987, no one felt
any different. These new machines
were actually powerful computers, but
expressly dedicated to game play.
Then The Legend of Zelda arrived
from Japan on the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) in the fall of
1988, and heads began to turn.
Now, a truly great game should
make people go out and buy the
machine that plays the game. This has
been a truism since the dawn of computer history: Software drives the
marketplace! Basically, the machine
specs are really irrelevant; it is only the
software that is available for a
machine that matters to the consumer.
Since I have 18 computers at home, I
hardly needed to buy another

do was suddenly needed.
Then, in '89, Phantasy Star
1I came along. It required a
MegaDrive/Genesis and
an additional Power Base
adapter so the original Phantasy Star (designed for the
Sega Master System)
could be played. Now, Ziria
in '90 necessitates a Turbo
Grafx 16 with CD-ROM
player. Three great games,
three new machines. (Sigh.)
You will notice one common thread,
however. All three games are
Japanese-designed CRPGs. While
America has been concentrating on
yet another Wizardry, Ultima, or
Might & Magic, each bigger and more
complex than the one before it, the
Japanese have slowly carved out a
completely new niche in the realm of
CRPG.
The first CRPG entries were Rygar
and Deadly Towers on the NES.
These differed considerably from the
"action adventure" games that had
drawn quite a following on the
machines beforehand. Action adventures were basically arcade games
done in a fantasy setting such as
Castlevania, Trojan, and Wizards &
Warriors. The new CRPGs had some
of the trappings of regular CRPGs. The
character could get stronger over time
and gain extras which were not merely
a result of a short-term "Power-Up."
There were specific items that could
be acquired which boosted fighting or
defense on a permanent basis. Primitive stores were introduced with the
concept that a player could buy some-

Overview

thing to aid him on his journey. The
dungeon mazes were incredibly simple
by U.S. standards, but still, there was a
hint of a CRPG.
When The Legend of Zelda burst
upon the scene in fall of 1988, it hit
like a nova. Although it still had many
action-adventure features, it was
definitely a CRPG. Fine graphics, exciting monsters, intriguing puzzle mazes
and a wide variety of items to acquire
were hallmarks of this game. But
above all, it was entertaining. For most
of the year, Zelda and Super Mario
Brothers (the original) traded places
back and forth as to which would be
number one on Nintendo's charts, and
the race was on. Sega came in with
Aztec Adventure and Alex Kidd on
the Sega Master System about this
time.
In 1989, the store shelves began
to fill up with an amazing collection of game machine CRPGs.
Three of the best on the Nintendo
were Zelda I: The Legend of
Link, Faxanadu and Dragon Warrior. With the introduction of these
last two games, America was also
slowly discovering that Japan had
been creating these games for
many years. Faxandu was an update of a best-selling CRPG in
Japan called Xanadu and released
on the NEC-9801 machine in
1984. Dragon Warrior was really
Dragonquest I, Japan's megaselling CRPG. When Dragonquest 4
debuted in Japan (in early 1989),
it reportedly sold one million
cartridges the first day of sales.
Sega countered in 1989 with two
blockbusters, Ys: The Vanished
Omens, and Phantasy Star. Ys was
also a Japanese CRPG with a long
pedigree. It began as the next game
from Falcom after Xanadu on the
NEC-9801, but its graphic style ended
up being crossbred with the hot
American graphics of Sierra's King's
Quest series. In 1990, Ys 1V will be
released in Japan, along with an animation series produced solely for video
tape, based on the games.

It was Phantasy Star, however, that
was to be the big shot in the arm for
Sega, Nintendo's major competitor
who was, at that time, being buried
under a ton of NES titles and aggres-

sive marketing. It is accepted wisdom
that the tremendous response to this
game propped up Sega long enough
for it to introduce the Genesis 16-bit
machine last Christmas. Phantasy
Star was really different. It was a
science-fiction game with a neat twisting plot, good sound, and a large array
of weapons, armor, spells, and other assorted goodies. It also was the first
Japanese import to employ a team
concept. Periodically throughout the
game, characters would join a player's
team in order to help him/her win,
each bringing unusual skills or magical
talents. Yet, what actually set Phantasy Star apart from all the other imported games was its fantastic combat
system. Not since Dungeon Master
had such a good and explicit graphic
combat system been seen. No mere

spot animation was used, but large,
fully animated monsters came right at
the player. There was also a large
variety of monsters to encounter, each
with different talents. This was serious
gaming for many CRPG fanatics.
Last year also saw the coattail effect
of traditional bestselling CRPGs being
ported over onto dedicated game
machines as the new market of
machines blossomed into money trees.
Games like Ultima, Shadowgate, and
Defender of the Crown appeared to
mixed reviews. These stalwarts of computer fame were not perceived, by
many of the players, to be as exciting
as the Japanese imports.
The big CRPG guns to be released on
dedicated game machines this fall
form quite a collection. On the NES,

one can watch for Dragon Warrior I,
Final Fantasy (another hot four-part
series from Japan), Crystalis, Tombs
& Treasure (on the Infocom label, no
less), Swords & Serpents, Dungeon
Magic, Ultima I (really 1V: The Quest
for the Avatar), and Wizardry I
(celebrating its 9th anniversary).
Sega's Phantasy Star II just hit very
impressively with a 6-Megabyte cart on
the Genesis (see the review in this
issue). Players better really hustle
through Phantasy Star I, because
Phantasy Star III should be out in
January. Another monster CRPG, The
Sword of Vermillion, is being released
here for Christmas, so Genesis fans
are going to be stuffed with dynamite
RPGs like a holiday turkey.
NEC is just getting its TurboGrafx16 marketing revamped and in

gear. Introductory-level CRPGs like
Double Dungeon and Neutopia,
which are currently available on
carts, simply do not do justice to
the machine's capabilities. Much,
much better is expected to come
from NEC, next year. Look for the
CD-ROM attachment to be the hottest gaming item of 1991. In
Japan, there are currently 26 CDROM based games already available for this machine, including Ys
/ & I (scheduled for Christmas
release in the U.S. on one disk)
and a truly gigantic game, Ziria,
which seems to be about the size
of 2 or 3 Ultimas put together. IF
NEC can handle the mammoth
translating job, Ziria could be the
game hit of 1991 on the game
machines (unless, of course, Nintendo counters with Zelda II or Dragon
Warrior II, and Sega with Phantasy
Star II).
Christmas 1990, as well as all of
1991, is shaping up to be a great time
for CRPG players, since the three
game machine companies plan to
pour massive amounts of effort into becoming the number one RPG machine.
The smart money is on Nintendo —
solid marketing and hundreds of titles.
The class money is on Genesis, the
flashiest graphics around with two big
hits. The real longshot, which may indeed come in, is the TurboGrafx-16
with a wave-of-the-future CD-ROM
player. No matter who wins, the
players will certainly have fun.

Review

Wishing on a Phantasy Star II
by Roe R. Adams, III

he

Winds of Change are blowing strongly through the
electronic FRP realm. Long the province of computers, now
sophisticated game machines are beginning to challenge
for a share of that realm. Riding high on the shock wave of those
winds is Sega's Phantasy Star I.

T

Two years ago, when Phantasy Star I debuted on the Sega 8bit Master System, it created quite a stir among the players.
That is nothing compared to the impact of Phantasy Star I,
which was created to showcase Sega's new 16-bit Genesis
machine.
The game is a whopping 6-megabyte cartridge! That is currently the largest game available on any of the game machines. The
16-bit graphics are gorgeous, but the real fun lies in the science
fiction story plot.
Continuing the plot begun in Phantasy Star I (but not necessary
to play this game), the player finds his character on Mota, the
middle planet of the Algo Star System. Closest to the sun is
Palm where the rulers and academics live, while the dark
mysterious ice planet of Dezo lies the farthest out.
Mota is a tropical farm planet and every aspect of Mota is controlled by a computer system called Mother Brain, which is
housed secretly somewhere. For years, things have been idyllic
on Mota, but now strange and deadly biomonsters are appearing
all over the planet. Obviously, these were grown in Mother
Brain's biosystems labs, but no one knows how this can be occurring. Mother Brain, in fact, says it is not happening, but a quick
trip outside Paseo, the planetary capital, will certainly show the
player how wrong she is! Biomonsters abound everywhere.
The player's character "works" for the Commander of Mota
who, in turn, assigns the character to enter the Biosystem labs
and retrieve the system's recorder, so that he might ascertain
what has malfunctioned. On this assignment, the protagonist is
accompanied by his adopted sister Nei, part-human and
part-biomonster.
Throughout the adventure, people with unique skills and talents
suddenly appear at the hero's home in Paseo and express their
willingness to join him and aid in his endeavors. So, one should
periodically make it a point to teleport back to Paseo and see if
any welcome visitors have appeared. A total of six people, in addition to Nei, will come to one's aid, including: a Hunter, Guardian, Biologist, Wrecker (great against the robots!) and Thief.
Only the thief can steal one of the major items in the game. However, as the active party can only consist of four people at a
time, "one must choose his friends wisely!"
As the game progresses, all kinds of weird computer malfunctions impede one's path. Paseo is an island in the middle of four
dams. These control the water level in an artificial lake used for irrigation. Suddenly, the dams close completely, drying up the
lake. The world-wide Climatrol system begins to produce freakish
weather and computer-controlled robots attack the party of
heroes.
The game is structured in a very Japanese fashion. That is, it is
highly linear with a major monster/boss character to defeat at
the end of each segment before progress can be resumed. While
these games tend to be more simplistic in terms of design than

typical American CRPGs, these games can be very entertaining.
The player always has a real sense of purpose and direction. His
focus is maintained, as well as a high sense of adventure and expectation.
Once all the problems are resolved on Mota, the hero journeys
to Dezo for a another entire planet to explore. The visual effect
on Dezo is quite striking as the game overlays a heavy mist over
all the landscape. It is really eerie to wander about Dezo. The
Esper Mansion in Alplatin is especially important, though very
well hidden from casual wanderers. While most of Phantasy
Star's dungeons are three or four levels deep, the last one on
Dezo, Guaron, is a whopping sixteen levels!
The finale of the game takes place at a secret location in space
called Noah (hint! hint!) where Mother Brain is really housed. A
really superb animated ending awaits one's victory.
For those players who love exotic weapons and spells, Phantasy Star I will be a real delight. Besides huge lists of possible
things to buy or spells to acquire, an added twist is that only certain characters can use or cast specific items/spells. So, the
player must frequently make decisions about the team's makeup
depending on the weapons and magic spells needed to overcome various roadblocks. It also comes as a bit of a shock to a
player towards the end of the game to find a shop selling a
deluxe vulcan cannon gun that shoots megadamage for the princely sum of 12,600. Amazingly enough, that is exactly what is
needed to blow one's way through the monsters of a particular
enemy stronghold. The only problem is that the Hunter (who was
the second person to join the party) is probably back at the
hero's house, because the player long ago replaced him with
more talented party members. Oops!
The really great "must see" feature of this game is its stable of
outstanding animated combat sequences. The monsters are
large and mean! Each has a regular weapon, claw, or sting, and
often a second special attack form. Every time the creature attacks, an animated sequence shows its whole body attacking in

Review

the different modes. When the players strike, each character
steps forward and hacks with his sword, shoots his gun, or casts
a spell. The game offers very impressive full-figure animation.
The spellcasting is particularly intense with fabulous special effects for each type of spell used.
The only thing that really mars this fine RPG is, of all things,
the excessive documentation that Sega has included with the
game. Apparently, Sega U.S. has a rather low opinion of the
game-playing ability of the average Genesis owner, despite the
huge success of Phantasy Star I over the past two years. Besides
the normal 48-page manual, included with the game is a fold-out
map of Moto and Dezo. Unfortunately, it shows not only all the
terrain features and villages, but also all the enemy strongholds
and secret locations. On the back is the exhaustive list of every
spell and item, showing who can use it and what properties it
has against what monsters. If this were not game-destroying
enough, shrinkwrapped on the outside of the box (because it is
too thick to fit inside!) is a 113 page booklet, erroneously called
a Hint Book.

Now, the book is very beautiful, all in color, with great drawings, tables, and maps. It is far better than its usual American
counterpart, which is non-color, very skimpy, and usually gouges
the player for additional $12.95. So, what is the problem? Well,
the book is not a hint book, but an extremely detailed
walkthrough of the game. Any player who reads the book has no
need for ever playing the game. The player is told what to expect and when and where to expect it. Players are provided with
the contents and pricing for every shop in the game, the complete maps to all the dungeons and towers, the exact location of
every chest in the dungeons (also which hold the real prizes),
when new members are waiting at home for you, and even the
optimum team configuration for difficult segments. This "book"
reduces playing of this outstandingly designed RPG to the level
of pablum. One should not even consider spending $69.95 for
this game unless he/she intends to securely lock that hint book
and map away (after photocopying the weapon and spell side
first — that is handy) and not to take it out until the game is
finished or one is hopelessly bogged down.
For those with the willpower not to be tempted by the Dark
Force of Marketing, Phantasy Star II is a challenging and enjoyable intermediate level game with superb combat and animated
graphics.

Game Hints

Scorpion 's M

(Continued from page 30)

Of course, first you have to discover how
to get below. Noticed a torch anywhere?
Too had it's stuck (all that dried mud .. .
wonder what would work . . .).
Ultima VI: Not surprisingly, many
letters come in about this game. Lately, I've
been asked by several readers about the
"cheat menu" mentioned in, of all things,
The Official Book of Ultima. How Origin
ever let that slip by them, I don't know.
The cheat menu does exist, and it is in
the game (at least through version 3.2). I
am not going to tell you how to access
it, at least not publicly (if you really want
to know, you can send me a letter .. .
uhh, Fred, I think we're gonna need
more room in here now!). Moving to
another subject, some people are having
a hard time finding all the mages with
spells for sale. The four of them are located: in Cove, north of the Lycaeum,
north of Britain, and north of Skara Brae.
By the way, Xiao will not sell you eighth
level spells. She's supposed to do this
once you receive Armageddon from the

ail

Wisp, but apparently there's a bug that
prevents her from doing that. The only
8th level spell I know of that you can buy
is Resurrection (someone else sells that
one).
Ultima IV: Questions have been asked
about the final dungeon. First, yes, you
absolutely need a full party of eight (including the Avatar) and every one of
them must be alive. So, try not to let
anyone die on the way down. Secondly,
if you have gotten this far into the game,
you should be able to answer the questions asked in the Codex Chamber itself.
After all, the idea is that you spent the
game learning about the attributes and
principles of virtue, so you ought to
know what they are and what they represent (I admit to becoming a bit peeved
when someone asks for the complete list
of answers). If you don't know the
answer, you end up (after being booted
out) at some location that provides the
answer (Moonglow, for instance, if the
correct response is "Truth"). The one exception is the prime axiom. To learn
that, you must make note of all the
visions seen in the shrines, which are
runes you have to translate into English.

Journey: Along the way, our stalwart
party meets an elf with a shy nature.
Well, maybe more suspicious than shy.
She wants to know you're okay before
she sticks around to do anything for you.
Now, if you could just give her some sort
of personal reference. You know, like,
you're the friend of someone?
Tangled Tales: A few dungeon delvers
are running into trouble with the mist
door on the way to Xavier's lair. Life
would be a lot easier if only you had
Riley's girl friend in the party. If you don't
know what to do about her, have a chat
with Drek.
And that's about it for the mail room
this time around. If you need help with
an adventure game, you can reach me in
the following ways:
On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie: Visit the Games RoundTable
(type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
By CIS Mail (enclose a SASE if you live
in the CIS): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie
Station, New York, NY 10028.
Copyright 1990 by Scorpia, all rights reserved

Sneak Preview
(Continued from page 38)
back to the base during the second
scenario. However, the program does not
allow the player to use these missiles
during either the fifth or sixth scenario,
simply having the player's on-screen characters radio their commanding officer
that they are "saving" the missiles. We
originally thought that the game was forcing us to save the missiles
until the final scenario, but
we couldn't use them there,
either. That may be a result
of having an incomplete
version, however.
Finally, the sixth scenario
is the coup de grace. The
player can maneuver over
a battlefield that scrolls to
almost four times the size
of the "killing fields" in the
other scenarios. In this battle, the player will command whichever damaged
and fatigued squad he has

led successfully through the fifth scenario.
Should the player be successful in destroying the Kurita mobile headquarters,
he returns to Morgan Kell and receives
the information he needs to rescue his
father. From that point, he can summon
the DropShip (with the new F10 function) and get ready for the sequel.

Command Disposition
Although BattleTech: The Crescent

Hawk's Revenge takes a decidedly different direction in terms of game
mechanics and appearance than BattleTech: The Crescent Hawk's Inception, it
would appear that Infocom has made
the right decision in creating a game that
will offer more appeal to those who play
the BattleTech boardgame. Those of us
who are more intrigued by the BattleTech novels will probably still enjoy the
MechWarrior series more because the
simulation aspect treats the
'mech pilots as heroic individuals. In Revenge, the
system deals with the
'mechs more as military
units.
Frankly, BattleTech: The
Crescent Hawk's Revenge
should have a decidedly
larger following than Inception because it is truer to
the genre. Now, if Infocom
was to add a construction
set and scenario editor to
the mix, they would have a
megahit on their hands.

Sneak Preview

Continuing
Education
(Continued from page 22)

mands in the way LucasFilm's SCUMM
system does, but my fears were unjustified. The menus contain a full complement of verbs (120+) and nouns. The
player has access to all the words
needed to solve the game, reducing
the 'guess-the-parser' problem, the program supplies only the appropriate
prepositions for a certain verb, reducing the parser's "duh, what?" responses, and the noun list is constantly updated to include all of the touchable,
lookable, tasteable items at the current
location, eliminating the "you do not
see the 'what's it' here" response. Yet
for all these pluses, I consistently end
up type all my commands. I find I can
simply rap out "WEAR THE BODICE"
in half the time it takes to search two
menus and make two mouse clicks.
Frankly, I find the menu system to be

of little use except to suggest possible
commands in tough puzzle situations.
Fortunately, with the swipe of a function key, the menu system can be tucked away and brought out for the occasional reference.

>LISTEN
Sound-card support has become a
standard in adventure games and, like
most games on the market, Spellcasting 101 has an excellent score written
by a voluntarily anonymous source
(take a bow, Arfing Dog, whoever you
are). With an AdLib card, or, better
yet, a Roland sound system, the
sounds are a real treat. I cast the BIP
spell (create romantic music) just to
enjoy the beautiful tune.
On top of the sound-card score,
Legend has outdone the competition
again by including the trademarked
RealSound digitized noises in the adventure. Birds tweet, dragons roar, and
doors creak along Ernie's path to wizar-

dom. It's a cute feature and another
first for adventure games.

>STATUS
Spellcasting 101 is a quality piece
of software. The interface is clean, the
parser is excellent, the documentation
and packaging goodies are cute, and
the story is Steve Meretzky at his best.
It is obvious that the Legend Group
knows the genre, understands what
the market is missing and what
garners want, and is dedicated to creating genre-advancing stuff. If their future releases, which include a time
travel adventure and a sequel to
Spellcasting 101, are of the same technical and storytelling caliber as this
product, Legend Entertainment will
turn the adventure game market on its
ear.
Spellcasting 101 will be released for
the IBM format in early October with a
suggested retail price of $59.95.

,

meaningful than in previous games
which have used this artifice.
(Continued from page 24)
disk and VGA required, $59.95) is an interactive movie in the tradition of Mean
Streets. The 256 color VGA graphics are
hotter than the earlier product and the ad
venture elements, as well as game elements like a more efficient "point and
click" reverse parser, seem stronger than
the earlier game.
Fans of pulp science fiction and Ultima
will apparently have their hands full in
the new Worlds of Ultima series. The
first release from Origin is The Savage
Empire, a "Jules Verne meets Edgar
Rice Burroughs in an Arthur Conan
Doyle Production"-style game where the
good-guy scientists find themselves in a
lost valley of the dinosaurs (IBM, $59.95).
Lucasfilm's The Secret of Monkey Island (IBM, $59.95) uses the familiar
"point and click" style reverse parser
from Maniac Mansion and Indiana
Jones and the Last Crusade: The
Graphic Adventure. As has been his
habit with each new release, however,
Ron Gilbert has made the parser even
more efficient. The Secret of Monkey Island places the player in the role of a
would-be pirate and forces him to solve
three basic portions of the game:
swordsmanship, thievery and treasure
hunting. The game is absolutely inundated with both self-effacing humor and
charming and not-so-charming characters. Also, the puzzles are challenging,
even with the reverse parser.
Adventure gamers who haven't read
the sneak preview of Spellcasting 101:
Sorcerers Get All The Girls from
Legend Entertainment (see p. 20)
need to complete their homework by
doing so, right now. Available on IBM format, the game will be available direct
from MicroProse.
Hard Nova (Electronic Arts, IBM,
$49.95) is a science fiction adventure
which immediately reminds players of
EA's earlier Sentinel Worlds game. The
interface and documentation are friendly
enough with a "guided tour" type of
tutorial insuring that the player is familiar
with all the game's controls before any
serious disasters can confront the player.
The game mechanics still involve piloting
a spaceship from planet to planet,
ship-to-ship combat, personal combat and interaction with non-player characters. Although the latter function uses the
familiar multiple-choice conversation
method, the conversations and encounters seem more "fleshed out" and

New World Computing continues its
exciting association with play-by-mail and
pen and paper game company Flying
Buffalo, Inc. with Tunnels & Trolls
(IBM, $49.95). Like the successful translation of Nuclear War from card game to
computer, capturing the flavor of the
original game's play while adding the
spice of computer game play to it, this
computer role-playing game will make
the classic solitaire adventures from Tunnels & Trolls come to life on the computer screen. Now, there is no more flipping pages from 8A to 16D and back to
2C in order to know how to roll the dice.
Now, Liz Danforth has the stories branching smoothly from one predicament .. .
er . . . situation to another.

If traditional chess is too tame,
Interplay's Battlechess I: Chinese
Chess (IBM, Amiga, $49.95) might fulfill
the quest for a more varied strategic
challenge. Interplay's artists found new subjects for their fascinating animations
(elephants, chariots, cannons) in this ancient Chinese game of chess where
pieces move along the intersections of
gridlines rather than into the squares
themselves and the entire board is
separated by a flowing river (representing the Yellow River). The game has
changed from its predecessor, but the
humor and spectacle is still there.
Galleons of Glory (IBM, $44.95), from
Broderbund, is a strategy game from
the "'Where, Oh Where' is Carmen Sandiego?" team. This one features three difficulty levels, represented by three of
Magellan's exploratory voyages, and follows the "plot" of each different peregrina
tion by the famous explorer. The game
stresses resource management and historical discovery over the primarily
geographical lessons of Carmen.
Broderbund has brought a
phenomenally successful pen-and-paper
game to life in Pictionary (IBM, Amiga,
$39.95, C-64, $29.95). Computerizing the
popular party game offers some advantages over the parlor game. The computer game offers a solitaire mode where
the computer does all the drawing, allows the timer to be adjusted according
to the skill levels of the players and features a built-in drawing (paint) program.
Maxis is ready to shout, "Let there be
SimEarth" (IBM, Macintosh, $69.95) and

Buying Guide

hope that players respond, "It is very
good." The GAIA simulation from Will
Wright, creator of the megahit SimCity,
allows players to develop the ecostructure of an entire planet and is more complicated than its city-planning progenitor.
Play balance and entertaining feedback
will be the keys to whether this product
with superior graphics and research will
reach the plateau of its sibling.
In something of the same vein,
Electronic Arts' PowerMonger (Amiga,
Atari ST, $49.95) offers a real-time
strategic challenge with an economic,
political and military basis. Players can
upgrade their civilizations through
economic means or simply conquer
other tribes in order to snatch their hardearned wealth. We think this game offers
a more serious model than Populous.
SPOT: The Computer Game (IBM,
$39.99) is Virgin Mastertronic's brilliant
abstract strategy game for one to four
players. The title refers to the licensed 7Up character from the television commercials who livens up the game board with
colorful and humorous animations. The
basic strategic challenge is similar to a
combination of Go's territorial imperative
and Othello's transformation of entire
sections of the board from one color to
another. However, the game board can
be customized to reflect new challenges
and strategies with symmetrical patterns
or provide handicaps against one side or
another using asymmetrical game
boards. Frankly, the Nintendo version of
the game would make a great gift for
those who do not have an IBM.
Many of CGWs traditional readership
will have fond memories of playing Milton Bradley's Stratego. Now, Accolade
has released a computer version that allows players to choose between three different game boards and sets of pieces,
utilize rules variations and always have
an opponent at one's disposal. The rules
variations are simply: "Silent Defense"
(enough fog of war that the player does
not know which piece he/she has just
captured), "Aggressor Advantage" (tie
goes to the aggressor) and "Rescue" (an
option which allows captured pieces to
return to the board similar to what occurs when pawns reach the back row in
chess) (IBM, Macintosh, $49.95).

Blue Max (Amiga, Atari ST, IBM,
$49.95) is one of the three World War I
aviation simulations expected to be
released this Christmas. From Three-

Sixty, the game features two-player action from the same keyboard and a pure
strategy version (phased action) version
of the game. At press time, it was not
clear whether the game would feature
modem-to-modem competition or not.
Dynamix' Red Baron (IBM, $59.95) is
likely to be the product with the most
available planes from the era and the
most versatile campaign game (see the
sneak preview in CGW #75, p. 6). It also
has a versatile VCR feature that enables
players to re-enter previously played dogfights and change history. Knights of the
Sky (IBM, $59.95) is MicroProse's entry
into the WWI dogfight and may have the
most responsive controls of any of the
three serious WWI air combat simulators.
Players get a real feel for the "flimsy" nature of their craft and what that does to
its aerodynamics. Plus, the MicroProse
game supports modem play.
World War II buffs are not left out when
the Christmas '90 releases hit the shelves. Submarine fans who prefer the Atlantic theater will find Das Boot from ThreeSixty (Amiga, IBM, $49.95) to have
beautiful graphics and detailed options
that allow players to toggle between
serious simulation and action-oriented
entertainment. Silent Service I (see the
quick look on p. 51) offers vicarious submariners almost all they could want from
a Pacific Theater campaign.
With Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe
(IBM, $59.95), Lucasfilm has taken the
technology used in Battlehawks: 1942
and Their Finest Hour and moved from
the realms of sophisticated action game
to the atmosphere of serious simulation.
The research is solid and damage affects
each plane's flight model realistically. In
addition, World War II air buffs can finally
get a chance to envision what it would
be like to fly Me 262s, Me 163 rocket
planes, Gotha 229 flying wings, Me 109s,
Focke-Wulf 190s, P-51 Mustangs, P-47
Thunderbolts and B-17 bombers.
Those who are more inclined toward
modern flight can either: re-enact Dale
Brown's Flight of the Old Dog in ThreeSixty's MegaFortress (Amiga, IBM,
$59.95), a simulation that carefully follows the book's plot; crawl in the simulated cockpit of Falcon 3.0 (IBM,
$69.95), a technologically enhanced version of Spectrum HoloByte's major hit;
fly the Phantoms and Intruders of
Spectrum HoloByte's Flight of the Intruder (see sneak preview on p. 28); or
enter the world of Soviet air combat in
Stormovik: SU-25 Soviet Attack Fighter
(IBM, $59.95) from Electronic Arts.

Reader Input Device

Conversions Received
Bar Games (Accolade) Amiga
The Cycles (Accolade) Mac
King's Quest IV (Sierra) Amiga
The Fool's Errand (Miles Computing)
Amiga,ST
Mixed-Up Mother Goose *Enhanced Version* (Sierra) IBM
Overrun! (SSI) Amiga
Police Quest 2 (Sierra) Amiga
Second Front (SSI) Amiga
Their Finest Hour (LucasFilm) Atari ST
Tunnels of Armageddon (California
Dreams) Amiga
Where in Time is Carmen Sandiego?
(Broderbund) C64

Megatraveller 1
(Continued from page 18)
one character at a time, possibly compete in real-time combat
with the computer controlling one or more NPCs? There is no
way that what the gamer is given can be considered a "level playing field." So loud have the protests been that Paragon
Software's promised revision of the combat system for MegaTraveller 2 has been extended to an update of MT1 and will be
utilized in Space 1889.
In spite of all this, the present reviewer must confess that the
original system can be both more exciting and, possibly, realistic
(in producing more of the flavor of combat) than those of a strictly tactical system. With the proper approach (see Tips), it is even
possible to win.
Apparently, the interplanetary travel system has caught some
flak as well. Maneuvering a space ship in MT1 is not like operating the usual "space combat simulator." MT1 has tried to come
to grips with gravity and Newton's laws of motion, which may disconcert some people. One's ship will continue to move in a
straight line unless thrust is applied to change that motion or unless acted upon by the gravity of a planet or star. To "land" on a
world, one must slow the ship to near-zero speed, which is, of
course, what is required in actuality. Admittedly, the system
takes some practice, but those who master it will be rewarded
with significant economies in fuel usage.
A complex game requires extensive documentation, and MT1

does not fall short in this regard. It has an extensive manual and
the production values are excellent. The manual is sturdy, uses a
spiral binding so that it can be laid flat while open to a reference
point, and abounds in diagrams and pictures. There is a good introduction to the Traveller universe in general, and the Imperium
Zhodani conflict in particular, for those not already in the know.
The organization is good. For the most part, needed information
can be found quickly, although a more extensive Table of Contents is needed to complement the very welcome Index.
A more general knock on the game seems to be that it is essentially an unfinished product. There is certainly some justice in
this. The number of manual changes which had to be included
on the pamphlet covering machine-specific features is disturbing
and the appearance of screen photos on the box which don't
resemble anything actually encountered in the game is also
rather disquieting. Even setting aside the personal combat system, there are areas where the play balance can be questioned.
For instance, the trade system is probably a shade too easy to
beat and a few minor additional efforts in that direction would
have been likely to have made it considerably more entertaining.
All these matters work against the integrity of the game

Tips
1. Save early and save often. Unfortunately, the Save Game
function is available only from starport buildings. You may have
to play some of the submissions over several times to get a
result you feel you can live with.
2. Goods sell on a world at a time-variable discount from what

Review

they can be purchased for there. Unavailability of a particular
item on a world is not a guarantee that it will sell there for a high
price, but examination of a world's characteristics can provide
valuable clues as to what will be valuable there. Try carrying
water to Louzy, and explosives to Efate.
3. In combat, rely on one character with exceptional military
skills and heavy weapons and armor to bear the brunt of the
fighting. Make careful use of obstacles to keep the rest of the
party out of harm's way as much as possible.
4. Keep careful track of the location of NPCs offering to buy particular items.
5. Search carefully—and don't leave the hospital ward of the
Sharurshid facility on Louzy without getting the second passcard!
6. Don't engage in ship-to-ship combat impulsively. You can get
chewed to pieces while putting your Jump and Navigation
programs in storage and loading your combat programs. If
you're going to fly the Jolly Roger, have your ship ready for it
before you leave orbit.

quality adventure they've experienced in the pen and paper
game will simply may have to wait a little longer until the
upgrade can be examined.

Version 3.0 Update
Version 3.0 of Megatraveller 1: The Zhodani Conspiracy
arrived in our offices after presstime. Paragon states in a letter to CGW that it will upgrade earlier versions free of charge.
Owners should call or write directly to:
Paragon Software Corporation
600 Rugh Street, Suite A
Greensburg, PA 15601
or call (412) 838-1166 during business hours.

Conclusions

The gist of the changes in the 3.0 version include the ability
to print out characters and the "enhanced combat system."
This combat system allows for pausing the game during corn
bat so that "orders" may be issued to characters. These orders may consist of either moving to a new location or firing
at a designated target. Combat can be interrupted repeatedly
so as to assign characters new orders. The character on the
display, however, is still manually operated as per the original
Megatraveller 1 combat system.

The consensus is certainly that MegaTraveller 1: The Zhodani
Conspiracy (prior to the update) is seriously flawed. One can
still appreciate the game for the variety of activities and natural
feel to the adventuring it offers, but those looking for the same

The game we at CGW hope to see in the next offering in
the Megatraveller series would have all the scope and grandeur of the first release, but with a phased combat system
where players may maintain more control of their adventures.

7. Never, never, never leave the starport on airless world
without a vacuum suit.

d

(Continued from page 100)
Like most recent EA simulations (with
the exception of Indianapolis 500: The
Simulation), the emphasis is on the mis
sion-based campaign game and "feel" of
the combat being simulated rather than
presenting an authentic model of the
flight dynamics of the particular plane.
Those who want to try their hands at
"aerial" combat in outer space have two
extremely viable options. Wing Cornmanner (IBM, $69.95) is Chris Roberts'
potential masterpiece from Origin. Chris
has brought rotoscoping techniques,
soundtrack branching according to the
game's tempo, cinematic touches, hot
graphics, fast scrolling and a campaign
game where the war is actually affected
(and branches accordingly) by what the
player accomplishes. The other viable option is MicroProse's LightSpeed (IBM,
$59.95), a hybrid of role-playing and starship simulation. The game involves exploration, negotiation and, when one
must, annihilation. Fast-scrolling simulates bringing one's own ship into combat, as well as offers special effects such
as remote-controlled fighters to engage
the enemy and kamikaze "missiles" to
aim at one's victims. Both games feature
incredible frame rates and very attractive
polygon-filled graphics.
Sports fans are not left entirely out of
the picture. Links, from Access (IBM,
$59.95), is the extremely well-rendered
golf game which has been previously
touted as "VGA World-Class Leader
Board" in these pages. The picture in the
buying guide comes from a demonstration program, so the title and huge golf
ball are not usually on the screen. However, all the scenery on the golf course is
just as detailed as this which is shown on
the demo program.
Spectrum HoloByte is carving out
new genres of driving simulations with
last year's Vette! and this year's Stunt
Driver (IBM, $49.95). In the current
game, players drive a 1966 Shelby Mustang against a VW bug (driven by a "little
old lady" from Pasadena or elsewhere), a
Porsche (wasting away in Yuppieville
with a driver who fits the profile) or an
IROC Z (driven by a bully who has never
quite grown up). The game features five
tracks which become ever more serpentine with each increase in difficulty, as
well as a grid-based track construction
editor to allow players to customize their
"battlefields."

The number of wargame titles continues to dwindle. Strategic Simulations, Inc.'s Interceptor is the first in
their Renegade Legions (IBM, $59.95)
series, featuring tactical level ship-to-ship
combat. Those who are more down-toearth will want to check out Command
Simulations's computer version of
GDW's Suez '73 (Amiga, IBM, $59.95).
Command HQ from MicroPlay (IBM,
$59.95) shows hints of a "breakthrough"
for more than just the hardcore wargarners. It is a step up from Risk! and
akin to the Milton Bradley boardgame
Axis & Allies. In scope, diversity and
play value, Command HQ is a solid
strategic level strategy game with a mercifully short learning curve. The
head-to-head play element allows for modern,
serial port or network play with plenty of
useful and easy to access interfaces from
which the player can gather vital military
information. Also suitable for solitaire
play, scenarios cover global conquest
from World War I through World War IV
and offers an Empire-like expansion and
conquest scenario.
From France comes Full Metal Planet
(Amiga, Atari ST, IBM, $49.95). Published in the United States by Data East,
Full Metal Planet offers one to four
players a planetary surface which is constantly changing due to tidal movements
for their global battlefield. Players select
the landing site for their interplanetary
freighter and mining vessels, deploy their
tanks for defense and mine all the ore
they can. It's a fast-flowing 25-turn strategic-level competition that offers plenty of
options for "stabbing" one's opponents.
The game is ruthless in its victory conditions and enforcement of penalties.

So, here's the hint list for 1990! For
best results, place a copy of this article
(marked with your fondest wishes) under
your loved one's pillow for maximum subliminal effect
or tape another annotated copy to the refrigerator door so
that family members cannot miss it
m. Right now, the staff at CGW is
waiting as expectantly as a child on
Christmas Eve to get our hands on some
of these great products! Merry Christmas!

Editorial

The Birth of an Art Form
by Johnny L. Wilson

State of the Industry: Recently, I have been asked my opinion
about the state of computer games
as art with regard to two very different
agendas. First, a journalist with a major
metropolitan newspaper asked me where
I would place the modern computer
game with regard to, for instance, the history of the motion picture industry. I unhesitatingly observed that we were still in
the silent picture era. Second, a correspondent on a major interactive computer network was expressing his frustration that a certain publisher had allowed
some "classic" games to go out of print.
Since the entertainment software industry
so often turns to Hollywood as a simile
for its own development, I began to
wonder about the formation of "classic"
films.
The

It seems to me that there are many
parallels between the "silent era" of motion picture production and that of computer entertainment today. Litigation is a
common feature to both the first decade
of motion picture making and the entertainment software industry of today.
Thomas Edison owned both patents on
the loop used in all film projectors and
sued anyone who used them in their own
projectors. This may have been the first
"loop and feel" lawsuit. Another common
feature between the industries was the
need for a viable platform. In the motion
picture industry, this developed in the
move from independent projectionists
(who moved from one vaudeville house
to another) to the use of permanent motion picture theaters. Currently, we have
independent publishers who move from
one computer platform to another. Yet,
we really cannot hope to reach the masses until some standardized form of
presentation system is provided.
A third feature common to early films
and current software is the lack of a star
system. Outside of Edwin S. Porter (The
Great Train Robbery, 1903), the first
decade of film making is virtually devoid

of noteworthy directors and stars. It
wasn't until 1913 when Mack Sennett left
Biograph to begin making shorts for
Keystone (of "Kops" fame) and two
years later, when Griffith broke from
Biograph and started making feature
films (including The Birth of a Nation,
1915, about which we will speak more
later) and Chaplin left Keystone to create
longer films for Mutual and First National
that any type of star system began to
emerge. All three began to realize that
the art advanced as the creative forces
assumed cinematic control and
developed a structural integrity hitherto
lacking in film. Later, when this director
as artiste system began breaking down,
Hollywood become known for its genre
pictures.
Software development is still heavy on
the corporate management side, just like
the pre-1913 films. Little recognition is
given to the "directing/creating/writing"
talent and much more import given to
distributing the product. We are in
danger of seeing floods of genre product
flowing through the marketing channel,
primarily because publishers do not
value innovation. SimCity is successful
because it does not fit in any genre, but
it is questionable whether it could have
been published without Will Wright and
Jeff Braun taking a chance with their
own company. Sid Meier's Railroad
Tycoon is extremely successful for MicroProse, but it is doubtful whether it would
have been published were it not for Sid's
personal influence in the company
(which softened any marketing department doubts that may have been voiced).
Finally, the question of art and the "classics." The Great Train Robbery was the
first major commercial success of the
film industry. It used cut scenes, told a
story and played on screens for almost a
decade. The first film that is often cited
as a work of art is The Birth of a Nation. It was a commercial success, but it
was a social controversy. While the film

only brought protests in some southern
cities, it brought riots in others. Art often
has a social impact. It is probably as
much because of the way people initially
reacted to Griffith's work that it is remembered as a "classic" as for what the film itself contains.
Some computer games are classics as
much for where we were (and who we
were) when we first played them as for
how well they were done. Which brings
us to two important questions. First, were
the games to be considered "classics" because they were the best of their era or
because they have something lasting to
offer? Second, would there be any value
to repackaging, say, Infocom classics
for the MS-DOS platform or M.U.L.E. for
the Amiga? Apparently, some companies
believe so. MicroProse's new versions of
F-15 and Silent Service on MS-DOS and
Pirates on the Amiga indicate that there
may be such a value for some properties. Let's hope others determine that this
is true, as well.
State of the Magazine: This issue,
CGW offers its own classic. The
"Christmas Buying Guide" has become a
tradition in our November issues since
1987. Our primary goal is to present a
hint list that can be copied, marked and
presented to those loved ones who never
know what to get the computer gamer
on their gift list.
This issue also holds a special bonus
section. With the expected price wars on
dedicated game machines around
Christmas time, computer gamers may
want some information to help them with
the old electric train ploy (You know,
where Dad buys his son a train so he
can play with it?). Co-designer of
Wizardry 1V Roe Adams offers an overview on dedicated game machines and
CRPGs for those so inclined and for
those thinking of buying a game
machine for themselves.

