June/July 1987

Number 38

FEATURES
S.D.I.
A Review of Master Designer's Space Game

Bureaucracy
Scorpion's Tale Gives Playing Hints

Sub Battle Simulator
A Review of Epyx's Strategy Game

King's Quest III
A Review of Sierra's Adventure Game

Bard's Tale II
A Review of Electronic Art's Latest

Educational Games From Broderbund
Where in the U.S.A. is Carmen Sandiego and others

Computer Role-Playing Games
An Editorial on the Genre

Battlecruiser
Strategic Simulation's Naval Game Reviewed

Comics
A Review of Accolade's New Game

Designer Profile
Jon Freeman and Ann Westfall Interviewed

Titans of the Computer Gaming World
Activision Company Report

Murders, They Wrote
VCS Murder Mystery Games From Spinnaker

Sinbad and the Throne of The Falcon
Another Master Designer Release Reviewed

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek
Letters
Industry News
Reader Input Device
Game Ratings

6
Hosea Battles
12
Scorpia
14
Regan Carey
18
Roy Wagner
22
Scorpia
26
Bob Proctor
28
Scorpia
30
Bob Proctor
32
Jasper Sylvester
34
Frank Boosman
36
Charles Ardai
38
David Wilson
46
Vince Denardo

4
8
42
55
56

TAKING A PEEK

ActionSoft Corporation
122 South Race Street Suite 4
Urbana, IL 61801
(217) 367-1024
UP PERISCOPE: This simulation is
similar to the classic Silent Service.
The main screen has most of the information one needs to play the game
on it, so one doesn't have to toggle
between as many different screens as in
Silent Service, but the major differences are in the historical scenarios.
Although there is some overlap in the
submarines used, both games seem to
emphasize different historical encounters. C-64/128 ($29.95). Circle Reader
Service Card #1.
Avalon Hill Game Company
4517 Hartford Road
Baltimore, MD 21214
GUDERIAN: Expected in June of
1986, Avalon Hill refused to release
this WWII eastern front game until
many of the complaints from the
playtesters were straightened out.
Those familiar with Panzergruppe

Guderian in its boardgame incarnation
will not be surprised by this design.
The game system is similar to AH's
Gulf Strike, but plays slightly faster.
Apple II ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #2.
Bethesda Softworks
9208 Burning Tree Road
Bethesda, MD 20817
(301) 469-7061
GRIDIRON!: This new football simulation has tremendous sound and
graphics. Gridiron! is a detailed simulation with a lot more to like than
hate. This is a real time simulation
with an artificial intelligence that allows players to have a very satisfying
and competitive game. The emphasis is
on action as opposed to statistics, but
the on-field performances we've seen
are very realistic. Gridiron! comes with
a detailed chart full of plays, but allows the players to design and save to
disk their own unique offensive plays.
Amiga ($69.95). Circle Reader Service
#3.

Cosmi
415 N. Figueroa St.
Wilmington, CA 90744
DEF CON 5: This is the kind of game
Matthew Broderick thought he was
getting into in the movie, Wargames.
It is not simply an arcade "
shoot-'em-up" version of S.D.I., but features options like: GCL (Ground-based
Chemical Laser) facilities, OLR
(Orbiting Laser Reflector) units, FEL
(Free-Election Laser) weapons, NPB
(Neutral Particle Beam) platforms,
EML (Electro-Magnetic Launcher)
"rail guns," NXL (Nuclear-pulsed Xray Laser) warheads, ASM (AntiSpace-Mine) robots, D3 (Decoy Deployment Detonators) cartridges, and
MT3I (Multi-Track Thermal-Target
Interceptor) rockets. All menus are
accessed by special codes printed in
the manual and the program even lets
you establish your own access code for
playing the game. C-64/128 ($19.95).
Circle Reader Service #4.
DELTA MAN: No, this is not an

"Animal House" fraternity party game.
This is another post-holocaust adventure game. The player's perspective
is taken from inside the character's
specialized exoskeletal suit and you
don't have to play "Outguess the
Parser" in this 3D graphic adventure.
All commands are joystick driven. The
object of the game is to survive instead
of mutating from the genetic contamination. C-64/128 ($19.95). Circle
Reader Service #5.
Data East
470 Needles Drive
San Jose, CA 95112
EXPRESS RAIDER: Admit it. You've
always been a bit jealous of Roy
Rogers, Gene Autry and Hopalong
Cassidy. You've always wanted to
rescue the passengers of a hijacked
locomotive by fighting on the treacherous footing of a 19th Century passenger car's roof and you've always
wanted to shoot at the bad guys from
astride a galloping horse. The home
computer version of the arcade hit,
Express Raider, allows you to live out
those heroic dreams of
yesteryear. C64/128 ($34.95). Circle Reader Service
#6.

Firebird
P.O. Box 49
Ramsey, NJ 07446
GOLDEN PATH: "Ah, Clodhopper,
follow the Golden Path to knowledge
and contentment." Actually, this is not
the Kung Fu adventure I expected. It
is a remarkable story of the one destined to become the "Golden Emperor"
if he can magically take on the age,
appearance, and burden of his father
and tread the Golden Path. Firebird
continues to release its graphics adventures on the Atari ST as its machine of choice, so GP makes its debut
in that format. Since it is a smooth,
attractive adventure based on Oriental
culture, it is sure to be popular in
other formats, as well. The adventure
is mouse-driven and takes the player
through 45 different animated screens.
The feedback mechanisms are given in
attractive icons which depict a vine for
one's life force and a book for clues.
Atari ST ($44.95). Circle Reader Service #9.
THE SENTRY: One of the most successful games ever published in the
Continued on pg. 10

Conversions
Received

For the Amiga:
Kampfgruppe (SSI)
For the Apple:
Starglider (Firebird)
For the Atari (8 bit):
AutoDuel (Origin)
For the Atari ST:
Colonial Conquest (SSI)
For the C-64/128:
War in the South Pacific (SSI)
Wargame Construction Set (SSI)
For the IBM:
Phantasie (SSI)
Wizardry!:
Knight of Diamonds (SirTech)

S.D.I.

Fantasy Adventure Issue

S.D.I.
TITLE:
Many
SYSTEM:
$34.95 (C-64)/$49.95 (others)
PRICE:
Kellyn Beeck
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER: Master Designer Software
Westlake Village, CA

by Hosea Battles
It is the year 2017 and as Captain Sloan McCormick, you have three objectives: 1) defend
America from missile attacks; 2) protect the S.D.I.
satellites from the attacking KGB ships; and 3)
rescue the Soviet commander in case her station's
defenses should fall. The opening scenes are crisply
illustrated as though they were the beginning of a
film.
The graphics in this game are the typically excellent efforts we have come to associate with
Master Designer Software and their Cinemaware
line. The scenes showing the earth, satellites, enemy
ships, and space stations in detail are exquisitely
rendered. The graphic screens make versatile use of
color and the capabilities of the various machines.
The manual is useful, but the ST version has a supplement. I had to reread the manual and supplement twice to make sure I understood the changes
for the ST machine. It would be better if the additions were part of the manual.
The game begins after a cinematic introduction
which shows the earth in spectacular color. McCormick is inside the U.S. Defense Station, surrounded by personnel at consoles and monitors.
This screen contains some of the key features of
the game. Dominating the center screen are two
screens which show different views of the earth.
These give you command of the satellites that are
used to shoot down incoming ICBM's
(Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles). To the right is a
screen which allows you to monitor the condition
of your defense satellites. To the bottom left is a

scanner screen which shows you the location of
your ship and enemy ships. Going to the satellite
screen will show at least two of your satellites are
non-operational. It is your responsibility to repair
them. McCormick must fly a spacecraft to the
damaged satellites. This portion of the game is very
arcade oriented. The player must concentrate on
flying, repairing satellites, and shooting down the
hordes of KGB fighters that will attempt to foil his
objectives.
In space, you get a first person view out of the
cockpit (which changes to a closeup of McCormick's face in the ST version, if your ship is hit
by enemy fire). A radar screen showing satellites,
space stations, and enemy ships appears in the upper center of the screen. Damaged satellites flash
on this screen. To repair satellites, press "R"
(repair). A green box will appear in the center of
the screen. Now, line up the satellite and press the
button. A green light show appears and the satellite
is repaired. When a message is indicated, press "M"
and the radar screen is replaced by the face of the
person sending the message and the message scrolls
underneath the sender's visage. At some point you
receive a message concerning the Soviet missile
strike. At that time, players have two minutes to
return to the space station, dock and get to the
control room.

Docking is the hardest part of the game. To
dock, press "D" and a red box will appear. Then,
center the space station, press the fire button, and
the scene will switch to the docking bay. To finish
docking, you must center the ship in the docking
bay, slow down, and enter at the right speed. If
you are off center, the docking will be aborted and
you must try again. There are no center reference
points to make docking easy. If you are successful,
you are given a chance to repair the ship. If you
don't repair it now, the ship will still be damaged
on your next mission. A scene showing McCormick
running to the station appears when you press the
button to enter the station.
Inside the station, players go into defense mode
by clicking on one of the two center screens where
a scene of the earth, targeted cities, and incoming
missiles are displayed. On the bottom half of the
screen, there is a display of the satellite control
showing full or pulse beam switch. A view of the
incoming missile appears in a close-up window at
the bottom of the screen. Place the crosshairs on
the selected missile, choose pulse or full beam laser,
and fire. If you hit the target, you are treated to a
spectacular explosion. Nevertheless, KGB ships will
be attacking your satellites throughout the strike
and you may find several satellites which are dysfunctional. After the strike is over, you must repair
the damaged satellites.
After several missile strikes, you will get a
message to rescue Natalya, the Soviet Commander
who happens to be your girlfriend (good thing you
don't work in an embassy!). Once you get this
message, you have four minutes to rescue her from
the KGB. You must successfully dock with the Soviet Space Station and fight your way through three
corridors to rescue your sweetheart. This is the
finest portion of the game with regard to graphic
detail. The scene shows both first and second person views. The second person view shows McCormick ducking a KGB laser shot or getting hit.
In the first person view, KGB agents pop around
corners or pop up from a chamber in the floor to
shoot at you. Once a KGB agent is hit, his skeleton
glows and he disappears. If you think you shot
enough to make them cautious, you can put your
cursor on the "RUN" sign and move to the next
corridor. If you are wrong, the game ends. If you
are correct, you can reach Natalya.

There are two possible outcomes to this scenario.
If time has run out, your character will enter and
find Natalya dead. In one of the most touching
scenes ever portrayed in a computer game, the
characters are silhouetted as McCormick kneels
down over his sweetheart. If your hero reaches
Natalya before time runs out, however, the silhouetted characters embrace in a passionate kiss.
At this point in time, duty calls. McCormick
turns and runs to his ship to destroy the last of the
KGB spaceships. Once the KGB ships are destroyed, a scene of the Pentagon briefing room is
shown and a message is displayed which reveals
how well (or poorly) you did.
This is an excellent game. 1 am told that it relies
more on arcade elements than the other Cinemaware games, but it is still a remarkable game to
play. It is a worthy addition to any ST game collection and causes one to wait breathlessly for the
next Cinemaware game for the ST computers.

BEZBOL BEEN BAD TO ME

WATCH THE BIRDIE!
How about a look at all the current golf games?
Any chance of going twelve times a year instead of
nine?
Mike Klassen
Dinuba, CA

Ed.: Rick Teverbaugh surveyed several golf
programs in CGW #29 ( p. 32) and updated his
information in a brief note in #30 (p. 21). This
survey was supplemented by Roy Wagner's reviews
of Leaderboard and Mean 18 in "Amiga
Preferences" for CGW #33 ( p. 44). Now that
MEAN 18 has been translated into so many
different formats, it might be interesting to go back
and read that column (even if you don't have an
Amiga). As for the frequency of the magazine, we'll
address that later in this column.

ADVERTISING MAZE!
Why not review some of the things advertised in

CGW? (Bronze Dragon, PHM Pegasus)? Was Moebius ever reviewed? (Maybe I've just forgotten it.)
Why not an article explaining how CGW works?
(The delays are sometimes puzzling.) I mean, how
are games/topics chosen for each issue? Why aren't
all the games listed on each R.I.D.? (Why can I only
evaluate a few?)
Dennis Owens
Old Town, ME
Ed.: Moebius was reviewed in CGW #29 and
Bronze Dragon was reviewed in #32. PHM Pegasus

will receive detailed attention from Evan Brooks and
an expert in hydrofoil operations in the August/September issue of CGW. Actually, your questions are a refreshing change of pace. Usually,
magazines are accused of giving too much editorial
attention to their advertisers. As for your other
questions, we have been planning an article on the
workings of CGW for some time now. It will appear
in one of the early issues of Computer Game
Quarterly, about which you can read more below.

Ed. Note: We received two lengthy letters stating
that Johnny Wilson may have mislead readers on the
merits of Pure-Stat Baseball (CGW #36). Although
it was not so stated, his review was based on the
Apple version. All of the complaints received so far
are from purchasers of the C-64 version. When
subLogic's Customer Service department was contacted, two different spokespersons for the company
admitted that there have been many complaints about
the stat-handling on the C-64 version. To date, neither person recalled a similar complaint on the Apple.
Even though Wilson did say that Pure-Stat
Baseball was "a good value", he also said that the
game had a weak computer manager (you can usually beat him by playing aggressively), mediocre
graphics, and slow play.
Here is what our two letter writers said:

I myself purchased Pure-Stat Baseball for my
Commodore 64 a number of months ago and since
that time, I have regretted my decision. I would
like to outline a number of the program's shortcomings in order to convince you that I know what
I am talking about.
Any baseball game that sells itself on the basis
of being able to keep statistics of games played
should be able to accurately accomplish this. However, Pure-Stat Baseball falls short in this area, due
to the fact that partial innings pitched are not accurately kept. A pitcher will often not complete an
inning and will only pitch 1/3 or 2/3 of that inning. This fact should be accurately kept by the
program. That it is not, is a major error on the part
of the programmer. When partial innings are not
accounted for, the earned run average is not accurate and thus, the statistics kept are not accurate.
The statistical part of the program also does not
keep track of stolen bases, number of times caught
stealing, sacrifices, sacrifice flies and the number
of times a batter has hit into a double play. ...Aside
from the statistical part of the program, the most
irritating shortcoming of this program is that after
playing a game and using the auto-update option to
update the statistics when you try to exit by entering the correct number from the menu (in order to
return to the main menu), the screen reverts back

to the Commodore blue and freezes. The only way
to play another game is to turn the computer off
and re-boot the program.
Another area where the program falls far short
is in a one-player game. ...I myself have played a
number of games against the computer and had
hoped for a better opponent. The computer has the
habit of using the short-reliever too early (often in
the first three innings) and too long (4-6 innings).
Any true baseball fan knows that the stopper in the
bullpen is not inserted into the game any earlier
than the seventh inning and will rarely pitch more
than three innings.
Another example of poor play by the computer
can be seen from the following example of a game
I recently played. The situation was that I was
managing the 1985 Cardinals against the computer's
1927 Yankees. The Cardinals were leading 6 to 4
going into the top of the ninth. The first batter for
the Yankees that inning was the pitcher. Any "arm
chair" manager would know that a pinch hitter is
called for in this situation. However, the computer
allowed the pitcher to bat instead of calling for the
obvious pinch hitter.
Mel Lockwood
Los Angeles, CA
...It is impossible to prevent the computer from
making "dumb" plays, since the computer's play selections flash across the screen too quickly to be
read. The computer automatically selects pinch hitters based on position in the team roster; however,
because of this, the computer may provide the same
pinch hitter for the pitcher in the third inning, the
sixth inning, and the ninth inning.
Thomas R. Clark
Union City, CA
Ed.: We printed the most salient points of both
letters because it is important that CGW act as a
forum with useful information for our readers and
not as a one dimensional publication. To that end we
have elicited a promise from subLogic to forward
any complaints from our readers on to Quest, Inc.,
designers of Pure-Stat Baseball, in order for these
hugs to be corrected.
M+A+X HEADROOM
I would like to thank you for your comments on
our product [Space M+A+X, CGW #35]. More im-

portantly, I would like to compliment you for the
effort and thought that went into the article in its
research. You obviously have a considerable
knowledge of the current space scene, I must say.
This is the second magazine review of our product
(the first was in PC Plus, a British magazine). Even
though the first review was very complimentary, it
was not nearly as well researched. You obviously
spent a great deal of time running M+A+X. I am
very glad that you did as your article reflects an
in-depth understanding of its operation and complexities, which, as you know, take time to appreciate. I can only guess how many hours you must
have spent to have the depth of understanding reflected in the article. This says a lot regarding
Computer Gaming World itself.
T. L. Keller (Final Frontier)
London, England
Ed.: Gee, Tom, thanks a lot! Just when I think
I've got Johnny under control (see Pure-Stat letter
above) you go and write a letter to swell his head
with illusions of editorial grandeur. His pompous
verbosity with its pedantic sophistry is an aberration
to the staid erudition of our publication which has
always eschewed esoteric circumlocutions. Not only
that; he sometimes gets carried away.
LITERAL COMMENDATIONS
"Letters to the Editor" is a great feature in the
magazine. It gives good tips in buying new games.
Thank you.
Cesare Foschi
Deer Park, NY
The letters were an excellent counterpoint —
good info here. Please keep running them.
M. Russo
Cleveland, OH
Ed.: Judging from the reader response, a regular
dialogue with the editors of the magazine is very
welcome. Our current intent is to run this feature
whenever there is enough material. Remember, we
publish some letters off of RID card comments, so
please write your name and town on the RID card
(if you write a comment you'd like to see published). We reserve the right to edit letters to fit the
space allotted.
Continued on pg. 43

PEEK (cont)
U.K. has arrived in the U.S. In this
strategy-arcade game, the player operates an energy-absorbing robot and
attempts to defeat the Sentry and her
allied robots, the Landgazers. One fascinating twist is that your robot can
actually "Create Objects," as well as
absorb them. There are 10,000 different 3D landscapes to conquer. C64/128 ($39.95). Circle #10.
Mindscape, Inc.
3444 Dundee Rd.
Northbrook, IL 60062
SUPERSTAR ICE HOCKEY: "Eh, we
goons love this game!" That's what
some of the CGW staff were saying
after playing a quadrupal overtime
game between "Mindscape" and the
"Red Wings." The appeal was as much
based on the ability to slash, rough,
and trip as it was on the strategic aspects of the game. Players can establish their own team to play against a
computer-coached league, but it isn't
possible to set up your own human
league in the present version. C64/128 (34.95). Circle Reader Service
#14.

Royal Software
710 McKinley
Eugene, OR 97402
GREAT BATTLES 1789-1865: GB is
actually a set of four different games,
using the same basic rules. Waterloo,
Austerlitz, Shiloh, and Gettysburg are
all available to the player. The game
screen makes use of the ST's color capabilities to look as colorful as possible
and the rules have the feel of a miniatures game. Atari ST ($34.95). Circle
Reader Service #17.
Sir-Tech Software, Inc.
6 Main Street
Ogdensburg, NY 13669
DEEP SPACE: The Andromedans
have invaded the Trojan asteroid belt
and it's up to the "good guys" to strap
themselves into their Katana fighters.
Unfortunately, too many of the "good
guys" are being blasted into space
dust, themselves. Therefore, the
United Planets have need of a Space
Combat Simulator to train these heroic
young pilots. The game is that simulator which is spoken of in the background fiction. Apple II ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #18.
Strategic Simulations
1046 N. Rengstorff Ave.
Mountain View, CA 94043
REBEL CHARGE AT
CHICKAMAUGA: The successful Gettysburg
game system is spawning an entire series of ACW simulations. This is is a
brigade level simulation with some
further refinements. Players can recreate the entire two-day battle in 13
turns. SSI has provided three different
levels of difficulty so that garners can
"grow with" the game. Apple II, Atari
8 bit, C-64/128 ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #19.

Fantasy Adventure Issue

by Scorpia
Warning! Scorpion's Tale contains hints on solving computer adventure games. If you do not want
help, do not read on.
Yes, indeed, step right in. It's much more
pleasant in here than outside in the middle of
summer (but don't worry; if summer is here, can
winter be far behind?). Fred is making you an extra-strong one today. You're going to need it. This
time around, you're coming up against something
terrible, something worse than Krill, Jeearr, Mangar, Exodus and Lagoth Zanta all rolled into one.
That's right, you're about to face the ultimate horror, the inescapable nightmare, the bane of all existence: Bureaucracy.
Make no mistake about it; this is not an easy
game. Some of the puzzles are quite hard. Yet there
are many that are simple. Bureaucracy, overall, is
somewhat uneven in this regard, partly due to
having passed through so many programmers on its
way to the shelves. Near the end of the game,
you'll be able to read its history, and marvel at the
number of people who worked on it in one way or
another. When they say on the box "and the staff of
Infocom", they aren't exaggerating!
Another interesting aspect of the game is its
linearity. You go from location to location, solving
a series of puzzles in each before moving on to the
next one. Once you've started, there is no going
back. That's rather unusual for an Infocom game,
isn't it?
You start off with a form. That's right, you
have to fill out a mock license application to get
started. Do keep the information you enter in mind,
though; you might need some of it later on (you
may also want to save the game real soon after this,
so you don't have to do it again).
With that out of the way, there you are, standing in your new home. Yes, you've just moved in,
even if your furniture hasn't. It will, no doubt, arrive sooner or later, probably later. That doesn't

bother you too much. After all, in a short while
you'll be on your way to Paris, courtesy of your
new company, Happitec. That is, you will be on
your way as soon as you pick up your ticket and a
money order arrives in the mail. You're a little
short of cash at the moment. While you're looking
over your new home (which seems to consist of
only a living room and a back room), the doorbell
rings. Aha! Could this be what you've been waiting
for?
Quickly you answer the door, only to find that
it's not the mailman, but a delivery man bringing
you a sack of llama treats. Llama treats? No matter,
there is probably some madness in this method, so
you pay for the treats (plastic money is good for
some things).
That's about when you realize the treats were
delivered to the wrong address and a nasty little
chill runs along your spine. Suppose YOUR mail
was delivered to someone else? Eeek! You rush out
to your mailbox and open it. Sure enough, the
leaflet inside is addressed to another house. Uh, oh!
Well, there's nothing for it but to go snooping
and nosing around other people's houses, poking
through their mail in the hopes of finding our own.
Naturally, there is no way you're going to be able
to explain about the mix-up, which means you'll
have to be incredibly devious.
Now, there's no set order here. You can go to
the various houses and establishments in almost any
order. I will say, though, that however you do it,
your own mail will always be the last you find, so
you must go everywhere. There's no getting around
that. In fact, whatever else you do, make careful
note of the order of the postal stickers on the mail
or you'll be very sorry later on.
The fast-food joint has no mail, but you'll have
to eat there sooner or later. I suggest later, when
you're hungry enough to at least partially enjoy
your meal. Ditto for the bookstore: no mail, but
perhaps something else of interest. Ask the clerk
about a few things you see around you there. The
travel agency is one of the truly straightforward
things in the game, which ought to make you suspicious. I mean, if it's that easy to pick up your
ticket, you'd guess there was something horrible
waiting for you up the line, and you'd be right.
That's still a bit in the future, however, and you
have other concerns at the moment. For instance,
you might be concerned about the house across
from the travel agency, the one where you can't go
upstairs (you really can't, so don't worry about it).

However, there is the slightly mad stamp collector,
busily shredding his mail (or perhaps, it's your
mail). Better do something about him quickly.
Well, it turned out not to be your stuff, but at
least you now have an issue of Popular Paranoia...
just what you've always wanted. Speaking of that,
there's a small flyer that comes with the game
about the magazine. Do keep it handy, as you'll
need it a little later on.
As you go along south, you pass a mansion from
which popular music floats out, the sort of music
you hear on 'easy listening' stations, in elevators, or
even airports. The lady inside totes an elephant
gun, and she's a dead shot with it. You don't want
to mess with her. Of course, there might be another
way inside... look around a bit.
Further down the street, you come to the llama
farm. This must have been the place that actually
ordered the llama treats. Make sure you read the
sign, as well as examine everything around you,
including the mailbox. There is mail to be found
here, if you look in the right place and do the right
thing. Luckily, you don't have to take the llama
with you.
At the very end of the street, you see a camouflaged house. The security here is very tight. You
won't be able to get inside until you satisfy the intercom voice in some way. Now, perhaps, may not
be the right time (and I'll bet that by now you're
having some second thoughts about your new
neighborhood).
As you go back, you may notice something new
about the llama farmhouse. Like, the front door is
open (remember the sign?). No one's looking; go

ahead, step inside. Oh well, nothing here; looks like
the place has been cleaned out very thoroughly.
That's when the weirdo shows up, carrying an
arsenal that Rambo would be proud of. He's obviously waiting for you to do something. So, do it
before he leaves. He may even be able to help out
with one of your little problems.
In time, when you've gotten into the camouflaged house, escaped from the basement jail (with
a little help from a friend), and finally, obtained
your own mail, you will have just one tiny difficulty to overcome: turning a check for -$75 into
real cash.
Yes indeed, a negative check. Read the memo
for an explanation, although it's not much help.
You'll have to think in reverse here, as the solution
is not obvious. However, if you fool around enough
with deposit slips and withdrawal slips, the idea
may come to you.
Now, at last, you're ready for the airport. Make
sure you have everything you need, call the cab
company (suspiciously easy again!) and you're off
(Kinda)!. When you go to check in at Omnia Gallia,
however, you find that airline has gone out of
business. Your flight to Paris will now be handled
by Air Zalagasa. Ho hum. Finding Air Zalagasa (as
precious minutes tick away) may not be simple.
Odd, how every time you try an area that says "Air
Zalagasa," it doesn't seem to be there. Let's hope
that suggests something to you.
Here it is at last! Unfortunately, the person in
front of you has some complicated scheduling he
wants to arrange, and it's taking forever, or possibly longer. So, you wait while your new flight is
announced and then, is closed. It taxis out of the
terminal to the runway, and you gnash your teeth
down to the roots.
Finally, you make the ticket exchange, although
the situation seems hopeless. Or does it? Amazing
how you never noticed that pillar before. Well,
don't just stand there, get a move on! You don't
have much time!
You don't need me to tell you what has to be
done here; the obvious will do fine (as I said, many
of the puzzles are easy and when they aren't easy,
they're hard). On your way back, you may want to
check out the speaker, one of many blaring forth
that inane 'easy listening' music. Don't you just
hate it? Wouldn't you just love to do something
about it? I sure hope so.
So here you are, in the plane, on your way to

Continued on pg. 50

TITLE: Sub Battle Simulator
SYSTEMS: Mac, C64/128, IBM, Apple II, ST
PRICE: $39.95
DESIGNER: Digital Illusions
PUBLISHER: EPYX
Redwood City, CA

by Regan Carey
Have you ever bought a cake because it looks so
good, only to find that the taste is a little disappointing? Sub Battle Simulator will bring that
feeling right back to you.
This new game from Epyx has all the icing and
decorations that you could want. The graphics are
excellent with detailed silhouettes. The digitized
sound effects are marvelous. Your crew talks, using
the MacinTalk speech simulator. Both American
and German subs from periods throughout WWII
are available and unlike its predecessors (Gato and
Silent Service), there is a wide variety of target
ships (including battleships and aircraft carriers).
Aircraft can be fought with anti-air weaponry. You
may choose either the Pacific and Atlantic for patrols and there is even a "Wartime Command" campaign game. You have radar, sonar, maps that expand out to cover almost 200,000 nautical miles.
The Commander's Training Manual is well done
and reasonably comprehensive. The "status" screen
gives you a multitude of details and all commands
can be given from the main screen, using the
Macintosh's mouse interface, or the keyboard.
Games in progress can be saved at any time.
Some of the finer brushstrokes include: a
sideview to help visualize the tense moments as an
escort passes overhead and drops depth charges; use

of accurate latitude and longitude coordinates; implementation of an SOS before abandoning ship to
provide a better chance of rescue; and an "end of
war" message for German subs at sea instructing
them to fly a black flag and head for the nearest
Allied naval base.
The press release from Epyx calls Sub Battle
Simulator "the most realistic, all encompassing
simulation ever created for the personal computer."
Sound too good to be true? It is.
As a game, Sub Battle is fast-paced and fun. As
a simulation, it falls far from reality. I first got a
little worried when I noticed that I could see Iceland through my binoculars - at a range of about 500
nautical miles! The chuckles really began when torpedoes were successfully transferred from the aft
compartment to the forward compartment while
submerged. How about sinking a crippled aircraft
carrier with a deck gun?
Once we ran aground in France. You can imagine my surprise when the map showed us about
fifty miles inland and we were still able to
submerge to 200 feet. Actually, this probably qualifies as a bonafide bug — the navigation problem
came from travelling in a compressed time mode
that the documentation states will disable the
"running aground" feature. Another interesting capability that I can only hope is a bug is the ability
to submerge well below the ocean bottom.
Not all these fantastic advantages are on the
player's side. When we encountered a small patrol
boat (alone in the mid Atlantic!), it started shelling
my periscope at a range of six miles. Good lookouts!
Then there was the time that six escorts stayed

overhead, making my life miserable, for thirtyseven hours. 1 think they were using psychics in
addition to ordinary ASW. Even though we hadn't
been pinged by sonar for five hours, and were
silent running at a steady two knots, they still
stayed right above us. It was a wolf pack's dream,
however, as the escorts left their convoy unprotected. Why is it that the history books don't tell of
that particular ASW tactic?
All was not lost, however. Even though we still
had plenty of oxygen (after 37 hours!) and the batteries were still good (after 6 hours of max speed),
I decided to surface and fight it out. My U-boat
was a German VII class, equipped with an 88mm
deck gun. It was fun, but hardly realistic, when I
finally sank the last of the pursuing surface ships.
Two destroyers, two corvettes, and two patrol
boats(?) fell victim to my deck gun and twin 20mm
anti-aircraft cannons. That's right. One of the escorts was sunk exclusively by 20mm cannon fire.
Now, really! There are other examples, but you get
the idea.
If you are after an exciting game, with plenty of
bells and whistles, Sub Battle Simulator is for you.
Mac owners may want it just to show off the digitized sound and graphics capabilities of their computer. If you want an accurate simulation of undersea warfare, though, you'll have to look elsewhere.

Fantasy Adventure Issue

OFF on a QUEST
by Roy Wagner

TITLE:
King's Quest III: To Heir Is Human
SYSTEM:
Amiga, IBM
$49.95
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
Roberta Williams
PUBLISHER: Sierra
Coarsegold, CA

Sierra has produced some very popular 3-D
graphic adventures for the IBMpc called the King's
Quest series. The third title of this series, To Heir
Is Human, and a new space parody game following
in the same tradition, Space Quest, have just been
released. A similar game, Police Quest, which is
being written by a police officer, will soon be released.
This suggests that the Quest concept has been
quite successful and popular with the buyers of
software for the IBM type machines. From what I
have seen of the product line as it runs on the IBM
type computers, the software is quite impressive for
what can be done on that type of computer.
In order to expand its market, these games have
been ported to the Commodore Amiga. The Amiga
ports are being exclusively distributed by Electronic
Arts. An additional title, Winnie The Pooh In The
Hundred Acre Wood (for the Amiga), is also being
distributed by EA (This game is an outstanding
graphic adventure game for children ages 7 and
up.)
About the Quest Series
The King's Quest series was designed by Roberta

Williams a few of years ago. It introduced a new
twist to graphic adventures games. These adventures contained animation and some semblance of
three dimensional animated characters, including
the one you control with a joystick, which move
about the screen passing behind objects such as
trees or rocks, through doorways, and up and down
stairways.
When this concept first appeared, it made quite
an impression. It is still impressive and very few
other games have dared to equal it. For it to be
done on the IBM series and make a good use of the
limited colors on an IBM was quite an achievement.
This certainly gives it great reason for its tremendous success.
King's Quest, the first in the series, is the fantasy adventure of Sir Graham who has been commanded by the King of Daventry to recover three
priceless items. These items were, unfortunately,
stolen by three magicians (a greedy sorcerer, a conniving dwarf, and a deceitful witch). Treasures and
clues can be found in any area. "Strategy plays big
part in this adventure, as players must know when
it is useful to challenge an obstacle, such as a firebreathing dragon, and when it is wise to run," says
Ken Williams, President of Sierra.
King's Quest II: Romancing The Throne contin-

ues the story. For, having returned the lost treasures, you have now been crowned King of Daventry. The Kingdom will not remain prosperous,
however, unless you marry and produce an heir. To
do so, you must rescue Valencia, a lovely maiden
that is being held captive in a quartz tower by a
jealous crone in an enchanted land.
The tower can only be entered through three
locked doors and you must find the three keys.
Along the way you will encounter characters of
legend, folklore, and fantasy, as well as explore
underground caverns, eerie towers and ocean wonderlands.
Our Quest Begins
King's Quest III: To Heir Is Human continues
the saga of the King Graham family in the Kingdom of Daventry, though how is not apparent until
the end of the game. It is not necessary to have
solved or played, the previous Quests. This one is
more challenging than its two predecessors. You
play the role of Gwydion, a young slave to the evil
wizard Manannan. You must learn enough magic to
escape from his control or else you will be zapped
from existence.
Your quest begins in the home of Manannan,
high on a mountain top in the countryside of Llewdor. Your first task is to thoroughly explore the
household to learn what objects in its many rooms
can be helpful. Not everything is easily found in
the home of a mean wizard. He regularly requires
you to perform several tasks such as sweeping the
floor, feeding the chickens, and getting him food.
Satisfying his hunger will with time become a major challenge, but one well worth meeting.
When he is not controlling your actions, he will
generally be sleeping or away on some evil deed.
This will give you time to do what must be done.
Finding objects that are needed is not easily accomplished, since you must be able to identify each
object from a less than high resolution representation of the object, then "get" or "examine" it using
the correct words of the game's limited vocabulary.
Some things are not so obvious and "get all" cannot
be used to find all obtainable objects in a room.
The house is well displayed in three dimensions.
You must go through doorways, as well as up and
down stairways. This can be done using the key-

board, a joystick or, with the Amiga, a mouse.
Using the mouse was most difficult and was not
well-implemented. Movement up and down stairs is
not easy, due in part to the 3-D perspective.
Once you have thoroughly explored the house
and discovered some of the wizard's magic, you are
ready to explore the surrounding countryside. It is
also very helpful if you have found the map that is
located in the house. (I'd like to tell you where it
is, but won't. It is very well hidden and you are not
given any clue that it is behind something you have
already looked at.)
The first thing you will discover outside are
some chickens and then a path down the mountain.
Moving down the path is not so easy at first, but
there is a useful set of commands (slow, normal,
and fast) that can be helpful in several situations.
On the Amiga, function key 10 controls the animation speed of your character.
The game lets you SAVE your progress and
RESTORE to that point when necessary. Up to ten
named files may be saved to your own formatted
disk. A SAVE is highly recommended before going
down the path. In fact, you are well advised to frequently use the SAVE option.
You will not be able to perform any of the
spells without going down the path and exploring
the countryside. And down there you will encounter several challenges. You will meet Medusa,
who is so repulsive that you turn to stone if you
look at her. Bandits will rob you of all your possessions, but all is not lost. The house of the Three
Bears will let you experience some of the "fun" of
Goldilocks and obtain some useful objects. If you
can get past the Spider, a friendly oracle will tell
you some interesting information and give you a
useful item.
If you have gotten enough money, seen the oracle, and gotten rid of the wizard using tricks of his
kind, you should be able to continue your quest by
catching passage aboard a ship that arrives. Once
you have gotten this far, you can feel pretty good
about your questing skills, but there are still many
more challenges.
You will now encounter some very nasty pirates
that certainly test your patience and SAVEd games.
You'll find a lot of "red herrings" exploring this
ship, but your main goal is to cross the ocean. If
you have been using your magic as it was intended,

you will now be able to find some buried treasure.
Of course, you may also have to contend with a
pirate on the beach, but he can be avoided. Next,
your path climbing abilities will now be put to the
test (again!). You must also get past an abominable
snowman. Then, once down the path and in the
Kingdom of Daventry, an old gnome will tell you
much of what is currently happening. The castle is
locked, though, and a dragon is holding the
Princess captive. If you've gotten this far and
studied your magical spells, you will succeed and
conclude this most challenging game.
The game has some very nice animation. For an
IBMpc, the graphics are visually aesthetic, but for
an Amiga they are very poor, and only 16 colors
are used. The 3-D perspective is a nice concept,
though. For the Amiga version, the game provides
a good use of Function Keys.
Con-Questing the Will
Where there's a will, there's a way. This game is
tough! When considering whether to pay $49.95 for
this game, be sure and add the price for the Hint
Book too. There will be very few that can get
through this game without a lot of help. Important
clues are not given from the text.
For example, there is not a way to know where
the map is without the hint book, unless you are
extremely persistent everywhere that you look. Even
if you know where it is and enter "get map", the
game responds; "It's of no use" or "You don't need
it" or "There's no reason to take it." Wrong! The
map can be extremely helpful, but the game wants
you to do something more. That is going beyond

fair game play.
It is difficult to keep the objects that you have
worked so hard to acquire. The wizard, bandits,
and pirates are all after those artifacts. It seems to
be you and your SA VEs against seemingly random
events. Some of them are not so random, however,
and in some cases, you can get your objects back
again.
There is just too much stairway and path
climbing. Having to do something difficult over
and over again is no fun. Having to do something
over and over again, until you succeed, also applies
to finding several objects. Even though they are
there, you must use "get" in the exact location or
you won't get the object you know is there. This
also is very frustrating.
Here I would digress to say that this is where a
pure text adventure proves more enjoyable and fair
to the player. In such a game, the text is forced to
describe each situation and you can act upon what
you have read. If it tells you that there are acorns
under the tree and you need acorns, you should be
able to get them and not graphically move about
the scene to be in the right spot to get them. Also,
in a pure text game, you don't have to figure out
what that object is that was drawn with two colors
and a few pixels.
For an IBMpc or reasonable facsimile, this game
is very well executed. On the Amiga, it does use
pull down menus and requestor boxes, but graphically and colorwise, it is certainly at a much lower
level than you have come to expect on the Amiga.
It is highly commendable that it does multitask. (I
am able to have the game running at the same time
that I am writing this article.)
If you are interested in playing with the 3-D
concept of these games, I suggest you try King's
Quest I since it is much easier. (I found a brief
encounter with Space Quest to be very similar to
KQ III, excessive action to attain essential objectives.)
If your frustration level is low, I highly recommend that you purchase the hint book. The hint
book is designed so that you only need to reveal the
hints to those situations in which you need help.
Knowing how to accomplish the task doesn't make
it that much easier to do and it still requires you to
explore most of the game. It is sort of like taking a
guided tour versus just driving around without a
map.

THE DESTINY KNIGHT
Bard's Tale II
Name:
Bard's Tale II
Systems:
Apple, C-64
$50
Price:
Designer: Michael Cranford and
Interplay Productions
Publisher: Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

by Scorpia

In times gone by, Turin, greatest of the Archmages, forged the mighty Destiny Wand, a rod of
great power. For centuries, it was used as a force
for good and the land prospered. Yet, with the rise
of the evil Lagoth Zanta, the Destiny Wand was
stolen, broken into seven pieces, and hidden away
segment by segment in foul dungeons where they
were securely lodged within cunning Death Snares.
Only the most brave and powerful of adventurers
can hope to penetrate the dungeons, solve the
Snares, recover the segments, and reforge them into
the mighty Destiny Wand. He who does reforge the
Wand will become the legendary Destiny Knight,
all-powerful and immortal...
Bard's Tale II is similar in many respects to the
previous game and experienced players will have
little trouble in adjusting to the new material. Some
of the old spells have been dropped and replaced
with new ones, while a complete set of new spells
have been added for the Archmage character class
(the only new one in the game). All other classes
are the same as they were in Bard's I.
Characters can be created from scratch or
transferred over from Wizardry (Apple only),
Ultima III, or Bard's I. In the case of bringing over
Bard characters, be aware that some of their
equipment may not make the transfer (swords of
Pak, for example, will be left behind). However,
such goodies as Dayblades, Hawkblades, and even
Crystal swords will come over quite nicely, as will
a wide variety of miscellaneous magical items, including the precious Mage Staff.
Gold will also come across, but be careful on the
amounts. If your characters individually carry too

much, a good portion of it may not come with
them. Keep each character's gold under a million
gp's to be safe (my own characters transferred with
as much as 700,000 gp's each without problem).
Of course, it is not necessary to have played the
previous game in order to do this one. You can
start with a brand-new group, and send them
around the starting town of Tangramayne, as well
as into the "starter dungeon" (provided specifically
for raising new characters up to decent levels). Of
course, bringing in advanced characters from other
games will give you a faster start in collecting the
pieces of the Destiny Wand.
Bard's II is more extensive in layout than Bard's
I. There are six towns in all, as well as a wilderness
to explore. Actually, the wilderness is not really
very large, and with some careful mapping, you
can get the whole thing on a single sheet of graph
paper. Further, the inside of the box top contains a
very helpful rendition of the outdoors, showing all
positions of all towns and other items of interest.
When mapping, keep in mind that the entire area
wraps around itself, so if you go far enough south,
for instance, you'll soon be at the top of the map
again.
The towns themselves are all pretty much the
same, differing only in their designs. Each has a

SCORPION'S TRAIL
An Annotated Dungeon by Dungeon Survey
of The Bard's Tale II

guild hall, armory, temples, taverns, energy emporium, review board, dungeon, and two new places:
banks and casinos. Banks are used for storing excess cash. Always keep most of your money there,
in case of disaster. If for any reason you should
turn off the game before saving your characters,
the next time you boot up, you'll find all their gold
is gone. Equipment will be intact, but none of the
characters will be carrying any money. Substantial
sums can easily be lost this way, so use the bank
often.
Casinos offer only one game, blackjack. It is
widely rumored that the dealers have been known
to cheat, so play at your own risk. Tipping the
dealer may or may not help. Casinos are great
places to quickly lose hard-earned gp's.
One item that will bring a sigh of thanks from
many players is that the major buildings are all
recognizable now, not merely the temples and taverns. No matter which town you're in, you will
easily be able to find the review board and other
important places. A map of Tangramayne is in the
manual. Use it to locate the various establishments
and observe what they look like. They will look
like that everywhere else, too. No more hunting
around and kicking in doors to locate Roscoe's or

the bank.
Getting started from scratch is somewhat easier
than previously. While monsters still roam the
streets, they are not quite so overwhelming in numbers or power as before. Beginners will still have a
tough time, but they won't be thoroughly outmatched in every encounter. Also, Garth's is much
closer to the Guild in Tangramayne, only two doors
away, in fact. New characters have an excellent
chance of getting there in one piece and outfitting
themselves properly. After that, of course, you're
on your own.
There is a whole slew of new graphics, to go
along with all the new monsters. You won't find
many that you knew from Bard's I, but the new
ones are just as mean, if not more so. Combat is
handled pretty much as before, with the addition of
one new factor, distance.
Previously, all monsters were in melee (hand-tohand) range. Now, however, they can be at any
distance up to 90 feet away from you. This calls
for new weapons (such as bows) and new tactics as
well, since a careful reading of the manual shows
that not all combat spells can be used at all distances. It may be necessary at times to advance towards monsters before they are in attack range.

There are also spells that can pull opponents closer
or push them further away.
Speaking of away, I found it much easier to run
from encounters. While not 100% effective, my experience was about 9 successful tries out of 10, especially if no combat had occurred yet. This is important to keep in mind, as there are times when
you'll certainly want to run, particularly in the last
few dungeons, where the monsters are very powerful, indeed.
Which brings us to picking up the pieces of the
Destiny Wand. There are seven, one in each of
seven dungeons, and of course, always on the last
level. Only an Archmage can use these segments, so
do have one or more in your party (the segments
are usable, even though broken apart, and each one
has different powers, so experimentation is necessary).
You may ask how one finds a dungeon. The
answer is simple, but expensive. You talk to the
Sage. He lives in a hut just outside of Corinth. He
will be happy to tell you what you want to know,
for a very stiff price. Further, the price escalates
with each new dungeon. For instance, learning
about The Tombs will cost you a mere 5,000 gp's,
but finding out about the next dungeon will cost
double. By the time you're ready for the fourth
one, the price will have gone up to an outrageous
100,000 gp's, and the remaining ones more than
that. Well, at least you have a use for all that spare
gold you have tucked away in the bank.
The dungeons are just like those we all know
and have come to hate, full of: monsters, spinners,
Darkness!, teleports, traps, spell drainers, hit point
drainers, and anti-magic zones, all arranged in
frustrating combinations. For instance, on the
fourth level of Dargoth's Tower, the stairway up
sits in the middle of a dark area, and is surrounded
by spinners. Getting to it is by no means easy. Especially as the area also contains a teleport, as well
as a magic mouth with important information.
There is only one way to find out which is which
(presuming you can manage to get to them), and
that's the hard way. Persistence, and heavy use of
SCSI ("Scry Site" spells) is in order.
You may have heard about the Death Snares,
which is where the segments are actually kept.
These areas have a number of nasty features. For
one, each is a total anti-magic zone. No spells will
work there, except SCSI, the one spell that, very
fortunately, works anywhere and everywhere. For
another, Light spells do not last long in these
Snares. Once a GRRE ("Greater Revelation" spell)

goes out, light can be obtained only from a lamp,
torch, or Bard song. And those, too, will be of only
short duration.
The third feature is that pausing the game cannot be done in a Snare. It is truly real-time. You
can't take a time out to think about things (You can
keep monsters off your back, though, by doing an
SCSI and not hitting a key until you're ready or
just looking at a character to produce the same effect. Still, time is passing, so don't take too long in
your cogitations).
What all this means is, you can't get out of a
Snare until you have solved it successfully. Usually,
everything you need will be found in the Snare itself, although sometimes you also have to have
picked up clues from earlier dungeon levels. However, if you happen to inadvertently end up in a
Snare when you didn't want to, you're in trouble.
This is especially true if the Snare requires a special monster you don't have or can't add to your
party because you have no open slots. Then, you
have no choice but to reboot.
Actually, the Death Snares are one of the biggest
disappointments in the game. Many of them are tedious. By that, I mean you end up going back and
forth, back and forth, over and over again, in order
to accomplish something. This is especially true in
the Maze of Dread, which is aptly named. The
Snare is dreadful. No more boring set of actions
could be imagined. Having to repeat your actions
again and again is neither fun nor enjoyable. It is a
dull and outrageous waste of time and there is
plenty of repetition in the Snares.
You don't catch on to this right away, since the
first Snare is a simple one and easily solved, as long
as you have heard all the clues, have an open
character slot in your party, and a couple of inventory slots. You can practically breeze through
this one.
The same is true for the second Snare, a type of
Monty Hall deal. Pick door #1, door #2, or door
#3. That's even simpler, although a bit more devious than the first one. Unfortunately, you then
come to Dargoth's Tower and the monotony begins.
It continues in the Maze of Dread, already mentioned.
There is a short break with the fifth Snare
which shows a little ingenuity, although the means
for solving the Snare may be rather obscure for
some people. Nevertheless, there are no "rote actions" in this one, which is a relief.
It is short-lived relief, however, since the sixth
snare requires some more running back and forth.

Still, at least it makes sense and is really necessary
for the solution. This snare and number five are
probably the best ones in the game.
The last Snare is much like that in the Maze, requiring a lot of essentially useless running back and
forth (through a series of small rooms) before you
can get out. I say useless, because once you have
everything you need to know, I see no reason to
have to go through those rooms extra times. It
merely drags things out, without adding anything to
the solution.
Taking out Lagoth Zanta at the end is another
dull procedure (fortunately, you don't have to go
through any dungeons to reach him). He has two
groups of Balder Guards with him, and there are 30
in each group. As you might suspect, getting rid of
them all is time-consuming because they absorb a
lot of punishment. Lagoth himself was a piece of
cake by comparison. He was dead long before the
last of the guards bit the dust.
Another irksome feature of the game is the relative lack of worth for your fighters as you
progress through the dungeons. Eventually, you

start running across monsters your fighters can't
even touch and we are talking about fighters beyond 25th level. They simply do not land a single
blow. Unless they happen to have magical items
they can use to cast spells (such as dragon shields),
their only purpose is to serve as buffers for the
mages in the rear. This is hardly good game balance.
The problem is compounded when many of
these high-level monsters not only have 1000+ hitpoints, but are also able to stone, critical strike, or
wither your party, especially since the monsters
generally go first. Thus, half or more of your group
could be out of action before they have a chance to
do anything. Bringing back the dead is usually no
problem, but only a temple can heal putrefaction or
aging, so you have to get out fast and come back
again later. I ran a lot in the last couple of dungeons.
One can also encounter some frustrations when
dealing with the Sage and various magic mouths.
Anything you type in here must be exact, abso-

Continued on pg. 54

Educational Games From Broderbund
by Bob Proctor

Mention Broderbund Software and you
immediately think of Lode Runner, or
Choplifter rather than educational software, right? They have always pitched the
value of programs like Bank Street Writer
and Print Shop using the words "learning",
"imagination", and "creative" instead of
"educational". I guess they don't want any
tired old "drill and practice" stereotype to
rub off on them. They certainly don't deserve it. Among their recent releases are a
number of excellent programs that, er,
well... TEACH!
Where in the USA is Carmen
Sandiego? (available only for Apple II and
C-64) is a sequel to Where in the World is
Carmen Sandiego? which I named the best
educational game of 1986. USA is very
similar to World in appearance, complexity, play and packaging. Both are mysteries where you try to locate a criminal by
following geographical clues. In USA, the
trail leads from state to state instead of
from country to country; that is the only
difference. At the beginning, you are a
lowly gumshoe and the trail is short but
after every three successful cases (or so),
you get promoted up the ranks and the
trail will become longer. Although the difficulty of the clues does not increase, the
number of possible clues is so large that
you will still encounter fresh ones on your
40th or 50th case. Further, since the clues
are chosen at random, you will also have
encountered a few several times by then,
providing an incentive to remember what
you've learned!
The answers to all of the clues can be
found in the reference that comes with the
game, a copy of Fodor's Travel Guide to
the USA (all 880 pages!). Where in the
World...? uses a World Almanac instead.
Sometimes the answer can be found in the
extensive index (What state has a town
named "Rugby"? Answer below.). Other
questions may be answered most quickly
by studying the maps (Where is Crater
Lake?). Sometimes, you will have to read
the detailed descriptions of several states
to solve the riddle (Where would you go to
learn about Colt firearms or to drive on
the Dogwood Trail?).
At any point, however, there are only
two to five choices for the next state and

WHERE IN
THE U.S.A.
IS
CARMEN
SANDIEGO?
common sense will often eliminate some
(you don't expect to find the Gulf Islands
in Kansas or mountains in Florida, right?),
so it is not really necessary to use the
book. You get immediate confirmation
when you are on the right trail, so guessing works well. It also gets boring pretty
quickly, at which point most kids discover
that finding the right answer is fun. This
game works especially well if there is a
"mentor" (friend, parent, etc.) to help
show how to use the "Guide." One person
on the keyboard and one on the book encourages lots of teamwork and talking.
Other references, such as an atlas or encyclopedia are also useful.

Look at all the things you can learn
from this game: geographical facts (of
course) including the spelling and location
of states and important cities (not just the
more trivial landmarks and places used in
the clues); the use of reference books; basic
map-reading; and deductive reasoning
(you must also pick the culprit from the 16
members of the Sandiego Gang from clues
about the person's appearance and interests). All of this learning is available in the
process of having fun! The only way I
could think of to make it better would be
to increase the difficulty of the clues as
your rank increases.
Other recent Broderbund titles show
an increasing emphasis on learning. Type!
(for Apple II, C64, and IBM) combines the
best elements of previous typing programs
and the synergy makes it an order of magnitude better than any of them. Most important in our context here, it is fun! The
exercises use interesting and humorous
anecdotes that make the minutes whiz by.
The so-called drill are more entertaining
than the game which is included.
Geometry (Macintosh) More a geometry text on disk" than a game, it has a
considerable number of puzzles (including
geometric proofs!) for you to solve. It is
completely open-ended; you can start
anywhere and use several approaches: do
just the problems and only look for help if
you need it or read the tutorials without
solving the problems. It uses the Mac's
graphics capabilities brilliantly and interactively, often letting you drag objects or
select options on the screen. It is completely rigorous and therefore for high
school students and adults only, but if you
have any interest in math and feel that
greater challenges provide greater rewards
then this on is not to be missed. An example of the thoroughness that went into
making this program is that students can
select the publisher of the geometry text
they use and the program will then use the
same terms as their book (two systems are
in common use). Is this a glimpse of the
future of Education?
By the way, did you answer the geography questions? Rugby, North Dakota is
currently the geographic center of the
USA. Crater Lake, the deepest lake in the
USA, is in Oregon. Colt made his famous
guns in Hartford, Conn. and there are
several museums there where you can learn
more. The Dogwood Trail is in upstate
Louisiana, near Natchitoches and is best in
Springtime when the flowers are blooming.

Fantasy Adventure Issue

CGW's Resident Adventure Game Expert offers
an Editorial on the Genre!
by Scorpia
In the beginning, there were the wargamers.
They fought their wars with miniature figures that
marched to battle over table tops, recreating wars
of the past or fighting wars of the future. In time,
it occurred to some of them that the figures could
represent individuals instead of whole armies and if
so, then the figures could also act in individual
ways. If THAT was the case, they reasoned, why
bother with figures at all, except in certain circumstances? Why not just mentally act it out yourself (sort of like creating a novel 'on the fly')?
Thus was born the role-playing game, or RPG.
With the advent of computers, transferring
RPG's from the living room to the CPU was only a
matter of time. In some respects, RPG's are ideal
for the computer, because they deal so heavily with
numbers. Dice are rolled, or a specific set of points
allocated, to create a character. More dice are rolled
to determine hits, damage done, spell effects, success of certain tasks (such as picking locks), and so
forth. Since computers love such number crunching,
it seemed inevitable.
One of the earliest computer RPG's (or CRPG)
was Castle Telengard [not to be confused with
Avalon Hill's Telengard which was a later commercial product based on the original public
domain program - Ed.]. It was a rather primitive
game in its original state. There was no set goal;
you merely wandered through multiple levels of a
dungeon, killing monsters, gathering loot, and
gaining experience so you could kill more powerful
monsters and gather even more loot. It was an
unending cycle of hack and slash.
Temple of Apshai soon appeared; this was a
more sophisticated version, complete with graphics
(although rather slow in execution due to being
written in Basic). It still brought some pizzazz to the
genre and CRPG's began to catch on. Then came
Wizardry and Ultima I, causing the floodgates to
open. The CRPG has come a long way since Castle
Telengard. Or has it?
When you strip away the graphics, the fancy
weapons and fancier spells, the sophisticated programming, and get down to the bare bones, what
do you find: the same old cycle of hack, loot, gain-

Computer
Role-Playing
Games

a-level, hack, loot, etc. The addition of a quest
(which is almost always "Kill the evil Wizard before
he takes over the world") doesn't change it much, if
at all.
What has happened, of course, is that a major
aspect of the traditional RPG has not, for the most
part, made the transition to the computer. That aspect is character development. It is not only the
battle expertise or magical knowledge of the character which is important, but the very personality
of the character itself. It is far easier to program
the purely mechanical parts, such as fighting, than
to program what would essentially be artificial intelligence. This was particularly true in the past,
when we were dealing with machines of limited capacity. The best that was done in this area was the
use of alignments (good, neutral, or evil) which
often had little effect on play.
If you think about it, you'll see that whether
you have one character or a whole party to run,
there is not much to differentiate one from the
other, except a convenient name and varying abilities. This one is a fighter, that one a mage, the
other is a thief, and so on. They have no real life;
they are merely sets of pre-calculated statistics that
perform in certain ways in certain circumstances.
Merlin the Mage will always carry out your commands, whether it be to cast a spell or put his "life"

if at all, to the computer.

in grave danger. He will never protest, never
refuse, and never walk out on you. In fact, he is
the perfect robot.
Monsters are robots, too, only they are controlled by the program instead of you. However,
they are just as faithful to the program as your
characters are to you. Generally, this means they
play the role of cannon-fodder, being nothing more
than targets for swords and spells and fighting to
the death, without any thought of self-preservation.
So, you end up with one group of robots fighting another, with perhaps a few little puzzles or
obstacles in between. The only difference, as such,
is that your goal is to accomplish a particular task
(killing that evil wizard), while the monsters have
the simpler goal of just killing off your robots,
without having to worry about the "big picture",
gaining levels, or finding loot.
Now, there is nothing inherently wrong with
hack-and-slash scenarios. Many traditional RPG's
are run on that premise. However, traditional
RPG's (with real individuals "creating" the action)
have more depth to them, because of the interactions between the characters themselves, as well as
with various NPC's (non-player characters) and
monsters (not all of which are mindless fighting
machines). Role-playing games are essentially a

social experience, something not easily transportable,

Another drawback to the CRPG is the lack of a
live DM to oversee the campaign. Some games, in
particular Might & Magic and Bard's Tale I, are
notorious for the difficulties players have had in
getting off to a reasonable start. If a live group of
players had those difficulties, they'd chuck the DM
in no time flat. The computer knows only what has
been programmed into it, however, and it cannot
tell when a player is having a hard time in order to
make the adjustments a human DM could to keep
the game balanced.
Therefore, game balance is often a sore point in
CRPG's. Usually, in the early going, fighters are
very important, and spell-casters very weak. As the
game progresses, the mages become extremely
powerful, to the point where the fighter types are
reduced to little more than bodyguards up front, to
take the brunt of the punishment while the mages
in the rear dispose of whatever nuisance happens to
be in the way at the moment. This sort of thing
makes a joke of the game manual advising you to
create "a carefully balanced party".
All this sounds rather dismal, which of course it
isn't. If CRPG's were really bad, no one would play
them. Many available games, despite the flaws, are
thoroughly enjoyed by the people who play them.
For all their weaknesses, CRPG's provide the opportunity to become a powerful conqueror, something which has enormous appeal.
Still, that appeal can only last so long. As more
hack-and-slash epics appear on the shelves, a point
of saturation will be reached. Regardless of scope,
graphics, complexity, or sophistication, a time will
come when the majority of gameplayers will tire of
the same old routine repeated in a new guise. There
are just so many monsters one can kill before it
becomes tedious.
Yet for all that, there is hope. There is one
CRPG that has taken the first steps in a new direction, stepping off the main path of hack-and-slash:
Ultima IV. Built on a superstructure of elements
from previous Ultimas (all of the hack-and-slash
variety), IV stands alone as an oasis in a desert. For
the first time, we have a CRPG whose focus IS
character development. Not how many monsters
you can kill, nor how much loot you can pick up.
Those are just a couple milestones on the path to
something far different.
Certainly, there is combat; no CRPG would be
complete without that. Nevertheless, it is combat

Continued on pg. 52

BATTLE
CRUISER
Name:
Battlecruiser
System:
Apple, Atari, C-64
Price:
$59.95
Designer: Gary Grigsby
Publisher: Strategic Simulations Inc.
Mountain View, CA
by Bob Proctor

When I reviewed Warship (WS) in the January/February issue of CGW (#34), I wondered if
we'd see an Atlantic version of the game. Well, it
didn't take long! Battlecruiser (BC) is the name of
the sequel and it is, as near as I can tell, the exact
same game with new Ship and Weapon Tables. All
of the description and comment from that article
still applies and there is not much to be gained by

repeating it so I will just describe what is different
and close with a new scenario.
BC is actually more than just a copy of WS. It is
two copies! One side of the disk is just what you'd
expect: the German, Italian, British and French
ships from WWII, along with four scenarios. The
other side has British and German ships from WWI
with four more scenarios. This version has been
slightly modified to reflect differences in Gunnery
Control and the absence of radar.
The map is a 30 by 30 grid representing an area
measuring 60,000 yds by 60,000 yds. This seemed
big enough for WS, but seems small for this theatre. There are two reasons for this. First, the scenarios in BC are daytime and visibility is often
30,000 yards. This puts opposing fleets much farther apart than the nighttime scenarios of WS,
where visibility was typically 9 to 12,000 yards.
Furthermore, the fleets in BC are often larger and
more spread out, so it is possible for the most distant units of the two fleets to be almost 60,000
yards apart. While you can create maps that have
land on them (as in ws) all of the standard scenarios use Open Sea (all clear).
As in WS, a ship that sails off an edge of the
map is permanently disengaged. As in WS, there is
no warning of an approaching edge in the Action
Phase. You must go to Orders Phase once in a while
to check on sea room so you don't accidentally lose

the services of one. You do this if you have ships
near the edge, even if they are not sailing toward
the edge, because the edge can come to you! In
battleline engagements in an open sea (where exiting doesn't score points), the map will automatically
adjust to keep ships in play and ships can only
disengage if they get more than 60,000 yards apart.
Once while playing the Battle of Sirte, the British
transports, racing to exit the map to the west,
pulled the eastern map edge over some Italian
cruisers and destroyers eliminating them from the
game! The lack of a warning about map edges is a
much more serious shortcoming here than it was in
WS.

Scenarios
All eight of the BC scenarios are battleline engagements. The four from WWI are historical:
Falkland Islands, Dogger Bank and two separate
encounters from Jutland. The WWII scenarios include the Battle of Sirte (a convoy raid by Italian
BB's and CL's), Denmark Straits (the Bismarck and
P. Eugen vs. the Hood and P. of Wales), and two
battles that came within hours of happening, but
never did. For example, what if the British Home
Fleet had sailed in time to catch Scharnhorst and
Gneisenau on their daring dash on the Channel?
The ship "libraries" include 77 or 78 classes of
ships for each period. Some British ships -- like the
Hood, the Queen Elizabeth and R Class battleships
-- are present in both and their factors have been
changed to reflect the improvements between the
wars. See the chart accompanying this article for a
breakdown of the ship types and numbers.

The ship drawings in the manual suffer from a
number of switched identities and "printer's goofs,"
but these have no effect on play. There does not
appear to be any way to combine ship and weapon
data between versions of the games (so, the only
way to get the Richelieu to Okinawa in 1945 is to
select a US BB and make it over using the factors
from the French ship in BC). A similar technique
would have to be used to get the Vichy French
ships to battle the Royal Navy since the French are
available only as Allies.
Emden Vs. Sydney
This scenario is simple, so you can create it with
the Scenario Builder in a few minutes. You must
create it as a Two Player game. Then, after saving
it to disk, you can restart it as a solitaire game. The
Emden is up against a bigger ship, but if it can
escape off the west edge of the map, it can continue to tie up the entire Allied navy in the Indian
Ocean. Try it yourself and see whether the career
of this German commerce raider ends on November
9!

Fantasy Adventure Issue

"A Spy for the Wry!"
by Jasper Sylvester
I confess. I am one of those baby boomers who
believes that comic books are an art form. Since I
am also enamored with computer software, you can
imagine how excited I was to hear that Accolade
was blending both art forms into an interactive
comic book/game. In this new release, the player
becomes Steve Keene, a cross between "James
Bond" and the Man from U.N.C.L.E., but this time,
each player gets to decide which wisecrack the ace
spy will "ad lib" in a given situation. Of course, the
game hinges on more than wisecracks. Decision
points include route of entry, choice of weapon,
and choice of tools, as well as the many different
maneuvers in the four different arcade games interwoven into each of two different story lines.
Play is initiated on a graphic screen which uses
a "window" routine to scroll one frame of art (150
of them animated) at a time onto the screen to advance the story. The opening frames are vaguely
reminiscent of the U.N.C.L.E. television series since

Napoleon Solo and Illya Kuriakin used to enter HQ
via a tailor shop. In Comics, the spy enters HQ
through a shop advertising "Pet Alterations" instead
of "Suit Alterations." Subtle humor permeates every
"page" of this product. Every "page" has, at least,
one frame where the player can choose a response
or wisecrack by using the joystick or keyboard to
toggle a statement presented in a traditional conversational balloon. Many of these have no bearing
on the plot line itself. For example, when the chief
asks Keene whether he has read the latest Times or
not, it doesn't matter whether the spy mentions an
advertisement for a muscle building course, Cher's
divorce, or the return of bell bottoms to fashion
prominence. Regardless of the answer, the chief
will tell about Professor Farad's abduction. If
Keene doesn't show some respect to the chief a few
frames later, however, it means that he will lose
one of his five lives (players can "lose" the game
five times before they have to reboot and start
over). It doesn't matter what opening comment
Keene uses at "Laughin' Al's Mercedes Disco"
(complete with Herbie the Love Bug?), but players
need to be careful how they respond to the professor's security robot or the guard dog in the castle.
Pay attention to potential threats. At those points,
there is usually one optimal response.
Of course, the simple toggling of potential badinage with enemies, suspects, and witnesses wouldn't
constitute a very interesting game. Therefore, the
designer has added some additional decision points.
At these points, the player can decide whether to
use doors or windows, high roads or low roads,
boxes or baskets, oil guns or his wits, etc. It is
sometimes possible to get back on the main track
after making an incorrect decision, but some of
these decisions can be fatal (charged against the
spy's five "lives"). Since these decision points do not
have any clues, it is advisable to save the game
before making these choices. This also makes it
possible to take some of the interesting side trips
available as a result of poor choices.

Yet, the game is not finished when these possibilities are exhausted. Each story line contains four
different arcade games. At first glance, these arcade screens seem deceptively simple. Do not be
fooled. The challenges may be derived from the
early days of video games, but they are not easy to
conquer. Players are certain to lose many more lives
on the arcade sequences than on the other decision
points. In one sequence, Keene climbs on a rectangular trapeze of bars. Five keys appear randomly in
the corners of the trapeze grid and the bars keep
appearing and disappearing from the coordinates of
the trapeze. Keene has to collect five keys without
falling into the jaws of "Harry the Exterminator," a
very hungry great white shark. If Keene survives
(and that's a big IF), he can continue his quest for
the professor in Ireland. After searching a castle
and swimming a subterranean river, complete with
electric eels and snapping turtles which are both
deadly, Keene must still play a modified
"Berserker" through a series of corridors filled with
radioactive piles and security robots and also win at
a simplified "Donkey Kong," "Miner 2049er," or
"Lode Runner" type game in order to solve the
mystery. The second adventure uses other arcade
sequences in its plot line, but one must succeed in
the first mystery to get to this one.
Frankly, this is one of those mixed bag games
that presents one with contradictory signals. I find
myself appreciative and frustrated at the same time.
I am impressed by the satirical "put-on" of the
product. It is the most humorous comic book satire
I've read since National Lampoon's "Comics Illustrated" version of Hermann Hesse's Siddhartha. I
love the directional arrow on the castle wall that
reads, "Next Frame," the pirate who follows the spy
up the gangplank on that slow cruise to Ireland, the
tourist who compares everything with the U.S., the
use of inflatable Ingrid as Keene's date for the
ballet, and Keene's assurance that he only survived
that blow on the head because he is a comic book
character. The satirical elements (including the "old

reverse oil gun trick" with its "Get Smart" overtones) are clever and effectively implemented. Unfortunately, the adventure/satire is much more interesting to me than the derivative arcade games.
Personally, I'm not that interested in video games
and one cannot be successful at Comics without
winning at the arcade games. Even saving the game
after each arcade victory (a matter of eye-blearing
attrition, I'm sure), it was slow-going to get
through the game. To be sure, Accolade has engineered a practice mode where one can access the
arcade sequences that give you trouble directly, but
boring repetition is still boring repetition whether
you are being electrocuted by eels in practice or
when you reboot a saved game. I just wish it was
possible to walk through the story without the arcade sequences. It gives me a tired feeling just to
think about trying to solve the second mystery.
My personal feeling, however, is that the game
should have gone one direction or another, action
or story line. Comics is an intriguing effort, but
one needs to enjoy arcade games to get the most
out of it. If you're looking for an illustrated mystery, you probably will be disappointed with
Comics. But, for a moderately coordinated action
game aficionado with a good sense of humor,
Comics should be a "Marvel".

DESIGNER PROFILE:

Jon Freeman and Anne Westfall of Freefall
by Frank Boosman

[Jon Freeman and Anne Westfall, collectively
known as Freefall, have been writing games for
Electronic Arts since its inception. Archon, a seminal game which combined chess-like strategy and
arcade play, is their best known work. They are
also responsible for Murder on the Zinderneuf, a
graphic mystery game that plays differently every
time, and Archon II: Adept, a sequel to Archon.
They're now working on what they call a "new approach to fantasy role-playing games on computers." Jon and Anne do their work at their home in
Silicon Valley. It is in a neighborhood where the
trees are so dense and lush they reminded me of a
jungle—an appropriate fantasy-like setting for their
games. After Jon soundly trounced me at a game of
Archon—I'm practicing even now for a rematch—we
sat down for the interview.]

CGW: What's it like doing software as a husband
and wife team? Does it create tensions in the relationship?
Anne: Certainly not lately. I can't remember
back to the first year or so. I don't think so.
Jon: I don't think so. It tends to work the reverse for us. We collaborate better, we get along
better while we are working because we have an
additional personal commitment to each other. We
always have to consider our feelings like, "Hey, we
have to live together," and we want to stay married,
so we can't be rude or unpleasant while working on
a game. Any potential programming conflicts exist
in a larger context that tends to sort of keep them
in perspective. But also there's just that something
that drew us together in the first place and why we
en joy working together. That's mostly that we are
trying to do the same kinds of things, fairly complementary.
Anne: Our goals are the same even though we're
doing different things.
CGW: What do you do?
Anne: I do the programming.
CGW: Do you do any of the design?
Anne: Not really. I'm more something to bounce
the design off of. Jon will come up with some
things, he basically is the designer. And I help.
That's about all I can say. Depends on the game.

Jon: Yes. There is designer development going
on until the day the game leaves your hands. And
some of that, obviously, Anne is responsible for.
There is certainly lots of human interface going on.
CGW: Jon, do you do any programming?
Jon: No, not really. I have programmed some
computer games that have been published, but I'm
not really a programmer. At the moment I can't
program in C (that's what we are currently working
in). But I am slowly absorbing C and getting to the
point where I can read C code and help Anne debug.

CGW: Chris Crawford mentioned how money
can be tight at times, but not as difficult as it
could be because his wife has a steady income. A
husband and wife team would seem to have more
difficulty. Is that true?
Anne: Oh yes.
Jon: Very much true.
CGW: Is it very difficult staying together as a
husband and wife team?
Anne: No. Not in the least, but as to financial
concerns, it can get pretty rough at times. When we
started out doing Archon, thank God for Jon's
parents! You really have to rough it a good part of
the time.
Jon: Yes, you have to get comfortable with the
notion of...
Anne: Poverty!
Jon: Well, you have get comfortable with the
notion that your income is really going to bounce
around and that there are going to be long stretches
of time in which you're practically watching every
penny. And then, if you are lucky, there are going
to be periods of time in which you have lots of
money and can buy things and so on and so forth.
But, that money also ... looks like it's a lot, but it
turns out that it's got to last you for months and
months and months...
Anne: ...and years...
Jon: To some degree. And it never really evens
out. Your income just remains very jagged. I think
that eventually, if you stay in it long enough, there
is the possibility that your income will sort of
smooth out.
Continued on pg. 44

Titans
of the
Computer
Gaming
World
Part Three of Five: Ardai on Activision
by Charles Ardai

Chapter One
Containing the briefest possible introduction, after
which ensues an examination of Activision.
Those of you who have followed this series from
the start know that I like to open each article with
a thought or two about the history of computer
games and about how we have arrived at the point
at which we are today. We will have to wait until
next time to continue the tradition, however,
because there is just so much to be said about
Activision's new material that there is no space to
cover its rather colorful background or its roots,
which stretch back to the days when "Atari 2600" is
what most people meant when they used the word
"computer" and "gaming" in the same sentence.
Activision has been around for so long,
however, that one would suppose its survival to be
the result of its games being of the highest caliber
imaginable. One would not exactly be wrong in

supposing this — some are — but one would not
exactly be right either. Activision has a great deal
going for it including excellent customer service,
nice packaging, top-notch graphics, several very
creative thinkers and the music of Russell Lieblich,
but it does not, unfortunately, have consistently
good software. The best games that Activision
makes do display a level of quality befitting the
company's stature. At the same time, the mediocre
and downright bad ones not only don't uphold this
standard, but they mar the company's image and
reputation and have given it a bad name in many
gaming circles. In addition, Activision is still
associated with those early days of videogaming
which, today, is no longer an asset. For these
reasons, Activision is perpetually denigrated by
gamers. The games may win awards (they do,
frequently) and they may sell well, but a mention
of the company's name usually prompts derisive
comments and laughter.
Now, I may not be one to talk, having laughed
once or twice myself, but this reaction hardly seems
fair. Efforts like H.E.R.O. and Park Patrol don't
exactly encourage kudos, but at least, they are
unique. It's mild praise, to be sure, but Activision
could just as easily make derivative games or
endless generations of sequels. In fact, it would be
easier for them to do so. Instead, they keep coming
up with original ideas or at least, original twists on

old themes. Even their sequels, like the excellent
Hacker II, are distinct entities with little in
common with other Activision games.
Look at Web Dimension, for instance. This
psychedelic maze game set to funky music failed
miserably as a game, but it deserves credit for
being one of the most unusual concepts ever
implemented, right up there with Creative
Software's Moondust and Coleco's Illusions. There
is, after all, something to be said for a triumph of
style over substance.
Furthermore, there are quite a few fine
Activision games (though sometimes it is easy to
forget triumphs when faced with failures). One is
only as good as one's last hit and all that...
Unfortunately, it seems to me, we have developed
higher expectations for Activision than for most
companies. Years of creativity have given us cause
to demand above-average material from Activision,
to ask of Steve Cartwright and the other designers a
Ghostbusters or a Music Studio every time out.
When an Activision game is good, it is usually
very good. When one is bad, it is still polished,
attractive and occasionally, even moderately
entertaining. Activision rarely releases truly awful
products and they are prolific enough that when
they do there is always a variety of other new
software available to choose from. Sure, this means
that some of each new batch of releases is always
bad, but some is quite good. As Lou Costello said
in Buck Pirates, with such a gamble, "you can win,
and you can lose."
To put it another way, quality is as elusive in
computer gaming as it is in any other entertainment
field. Of all the movies made in a given year, how
many are good? As author Theodore Sturgeon is
supposed to have said, "Ninety percent of anything
is garbage." Allegedly, he put this in less delicate
terms, but this holds true for the world of
computer games, in general. For Activision, the
figure is more like fifty percent — at worst.

Chapter Two

In which the author contacts some Activisionaries
and the effectiveness of electronic data transmission
is demonstrated in the Story of the Slanderous
Salesman.
You are seated at the display terminal in the
"Software Village" computer store. In a small
cubicle to your right, a salesman stands before a
mirror, combing his moustache. On the monitor's

screen, you see the words "Welcome to Actisource,"
a blinking cursor, and a spot of grape jelly.

>INPUT ENTRY CODE
You hear the beep which heralds entry to
Actisource. A message appears on the screen.

>READ MESSAGE
The grape jelly obscures the message.

>EAT JELLY
You eat the jelly, also swallowing a mouthful of
dust in the process. You feel sick, but at least the
screen is clean. The message says, "Chatroom 17
open. On-Line: Steve Cartwright, Jan Marsella,
Glyn Anderson, Brenda Laurel, Rob Holmes,
Loretta Stagnitto, Charles Ardai."

>TYPE "HELLO, ALL. WE'RE IN THE ARTICLE.
IS THERE ANYTHING YOU WANT TO SAY TO
THE READERS?"
The screen fills up immediately:
STEVE CARTWRIGHT (DESIGNER): If you
find any bugs in a product, I'm sorry. The
computer is perfect but I'm only human.
JAN MARSELLA (PRODUCT SUPPORT): Even
if you don't own an Activision game, please call us
about your interest as a first time buyer...
GLYN ANDERSON (DESIGNER): Buy Aliens!

BRENDA LAUREL (PRODUCT
DEVELOPMENT): If you had asked a bunch of
people in 1957 what they wanted, nobody would
have asked for plastic hoops to rotate around their
hips. This gives me some hope that there is still use
for intuition, instinct, and even some good oldfashioned brain damage in the creative end of the
business.
ROB HOLMES (MARKETING): The day when
you can sit in front of your computer and, in an
interactive fashion, use all of your senses...may not
be that far off...[Just] continue to be demanding
about what software can deliver.
LORETTA STAGNITTO (PR): Are you at
Software Village, Charles?

>TYPE "YES"
LORETTA STAGNITTO: Is the salesman there?
>AGAIN
LORETTA STAGNITTO: I read the Electronic
Arts article last month. That salesman seemed to
imply that we are copying ideas from EA (or vice
versa). We're not. I want that on the record. Where
is the salesman now?

>TYPE "AT THE MIRROR"
The screen clears and then fills with gibberish.
A hissing sound comes from the modem. For a
moment, the air in the room seems charged with

Continued on pg. 48

Fantasy Adventure Issue

TITLE:
Operation: Murder and Behind The Screen
SYSTEMS:
VHS Video Cassette Recorders
# PLAYERS: Up to 10
PUBLISHER: Spinnaker Software
Cambridge, MA
$19.95
PRICE:

by David M. Wilson
Abby Dorn, the respected philanthropist who
founded Dorn Hospital, lay on the operating table,
fully prepped for surgery. In a few minutes, kind
Dr. Janney would enter the O.R. and perform the
simple surgery. Yet, mere moments prior to the
surgery, a shadowy form dressed in surgical gown
and mask enters the operating room and strangles
the unconscious matron of the Dorn family. Who
was that masked murderer? The task of finding out
belongs to you and Ellery Queen in Opera-

tion:Murder.
It is a placid evening in the Victorian era sitting
room of the Ellis family. Alas, it is not to remain
so, for a trickle of blood is beginning to intrude on
this gentle domestic scene. Mrs. Ellis gives forth a
bloodcurdling scream which shatters the tranquil
evening. The family's mysterious boarder has been
murdered Behind The Screen. Are you ready to
match wits with a convoluted Agatha Christie plot?
Although CGW is chiefly concerned with computer software, other game modes occasionally
capture our attention. This time, it is Spinnaker's
Interactive Murder Mystery games. The major difference between these games and most interactive
fiction games is that these are played on a VCR.
CGW readers know Spinnaker Software as the publisher of award-winning educational programs,
Major League Manager, and the Telarium line of
interactive fiction (Amazon, Nine Princes In Amber,
and Perry Mason: The Case of the Mandarin Murder), as well as the distributor of the UXB line of
British arcade imports(A.C.E., Strike Force: Cobra,
and Mega-Bots).
Ellery Queen's Operation: Murder is based on the
Ellery Queen novel entitled, The Dutch Shoe Mystery. Even if you have read the novel, however,
you would still have a challenge in solving the
mystery. The mystery has thirty-two possible solutions and more than 250 paths to find the solutions.
Watching the mystery unfold via videocassette is
not unlike viewing an old thriller, except the film
is in color (saving Ted Turner the trouble?). The
video picture is excellent, the sets are aesthetically
pleasing, and the acting is performed in a superb

melodramatic style. Players must look at every
character, for the feeling that each one has something to hide never goes away. The sound quality is
poor, however. It sounds as if it were recorded in a
shower because there is a small echo to every sentence. The best part of the sound was the whimsical
jazz soundtrack which both reflects the period of
the mystery and is interesting in its own right.
Each player is given a detective note pad with
which to keep track of the clues. The real clues are
not given in the video presentation, but are
recorded instead on eight playing cards. The cards
have two clues each on them. The solution depends
on which side of the card you use. At various
points during the video presentation, the show stops
and a player who is beforehand designated as
"guardian of the clue cards" reads the clue aloud to
the group. Example: Ellery finds a clue, a piece of
paper wadded up on the floor. He picks it up and
the television screen instructs the "guardian" to read
a clue card which tells what is written on the piece
of paper. Players need to keep track of the combi-

actively participating in the denouement is not
wholly bad, however, because families need to
learn how to interact more with each other instead
of always viewing their forms of entertainment
passively.
The most exciting aspect of the game was the
fact that I often found the correct solution (even
though I am the poorest of detectives). I wanted to
shout "Yes!" when Ellery Queen (OM) or Inspector
Rice (BHS) turned and faced the camera and said,
"I know who did it, do you?" I thought I was in
danger of convulsing with laughter when the other
members of the cast of OM turned and looked at
me quizzically as though they could see past my 19
inch television screen and determine who Ellery
was talking to. The melodramatic style was fun.
The game is recommended for ages 10 & up. It
really seems best for ages 10-15. Those who like
the Parker Brothers boardgame, Clue, will like
these, as well. They are good family fun time
games and can be played in 30-45 minutes. Personally, I can't wait until a Perry Mason mystery
comes out.

nation of clues by noting on their pad the color of
the clue card read aloud.
Spinnaker's catalog advertises that the game uses
something called "Detective Filters," which would
presumably allow players to read secret evidence as
it is presented on screen. The two games mentioned
in this review did not have any "Detective Filters."
I searched both boxes carefully and not only were
there no filters, but there was no mention of the
filters in the documentation for the game.
Perhaps the most disappointing factor of the
games was in the most important aspect of the
murder mystery genre, the presentation of the solution. Players cross-reference the combination of
clue card colors (e.g.
red-blue-red-blue-blue-red-blue-red) with the solution grid in the documentation. The grid tells you to look at solution number
X. Then, the designated "guardian" reads the solution aloud to the group of players. No video confrontation is presented. Instead, each player is encouraged to dramatically explain his or her views of
"whodunit" and "howdunit." The concept of players

SPORTS SCOREBOARD

By RICK TEVERBAUGH
I know there's a poem that ends with
"and miles to go before I sleep," but rather
than digging through my brain or through
Bartlett's, let's just get on to the games
because we do have a lot of ground to
cover. [Ed. Note: "Stopping by Woods on a
Snowy Evening" by Robert Frost]
Pursue The Pennant
Just when you thought we'd already
covered all the computer baseball games in
the entire universe, another one pops up.
This new entry will indeed stir up some
interest because it is patterned after the
popular board game Pursue The Pennant.
The board version has always been an
attractive alternative to baseball simulations because of the obvious attention to
detail given the physical and statistical
elements of the game. Now most of those
qualities have been transferred to the
computer. Before we dwell on the positives, however, let's get the negatives out
of the way.
First of all, the game is only available
for IBM and compatible computers. However, this is an all-text effort and should
translate quite quickly to other machines.
A second detraction is the lack of a
computer opponent. It is my belief that
even a bad computer manager is better
than none at all. When I'm bringing my
mighty Dodgers into the fray against a
team that I loathe (insert your favorite
team here), I don't want to be responsible
for making strategic decisions that would
help beat 'dem Bums.
Finally, there is no utility to create
your owns teams. This has been explained
as being a problem because of the way the
game accepts information and the type of
information used for the ratings. Pursue
The Pennant uses play-by-play information from the current season. That type of
data isn't readily available to most gamers
so it would be hard to create such a do-ityourself utility. But it also creates another
problem. What will the company do when
gamers clamor for the 1951 season or a
best-of collection of great teams from the
past. Right now, 1986 is the only available
season.
It is possible to draft new teams from
already rated players. The program keeps
league and team statistics, thus making it

a perfect choice for draft league play, especially in head-to-head situations.
With so many computer baseball versions on the market, it is indeed refreshing
to find a game that can put a totally new
idea on the field. Such is the case with
PTP. The game keeps not only a box score
of the game, but a running play by play.
Both can be printed at game's end. The
play by play requires the learning of a new
language of numbers and symbols. The
best way to learn the system is to play a
game or two with you keeping score as you
normally would in a baseball game. Let the
computer also keep track and print the
result at game's end. By comparing notes
it should be obvious that S+e7.B-2;2-H
means that the batter singled to left, the
left fielder booted the ball allowing the
batter to go to second and the runner on
second to score. It really won't take as
long to figure it out as you might think.
As previously stated, the game is all
text, but the game display is an absolute
joy. Vital statistics on the player at bat
(both for the season being replayed and
the game currently being played) give the
manager a real feel for being in the dugout
with a computer right alongside feeding
him pertinent data for him to made intelligent(?) coaching decisions.
The play by play certainly isn't as sophisticated as that of Computer APBA
and is not as verbose as Radio Baseball,
but PTP also doesn't grind the disk drives
with constant access or need to be loaded
into a RAM disk to speed up play.
On defense, the choices are to: challenge the hitter (picked most of the time),
pitch around the hitter, give an intentional
walk, make pitching or defensive substitutions, display statistics for pitcher, position infield (normal, in, in at corners or
guard the line) or hold runner close at
first.
On offense, you can swing away, bunt
(sacrifice or for a hit), hit and run, steal or
see hitter's stats. There will also be base
running decisions that must be made as
the situation arises. Still, with all these
options and with all this activity, a game
can still be played by two humans in
about 40 minutes.
If the creators can figure out a way to
produce old-time teams, let the fans create
their own teams and put in a computer
manager, PTP will be as good a package
as anything on the market. Until then, it is
a good choice, given the limitations.
World Class Leader Board
Sometime in the near future I'm going
to do a golf roundup covering everything
currently available on the links. But for

now, some mention needs to be made
about World Class Leader Board (WCLB),
released for the Commodore 64 by Access.
The game still won't allow you to create
your own courses, at least from scratch, so
let me put that rumor to rest right away.
You can create your own course of sorts by
taking holes from different courses and
putting them together in different order.
Don't try this with your old Leader
Board disks. It will only work with the
four courses contained with WCLB. Three
of the courses are famous layouts; St. Andrews, Doral and Cypress Creek. A fourth
is fictional and very tough (Gauntlet).
All these courses have trees, traps,
rough and water, but each shot also takes
a bit longer while they are redrawn after
each time the ball moves.
The biggest change is putting at the
professional level. A major complaint
about regular Leader Board was that
putting wasn't enough of a challenge to
real aficionados, especially since all greens
slope in one direction. To make it more of
a challenge, the strength indicator for
putting at that level stops right at the line
for 8 feet. For putts longer than eight feet,
the player must estimate how long the
joystick button should be depressed.
This brings me to yet another complaint. Try to have a joystick with a button that has tactile feedback. That way
you know when you've let off the button
enough to begin the shot. In my first few
rounds with WCLB, I've had many a 30
foot putt stop after about 10 or 12 feet
because I eased off the button sooner than
I realized.
Otherwise, WCLB is a son that follows
right in the footsteps of the father. The
game play is smooth. Up to four golfers
can compete, each with his own difficulty
level and up to four rounds can be contested at a time.
Hoops
Hoops (which is not only the name of

the game, but also the name of the company) is a text-only college basketball
game and is currently only available for
IBM and compatibles. Just because I've
mentioned that the game is all text, however, don't think that means it is all cut
and dry.
The game is full of flavor, full of teams
and full of options that should delight
even the most demanding fan of the cage
sport. Hoops is steadfast in its perspective.
It makes you the coach of some of the
greatest teams in college basketball history. If, however, you want a game where
you can control almost everything that
goes on in the game, including who shoots
and when, then maybe Lance Haffner's Final Four is for you. If you don't mind
putting on your coaching face and dealing
with all the frustrations and triumphs that
Bob Knight, Dean Smith or Jerry Tarkanian must experience every season, give
Hoops a try.
The game comes with over 200 teams.
You might have to forgive a slight Midwest bias in the selection of teams. If it
looks like there are more Indiana University teams than might be proper, understand that the game is created and marketed out of Bloomington. Judging by the
power rankings given these teams by the
program, though, a couple of UCLA teams
headed by Lew Alcindor and Bill Walton
stand atop the heap.
Then, once you pick the two teams,
the fun has just started. You follow-up by
picking a starting lineup for each side
(there is no computer coach to handle one
of the teams) and decide on a defense. If
you pick a man-to-man, you'll then have
the option of deciding who'll guard who.
There are several selections for offensive
style also available and it's even possible
to fiddle with the percentages each player
will handle the ball. That can serve to
skew the averages a bit, but I've found the
device is helpful down the stretch when
another team is trying to foul and you
don't want the ball in the hands of poor
ball handlers or less-than-spectacular free
throw shooters. It is possible to change
coaching strategies, but you'll need a time
out to do it. Player substitutions can be
made at any dead ball. Other features of
the game include double-teaming, going
for one shot, intentional fouls or even
changing the color of the screen display.
The screen display is divided into three
sections. The bottom displays a complete
box score (which is updated continuously);
the upper right hand of the screen portrays the the scoreboard clock in text
form; and the upper left contains the running play-by-play of the contest. The

game's creators have obviously spent some
time listening to basketball on the radio.
The text is spiced with all the right adjectives (thankfully without Dick Vitale's
tiresome abbreviations). It is quite easy to
visualize all the actions to the point where
you become thankful that graphics weren't
included in the package.
At game's end, a full box is shown for
each team and a simple print screen command will save the game forever. One minor complaint is that there is no device to
save statistics and compile them. It is possible to save each of the box scores and
then do it yourself, but quite honestly, I'd
rather be playing the game.
Hoops is available only by mail. The
address is: Hoops, P.O. Box 310, Bloomington, Ind. 47402. You can get more information about the product by calling
812-336-4886 or 812-332-0699.

Indoor Sports
Indoor Sports, from Mindscape, is
available for the Commodore 64/128 market and combines bowling, air hockey,
darts and ping pong on a single, two-sided
disk.
First, the bad news is that the bowling
game is quite difficult and badly executed.
My first time through the game I had a 16
for 10 frames. You need to pick the weight
of the ball and the slickness of the lane.
Once you pick up the ball and pick a spot
to stand for the approach, a moving aim
arrow begins its path across the lane in
front of you. It is necessary to hit the fire
button on the joystick at just the right
time to aim the ball properly. Then the
bowler begins his approach, but there are
still two things that need to be done. You
must move the joystick in a certain direction for a straight ball or to control the
degree of curve. Then one more touch of

the button at just the right moment will
send the ball merrily down the lane. Push
too late and he'll fall on his face. Push too
early and the ball will hit his leg and go
into the gutter for sure.
Once the ball starts toward the pins,
the scene shifts from a sideways angle of
the bowler to a straight on shot of the
pins. Pin action, when you hit any, is lifelike, but the cartoon character of your
bowlers face in the upper right hand corner is only humorous the first few times
the ball rattles harmlessly into the gutter.
With 10th Frame by Access on the market, I don't know why anyone would use
this game for computer bowling.
The other three games in the package
are much better. Of the three, darts is the
best. First, you must clarify some rule options and then, select a score from which
to start. Then each point scored is deducted from the total with the goal being
the first to get to 0 by an exact point total. The joystick provides control to aim
the dart, set an angle of trajectory and
gauge the power of the toss. It sure beats
putting holes in the family room wall.
There is ping pong, as well, which is
certainly not to be confused with the
original computer? Pong. For this game,
you will need to master the serve, hitting
the ball with spin and anticipating the
other player's moves. There is a real challenge to the game and it probably comes
the closest to duplicating the feel of the
real thing of any program in the package.
Air hockey is the easiest of the programs and one where the younger players
will be able to battle on even ground with
the adults. The joystick controls the hitting of the puck. As with all four games,
there are settings for a computer foe. For
air hockey, you can also set the speed of
the game and the number of games to be
played in order to decide the match. The
program keeps track of each player's success in each game, so it's possible to have
competition on all four and then crown an
overall Indoor Sports winner. It's better
than being labeled an A-Number One
couch potato.
Finally, with apologies to Paul Simon,
why don't you write me. I'd love to hear
from you, what you like and don't like
about the column. That will help me
groom what I do hear to what you'd like to
read. Also if you have questions about
anything relating to computer sports
gaming, drop me a line. I probably won't
give you a personalized response, but, if
the mail justifies it, I'll answer as many as
I can in this space.
The address is: 2501 Dover St., Anderson, IN 46013. Until next time, have
fun and be a good sport.

BRODERBUND GOES PUBLIC!

Industry
News

On April 10, 1987, Broderbund Software, Inc. announced that it had filed a
registration statement with the Securities
and Exchange Commission to cover a proposed initial public stock offering of
1,275,000 shares of common stock. Salomon Brothers and Robertson, Colman &
Stephens are the underwriters for the offering which is expected to have an initial
price between $12 and $14 per share. The
company, founded in 1980, has sold or licensed over 7.5 million units of its software
(137 different titles) and plans to use the
proceeds of the stock offering as working
capital for expansion of product lines,
more aggressive product development, and
marketing.
AMIGA PROSPECTS STILL
BRIGHT!

SSI LICENSES THE AD&D SYSTEM!
Strategic Simulations, Inc. announced
on May 7, 1987 that their company and
Tactical Studies Rules (TSR) had signed a
letter of intent to work together in marketing a product line series of games based
on TSR's Advanced Dungeons & Dragons
fantasy role-playing game. In the
agreement, estimated at several million
dollars valuation over the five years of the
pact, SSI plans to develop at least ten different role-playing games and several action games based on the progenitor of
RPGs. The products are planned for all
the systems SSI traditionally supports, as
well as some for the Nintendo family game
system. Packages will bear both the SSI
and TSR logos.

As the computer world anxiously
awaits the actual merchandising of the two
new Amiga machines, CGW has begun to
hear rumors that the Amiga market is too
soft to support the kind of attention it received in 1986. Certain insiders have even
suggested that Electronic Arts, in spite of
its much heralded commitment to the
Amiga, has put Amiga projects on hold
until lackluster sales of Amiga software
improve. CGW approached EA executive,
Bing Gordon, to determine whether EA's
"Commitment to the Amiga" was, indeed,
softening.
Gordon responded, "The Amiga has
never done as well as we had hoped when
we started out. We were under the impression that Commodore was going to
price it at five or six hundred dollars and
promote it as a high end home computer.
Instead, it came out around $1800.00 and
was positioned as a business productivity
tool. I personally think it's the best
machine to play games on and owning one
myself, I try to see that a large percentage
of our titles have an Amiga version.
However, we don't want to bring out
anything on the Amiga that doesn't take
advantage of the machine."
Asked if EA was less convinced about
the viability of Amiga software than before, Gordon replied, "No. We're still
working on it with a rough goal of releasing one Amiga product per month. We're
still approving projects, signing contracts,
and hoping it will be the premiere home
computer." Questioned as to why certain
projects which seemed to be naturals for
Amiga translations were shuffled over to
the C-64/128, the executive noted that
the best selling Amiga games sold about
25,000 units in 1986 while the best-selling

C-64 games ran 125,000 to 150,000 units.
The executive affirmed that twelve projects were in development at the present
time with four nearing completion.
CGW speculates that many developers/publishers are waiting to see how the
Amiga 500 broadens the user base of Amigas before making it their machine of
choice. The next six months may well signal a watershed in the future of the
Amiga, particularly for gamers.

SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS ASSOCIATION HANDICAP MEAN 18 AS BEST
SIMULATION!
In April, 1987 the SPA chose Accolade's Mean 18 as Best Simulation. Other
nominees included SSI's Gettysburg: The
Turning Point, Microprose Software's
Gunship, and Venture Magazine's Business
Simulator from Reality Technologies. The
Toy Shop (from Broderbund) won three
awards: Best New Use of a Computer, Best
Concept, and Best Creativity Program.
Broderbund's Where in the USA is
Carmen Sandiego? won two awards: Best
Primary School Education Program and
Best General Education Program. Best
Graphics (8 Bit Division) went to
Broderbund's Airheart. In other awards
related to the software industry's major
trade association, Infocom's Zork I and
Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy received
Platinum Certification for selling over
250,000 units, Suspended received Gold
Certification (over 100,000 units), and
Leather Goddesses of Phobos and
Wishbringer received Silver Certification
(over 50,000 units in sales). Activision,
Infocom's parent company, also received
Gold Certification for Hacker and Silver
Certification for Hacker II. Meanwhile,
Darien and Morra, Inc., the advertising
agency for Accolade, received word that
they had been selected as finalists for the
Clio Awards (the Oscars or Emmies of
advertising) for their package designs for
Fight Night, Mean 18, Ace of Aces, and
Killed Until Dead. The packaging for
Fight Night has already won two Addys
(Northern California Chapter of the
American Advertising Federation) and Ace
of Aces has been named a finalist in the
New York Art Directors competition.

SPECTRUM HOLOBYTE ON THE
MOVE!
Spectrum Holobyte has moved to:
1070 Marina Village Parkway #203
Alameda, CA 94501.
(415) 522-3584.

Letters (cont.)

Continued from pg. 9

STARFLIGHT, STARBRIGHT...
Star flight is the adventure game I've enjoyed.
The "hard science" approach got me interested (I
like science fiction), but I admit, it is as false as
the "pure fantasy" games. Maybe I should give them
a serious look?
Roger Bohn
Arlington, MA
Influence EA to make Amiga versions of
Starflight and Bard's Tale II.
Jeff James
Roy, Utah
P.S. Go monthly - I'm sick of waiting two
months for an issue!"
Ed.: We have encouraged EA to convert Starflight
to the Amiga. Thus far, the only official word is
that they have a signed contract to do a C-64 port
which will come out sometime in 1988. We think the
Amiga conversion would be a natural but, at the
present time, there is no Amiga conversion in the
works. Publishers sometimes have to think in terms

of market base. As for Bard's Tale II, I presume the
conversion will depend on how well the Bard's Tale
port sells.
As for your postscript, it is not feasible to put
out CGW on a monthly basis and keep up the production- quality and in-depth reviewing to which
you are accustomed. However, we have been
concerned about those "off months" and are offering
an alternate solution. Beginning this September,
Computer Game Quarterly (CGQ), a 16 page black
and white newsletter, will debut. See the ad in this
issue and become a charter subscriber at a special
low rate. CGW's sister publication won't be as glossy
as her predecessor, but will contain many interesting
features that will not be found in CGW itself
(additional reviews; contests with prizes in each issue; gamer classified ads; a sort of Rona Barrett/National Inquirer/Mad Magazine approach to
industry facts and rumors, and much more). CGQ
will appear in the "off" months when CGW does not
(i.e. February, July, September) and in a special
pre-holiday issue each November.

Designer Profile (cont.)

Continued from pg. 34
CGW: Anything more you'd like to say about
working together as a husband and wife team?
Jon: To some degree we've kind of spoiled each
other.
CGW: How's that?
Jon: Well, in the sense that our collaboration
works so well now partly because we do tend to
know what the other person is intending and that
makes collaborating a lot more smooth than it
might be otherwise. Also, simply because we are
around each other all of the time and since the way
we work when we are in work mode, we're sort of
working to some degree twenty-four hours a day.
It's a lot harder to collaborate with people if you're
only working 9 to 5 or something because your
mind doesn't tend to work 9 to 5 and it's very convenient to be able to bring up a topic or being able
to bounce an idea off in the off hours. Lots of
things occur to me trying to get to sleep or whatever or waking up or when I'm getting in the
shower. Showers are a very productive time for me.
Anne: For me it's the hair dryer.
Jon: It's nice to be able to say at that moment,
"Hey, what about the possibility of..." and talk
about something now that would (in a 9-5 work
relationship) get, at best, postponed a day or so or
at worst, forgotten about or discarded.

CGW: Name some games that you really like.
Computer games that you have a lot of respect for.
Anne: There's M.U.L.E.. Most things from Ozark
Softscape. But right now, I am almost a blank. I
would have to look around in computer stores, so I
could see them and say, "Yeah, that's good..."
Jon: Star Raiders. A classic. You know, and
designed very nicely within the constraints of what
the designer was doing. There are many other
games that I like, or like certain things about.
There are lots of games that I like the system or the
artwork or certain aspects of. Like Mail Order
Monsters (the monster selection) that whole thing is
done graphically... neat pictures, nice little graphics, nice little idea.
CGW: Name some computer games that you
don't like. Something relatively successful that you
have looked at and said, "God, I'm glad my name
isn't on that."

Jon: In general, there really are not very many
games that I would feel comfortable about saying,
"That was mine." As far as things that we don't
like, to use the examples that I have gone on record
with many, many times.... clones, copies, rip-offs
of arcade games and other people's games and so on
and so forth which I object to generally.
CGW: Anne, have you seen anything that really
had no redeeming qualities?
Anne: Some things that I don't think ever made
it to market, that goes back to CES. For example
Trillium had a bunch of these "novel" games, based
on books. We just saw some of these things where
they were taking "name" authors and trying to make
a game around their books. But Trillium wasn't really the worst of them.
CGW: You talked about people doing poor
adaptations of books by famous authors... in fact, it
was two or three years ago that the industry was
crazed with licensing fever. They thought they
could just put Raiders of the Lost Ark or E.T. on
box and sell it.
Anne: This is when your marketing department
is doing your game design.
CGW: Those all crashed and burned. That pretty
much put a halt to that kind of thing. And yet,
certainly, it can be said that there are some great
themes, or books, or movies that lend themselves
well. If you could do a game around a book, a
movie or a legend, excluding what you have already done, what would you do?
Jon: If we have a free choice?
CGW: Free choice... any book, any movie.
Anne: Of course, we might split on this decision... what would you say?
Jon: I was going to say Star Wars. We could
have done a terrific Star Wars game.
CGW: What about you, Anne?
Anne: Yeah, I thought that Star Wars was great.
We actually got excited about that one. But, actually that was only my secondary thought. My first
thought was C.J. Cherryh's Downbelow Station or
any of her works. She's my favorite author. After I
read that I thought, "Wow, this would be a great
game." [Ed. Note: OK, sounds good to us... when
will it be out?]

Fantasy Adventure Issue

The Interactive Voyage of Sinbad
A Review of Sinbad and the Throne of the Falcon
by Vince DeNardo (as told to Wyatt Lee)
TITLE:
Sinbad and the Throne of the Falcon
SYSTEM:
Amiga
PRICE:
$49.95
DESIGNER:
Bill Williams
PUBLISHER: Master Designer Cinemaware
Westlake Village, CA

In 1958, my friends and I were treated to an experience in delightful terror. We sat enthralled in
the darkened interior of a theater as a parade of
incredible monsters towered above us in life-like
Dynamation (Ray Harryhausen's classic use of stopaction animation) and Technicolor. I will never forget that fearsome orange cyclops towering above
the heroic, but minuscule looking, Sinbad. At the
time, we didn't realize we were watching cinematic
history. We probably wouldn't have cared to know
that actors as diverse as Douglas Fairbanks, Jr. and
Dale Robertson had already sailed the cinematic
Persian gulf or that Harryhausen's particular magic
(straight out of a 35mm Aladdin's Lamp) would last
through three separate films where the special effects were the real stars. All we knew was that this
was the ultimate in adventure.
Sinbad and the Throne of the Falcon (STF) is a
brilliant tribute to those masterful films. Unfortunately, STF is also a very uneven product. The first
thing you notice when you boot up STF is that the
graphics are not as masterfully crafted as those of
DOC (or even S.D.I.). Where the previous games
offered a finely etched "canvas," STF gives the impression of a watercolor. Designer Bill Williams
seems more concerned about broad strokes of color
than imitating the intricate detailing in Kellyn
Beeck's Defender of the Crown (DOC). Yet, there
are graphic flourishes which occasionally surpass
Beeck's creations. The cartographical screens are
magnificent. "The City" map, where the player must
maneuver his armies in order to keep the Black
Prince from taking over the capitol, appears even
more like parchment than the "parchment" windows
in DOC. "The World" map is even more exceptional.
Pressing the left mouse button when one is viewing
"The World," causes a window to appear which
looks like a view through a magnifying glass. I've
never seen anything like it.

The second impression one receives when booting STF is that the musical score is phenomenal.
Bill and Martha Williams are excellent musicians
and the score reflects that. The third initial observation about booting STF is that the designers have
enough concern for the players to allow one to skip
the introduction and get right to the game. The
initial experiences one has with STF are certainly
positive.
STF is a mixed genre game. It attempts to interweave arcade, adventure, and strategy into a
composite product and is moderately successful.
I use the term moderately successful because I'm
not sure that it works on all three levels. The adventure elements are interesting. The quest is relatively simple. The player must get the items necessary to reverse a diabolical spell which has turned
the Caliph of Baghdad into a falcon. Should the
player fail to do so before the sands in the hourglass run out, the Caliph will remain a falcon and
the throne will succumb to a lesser ruler. As Sinbad, the player must interact with various different
characters through conversation balloons in order to
succeed in the quest. A character like Libitina, the
sorceress, will open a conversational gambit. The
player uses the mouse interface to toggle between
answers and presses the button to choose his answer. These answers are significant to the plot and
may determine whether the player gets vital information, cooperation from the NPC, or absolutely

nowhere. Once the player takes the hints in the
documentation and acts seductively toward Libitina
and sympathetically toward the Gypsy, there is little challenge to this part of the game.
Strategically, the defense of "The City" is not
only rather simple (just protect those six supply
centers), but it becomes superfluous once you are a
good enough swordfighter. After all, the objective
of the strategic game is to keep the Black Prince
out of the capitol. Yet, the easiest way to kill the
Black Prince is to let him come into your
stronghold and slay him in a duel to the death with
your scimitars. Save the game and you never have
to worry about him again. Since this strategy can be
effective, it undermines the design features of this
portion of the game.
As an arcade game, it is certainly more effective
than its Cinemaware predecessors. The blood displayed during the fight scenes helps provide feedback that was missing from the Amiga version of
DOC and the swordfighting itself is certainly more
satisfying. Arcade elements also come into play
when one uses a crossbow to kill the troublesome
pteranoxi, manipulates a sling to slay the deadly
cyclops, attempts to rescue the survivors of a shipwreck, or survive the treacherous landslides caused
by ubiquitous earthquakes. Unfortunately, the game
even fails to reach its full potential in the arcade
elements. In one sequence of five moves, I ran into
four earthquakes. During this sequence, one must
dodge boulders by going sideways, diagonally, or
straight up. The sequence is tremendously redundant after the second time through. Fortunately, the
genie sometimes allows you to wish that the earth
remain quiet for a while, which it does.
You can be victorious in this adventure, however. There are three primary secrets to winning.
First, it is extremely important to become an effective swordfighter. Without skill in this facet of
the game, you are doomed to failure. With this
skill, nothing can really stand in your way. Second,
it is important to save the game regularly. Every
time you kill a villain or monster; each time you
retrieve a gem from the Ishtiki; and whenever you
get new information, you should save the game. It
is extremely easy to die at this game, especially
when those recurring earthquakes wear you down.
Note that it is often possible to retreat from combat, save the game, and then, return to combat.
Third, you need to find out two vital pieces of information from the Gypsy. You need to locate both
the genie and the shaman. The genie resides in

(what else?) a lamp and is able to grant some important wishes. The genie can extend the time,
bring your ship back, raise members of the party
from the dead, etc. The shaman tells you what you
need to get in order to reverse the spell which
plagues the Caliph. It is unlikely that you will be
successful without these two characters.
With regard to game play, in general, you can
make life easier on yourself in two ways. First, try
to use your reflexes to grab the gems from the
Ishtikis' eyes while the light is playing upon them.
If you do it right, you will not have to fight these
`Shiva's with six swords (and they are tough!). Second, whenever you land at a port, make sure that
you take a landing party with you. Without a rear
guard, if you should have to retreat, your opponent
will kill either the prince or the princess, making
your task that much more hopeless.
The most frustrating experience I had with the
game occurred when I had acquired all of the gems
necessary from the Ishtiki and only needed to get
the bones of the skeleton to return to the shaman
with my quest successfully complete. I searched the
map from corner to corner and could not find the
skeleton. I finally got tired of all the earthquakes
and started all over again. The most deadly location
I found on the map was Pele Shoals. Do not try to
land your ship near there or you will break up on
the reefs, for sure.
Bottom Line: STF is light, entertainment fare, at
best. Those who are serious about their adventure
games will be frustrated by the dependence upon
arcade mechanisms. Those who had hoped that the
strategy elements would be superior to DOC will
also be disappointed. Although the game seeks to
accomplish more than the standard arcade game and
certainly is a cutting edge product with regard to
some of its graphics and sound, I can only recommend it to those who are enamored with repetitious
arcade sequences or want a showpiece software
product to demo their systems on. Yet, for all of
this, this reviewer firmly believes that Cinemaware
is carving out a well-deserved niche for itself in
artisanship. Their definitive game may be just
around the corner.

Titans (cont.)

Titans
of the
Computer
Gaming
World
Continued from pg. 37
energy. All of a sudden, a hundred tiny sparks
shoot from the mirror's surface, singeing the
salesman's moustache. A single line of text
illuminates the monitor's screen.
>READ TEXT
LORETTA STAGNITTO: Thanks.
Chapter Three

Treats of Activision's strength in the marketplace,
upon which point much remains to be said.
Whatever people say about them, Activision's
games persist in being top sellers throughout the
nation. In an industry that has seen brighter days,
Activision's success is especially noteworthy. This is
all the more surprising because of the sort of games
that Activision makes: challenging, but elementary,
action-strategy contests. As a rule, these games are
simple to play, if not always simple to win. They
are the computer equivalent of game shows like
Hollywood Squares, which are quickly understood,
easily played and require minimal skill or

knowledge.
Of course, like Activision, Hollywood Squares is
a big hit. In this age of "lite" foods and the like,
"lite" computer games and television shows make
some sense — and that's "sense" as in "dollars and,"
too.
The "lite" label is not universally applicable.
There is a great deal of depth to Shanghai and
Portal, both of which are more unusual even than
what we have come to expect from Activision.
Borrowed Time is a superbly cinematic graphic
adventure. Gamestar Football brings a truly
different perspective to an old favorite. On the
whole, however, Activision games are very light
fare. This doesn't mean they are not entertaining.
On the contrary, they are both entertaining and
aesthetically pleasing. What they are not is complex,
in-depth simulations with multiple levels of play
value. Nothing Activision makes will have the

longevity of chess or Monopoly. That's fine,
though, since they make clever, inventive and
flashy games filled with enough chrome to stock
every auto manufacturer in the country for a year.
That's the Activision Style. It is also, evidently,
what many people look for.
Why not? Is it fair to ask more of a game called
Transformers: Battle to Save the Earth than that it
be visually and aurally satisfying? Perhaps it would
be fair if the game were Civil War Battles or
Dreadnaught Commander, but Transformers? If that
game were any lighter, it would give a whole new
meaning to the word "vaporware."
For the record, Transformers is pretty,
professional, interesting and well-designed, in
addition to which it is a passable game with
uninteresting action and simplistic strategy. In other
words, it is typical.
People don't buy Transformers for the action.
They buy it for the animation, the music and the
license. The same is true of Aliens, which has the
added advantage of graphic screens taken from the
movie. Few people can enjoy its Gorf-like
succession of overly difficult action game
sequences. People know what they are getting when
they buy such a game. They are buying a name and
a catchy tune and some graphics worth telling their
friends about. They're buying a bouncing ball over
the lyrics to the Ghostbusters theme. Since they
keep buying, one can assume that they are satisfied
with what they are getting.

There is only one sad aspect to all of this.
Garners should not be satisfied. It is great as far as
it goes, but people should "continue to be
demanding about what software can deliver."
Couldn't the designers who put so much effort into
animating Transformers put a little into improving
the game? Activision's forte is raw talent and
rampant creativity. For optimum effect, this must
be harnessed and channeled, not just sprayed
around indiscriminately, and the only way to do so
is under pressure from the consumer.
There is no such thing as good enough.

Chapter Four
In which, at last, the author gets down to brass
tacks.
It is rarely a good idea to take knowledge for
granted. There probably are more than a few
people who didn't know what they were getting
when they bought an Activision game, and who
were disappointed as a result. It is for them that
the following series of short reviews is compiled.
Portal: The author of this game, Rob Swigart, is
a wonderful writer, and I recommend his book
Vector without hesitation. I hesitate to recommend
Portal, not because of the quality of the writing
which is very high, but because Portal is not a
game. It is a fascinating novel transposed into a
narrowly interactive format which consists entirely
of accessing text files by joystick manipulation, a
process that quickly becomes tedious. Get Portal
because that's the only way to read the story, but
don't expect to have a ball turning the pages.
Alter Ego: This psychological role-playing game
is fascinating the first time out. After that,
situations start repeating themselves and there are
only so many times you can get a kick out of
deciding whether or not to have an affair with your
secretary. It is better than Electronic Arts' Mind
Mirror, though.
Spindizzy: This charming British-import marble
rolling contest displays more creativity and variety
than Marble Madness. Each time you play, you'll
discover something new, enticing you to play more.
This is a thoroughly enjoyable game.
The Rocky Horror Show: Also from England,
this strategy game is an enjoyable adaptation of the
cult classic. It stands up to repeat play, but doesn't
encourage it. Its bizarre sense of humor makes it
worth a look, at least.
Shanghai: Though some disagree, I am convinced
that this is one of the best games around. If you

bore easily, it is not for you. Otherwise, this loose
adaptation of Mah Jongg will probably keep you
playing solitaire for some time.
Greeting Card Maker: Though Activision rarely
releases truly awful games, when they do, they go
all out. This is a disappointing program with
muddled menus, confusing instructions and very
few options. You'll be better off with Hallmark.
Borrowed Time: This adventure is unusually
good at enveloping the player in the story's
atmosphere. At the climax, I was thinking — and
feeling — like a gumshoe on the run. Its main flaw
lies in its being too brief. This one deserves a
sequel.
Gamestar Baseball, Basketball and Football:
Baseball is traditional arcade baseball with few
improvements over its videogame predecessors.
Basketball is worth a look, but it degenerates too
easily into an arcade style contest; an easier control
system would have helped avoid this problem.
Football is excellent, especially because of its
unique on-the-field perspective. There are some
rough spots, but not many.
Tass Times In Tonetown: There are some nice
screens in this graphic adventure, but somehow it
failed to draw me into its strange story. If you
don't care about the characters or the quest, you'll
end up feeling that you've wasted your time. Puzzle
nuts might want to try it, but even they would not
find much to like.

Chapter Five
Wherein rumors are discussed and the author leaves
the readers with something to mull over for two
months.
Recently, while speaking with Loretta Stagnitto,
a discussion of science fiction turned to William
Gibson's acclaimed novel, Neuromancer. I had heard
a rumor that a movie may be in the works (which
may be common knowledge by the time this is
published, but such is a writer's curse) and she
countered with a revelation which gives me hope.
Activision, it seems, is working on a Neuromancer
computer game which will probably feature art by
Peter Max, an original soundtrack by Devo,
backing by Timothy Leary and promotion by
celebrities such as Grace Jones. Certainly, this is a
program worth waiting for. Will it be a good game,
however? That, in the end, is the question that
Activision must face.
Next Issue: Part Four - Ardai on Infocom!

Scorpion's Tale (cont.)

long, the consequences will be too horrible to contemplate. And we certainly don't want that happening! Now is a good time to play with the buttons again and feel free to move around.
Once the stew has been dealt with, you receive a
telephone call. Yes, there is (mirabile dictu!) a
phone on the plane. However, the conversation is
going to be a short one. The connection will soon
go dead and you will overhear the pilot telling the
control tower that the plane is going to crash in
about five minutes.
Very fortunately for you, the phone is right next
to the emergency hatch. Unfortunately, you don't
happen to have a parachute. Perhaps someone could
help you out here, if you ask for the right thing.
In due time, you're out of the plane (with a
parachute, I hope), floating -down into the wilds of

Oh, that prospect doesn't thrill you? Hmmm. In
that case, you had better get their minds on other
things. Fast. Remember they are members of ZBUG and eclipse-predicting is old hat these days.
Let it not be said that the Zalagasans take and
do not give. You very kindly receive a mysterious
unlabeled cartridge and an address book. Looks like
the book you lost at the airport, but perhaps you
should check, just in case. I'd also advise getting
out of the pot while you can.
Whump! Seems like you fell into a pit (well, it
doesn't matter; you had no idea where you were
going anyway) and ended up in a Grubby Antechamber with a locked locker. Do read the sign
below the handles carefully and count your hands.
Since you have a little time here, you may want
to check out your new cartridge. By all means read
the "NOOZ." You'll find out more about Bureaucracy's history than you ever dared ask for or possibly wanted to know.
There are four other files in the cartridge. Look
at the directory listing carefully. They should remind you of something. Further, keep in mind that
not everything is read from left to right.
Once through the Switchgear rooms (let's not inquire as to what they are doing in the middle of a
jungle), you approach the end game. After the
hatch, you arrive in the Persecution Complex,
where much becomes clear. The longing for revenge boils up within you and revenge is in your
grasp! You, too, can be a hacker! Plug in, log on,
and... well, really, I can't quite tell you what to do
(except to say that you ought to have an emergency
route ready before you leave). Be sure to look over
all the files, all the commands, and all the computer messages. Then, do one little thing to make
life sweet again. Now, if it could only end up this
way in real life. Alas, such victories are often
achieved only in computer realities such as this. I
suppose, alas, it's better than nothing.
Well, I see by the invisible clock it's that time
yet again. Remember, if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the following
ways:
On Delphi: visit the GameSIG (under the Groups
& Clubs menu). On GEnie: Stop by the Games
RoundTable (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
On the Source: send SMail to ST1030. By U.S. mail
(enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you

Zalagasa. In fact, right into a Zalagasan cooking
pot: The Zalagasans, as you know if you read the
magazine, are cannibals. How clever of you to arrive just in time for dinner!

live in the United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, NY NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1987 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Continued from pg. 13
Paris via Zalagasa, wherever that may be. This is a
good time to check out your surroundings, the airline magazine, for one. It contains some interesting
articles. The headphones are connected to (what
else?) 'easy listening' music. Don't forget to play
with those cute buttons, either.
In a short while, dinner is served. Guess what it
is? It's Zalagasan stew, something you can easily
live without. Hint: don't eat it. Getting rid of it,
however, is not so easy. The airline attendants seem
obsessed with making sure you poison yourself
with this atrocious "food".
Somehow, some way, you are going to have to
get rid of the noxious concoction. If you wait too

Computer Role-Playing (cont.)

Computer
Role-Playing Games
Continued from pg. 29
with a purpose, one of many yardsticks by which
the character will be measured throughout the
game. Below the surface is an incredibly complex
set of "barometers", weighing every action, every
move, as the player strives to become the "Avatar."
Some of it is obvious: honest people don't steal
or cheat; valorous ones don't run from battle; compassionate ones give to the needy. Yet, there are
eight attributes in all and it is not always obvious
which actions will affect which attributes, for better or worse. Indeed, one action may affect several
at the same time, without the player even being
aware of it.
Further, the ultimate goal of the game is not to

save the world by killing the evil wizard, but by
proving yourself to be the Avatar, the perfect human, who will make the world better through

leadership and example. This is a far cry from
rampaging through dungeons in order to put an end
to Exodus or Mangar or Nikademus. Indeed, the
success of the game shows that combat can be combined with more subtle elements to create an experience for the player that brings more satisfaction
than mere monster-mashing could. The achievement
is even more remarkable when you consider that
the game was crammed into a 64K machine. We
stand now in the dawn of the 16 bit computer.
These are the machines of the future. With their
superior graphics and huge amounts of memory, the
possibilities for the CRPG are enormous. If Lord
British can do so much with 64K, what is the potential with 256 or 512 or more? The prospect is
truly mind-boggling.
Think of what could be done: monsters you can
converse with, and perhaps outwit without having
to draw your sword; NPC's who join your party,
who have definite personalities of their own, and
behave like real people. A world that changes in

response to your actions, for better or worse,
throughout the game. The list is almost endless.
With all this additional memory, the question is:
will the game designers and programmers work on
enhancing, broadening, and refining the personal,
non-combat elements to create a complete CRPG,
or will they follow the same old path of
hack-ndsl,goevrwithpgacsndier
sound effects?
Only time will tell. So much can be done to lift
the CRPG out of the mire of endless combat to
something that approaches the real, live, role-playing game. Perhaps, in some respects, even surpass
it. The true future of the CRPG is not the fighter,
bloody sword in hand, killing his millionth orc, but
the boundless imagination of the human mind, creating worlds of subtle wonder to explore and experience in more satisfying ways than mere bloodletting and money-grabbing. I hope it comes to
pass.
Copyright 1987 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Bard's Tale

(cont.)

Continued from pg. 25
lutely exact, or you will get nowhere. Bard's II does
not have a real parser, merely a comparator. It
takes what you type and compares it to whatever
the answer is, and if the match is not perfect, too
bad.
For example, I went to the Sage to ask him
about the Tombs. The prompt comes up: "What do
you want to ask about?", and I type "Tombs." The
sage took my money (he will always do that,
whether he tells you anything worthwhile or not),
and regaled me about his travels. Why? Because I
hadn't entered "THE Tombs." That's right, "Tombs"
alone wasn't good enough. On the other hand, there
are also times when you don't want to use a "the"
with your answer. That happened to me in the last
dungeon, where I knew the answer to a magic
mouth question, but typed in "The ---- ----" instead of "---- ----"; in this case, no "the" was
necessary (by the way, I left that answer blank;
you'll have to find it on your own, but at least
you'll know how to type it in!). This sort of thing
can become irritating in the extreme, not to mention expensive.
A note to Apple owners: running the game on two
drives will likely cause it to crash when you enter a
dungeon. The easiest way around this problem is to
use one drive only. Since disk swaps are minimal
(usually only on entering/leaving a dungeon), this
is not too much of a hardship. Although why it
should work with one drive and not two is a mystery
(after all, the dungeon disk is in the same drive,
regardless!).
Overall, I am not as pleased with Bard's II as I
was with Bard's I. While many interesting features
have been added, and some of the difficulties
(getting started in the previous game was extremely
hard) of the earlier game have been removed, still
Bard's II was not quite as satisfying as the first one.
Too much silly repetition, plus the drawn-out finale, took away a lot of the pleasure. When the
game was finished, I felt relieved rather than exhilarated.
Bottom line: recommended, with reservations;
this one is a long haul with several tedious interludes. Patience required.

READER INPUT DEVICE

RID #38 (Use card at p. 5)
On this page, a number of games and articles are listed for
evaluation, as well as some general interest questions. When
evaluating a game, consider such matters as PRESENTATION
(graphics, sound, packaging and documentation); GAME
DESIGN (design, playability, and level of interest); and LIFE
(does the game wear well?).
For each game which you have played or each article
which you have read, place a 1 (terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next to the appropriate number. For each multiple choice
question, place the appropriate letter next to the appropriate
number and for each yes or no question, place a 1 (yes) or a 2
(no) next to the appropriate number.

GAME RATINGS

There was not a lot of new activity from
R.I.D. #37. SSI's War In The South Pacific
recorded an initial 7.22 rating which places it
14th on the strategy list. New World's Might
and Magic joins the adventure/action Top 10
(8th) with a 7.35 rating.

Check out page 43 for exciting information concerning Computer
Gaming World's new companion publication, Computer Game Quarterly!

