April 1992

Number 93

Features
16
Going Gonzo at Winter CES
CGW's editor emulates a journalistic cult figure.

26
Turning Your IBM Into a "Super" Computer
Unveiling Champions' secret identity.
by Johnny L. Wilson

30
Peregrinations of an F-16 Pilot
An F-16 flight instructor shakes down Falcon 3.0
by Doug Fick

34
All the Bloodwych Is Fit to Print
Konami's European partners present blood on a budget.
by Allen Greenberg

36
Totally Tubular Titillation
"Manley" Allen Greenberg visits Hollyweird in
Accolade's Lost in L.A..

40
The Raven Versus the Draxon
Todd Threadgill faces Gir Daxon's revenge in Nova 9 from
Dynamix.

Supplementary Section
Special Advertising Supplement
Dynamix presents "Great War Planes:" a look at the computer
game series.

58
The "Miracle" Workhorse
Jason Rich at the keyboard of Software Toolworks' The
Miracle Piano Teaching System.

60
SimAntics
Allen Varney relives a SimAnt battle.

62
Calling Dick Tracy
David M. Wilson is stationed with Disney's ace detective.

64
The Next Millennium
Paragon's space strategy game.
by Alan Emrich

68
Statistical Football That Scores
Striking paydirt with MicroLeague Football: The Coach's
Challenge. ...by Win Rogers

72
Pols and Polls
Prodigy's The Next President.
by Wyatt Lee

76
The Alien Atmosphere of Global Conquest
Will Dan Bunten connect in Microplay's New Strategy Game?

80
The King and Wry
Roger White's review of and strategies for Romance of the
Three Kingdoms 2.

88
Strategies for Sid Meier's Civilization
The 6,000-year-old man gives sage advice.
by "Roger-Tsu" White

Departments
8
Taking a Peek
14
Rumors
16A (Margin of Insert)
Questions for the CGW Poll
44
Scorpion's View (Eye of the Beholder II)
48
The CGW Poll
49
The Hall of Fame
50
PC Research/SPA Top Games
51
Scorpion's Mail
52
Over There (European Games Report)
54
Letters from Paradise
84
Computer Wargaming World (Supplement)
92
Opponents Wanted
96
Editorial (Magazine Madness)

Taking a Peek

Access
Salt Lake City, UT
LINKS BAY HILL: Yet another in the graphically beautiful course supplements for Links,
Links: Bay Hill offers many especially challenging holes. In fact, because of the steep
bunkers in the game, a new GOLF.EXE program has been added which brings the view
back closer to the player and creates less
awkwardness for this particular shot. IBM
($24.95). Circle Reader Service #1.
Broderbund

Novato, CA
SPELUNX AND THE CAVES OF MR.
SEUDO: This "software toybox" is almost a
full-blown computerized exploratorium.
Youngsters explore caves done in largely
black and white Macintosh graphics. As they
explore, they encounter lessons about planets,
flora, fauna and science on their fascinating
journey toward color graphic reward sequences and engrossing animated interludes
(which range from the realistic to the surreal).
Not only will youngsters be drawn into this
product by the sense of exploration (clicking
around in the different locations to find new
and hidden goodies), but some of it is just so
bizarre that they will be compelled to press
ahead, just to see what is around the next
"bend." Players can even rearrange the cave
(map) to suit themselves. IBM ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #2.
Capstone

Miami, FL
CASINOS OF THE WORLD: If "everything
old is new again," here is the software package that strives to prove it. A straight repackaging of three of Capstone's gambling simulations, Vegas Gambler, Monte Carlo Baccarat
(Chemin de Fer) and The Ultimate Casino
Gambling Simulation (a.k.a. Trump Castle
I), it combines to include many games of

chance in a single package. All together there
are many slot games, Blackjack, Keno, Craps,
Video Poker and Chemin de Fer (Baccarat).

Well, do you feel lucky? IBM ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #3.
LOTS-O-SLOTS: This add-on disk provides
plenty of one-armed bandit action for players
of Capstone's gambling games. Nine new
slot machine types have been added, including 3-wheel and 5-wheel spinners with cherries,
bells, bars, stars, "lucky 7s" and more for
regular or progressive play. Fixed with an Atlantic City 83% payback, this supplement can
be used with Trump Castle, Trump Castle II,
Casinos of the World, The Big Deal and
Casino. Just insert $24.95 into an IBM and
pull the mouse or joystick. Circle Service #4.
POKER: Another supplement for the abovementioned Capstone casino games, this one
adds a poker room to the East Coast casinos
simulated (where poker is not legal). Four
games are presented: 5-card draw, 5-card
stud, 7-card stud and Texas Hold 'Em. Only
five players to a table (although they can all
be humans at the same machine), this
software creates a nice, if limited, poker playing environment. Still, the stakes are pretty
low at $24.95 (IBM). Circle Reader Service #5.
THE TAKING OF BEVERLY HILLS: For
those who missed the movie (which, apparently, was almost everyone), this action film has
the gilded city of the rich and famous being
evacuated by terrorists in police uniforms, the
love interest in danger and, along with everything else in the city, a priceless work of art
up for grabs. Our hero, football quarterback
Boomer Hayes, becomes a one-man anti-ter-

rorist unit out to unravel events and right the
situation. This standard adventure game uses
plenty of Beverly Hills backgrounds and some
digitized pictures from the movie as the players find and use objects to solve the puzzles
encountered. A coupon to rent the video free
is also included, for those who simply cannot
resist seeing the "wealthier than thou" citizens
of the famous suburb repeat their role as victims of terrorism or need help in solving puzzles. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #6.
Electronic Arts

San Mateo, CA
BIRDS OF PREY: Another flight sim package
from England, this one features 40 modern
aircraft in a dozen different roles and missions.
While it is all pretty standard combat flight
simulator stuff (with a mix of fighters and bombers), it is clearly targeted away from the hardcore, since every aircraft type shares a single
cockpit instrument panel and the action is
rough enough that (at least, on machines with
68000 processors) the planes handle clumsily.
The campaign scenarios are abstracted into
conflicts between fictional countries called A
and B, in which the air forces fly NATO and
Soviet hardware, respectively. Missions include
the likes of long-range bombing, shore/border
patrol, supply and troop drops and stealth
bombing. While the documentation is about
200 pages long, experienced pilots will be
working the controls quickly thanks to the
large keyboard summary sheet. Amiga
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #7.

Taking a Peek

POPULOUS II: Ye gods! As one of Zeus'
many illegitimate offspring, the only way to
get the recognition of the Olympians and take
one's rightful place in the pantheon is to survive the trials they have in store. With thirtytwo of the most powerful gods to best over
the fields of classical Greece, it is a good thing
this second version of Populous allows a
player to unleash multiple forces of nature
simultaneously. Also new is the feature in
which a player "creates" his deity with
strengths, weaknesses and a given look. Still,
I'm Aesop for these games, and without splitting Heras, it simply can't be "Pan"ned. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #8.
POPULOUS WORLD EDITOR: For use with
the original Populous, the premise is that any
unimaginative immortal can conquer a world,
but it takes a real god to create one. Many features become "programmable," including the
landscapes (the game includes four new
landsets: French Revolution, Space, Fast Food
and Wild West) and icons (which use a
simple, internal paint/draw program). World
sizes can be adjusted, the birth and death rate
for houses and castles, the manna rate, native
intelligence and much more is subject to
player modification. An incredible toolbox for
the Populous player, now one can shape
one's own destiny. Amiga ($24.95). Circle
Reader Service #9.
Genus Microprogramming

11315 Meadow Lake
Houston, TX 77077
(713) 266-9362
GX GAMES: A part of the GS Programming
Development Series, this product is to computer gaming what the "Visible V-8" model
from Revell was to model building. Five
games are included (an Othello clone, blackjack, a Mastermind clone, a Galaga clone
and a turn-your-PCX-image-into-a-puzzle
game), but more importantly, so is the source
code! This is to help would-be game programmers get a look "backstage" at the software.
The code is completely commented and each
game is provided in C, Pascal and Basic. More
than just a games package, it could open up
the doors to a future in game programming.
(Is this how Chris Crawford got started?). IBM
($59.00). Circle Reader Service #10.
Infocom

(from Activision)
P.O. Box 3048
Menlo Park, CA 94025
THE LOST TREASURES OF INFOCOM: See
our Scorpion's Mail column on page 51 for a
complete description of this product. Basically
it's what real adventure gamers have all been
waiting for! IBM and Macintosh ($69.95).
Circle Reader Service #11.
Interplay

Santa Ana. CA
OUT OF THIS WORLD: While this game was
not designed out of this world, it was made
outside this country. This French action/adventure game has a distinctive blend of real-world
and science-fiction motifs. This "other-worldliness" is enhanced by very smooth scrolling,
polygon-filled, rotoscope-style animation (as
seen in so many good flight sims) and a continuous soundtrack replete with digitized
sound effects and music. Though wags may
say the game has too much copy-protection
wheel and too little documentation (two tiny
pages), there's still plenty of gameplay there.
Amiga received. The upcoming SNES version
looks so good that some people at CES

thought it was running on an Amiga. ($59.95).
Circle Reader Service #12.
Konami

Buffalo Grove, IL
THE SIMPSONS ARCADE GAME: This conversion of the popular coin-op quarter
cruncher is a fairly faithful translation. Eight
levels of Groeningesque backgrounds and
characters create the bizarre look and feel for
this game that Americans have come to love
courtesy of the Fox network. For one or two
players, using joystick and keyboard, each
Simpson has a unique attack method (including character "team attacks," like the Marge
and Homer barrel roll) and every level ends
with "the big challenge." The game also includes a rules booklet that's written in the
same bent style of humor that has made the
TV show so popular. (Now, if I could just get
the tune of The Simpsons theme song to stop
playing over and over in my head!) IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #13.
TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES: MANHATTAN MISSIONS: In their first action/adventure game designed exclusively for computer
software, the turtles can now fight in pairs as
they help the police department (and department of sanitation) clean up the streets of
New York. Each turtle possesses unique attributes (and requires development to achieve
maximum potential) and players must take
them through the 15 missions on the way to
Shredder's hideout. With a map of Manhattan
and some informational scenes between kicks

and chops, there is a bit of a strategy element
to go with this mean, green fighting machinestyle arcade game. Pass the pizza, dude! IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #14.
Lucasfilm Games

San Rafael, CA
TOUR OF DUTY: P-80 SHOOTING STAR: As
for the first aircraft (the P-38 Lightning) in this
series of supplements for Secret Weapons of
the Luftwaffe, the P-80 Shooting Star includes three flight school missions; eight historical missions; five missions to fly German
aircraft against this plane; a tour of duty and a
mission builder. Note, however, that none of
the "Tour of Duty" disks integrate with the
campaign game in SWOTL. Flying America's
first successful jet fighter can put a player on
an even "plain" with the Me-262 and Me-163
Komet and make hunting the enemy a much
easier chore. Straighten up and fly right! IBM
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #15.
Mallard Software, Inc.

550 Edmonds #201
Lewisville, TX 75067
(214) 436-0044
FLIGHT PLANNER FOR MICROSOFT
FLIGHT SIMULATOR: Including both MS-DOS
and Windows 3.0 versions, this package has
plenty to offer simulation airline pilots. Automated and manual flight plans can be produced (using a full-screen flight plan editor),
summary and detail reports can be generated,
calculations for wind correction, descent dis-

Taking a Peek

tance, descent rate and many other features
are included. Additionally, in the Windows version, many features are enhanced and several
new ones are added. It is one thing to take off
and land, it's another to really know where
you're going. Just follow the Mallard.... IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #16.
RAW Entertainment

League City, TX
(713) 538-3399
ACTION STATIONS! SHIPS, SCENARIOS
AND UTILITIES DISK: While the title says a
lot, there are three utility programs, 28 new
ship classes and 13 new scenarios. The
utilities include: an easier-to-use scenario
editor, an upgrade to the generate program
and fleet definition program. The new
scenarios include both historical and hypothetical battles. Action Stations! enthusiasts will
go "overboard" for these game supplement
disks. IBM (Available direct from RAW Entertainment only for $19.95 + $2.00 shipping and
handling [Texas residents add 7.25% sales
tax]). Circle Reader Service #17.
Reactor

445 West Erie, #5B
Chicago, IL 60610
(312) 573-0800
CREEPY CASTLE: No, it is not a low budget
film on videocassette (although it is packed in
a standard VHS tape package). Instead, it is a
horror-oriented computer arcade game,
deliberately presented in low-budget black and
white graphics for the Macintosh. From the
same people who brought you Spaceship Warlock for CD-ROM, this time a mad doctor has
kidnapped the heroine and is holed up in
Creepy Castle. Guess who gets to save her by
emerging victorious from the four scenarios?
Macintosh ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #18.
ReadySoft, Inc.

30 Wertheim Court, Unit 2
Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada L4B 1B9
SLEEPING GODS LIE: How can one help but
chuckle when a game promises "4 dimensional role-playing action" and "3 dimensional
sound effects" in all seriousness? Still, the
one-player-against-the-world role-playing/adventure
game (with arcade combat sequences) included in the box takes on the challenge using
a flight sim-style polygon-filled environment
with some hand-drawn graphics here and
there. It was an odd feeling in getting around
with the mouse, but eventually, the interface
seems natural. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service # 19.
SPACE ACE II: BORE'S REVENGE: Won't
that blue baddie ever give up? Borf's goons
used the Infanto Ray to bring him back to his
original age (and evil designs). Well, Ace,
you're off to rescue sexy Kimberly yet again in
a story that offers more of the same along
with a few new animations for your amusement. Fast reflexes (and more than 5 MB of
hard disk space) are still the ultimate weapon
in this graphically intense arcade game. IBM
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #20.
VOLFIED: A conversion of the Taito coin-op
hit, this "scroll around and zap" fest requires
the modicum of skill necessary to give this
reflex-fast game that addictive quality that can
cost a player many quarters in the arcade.
Each of the sixteen levels ends with a massive
"ultimate" alien menace to provide the appropriate nerve-wracking ending en route to
the end. With rules written in four languages
(on the back of a poster, no less), there are
only five paragraphs of non-installation/load-

ing instructions. Zapmasters can probably purchase the game with the quarters they'll save.
IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #21.
Sierra

Coarsegold, CA
ECOQUEST: The young hero of this adventure game (for ages 10 and up) travels "under
the sea" (sans calypso beat) with his dolphin
friend in an attempt to find the king of the
whales. The thesis of the game is that
humankind's evil polluting ways have
deranged certain sea creatures. So, in order to
put matters right in the game world, the hero
must literally clean it up. The game not only
expresses its environmental concerns within
the game's fiction, but the publisher has been
true to those concerns in the entire package.
The documentation is even printed on
recycled paper with biodegradable soybean
ink. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #22.
Strat-O-Matic Computer Baseball

46 Railroad Plaza
Glen Head, NY 11545
(516) 671-6566
STRAT-O-MATIC COMPUTER BASEBALL:
Anyone who doesn't recognize the name
Strat-O-Matic is probably not a "real" baseball game fan. Since 1961, Strat-O-Matic has
meant sports games and their large following
of boardgame enthusiasts have achieved virtual "cult" status. With their player cards as
their hallmark, their computer version uses
these same player cards, which are moved

about manually on the table. With detailed features like rare plays, individualized balks, wild
pitches, passed balls and clutch rules, the
detail level is something that only 30+ years of
boardgaming refinement could achieve.
StratO-Matic Computer Baseball is a statistical
journey into the true minutia of the game. Batter up! IBM. Circle Reader Service #23.
Three-Sixty

Campbell, CA
BATTLESET 1: D-DAY UTAH BEACH —
1944: The first game in their V for Victory
series, these are truly wargamer's wargames.
Using traditional boardgame elements, including a hex grid, unit icons with standard military symbols, movement points, turn-based
movement, stacking limits, zones of control
and so forth, this one also takes full advantage of its computer host. Easily managing difficult combat, supply and weather calculations, the interface is simple enough to entice
any hardcore paper wargamer to computer
wargames. Extremely rich in detail, this looks
like a new standard in computer wargaming.
IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #24.
OPERATION SLEDGEHAMMER: This, the
first mission disk for Megafortress, was
covered in the COW sneak preview, issue #91,
page 104. Naval targets in and around the
Mideast and Libya are featured in the 25 new
missions. With tons of new features, this disk
definitely teaches the "Old Dog" new tricks!
IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #25.

Industry News

• Accolade is working on Hardball Ill.
Our sources indicate that it is supposed
to have more statistical emphasis than
earlier games and more emphasis on
graphic presentation. An unconfirmed feature is the game's expected compatibility
with data files from both Tony LaRussa
Ultimate Baseball and Earl Weaver
Baseball II. With as much trouble as
EWBII had in maintaining compatibility
with the earlier EWB data disks, astute
readers will hold the expectation of the
latter feature in abeyance.
• Simulations Canada is expected to
release two out of the following four
games around mid-summer: Main BattleTank: D-Day to Berlin, the penultimate
release in the series; Sea Power and the
State, modern naval combat without
having the Soviets as an enemy; Man of
War, naval warfare in the Age of Sail

(which will feature a mouse-driven interface and Al for each individual ship) and
Divine Wind, grand strategy in the
Pacific during WWII.
• Did you know that there are subliminal messages hidden on the cover of
the Leisure Suit Larry 5 box? The
Rumor Guy will autograph a bag for any
reader who can identify the three words.
• Spectrum HoloByte has postponed
publication of A-10 Avenger, their next
anticipated release in the Electronic Battlefield Series, until 1993. The company
is expecting to replace the product with
an F-18 Hornet simulation that will integrate more easily into the existing EBS
technology.
• A poll authorized and financed by
CGW indicates that New Hampshire residents who are unlikely to vote in the up-

coming presidential primary prefer the
Rumor Guy 83% to 6% over Arkansas
Governor Bill Clinton (with 11% undecided) and 17% to 2% over George
Bush (with 81% undecided). An independent polling organization refuses to
confirm the data purchased by CGW and
insists that the people of New Hampshire
have never heard of the Rumor Guy and
the American Interactive Party. According to the independent service, the wellcirculated AP wire photos of the Rumor
Guy — complete with trademarked bag
over his head — on the floor of the
House of Representatives provided less
name recognition than expected. That
source suggested that less than 1% actually supported the Rumor Guy's bid for
the Presidency and the most common rationale for the support was to keep him
from writing that [expletive deleted] fiction in this column.

Industry News

A Gonzo Look at CES
The Winter Consumer Electronics Show — Part II

Red
That gaudy color that
grabs one by the eyes
and pulls a normally
perceptive brain into
a gravity-free mode
of pure adrenalin
that says "Danger!"
"Excitement!" "Emergency!" "Major Corporate Losses!" or
"Here I am in Las
Vegas, again!"
The walls were that faded red of disrepair and inattention that looked the
same color as my tongue had when I
had given myself a bronx cheer in the
mirror while shaving this morning. The
floor boasted a new carpet that looked
like a showgirl trying out a new lipstick
that looked more like the purple hue on
a Doors poster than the sensuous hues
one expects to see on her lips. The fact
is, the setting matched the uncertain
"good news, bad news" state of the industry. We weren't sure whether to
scream out that we were on a lucky
streak or go into a corner and pound our
foreheads into the wall while crying in
our losses. Now, that's CES!

The truth is that there has been plenty
of red ink in the entertainment software
industry during the last year. Software
Toolworks had record losses during
1991 and is banking on a Miracle (see
the article on page 58 of this issue) and
a Mario to help them improve their profit
picture. Activision is the updated version of Mediagenic as it emerges from
Chapter 11 bankruptcy. It has hired
Accolade's Peter Doctorow as its new
president and moved its corporate headquarters to West Los Angeles in a costcutting move.
Data East experienced a major reorganization in its product development
area, deciding that almost all of its future
development would be done in Japan.
As a result, most of its American designers have found jobs elsewhere in the industry. Lucasfilm Games, after doubling
the number of products every year for
four years, reflected on a disappointing
Christmas and had the first layoff in the
games division's history. Apparently, no
major projects will be cancelled, and the
approximately 10% reduction in personnel combined layoffs with not rehiring personnel who were finished with previous
assignments.
Microprose is in the black after seeing
too much red over the initial performance of its coin-op division. Even
mighty Sierra, still stable and profitable,
saw its earnings per share dip (although
still remaining respectably in the black)
as a result of the Sierra Network taking
longer to reach the market than originally anticipated.
In the financial world, the analysts pay
less attention to good profits than they
do to the great profits that answer the
eternal question, "What have you done
for us lately?" Of the publicly-held
software companies, Electronic Arts
was the only one to sail solidly against
the tide of reduced performances. Even
that is a mixture of "good news and bad

news" for many CGW readers, because
their phenomenal earnings per share
(and resultant rise in share prices) is
directly related to the timing of EA's successful assault on the cartridge market.
The unequivocal good news is that the
Software Publishers Association numbers just released show that software
sales are up across the board. Perhaps
most hopefully, even the muted fourthquarter performances of entertainment
software publishers may bode well for
1992, because the companies managed
to survive when a preponderance of
major Christmas releases slipped until
early 1992. Retailers believe that those
releases will still sell in record numbers. If
the companies can get back on track
during 1992, this could feasibly be a
record year. Of course, could is one of
those weasel words reserved for financial
pages, motivational speeches, congressional testimonies and careful editorial
staffs. The following genre summaries,
along with the summary of upcoming
CRPGs in our last issue, should explain
some of the reasons for optimism in
1992.

Red-Lining the Tachometer
(Simulations)
Race cars will be one of the hottest
areas of competition on the polygon-filled

Industry News

save their tracks to disk. Most important
ly, Loughery is determined to get the
physics right so that the cars handle as
realistically as possible.

simulation circuit in 1992. Microprose
will import a European simulation of Formula I racing from their U.K. affiliate. It
will be called World Circuit and will feature graphics which look like a cross between Vette! and Test Drive 3, sceneryspecific views of the European Grand
Prix circuit, twenty-four different racing
cars, profiles of actual Formula I drivers
and difficulty levels that run from being
easier than Mario Andretti's Racing
Challenge to being more detailed than
EA's venerable Ferrari Formula 1. The
game allows drivers to set up their cars
from the tires and transmission up to the
wing angles. Beginners can have every
feature from automatic braking (for curves), automatic transmission, self-correction after each crash and a line on the
track to tell drivers where the "groove" or
best line is. The game will debut on the
Amiga and be followed by an IBM version prior to Christmas.
Electronic Arts and Accolade will feature dueling automobile magazine licenses in their polygon-filled racing games.
EA's entry is Car and Driver. Designed
by the designer of the original Chuck
Yeager's Advanced Flight Trainer
product, Ned Lerner, this simulation features ten different cars and ten different
"tracks" (some places one would never
expect to drive a high-performance car).
It also features, as noted last issue, EA's
first use of a new graphics mode with
twice the pixels, as well as a new joystick
routine which EA has purchased from
Lerner to use in other projects.
Accolade's entry is Road & Track
Grand Prix, a serious simulation from
one of their veteran game designers,
Tom Loughery (Steel Thunder, Gunboat
and Test Drive 3). Not only does the
product feature the capacity for drivers
to change gear ratios, wing angles, tires,
weight distribution and more, but it will
feature two authentic Formula One courses and an Architect feature that will
allow gamers to move barriers, use tilebased track and contour squares and

Naturally, the traditional movers and
shakers in the genre are still the publishers of flight simulations. As previewed
last issue, Dynamix/Sierra is readying
Aces of the Pacific, a World War II
Pacific Theater game that advances on
their Red Baron technology. Naturally,
Microprose and Electronic Arts have
flight simulators which are expected to
make their maiden voyages in 1992, as
well.
Microprose will publish a bomber
simulation that was developed by Andy
Craven's team at Vektor Graphix (Shuttle). The working title is B-17 Flying
Fortress and the game will feature much
more than an accurate flight model.
Gamers will be able to play every crew
position; the entire map of Europe will be
used in the campaign game; players will
manage crews in a competition in which
morale is very important and nose art
can be designed, selected or imported (in
.LBM files) by the player.
In addition, Microprose will combine
elements of simulation and adventure in
A.T.A.C. (Advanced Tactical Air Command). The title of this war-against-drugs
game has changed, but the thesis is still
the same. The player has been recruited
into an elite strike force and is flying his
F-22 against the drug plantations, factories, guerilla camps and headquarters
of drug cartels.
Electronic Arts is not only converting
their LHX Attack Chopper for the Sega
Genesis, but they were putting finishing
touches on Heroes of the 357th and
Birds of Prey (both had just shipped at
press time). The former is a British
product that lets gamers fly a P-51 Mustang for individual missions or a full tour
of duty. It also features a replay camera
that allows gamers to see the action
from a wide variety of angles. Birds of
Prey is a flight simulation on the Amiga
that lets garners fly 40 different planes
(see "Taking a Peek" in this issue).
Mirrorsoft, a familiar name to
European computer garners, is publishing a "Battle of Britain" flight simulation
in Europe, and it is coming to America
via Konami. Entitled Reach for the
Skies, the game allows computer pilots
to fly eight different combat aircraft from
World War II.
The new player in the flight simulation
field is Walt Disney Software. The company plans to unveil Stunt Island during

the summer. The product features a campaign game in which players try to win
the "Stunt Pilot of the Year" contest and
individual "missions" in which pilots can
simply fly interesting planes and perform
stunt maneuvers. The real news is that
players will be able to try their hand at
directing "movies" in this game and will
feature a detailed editor that will allow
garners to perform pre-production,
production and post-production tasks as
a film director. See the "Sneak Preview"
in the June issue of CGW for more
detailed information.
Disney also plans to open up the
simulation market by publishing a simulation that's completely different. Coaster
is practically a simple CAD program that
allows one to design a high-speed roller
coaster, test it and "ride it" in a simulated
roller coaster experience. Coaster might
be called "software toy" meets simulation.

Red Team Rising (Strategy)
Garners who liked Populous and Powermonger have several treats in store for
them during the upcoming year. Konami
is importing MEGAloMANIA from the
U.K. It is a real-time strategy game
similar to the popular Bullfrog games
published by Electronic Arts, but
players can compete in nine different
epochs: Caveman, Old Testament,
Roman, Norman, Middle Ages, Victorian,
World War I, World War II, Modern and
the abstract era of the game's title. Like
in Powermonger, players determine
which weapons their societies will build in
order to face their enemies in the future.
Another European import with the
Populous look is Utopia. Before midsummer, Konami expects to release this
game, which features 10 different planets
(i.e. games) in which players try to control construction, finances, industry,
defense and population using the icondriven interface. It looks like SimCity
meets Populous with hostile aliens
thrown in as an added obstacle.

Industry News

Buena Vista Software line that looks
very impressive. The first entry is expected to be Heaven and Earth, from
the creators of Shanghai and Ishido.
Heaven and Earth is sort of a zen
strategy game with three unique tracks:
software toy, puzzles and game. In fact,
there is even an "Easter Egg" for anyone
who completes the pilgrimage of journeying successfully through all three tracks.

Red-Eyed Monsters
(Adventure)
Electronic Arts is importing a different
SimCity-style game called Global Effect.
Conservatives will call this the ultimate
"Eco-Nazi" game because it has an environmental twist. Players try to build up
their cities while their opponents try to
destroy the cities environmentally. The
game requires both advance planning
and damage control. Up to two players
can play at the same computer.
Of course, the parents of SimCity are
not about to default. Maxis is translating
Japan's famous A-Train into a game for
the United States market. The game is a
fabulous model for showing what the
economy could be without either the
Sherman or Clayton Anti-Trust Acts.
Both rail fans and capitalistic
megalomaniacs should find themselves
easily addicted to this version of Monopoly meets Railroad Tycoon. Strategy
gamers who like network and modem
play should be particularly interested in
RoboSport for Windows, an update of
the company's popular Macintosh
strategy game that allows human players
to compete with each other.
In addition, Maxis is working on SimLife, an evolution simulator that follows
Richard Dawkins' The Blind
Watchmaker model more closely than
James Lovelock's Gaia hypothesis was
followed in SimEarth. Also, for those
who haven't given up on the simple joys
of economic management, the company
is developing SimFarm. The latter is a
detailed and user-customizable approach
to the agricultural industry.
Three-Sixty Pacific is supplementing
its line of highly successful wargames
with an abstract strategy game called
Theatre of War. As noted in the last
report, it will feature SVGA graphics and
stereo sound, as well as some new advances in Al. It is essentially a Populousstyle interface for a chess-like strategy
game in which the action takes place in
real time. This one should make
modem-to-modem gamers very happy.
Walt Disney Software is introducing a

In addition to the British import, Jekyll
and Hyde from Palace Software, that
allows three different players to compete
against each other when three computers
are linked, there were plenty of other adventure games nearing release. Paul
Reiche's Star Control II: The Ur-Quan
Masters is Accolade's sequel to the successful action/strategy game. Now,
Reiche and co-designer Fred Ford are attempting to unite game elements in such
a way that the adventure portions of the
game are resolved by action sequences.
Fortunately, the game has a statistical
reservoir for alternate resolutions so that
non-joystick-oriented gamers can enjoy
the game, too.
While still in outer space, there are two
new players in the space adventure lineup. Accolade is now distributing Legend
products (Spellcasting 201, Timequest
and others). At CES, Legend officially unveiled their science fiction adventure
called Frederick Pohl's Gateway, based
on the HeeChee universe of the novels.
As noted in last issue's report, Legend is
introducing plenty of new technology to
their now-familiar line of games. Also,
Microprose presented a teaser when Bill
Stealey announced Johnny Crash, a
space opera game that will be the
company's first graphic adventure. Although the product should be at least a
Christmas release, the announcement
brought increased awareness of the
company's intent to broaden their
product line and the technology looks
fabulous.

Industry News

Lucasfilm was touting the virtues of
their just-released Secret of Monkey Island 2: LeChuck's Revenge and
demonstrating Indiana Jones and the
Fate of Atlantis, the three-track game
(action, puzzle or conversation-oriented)
that seemed so marvelous in principle
and so difficult to actually produce.
Sierra has plenty of new adventures
up their developmental sleeves, but they
were only showing work from Laura
Bow II: The Dagger of Amon Ra. The se-

quel to The Colonel's Bequest takes
Laura from the plantations of Louisiana
to the flapper-filled world of New York in
the '20s. Rather than following the "game
as drama" approach of the original, however, it appears that this one is going to
be a more challenging mystery to solve.
We couldn't pry the subject of Al Lowe's
new, non-Larry adventure out of him (we
thought it was going to be a comedy
western a la John Astin's "Evil Roy
Slade," but Al said we were playing a
"dead man's hand" in the high-stakes
world of computer game rumors), but he
did demonstrate the new miniature golf
game on The Sierra Network. It wasn't
technically an adventure game — but it
was the way Al played it. Anyway, with
Al's comedic background, we're betting
the new game will feature a new comic
hero or heroine in an entirely different
genre than the Larry games.
Electronic Arts has stayed away from
the graphic adventure genre for quite a
while. Now it looks like they are ready to
give it a whirl with Holmes, a graphic adventure with plenty of technological
polish to help tell one of the "lost" adventures of Sherlock Holmes.

Red Light, Green Light
(Action)
Of course, action games are always
present. Some are using cutting-edge
technology. For example, Electronic
Arts' Michael Jordan: Flight basketball
game uses digitized videotaped images
and rotoscoping to get extremely realistic
movement in a three-on-three basketball
game. Origin's Strike Commander still
looks impressive with its sophisticated
rendering, cinematic visuals and pulsepounding sound effects. Truthfully, this

Industry News

can create their own tortures for the cute
little guys and Lemmings 2, a fourthquarter release that will feature individual
personalities for the lemmings.

Red Alert (Wargames)

gaming experience may be about as
close as anyone can come to portraying
the feel of the pulp fiction series
Wingman without actually licensing the
characters and universe.
Konami's publishing partner
Renegade has an entire series of action
games that they plan to release over the
next few months. Before the end of
March, they hope to unveil Gods, an action game with puzzle-solving blending in
which players take on the role of Hercules and battle their way through three
sublevels under each of four "Boss
Monster" levels. In this game, however,
the "Boss Monsters" are equivalent to the
four guardians of the secret of immortality. They also plan to release a Nintendo-esque children's game called Magic
Pockets and an action/role-playing game
based loosely on the kind of Victorian
England gone awry that Sterling and Gibson portrayed in their co-authored best
seller, The Difference Engine. The roleplaying aspects are largely limited to
upgrading weapons and abilities, as well
as featuring an interface allowing the
player to control up to three members of
the questing party of six.
Ocean is about to release a space combat fighter simulation that is being
developed on the Amiga. It is a missionbased action game with something of the
feel of Rainbird's successful Starglider
ll of a few years back. It has a larger
galaxy and missions that are more carefully defined and evaluated, however.
In conclusion, most of our readers will
be genuinely excited by Psygnosis'
plans to expand the Lemmings line. In
addition to Oh, No! More Lemmings
(see last issue's "Taking a Peek"), the
company plans to spread three new Lemmings products over the coming year.
There will be Lemmings for Kids levels
that will have been co-designed by
educators and child psychologists so that
each level teaches specific skills; a Lemmings Construction Kit so that gamers

In the wake of last year's Castles, Interplay's combination strategy, software toy
and role-playing game, Mindcraft has
decided to zero in on one element of
medieval warfare, the siege. In Siege,
players can command troops based on
fantasy or history. Two can play (although its potential for connectivity via
serial cable or modem has not been
determined) at the same computer. The
game also features a scenario builder.
Microprose had not only just released
Sid Meier's Civilization at the time of
the show, but they were nearing release
on Dan Bunten's new game, Global Conquest. As noted in the sneak preview (p.
76 of this issue), Global Conquest is a
modem game that is about to be
released under the Microplay label.
Three-Sixty showed screens from their
SVGA version of Harpoon-CD ROM that
is due this summer, but they were not
showing any of the work being done on
Patriot, a Gulf War game being designed
in association with GDW (Game Designers Workshop), or Victory At Sea, a
World War II naval game being
developed with James F. Dunnigan
(author of Shooting Blanks: War
Making That Doesn't Work). ThreeSixty was not the only publisher that
was not showing wargames, however, as
Strategic Simulations, Inc. elected not
to show their Conflict: Korea game or
their new IBM version of Carrier Strike.
The sequel to Conflict: Middle East is expected to be released in the second
quarter and the new version of Carrier
Strike should follow Conflict: Korea by a
matter of weeks.

Redshirts (Sports)
The name of the game in sports is

Industry News

for their Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf
product. The power bar is now horizontal
so that the screen can present a bigger
image area; the course architect has
been revamped so that garners can now
"Plot and Play" by immediately entering
test mode from the architect and features
real-time weather. The game is now 256color VGA and allows gamers to import
their own "objects" (bushes, sheds, trees,
hills, etc.) into the game.

bound to be golf. Access continues to
release lavish course disks for their successful Links line of products, but both
Microprose and Accolade are taking
aim at them. Microprose is releasing an
Amiga-based golf game called Greens. It
will feature four designed courses, 11 different options for different types of competitions, five camera angles that can be
adjusted both before and during replays
of any given shot and putting that takes
the player out of the view so that the line
to the hole is never obscured.
Accolade has pulled out all the stops

In other sports, MicroLeague Sports
has signed a new deal with the USA
Today Sports Network to allow
downloading of up-to-date statistics from
the network into their line of statisticallyoriented strategy games.
Finally, Konami has announced a
strategically-oriented NFL Football game
that enables garners to create their own
custom plays, use actual NFL player
statistics and choose between being the
coach, a player, general manager or
player-coach. As the last game
developed by Distinctive Software,
Inc. (now a division of Electronic Arts)
for Konami, it is expected some time
before mid-summer.

Red Only Memory
(Conclusion)
Red. The oxygen-toting little bearers
that feed my overworked brain cells and
jerk my lazy subconscious out of the
somnolent brain patterns of a journalist
who thinks he's seen it all. Well, I haven't
seen it all! My red-rimmed orbs just keep
swimming through the hypnotic hoopla
that signals that entertainment software
is alive and kicking us right in the gut of
our technological skepticism. I'll be there.
As soon as I catch my breath!

Sneak Preview

by Johnny

superhero comics have a particular
Appeal to the young male, whether
one's idea of young is 8 or 48.
Comic book characters are a
larger-than-life mythos where titanic powers confront
gargantuan problems. When the
prototypical young male is younger, feelings of helplessness create a longing for
power and being able to identify with a
superhero satisfies this need vicariously.
Yet, the contrapuntal harmony to this
bestowment of power is the sense of
responsibility inherent in the superhero's
creed and the awesome struggle with the
misuse of power by the supervillain. In a
real sense, the comic book mythos is an
acculturating influence that teaches the
young male that raw power is not a solution to the challenges of life. Rather, it is
the creative use of that power that
provides the real victories in life. In later
life, the comic mythos is a reaffirmation
of this lesson to those who, at least temporarily, may feel powerless and disenfranchised. It is a reassuring reminder
that victory is possible to those who are
creative and flexible upon facing the vicissitudes of life.
What this means is, "Superheroes are
fun!"
Supercharacters offer a necessary
release that lets us soar like Superman,
clobber like The Thing, swing like Spiderman, hide like the Invisible Girl, swim like
Aquaman, avenge like the Moon Knight
and solve mysteries like Batman. Then,
they follow up the colorful action sequences with a story that, at least in the best
stories, not only teach us about the
human frailty that is present in all of us
but encourage us to find that inner

strength that enables us to overcome
that frailty and grasp the heroic.
The trouble is that most computer
games have focused on the action and
raw power without recognizing the necessity of dealing with the human aspects of
the characters and those they encounter.
For action aficionados, this has been acceptable. The colorful costumes were
present and each superhero had his or
her special attack powers. The challenge
became that of the gamer and the onscreen character becoming one as they
fought off the minions of an evil which
could not be veiled by all their colorful supervillain costumes. Yet, previous games
have not offered enough for the comic
aficionados who love the psychological

drama and the story elements of the
graphic storytelling art to be found in
comic books. They have long yearned
for a computer role-playing game based
on superhero role-playing. Now, courtesy
of Hero Software and a publishing
partnership with Konami, it is almost
here.

Origins of the Champions
Like most role-playing, the concept of
superhero role-playing began in the
"people and paper" genre. Students at
the University of Indiana at Bloomington
created Superhero 2044, a role-playing
system in which characters created their
heroes based on their origin (inventor,
scientist, mutation, accident, etc.) and en-

Sneak Preview

L. Wilson

examples (e.g., claustrophobia,
agoraphobia, paranoia or racial
prejudice). In the computer game,
one simply selects Psychological
Limitation, its frequency and its intensity rather than creating a fullblown fiction as one would do in
the earlier version. Pointwise and
combat-wise, it works out the
same, but the computer process
is streamlined.

countered other characters by having the
game master (referee) compare the
schedule of each superhero and supervillain. The rules were fairly wide-open with
regard to hero creation and non-roleplayers had a difficult time getting
started. Another entry into the field was
Arizona-based Fantasy Games
Unlimited's Villains & Vigilantes. V&V
offered more assistance in terms of character generation than the earlier game,
but its play balance was horrendous in
terms of its combat system.
Enter Champions: The Super RolePlaying Game by Steve Peterson,
George MacDonald and Rob Bell (inspired, some say, by a major home-brew
modification of Superhero 2044, called
Defenders of Justice, that was never published). This entry allowed characters to
be created using a point system in which
all characters start with the same basic
number of points and purchase their characteristics, skills, talents, perks and
powers. If one runs out of points before
building up the superhero to the point at
which one desires him or her to be, it is
possible to select Disadvantages in

order to obtain extra points for extra
abilities. This enabled role-playing campaigns to be much more balanced, but it
required a considerably longer time commitment to character generation. Also, it
required a would-be hero or heroine to
find a game master who had a campaign
world for him/her to adventure within.
Hero Software is currently adapting
the successful "people and paper" roleplaying game into a computer version.
The character generation system is entirely compatible with the familiar role-playing rules. The character generation
screen keeps track of extra points
generated by taking disadvantages and
the number of points remaining after purchasing advantages for the superhero.
The only real difference between the
printed rules and the system one encounters on the screen is that the disadvantages and perks are merely listed according to their general categories.
For example, Psychological Limitations
within the "people and paper" game involve three basic areas: codes of conduct, fears or hatreds and personality
traits. Then, all are broken into specific

Other than the inability to flesh
out the specifics underlying some
of the general disadvantages and
perks, the computer version creates a
consistent enough Champions character
that many "people and paper" RPGers
will elect to use the "Print" feature to
print out characters created for the noncomputer version as well as the CRPG.
Beyond this, however, is a jewel of a feature which the "people and paper" genre
cannot provide. Champions on the computer features a paint program that
enables even non-artists to create costumes instantly for their superhero or superheroine and save them to disk. One
starts with a palette of more than 32
colors and a flesh-colored figure. By
choosing a color and pointing/clicking
on the figure, one creates a costume that
will be refined and utilized in the combat
sequences of the game. Gamers will also
be able to design their face masks (if
desired), special weapons, special effects
for using their powers and special soliloquies (in Marvel comics, for example,
these are tag lines like "I say thee, nay!"
or "It's clobberin' timer). Once the character generation is completed, it is time
to save the character to disk and move
into the game.

Sneak Preview

In the Know
Once the supercharacter enters the
game, action is menu-driven until an encounter takes place. The encounter can
either be a combat sequence or an interaction (conversation or interrogation).
The major difference in the combat
found in Champions, as opposed to that
found in previous games which featured
superheroes, is that it does not require
versatility with a joystick or perfect
timing in order for one to be successful.
Combat is mouse-driven and resolved by
Champions rules. One merely uses a
click of the right mouse button to move
to the location desired on the combat
screen or a click of the left mouse button
to attack the current target (seen in the
target window on the lower right of the
screen). No coordination is needed, because one always attacks the selected target, regardless of where one clicks on
the screen. Of course, if one doesn't like
the current combat tactics, it is possible
to bring up additional options and then
to try again.
The major difference between conversational interactions and earlier CRPGs is in
the fact that the database is not packed
with inane superficial conversation. Both

the player's character and the non-player
character are presented in the top portion of the screen with on-screen attitude
'buttons" in between them and a wall of
gray squares representing, potentially,
either a barrier to communication (a
wall) or a bridge to communication underneath their portraits. The player chooses
an attitude with which to approach the
NPC in a given conversation by clicking
on one of the on-screen buttons. For example, there might be six buttons with
six different approaches: comforting,
angry, friendly, patronizing, official or unsympathetic.
When the player selects an emotive approach, the screen will either display the
gray blocks disappearing toward a negative reaction on the left side of the
screen or gray blocks being added to
form a bridge toward the positive reaction on the right side of the screen. If
neither side is reached, the process starts
all over again with, often, intensified emotive states replacing the original attitudes
on the selection buttons. Finally, once
one side or another is reached, the conversation is either terminated in an unfruitful manner or the superhero receives
some valuable information.

To Be Continued
Another nice touch about Hero
Software's Champions is its open-endedness. Just as most comic stories seem to
be presented as graphic soap operas
with plot lines continued from issue to
issue, Champions will allow characters
to continue playing in the game environment after the main story is completed
(at an estimated 30-40 hours of game
play). Beyond this, Hero is planning to
expand the game's universe by offering
additional modules on a regular basis
(some written by former Marvel and DC
talents). Of course, like any entertainment endeavor, this depends upon the
reception garners give to the first "issue."
Champions may be one of the surprise
CRPG hits that expands the definition of
computer role-playing from the
predominantly "hack and slash" genre it
is currently perceived to be. With its innovations in interface and concern for
story, it is likely to be perceived as revolutionary. Of course, what are myths for if
they are not to remake the way we think
about things? In that sense, Champions
may very well be considered to be
"Super!"

"Look What They Done to My Cape!" (Computer Games and Comic Book Heroes)
It was appropriate that one of the first
appearances of a comic-book hero on
the computer screen was Superman.
Just as appropriate was the name of the
software company that published it, First
Star Software, since this was one of the
earliest licensed presentations of a costumed vigilante from the mainstream
world of comic books. Superman: The
Man of Steel was also one of the most
resold game designs in the industry,
since First Star Software published the
game in the early '80s, Main Street
Software revived the game in 1987 and
Capstone repackaged it in 1989. As action games go, Superman: The Man of
Steel was fairly straightforward. It featured seven levels and managed to
migrate from the early Atari 8-bit through
Commodore 64 and all the way to the
Atari ST and IBM.
Also in 1984, Marvel Comics made a
deal with Scott Adams' Adventure International, in which the latter would
produce a series of graphic adventures
based on the Marvel universe. The
games were hardly graphic adventures
in today's sense, being static pictures
with a story driven by the then-standard
two-word parser. Most comic fans were

disappointed because they felt that the
game designs were built around Scott
Adams' typical puzzles and did not allow
them to play the characters as the characters should have been played.
The next comic "hero" (or possibly, antihero) to appear on the computer screen
was Marvel's Howard the Duck. Activision published Howard the Duck:
Adventure on Volcano Island. Activision seemed to believe that the
George Lucas film would guarantee that
even the silliest premise would make
money. Since the primary thesis of
Howard the Duck as a comic book character was the social satire predicated on
the reader's awareness of modern
philosophy, it seems ludicrous to burden
the "Master of Quack Fu" with an adventure that seems more appropriate for
David Letterman's "Stupid Pet Tricks."
For a while, it looked like comic book
heroes would never make it to the
digitized screen again, but Tim Burton's
film success with Batman brought Data
East financial success in their 1989 Batman, followed by Batman: The Movie
(both developed by British based
developer, Ocean). At the same time,

Paragon Software elected to bring Captain America and Spiderman to the computer with Dr. Doom's Revenge. The latter was followed by X-Men: Madness at
Murderworld and The Punisher (perhaps the best combination of action and
adventure in a computer game to this
point).
Finally, 1991's The Rocketeer took the
action track once again. Interestingly
enough, The Rocketeer was made
popular in the so-called independent comics, which are sold, largely, to an adult
(as opposed to adolescent) audience.
One would have thought that a sophisticated role-playing game would have targeted this audience better than the beautifully crafted arcade-style game, but Walt
Disney Software opted to publish it as
the latter.
So, the basic history of comic book
heroes appearing in computer games
has been heavily weighted toward the action genre. Until Champions, no one had
sincerely attempted to design a game in
which players could assume the roles of
their favorite costumed avengers. Now
we'll see how well a superhero CRPG is
received.

Review

Mission Objectives
With Falcon 3.0, the design team set out to "develop the most
realistic combat simulator on the market and still make the
product playable to the widest range of consumers." To attain
this worthwhile goal, they would have to achieve six objectives:
1) develop a highly accurate flight model of the F-16 Fighting Falcon; 2) support this model with state-of-the-art graphics; 3) equip
the F-16 with a full and realistic weapons suite, to include air-toair and air-to-ground ordnance; 4) populate the environment with
capable adversaries and allies; 5) make the simulated environment large and flexible enough to support a story line rich
enough to bring the computer gamer back repeatedly and finally,
6) write a manual that thoroughly explains the operation and concepts behind the program.

Mission Specifics
Objective 1: The Flight Model — The time spent between Falcon AT and Falcon 3.0 was not time wasted. During this span,
Spectrum HoloByte worked with Perceptronics to develop the
Advanced Situational Awareness Trainer (ASAT) for the
military. The experience gained on this project paid off in the
programming of Falcon 3.0's flight models. The game provides
four different flight models of the F-16, from Simplified to High
Fidelity (which requires a math coprocessor).
The simplified model is similar to older versions of Falcon in
that the aircraft is overpowered. In addition, the easier flight
models roll slowly in relation to the real aircraft. They do, however, provide a good starting point to get into the simulation and
learn the controls until a more deft feel at the joystick is acquired.
As the player steps up the flight models, the aircraft begins behaving more like the real F-16. Thrust is not as excessive as in
the simpler flight models and the roll rate becomes more realistic. One complaint: the actual aircraft does have an impressive
maximum roll, but delivers it only with maximum stick
pressure. With the higher flight models, the simulation
gives the same high roll rate with very little joystick
input. This makes fine control a very touchy matter.

Spectrum HoloByte's Falcon 3.0
by Doug Fick
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
#PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Falcon 3.0
IBM (386 recommended)
One (Two via modem)
$79.95
Gilman Louie
Spectrum HoloByte
Alameda, CA

Doug Fick is a pilot with
over 1200 hours split between F-16As and F-16Cs. He
is a pilot instructor with the
Vermont Air National Guard.

F

alcon 3.0 is not for the

faint of heart, weak of
system arcade gamer. Its
very design boldly says, "This is the future of flight simulation,
keep up or shut up!" It will eat megabytes of hard drive memory,
devour expanded memory and demand a fast machine. A
386/20 provides a usable basic setup, but to let the game fly
with anything approaching the feel of the real plane finds a
386/33 much more suitable. A math coprocessor will step the
flight model to an even higher, more realistic level.

Loaded ordnance also affects flight characteristics. A
clean air-to-air configured F-16 flies far differently than
one loaded wall to wall with fuel tanks and Maverick
missiles. Energy bleed off from maneuvering with
stores on board is somewhat less than actually seen
with the real F-16, but as Spectrum's advertisements
say, if it had been any more accurate they'd be in
trouble. Overall, Falcon 3.0 is a very good and accurate portrayal of the F-16. Objective One
achieved.
Objective 2: The Graphics — Falcon 3.0, like
most new programs, requires VGA. In return, it
provides excellent depth of field. Allied and adversary aircraft are accurately portrayed in graphics
very similar to that found in Chuck Yeager Air
Combat, but not as detailed as those in Red
Baron. Ground targets are depicted with commendable precision. In fact, the first time ground troops
are seen running from a destroyed bunker, the
player will be convinced that there is no detail so
small it would not be included in the program. At
the highest levels of detail, the terrain scrolls by
looking very much like desert or jungle landscapes
(depending on the theater of operations portrayed).

Naturally, all this detail has a cost. Slower
machines don't have the processing stamina to keep up with the
game's demands. As stated earlier, a 386/20 can be considered
a baseline system and the game will gladly take whatever it is
given beyond that. Objective Two achieved, but at a cost.
Objective 3: Ordnance — Sidewinders, AMRAAMs and the Vulcan are provided to handle various airborne adversaries, while
dumb bombs, smart bombs, dumb rockets, smart missiles and

Review

Durandal are provided to let the player
pound the ground. This should definitely
be enough ordnance to satisfy anyone.
The weapons interface is smoothly
handled, as well. Employment of air-to-air
missiles, tied with the various flexible
viewing modes (the best on the market
to date), is especially accurately
portrayed. Further, the experience gained
on the ASAT program helped push situational awareness to new heights in the
product. The padlock view is a model
that other simulators will soon strive to
emulate. In padlock view, the pilot is able
to maintain a tally ho on an engaged bandit (no matter what the bandit's position
in relation to his aircraft), then employ
ordnance from the same viewing mode
once a firing solution is achieved.
As for actually employing missiles, the interface is nearly identical to what has to be done in an actual F-16. The player has to
hold the target near the center of the head's-up display (HUD)
long enough for the missile to uncage (target) on the bandit.
To defend against the various missile threats, the player is
provided with chaff (radar) and flare (infrared) countermeasures.
These are very effective and timely use can prevent a long walk
home. Of course, one's adversaries are also provided with these
countermeasures, so a computer pilot should not be surprised
when that $100,000 AIM-9P spears a flare instead of that MiG-29.
Employing the M-61 Vulcan 20mm cannon can be a tricky
proposition at the high-fidelity flight model level. The touchy roll
rate previously mentioned makes a gun tracking kill a real finesse job. Fortunately, the other flight models are not nearly as
sensitive, making the gun much easier to employ. The bottom
line is to get very close prior to putting the hammer down.
In air-to-ground ordnance, there is one exception to the ease of
employment rule — continuously computed impact point (CCIP)
deliveries. When designating a target with this mode in any but
the steepest of dive angles, the HUD provides steering cues to fly
until the computer calculates the proper release point. Quite
often, this release point is never achieved and the computer inhibits releasing the bombs altogether. In the actual aircraft, it is
rare to have this "delay cue" prior to bomb release. This delay
makes for some very long, predictable bombing runs that ground
gunners love.

Falcon 3.0 provides three levels of radar control: Situational
Awareness Display (SAD), Situational Awareness Mode (SAM)
and High Fidelity Radar (HFR). SAD provides 360 degrees of
coverage around the player's aircraft and gives range, relative altitude and relative heading in relation to the player's aircraft. This
is the least realistic radar mode and is more akin to an arcade
game. SAM covers the same amount of area as the actual
aircraft's radar (+ 60 degrees off the aircraft's nose). All radar
operations, such as changing radar range scale and lock-ons, are
performed automatically by the computer. HFR puts the player
in complete control of the radar. Azimuth and elevation
coverages as well as changes in range scale are all player-selectable. This is by far the most realistic mode to operate and most
rewarding once the controls are mastered. The only way to find a
more accurate APG-66 radar model is to go to an F-16 unit and
climb into their simulator. Objective Three easily achieved.
Objective 4: Adversaries — There are a total of 17 different
adversary and 16 allied aircraft portrayed, ranging from
yesterday's news (MiG-19/MiG-21) to deadly aircraft that still
have that factory new smell (MiG-29/Su-27). In addition, adversary prowess is user-selectable from hamburger to seasoned
killer (actually, novice to ace). Still, this reviewer would like to
have seen the enemy artificial intelligence a little tougher at the
hardest level. Even at the hardest levels, going against any two

enemy aircraft isn't that difficult once the
player is familiar with the game.
Surface-to-air missiles are an entirely different story. They seem plenty deadly,
made more so by the fact that it is nearly
impossible to pick them up visually; the
player must rely on the threat warning
scope to provide cues. A padlock view,
set to allow the player to see incoming
missiles, would have been a nice option
(this may or may not be realistic, depending on whether the missile motor is still
burning and leaving a visible trail or not).
The abilities of wingmen are rated in
three separate areas: dogfighting, bombing accuracy and overall flying ability.
Such depth of scope is impressive to say
the least. Objective Four achieved in admirable fashion.
Objective 5: Story and Environment — One of the biggest
complaints players had with the earlier Falcon releases was the
small playing field. A minute or two of straight line flying brought
the player to the edge of the computer world. No more! Three
combat theaters (with more scenario disks promised to follow) include: Kuwait, Israel and Panama. The game does not simply
offer a piece of these countries, either. They are entire countries
plus quite a bit of adjacent territory.
In campaign mode, the scenarios are played as a series of missions performed by the player's squadron. So, one's success or
failure will determine the progress of the story (as in Wing Commander). This allows the player to act as squadron commander
in assigning pilots, number of aircraft and number of flights. In addition, the player will be flight leader of the first element. The
story lines are rich and even include home-front news updates on
the progress of the war.
Players who are not up for a full campaign have no problem,
however; the game throws in half the state of Nevada (otherwise
known as the "Red Flag" ranges) for their benefit. The "Red
Flag" section allows players to design custom missions from
scratch, try new tactics and experiment with various modes
before committing to a campaign.
The last mode of play is the Instant Action "Player against the
World" mode. Without a doubt, this is where the new pilot should
begin. This mode allows the gamer to jump right in with minimal
preparation and take the program for a test flight. Here,
ordnance is unlimited and everything out there is hostile. Yes, the
world is plenty big. Count Objective Five a success.
Objective 6: Documentation — The 342-page manual is
more than up to the task of taking the player step by step
through each nuance of the game. There is even an excellent
primer on Advanced Fighter Tactics to give players a greater understanding of what fighter pilots do and why they do it. Indeed,
Objective Six is fulfilled.

Mission Discrepancies
The one mode of play with, perhaps, the most potential and

definitely the most bugs is modem play. As it currently stands
(under the Falcon 3.0a update), modem hook-up time is excessive, from three and a half minutes to over ten, depending on
type of scenario, modem and computer. To the design team's
credit, the program is passing a tremendous amount of information between machines, but this reviewer would certainly like to
see them reduce this amount of time.
In addition, flight is less smooth while operating in modem
mode, due to on-line error checking. Also, sudden uncommanded changes in bank angle are common. This is definitely
not something the player wants to have happen when about to
get a gun track on a friend during modem play's two-player duel

Review

mode. Given the immense possibilities modem mode of play
provides, one can only hope these obstacles are overcome.
Additionally, the game occasionally locks up. This does not happen often, but having the machine lock up twenty minutes into a
mission is not conducive to lowering blood pressure.
The last "weakness" of the program is also its greatest
strength. The program is very large in scope and is designed for
someone very interested in the area simulated. To properly enjoy
the game requires some long hours learning the system and perfecting tactics. If the player wants a quick shoot-'em-up diversion,
Falcon 3.0 is not the answer. Of course, should the gamer be
looking for an in-depth simulation of modern air combat and be
willing to put some effort into it, there is no reason to look further.

Lessons Learned

more quickly and may provide a tally ho on any incoming missiles. The time saved between using track mode vice padlock
may be all the time the player has to initiate a break turn and dispense countermeasures. Use the padlock to engage once one
bandit is singled out.
Once the immediate area is sanitized for close-in threats, switch
to the internal view to check the threat warning indicator and
radar for more distant threats. Diligently following this plan greatly reduces the chances of being shot down by an unseen bandit.
Remember, throughout the history of aerial warfare, the vast
majority of kills were scored against an unaware foe.
When engaged, shoot first. Don't waste time trying to sweeten
the shot. If it meets launch parameters, fire. Additionally, shoot
your best weapon first. Four AMRAAMs on the rails don't do any
good if the plane they are attached to is going down in a fireball.

Here are a few quick tips on how to keep situational awareness
(SA) out of the mapcase. Take advantage of the learning modes
and ability to select less capable adversaries. The game is involved and the controls to the F-16 are complex. So, it is a good
idea to make them become second nature by practicing good
habit patterns when flying in low-threat environments. This will
pay big dividends when the adversary skill level increases. That's
what peacetime flying is all about: reinforcing good habit patterns so that they become automatic in combat.

When firing a missile, don't stare to see if it scores. Use the
time to scan the sky for threats and break the current plane of
motion, while simultaneously dispensing countermeasures. Chances are, the player has been predictable while trying to obtain a
firing solution and predictable aircraft are dead aircraft.

Good pilots keep their eyes out of the cockpit to the maximum
extent possible. (That Flanker contact at 30 miles isn't nearly as
deadly as the Farmer two miles away at one's six.) To do this,
go to the track mode of viewing and toggle between all aircraft in
visual range to ensure no new bandit has entered the equation.
Use track mode vice padlock, as it shifts from target to target

Mission Summary

Try to use hit-and-run tactics, keeping airspeed up. Getting anchored in a low-speed knife fight allows Ivan's buddy across the
circle to find an entry at the player's six and ruin his whole day.

Spectrum HoloByte set their sights very high throughout the

Falcon 3.0 project. They wanted to create the best flight
simulator yet. Of course, "yet" is an interesting word that opens
up awesome possibilities for the future. As for the present, they
have achieved everything they set out to do.

Review

You Can Take the Bloodwych
Out of the Dungeon...

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DEVELOPER:
PUBLISHER:

Bloodwych
IBM (from an Amiga
and Atari ST original)
1-2
$39.95
Mirrorsoft
Konami
Buffalo Grove, IL

Konami's Bloodwych
by Allen L. Greenberg

T

he IEPA (Imaginary Environments Protection Agency)

recently announced it will be investigating what it describes
as "unhealthy and often fatal conditions" which prevail in
the dungeons that role-players have been using as playgrounds
for quite some time. Human adventurers will probably be fortunate to receive only minor citations for consuming food treated
with enough preservatives to have kept the stuff fresh throughout
recorded history, as well as the gratuitous quaffing of untested potions. Certain mages and clerics face additional charges for excessive use of explosive incantations and other spells hazardous to
the pseudo-environment. Other races, having spent millennia
under the glow of phosphorescent lichen, openly sharing magic
weaponry tainted by the blood and/or venom of
zork-knows-how-many foreign creatures, face more severe penalties. Attorneys for
the creatures are already planning to base their defense on the
non-existence of their clients. First among the heroes to be indicted will undoubtedly be the Bloodwych.
The Bloodwych are really a swell bunch of guys who, several
years ago, were quick to answer the trans-Atlantic call for more
dungeon adventures for the Atari ST and Amiga computers.
Bloodwych quickly became one of the most sought-after im-

ported games by owners of those machines, and is now available
in the United States for IBM computers. It features close-up, realtime action along with an icon-based command system. This
combination is rapidly becoming popular in today's CRPGs and
forms what this reviewer has referred to as the "gut-level interface." The game also boasts several other innovative features
which have since failed to appear in any other program of its
type.
The player must adopt the persona of one of the 16 Bloodwych
champions, recruit three other characters from that group and
lead them in a dungeon expedition to destroy the
villain-in-residence. Alternatively, two players may each adopt a hero and
form their own parties, letting their feelings for each other govern
their interactions. Under this option, each party is assigned his or
her own separate-but-equal portion of the screen. One player,
then, simply treats the other's party like any other computergenerated characters which may be bargained with, ignored or
fought against. (An option allowing two players to connect via
modem could only have boosted the game's popularity and, possibly, set new records for players' telephone bills. Unfortunately,
there is no such option.)

Review

There are four classes of characters available and it is recommended that one of each be present in any party. Fighters and
mages each excel at their respective trademark tasks of combat
and spellcasting; adventurers are the most talented diplomats
and assassins are at their best with a bow and arrow. Each of the
game's 16 title characters belongs to one of the four classes, and
possesses individual ratings in familiar areas such as strength
and charisma. Muscle and magic are certainly vital skills in
Bloodwych, but no less so is diplomacy. It is also unlikely that
the player will be able to complete the game without an assassin
on his team. So, fortunately, the game is well-balanced enough
that each character has some specialty to add to the party's
chances of success.
In addition, characters can perform with limited skill outside of
their specialty. All classes may cast spells and each character
enters the dungeon with one spell inscribed in his spellbook. To
cast a spell, the character is made to consult his or her book and
memorize the spell. The player must also decide how many
"spell points" to invest in the casting. A greater expenditure of
these points produces a more favorable result as well as a
greater drain on the spellcaster. Unfortunately, these spells are
not documented and it is left to the player to discover the use of
such obscure incantations such as "alchemy" or "magelock." Acquiring new spells takes place while the character is asleep,
provided he has gold to pay for the service and has advanced
sufficiently in rank. At these times, the character will be visited
by the Spell Fairy. Yes, the Spell Fairy.
In the dungeon the player will encounter those Bloodwych who
are not members of his party, equipment merchants and no
small number of monsters. It is possible to battle each of these in
order to gain their possessions, but the player who does so will
not complete the game. Selecting from the choices on an extensive dialogue menu, the player must both converse and barter
with all he meets. Shrewd applications of flattery, salesmanship
and an occasional dose of magic will help pry food, water, some
useful objects and important information away from many wouldbe enemies. The creatures have a short attention span, however,
and a boring conversation serves as mere foreplay for battle.
Dialogue takes place, not only with individuals whom the party
encounters, but within the group as well. A member may be commended for his or her initiative. Such compliments may make
that person more valuable to the team or simply more likely to
cause problems by acting on his or her own. Admonishing that
character will produce the opposite result. At any time, a member may be dismissed from the party in order to create a vacancy for someone else encountered in the dungeon. Another of the
game's innovations allows a member of the group to remain in
one spot while the others go somewhere else. Then, the player
may switch back and forth to that individual's viewpoint. This is
a wonderfully useful feature for helping to determine the function
of the dungeon's myriad switches, buttons and pressure plates
which frequently result in changes at remote locations.
There are nearly 40 levels to be explored and extensive graphpaper mapping is required. The "compass spell" will prove valuable, particularly in the various spinners and mazes. The place is
organized into four dungeon levels with five towers, no part of
which may be ignored if the quest is to conclude successfully.
The puzzles, for the most part, are of the mechanical type, which
require the player to manipulate switches and special items in
order to gain access to other areas of the dungeon.
Players of the MS-DOS version are likely to be unimpressed
with the graphic look of Bloodwych. The game's graphics on
the Amiga and Atari ST were adequate at the time of its original

release, but appear to have suffered in being redrawn on the
IBM. The pictures are simple, blockish and contain a minimum
of detail. The dungeon's occupants give the appearance of paper
dolls mounted on Popsicle sticks for the purpose of a child's first
puppet show. They raise and lower their arms during combat,
but they might just as easily be waving "Hi." The scenery is also
very small — only one-half of the screen is used in the one-player
version and, of that, two-thirds are taken up with menus and
icons. Sound effects in the game are likewise uninspiring and
owners of soundboards will either choose not to use them or be
forced to listen to the program's repetitive opening music for the
duration of the quest.
Bloodwych was designed to be played using the mouse, although the keyboard may also be used. In a two-player game,
the second player is supposed to be able to use a joystick, but
this reviewer was unable to do so. In any event, the mouse-versus-keyboard combination seems to work well. The only significant problem with the interface is caused by the tiny, closely
crowded icons. It is easy to click on the wrong command and,
for example, instruct the hero to turn away from his adversary
rather than attack. Needless to say, there are times when a fullscreen display would have been greatly appreciated.
Despite its weak graphics, Bloodwych scores very solidly on
game-play and deserves serious consideration from dungeon
fanatics. Its budget price should certainly not be mistaken as an
apology for an inferior gaming experience. Indeed, the IEPA will
have its non-existent hands full in trying to evict players from this
dungeon.

Review

"Actors are not animals, they're human beings!"
"They are? Have you ever eaten with one?"
— Gene Wilder and Zero Mostel in Mel Brooks' The
Producers
ost in L.A. (LILA) is Accolade's follow-up to their initial graphic adventure game Search for the King, starring Les Manley. Gone, however, is the conventional
cartoon figure who nervously peered out from the gold
record label on the earlier game's package. In his place is a
Les made of real flesh and bone — or at least as close to
real flesh and bone as Hollywood ever approaches. LILA
uses dozens of digitized photos of actors, actresses and
models to tell a story of lust, logic and mayhem in Los Angeles, without once stopping to remove its tongue from its
digitized cheek.

L

With LILA, Accolade seems to be breaking away from
the standard graphic-adventure appearance and interface,
the "look and feel" most commonly associated with games
from Sierra. Many adventure games being released now
feature no-typing, object-oriented interfaces. However, this
reviewer found Accolade's to be one of the least cluttered
and remarkably easiest to use. The game is heavily mousedependent, but use of the keyboard is still an option. By
moving the cursor over the graphic screen, the player observes that it may change to a set of footprints or a question
mark. Footprints indicate that Les may be made to walk to
that location, while a question mark signals that some other
interaction is possible.
Not once in LILA does the player have to endure the
inept command, "Move Closer!" If there is an object or character on the screen which requires Les to move toward it in
order to carry out a given command, he will do so on his
own. Further, the player need not worry about guiding Les
around corners or other graphic obstacles. Once the player
clicks on a location with the footprint cursor, Les finds his
own way there with gratifying quickness. There is also a
refreshing lack of pixel-sized items buried in the graphic display which the player might too easily miss.
Objects which Les has in his inventory are revealed when
the player moves the cursor to the bottom of the screen.
By clicking on an object, the player may either read a brief
description of it or select, "Use this item with...." If the latter
is selected, the cursor then becomes the chosen object and
the player may position it anywhere on the graphic screen
to complete the interaction. Along with Les' inventory, a
"computer" icon may also be selected. This calls up a
menu of such mundane yet necessary functions as saving
or loading games in progress, or turning off the background music.
Clicking on an object or person with the question mark
cursor allows the player to gain more information about his
or her choice before proceeding. If that choice is an object,
it may be taken by the character. If it is a person, he or she
may then be spoken to. Communicating with other characters in the story involves selecting phrases or questions
from a menu. Certain key phrases will not appear on the
menu until the player has progressed in the game by gaining certain knowledge or performing certain tasks. In most
cases, conversation with the characters will provide hints to
the player who has not made the required progress as to
what he or she is lacking. In all cases, the character will attempt to say something funny.

Check It Out, Dude

The object of LILA is for Les to discover the UBG (Ultimate Bad Guy) who is abducting L.A.'s celebrities. Helmut
Bean, Les' Lilliputian pal from Search for the King, now
numbers himself among Hollywood's rich and famous. Unfortunately, "rich and famous" has now become "marked
and endangered." When Helmut disappears mid-way
through a phone conversation, Les decides it's time apply
his superior mind to the case. In the process, Les will meet
up with nearly every West Coast stereotype and cliche ever
presented in the movies.
Beginning with the mellow-brained, hyper-tanned, hardbodied perfectionists at Venice Beach and continuing with
the sleaze-lords and eccentrics of Hollywood Boulevard, Les
will need to understand the many egos which populate the
city he is investigating. It was generally reassuring for this
East Coast reviewer to know that he could, at any time, call
on his West Coast editors for help in the
translation of certain California-specific
phrases.

by Allen L. Greenberg
Les Manley in:
Lost In L.A.
SYSTEM:
IBM
PROTECTION; Code-wheel look-up
PRICE:
$59.95
DESIGNER:
Steve Cartwright
PUBLISHER:
Accolade
San Jose, CA
TITLE:

Name-dropping is clearly the rule in LILA
and seemingly hundreds of movie greats
receive a tip of the hat from the program's
authors. At times, the game recalls the silliness of a madcap 1960s spy film. The ending is based on
an old Vincent Price horror favorite that has become the victim of satire countless times since it first appeared. Other
computer games also receive their share of jibes and one
scene includes a long list of famous game titles. Les is also
particularly fond of reminiscing back to the old pre-VGA
days of his previous adventure.
The game is relatively easy to solve, although the player
will need to be thorough in directing Les' explorations in
order to successfully solve the mystery. Although the
volume of inventory Les must gather is not large, certain
key items are misleadingly inconspicuous. Players may also
look forward to a small degree of nudity in the game's introduction and several scenes of implied sex in the story itself.
Les has a unique ability to multi-task his computer expertise along with his romantic talents.
It is very appropriate that this particular adventure game,
with its extravagant use of live actors, takes place in Los
Angeles. The cast easily resembles a group of Hollywood
"wanna-bes" waiting to hear from their agents, perhaps
wondering if they will now be forever type-cast as "software
actors."
In addition to the close-ups of the models, the game features some interesting hand-painted graphics to represent
larger and more distant views. The blend of live action with
the painted scenery works well and the transition from one
to the other is quite smooth. The 3-D effect in wide-angle
shots is also particularly well-achieved, as is the scrolling
from one screen to the next. Mindless pop music plays
throughout the program unless the player chooses to play
without it. Certain sound effects, however, such as loud
female shrieks, may not be turned off and can happen unexpectedly.
If LILA has a drawback, it is its concentrated serving of
pop-California culture and West Coast "inside" humor.
Otherwise, this beginner-level game represents a good,
solid effort from Accolade. The digitized photos will not appeal to everyone and may not even be appropriate for an
adventure game taking place outside of California. But,
heck, actors need to eat.

Review

by Todd Threadgill

ad guys have a knack for sticking around. From
Professor Moriarty to Darth Vader, men with evil in
their hearts have proved difficult to defeat throughout
the entire history of literature, film and television. And so it
is with computer games, as the wicked Gir Draxon himself
returns to fight another day in Dynamix's latest release,
Nova 9. Defeated by brave gamers in Stellar 7, Dynamix's
landmark arcade-action hit recently spiffed up and released for
MS-DOS and the Amiga with improved graphics and sound, Gir
Draxon now leads another relentless assault force of Arcturan
baddies. This time he's not kidding around!

B

TITLE:
Nova 9
SYSTEM:
Amiga, IBM
REVIEWED:
IBM
PROTECTION: None
PRICE:
$34.95
DESIGNER:
Paul Bowman
PUBLISHER:
Dynamix
Eugene, OR

Filled with non-stop action against intelligent computer-controlled enemies, Nova 9 is a tough game to beat. While Stellar 7 offered armored arcade combat on seven different worlds of increasing difficulty, the action in Nova 9 stretches across the surfaces of nine planets and features some of the most challenging
action this reviewer has ever seen in an arcade-action game.
For those unfamiliar with the first game, Stellar 7 is a first-person perspective science fiction battle-tank game. Nova 9 carries
on the ideas from the older game and improves on them. The
player is still the pilot of a heavily armed hovercraft-tank vehicle
(now in its second generation and named the Raven II). There

are many, many enemy types in Nova 9 (very few of which are
documented in the manual, leaving the majority to be discovered
by the unsuspecting player!), and all of them are creative in both
design and presentation. They are also extremely dangerous to
the Raven II. It is quite easy to find oneself being mercilessly shot
at by peripheral enemy forces while staring in wonder, jaws
agape, at a newly-discovered enemy.
Nova 9 starts up with a cinematic introduction to the storyline.
While players familiar with the Wing Commander games (especially Wing Commander II) will find Nova 9's cinematic scenes
somewhat less than impressive, they serve their purpose well
without being overly long or intrusive. In the opening scenes, the
player finds out that Gir Draxon's ship has crashed on an unnamed planet (which, fortunately for our villain, just happens to
have a breathable atmosphere). Upon emerging from the wreckage of his ship, he annihilates one of the local critters and gazes
malevolently at a distant city. Later, a garbled distress call comes
in. The Arcturans are attacking the Nova 9 system! Gir Draxon is
back in business and things don't look good for the forces of
peace and freedom as the opening credits begin to roll.
Fortunately, there is someone within reach of the Nova 9 system, someone who stands as the sole warrior of good against the
marauding hordes of Arcturans — that's right, the player's going
in there alone. Well, not completely alone. There will be the assistance of "Sparky," a repair droid who can fix even the most
serious damage quickly and easily; and S.A.R.A.H., a super-computer with a woman's face. (The player is cast in the role of Captain John Alex and S.A.R.A.H. was created in the image of Alex's
dead wife, Sarah.) Once again designers have made the unnecessary assumption that the player is male. While this may be true
for the majority of computer game players, it is certainly not always the case. This comes as a surprise from Dynamix — being
a subsidiary of Sierra, one would hope that the efforts made by
the parent company toward representing both sexes equally
would be made manifest in the products of the subsidiary.
S.A.R.A.H. travels with the player into the fray and offers advice
from time to time, but for the most part the player is sent to battle with (aside from the Raven II) little more than moral support.
What else is new?
Nova 9 is all about action and the game's designers have
proven themselves well attuned to what makes a good game in
this vein. The pacing of the action, with periods of frenzied activity interspersed with slow moments, during which the player
can take a breather, creates an irresistible momentum that keeps
the player glued to the computer. The game is structured in
levels, with the player warping to a new planet at the beginning
of each level. Once on the new planet, the player will battle
swarms of enemies until the Boss enemy shows up for that level.

Review

These Bosses are awesome, fascinating and challenging. They
are not easy to beat. As an example, consider the Boss of the
first level (the planet Kryon): a huge, tank-like creation with a
completely impervious bulldozer-shaped shield across its front.
This thing attacks by ramming into the Raven II repeatedly and it
moves fast, so getting behind it isn't easy. With each new level
comes new enemies and a new Boss (such as a mine-laying
tank, whose mines slither in lizardlike fashion directly toward the
Raven II, and a gargantuan brown salamander that fires bursts of
deadly shells in an arc). There is certainly plenty to do at all
times.
In addition, the enemies one encounters are intelligent enough
to keep the player hopping. There have been many games since
the dawn of computer gaming in which the computer-controlled
enemies possess the collective intelligence of a brick — they
could only defeat the player through sheer numbers. Thankfully,
Nova 9 rises above this level. Each of the enemies has its own
distinctive way of aiding in the player's destruction. Generic
tanks and sand skimmers (looking like roller skates on skis)
crisscross the landscape, their gunsights locked on the Raven II,
while swooping creatures resembling pterodactyls and hopping
birds (in this reviewer's opinion, the most annoying of all the
enemies in the game) lob shots at the player. All of these creatures are well-animated. One note: players with slower machines
(like this reviewer's 10-MHz 286 machine) who reveled in Stellar
7's blazing animation speed may be somewhat disappointed with
the frame rate in Nova 9. Since there is so much more going on
in the new game, it slows down the animation considerably. One
solution, of course, is to turn down the level of graphic detail, but

doing so will remove the flashy graphics that are a major part of
the game.
With all this going for it, one could ask, surely there's something about Nova 9 that could use improvement? Of course
there is. The major problem with Nova 9 is its lack of a savegame function. While some may decry the option of saving one's
game in an arcade-action game, this reviewer found the game to
be sufficiently difficult to warrant the inclusion of such a feature.
It is particularly frustrating to emerge relatively unscathed from
the first few levels of the game, lose it all on the next level, and
have to start all over from the beginning. The designers have
taken a small step in the right direction by allowing the player
two chances to continue from the place at which he left off, but a
save-game feature would eliminate a lot of frustrating repetition.
Another problem (minor, to be sure, but an annoyance nonetheless) is an inconsistency in the directional controls between Stellar 7 and Nova 9. In the earlier game, holding down the "2" and
"3" keys (on the numeric keypad) caused the Raven to back up
while turning to the right. Similarly, holding down the "2" and "1"
keys backed up while turning left. In Nova 9, these keys cause
exactly the opposite result. As a grizzled veteran of Stellar 7, this
reviewer was thrown off by this change and forced to re-learn the
commands. This could have easily been avoided.
Despite these problems, Nova 9 is an excellent offering for arcade fans everywhere, particularly those with machines fast
enough to support the game's breathtaking graphics. A thoroughly professional effort, Nova 9 follows in the illustrious footsteps
of its predecessor while blazing a new trail on its own.

OPINION

Scorpion's View
Scorpia's "Eye"-temized Deductions:
Strategic Simulations' Eye of the Beholder II
as told by Scorpia
Scorpia is an experienced and
respected adventure game expert.
CGW is pleased to be able to provide
this forum for her distinctive and
often controversial perspective.

E

ye of the Beholder II: Legend of

Darkmoon is the stand-alone follow-up to the previous Eye of the
Beholder from SSI. This time around, instead of wandering through sewers, your
party gets to explore the passages and
byways of an evil temple.
If you saved your characters from the
previous game, you can transfer them to
Darkmoon. Unlike the usual procedure
in SSI transfers, the characters will keep almost all their equipment, including the
really good items, such as the sword +5,
the halberd +5, magical armor, wands, potions, etc. About the only things that
don't make the transition are the stone
portal keys.
This gives the transferred characters a
big advantage, and considering the toughness of the opponents in Darkmoon,
bringing over your party from EOB I is
highly recommended. The game will be a
little easier if you have your original characters and equipment. You will have to
make a choice, though, on which ones to
transfer, as you can start with only a
party of four.
Important! The original version of
EOB II contains a bug in regard to tripleclassed half-elves. Should you bring over
such a character, the game is likely to
crash on you at certain points. If you find
this happening in your game, you can do
one of two things: (1) start over, transferring some other character instead of the
triple half-elf, or (2) send your EOB II
disks to SSI for a replacement.
If you didn't play EOB I, or no longer
have a save game from it, there are two
other options available. The first is to create a completely new party of four characters. You have the same classes and
races to choose from as before, the
ability to modify the stats (highly recommended), and the characters will start off
at around level 6, with armor, weapons,
spells, etc.

The second option is to go with a precreated "quick start" party. This is a wellbalanced team, also of about level 6,
with weapons, armor, spells, and so on
(since these are pre-created, however,
you can't modify their stats). For those
who want to get into the game right
away, this is a good choice. Remember,
however, that you can't change any of
the party members; it's all or none. If you
don't like the mix of characters, you'll
have to create your own group.
Whichever team you decide on, it will
start in the same place, namely a small
woods outside Darkmoon Temple. Those
who were looking forward to spending
some time out in the fresh air will, alas,
be disappointed. The forest is a very
small area, and there isn't much to do in
it, except kill a lot of wolves. All of the action in the game takes place in and
under the temple.
So, it's best to find your way there as
soon as possible. You will be met at the
door by a pair of clerics. While they look
okay and sound congenial, they are, in
fact, evil (all the clerics in here are evil).
You will have to kill both of them to
penetrate into the temple's inner recesses. Doing that, by the way, permanently
shuts the door to the forest, and you
won't be able to leave again.
Once past the inner door, you can go
either upstairs or downstairs. The
upstairs has two locked doors which
can't be opened at the start, so you'll
have to go below. This is where the
game proper begins.
Like EOB I, Darkmoon is a linear
game, which has to be done in a certain
order. First is the underground, followed
by the three towers. Completing each
area provides the means to reach the
next one.
When you're done with the underground portion, you will have four horns
that (when used in the right location)
open up the way to the first tower. This
tower is actually a testing ground for
Darkmoon clerics (pretty rugged tests,
too). Successfully completing it gives
your party the mark of Darkmoon.
This mark, in turn, allows you to pass a

magic door that leads to the second
tower. Among other things, you will find
the crimson key somewhere along the
way, and this key opens the door to the
red tower, which is the end game.
That sounds quick, but don't be
deceived. It's a long haul from the
temple's front door to the big confrontation with Dran Draggore. EOB ll is a
larger game than EOB I and there are
many more puzzles to solve than the first
game had. Don't expect to just whiz
through this one in a couple of days.
As before, you will come across some
NPCs (living and dead) whom you can
take into the party. Since there is only
room for two extra people, you will have
to make some decisions on which ones
to accept. I went with Shorn the Dwarven
cleric and Calandra the human fighter,
since extra healing is always welcome
(and necessary in one area), and I already had three magic users in my
group (actually, dual-classed Elves), and
so didn't need any more. Your needs
may be different, however, so don't just
go by that.
Do keep in mind that any NPC you dismiss is gone for good and you can't get
that person back again. Further, if you
turn down someone who asks to join
you, he or she also goes away forever.
So, make your decisions wisely.
In general, you can get through most of
the combats with the usual mix of fighting, spells and sashaying around to avoid
damage. However, there are three spots
in particular that will be of more than
average difficulty.
The first is underground, where you
must take on a lot of skeleton warriors.
(These are exactly the same as the
skeleton lords of the first game; only the
name has been changed, for obscure
reasons.) These things are tough, as
anyone who has fought them before will
remember, and they come in groups of
four.
Even worse, there are some clerics with
them and these priests cast spells. Compounding the problem is the fact that
you're down there in narrow passages,
with little room to maneuver. It all adds

OPINION
up to some very tough fighting fairly
early in the game.

fancy beginning, but it also has a fancy
ending. You needn't worry about another
infamous "drop to DOS" here. This time
around, there is a big finale to sit back
and watch. Further, when all the razzledazzle is over, the game automatically
makes a final save for you (called
FINAL.SAV, in fact), so your characters
are tucked away with all the experience
they've earned, ready to go on to the
next one in the series.

Your best bet here is to hit, back up,
hit, back up and keep moving until you
get to an open area where you can move
around a bit. Spells don't usually work
very well on these things, although on occasion ice storms will do some damage.
Lightning bolts are good to use when
clerics are present, as they have no
magic resistance and will take damage.
Duck into a room whenever you can to
renew spells and heal injuries. Eventually, you will be able to wipe them all out
(and you do have to kill them all), but expect to have a hard time of it.
Another problem area is the frost giant
level. The giants (even though on hands
and knees) can hit multiple party members with one blow, including those in the
back ranks. This makes them extremely
deadly, especially as you are fighting
them in narrow passages that offer no
maneuvering room. Your best tactics
here are to use protective spells, back
up, send lightning bolts at them (these
seemed more effective than anything
else) and hope you will have time to rest
up and heal the injured before any more
of them show up.
The last tough spot is the fight with
Dran Draggore. Dran is fast and deadly,
for more reasons than one. The only way
to handle him is to back up to a large
room and use maneuverability. Let your
two front fighters take swipes at him
while you keep moving (haste spells help
a little here; cast one before you start
fighting Dran). Don't bother with throwing spells at him. There isn't enough
time for that. Constant movement is the
only thing that can keep you alive in this
confrontation.
These situations point up the problems
with the interface, which has not changed
substantially from the previous game. As
someone correctly remarked, "It's only
real-time for the monsters." There is still
the hesitation when a spell goes off,
during which time no one in the party
can do anything, while the critters are
merrily hacking away at your characters.
Also, as before, precious time is lost
while you flip through a spell book to get
to a spell. Everyone in the party waits
while you click around to bring up a
magic missile or fireball or cure light
wounds. The same holds true if a character is switching weapons, or exchanging
a weapon for a spell book or holy symbol.
For a product that bills itself as "realtime," this is ridiculous. Real-time means
all characters should have a chance to
act without waiting. With as many as six

individuals to manipulate in combat, that
is not possible with the current system.
In fact, with multiple characters, it isn't
possible at all.
In my article on EOB 1, I suggested the
addition of an optional auto-combat
mode. Since the two characters up front
are almost always fighters, it makes
sense that, most of the time, you'll want
them to hack away at the opposition. Further, there are usually others in the back
ranks who have missile weapons such as
bows. In many cases, you want them to
be firing their arrows each round.
With an auto-combat mode, the fighting
types would continue to slash away, allowing you to set up spells without loss
of time or effectiveness. It would also
make things easier in terms of moving
and fighting at the same time.
Currently, you need two hands to fight
effectively in combat, because the movement arrows are on the opposite side of
the screen from the character icons. That
is poor placement, since you must then
have one hand on the keyboard to move
the party and one hand on the mouse to
click on weapons and spell books. Trying
to move and fight using just the mouse
is virtually impossible.
Moreover, people who have poor coordination in their off-hand or whose
reflexes are slow are at a distinct disadvantage, since this type of combat borders on the arcade in quality. I have
gone on at length about this point because — let's face it — much of your time
in any CRPG is spent fighting monsters.
So important an activity requires a welldesigned interface and that is where the
EOB series is at its weakest. It is the only
major weak spot, but it's a big spot. The
games would be more enjoyable and less
frustrating, if the combat engine were
overhauled to make it less of an exercise
in dual-hand coordination.
On the bright side, there have been
some improvements made since the last
game. Not only does Darkmoon have a

As mentioned earlier, Darkmoon has
more puzzles, although fortunately none
of them are like the "Beholder bonuses."
Most can be solved by a combination of
inspection and trial and error. You can experiment to your heart's content, because now there are five (or six, if you
use the Quick Start Party slot) save positions in the game.
The majority of problems relate to fiddling with pressure plates, levers, and buttons, but there are a couple of instances
where you have to deal with pits that
open and close. These are extremely annoying, since your timing here must be
exact, and you have to move fast (but
not too fast). Outside of certain combats,
these gave me more trouble than anything else. While the game is linear in
progression, the design is fairly open,
and you can always return to an earlier
area in any of the towers or underground. So, if you happened to miss picking up an important item somewhere,
you can go back to a previous location
to search for it. The way everything is
laid out, it's almost impossible to find
yourself painted into a corner with no exit.
The one possible exception is the green
crystal hammer (which looks like an axe
when it's lying on the ground, for some
reason). There is a note in the game box
with the warning that you must have this
hammer before taking the mark of
Darkmoon. I have heard from some
players that you can, in fact, make your
way back to the beholder level (yes,
there are several in the game) to obtain
the hammer, but did not try that myself.
To be on the safe side, and make life
easier, get the hammer before you leave.
Overall, Eye of the Beholder II:
Legend of Darkmoon is a more substantial game than its predecessor. There is
more to do, a bigger variety of critters to
fight and a larger area to explore.
Graphics are a bit finer than in EOB 1.
Sound effects are about the same. Some
of the problems with the earlier game
(poor ending, lack of save positions)
have been fixed, although the combat interface remains a sore point. If you enjoyed the first game, you will definitely
like this one.
Copyright 1992 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Three high ranking games are being inducted
into the CGW Hall of Fame this month: one
from Microprose (Sid Meier's Railroad
Tycoon); and two from Origin Systems (Lord
British's Ultima VI and Chris Roberts' Wing
Commander). These three games join an impressive list of the industry's finest. >

> The recent strong showing by sports games
has prompted a new category. It will start next
month, along with a new feature: "The Most
Played Game: Last month a new question
began in the Poll: "What computer game have
you spent the most hours playing in the past
30 days?" Look for the first results next month.

Bestseller List

Game Hints

S

o here we are again in the back
room, which is as cluttered as
ever. Spring is just around the
corner (eek! already?), so maybe Fred
and I will do a little cleaning one of these
days — if I ever find the time for it. Not
too much, though; there's a sort of distinction in having a room decorated in
Post Office Modern and Fred does like
having a place where he can (ahem)
sack out (grin). But enough of that, let's
move to the important stuff.
However, before we get to the mail
sacks, there are a couple of items to men
tion. Once again (sigh), I have to remind
people who live in the United States to
enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope with their help requests. Too
many letters have come in since the
holidays without that vital enclosure. I
don't like to put aside pleas for assistance from fellow adventurers, but ... no
SASE, no reply. Please remember to
enclose one when you write.
And now, good news for IBM/compatible and Macintosh owners! Activision, rising like a phoenix (we hope!)
from the bankrupt ashes of Mediagenic,
has re-issued twenty, count 'em, twenty,
classic Infocom text adventures, all in
one big package! This is the real stuff!
The original games, with (ahem) all the
words! Yay! (Okay Scorp, calm down a lit
tle....) Whew! Anyway, this has to be the
biggest bargain to come along in years.
After having to tell readers for so long
that the only way to get old Infocoms
was to go through long and tedious (and
usually frustrating) searches, it's a
pleasure to announce that they are now
available again (well, at least if you have
an IBM or Macintosh).
There are some great ones in this package: the entire Zork series, the
Enchanter trilogy, Hitchhiker's Guide to
the Galaxy, Lurking Horror, Starcross,
Planetfall, Stationfall and Suspended
(still, to my mind, the toughest Infocom
I ever played), as well as several in the
mystery series (Deadline, et al).
In addition to the games themselves,
you also get detailed maps for most of
the adventures and a giant book of hints
and answers (this is mainly a collation of
all the old Invisiclues, but without the
need for a special marker to reveal the
hints). So, you have absolutely everything you need to play the games, all in
one package. Wow!
There is a special installation routine
that will put to hard disk as many or as
few of the games as you like, and it can

be run any time to install more. This
is handy when disk space is tight, or
if you've already played some in the
past. Even better, because these are
mainly text adventures (Zork Zero
does have some graphics), you don't
need a lot of RAM, or fancy graphics
adapters, or extended memory or a topof-the-line computer to play them.
The IBM box even includes both 5.25
and 3.5 disks, so you're covered,
whatever floppy drive you have. So, for
all of you out there who've been looking
for Infocom, run, do not walk, to your
local software outlet and ask for The
Lost Treasures of lnfocom from Activision.
And now, on to the mail!
Elvira II: In my article last time, I mentioned that there seemed to be no way of
turning off the music. Since then, I have
learned of an undocumented command
that will do just that: press Alt-M. So,
you can discard your earmuffs (or plug
your sound card back in) and use that
when the music gets to be a bit much.
Also, another dead end to watch out for:
resurrecting the priest should be the last
thing you do before the showdown with
Cerberus. Don't bring him back to life
until you have collected all the necessary
items and returned to the Shaman the objects he requested. Otherwise, you won't
be able to finish the game.
Might & Magic III: A lot of people are
having trouble in the Fortress of Fear. I
have to say, that one is a bit annoying. It
works like this: there are eight heads and
sixteen levers. That's two levers for each
head: one makes a head appear and the
other makes it disappear (always the
same two levers per head). You have to
run back and forth and discover which
levers work which heads (that's a lot of
running around). Then, once you know
all that, you have to work the necessary
levers to make just the corner heads appear (that's what the "when only the
corners moan" clue refers to). What happens after that, I'll leave you to figure
out; it should be pretty obvious.
Monkey Island II (LeChuck's
Revenge): A new game (at least as I
write this), but questions are starting to
trickle in (well, it is tougher than the last
one; watch for a Tale next issue). The
spitting contest is giving some people a
hard time. Well, you need three things.
One, you have to work up a good
phlegm. (Have you noticed that whenever spit is shown, it's always green?)
Two, you need a good wind (keep an
eye on the crowd). Three, you have to
cheat (a little distraction helps here).
When all these are put together, our boy
Guybrush should have no trouble walking away with first prize.

Eye Of The Beholder: Continuing with
the series of hints for the Beholder
bonuses: On level 11, look for the room
with the levers (this is where you find the
Dwarven healing potion). You will have
to work these levers twice. Once to make
something appear in the niche, and the
second time, to trigger the bonus. On
your second go-round, you need to place
a clerical item in the niche. Then, fool
with the levers (it will take a while) until
two in the same relative positions are different from the others. On level 7, the
bonus is related to the three niches opposite the stone portal. You need to put
something in each niche. Consider where
these niches are and what you have to
use may become apparent.
Spellcasting 201: Some people are
having trouble with completing the first
frat assignment of climbing the statue
and affixing the mustache. They figure
they know where the spell is that they
need, they just can't get it. Well, some
things may not be breakable, but there's
always hack'n'slash. Just apply yourself
to the problem, and you may find a gem
of an answer.
Time Quest: Fun and games in the
harem, but not for everyone. Finding out
who's fooling around with one of the
wives and which wife, can be a
headache. Actually, we all know it has to
be the Vizier, because there isn't anyone
else. Proving it, however, is another matter. He sure does like those figs, eh? And
there has to be some reason why the
wives leave their clothing behind when
they go to the baths. Save the game and
experiment. (It's always the same wife.)
Conquests of the Longbow: Rescuing the widow's sons is a tricky matter.
You can't just go barging in (although
you'd think a hero like Robin Hood could
easily take out a pair of guards) and
trying to sneak in to get the boys out
while the guards are away won't work.
There isn't enough time for that. What
you need to do is make sure the guards
will be away for awhile. One of them is
certainly thirsty. Well, you know what
Robin is supposed to be famous for (thief
that he is), now go do it.
And that's about it for this look into the
mailbag. Remember, if you need help
with an adventure game, you can reach
me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie:
Stop by the Games RoundTable (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US
Mail: (Remember that SASE if you live
in the US!): Scorpia, P.O. Box 338,
Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1992 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Foreign Correspondence

Next on the CRPG listing is Fate —
Gates of Dawn, from the German developer Reline and published by Rainbow
Arts. Fate is another CRPG that is supposed to be enormous. What is this? A
trend toward comparing games by stating, "We squeeze more square miles of
dungeon into our CRPG than you can?"

Over There
Role Up!
by Paul Rigby

R

ole-playing games form a large

part of this month's column, ranging from all over the European
arena. First on the list is Abandoned
Places, from the UK outfit known as
Electronic Zoo. However, the guys who
actually produced the game come from
Hungary.
Played with a first-person perspective,
in classic Dungeon Master style, Abandoned Places (AP) is divided into three
main portions: the countryside, the towns
and the dungeons. Actually, judging by
the early version, this game will not push
any genre boundaries back. It does, however, add a few frills (the above-mentioned outer world portion of the game
being one example) such as auto-mapping (although one has to earn it) and a
varied set of scenery in the dungeons.
The interface is very Dungeon Masteresque, sporting the four character
portraits which can be clicked upon to
gather more information, plus additional
windows for directional commands, text
output and so on.
I he crux of the game is that old
chestnut, the UBG (Ultimate Bad Guy).
To get to him/it the party will need to
wander through a myriad of interconnected quests and puzzles. Finally, the
title of this game (which is touted to be
very large indeed) appears to be a misnomer — the game world appears to be
bursting at the seams with characters
and monsters! AP is currently out on
Amiga with other formats to follow.

Fate is another first-person perspective
role-player for the Amiga (with IBM and
Atari ST to follow). However, programmer Olaf Patzenhauer was determined
that his game would not be like the rest.
He states:
"First of all, the game is controlled by
the computer in a systematic fashion.
The player obtains important information
during gameplay only by engaging the inhabitants and Mages in conversation. In
time he encounters numerous puzzles
that must be solved. Fate does not
employ the much-abused question/answer trick — each puzzle must be
solved step by step before each new adventure can begin."
The game centers around Winwood, a
chap who owns a small record store on
Fifth Street. Winwood falls asleep and is
whisked away to a parallel world (look,
blame the guy who wrote the manual).
Then it's... find the UBG! Many of the
aspects of Fate are standard fare. Races,
though, include some interesting beings
such as Zaraks (strong/dumb), Bes
Zaraks (semi-human), morons(!), Errins
(the demonic race), etc. The game world
is split into (surprise!) wilderness, towns
and dungeons. Travel does include
maritime transport, however.
Fortunately, encounters do not have to
be hostile. One can INTRODUCE, CHAT
and even JOKE with non-player characters. Trading and information seeking
can also be performed along with many
special questions, such as being able to
ask about the character's profession.
Combat includes a few different features such as: GROPE to grab the assailant, MOCK to irritate him and even
DUPE to hit him from behind. In addition,
the welcome feature of SPLITting the
party into sub-groups (previously only
seen in The Magic Candle) bodes well
for playability.
Specifications include: nine dungeons
with up to seven levels, four cities, up to
four simultaneous parties totalling 28
characters, 32 character classes, 11
races, 200 spells, 80 animated character
graphics and one or two surprises. For example, one of Reline's other games is a
graphic strip poker game called Hollywood Pro. Rumors are that one of

Foreign Correspondence

Reline's graphic artists "lost" one of the
Hollywood Pro girls in Fate's parallel
world. Her, ahem, clothes never made
the transition. So she's... cough... wandering around without... er.... Next!
The final CRPG for this issue is from
the British software developer Teque.
Their isometric CRPG Shadowlands is
distributed by Domark in the UK. Using
a four-character party, Shadowlands
aims to be different by focusing on puzzle interaction. That is, as opposed to
other CRPGs' strict party movement,
Shadowlands encourages individual endeavors to solve puzzles and cooperation
between party members to solve major
puzzles for the benefit of the whole party.
Initially, the Photoscape process used
by Teque introduces the first worry for
the player. Light sources are a principle
need in the game. Photoscape places
concentric circles of decreasing light
around the party or individuals and only
illuminates that part of the dungeon, or
whatever, that the light exposes, while
the rest of the screen is shrouded in darkness. Controls are icon-driven, the
gameplay is puzzle-oriented and the

magic system is scroll-based. The game
will appear (on Amiga first) during
February.
Based on the European aviation success story, Thalion has just released Airbus A320 for the Amiga (L29.99), with
IBM to follow. Designed with the aid of a
Lufthansa pilot, the emphasis is on
reality. In fact, the principle competition
for this product will be Sublogic's ATP.
Before take-off, the player is required to
fill out a flight plan. One must state the
airport of departure and arrival and any
stop-off points on the way. Passenger
numbers must be stated as must any assigned freight and the quantity of fuel required. The player will also need to state
whether flight will be via visual flight
rules or solely on instruments.
Some of the Airbus controls included in
the simulation are: left/right engine
power, hold speed indicator, DME, VOR
1, VOR 2, NDB 1, IAS and actual air
speed, relative and absolute bearing, plus
all the other usual indicators.
Airbus promises to be a significant aviation product, complete with a wealth of

technical and support documentation
and, later, possible scenery disks et al.
Incidentally, anyone who would like to
contact this writer can do so on CompuServe (75300,1503) or by mail to 20 Malvern Road, Liverpool, England, L6 6BW.
(Please include three international reply
coupons if you would like a reply.)
Note: The above games, and any of the
other games mentioned in "Over There"
in past issues, can be obtained from:
Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY.
Telephone: 01144-51-263-6306.
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins sq., Burnt Mills, Basildon,
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ. Telephone:
01144-268-590-766; Fax: 01144-268-590076.
Software City, Unit 4, BDC, 21 Temple
Street, Wolverhampton, WV2 4AN.
Telephone: 01144 902 25304; 24-hour
credit card hotline: 01144 902 25304.
All of the above telephone numbers assume you can dial direct. If you have any
trouble, contact the international
operator.

Letters

Freak Previews
At the present time, February '92, I am still waiting for the Star
Trek: The 25th Anniversary game to be released. I called the
mail order people to see if I could change my order. Wizardry 7
and Planet's Edge [are] my choices after Star Trek. They were
also waiting to be released. All of these games, with the exception of Planet's Edge, have been covered by pseudo-reviews by
your magazine. I was expecting the Christmas issue and maybe
the November issue to be a good source when making my
choice for Christmas gift software. I was wrong.
I guess the purpose of this letter is to ask you guys for better
judgment when covering games and not to mislead us, the consumers, again and again by showing us software that will not be
available in the near future.
By the way, I have been entertaining myself with Omnitrend's
Rules of Engagement since it was released. It received a
lukewarm review on its "looks," but never a full-blown article.
Here we have a definite classic, on time, and your magazine is
somewhere counting your Nintendo cartridges.
I know you had an article on advertisement, late releases, etc.
Maybe you should go find it and read it. By giving undue attention to software which is not yet out, you are doing a serious
amount of damage to the industry.
Jose E. Lopez
San Juan, Puerto Rico
As noted in the first part of our Winter CES Report (see the
second part in this issue), the accelerating pace of advances
in digitized sound, three-dimensional technology and connectivity caused a veritable tidal wave of "slippage" in the entertainment software industry during 1991. By attempting to
cover the "cutting edge" of that industry, CGW's editorial staff
found themselves in a perpetual tug of war between sharing
the exciting news of what was "on the way" and playing the
cynical role of skeptic. In essence, we opted to err slightly on
the side of excitement when writing Sneak Previews on
works in progress, while holding our full critical broadsides
for the Reviews and opinion articles which will come after
the game is published. Writing about product delays when
software publishers are working overtime in order to release
products with the latest in technology would only serve to
dampen our readers' spirits, anger publishers, allow other

publications to appear to have a more inside track than we
do and discourage our staff and writers (after all, finding out
the latest and greatest revitalizes us when we feel overworked).
Instead, we opted not for "pseudo-reviews," but for Sneak
Previews. These are clearly delineated feature articles about
works in progress. This means that the design or graphics
could change and production could be delayed after we
cover the game. This turned out to be the case with The
Magic Candle II, as the design team completely redrafted the
graphics so that they would be VGA instead of EGA. Ultima
VII presented a different problem, as the design team is integrating so many new technologies that they failed to consider how many things could go wrong when the new
modules had to interface with each other. We had no way of
knowing how long the delay would be when we presented
the "Sneak Previews." On every occasion, we thought that
they were a maximum of a month or two away. Nevertheless, we still believe that "Sneak Previews" are worthwhile,
even before their time. We simply cannot see how they do
any harm to the industry, any more than HBO's Behind The
Scenes or a Premiere magazine article about a Christmas
movie would be damaging in a Spring issue.
By the way, just to set the record straight, CGW not only
reviewed Rules of Engagement in issue #89, but presented fulllength designer's notes in issue #84. We didn't think early
coverage of that game was damaging, either.

DisADvantageous
I find ad awards irrelevant, as ad quality is usually no indicator
of game quality.
Ralf Grisard
Centerville, OH
Is this "Top Ad Award Ballot" really necessary?
Jeff Swartz
Longmont, CO
CGW is not only read by computer gamers, it is also read
by computer game designers and publishers. The CGW Poll
gives computer gamers the chance to speak out on the
quality of games and the Top Ad Awards give computer

Letters

garners the chance to speak out on the quality of the ads
which often trigger their purchases.
As an illustration of how effective our readers' votes have
been, we noticed a trend which followed our first Top Ad competition. Prior to that competition, we had several full-page advertisements that had absolutely no screen shots of the
games they advertised. After an advertisement with lavish
use of screen shots won the competition, we noticed a concerted effort to place screen shots in almost all of the subsequent advertisements placed during the next couple of
years. Such a consumer voice is certainly neither an exercise
in the irrelevant nor a bone thrown to our advertisers at the
readers' expense. It is part of our continual effort to cover the
full spectrum of the entertainment software industry.

Used Cart Lot
Why have I not seen any information on used games? Is there
not a market for used games? Are there any places for me to
sell my used games to?
Terry Hanna
Santa Barbara, CA
While there may eventually be a used cartridge game
market and a used compact disc market (since games on
such media cannot be copied easily), there is an inherent
problem with advocating any type of market for used diskbased computer games. The problem, of course, is piracy.
Even if a potential purchaser of a used game knows that he

or she is purchasing a published, off-the-shelf version of a
game, there is no real way to know whether the seller has
kept a "pirated" copy on his/her hard disk or stored a
"pirated" version of the game at home. So, even the most innocent purchaser cannot get away from the possibility of
piracy when purchasing used games and even the most innocent seller cannot get away from the stigma of possible
piracy when selling them. For this reason, there are very few
outlets for the sale of used games.
There are, however, a few exceptions. Many computer flea
markets allow individuals to unload computer games of
which they have grown tired via consignment tables. In addition, many local and national game conventions will auction
used copies of computer games along with used copies of
board games and boxes of lead miniatures.

Dumping the Carts Before Remorse
I am tired of seeing a computer gaming magazine devote itself
to reviewing cartridge-based games for Nintendo and Sega
Genesis. There are enough mindless, worthless magazines
publishing reviews of these games. You should stick to reviewing
computer games because the people who buy your magazine
buy it for the reviews of computer games. Try to do better
before your loyal readers abandon you.
C. Hoage
Baltimore, MD
Now we know how Surfing magazine felt when they ex-

Letters

panded their coverage to include bodyboarding. The parallels
between the kinds of letters they get (and those which skiing
magazines get with regard to covering snowboarding) and
the ones we continue to get on the occasional bonus
videogame reviews we publish are incredible. A letter in the
January '92 issue of Surfing stated, "I know you're using the
excuse of sharing the ocean. But if you take that thinking a
little further, why not add sections for jet-skiers, little kids,
fishermen, fat tourists, rental rafts, and other flotsam that are
making most breaks an obstacle course?"
Of course, we use the rationale that videogames are computers and use, in some cases, exactly the same processors
as other personal computers that we cover in our magazine.
So, in a very real sense, computer gamers do share the same
"ocean" with videogamers. However, we think the fact that
many of the games we cover on the console front were originally personal computer games or happen to be the kind of
games that many of our readers are interested in keeps us
from reducing our coverage to the "rental raft" level (though
this editor has certainly put in some time as a "fat tourist").
Of course, this doesn't seem to score any points with the anticonsole crowd. Like skiers who can afford more expensive
equipment than snowboarders and surfers who may be more
coordinated than their less experienced bodyboarding
cousins, the issue doesn't seem to focus on the coverage itself, but on a "snobbery factor" of which this editor was once
a willing practitioner. Computer Gaming World has always
been more concerned with the games themselves than with
the platforms. We suspect that will always be the case.

Conversions Received
Battle Chess (Interplay) MPC
Break Point Pro Tennis
(Lance Haffner Games) IBM

Jordan vs. Bird (Electronic Arts)
Game Boy

King's Quest V (Sierra) Macintosh
MicroLeague Baseball
(MicroLeague Sports) Amiga

Red Baron (Dynamix) Amiga
Super Tetris (Spectrum Holobyte)
MS Windows

The Adventures of Willy Beamish
(Dynamix) Amiga

Wordtris (Spectrum Holobyte) Macintosh
World Class Track & Field
(Lance Haffner Games) IBM

Review

n December 19, 1991,
when Arsenio opened The
Arsenio Hall Show latenight talk show by saying, "Let's
get busy!" it was with music being
performed by Herbie Hancock as
he demonstrated The Miracle
Piano Teaching System. While it
is not unusual for musicians to use
computers as a tool for creating
their music, it takes something out
of the ordinary for Arsenio to
spend over six minutes on national
television talking about a product.

The Software Toolworks
Puts a Mira+ into Music
he Miracle Piano Teaching System

The Miracle Piano Teaching System
from The Software Toolworks is unique in that it uses artificial intelligence
and computer games to teach just about
anyone how to play the piano and read
music. While Herbie Hancock certainly
had no need for the tutorial aspects of
the system, it is designed so that anyone
can use the system and begin playing
basic songs (like "Mary Had a Little
Lamb") in under an hour.
According to John Mandel, a member
of the development team responsible for
The Miracle, "We wanted to create a system that would teach people how to play the piano in a fun and
interesting way. We wanted to make sure the student didn't get
bored or frustrated." The result was a keyboard and video game
cartridge developed originally for use with the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES). This system combined basic music
theory with video games in order to teach music and keyboard
to people of all ages without the fears usually associated with
(gasp!) piano lessons. Now, an advanced version of The
Miracle is available for use on IBM-compatible systems.
The IBM version of The Miracle Piano Teaching System consists of an electronic keyboard, custom software, a cable for connecting the keyboard to the computer's serial port and two short
manuals. The basic system requirements for using The Miracle
include: an IBM compatible, at least one serial port, PC-DOS or
MS-DOS 3.1 (or higher), 512K RAM (with a CGA graphics adapter) or 640K RAM (with an EGA, VGA or Hercules graphics adapter). In addition, a hard disk, mouse and printer are recommended, but not required.
While the system may look intimidating coming out of the box,
everything can be set up and running in less than 30 minutes.
Once the electronic keyboard is connected to the computer
and the software is installed, the music lessons can begin. The
Miracle Piano Teaching System's software is divided into six
sections (graphically depicted as rooms in a house). In the
"Classroom," the computer will interact with the electronic keyboard and the user to teach 1,100 basic lessons, designed to
proceed at the student's own pace. The Miracle is designed
using advanced artificial intelligence techniques, which allow for
true interaction with the student. Detailed instruction and critiques, based on the individual problems of the student, make this
system unique.
After each Classroom lesson, students are encouraged to spend
time in the "Practice Room" to review and practice each lesson
before proceeding to the next. The computer will determine when
the student should advance to the next lesson; however, it is pos-

by Jason R. Rich
sible for the student to override the computer tutor and jump to advanced lessons, ready or not.
One of the nicest features of The
Miracle is that it incorporates
easy-to-play games and colorful animated
graphics into the teaching process.
These games are not only entertaining
and challenging, but they are also cleverly designed to reinforce the lessons
taught in the Classroom. These action
games are used as part of the Classroom
lessons, but can also be used to practice
when the student enters the "Arcade" portion of the program. In the Arcade, the
student can play Ducks (a musical shooting gallery), Ripchord (an action game
that reinforces note recognition, fingering and chord-playing technique) and Aliens! (a memory game that teaches musical note
recognition). Within the Arcade, the Jukebox option can also be
selected to hear the computer perform any of the 100 musical
selections the student is taught during the course.
When specific musical pieces have been mastered, visiting the
"Performance Hall" will allow the student to play with full orchestral accompaniment. While visiting the "Studio," students
can record and play back their own music. This portion of the
program simulates an eight-track recording studio.
The "Administration Room" is where the computer user can
measure his or her progress as a student, add new students to
the system's database and perform basic system maintenance
functions. (Any number of students may be added to the
database.)
These software modules are all graphically based and extremely easy to use. The majority of them are self-running and require
little more than having the student press the Space Bar or Tab
key at the appropriate times. Much of the interaction between
the student and The Miracle is done by having the student play
the electronic keyboard. The overall goal of the system is to
teach the student how to read music, play the piano with two
hands (using chords and common rhythms), pick up music and
learn to play it on his or her own and play with other musicians.
Of course, all this takes plenty of time and practice. In spite of
the product's clever design, it still requires that the student be
motivated to use the system on an ongoing basis, both to learn
the lessons and to practice. While the system is designed to be
used by children and adults alike, parents (whether they play the
piano or not) should consider working with their child, at least to
complete the basic lessons. The Miracle system can replace a
traditional human music teacher in many ways, but it cannot
force the student to practice and it cannot ensure that the student is using the correct hand positions and finger movements.
The Miracle can "listen" to the student play and analyze his or

Review

her performance by looking for everything from bad timing or keys being
held too long to the wrong notes being
played, but it cannot correct those bad
habits that have a way with catching
up with lazy piano students.
Once students have completed The
Miracle course successfully, they will
understand the basics of playing the
piano and reading music. They will
have been taught all of the fundamentals, but for further instruction, turning
to a professional music teacher for a
few one-on-one lessons is almost inevitable.
Currently, The Miracle Piano Teaching System is available for the 8-bit NES for $379.95 plus the
price of the NES. More advanced versions of the system are avail
able for the 16-bit Super NES, the Amiga and IBM compatibles
($479.95 each). While the NES version of the system is excellent, the newer IBM, SNES and Amiga versions are more graphically oriented, contain more information and are far more
elaborate. On the personal computer versions, the biggest advantage is that students can save their progress to disk and that
the orchestral accompaniment is more complex.
Along with more than 100 pre-programmed songs (and their appropriate accompaniment) that are built into the personal computer versions of The Miracle, optional song collections are avail-

able, containing 40 additional songs
each. These songs can be incorporated
into the teaching system, so students
can be guided as they are introduced
to the new musical selections (which
may be more to their liking). The
Miracle Song Collections are available
on disk for $49.95 each. Two volumes
are currently available. Conversion kits
are also available for those who wish to
use The Miracle with more than one
type of video game or computer system. These conversion kits are priced
at $129.95 each and include the appropriate cables, manuals and disks (or
cartridges) along with instruction.
The Miracle Piano Teaching System
is extremely easy to use, even for non-music- or
non-computer-oriented people. In this reviewer's opinion, everything that
Software Toolworks promises about this system is true, but
nothing can replace the student's personal desire to play the
piano and read music. While a student's progress can be seen
within the first hour, it would take a true miracle for someone to
play like Herbie Hancock or any other professional musician
without putting in years, maybe decades of work. The computer
games incorporated into this system, along with the graphic user
interface, take much of the boredom and fear out of learning and
practicing. Nevertheless, no matter how good the system is,
there is still no substitute for parental involvement.

Strategy

How the Yard Was Won
A SimAnt Replay
by Allen Varney

A

s a kid, I sold seeds door to door,

Back on the strategic map, place the
fertile queens manually in adjacent
patches, one queen per quadrant
(quadrANT?). Spend a minute or so
watching the human and pets, then
move to a new quadrant and look
around. Funny how these ants do better
without help!

earning one of the seed
company's neater premiums, an
ant farm. I set up the modules, thin
worlds sandwiched between clear plastic,
and connected them with flexible tubes.
But I never collected residents. Apathy?
Reluctance to imprison guiltless ants?
Now Maxis has produced SimAnt: The
Electronic Ant Colony to show what fun
I missed.
As the company points out, though,
real ants were never this fun. A viewer
can't pause a real anthill, nor shift to
cutaway views, nor lead black ants in
wars against rival reds. When real ants
drive humans out of their house, one
can't count it a personal victory.
The game beats real ants for education,
too. That plastic colony might have
taught two vital SimAnt principles, that
food is everything and life is cheap, but it
didn't include an online ant-fact database
and it would never have taught the chief
rules of anthood:
• Become a soldier as soon as possible.
• When necessary, turn into a spider.
• Ants, left alone, will conquer the world.
How did I learn these fascinating facts?
Follow a full game and see.

The Thrill of Battle
Move the queen somewhere near the
food supply, then click on her to set her
digging a nest. (She's picky about sites,
isn't she?) Another click, and she will lay
eggs, starting with the yellow worker ant.
Within seconds after birth, the worker
should lay a pheromone trail to the
nearest food supply. Once the black
queen is fed and busily creating citizens,
it's time to plot war against those nasty
red ants a few feet away.
Tok-tok-tok-tok. "Oh no, it's that
dratted spider!" Here's a subversive trick:
exchange bodies with it. Click on the
spider, then press the space bar to
choose its behavior. Send it chasing after
a red ant, all the way across the map.
Once there, make it hunt. In theory, the
spider could win this war all by itself, just

in singleminded pursuit of red ants. Of
course, this is a cheesy and displeasing
way to win. It is much more exciting to
use force of arms — of mandibles, that is.
To raise the army, set the Caste Control
panel to 60 percent soldiers, 40 percent
workers and no breeders. When the forces are four dozen strong, recruit them
all and set out for the enemy nest. A
slow approach lets these heroes pick off
opponents one by one.
Aargh, the yellow ant has died. Quick!
Once it's reborn, pause the game, move
to the battle site and exchange bodies
with a soldier. Then recruit the troops, so
they don't forget their mission. Try to
stay behind the front lines, surrounded
by loyal guards.
When most of the red ants on the surface have perished, lead the charge into
the nest. Unfortunately, soldiers like stealing food better than killing the red queen,
so be patient. Don't use the "Silly" mode
here — the word balloons, though delightful, obstruct the action. Soon, the red
queen dies. Victory is ours!

This Means War
Set Caste Control to 60 percent soldiers, 30 percent workers, and 10 percent breeders. Wait half a minute or so.
Then, move to the strategic map and
begin the mating cycle. Then, back at
the patch map, recruit everybody and set
out for the spider. (The spider seems to
especially love breeders.) Stay on its tail
— er, abdomen — and chase it away or
kill it.

When this new quadrant has five or ten
breeders of each gender, start the mating
cycle anew. Establish new patches in a
solid line marching toward the house and
the red territory. Then move to another
quadrant and repeat.
To achieve the maximum score, chase
out the humans before seriously tackling
the red ants. This lets the black ants occupy every quadrant on the map, instead
of just three-fourths of the house.

Hints from "Ant Hill"-ary
When new food appears, blaze a trail to
it, then recruit all the ants around.
Release them as they arrive, and they'll
carry the food back to the nest.
Set an alarm scent around food, then
recruit a few ants to garrison the spot. As
red ants arrive, the guards kill them one
at a time. This may starve the red ants.
Does the lawn mower annihilate you?
Does a giant foot descend like a Monty
Python routine? Too bad. There's not
much to do except curse and cope.
Dead spiders eventually turn into a
measly four food pellets, but only after a
long, twitching wait. Once a spider dies,
a replacement quickly arrives on the
scene from Central Spider Dispatch.
Ignore the caterpillar. It's nutritious, but
not worth the trouble of killing. (Just like
real life.)
The "mystery button" might fill one end
of the map with nests, create a whole
bunch of ants, kill them, give the spider
a fearsome death ray, or ask a riddle.
Don't chance it unless you're desperate
or frivolous.

Strategy

In assaulting a red quadrant, place five
or six queens. After a time, sheer numbers will overwhelm the reds. It also
helps to go in and send the spider romping merrily through the red ranks.
In this way, the whole yard soon becomes a crawling carpet of black ants.
With a final score around five million, a
winner garners Maxis' highest praise:
"On a Mission From Elvis."

Lessons of War
Ants will conquer the world ... at least,
in SimAnt. The game allows colossal victory for any first-time player using
straightforward strategy. As a "software
toy," SimAnt shows why ants are so
widespread and so fascinating. As a
game, this lightweight exercise ought to
be the "easy" level, with higher levels of
difficulty included. Unfortunately, they are
not. Maybe Maxis should try simulating
a life form that faces a tougher battle.
How about SimSnailDarter or SimCondor or, for the really tough challenge, SimDodo? From there it's just a
short step to, say, SimGameDesigner
—buthawyliesmdn.

Review

"Calling Dick Tracy!
Calling Dick Tracy!"
Walt Disney Software's Dick Tracy
By David M. Wilson
"Calling Dick Tracy! Calling Dick
Tracy!" the famous detective's futuristic
two-way wrist radio squeals. "There's
big trouble," it continues. Tracy listens
carefully to the report of a crime and
gives his customary reply, "I'm on my
way."
Fans of Dick Tracy can now step into
the shoes of the famous comic strip
detective with Walt Disney Software's
Dick Tracy: The Crime-Solving Adventure.
Players are encouraged to rise through the
ranks of the detective bureau by using their
detective skills, as well as their arcade
prowess, to solve a series of crimes. Big
Boy Caprice is running the largest criminal
organization that the city has ever seen.
Tracy is assigned to catch all of the "little
fish" in hopes of smoking out the "big fish."

TITLE:

Dick Tracy: The CrimeSolving Adventure
Amiga, IBM
$39.95
with Sound Source, $59.95
PROTECTION: Code-Wheel Look-Up
DESIGNER:
Distinctive Software
PUBLISHER:
Walt Disney Software
Burbank, CA
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:

Those familiar with the Touchstone movie will recognize an approach closer to the famous Warren Beatty incarnation of Tracy
rather than the square-jawed comic strip caricature. Still, the program follows in the steps of the motion picture's art direction by
trying to maintain the look and feel of Chester Gould's famous
comic strip. Basic comic strip colors are used. Voice balloons are
employed for dialogue. Pointer balloons indicate objects that
might otherwise have been obscured. Enough attention is given
to integrating the interface with comic strip authenticity that true
fans should be very pleased.

Getting a Clue (Game Elements)
The first of the two major components of play is driving the
squad car through the city. Detectives must steer their squad car
through traffic, avoiding collisions with other cars and
pedestrians. Naturally, each collision counts against the car's
damage meter and damaging the car too much will mean that
Tracy will have to walk to the station. In addition, the fact that
the car doesn't run well when damaged means that executing a
successful chase is practically impossible. Fortunately for some
players, the game provides several police contract garages
where Tracy's demolition derby squad car can be repaired.

most invariably find himself in a shootout with the villain, who
shouts something like, "Eat lead, copper!" This arcade sequence
is simple enough that even the most inept player can handle it.
The only real difficulty Tracy may have is when he is outnumbered by extremely long odds. Dodging and shooting will usually
enable him to chase a couple of the opposing gunsels away.
Then, Tracy must pursue the head villain of the group into the
sewers or onto the rooftops. Once he has shot the villain's
strength down to nothing, the villain will surrender, leaving Tracy
free to arrest or interrogate him.
Interrogation plays a major role in solving crimes. It is too bad
that the player is not allowed to have more control over the interrogation phase, though. Instead, players are stuck with whatever
facts the villain they are "grilling" wishes to give. Tracy may want
to know where "The Brow's" hideout is, but will instead get information on what part of town Shoulders lives in. This becomes
quite frustrating at times.

Using the siren may become audibly annoying to both the
player and anyone in the player's immediate environs, but such
use is a necessary evil. Since players won't be penalized for unreasonable use of the siren and everyone (except for some villains) will yield right of way to the siren, it is wise to use it often.

What is a mystery without clues? Tracy will find clues at the
crime scene and at various criminal hideouts. Clues must be
processed by the crime lab. As in real life, many of the clues will
yield no pertinent information and Tracy will be informed that
they were inconclusive. Sometimes, the clues are nonsensical
items. For instance, one that kept popping up was a painting.
Not once did the painting relate to a crime. It just never really
made sense as the kind of clue Dick Tracy would be expected to
pick up.

The second of the major play components is shooting it out
with the bad guys. Once the player has stopped a villain in his
car (either by pulling him over or colliding with his car and running him off the road) or entered a villain's hideout, he will al-

One major lead that Tracy uses in solving crimes is considering
in what part of town a villain usually operates. Apparently, villains only commit crimes in their own part of town. Gangsters
must have a tough union. At any rate, this concept keeps

Review

players from facing a true challenge. So, crime-solving ends up
being a process of elimination to determine which players live in
what part of town (they move after every case).
I racy has other tools to assist him, although they take even
more challenge out of the game. He is permitted three "bugs" at
the beginning of the game and allotted another "bug" each time
he solves a case. These electronic devices are as futuristic as
Tracy's two-way wrist radio because they don't just eavesdrop at
the villain's hideout, they also detect criminal activity. Once they
detect criminal activity, they alert Tracy and he can respond to
the scene. This reviewer honestly played through the adventure
without even using the bugs, but many players will want to add
them to their arsenal as insurance. A special agent replants the
bugs in the criminal's new hideout after each case. Surprisingly,
he seems to know where the criminal's new hideout is, even
though Tracy doesn't, pardon the expression, have a clue.
Along the way, Tracy will need some allies. Pat Patton can be
found in the Squad Room and he can offer players advice on
how to proceed on a dead-end case. Breathless Mahoney has a
dressing room at Club Ritz (on Fifth Street) and will give one
clue per case, if consulted. The "kid" (a newsboy) moves around
frequently, but he generally will have "the word on the street" or
a piece of evidence for Tracy.
A good detective must consider his health. When Tracy's health
meter gets low he can stop off at Mike's Diner (on Ninth Street)
for a bowl of Mike's wonder chili. Mike's chili is said to have
great therapeutic effect on a detective's ailing health. In addition,
Tracy's girlfriend, Tess Trueheart, is quite handy with iodine and

bandages. A visit to her apartment (on First Street) will also improve Tracy's health.

Saving the Day (Game Objectives)
The goal of the game is to advance through the four ranks in
the detective bureau, which range from Detective Junior Grade
to Chief of Detectives. Naturally, players will be promoted for
solving a case. They can also be demoted for letting Tracy's
health drop so far that he goes to the hospital, arresting the
wrong person or arresting criminals without sufficient evidence.
If Tracy is able to solve several crimes, Big Boy Caprice will kidnap Tess Trueheart and challenge Tracy to come after him at
the Club Ritz. Tracy must not only catch Big Boy, but must also
save Tess. This is the only arcade segment that has a time limit.
Players will be wise (as with most computer games) to use the
save game feature frequently. Even though the arcade segments
are not really very difficult, players will occasionally lose a raging
gun battle. A save should most definitely be used before the final
confrontation with Big Boy Caprice.
Dick Tracy: The Crime-Solving Adventure offers an interesting
blend of action and puzzle. It certainly offers a different type of
game. If the puzzles were a bit more oriented toward hard
evidence (fingerprints, photos, eyewitnesses, etc.), the game
would be greatly improved. Instead, the constant arcade action
combined with the juvenile puzzles keep the game from rising to
its full potential. Unfortunately, the game is too easily mastered.
In fact, the limited difficulty may be the only demerit in a cleverly
conceived game.

Review

Give or Take a Thousand Years
A Review of Millennium
by Alan Emrich

mander of Lunar Base 1, a small
research station on the moon's
Sea of Tranquility. With terraforming still a science in its infancy, it
is quickly apparent that the
resources of the moon alone will
not be enough to achieve the recolonization of Earth. In fact,
every planet in the solar system
will need to be probed for its
viability as a mining colony. Likely prospects will need to be
settled (and protected), their resources returned to the moon
and much research and development will have to be done
before Earth can once again be called "home."
TITLE:
Millennium
SYSTEMS:
IBM, Amiga
REVIEWED:
IBM
COPY PROTECT: None
PRICE:
59.95
DESIGNER:
Ian Bird
PUBLISHER:
Paragon Software
DISTRIBUTOR: Microprose
Hunt Valley, MD

Postcards from Space
There are seven locations on Millennium's Lunar Base 1.
They are arranged as six "stations" (colonies are all similar
with only four stations) connected to a central docking bay
where, naturally, ships take off and land, and into and out of
which cargo is moved. Additionally, on the moon, a bunker
can be built under the docking bay, where scarce commodities and precious resources can be moved out of harm's way.
The six stations include a life support station containing
population "nodules," each of which holds 100 people. The
game begins with a single nodule operating to capacity, but
five more can (and will need to) be built during the game.
Population does two things: it allows ships to be crewed and,
when a colony is established, it allows mining to commence
when there are at least fifty people on a planet. Fortunately,
the birth rate is phenomenal. (A single person, it seems, can
become about 20 people in less than a year — nice work, if
you can get it.)
An Energy station also exists on Lunar Base 1, and each
colony, when established. Solar panels provide each colony's
energy (or, if destroyed, the colony can subsist on batteries indefinitely). Of course, huge, multi-paneled generators don't
return nearly as much energy as the colonies orbit further
from the sun.

January, 2200 AD
There's a new moon out tonight. It's not that the people on
Earth are looking up into the night sky and seeing the dark
side of the moon.... No, it's the colonists on Earth's Lunar
Base who cannot see the people on the Earth. Devastated by
impact with a 20-trillion-ton hunk of space debris which
plowed straight into the planet and penetrated to the magma
core, the Earth just isn't what it used to be. Efforts to stop the
behemoth object utterly failed, and the ecological consequences of the disaster would vindicate every environmental extremist on the planet (just before killing them all).
The Earth was rendered uninhabitable.
As life ebbed away on the planet, choking on poisonous, sulfuric gases, civilization (and a lot of other computer games,
no doubt) ceased to exist. The one hundred lunar colonists
who helplessly watched the apocalypse are humanity's last
hope at reestablishing life on Terra. Since Terra is no longer
"firma," however, much remains to be done around the entire
solar system before Earth will be ready to be reinhabited and
made "home" once again.

Barking at the Moon
B.C., "Before the Calamity," the player was merely the corn-

The Resource station, another feature of each colony, requires 30 kilowatts of power and can be switched on like a
light. Once running, it stockpiles resources for transportation
(or, on the moon, production) automatically. Each colony, as
well as Lunar Base 1, also has a Defense station. It is here that
fighters and orbital lasers become operational when a location is
under attack and where the damage, if any, will be reported.
Lunar Base 1 has two exclusive stations, the first one being a
Research station. Before anything can be built or any planet
colonized, it must be researched. Unfortunately, research of any
item is ridiculously fast — after the early segments of the game
are completed, one's scientists sit around on their hands waiting
for something, anything, to study. The final, and by far the most
important, station on Luna Base 1 is the Production station. It is
the only place where new items can be built and they must be
built one at a time. A player must keep the lights burning every
day at the Production station, because it is not possible ever to
have enough defenses to repulse attacks or enough transport
ships flying the merchant lanes.

Solar Operating System
The mechanics of Millennium are a breeze. A handful of icons
with some mouse clicking, much like Virgin's Overlord, and
zoom, players are on their way. Not only is the interface akin to
Overlord, but so is the graphic perspective of the game. The
screen designs are remarkably similar in feel to Overlord's.
Where Millennium has its big advantage on Overlord is that

Review

play is not "real time." Making it more of
a strategy game, designer Ian Bird has
opted to move time whenever a player
pushes an icon. In this manner, time will
either advance a single hour (useful for
landing spacecraft) or one day (where
rapid, multiple clicking generates a sort
of player-controlled "warp speed"). Occasionally the computer ticks off an hour
on its own, but that "real time" element
in the game is completely negligible.
Players will get into the meat of Millennium quickly for one very good reason:
the icons pretty well spell everything out.
This is particularly good, because the
documentation is a masterpiece of understatement. With the help of the former
rather than the latter, players will find
themselves exploring both the limits of the solar system and the
limits of the game system in practically no time.

What Do the 'Little Green Men' Know?
Players begin by researching more powerful solar generators
and launching probes to every planet and moon in the solar system. These probes will disappear around Mars, however, as one
quickly discovers that there are hostile Martians out there. This is
somewhat unfortunate for those who simply want to build lunar
colonies as in Wesson International's Moonbase, because it
means that one spends much of the game preparing every base
and colony to defend against Martian raids.
Then, as worlds are discovered and the choice ones settled, "ancient artifacts" will start to appear in a predestined manner to
give the player the key to the next step in the game. Sudden
"carrier" technology will allow for the conquest of Mars, for instance. Naturally, Mars has a key technology required for terraforming Earth, but moving colonists over requires another discovery. Well, the astute reader will see a pattern here. This is
what is known as an "adventure game" storyline. Linear, with but
one conclusion, a player must have the correct key before opening the next door.

"It's what we call a 'Shake and Bake' colony."
Colonies are nice, but players will have to be picky about creating them. Certain key elements are not produced by the moon or
easily mined from the asteroid belt by automated "Grazer" ships.
Find those elements and plant as few colonies as possible, because the fewer there are, the easier they are to protect.
As for interstellar travel... it certainly leaves one's merchant
marine with plenty of time to kill. This is because it takes over a
year, sometimes, to travel from the moon to the furthest reaches
of the solar system (depending on the alignment of the planets).
That's a long time for a one-way trip, but successful players will
soon recognize that many of the promising colony sites are a
long distance away.
During the game, a player will spend much of the time with the
mundane tasks of playing "space traffic controller" and "docking
bay manager." There is a 10-click sequence for landing and
preparing to load and unload a ship which achieves orbit around
a planet, for instance, which quickly becomes as rote as typing
one's own name. Surely some more development time could
have automated more of this mundane gameplay element, but it
really isn't so bad for the detail-minded person. The middle portion of the game, however, can get pretty busy for the player
who has a lot to shuffle around.
Another bit that will seem like "busywork" for some is the
defense of colonies. When they are under attack, a player who
has any defenses must rush to them (since advancing time is
prohibited until the attack is resolved). With two weapons at a
player's disposal (assuming they've been researched, built and
transported to the area under attack), a player can fire an orbital

laser and/or launch fighters. Orbital
lasers fire automatically, knocking down
attackers but expending themselves permanently in the process. Fighters are a
reusable resource (assuming, of course,
that some survive to reuse). However,
fighter defenses activate an arcade game
sequence called "zap the
pseudo-spaceship-looking polygon" which might
annoy a strategy gamer. Fortunately, this
reviewer found the fighter's arcade combat sequence easily manageable and so
it did not detract from the more engrossing strategy elements of Millennium.

The Universe Is Fixed!
Moving elements back to the moon,
protecting the colonies and building new
toys are nice. Winning the game, however, remains the goal. To
that end, players will have to suffer the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune in the guise of "random" events. Note that the
word random is in quotation marks in the preceding sentence.
Events are far from random.
While the location of mineral deposits varies from game to
game, players can be certain that the Martian commander will always send a nasty note as soon as their first probe is launched,
that their first Mark III generator will melt down, that they will
"stumble" across the two highest technology ships, as well as the
Martian flu, and that the Martians will deliver one lalapalooza
farewell punch at the end of the game. Colonies are certain to
declare their independence, too, but this usually occurs after their
usefulness becomes moot. In other words, that old "adventure
game" story line element is the thread that holds Millennium
together. It is unfortunate that only these few, fixed "random"
events were included in the game, for variety is the spice of
game replayability, and Millennium would certainly have more
of that if there were more randomness built into it. Like any other
adventure game, after a few plays, one has "done it all" and the
game is likely to go on the shelf for a long, long time.

The Speed of Lights
With Millennium, Paragon has taken their first step into
strategy gaming. Supported by an arcade game crutch in combat and welded together by an adventure game's linear story line
which might have been better left in their MegaTraveller
products, the game still provided several enjoyable playings for
this reviewer. While it is not outside the bounds of reason to draw
parallels between Millennium and Civilization, Millennium
would be to Civilization what a train would be to a car. Millennium will get you there, but it locks the player onto a set of
tracks rather than allowing him or her to veer off and really go exploring. Millennium holds up very well as a game, however,
showing considerable promise as the first of (hopefully) many
strategy games from Paragon. If there is a cadre of "pure"
strategy game designers to be found along the hallways of
Paragon Software, this reviewer hopes that they can launch
another project soon. A pure strategy/war game without the arcade/adventure game elements seems a challenge Paragon is
ready and able to meet.
While the speed at which Millennium flows is excellent, limited
only by one's ability to click off another hour or day and deal
with events as they occur (rather than waiting forever for anything significant to happen), players who are not "born administrators" might find all of the rote interplanetary commerce management to become mere "busywork." Of course, some people
also find golf to be a boring sport, because the same thing must
be done by an individual over and over again. Still, like golf, this
reviewer went back for several "rounds" of play in an effort to improve his score (read: efficiency). Call me a cad(dy), but when
Alan Shepard hit the first golf ball on the moon, he was prescient
in forecasting the game of Millennium. Fore!

Review

No-Nonsense Gridiron Performer
MicroLeague Sports' Microleague Football:
The Coach's Challenge
by Win Rogers

MicroLeague Football:
The Coach's Challenge (1.5)
IBM
SYSTEM:
# OF PLAYERS: 1-2
PRICE:
569.95 for Deluxe Edition with
General Manager/Owner's Disk
PROTECTION: Document Look-Up
PUBLISHER:
MicroLeague Sports, Inc.
Newark, DE

TITLE:

The manufacturer reports that MicroLeague Football: The
Coach's Challenge (MLFTCC) will only be stocked in
software stores as a "Deluxe Edition." The General
Manager's/Owner's Disk, needed for making roster changes,
used to be sold separately, but is now packed as part of the
Deluxe Edition. The basic game, without the utility disk, will
be seen only at discount outlets like K-Mart or Target.
MLFTCC comes with a total of 48 rosters — all the 1990
teams plus a selection of twenty historic rosters from the
1958 Baltimore Colts through the 1986 New York Giants,
Cleveland Browns and Denver Broncos. When the game is
first booted up, these rosters can be used only for exhibition
games. The manual takes one through an elaborate process
of initializing a league, necessary for those who want to program and play out a season schedule or keep standings and
statistics.

The Coin Toss

ven successful sports franchises must occasionally undergo a "rebuilding process." Normally, such a process means
that the franchise will undergo a painful couple of years as
a loser before becoming a winner once again. MicroLeague
Sports has managed to "rebuild" MicroLeague Football without
forcing gamers to go through the painful "loser" stage. The company has upgraded MicroLeague Football to MicroLeague Football: The Coach's Challenge (Version 1.5) and, in doing so, has
come up with a lively, well-designed strategy game. There is no
arcade mode and the graphics are not fancy, but the game
provides a thorough, accessible simulation of football strategy.
Like their MicroLeague Baseball: The Manager's Challenge
(reviewed in CGW 1/88), this game has a companion volume,
The MicroLeague Football Power Bundle (from Bantam
Books), which offers a demo version of the game and background information about football strategy and the particular
strengths and weaknesses of the classic teams included with the
game.

E

To get a taste of the game quickly it is best to ignore the
first third of the manual, bypassing the initialize-a-league
process, and go right to an exhibition game. Two players can
play against each other, one player can take on the computer or
one can watch computer-coached contests. Whenever the computer is a coach, the human player has the choice of making the
computer-coach a tough coach, an average coach or an easy
coach. This makes it easier for the novice to face doing battle
with the likes of Johnny Unitas, Joe Namath or Mean Joe
Greene. Another nice feature is the human player's ability to interrupt the game at any point in order to view game statistics or
make substitutions. This makes it easy to keep up with the ebb
and flow of the game without being overwhelmed.
The game is well designed to respond to the needs of players
with different levels of knowledge and experience in coaching
football. Coaching plays can be done in three ways. Though the
process is somewhat confusing at first, novices will appreciate
the chance to design plays by going through a series of graphic
diagrams. The first choice is between moving the ball, trying for
a field goal, punting and killing the clock. After choosing, for ex-

Review

ing, for example, to move the ball, the player chooses the formation, then the pass/run pattern and finally the primary receiver or
back. Defensive play-calling follows a similar pattern.
To aid players in moving up the learning curve without too
much frustration, there are some welcome "idiot keys." When it
gets too frustrating to chart out the plays, one can always press
"6" to have the computer select any running play, "7" for any
passing play, or "5," if one is completely befuddled, for any play
at all. The same choices are available for setting the defense. Be
warned, though, that even an "easy" computer coach with a
weak team like the 1990 Patriots can destroy the player who falls
back on this kind of random play-calling, even when commanding Bait Starr and his 1966 Green Bay Packer teammates.
The second way to enter plays is through accessing a
playbook, either a default playbook or one the player has
designed and developed. One prints out the playbook for reference and enters the corresponding number for each desired play.
The third method is called "expert play." One does not see
diagrams or playbooks, but simply enters a four-digit code for
each offensive or defensive play according to a key provided on
cardboard reference cards packed with the game. Although this
is called "expert mode," it may be easier for some people than
the graphics mode with its four layers of diagrams to work
through.
When the play has been called there is
a graphic recreation of the play in CGA
or EGA mode. There is no choice of
uniform colors and the teams do not
change ends, but the action is lively and
easy to follow. The ball carrier turns
white so he can be picked out and followed. The same digitized sound bites
are heard again and again, however, and
get so stale that most players will probably want to run the game without sound.

Replaying 1990
A replay of the 1990 NFC season was
carried out to test the effectiveness of the
simulation. Even though all 1990 teams were included and there
is a module for preprogramming a season, it was a trickier than
expected task. It would have been even worse if a replay of the
entire NFL season, not just of the NFC, had been attempted. The
scheduling module allows for a 16-week season, but in real life
each team plays those games over seventeen weeks. The byes
are staggered, so an encounter that is one team's eighth game
may be its opponent's ninth. The scheduling module did not include the seventeenth week.
After some juggling, the schedule was set and the season was
played out in a couple of minutes. While playing out a season it
is possible to select any of the games to play out or watch in
detail. Two of the three divisional leaders and four of the five
playoff teams in the simulated season were the same as in the actual 1990 season, though the Philadelphia Eagles beat out the
New York Giants for the Eastern Division title and the Minnesota
Vikings replaced the Washington Redskins in a wildcard slot. Individual and team performances did not match up very well; in
the simulated season running yards and pass completions were
more evenly spread among all the available personnel on the
roster than in the actual 1990 team records. It was a big disappointment not to be able to access any league leader lists for
either individual or team performances. The data are stored team
by team, but also ought to be available in summary for the entire

conference. After all, storing, sorting and reporting data conveniently is what computers are good at.

Handicapping the Competition
MLFTCC will inevitably be compared with NFL Pro League
Football from the phonetically similar-named Micro-Sports com
pany (reviewed in CGW #90). Both games emphasize strategy
and statistics, not arcade action. NFL Pro League Football costs
more, but provides many more rosters with actual NFL stats —
five years' worth. It keeps much more detailed game records of
computer-versus-computer replays, and does a much better job
in reporting league leaders. It offers a greater range of play-calling options and an innovative artificial intelligence "game plan"
module for recording coaching tendencies to guide computer
replays.
On the other hand, MLFTCC has more enjoyable, realistic
graphics and is more accessible to the football strategy novice. It
includes many features not included in NFL Pro League Football, such as the capability to add or trade players between different rosters and the ability to set up and play out a preprogrammed schedule. It offers more control over some game
details such as substitutions and injuries. It may be all the football simulation many fans want.
Like MicroLeague's baseball game,
MLFTCC has somewhat cumbersome procedures and documentation that is occasionally weak on grammar and accuracy. The reference cards do not simply reinforce the manual, as they should,
but add information that is not in the
manual and even correct mistakes in the
manual. The front of the box says "1991
season included" when it is the 1990
season statistics that are provided. The
manual contradicts itself on whether one
can make substitutions when playing
against the computer; fortunately one
can.
Though the procedures outlined in the
manual are sometimes cumbersome, the
manual admits as much and scores points with this reviewer for
one of the most honest (though ungrammatical) disclaimers ever
included in software documentation. This occurs at the point
when the General Manager/Owner's manual is describing how to
edit player statistics: "Pay close attention to where you are and
what you are doing, otherwise you will creating [sic] more stress
than you would ever want to encounter from a game."
The MicroLeague Sports company is developing a broad
range of sports simulations, with hockey, basketball, boxing and
horse-racing simulations planned in addition to their successful
baseball and football games. MicroLeague Football: The
Coach's Challenge shares the general approach and the look of
its interface screens with MicroLeague Baseball: The Manager's
Challenge. It occupies the same niche among football simulations that its companion does among baseball simulations. Each
has a strong emphasis on strategy, no arcade mode, serviceable
but not spectacular EGA graphics, a helpful companion volume,
somewhat cumbersome interfaces and quirky documentation,
and useful but not state-of-the-art statistical modeling and reporting capabilities. Despite the relatively high sticker prices, these
are actually economy cars offering dependable family transportation. They are for the serious no-nonsense sports fan — not for
the thrill-seeker in the market for a sexy sports model.

Sneak Preview

The Game as Social Experience
Prodigy's Next President Offers the "Vision Thing"
by Wyatt Lee

O

n Wednesday, February 5th, subscribers to Prodigy were introduced to a new concept in
gaming. Rather than relying on the roll of
the dice, a table of random events or the
turn of a card, Prodigy's Next President
will use the accumulated results of polls
(in which the players themselves participate and provide the basic
demographics for the game) to create
the results. The game's play will be advanced by daily news reports which will
both set the stage by presenting a predetermined story line of events and indicate how the game is progressing by
reporting on the results of the playerdetermined polls. Using these "news"
reports and poll results, players will move
to the campaign headquarters of the candidate of their choice and offer advice
concerning campaign strategy.
Next President is a presidential election
simulation in which four composite
Democratic candidates square off against
each other and their four Republican opponents while four composite Republican
candidates face each other and their
Democratic competition. By paying
detailed attention to real issues (abortion,
funding drug treatment, environmental
spending, isolationism, national health insurance, protectionism, affirmative action
and reduction of Social Security taxes),
the game reminds us of a very serious
game from Campaigns and Elections
magazine that CGW reviewed in 1988
(#51). Until Next President, the political
journal's On the Campaign Trail was
the only other campaign game that we
recall that paid any real attention to issues. President Elect '88 and its ancestor focused more on campaign spending
than issues (except in the debates) and
the Monopoly-style Campaign Promises
focused on regions.
Ironically, On the Campaign Trail
taught a political theory of ambiguity,
noting that real politicians always lose
some votes somewhere every time they
take a stand. In Next President, the issues are the "meat and potatoes" of the
game. Gamers influence the game's
database by taking stands on the issues
and they influence their chosen
candidate's chances by encouraging him

surance with primarily liberal views on
the rest of the issues.

or her to take a given stand on various issues.

The Four Flushers (Meet
the Candidates)
The candidates, drawn from profiles to
be found in both major parties, are an interesting mix. The Democrats include: a
59-year-old divorced male governor from
a southern state who is anti-defense
spending and pro-affirmative action, but
against abortion and soft on the environment; a 66-year-old married male governor from a northeastern state who is
protectionist in economics, but opposed
to affirmative action; a 53-year-old married female senator from a midwestern
state who is strongly pro-choice and
strongly protectionist, as well as favoring
the traditional liberal agenda on the environment and affirmative action; and a
49-year-old twice-married male congressman from a western state who is
strongly in favor of national health in-

The Republican candidates include: a
43-year-old married male senator from a
New England state who is strongly antiabortion and strongly anti-protectionist; a
61-year-old married male who is both a
retired general/war hero and strongly opposed to a social agenda based on
peace dividends; a 58-year-old twice-married male congressman from a western
state who is an interesting blend featuring a very protectionist and very pro-environment agenda; and a 54-year-old married female professor at a major midwestern university who is strongly prochoice and strongly pro-national health insurance on the one side, while being antiaffirmative action and anti-Social Security
on the other.
Once players have emulated Simon
Garfunkel's legendary Mrs. Robinson by
"lookin' through the candidates to date,"
it is time for the next, and potentially
most fascinating, phase of the game. At
the Campaign Headquarters, players try
to influence their chosen candidate to
either change positions or stay the
course, as their fellow campaign workers
attempt to do the same from their viewpoints. Beyond the advice of the players,
fast-breaking news stories and the
preference polls for upcoming primaries
will influence each candidate's potential
positions. These changing perspectives
and situations will present some of the
decision points that each player will face
in the course of the game by, possibly,
causing players to compromise on some
issues and become more firm on others.
Next President is a fascinating experiment in which thousands of gamers will
make thousands of decisions that will
decide the basis and results of the game.
Right now, the results of the experiment
are still out, but we think everyone on
the Prodigy network has gotta get this
vision thing.
Computer Gaming World magazine is
a paid expert on computer games for
the Prodigy Interactive Service. This article is presented for information only
and does not constitute either a buy or
don't buy recommendation.

COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD
April 1992

"Veni, Ludi, Vici"

CGW # 93

Broadsides & Gripeshot
Reach Out and Crush Someone
by Alan Emrich

L

ast issue, we revealed to our

readers a possible new trend in computer wargaming: "games sans
brains." These are complete wargames
without artificial opponents to play
against. Instead, computer wargamers
would either have to play both sides
solitaire (as so many boardgamers do)
or connect up by modem, E-mail or faceto-face to play out their campaigns. Because of the normal production lag time
between issues, readers' feedback comments on this subject will be printed next
issue in this column. At the time of this
writing, the feedback cards for issue #92
haven't begun to trickle in yet, but they
soon will.

Wargamers of the World,
Unite!
Readers of Computer Wargaming
World will learn that this CWW editor is a
great believer in "wargamer connectivity." Wargamers need to search out
and engage each other, so as to enjoy
our hobby. It is well known that wargamers are a niche market. (Fortunately
for wargaming, we are a niche market
with disproportionately high economic
clout, which keeps us from being completely ignored.)

O

74

Editorial: Reach Out and Crush
Someone

76
Sneak Preview:
Global Conquest

80
Strategy: Romance of the
Three Kingdoms II

88
Strategy: Sid Meier's
Civilization

0

92

Opponents Wanted

Because wargamers are few, where roleplayers (for example) are many, it is
often harder to find a real live opponent
to play wargames with. To that end, this
editor wishes to express his willingness to
go the extra mile to help facilitate wargaming connectivity. Of course, there are
game clubs, gaming conventions (where
mostly boardgames are played),
play-by-mail, play-by-email, modem, serial and
network gaming, all of which are
designed to help wargamers find each
other. For over 25 years now, The
Avalon Hill General has run their "Opponents Wanted" ads, a feature which
has been emulated on the computer networks and in many other magazines, including Computer Wargaming World.
That's the particular point, here. While
it is one thing to say that the editorial
staff here are partisans of wargamer connectivity, it is another thing to do something about it. Therefore, this opportunity
is being taken to ask all our CWW
readers to do their bit, and make a few
wargaming buddies along the way.
Be sure to look at our Opponents
Wanted feature on page 92 of this issue.

There you'll find listings for networks,
BBSs and individuals seeking opponents
like you. Do yourself a favor. If an ad
looks interesting, make a call. Better still,
do a good turn for the wargaming hobby
and place your own ad in our Opponents Wanted section. The price is
right (free). This editor has learned that a
well-connected wargamer is a happy wargamer. Let's strengthen the foundations
of the wargaming community, starting
with something as small and enjoyable
as placing an Opponents Wanted ad.

A Challenge from the CWW
Staff
[With apologies to the introduction to
Patton.]
At ease. When you were younger and
just learning wargames, you all admired the best game designers, the
cleverest strategist, the best die
roller.... Wargamers love a winner, and
will not tolerate a loser! When you
stick your hand over a bunch of units
that used to be your front line — well...
you'll know what to do.
The apathetic are the enemy! Wade
into them. Spill their counters. Shoot
them by e-mail. I want you to contact
them, and use their connected computers to grease the treads of your
tanks! I want you to hold them by
phone, and kick them in the bits! I
want you to kick the code out them all
the time because we are not interested
in playing solitaire only, we're here to
make the world is safe for wargamers
once again!
With the 50th anniversary of World War
II still in full swing, we can thank our
parents or grandparents for not only
making the world safe for democracy,
but also for giving us so many good wargames to play. (Those who think that
such a statement is "sick" must consider
the fact that, although WWII produced
many hit songs, it was not, primarily, a
musical.) Reader response to Computer
Wargaming World and its
magazine-within-the-magazine look and feel has
been highly favorable. Computer wargarners are finding their media niche
here among these pages, even as computer wargame coverage in traditional
board wargame magazines continues to
rate poorly among their predominantly
reactionary readers.
Welcome home!

Playtester's Notes

New Worlds to Conquer
by Alan Emrich

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Global Conquest
IBM
$69.95
Dan Bunten
MicroPlay
Hunt Valley, MD

The Pentagon Has
Five Sides, Too
Global Conquest is an abstract
strategic level strategy/wargame in
the best traditions of Empire,
Strategic Conquest and Sid Meier's
Civilization. Clearly, however, the
game's roots are deeply embedded in
Command HQ, where quick-draw
modem play makes up the very heart
that pumps the game-play action.
Global Conquest is a five-sided conflict, with four "alien invaders"
(players) simultaneously invading a
planet and trying to best both the natives and each other. Each game is
played on a randomly generated
world that is hidden until discovered.
Terrain types are not as numerous as
in Command HQ, but still include
forests, mountains, oil (found only by
searching swamps) plus a new
resource, minerals (found only by searching mountains). These terrain types
go along with the usual plain, oceans,
docks and cities (which now come in
a variety of "economic sizes" ranging
from village to metropolis — called a
"metroplex" — plus the natives' capital
city). Thus equipped, the map is
poised for a set-piece wargame to
ensue.

War and Pieces

[Editor's Note: Although Global Conquest
was not formally released at the time this article was written, the version examined included all of the game's features and was
going through quality assurance for a final
check for bugs. Consequently, the copy
protection method had not yet been included in the game and, thus, could not be
listed.]

D

esigning

computer games has always
been a pyramid-shaped operation,
working from top to bottom. At the
top is the designer, at the base are the
gamers, and in between are the developers,
playtesters, quality assurance people,
marketers and other types who get involved in
the game manufacturing process. It is
newsworthy to report that veteran strategy
game designer Dan Bunten (Command HQ,
Modem Wars, M.U.L.E. and Seven Cities of
Gold) has turned the "design pyramid" upside
down with his latest effort, entitled Global Conquest (soon to be released on the Microplay
label from Microprose).

Vox Populi
After the release of Command HQ, a little
over a year ago, a growing corps of dedicated
players (including this reviewer) posted scores

of comments on the various computer networks and BBSs around the country. The contents of these messages were read by Dan
and company at Ozark Softscape (who
regularly monitor the networks), with the gist
being that some fine-tuning could still be done
on their then-recently released Command HQ
project, particularly to improve the play of the
computer opponent. Once the phone number
got posted, messages began to pour into the
Ozark Softscape BBS in Arkansas and this
core of CHQ players became the ad hoc
playtest group for what became the latest
(1.97) version of that game. (Kudos, by the
way, are due Ozark for enhancing CHQ on
their own time between projects.)
Even after the release of this version of Command HQ, however, the Ozark Softscape BBS
was still abuzz with comments, questions and
suggestions (especially suggestions, Dan
would say). Apparently, Dan had always
wanted "to do Empire right," in his own words
and, when he mentioned this on his BBS,
CHQers began chiming in about what they'd
like to see in such a project. Armed with extremely well-connected CHQ fanatics (to
whom, apparently, phone bills are no object),
and led by "Modem Master" Dan Bunten and
the team at Ozark Softscape, Dan's latest
gaming project was conceived.

Naturally, a "set-piece" wargame requires a good set of pieces. Global
Conquest has a mix of unit types that
will appear very familiar to Command
HQ players. Infantry, armor, airplanes,
submarines, carriers and battleships
(replacing CHQ's cruisers) form the core unit
types. To this is added the Command Center
("Comcen") and spy pieces straight out of
Modem Wars. The Comcen is a player's best
all-round piece for both scouting terrain and
fighting. Like the king in chess, however,
losing it means losing the war (a defeated
player can, however, opt to take over a computer player's position to finish the game).
Spies are used to gather military information,
sabotage enemy production and flush out
other spies.
The interface for movement is also reminiscent of Command HQ, with simple "grab and
go" commands easily executed with a couple
of mouse clicks. It has evolved, though, in that
sub-menus are presented when commanding
a unit by simply doing a "held click" (holding
the button for a full second) when selecting it.
These sub-menus will allow land and sea units
to blitz (move faster, but suffer attrition as
they go), sneak (move slower, but remain unspotted until they are right on top of an
enemy), pursue (a designated enemy unit),
repeat (the same move as the last unit given
orders — that is very handy for issuing complex orders to large masses of pieces quickly),
etc. Airplane sub-menus allow for kamikaze at-

Playtester's Notes

tacks, dogfights, transport missions, paradrops
and so forth.

Above this window is a button marked
Treaties. It is here that players can cut deals in
earnest. Up to three levels of entanglement
can be consummated with each other player.
The first level is a simple "cease fire," in which
units no longer shoot at each other. From
here the stakes can be raised to "alliance," in
which players share their personal information
with each other (where all their units are, what
parts of the map they've discovered and their
complete economic picture) and mutually
receive a 25% income bonus. Finally, players
can go to the highest level of "teammates," in
which the characteristics of the other two
levels are largely in effect, plus players can
control each other's units and production!

The combat mechanics are virtually identical
to those in Command HQ. Units will attack
automatically when within proximity of each
other. Flank and rear attacks inflict extra
damage in land battles, while air combat is
also handled largely as it was in CHQ, with a
few refinements thrown in. Submarines are still
stealthy, but without "known" sea lanes to
patrol, submarines have a somewhat reduced
military value compared to those in CHQ. To
offset this, they now cost $10 billion less than
battleships (and $20 billion less than carriers)
do, making enemy denial of the oceans an interesting speculative venture now.
A major departure that will be noticed by
veteran CHQ players is that there are no
longer any "sea lanes" by which units at sea
will neatly move around the edges of continents. Instead, units may now have up to
four destination points set at once, allowing
them to maneuver around obstacles only
upon one's own personal instructions. This
can allow skillful players to perform some very
complex maneuvers and should be a welcome
new feature of Global Conquest among
veteran CHQ players once their skill at using
it is mastered.

Twists in Turns
While Command HQ is played in real time
(with units moving, fighting and being able to
receive orders continuously during play) and
Empire, Civilization, etc. are turn-based (with
one player completing a turn, including battles, followed by the next player's turn, etc.),
Global Conquest walks a new middle ground
Using what Dan describes as a "modified real
time" game turn sequence, each "turn" consists of two phases.
During the first (or "planning") phase, all
units sit still and receive their orders, the exception being airplanes, which carry out their orders the instant they are issued. At some
point, one of the human players will hit the "execute" button that will give his opponent twenty seconds to finish his or her turn before the
second (or "execution") phase begins. In other
words, there is always an element of time pressure during the planning phases, in which
players are intensely plotting the demise of or
diplomacy with the other players in the game.
The execution phase is eight "pulses" of
game play; in other words, eight opportunities
for every unit to move and shoot at others, exactly as a turn works in Command HQ. However, during this phase, players can only
watch events unfold, for units cannot be interacted with again until the eight pulses are complete and another planning phase for the next
turn commences. More than once a player has
bravely marched his Comcen to eliminate a
single reduced unit in a city, only to find a
surprise reinforcement appear and have the
two units combine to eliminate his Comcen!
At times like that, eight pulses of game play
can be excruciating to watch go by.

Burbs! (Oh, excuse me...
Fortunately for Command HQ veterans, the
game control buttons (and their corresponding
function keys) translate directly over to Global
Conquest. F4 still calls up the airplanes, F5
still allows for "chat" messages but the oh-hit

F6 key leads to a different kind of building
menu. In fact, Global Conquest has got an
economic system souped up quite a bit from
CHQ, although not nearly as intricate as in
Civilization.

During a planning phase, a player can do a
long click over a vacant square of a city and
call up its production menu. At the top is the
city name followed by a brief ledger including:
the city's present cash balance; its income (villages, towns, cities and metroplexes produce
$4, $6, $8 and $10 "bucks" per turn, respectively) that includes any nearby friendly resources (which generate an additional $2 bucks
per turn each); the cost it pays to support the
units built by and attached to it (a la Civilization), etc. beneath this are the choices of units
to produce that range in cost from $25 bucks
for infantry and subs, $35 bucks for tanks, battleships and airplanes all the way up to $85
bucks for a new spy. Players also have the option of not producing any unit at a given city,
allowing it to save its money locally.
Beyond managing individual cities, however,
by hitting the "Burb" (F6) button, a window
pops up showing a list of all of a player's
cities, complete with economic and production
information. Above this is the player's
"treasury" (i.e., the "safe" money that is not at
risk when cities are captured), while beneath it
are three buttons: build, transfer and support.
By activating one of these buttons and clicking on a city name, that activity can take
place. For instance, selecting build, followed
by a city name on the list, one is instantly
zapped over to the city's build menu and,
when finished there, zapped back to the burb
menu. Similarly, transfer allows for moving
money from individual cities to one's treasury,
and back again to the cities (although only
half of a transfer from the treasury gets to any
specific city — corruption, no doubt). The support button allows a player to reassign units instantly to different cities. The economic system is far deeper than that of Command HQ
and Empire, but has been honed through
many man-hours of playtest experience into a
system that is as visually intuitive and quick to
use as possible (which is vital in a modem
play game).

By referencing this window, players will get
an instant picture of who is winning (and, consequently, needs to be ganged up on), who's
allied with whom, etc. Interestingly, computer
players have a curious way of making and
breaking alliances that, while based on some
logic routines, have so many variables in them
that they can act annoyingly human in their
diplomatic fickleness. Well, like most good
global conquest games (particularly Global
Conquest), the only good opponent is a dead
one.
The middle window is for "current events."
Players will see where units have been built or
destroyed and can zoom in instantly to those
areas by clicking on this window.
The bottom window provides close up information on the space the cursor is currently
over. Command HQ players will be very
familiar with the uses of this window, but
many new features have been added to it. Unit
strengths are now shown in percentages, for
example. Thus, players will get a solid numerical value for each unit's strength (including
enemy units). In battles, each unit shows a
miniature icon of the unit it is engaged with on
the side that it is engaged from, making flank
and rear attacks easier to determine. Putting
the cursor over cities will also show what unit
is under construction there, as well as how
many turns away it is from completion. With
that and the spiffy hi-res EGA graphics in this
window, players will be enjoying one very
sharp-looking and informative display.

That Personal Touch
As a "throwaway" feature of the game, it
also includes an "icon editor" program. This allows players to paint their own custom icons
as symbols of their empire. Frankly, the
playtesters went a bit nuts with this, and currently this reviewer has over 60 icons on file! It
is easy to see the network and BBS libraries
brimming with players' original creations shortly after the game is released. Frankly, this element of letting players add their own "personal touches" is what keeps Dungeons &
Dragons alive, and can only help lengthen the
legs of Global Conquest. This reviewer
predicts that this little "throwaway" feature not
originally intended in the design is going to be
a runaway hit element to the game's future.

The Windows of
Opportunity

Custom Scenarios Made
Easy

The three windows along the right side of
the screen display replace the windows along
the bottom of the Command HQ screen display. The top window shows the four players,
their scores, known assets and alliances.

So how did Dan Bunten turn the design
pyramid upside down? While everything previously mentioned about Global Conquest
might sound straightforward, it is only because
this reviewer took a single path in explaining

Playtester's Notes

the game. Players, however, will get to choose
their own paths. Perhaps some further explana
tion is in order....

there are nearby minerals). Economic exploitation (by expending an infantry unit) can be set
to either create a resource on any land hex (although these deplete during the game) or attempt to upgrade "burbs" (from villages to
towns and towns to cities).

During the design process, Dan received
plenty of input from his legion of dedicated
CHQ players. Of course, every one of them
had his own individual ideas of what would
make a good strategy game. This left Dan
with many choices to make, but rather than
choosing, he's left all that up to the players. In
other words, players can select from many features and "custom design" their own favorite
games. Frankly, this element of player customization is going to be Global Conquest's
great strength among strategy garners.
Some examples of scenario customization
are in order, of course. Not only can players
paint their own imperial designation (player
icon), as described above, they can also type
in their own name for it (again, a la Civilization) and set a "rank" (or difficulty level) for
each (affecting the amount of starting cities
and money, as well as the purchase price of
units throughout the game). One can also
choose the "look" of the pieces on the game
map from among three different sets (the
standard military symbols, standard icons or
exotic icons).
When designing a scenario to play, first
there are the set up options. The mix of units
in the game includes infantry only, WWI level
(which adds battleships and submarines),
WWII level (which adds tanks, planes and carriers) and then the Comcen and spy pieces

Most importantly, one of three victory criteria
can be set. Play can either be for the largest
economy (with money in the bank counting
the most), inflicting the most damage on
enemies or, the most cutthroat of all, to control the lone alien capital. This latter victory
criterion removes some subtlety in play but,
oh, what catfights it produces!

can be added separately to the mix. This
reviewer's faithful 6-year-old son, junior
general and (now) rookie playtester, James,
managed a WWI level game with very little
help from daddy. The best part was that this
reviewer realized Global Conquest was no
less interesting even when using a more
limited mix of units in the game.
From here, a scenario has a plethora of
economic options. The general richness of the
world and the amount of "bucks" it will take to
support units each turn are easily adjustable.
Resources can also be set to have a restricting
effect (players cannot build tanks and planes
unless an oil resource is nearby, and are
similarly restricted from building ships unless

Play options include setting the end-of-turn
time limit from 5 seconds after the first player
hits the execute button, to 20 or a more
gentlemanly 60 seconds. Alternately, a flat two
or four minutes can be set, or turns can be for
an unlimited time. Game turns can be set to
30, 60, 90, 120 or unlimited in length. Opponent visibility can be hidden (everything is
secret until discovered), partially hidden
(players will jointly see whatever any player
can see) or open (which is like a boardgame,
with the map and visible units always on display).
Finally, the map can be customized. Everything from the size of the playing surface to
the density of each terrain type, resources,
cities and number of native units can all be adjusted or left to be "rolled up randomly" by the
computer. When each game starts, there is a
"creation" process with pictures of a world

Playtester's Notes

being created scrolling along the right side of
the screen (sound familiar, Civilization fans?)

Take a Walk on the "Wild"
Side
When Dan originally described his plans to
his playtest legions (whom he keeps from
pirating by giving out unique NAME.PIC files
that can instantly be traced and without which
the playtest versions of his games cannot be
played) he said, "Think of it as Command HQ
meets Seven Cities meets M.U.L.E." Well, the
single most important element of M.U.L.E. is,
arguably, the random events which occur
every five turns, and these events can also be
found in Global Conquest as a major feature
of the game. These can be toggled off or a
deck of "tame" cards (left over from Robot
Rascals?) can be used in play. Optionally,
players can add the "wild" cards to the deck
as well.
"Tame" events include such things as the
weather, local economy, native attitudes (or
the ever-merciful "no effect"). "Wild" events,
on the other hand, might beset players with
time warps (literally resetting the game five
turns — very cool — and give players the
chance to answer the question: What would
you do differently, knowing what you've
learned in the past five turns?) and space
pirates (who steal every saved buck on the
planet). These event cards remind one of playing the popular Mayfair boardgame Cosmic
Encounter for, while their consequences are

profound, each of the 32 events will only be
decisive if a player has not maintained enough
flexibility to adapt his or her plans to the everchanging circumstances they present.
Quite honestly, this reviewer and most of the
rest of the playtest group considered these
"wild" events a serious breach of "wargaming
etiquette." Dan, however, persisted with his
"Try them, you'll like them" sales pitch to
these grognards who, eventually, did. Actually,
Dan was right on target by adding these wild
events to the game, for not only do they enhance play value of the product, but they reinforce the occasionally bizarre science-fictionesque theme of the game.

To Battle!
Global Conquest tries to deliver the proverbial kitchen sink in strategy gaming. As part
of the playtest group, it is difficult for this
reviewer to find much to complain about in
the game, because virtually every complaint
or comment about the game over the past few
months has been met with a change to either
add, fix or improve it by Dan and the gang at
Ozark Softscape! Of course, this reviewer
would like to have seen an amalgamated victory criteria, which incorporated all three elements of economic power, enemy casualty infliction and control of the alien capital, but
"you can't have everything."

One thing players can have with Global Conquest is what is probably the largest rules
manual in any Microprose released game to

date. Written in a humorous, science-fiction
motif, but complete with the types of tabular information serious strategy garners desire, its
sheer size will require a certain amount of
"manual" dexterity to manage.
While up to four human players can play at
the same machine by "hot-seating it" back
and forth in front of the monitor (the screen
blacks out between player turns so no one
can see what the last guy was up to), a network driver of sorts is scheduled for inclusion
in the game. It will allow players to set up their
own mini-networks by having one computer
as a master to three connected "slaves." No
Novell or other network drivers will be included in the finished package, although
"hooks" have been left in the game for their
later inclusion, should anyone care to program
them (contact Ozark Softscape for details).
Furthermore, a hook has also been included
for a map editor (again, should anyone care
to program it). For the time being, players can
save the maps from past games and select
them again for later use.
Whew! As if the four billion permutations of
the game weren't enough, Global Conquest
also offers a wide variety of features to explore. This is a strategy game that one can
truly "grow into," customizing it to suit and
playing others by modem or network for lively
interactive play. If anything major is missing,
then blame the bottom of the design pyramid
this time, for Dan Bunten, literally, "made this
game for you."

Review

TITLE:

Romance of the Three Kingdoms II

Koei's Romance of the Three Kingdoms II
Snafus Straightened

by Roger White

K

RTK2 has straightened out some
of the procedural peculiarities that
marred RTK. For instance, each
general takes an action in RTK2
rather than being restricted to just
one action per province no matter
how many generals are stationed in
it. RTK2 sports nice EGA graphics
and AdLib sound, but it may make
trivia history as the last commercial
entertainment offering not to support
a mouse.

oei is the leader in games

about historical China. In
Romance of the Three
Kingdoms II (RTK2), they have updated their previous offering,
Romance of the Three Kingdoms, in
the hardware supported and in the
commands available to the player.
The result is a game brought up to
date on technology and one that
does a better job of simulating the
chaos of that era.

Koei has moved more of the behind-the-scenes action up front. The
main screen shows little horses galloping between provinces, so the
player can get a feel for which provinces contain leaders and which
leaders are conversing. If these messengers go through the player's
provinces, they sometimes get
caught and the player can read the
messages.

Background
Romance of the Three Kingdoms
is the title of a Chinese novel written
about chaotic times in second century China, when the Han dynasty collapsed and was replaced briefly by
three rival kingdoms — Wei, Wu and
Shu. The three kingdoms lasted
about half a century until they were
unified under the first Emperor of the
Chin dynasty. (This was the period
when Sun Tzu wrote The Art of War
and he is here under the name Sun
Ce.) The novel describes a time of
warlords, conflicting loyalties and
treachery (on a scale unrivaled in
Western literature) and the game
reflects this.

Positions, Everyone...
Each player takes the position of a warlord aspiring to be
Emperor by conquering all the provinces of ancient China. The
warlord must choose how to allocate resources between:
• making his peasants happy and productive
• recruiting, training and arming his military
• buying the loyalty of his generals
• buying loyalty from other warlords'
generals
• keeping other warlords pacified.
The player's warlord is one of a group
of four to 15 other warlords — depending
on the scenario — trying to accomplish
the same goal. (This was a chaotic time
by any measure.) Up to 12 of these can
be other human players, but the game organization is awkward for multi-player
use, because each province's turn comes
up randomly during each month and,
hence, players will be hopping in and out
of the command seat many times a turn.

Diplomacy Enhanced
Diplomacy is not a sideline in RTK2
— the player can't do all his or her
negotiating with sword and pike and
still be using resources efficiently.
Computer leaders will gang up to
launch joint invasions. To counter
this, the game incorporates ways for
the player to call in defensive reinforcements from silicon allies.
The game also provides ways for the player to launch joint invasions of enemy provinces.

The Field of Battle
When the player, or the player's enemies, determine that differences are irreconcilable, it's war time. War takes the player to
a tactical view of the contested province and the time for
maneuvering military units begins. Units
maneuver in turn-by-turn fashion on terrain that is different for each province.
Battles consist of engagements that
progressively weaken the units involved
rather than killing them instantly. There
are "trick" attacks available, such as incendiary attacks, insult attacks and
single combat. There is also treachery: if
it moves, it can be bought.
In RTK2, battles can last longer than a
month. Once the end of a month is
reached on the tactical screen, the game
reverts back to the main menu and
regular play is resumed until that

Review

province's "turn" comes up again in the next month of play. This
allows time for both sides to order in reinforcements and line up
new allies for the next month's continuation.

True to Form
The changes Koei has made in RTK2 bring the game closer to

Wise Counsel on

Romance of the
Three Kingdoms 2
The path to Zhuge Liang's door was
not well beaten. The shingle over the
door read Zhuge Liang, Advisor to Warlords, but it looked like it might have
been centuries since anyone had last
read it. A white-bearded man stood in
the doorway motioning for me to come
in.
'Business has been slow?" I queried.
"Terrible!" he said shaking his head,
"You'd think in these times I'd have to
beat off aspirants with a stick, but no.
They think they know it all." He stuck

the form of the novel. These warlords didn't operate in a
black-and-white world; their fates rose and fell many times, and they
had to deal with familial and political obligations as well as the
military and economic ones. Koei's enhancement of the
diplomacy, the treachery and the joint military ventures brings
out more of this chaotic flavor.

out his tongue as he looked down the
road. "Only that loser Lui Bei has
bothered to show up, and I've chased
him off twice." He looked back. "What
can I do for you, sir?"
"I'm here for advice."
"Well, why didn't you say so! Come
right in."

The Words of the Master
These are turbulent times, sir, and there
are many things for people to be loyal
to. The key to victory will be getting your
share. You want the loyalty of three
kinds of people: peasants, generals and
warlords.
Peasants: When the peasants aren't
revolting they are providing you with the

food and gold that makes your armies
run. Give them food and they will return
you food and gold many times over. Let
a general with high charm do your giving
and a little food will go a long way.
Generals: Your generals are your
hands, eyes and mouths. You need loyal
generals, and lots of them, to wage
peace or war. Pleasing peasants is
simple. Pleasing generals takes a little research into their likes and dislikes. Give
horses to generals with high war ratings,
special visits to generals with high intelligence ratings and letters to those with
high charm ratings. Gold will reach all of
them.
Other Warlords: Your neighbors are
numerous, and as ambitious and bloodthirsty as you are, so there's going to be

Review

bloodshed. Fortunately for you, they
have lots of neighbors too. The goal of
your diplomatic efforts is to see to it that
your neighbors find some other neighbor
a more attractive target than you. You
want peace with all your neighbors except one: the one you want to destroy.
When that one neighbor is destroyed,
then pick another single neighbor to take
on. The more you can avoid wars on
many fronts, the more effective your
military will be.
Priority: Your leader's most time-consuming task throughout the game will be
building the loyalty of your generals. Consider him a human-resource person first,
then a diplomat and finally a warrior.
Building armies: Armies are your tool
for taking provinces. Poor armies can
take unoccupied provinces, but if you
covet a province already occupied by a
warlord you're going to need a quality
army.
Concentration: Put all your eggs in
one basket. Only one general can occupy a square and battle losses are deter-

mined in part by the disparity in size between the contestants. This makes a
strong general with 10,000 men worth
much more than five average generals
with 2,000 men each. Build each
general's army to 10,000 men before
you start on the next.
Quality: Expend resources to improve
the quality of your armies: spend the
money to acquire arms and take the
time to train them before you take them
to battle.
Effective recruiting: To win battles
you need generals, so you must collect
generals even before you win battles. To
do this, you entice them to come from
other warlords or you search your home
provinces to find likely candidates waiting to be discovered. Some provinces,
such as 21, are rich with hidden candidates; others, such as 6, are rich with
discontented generals. Play the game
many times and keep a record of where
your heroes are coming from.
Do your homework: In the turns
before you start recruiting, view the

various provinces and make records of
the generals' loyalty and characteristics.
That way you'll know where to find vulnerable generals and know what enticement to use. Do your searching and
recruiting at the beginning of the turn
and don't use your leader. That way
when you find someone and entice him
to join, your leader can reward the
general in the same turn and bring his
loyalty up to a safe value before the
other warlords get a chance to steal him
away — and they surely will if they get a
chance.
Wealth: OWPs (Other Warlord's Provinces) are likely to be your richest
resource. The Yin of the other Warlords
is as strong as the Yang. They muster formidable armies, but they also improve
provinces. A province owned by another
warlord will be rich with gold and food,
filled with happy peasants and guarded
by able generals. You covet all these
things. Once you start down conquest
road, follow the route of the warlord's
provinces.
Tactics: Assemble a core army: 40,000

Review

men, well-armed, well-trained and wellled, should do. This means you will need
at least five generals in the starting
province and they all should be at 100%
loyalty — you'll be acquiring plenty of untrustworthy generals as you campaign.
Once you have won, take a month or
two to reorganize. Fill out the ranks of
your loyal generals' armies and strip
men from the untrustworthy ones. Pick
which general will be governor when
your leader moves on and boost his loyalty to 100%. If the merchant comes, buy
more arms for your generals. If a general
hasn't any better thing to do, train, train
and train.
When you have 40,000 men ready to
go again, continue the campaign against
the warlord you have already attacked. A
warlord's forces will always retreat into a
province he already controls, if one is adjacent, and retreat into an unoccupied
province, if a controlled one isn't available. The goal of your campaign is to
corner him so that he can retreat into
neither. Once you corner him and defeat
him, you will have the opportunity to

recruit all his remaining generals, and if
that is his last province, he is gone from
the game — unless you want to set him
up as a "straw man" for some reason.
Targets: Pick on outlying provinces
first. Once you start winning, you don't
want to lose. The easiest way to get
upset is for your opponent to call in reinforcements from his nearby allies, so
pick isolated provinces to start your campaign.
Making friends on the way: The limiting factor in your expansion will be how
quickly you can acquire generals. When
you take lots of generals in a battle, first
strip them of men so they are less attractive to the other leaders, then spread
them out through the provinces behind
you. Once spread out, the governors of
the provinces can reward these men just
as your leader does, and many generals
can be given loyalty boosts in the same
turn.
Once generals are loyal, you can reman them, re-arm them and send them
back to the front. Hold off on training

until you can collect a lot of recruits in a
single province. This is because one
general can train many armies at the
same time. Once you have a lot of
recruits gathered together, you can have
a "training party" in which each general
in the province takes his turn training the
troops, and all the troops benefit from
many rounds of training.
Keep the loyalty of your generals high
so your nearby neighbors won't be
tempted to steal them and help those
neighbors in campaigns when called
upon to do so.

Parting Admonition
"Do these things well, sir," he said,
"and the Three Kingdoms will become
a figment in someone's imagination."
An apprentice came in. "Excuse me,
Master — Lui Bei is here to see you
again."
"For a third time... perhaps this
general does have some redeeming
qualities. Excuse me, sir, history calls."

Strategy

Tips and Tricks for Sid Meier's Civilization
by Roger-Tzu

game. The Warlord Way declines in effectiveness when City Walls and Musketeer units show up. The defenders become so numerous and expensive that
Diplomats can't buy off all the trouble,
and City Walls make even cannon and
catapult attacks risky. The world becomes complex and the Warlord Way
becomes harder to pursue. Other
strategies become more productive,
such as the Wenceslaus Way.

The year: 4000BC.
The place: a grassy, well-watered
plain covered with wagons, oxen and
people.

The Wenceslaus Way

I'm here with a man who will live
6000 years — if all goes well. He's
directing a tribe of Homo sapiens who
are developing an exciting new innovation: the city.
"Over there with the oxen!" he yells.
"Yes, put the road there and the huts
there!" He points at various places on
the plain. "That's right." The workers
scurry on.
"Excuse me."
"Speak to me. Don't waste my time.
Every decade counts in this civilizing
business, you know."
"I'm from Computer Gaming World
and I wondered if you could spare a
few moments to tell me some tips
about this 'civilizing' business?"
He turned and gave me his full attention, no doubt impressed by my press
credentials, although I'm sure he
didn't recognize me without the bag
over my head. "I've got a few minutes,
yes. Let's talk in my palace." The
palace wasn't much, just rocks piled
up to look like a cave, but it was majestic compared to the thatched huts forming the city around it. Inside, we sat
down to herb tea and a fermented
milk by-product. I listened while the
6000-year-old man related these tips:
"Growth is your first concern and
there are many ways to make a
civilization grow...."

The Warlord's Way
The Warlord's way is the easiest to start
with. The world is a ripe plum to be explored and conquered. Growth comes by
taking the grass huts of minor tribes and
the cities of your major rivals. Use your
cities to build chariots, chariots and more
chariots — which means you need to
develop The Wheel.
Send those chariots to the four corners
of your continent while your scientists
cook up Map Making and Writing. Map
Making will get you off your starting island and Writing will get you Diplomats.
What your chariots can't overrun, trust
me, those silver-tongued devils can buy.
You've got to move fast. You want to
knock out as many civilizations as you

can before they get (shudder) Construction and start building City Walls.
If you see barbarians arriving on a sailboat, rejoice. Get your Diplomat over
there lickety-split and bribe the ship's captain into joining you. That's the quickest
and cheapest way to get trans-oceanic
capability. And don't even think about
anything but Despotism as a government
choice, because that style allows military
units to be organized and deployed with
impunity. Remember, you're growing by
conquering in the Warlord Way.
"But what if I start on an island by
myself?"
Then forget about being a warlord. Try
a different way. May I continue?
"Please."

Cities from the Ground Up
Back to growing: if you want to capture
an enemy city intact, first try sending a
Diplomat to buy it. If you can't do that,
send one chariot unit per point of city
size. Position them so they can all attack,
using both of their attacks, on the same
turn. This gives you your only chance of
killing off all the defender's military units
without killing off the city itself. If you attack piecemeal, he'll keep building defensive units and losing population with
each of your attacks as long as there's a
city left to defend.
You don't need any Wonders when
using the Warlord way, but the Lighthouse is nice. It extends trireme sailing
range from three to four spaces.
"But all this sounds like typical 'I want
your jugular veins tangled in my canines'
wargame strategy."
So it is and it's one way of playing the

The Good King Wenceslaus Way calls
for being a "nice guy" leader. You concentrate on growing through internal
development of cities. You'll spent a lot
of time working the city maps when you
grow this way. The key units are Settlers
for colonizing and improving the land
around each city with roads and irrigation, and the key government form is
Democracy, which promotes the fastest
city growth. Finally, the key Wonder is
the Pyramids. The Pyramids will let you
transition to Democracy quickly and
avoid long bouts with Anarchy should
you misstep.
When you're pursuing the Wenceslaus
Way, internal growth becomes everything. You need to manipulate your taxes
and city improvements as you transition
to Democracy so that your civilization experiences an unprecedented "Era of
Good Feelings." Your cities need to
spend a lot of time celebrating "We love
the President" day. President's Day is
more than just a parade, it's a time when
the city experiences hypergrowth. Under
a Democracy, each celebrating city
grows by one population unit per turn
until food supplies run out.
The Wenceslaus Way is easiest when
you're on a landmass by yourself. By the
way, if you start with two Settler units,
don't even think about starting out the
Wenceslaus Way. The two-Settler start
means that rival civilizations are close at
hand. You'll probably run into them in
less than ten turns. Once you've cleared
the land mass of rivals, then you can
think about internal development again.
"So, you can fight those around you, or
you can grow internally. Are there any
other ways?"
Those are the basics... then there are
the embellishments.

The Techno/Trader Tax
Swing
There's a lot that gold can do. There's
a lot that technology can do. You have
to make the choice of when to support
science and when to support diplomats
and infrastructure building. The best
answer can be to swing the tax rate wildly between science and taxes. Start with
100% science until you acquire trade,
then switch to 100% tax and build

Strategy

Marketplaces, then switch back to 100%
science and learn how to Write, then
switch back to taxes and build Libraries,
and so on.

many! No class of unit undergoes more
change and improvement as civilizing
traits are acquired.
• Diplomats: Diplomats are wonderful
units. They are mobile extensions of your
treasury. In this game, every unit has its
price and the diplomat unit is the way to
pay it. The sweetest part is that units and
cities can be bought during peacetime
without antagonizing the nation they are
purchased from.

Railroads and Caravans
Once your cities have grown mighty —
populations of 6 citizens or more — it's
time to send out the caravans. Trade
routes bring riches, but they take time to
establish, and the best routes are to large
cities far away.
One way to cut down on the time it
takes to establish trade routes is to wait
until you have a railroad net in place.
The rail net lets caravans cross continents on a single move. Railroads, by
the way, are a mighty trade engine themselves. They increase a square's productivity by 50%. So, as soon as you get the
railroad innovation, have your settlers
laying track.
If you're doing well, that large foreign
city you're planning on sending caravans
to may get jealously hostile. Be prepared
to buy peace and learn the art of slipping
in caravans from two or three squares
away so they don't get attacked on the
outskirts. Keep in mind that it's tough to
keep people in a Democracy happy with
lots of units away from home. Sending
ships away will stop a President's Day
celebration.

The Wonders Way
Each Wonder of the World brings a
specific benefit and most make your
people generally happy too. You can
either home-grow your Wonders — which
dovetails nicely with a Wenceslaus
strategy — or you can capture cities with
Wonders in them and they become
yours. Doing this using outright assault requires a great deal of finesse or you
destroy the city and its Wonders. If you
can, try to buy the city with a Diplomat.
And remember: cities come mighty
cheap when you approach them during
Civil Disorder.

The Technology Way
Remember too, you're here to build a
civilization. If you can't overwhelm all six
of your neighbors quickly, you're going
to have to beat them to outer space. If
that's the case, your progress is ultimately based on the advance of knowledge.
You need to know a lot of things before
you can build a spaceship.
That knowledge can be acquired many
different ways: your own scientists can research advances, you can trade with
other nations for advances, you can send
a diplomat to steal them from a city, or
you can conquer a city and take one as
part of the loot. You can also build the
Great Library Wonder: any skill known by
two other civilizations will become known
to you, too. But it only works until the
University skill is developed.

A further sweetener: if units are purchased far from any of your cities, they
have no home city and no city is caused
unhappiness by their being away. As a
Democrat you can still be popular while
amassing a large "mercenary" army.
Trading with your neighbors in the late
game isn't easy. They'll be as jumpy as
pit bulls on crack when your first piece of
spaceship hits hard vacuum. Be prepared to give up a lot if you want peace
in the late game.
"You're right. There are certainly a lot
of ways. Is there anything else?"

Familiarizing Yourself With
the Controls
Pay attention to your displays. They're
telling you a lot. For instance, on the
negotiating display: If that leader comes
up with four aides behind him, he's the
number one honcho on the board. Treat
this man with some respect! If those
aides look like they just came riding in
from some Asian steppe, he's a despot.
He'll go to war easily, but his units will be
cheap to bribe. On the other hand, if
those aids look like the Thomas Edison
bunch, you're talking to the president of
a Democracy and that civilization has acquired the Invention civilization skill.
They're not going to provoke quite as
easily, but they'll be bringing powerful
units to the party when they come. If the
aides look like they just wandered in
from Haight-Ashbury, then the country is
in Anarchy and, if you've got any money
at all, your Diplomats are going to have
a field day buying units and cities.
"How about the units themselves?"
The units? I could talk about them for
the next decade!

The Pieces
• Settlers: Settler units are the infrastructure makers. They irrigate, mine
and build roads. They're an expensive
unit and their work takes time, but
anytime you're not conducting "veins in
your teeth" war campaigns, they're indispensable. The more prosperity you are
planning, the more Settlers you need to
improve the land around your cities. But
there's a limit. These units are extracting
resources from their home city each turn.
Don't build too many too soon or the
city won't grow.
• Ground combat units: There are so

• Ship units: Triremes are truly a
feeble ship. But because they are the first
and their replacement, the sailing ship, is
usually a long time coming, they are perhaps the most valuable ship you can
make. The fundamental characteristics of
your empire will be formed in the Age of
Triremes, so learn to use them well.
• Air units: Your first fighter will be a
joy. When I got my first I felt like Mussolini attacking the Ethiopians. The
enemy knights and musketeers that were
closing on my city fell like wheat to the
scythe. Fighters can attack many times
in a turn, bombers only once. Fighters
will rip up enemy ground formations closing on your cities; bombers will carry the
battle to faraway cities.

Suddenly...
There was a knock at the door.
"Excuse me sir, but the Spontaneous
Palace Beautification Committee is
here and we've just received a Mongol
emissary."
"What, so soon? Tell the Committee
to gravel the walk! Get those scientists
hot-footing it on developing The Wheel,
and tell the emissary I'm on my way.
Go!
"Wait! How many men does he have
with him?"
"I'll check."
He turned to me. "Sorry, have to rush
now. I hope I've been helpful."
"You certainly have, and good luck
with your negotiations."
"One last thing: remember that you
can make killing fields. Your opponents have silicon minds; they are
very persistent. As long as the situation they perceive doesn't change,
they'll keep coming at you the same
way for a long time. Find how they
are getting to you and trap them."
"Sir, there are four of them."
"Four! Oh, my gosh. Bring my knee
pads! There's going to be a lot of
bowing and scraping today."

Opponents Wanted

Reach Out and

Someone

a

3E
37
32

74
37
32
37

7
7

7
77

7

1
32
32

32

37
27

32
32

7

12

It

5

27
37
2E
35
37
24
32
37
37

32

34
2E
32
2C
2(
2(
37
31
41
31
41
41
4(
31
31
31
31
:
21

S

tic

Editorial

S

tate of the Magazine: Sometimes, the task of publishing a
monthly magazine can turn into a
whirlwind of confusion. Couple those inexorable deadlines with a major increase in
magazine size, and the potential for confusion gets even greater. Add a sprinkle
of human error and the confusion increases geometrically.

fered a parlor mystery in the style of
Lord Peter Wimsey. Unfortunately, the attribution for the mystery series was erroneously given to Virginia Sayers (the
psychologist) instead of to Dorothy L.
Sayers (the novelist). Such errors infuriate this pompous redactor and could
have been caught if he had allowed more
time for fact-checking.

When all of the above are combined
with an editorial staff that strives for excellence and agonizes over every minor
error, the stress level rises, some of the
corrective processes that are supposed
to perform error-trapping functions shut
down and there comes a point of
diminishing returns. The last six months
of CGW have reflected the growing pains
of a magazine that has, during the last
five years, gone from a total page count
of 58 pages in November of 1986 (#32)
to a total of 162 pages in November of
1991 (#88). Indeed, we are averaging
over 100 pages since our August issue
of last year.

To add insult to injury, the names of
the top games dropped out of the graphs
on page 49 of the same issue. This was
a printer error caused by a change in the
black plate, where the names were temporarily lifted to make changes to the
plate and the workman forgot to replace
the names. [Art director's note: Four
"process" colors, cyan, magenta, yellow and black, are used to create fullcolor images; there is one "plate" or
piece of film for each process color
used on a given page.] Of course, we
would normally have caught this error at
"blue line," our final chance to catch
problems, but we had run late on getting
these pages to the printer and printed
them without that final check. Again, the
increase in pages has caused us embarrassment.

Such growth has been duly celebrated
around Golden Empire Publications,
Inc., but as in many of life's experiences,
it offers a double-edged sword. We may
be able to publish bigger magazines with
more features, but in so doing, we have
increased the possibilities of error. In
retrospect, the additional errors have not
been proportional to the growth, but
there have been more than our staff is
comfortable with having. For instance,
this editor added a late addition to his
sibling's review of U.S. Gold's Murder!
(CGW #92), suggesting that the game of-

Any such embarrassment, however,
must be considered an embarrassment
of riches. The additional pages enable us
to provide significantly more quality features than they cause us to "goof." It continues to be exciting to cover the world
of entertainment software from the personalities and techniques behind the
software to the games themselves and
the strategies required to "beat" them.

In discussing such excitement, this
month features three cases in point: Railroad Tycoon, Wing Commander, and Ul
tima VI. We are inducting all three into
the CGW Hall of Fame this month. Railroad Tycoon is a welcome addition to
the Hall of Fame as a genre-busting foray
into strategy gaming. Sid Meier was able
to blend the construction elements of
SimCity, the economic elements of a
solid business simulation and the joy of
railroading into a coherent and comprehensive whole.

Wing Commander is also a longawaited inductee into the Hall of Fame.
The envelope-stretching action game
with cinematic sequences, terraced 3-D
flight model and emotive soundtrack orbited atop CGW's Top 100 from the time
of its inception to the time its sequel surpassed it. Chris Roberts was able to
blend story, emotion and action into a
creative computer space opera that became synonymous with excitement.
Ultima VI leapfrogged past previous (llamas in terms of both story and technology. Since Ultima IV, Lord British has
been extremely concerned with the story
that undergirds each Ultima. Ultima VI
both presented a parable on prejudice
and showed how object-oriented programming could be used to create a more
realistic world in which to adventure.
Bugs associated with the earliest release
of the game held back its initial acceptance, but it is considered a major work
in its present incarnation.

