"Covering Interactivo & Multimedia Entertainment COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Battlecruiser 3000 A.D. The #1 Computer Game Magazine May 1994 / Number 118 ZD GAMES RATED Feature Reviews The Horde Frontier: Elite II StarTrek CDN Victory At Sea In-Depth Strategies SimCity 2000 Flight Sim Toolkit VG Planets Aces Slye An Interview With Dynamix Designer Science Fiction UU Games Compared $3.95 USA $4.95. Canadian 071486 01143 "


"FOM GEN INCORPORATED Oisciples STEEL The disappearance of your father has left Lanthor without a leader, Factional infighting in the resulting power vacuum has left the realm in chaos! In your heart, you've always known that you were the chosen one now it's time to act! You've got to save your once-rich land by re-establishing the supremacy of the guilds. Choose your disciples and your strategies, build vast armies to conquer or defend, heed the counsel of the lords or assassinate them everything is under your control! Disciples of Steel is the ultimate role playing game, with stunning graphics and hundreds of challenging quests. Heart pounding sound effects and original soundtrack make Disciples incredibly realistic. It'll amaze you with its fine attention to detail, powerful weapons, and huge array of magic spells! reconoce 2006 Recleone NAME SHOW Ducu STEEL Diciple STEEL Duple STEEL SHECHA  THITELLIGENCE HISDOM INTUITION YOUR FARTWAS FROGRESS 15 TITLECUP TEO EVA GROUP OF POSSIBLE FOCS. VOU HAVE ENCOUNTERED A LIZAROHANI, SEVERAL GIATEATS: 1 MAG SPL O ILL SEUS 1 SPL POS I ATT FOS CHARM LUCY HITS FOOD HATER KARA ESSENCE 42 OFFICE POOL HONEY FOOD OPTIONS HT PARLEY SHEENA MAG ACH 23 OUT OF ALTER DISCIPLE SEXU Hone your skills and build your strengths danger lurks around every turn! Fight or flight! Choose wisely, as things are rarely what they seem! Time for talk is pell Only the mighty and the cunning will survive! Game by Megasoft Entertainment. Published by FormGen Inc. (800) 263-2390 Circle Reader Service #65 "


"SOMEONE OUT THERE WANTS TO DESTROY YOU. METALTECH BATTLEDROMENI BET ON IT. Lonely at the top? Don't believe it. You're top rated, and with real time modem play, you can be challenged by there's a crowd of cyberpunks just waiting to take anyone, anywhere, anytime. Nice touch-reach out and blast you down. someone. Of course they've challenged you before. And they've lost. So far. But you're up for it. You and your stable of 10 Herculans. Pure fighting machines, in riveting 3Space graphics, Yeah, someone out there wants you. So let'em come and orticulated perfectly to prowl the drome—to seek and destroy, place their bet. Then let's see if they've got the ballistics to fight toe-to-toe-and battle with cunning, power and skill. go up against number one. No, getting on top wasn't easy. But you're smart and you set the perfect battle conditions. You chose the weaponry, the right Here, even the right music. And you bet smart. Building a stash to buy new weapons, new Hercs and enough cold cash to back up your boasts. Battledrome-blast into the MetalTech era. HIGH-STAKES ROBOTIC COMBAT MODEM READY Dynamix 21994 Dynamic Inc. Dynamix or IM indicate trademarks of, or licensed As, Dynamis, loc. All rights reserved de Available at retail for IBM/compatibles or call 1-800-757-7707 Circle Reader Service #109 che tenders "


"THERE GOES THE E E E "


"NEIGHBORHOOD. D oom. Earth is destroyed by a D catastrophic event, and you're responsible for rebuilding civilization on another planet. Lucky you. Where you go and if you survive is up to you there's a galaxy of possibilities. the robominers and monorail systems you'll use on the planet surface, Outpost's photorealism and 3-D rendered animation are unprecedented. Based on NASA research in planetary science, robotics, terraforming, and interstellar spacecraft design, Outpost places you in control of the most comprehensive strategy simulation ever developed for the PC. No kidding. From the colonization starship to Develop agriculture, mining and manufacturing to survive, and then invest in research and recreation facilities to make life more comfortable for your colonists hopefully they'll be around long enough to enjoy it. Because, in the end, the decisions you make will determine the destiny of mankind. OUTPOST BUILD MANKIND'S FUTURE IN SPACE SIERRA See your local retailer or call 1-800-757-7707 Circle Reader Service #111 "


"COMPUTER FEATURES FEATURES GAMING WORLD 14 Cover Story: Battlecruiser:3000 A.D. Mission Products Brings Derek Smart's Dream Galaxy To Life by Mike Weksler Gametek Launches Frontier: Elite II Jeff James' Transformation Into A Galactic Capitalist Nomad Journeys Back In Space-Time Wander Where You Will Through Gametek Galactica Righteous Fire In The Belly Bernie Yee Burns Through This Privateer Sequel Spectre VR Appears Martin Cirulis Gazes Upon The Apparition Arctic Baron Puts Cornelius Vanderbilt On Ice Trains, Coal and Mammoths In Readysoft's Frigid Future by H.E. Dille and John P. Withers Battlecruiser:3000 A.D. pg. 14 Star Trek Speaks! Shatner, Nimoy And Crew Give Voice To Star Trek: 25th Anniversary CD-ROM by Charles Ardai We Came, We Played, We Surveyed Science Fiction Games from 2000 To Infinity by M. Evan Brooks Analysis indicates that one cannon has been dismounted and taken. Special Feature: State Of Sound Where To Go When The Sound Chips Are Down by Donald S. Griffin 42 Righteous Fire Pg. 26 SimCity 2000 Strategy Guide Making The Maxis Of Your Mayorship, Part 2 by Robert L. Hayes, Jr. 200 Damon Slye Speaks! CGW Interviews The Red Baron Himself Puzzling Out Oxyd Magnum! Ken Hill Goes For All Of Dongleware's Marbles Do-It-Yourself Flight Sims, Part 2 Flight Sim Blueprint For Domark's Flight Sim Toolkit 2000 SOD Arctic Baron Pg. 32 108 How Now Butchered Cow? Cows, Chivalry, And Chaos In Crystal Dynamics' The Horde by Chris Lombardi On The Mound With Pursue The Pennant 5.0 Jim Gindin Comes Out Of The Bullpen 118 About The Cover---Robert P. Whitney of Mission Studios created the cover art on a Pentium using 3D Studio, Aldus Photostyler and John Wagner's Improces. Inspired by the Battlecruiser story, the scene depicts an attack on Galcom Headquarters by enemy forces. The Horde pg. 108 "


"Alf's time for another run, Chummer! SHADOWRUN GENESIS Rated by V.R.C. MA-13 Parental Discretion Aerised, Mature Audiences SEGA =nter the ultimate psychocyberpunk fantasy! You witnessed your brother fall to enemy fire. ow you travel the streets of the Seattle Sprawl to o find your brother's killers and bring them to justice. F959 SEGA nesis puts you in the heart of Cyberspace on the heads-u run of your life! SEGA FASA OS 20DL Faled by V.R.C. Jack into the Virtual World of the Matrix and get ready for intense cybercombat! Fight Back! Real-time combats lets you actively control characters as the actions heats up. Search the Sprawl! Uncover valuable clues while you're constantly building your character's quickness, strength and charisma! MA-13 Parental Dischen Advised Mature Audiences You've got the Skill. Sau de gat the fut...and Sega benesis has all the Magic and Technalagu you need! Circle Reader Service #130 Sigiai ant grindherid ademais BA SECA Studowrud and otri hohtanud talumatu of FASA Carporation and I FASA Corporation. An echta rabarve The Video Game Putting Centers Rain System ymi anordea are trademarks of Sago pl Amunica loc-91994 SIGA. A dins restved "


"132 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD In The Groove With ProWheel Wizard Racing Weaves Its Magic Over Racing Sims by Gordon Goble COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD 146 Blood And Sand From Operation Crusader Rommel Hits Avalon Hill's Desert With Authority by Terry Lee Coleman Dunnigan's Dilemma The Stormy Seas Of Three-Sixty's Victory At Sea by Bob Proctor 152 158 Planet Busting A Galactic Conqueror's Guide For VGA Planets by Ted Foster 166 Publisher Russell Sipe Associate Publisher Jonathan Lane Editor-in-Chief Johnny Wilson Editor Chris Lombardi On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Technical Editor Mike Weksler Assistant Editors Chuck Miller Terry Coleman Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Production Assistant Christine Kloss M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Advertising Manager Lee J. Uniacke Advertising Sales Coordinator Kathy Garcia Account Representative Marci Yamaguchi Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks Hannibal Does DOS MicroLeague Salts The Soil Of Ancient Rome by M. E. Brooks File startwatch Display Command status GameBook 00041421 LEOPY ARGO (BSN Kote! CAP Aled Loc: Victory At Sea pg. 152 Contents are copyrighted by Ziff Davis Publishing Co., 1994. Subscription Rate: The subscription rate is $27.94 for a one year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $11.00 for postage. Airmail subscriptions are $78,00 per year. Canadian GST registration number is R123669673. Payment must be in U.S. dollars made by check or money order drawn upon a U.S. bank. Visa, MasterCard, AMEX accepted. Subscription Services: For subscription service questions, address changes or ordering information, call toll free (800) 827-4450 within the U.S. and Canada. All other countries call (303) 447-9330 or fax to (303) 443-5080 (international subscribers only) or write to Computer Gaming World; P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167. Back Issues: For back issues (subject to availability). $6.00 per issue ($8.00 outside the U.S.), send check, money order or credit card information to Back Issues Dept., Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., P.O. Box 53131. Boulder, CO 80322-3131. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe (76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B GEnie: CGW Internet: 76703.622@compuserve.com Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 For advertising information only, call: Lee J. Uniacke (714) 283-3000 x41 DEPARTMENTS 10 Editorial (Infocalypse Now) 170 Advertiser Index By Games 12 READ.ME 171 Advertiser Index By Company (All The News That Fit) 174 Taking A Peek 102 Scorpia's View (Arena) 181 Hall of Fame 112 Shareware 182 Top 100 Games 122 Letters To The Editor 184 What's Hot? 130 Reader Survey 185 Patch File 138 CWW Editorial 186 The Rumor Bag 140 Opponents Wanted (Doggie Baggus) 169 Marketplace Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Ziff Davis Publishing Company, a division of Ziff-Davis Communications Co., 130 Chaparral Ct, Suite 260, Santa Ana, CA 92808. Second-class postage paid at Erlanger, KY 41011 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Postmaster. Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 57167. Boulder, CO 80322. "


"THIS OPPONENT IS PROGRAMMED TO BE CHALLENGING. this one wants to rip your lungs out. If you think you're good at games, then let's have some are terrific, and even the prices are competitive. So put real fun. When you're online with Genie Multi-Player some new life into your joystick, and sign on. We'll see just Games, you're playing real people, in real time. Some of how good you are. Sign up now: 1. Set your modem for the best players around the world. Splash a bandit in Air half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial Warrior, and you've just taken out eight other guys, who'll toll free 1-800-638-8369. Upon connection, enter HHH be back gunning for you. Blast a MechWarrior in Multiplayer 3. At the U# = prompt, enter JOINGENIE then press RETURN Battle Tech, and who knows? Could be that jerk from the 4. At the key code prompt enter AKE423 5. Have a major coast. Could be a mercenary who's looking for a few good credit card or your checking account number ready. For friends. With GEnie, the possibilities are endless, the people more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. L C D multi-player games 100% ORGANIC OPPONENTS GEnie 10% ORGANIC OPPONENTS AIR WARRIOR AIR WARRIOR IN MULTIPLAYER BATTLETECH STELLAR EMPEROR corporation Air Warrior is a registered trademark and Stellar Emperor is a trademark of Kesmai Corporation. Multiplayer BattleTech is a trademark and MechWarrior and BattleTech are registered trademarks of FASA Corporation. Circle Reader Service 1167 "


"EDDOORDAL THEY JUST DON'T GET IT! by Johnny L. Wilson Yurned off by those neologisms desure the host computer is going to process Some computer journalists may be as bad signed to describe the current state of that command before it processes the simulas the rest. While they complain that no one computer gaming? Does \"cross-plattaneous command of an opponent. Timing is will want to watch 500 channels of junk on form compatibility\" sound more like seating everything in the \"twitch and flex\" games that the information superhighway, they also considerations for a political convention than dominate the video game market and those overlook the obvious. It's not about 500 a technological concern? Do you find yourself gamers are not going to accept delays. channels. It's about one channel with you as wondering who put the \"multi-\" in multimeStrategy gamers wouldn't notice the delays program director. You can program informadia, especially when the current generation of as much, but we don't see the television/teletion, games, television, video conferencing or products seems so one-dimensional? Even phone providers looking to strategy games as movies, but it's your channel. As pundirs, they though it's still under construction, do you a viable strategy. Stat-based sports gamers à viable strategy. Stat-based sports gamers question the model of having people computfind yourself looking for the nearest off-ramp wouldn't notice, but the interactive televiing in the living room, because they know from the «information superhighway?\" sion/telephone market segment hasn't disthat gamers/users won't be able to get the Then, cheer up, we have a new phrase for you. covered the fantasy leagues and star-based large screen television away from their kids. The new buzz phrase for 1994 is, «They just simulations that would appeal to mature, casToo many of them just don't get it! Any don't get it!\" ual gamers. They just don't get it! society that is wealthy enough to wire a neighLook at Hollywood. The film industry has Book and magazine publishers are also enborhood is weal Information, television, video, movies, comactive entertainment and decided that it has publishing. Most executives think that they puter games, etc. may all enter the house revenue potential to eclipsc thcir current can pour their \"content\" (a very important through the same node, but the bandwidth is business. Yet, «They just don't get it!\" Most buzz word meaning \"the stuff we've already likely to be such that several downstream of the projects seem to be based on grabbing done for which we think we can get more transmissions can be received simultaneously some outtakes from an upcoming film; slapmoney\") into CD-ROM molds. The trouble and sent to various rooms in the house. ping in a few arcade sequences; and adding a is that most of these products look like eleclittle dialogue. Or, some would-be multimetronic coffee table books. You can access their Frankly, I think the software industry needs dia directors simply want the viewer to choose data in new ways, but the only way to really to focus on integrating new technologies and between different perspectives when viewing use the data is to play the trivia games which new content into quality games. The game is the action in an «interactive\" movie, rather seem to have been jammed onto the same CD the thing. Publishers need to consider than truly affecting the action. They don't in order to claim that they include a \"game.\" whether that extra musical track or video clip seem to understand that in order to be interThey just don't get it! enhances the game experience, not whether active, the player has to feel like his or her Even software developers, those who have it's cool technology and everybody's doing it. involvement means something and changes been in this industry longest and should They particularly need to concentrate on the story, not just the perspective. know how to get around the technical limisolid game design, careful play balancing, and Many of the planners for the cable televitations, don't get it. Too many of them want rich game world development. If they can do sion providers and telephone companies Telephone companies to be able to use the same techniques to C to be able to use the same techniques to create that, they'll find a way to reach new markets, e success of on-line nerwork games as they have used in whether those markets are delivered by telech stand-alone games. They haven't bothered to phone, television or the next big thing. cow. Lots of people play video games, right? try to understand the challenge of keeping Astute readers and since you've bothered They'll pay money to download video games. hundreds or thousands of players entertained to wade through my rhetorical rhumba to this Or, if we have to, we'll create multi-player via constant design tweaks or the business point, you are obviously astute) will realize video games. They just don't get it! There is model that requires \"retention\" (a marketing that there is always a risk of overgeneralizano guarantee that even diehard video game term meaning \"a quality that makes gamers tion whenever you use the third person comaddicts will want to download games more keep coming back again and again\"). than once. It is highly unlikely that channels In a related vein, most software publishers mon plural («they» for those of you who can succeed as merely a \"try before you buy\" don't want to invest the funds and energy to skipped to the end). There are perceptive service, unless the business plan has changed develop on-line games because they don't pay individuals in all six categories of \"they\" that significantly. Further, making multiplayer enough according to today's profit model. actually do get it on these issues. Still, the video games that function over cable systems Little do they realize that today's successful point is that all six categories are full of people or fiber optic networks is going to be tough. on-line games may well serve as the model for looking for easy answers in order to address a There is a latency factor whenever data is tomorrow's massive \"cyburbs» (a CGWism very complicated future situation. If we don't processed remotely. Action gamers are not meaning \"the imaginary playground where learn to focus on quality now, we may never going to put up with multiplayer games we all hang out on-line\") on the information get that chance to exploit the potential of that where they input a sword thrust and can't be superhighway. They just don't get it! future. Either that, or I just don't ger it. CGW Page 10 Computer Gaming World "


"Epic Pinball is shareware from Epic MegaGames. \"EPIC PINBALL RINGS UP A HIGH SCORE\" COMPUTER GAMING WORLD \"UP THERE WITH THE BEST OF THE COMMERCIAL RELEASES\", RATED 91% PC FORMAT \"PERFECTED TO THE PEAK OF PLAYABILITY... EPIC PINBALL IS VITAL TO HAVE... BUY, BUY, BUY!\", RATED 5/5 PC POWER SHAREWARE TRY IT TODAY! Play Epic Pinball, Our Latest PC Masterpiece What Do We Mean by the Term \"Shareware\"? It means you can try it before you buy it and it means you won't pay an arm and a leg for a quality PC game. The shareware version contains the Android table The \"registered\" versions are the Epic Pinball Packs shown here which contain four pinball tables each Epic MegaGames redefines the art of PC Pinball with Epic Pinball by James Schmalz. It offers realistically fluid ball movement, a high-quality sound track and ultra-smooth scrolling graphics. It's all here: ramps, sink holes, kickbacks, drop targets, multiple-ball play, jackpots, skill shots and scoring rules just like real pinball tables. Epic Pinball packs offer a variety of pinball styles from the nostalgic Excalibur to the futuristic Enigma with targets and other surprises emerging from an oozing plasma field. Epic Pinball is shareware which PC Zone says is \"easily as good as commercial offerings\". See the sidebar to find out how to try it today. Where Can You Find the Shareware Version to Try? If you have a modem try one of these two great places (or your local BBS); On CompuServe, GO EPIC. You can download a specially priced Game of the Month and visit our forum where you'll find more Epic shareware games, hints, tips and support. To try CompuServe for free, call (800) 524-3388, ask for representative #536. EXEC-PC is the world's largest BBS with over 280 lines. On your very first call you can download Epic shareware games hassle-free. Just call (414) 789-4360 (V.32bis) or (414) 789-4210 (2,400 baud). Call today! If you don't have access to a modem but you have a VISA or MasterCard you can order the shareware version through our tollfree line for only $5. Android Excalibur Pot of Gold Crash and Burn PINBALL PACK You can buy Epic Pinball pack 1 or 2 for $29.00 SMO POLOV PLUS $4 SHIPPING AND HANDLING Jungle Pinball Deep Sea Magic Enigma EPIC PINBALL PACK FOREAC) Or get both Epic Pinball packs for only $45.00 Where Can You Get the Registered Versions? Call 1-800-972-7434. Have your credit card ready. Or, you can also purchase our games on CompuServe for download directly to your computer. GO EPIC for details. UINGLE 9@ PLUS $4 SHIPPING AND HANDLING TO ORDER CALL EPIC MEGAGAMES 1-800-972-7434 VISA, MasterCard and Checks accepted. MD residents please add 5% sales tax. Each order includes a bonus shareware game. In the U.K. or Europe please call Epic MegaGames UK at 0767 260903. Epic MegaGames 20 Courthouse Square, Rockville MD, 20850 . Phone (301) 983-9771 Fax (301) 299-3841. CompuServe: 70007,1631 EPIC PINBALL REQUIRES A 386 OR BETTER, 640 KB OF RAM AND VGA. SUPPORTS MAJOR SOUND CARDS INCLUDING GRAVIS ULTRASOUND "


"READ.ME THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE GAMING WORLD Software Publishers Association Picks Codie Winners Macintosh Titles Lead The Pack Again Free CD From Logitech Offers Gamers Sound Advice' AAAA n annual highlight of the Software Publishers Association's Spring Symposium is the Codie Awards Banquer. This year, as usual, the Macintosh platform showed a greater strength in the award categories than it does in the actual marketplace. Three out of five award winners in the entertainment software categories debuted on the Macintosh. Best Adventure/Fantasy Role-Playing Game honors went to Broderbund's MYST. The eerie adventure developed by Cyan (Robin and Rand Miller) features beautifully rendered 3-D environments and diabolically difficult puzzles. The Codie for Best Simulation went to AAA A A A A. Maxis for the fifth year in a row. This year, SimCity 2000 won the nod and the award was presented by CGW Publisher, Russell Sipe. In accepting the award, Will Wright made his first Codie appearance and thanked co-author Fred Haslam, as well as Maxis 94 Chairman Jeff Braun. Drew Pictures' Iron Helix, distributed by Spectrum HoloByte, won Best Strategy Game honors. The Codie for Best Sports Program was presented to Papyrus Software for IndyCar Racing. Designer Dave Kaemmer was present to receive the award for the program which surpassed Papyrus' previous watershed simulation, Indianapolis 500: The Simulation (published by Electronic Arts). Finally, Lemmings 2: The Tribes won the award for Best Action/Arcade game. This marked the second victory for Psygnosis and their British developer, DMA Design, since the original Lemmings also won the award in this category. VILJ TI SOFTWARE LYCELLENCE IN SOFTE Software Publishers Association Unveils New Data 27% Of U.S. Households Have One Or More Personal Computers Tith all the cryptic jargon for sound boards and digitized audio, it's no wonder a lot of gamers are still listening to bleeping PC speakers. If the ads and hype sound like one cacophanous din, you should hear Logitech's free «Sound Advice\" CD that explains the different technologies and uses audio demos to illustrate the differences. Hosted by a technology commentator, an electronic musician, and a Logitech product manager, the Logitech CD does a great job of explaining the basics. The discussion covers 8-bit and 16-bit audio, FM synthesis, and wave table synthesis, with musical accompaniment by Wayne Gabriel. As Logitech's product manager Dave Pelton points out, the game community is now moving towards wave table and General Midi standards. Pelton advises gamers to buy a sound card that supports both, to enjoy games such as The Seventh Guest, X-Wing and Return to Zork. Leo Laporte, host of the nationwide talk show \"On Computers,\" keeps the 20-minute discussion lively. The CD then features original, full length compositions by Gabriel, who received Gold and Platinum records with John Lennon and has performed or recorded with Mick Jagger, Stevie Wonder, John Lee Hooker, Muddy Waters and others. Sound Advice, which can be played on any CD player, is available at no charge by calling (800) 889-0046. The package includes a $10 rebate coupon for any Logitech sound product. r the Spring Symposium of the Software Publishers Association, Research A Director David Tremblay revealed that 27% of U.S. households (roughly 24 million homes) have at least one personal computer. Of these, approximately 31% acquired their primary computer during the 1993 calendar year or early in 1994. The best news for gamers is that these machines are loaded. 40% are 486-processorbased or higher; 60% have modems; 35% have CD-ROM drives (usually replacing the 5.25 inch floppy drives); 35% offer FAX capability; and 20% have a sound card. Most importantly for the growth of the computer gaming hobby, 48% of those surveyed play games on their computer. The only sad statistic in the recent survey is that only 7% of respondents reported any kind of on-line usage. Tremblay admitted that the percentages of computer ownership may be slightly conservative, but he assured the press that these were useful numbers. Page 12 Compuuter Gaming World "


"Creative Labs Rides The Wave With New AWE32 Sound Card AWE32 Cot content to rest on their unoffi4 megabit DRAM chip handles samples cial \"industry-standard\" laurels, downloaded to the AWE32, and can be Creative Labs has launched their expanded to 28 megabytes of RAM. latest and most advanced sound card to Bundled with the new card are Creative date, the AWE32. Incorporating the Sound VoiceAssist speech recognition and Creative Blaster 16's Advanced TextAssist text-to-speech software, Signal Processing techWave Studio, nology (real-time Creative Ensemble audio compression (software resembling and decompression), an on-screen \"hi-fi\" the AWE32 features system), a microthe Advanced Wayphone and several Effects digital sample other applications. playback synthesis Available for a capabilities of E-mu suggested retail of Systems' EMU8000 $399.95, the integrated audio DSP. AWE32 offers all Real instrument sounds are provided in CD the capabilities of the Sound Blaster quality audio through wave table technolo16/Wave Blaster duo, and beyond, at a gy, along with multiple channel audio and competitive price. There is, however, a downloadable sounds (through E-mu's notable drawbackloading all of the SoundFont collections). AWE32's required TSRs consumes a signifThe AWE32 maintains the compatibiliicant chunk of RAM (initial tests indicate a ty of Creative's 16-bit audio boards, as well loss of 30-50K of conventional memory, as supporting General MIDI, Sound depending on other TSRs loaded, while Canvas and MT-32 specifications. In addiemploying a memory manager). This, tion, the audio card supports CD-ROM unfortunately, leaves precious little RAM drives from Sony, Mitsumi and Creative. A available for today's memory-hungry games. Open MPEG Group Means Good News For Gamers amers tired of incompatibility problems with peripheral cards will be pleased to know that the manufacturers of MPEG video cards (hardware devices which allow computers to play back video according to compression standards set by the Motion Picture Expert Group) are meeting to avoid such hassles. During March of 1994, more than 80 people from approximately 60 companies met at intermedia to form the OM/1 (Open MPEG-1) Group. With digital heavyweights like GTE, Sigma Design, and Diamond Computer supporting the drive for a common API (Application Programming Interface) in order for all Windows and DOS programs to call MPEG files and establish basic settings, the group expected a new industry standard to emerge prior to this summer. Several industry leaders served as spokespersons for the effort. Jim Anderson, one of the founders of the VESA and MPC standards, observed in announcing his support of the OM/1 approach, «Without a standard, there isn't a market.\" Glenn Kaufmann from Diamond Computer (the leader in the graphics accelerator market for Windows) suggested that it will become increasingly important in the near future for entertainment and educational products to be able to shift video functions (scaling, color shifting, et. al.) to boards themselves. He asserted that there needs to be a standard API to assist this development. Dave McComb, one of the developers of the ReelMagic board, said that the group's goal is to ensure that every hardware manufacturer that wants to use MPEG can have the same driver and function calls for their hardware. This means that gamers shouldn't have to face many of the incompatibility problems between games and peripherals that we faced in the sound card driver wars. Technical specifications have not yer been finalized, but the group expects to agree upon specs by mid-year. CGW On War The Best Wargaming Minds Will Meet To Discuss The Hobby's Future ome of the greatest wargame designers Frank Chadwick (Third World War), Jim in the country are drawing up battleDunnigan (Hundred Years War), Trevor plans to invade Montgomery, Alabama Dupuy, (Encyclopedia of Military History), in late May for the mother of all wargaming Don Gilman (Sub Battle Simulator), Gary conferences. The Second Air University Grigsby (War In Russia), Mark Herman Airpower Education & Commercial (Gulf Strike), Joseph Miranda, Wargaming Conference (how's that for a (Afghanistan), LTC Gary Morgan (TAC title?) is designed as a brainmerge for the Air), Dr. Al Nofi (Imperium Romanum), largest gathering of civilian wargame Dr. Peter Perla (The Art of Wargaming), designers and military authorities. Ezra Sidran (U.M.S.), S. Craig Taylor (Air Those in uniform will include all serForce), Dave Walker (Tigers In The Snow), vices (Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Lou Zocchi (Battle of Britain). Force) plus a number of foreign military The program is composed of several lecexperts. HQ for this TacOp will be the Air tures on the various aspects of gaming as War College at Maxwell Air Force Base, well as \"break-out\" groups which discuss May 25-27. the nature of the market and directions it is Last year's attendees (who are expected moving in. Topics will cover land, naval, again) included: Dr. Ed Bever (No Greater air, geo-political and economic factors. Glory), Larry Bond (Harpoon), M. Evan Wargame designers wishing to join in on Brooks (Computer Gaming World the assault should contact Maj. Matt Contributing Editor-Wargaming), Maj. Caffrey at (205) 953-5499. Matt Caffrey (The Gulf War Fact Book), May 1994 Page 13 "


"SNEAK PREVIEW 3:0DCAS A Celestial Call To Glory by Mike Weksler B attlestar Galactica it's not! Of course, pumping space action and adventure of the to those of us of a certain age, that's Wing Commander series. Quite a celestial exactly what we're going to imagine cocktail! when we hear of huge intergalactic battle Derek Smart, Battlecruiser: 3000 AD's ships equipped with fighter interceptors. designer, explained it this way: «This is Fortunately, the only similarity between more extensive than just going into space Battlecruiser: 3000 AD and the weak science and blowing things up. I want to get the fiction of the television series is that you player involved, to know the feeling of scramble fighters to interdict the waves of commanding the game, not the game comalien assaults against civilization as you manding the player. The player has control know it. over every facet of the game combining fanThe Battlecruiser: 3000 AD space rasy role playing, with space flight epic allows the player to experience simulation and planetary flight such old time favorites as fastersimulation using advanced Technology to accomplish than-light speeds, transporters, technology to accomplish wormholes, jump-points, flux this.\" fields and, of course, a nasty Where the product differs alien race with a yen to rule the from its predecessors is in its stars. Still, it is perhaps the most tremendous depth, multiambitious space game to date. It tasking story, and its advanced has the scope of the genre-busting use of physics in its modeling of Star Saga classics; the dynamic world of the game universe. By the time the an adventure game in the tradition of the player has mastered the systems and the Starflight and Star Control II games; the intricacies of command, it's time to comdepth and simulation aspects of Falcon 3.0, mand mission after mission in thwarting Flight of the Intruder, Megafortress and 688 the Gammulans, the nasty aliens who want Attack Sub; combined with the adrenalineto rule with a titanium fist. Interceptors of the Lost Art Some missions may only require the use of the battlecruiser itself. In other missions you may need to switch back and forth (Flight of the Intruder style), into one of four Interceptor cockpits. Others still demand that you enter the atmosphere of a planet and conducting planetary raids. Interceptors are used for both dogfighting in atmosphere and in space, and can be armed to the teeth. Atmospheric missions can turn into heared high-tech furballs. Not only must you take of you take on enemy craft in dogfights, but you have to watch out for surface-to-air lasers (SALs) or missiles (SAMs). You can't fly too low because of SALs, nor can you fly too high because of the SAMs. Interestingly, interceptors which become damaged in atmosphere may have to be left on the planet until you can manage to bring down a shuttle full of parts and engineers to repair it. Tonkas in Space Battlecruisers have a point defense called Page 14 Computer Gaming World "


"player, he can move his \"virtual head» systems and then relay information back to around and targer enemies and acquire tarthe network of other probes and star stagets in this manner. This locks the ship's tions. If information is being relayed from a lasers onto a given target. The VR monocle probe and the probe gets destroyed, the is also used in the Interceptors as well. In same information may or may not be sent the battlecruiser, everyone has access to from another probe. It depends on your different computers via the VR monocle. range, but there is built-in redundancy. The Navitron, Engineering, and Tactical Cockpit instrumentation is fairly simple computers are all accessed from within the to grasp after a brief learning period. Both bridge location via the VR monocle. the battlecruiser and the interceptors use a There's nothing quite like a battlecruiser flight path computer, a Wing Commanderwith four interceptors flying in formation esque radar, and a computer to sort targers off its stern; the program allows you to and select weapons. Interceptors have a enjoy this scene by using outside views with back seat position and, should your front Passive Target the ability to slew the view around. The seat ger shot up, you can heroically attempt Acquisition (PAT) outside view of a battlecruiser in high orbit to fly it back from the \"pit.\" which will automatically around some of these texture mapped planacquire and destroy a target which comes ets could make other space operas envious. A Star To Steer Her By into a specified range. In addition, bartleNavigating in a space game may be as cruisers have a variety of laser and guided The Supreme Commander important as the magic system in a fantasy missile weapons. However, most enemy As Supreme Commander, you are the role-playing game. It is the device which able to use some type of elec-micro-manager extraordinaire. You must provides for the most suspension of disbekeep track of your crew and let the fatigued lief as you chart courses across the far reachattempts to target them effectively. ones rest. After interceptor flights, Additionally, for those times when the they must be pre-flighted again, and Supreme Commander is commanding four any repairs made. This takes a certain interceptors in combat, or just relaxing with amount of real-time game a beer, there's a Fast Target Acquisition and time in which you may not Lock (FATAL) system, which can assign use the particular craft unlimited weapons to given targets. Thus, because it will be rendered you can assign 20 missiles to a Gammulan off-line until ready for flight. storm carrier—the only ship in the Galaxy Repairs that are made to which packs more of a wallop than your either the battlecruiser or the own battlecruiser-and the weapons com interceptors will be accomplished puter will handle firing automatically when whenever you assign adequate the storm carrier comes into range. engineers to the appropriate To manage tactical information from tasks. Naturally, the effectiveness the battlecruiser, each crew member wears a of repair assignments (as with all assignes of the galaxy-assuming it is well done. VR monocle that proiects pertinent HUD ments) will be modified by whether the Battlecruiser: 3000 AD uses the Navitron, (head up display) information onto various crew members assigned are green, fatigued, which is available both in your battlecruiser, scrolling views, providing the Supreme have low intelligence, or rate with more as well as most friendly star stations (which Commander with a panorama view of a positive evaluations. When repairs are made can be handy in case the Navitron on board battle. If manually locking on using the in a battlecruiser, it takes real game time. ship becomes damaged). From the TACSCAN computer is too much for the However, when repairs are made in a star Navitron, you can view a map of a given station (which costs star system. From here, the virtuoso comRUTOPILY money as opposed to the mander can compose a concerto of way\"free\" work done by the points for the battlecruiser, its four intercrew), time is suitably ceptor craft, and any shuttles, probes, mines accelerated. All this time, and marine units. Waypoints may be you may be flying inter\"anchored» in one star system, and subseceptors on missions, quent star system maps may be invoked for deploying marines and creation of additional our system waysupplies via shuttles, points. The assignment of waypoints and launching probes, or tasks is done to a level the likes of which I managing your intellihaven't seen since Falcon 3.0. The windowgence, resources, and ing interface is very slick (it's good enough information, while tarto give MS Windows and OS/2 a real run geting your lasers on a for their money). You can have a window pirate vessel. for each craft and unit in your command, 000 [0]]]] 100 The Probes used in and each can be moved and minimized to Deep within the Credian Sector, the battlecruiser establishes orbit around a planet. the game fly out to star suit your preference. er or the HEREHEHE 04/04/2000 19:15 00345 ME FANS WISABLED -236999 TRENISCCREDIAN) 15:04.40HQUO 85BI DARIAN May 1994 Page 15 "


"100 RUTOPILOT RERCTOR 100 100 LASER REDE 100 100 (ocou] FATAL SCAN 28 MAGELLAN 1:1000:000 IC460191 [[ ]] BLACKHOLE TRACK HER  Harstation ventory Ulla DZIELT CETEAS Tas FLAG LEATHER 1:00 Trading Spaces are man-made flux fields that were deliberately placed in a The TRADECOM is where you particigiven star system. Wormholes 000 pate in the second oldest Terran profesare bad news; they damage your sion-commerce. The dynamic world ship due to intense gravitational incorporates inflation into the economic [2000] fields and end up spitting your model. Prices in parts of the galaxy may ship out to some unknown locachange due to the political climate, so the tion. As for black holes, well, if best plan is to opportunistically buy goods you want to end the game in a in a non-war zone, then sell goods in a war hurry, steer your ship towards ravaged area where goods are scarce and one of these cosmic toilet bowls. prices are whatever the market will bear. The trading is used as a device for one to Star Thirst have extra money instantly without having During a break in a dogfight, an idle interceptor scans to rob ships (you are a military pilot and a star system for hazards. not a mercenary in this game). Items are blower. If you haven't partaken fairly diverse for a space game, including of a space game since the Starflight days, player discovers new information) that miscellaneous items like magazines, sportsyou are in for a treat. I would have done operates subordinate crew members, allies wear and livestock, in addition to more anything to take control in a first person and enemies throughout the entire game. mundane items like spare parts, weapons perspective in Starflight and fly to all the The gamer will be able to control as much and minerals. planets in a given system. I might have or as little as desired. Derek Smart Additionally, star stations give all the done more to be able to man a smaller craft explained to me that even if you just sat dirt on a given star system, including the r system, including the and actually enter the planet's atmosphere and actually enter the planets atmosphere and watched the even and watched the events transpire, several presence of flux fields (ala Starflight) or or and des and descend down to the surface, all in first hundred hours would pass before the game person perspective. This is where events played themselves out! Add player Battlecruiser: 3000 AD really interaction and its attendant new variables EXIT TRROLOM shines. It not only presents planets to that equation and, according to Derek, in texture-mapped detail, but you can literally have a game that goes on models their gravity and atmosfor well over a year! phere, as well. You can approach a What remains to be seen is how well planet and use its gravity to sling developer, publisher, and distributor can your battlecruiser around the work together to bring this product to planet to another part of the star fruition. Play-balancing this magnum opus system, manually perform a will be crucial. Will the gameplay subtly \"Hoffman ellipse\" maneuver from change as you become more experienced high orbit to low orbit, or have various portions of the game, or will gameCARGO the autopilot perform the task for play become repetitious as you advance you. If you approach the planet ar WEAPON BAY 2012 through the game? That remains to be seen. an improper angle or speed, you As for myself, I'll be the first in line at the can expect to burn up in the GALCOM Academy, for Battlecruiser: \"I'll have a plug of tobacco, some leather underwear, atmosphere. In addition to plan3000 AD has the most potential of any and a bag of fertilizer...to go.\" ets, there are nicely rendered asterspace epic I've seen. GALCOM should be jump-ports. They also serve as a clearing oids, comets, meteors, and alien aggressively recruiting stalwart star pilots house for missions via the MISCON craft, all with their special effects. this summer. Cow (Mission Control) computer, providing information on intelligence, scenarios, misIt's The Glory, Stupid! sions and training. These star stations are in playing space games over the last like the self-service rest stop gas stations on decade, I believe I can safely say strands of highway in the middle of that Battlecruiser: 3000 AD nowhere. won't be a game where the average player can boot up and When In Doubt, Jump, Flux, immediately proceed to kick Or Take A Wormhole Gammulan butt. Most of us Battlecruiser does not offer interstellar will have to scrutinize the manflight as in the Starflight series. Traveling ual thoroughly before doing from one system to another is accomplished anything described in this previa the story device of flux fields (naturally view. Battlecruiser: 3000 AD is occurring fields which \"warp\" the player based upon a complex Al runfrom one coordinate to another). These ning on a neural net (an artififlux fields are, once discovered, known concial intelligence structure in stants throughout the game. Jump points which the software learns and The hunt begins: An interceptor in atmospheric flight makes new connections as the has locked onto a target. FURS LEATHER C RED FISHGA FELTAL GETIS MISTE S TEATRAS TUFF FERITE Essais GOOOOOOOOOOOOOO Essass LEATS UETS BUOTS. FILTRA  RETINES KERERT PLASTCS Durita Arte CARSO L2 ti HEAPONEAY 1 030 PLAGICS 2017 DDOOD DOO SPC Page 16 Computer Gaming World "


"TM WOLFPACK Now on CD-ROM! Since its release, WolfPack has set a new standard for submarine simulations. Winner of Tilt Magazine's Tilt D'Or award for best simulation, it has consistently topped the best seller charts, earning raves from the reviewing community: \"Wolfpack can only be classified as a genre buster, one of those rare games that sets a new standard for other releases in the same field to live or die by.\" Video Games & Computer Entertainment \"The graphics for Wolfpack are stunning. Wargamer Now Wolfpack is available on PC CD-ROM. The same compelling game play of the floppy version allows you to command either a WW2 submarine wolf pack or the surface fleet. Historically accurate, your weapons and instruments are precisely keyed to the war year that you choose to play A full construction set is included to allow you to re-create actual battles. From NovaLogicTM the creators of Comanche Maximum Overkill and Ultrabots Wolfpack CD-ROM also includes: 58 new missions, 70 total. Over 5 minutes of breathtaking animation sequences. Pick up a copy at your local software store and find out what underwater warfare is all about. NOVA LOS LIIGA Actual screen images. Circle Reader Service #97 "


"REVIEW So Many Star Systems, So Little Time Gametek's Frontier: Elite II by Jeff James esigners David Braben and lan Bell manity has spread across most of the galaxy, interconnected; Frontier shirks the plotline burst onto the computer gaming colonizing thousands of worlds. The balance found in such products as Privateer for pure, scene almost 10 years ago with Fireof power is held by two powerful interstellar unrestricted playing freedom. You are free to bird's Elite, bringing revolutionary 3D polykingdoms, imaginatively called the \"Federalive life as you choose, whether it be as a gon technology and an addicting milieu of tion\" and the \"Empire.\" Filling in the cosmic bounty hunter, interstellar merchant or star-hopping capitalism to 8-bit computers. cracks between these two diametrically opbloodthirsty pirate. Of course, smuggling With Elite, a new gaming genre was born, posed forces are an innumerable amount of guns, slaves and drugs won't endear you to soon populated with products attempting to non-aligned and unexplored worlds, providthe already touchy authorities, who will be capture its mystique and \"cult» success. Overing a colorful environment for exploration. In much more likely to blast you into atoms if the years, gamers have been treated to funcaddition to peaceful traders and merchants, you live a life of crime. tionally equivalent products, including Lightthe space lanes are filled with the flotsam of However you decide to make your living in space: pirates, rogues, mercenaries, the space lanes, Frontier offers many ways to bounty hunters and criminals. spend your hard-earned credits. As opposed Unlike the original Elite which to the limited number of ship types available offered players only one starting in the original Elite, you can now choose from point, Frontier provides three startnearly three dozen ships of varying capabiliing positions. The recommended ties. Bounty hunters and pirates may opt for starting position is on the planet the Boa-class starship, while commerciallyMerlin in the Ross 154 system, minded players might prefer the wallowing with the player in possession of a Panther trader, which can hold a whopping tiny spacecraft equipped with a 2100 tons of cargo. Large ships such as the Actual:14.5 kmh Set:0.0 kmh 1297mm Relative to Mars scanner, atmospheric shielding Panther also require that you hire and pay a 12:0213 =EUDEY Armed: Homing Missile Manual Lontrol (for atmospheric flight), a class-1 staff of crew members. Each ship can be LINEE RAXE. hyperdrive, a single laser cannon YAKE. upgraded with a wide variety of missiles, speed and Hyperspeed from Micro Prose, Starand an autopilot. Elite veterans guns, mines and other weaponry. Items of a flight from Electronic Arts, and Origin's looking for a challenge should look to the less militaristic nature abound as well, includSpace Rogue and Privateer. Into this crowded other two starting locations, Mars and Lave, ing an auto-piloting module, escape capsule, market comes the long awaited sequel to since they provide much less starting equipextra passenger cabins, fuel scoops and even Elite, Frontier: Elite II. ment. self-contained mining machines used to procTo earn money for more equipess and refine minerals from rocky planets Buy Low, Sell High, Shoot Often ment, you have a number of opFrontier. Ellite and asteroids. tions. In addition to the profit True to the money-grubbing nature of the generating staple of interstellar original, Frontier is first and foremost an exPRICE: $59.95 trade, you may also choose from a SYSTEMS:.. Amiga (reviewed), Atari ST, IBM ercise in cut-throat capitalism. To make REQUIREMENTS: Amiga: 1MB RAM, mouse money, you must heed the motto of Wall variety of missions. Available via a IBM: 386 or better, 2MB RAM, Street: Buy low, sell high. Buying goods on BBS link at most starbases, mis6MB hard drive space, VGN/MCGA graphics, mouse: one planet and then reselling them elsewhere sions range from ferrying passen FRONTIER supports most sound boards PROTECTION: Documentation look up for a higher price is the essence of this game. gers from one star system to DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: another, to carrying out covert Gametek, Inc. Profits gained can be used to buy weapons, North Miami Beach, FL ship upgrades, and more goods. The tableau military missions for the powers (305) 935-3995 for Frontier is the 33rd Century, where huthat be. None of the missions are IN HET David Braben Page 18 Computer Gaming World "


"THE VIEW IS SPECTACULAR. THE ACTION IS ON THE EDGE. THE THRILLER DEL THERE IS ONLY ONE WAY TO MAKE IT HAPPEN. TM CO MONGHE CD The rotor blades are turning. The fuselage dips. Your chopper is reflected in the river beneath you. Watch out! It's real! Or is it? With Voxel Space from NovaLogic your sense of reality is given the ultimate challenge. With twelve detailed terrains, from arid desertgorges, lush mountain valleys to frozen wastelands and wide river basins, Comanche is the promise of 3-D simulation action come to life. With Comanche CD you'll take on 100 complete missions. And when the Pentagon calls you, they'll never know you were trained on a personal computer. Suggested price of Comanche CD $74.95 Requires IBM-PC compatible with CO-ROM drive. Winner of numerous major awards including: Best Simulation Video Games and Computer Entertainment Action Game of the Year PC Games Plus Best Graphics of the Year Computer Game Review NOVA LOGIC Actual screen images. Circle Reader Service #98 "


"Perpus Arm while ships sport ID numbers, roSpaceflight 101 tating radar dishes and flashing Morf navigational lights. This detail exIn terms of flight controls, Frontier shares tends to the portrayal of other obseveral elements with its progenitor. The fajects in the Frontier universe, miliar radar scope uses a system of dots and including planets, moons and lines to indicate the location and direction of other objects. Taking a low-altiany spacecraft nearby, and is placed squarely tude flight over many of the planat the bottom of the viewscreen. Flanking the ets will reveal tiny buildings, radar scope are ten icons: the five on the left 1600D light year bridges, towers, mountains, rivers control display features (maps, viewing posiand other structures. Screen uptions, etc.), while the five on the right are used s a ns Rot 154 Dist. 0.00 night years liangallantro 11 TypeHreditar dates are slow on an unexpanded to perform ship functions (jumping to hyper R IZOTO ice and maler satile Tourism and Highline L Amiga 500, but owners of accelerspace, raising landing gear, engaging autopimy frequent attempts at doing so, my craft ated Amigas sporting speedy 68030/68040 lot, etc.). was either burnt to a crisp upon entering the processors will be treated to silky smooth Navigating across the galaxy is facilitated by atmosphere or smashed to flinders when scrolling and animation. mapping features. At the striking the ground at high speed. Roughly The Frontier package includes a robust set highest level of magnification, a Galactic Map half of the docking attempts I made using the of instructional documentation, including a option offers a top-down view of the galaxy. autopilot resulted in my craft being smashed hefty 106-page reference manual, an interFrontier features an incredible amount of into bits by colliding with the outside surface planetary travel guide and a booklet of short magnification, allowing players to zoom in to of the station. The autopilot also has a bothscience fiction based in the Frontier gamesee individual star systems. For an even closer ersome tendency to bounce a ship around the vantage point, the system map provides a world. A large, colorful map of the galaxy is edges of a docking bay before entering. view of planets orbiting their sun. For astronquire helpful, as is a quick reference sheet for Strangely, one of the best uses of the autopilot omy buffs, a novel bank of VCR controls on quickly locating play options. The documenis as a targeting tool. Selecting an enemy shiptation should serve any aspiring interstellar the system map is used to see planets and will cause the autopilot to doggedly pursue tradesman well. moons zip around the sun in their orbits. This the craft, attempting to smack the two vessels same VCR button metaphor is To Go Where No Capitalist successfully used in Frontier's time compression utility. Replete with Has Gone Before pause, stop, play and a number of A blurb on the box claims that Frontier fast-forward buttons, the \"Starcontains nearly 100 billion planets and dreamer» time control can commoons! While it may be next to impossible to press the passage of time from 10 verify that figure, even in a lifetime of gameto 10,000 times normal. If you're play, the world of Frontier does seem incredattacked while time is compressed, ibly immense. From a practical standpoint, the system will automatically reyour limits are dictated by the amount of fuel turn to real time. Actual:551538 kms\" Set:2231.75 km you can carry, the strength of your hull, and V Manual Lontrol the limits of your desire. Gamers who want a guiding force in their gaming products which Barnarts Star together. While this makes lining gently (but insistently) nudges them in a cer+36 Ophiuthi up shots incredibly easy, it also tain direction are apt to be disappointed by Alpha Centauri simplifies the process for enemy the unfettered nature of Frontier. Its large ships. universe is a tabula rasa in which the player becomes the actor, director and scriptwriter Lu Ceti Polygons and Parsecs in a science fiction opera. If you've the imagi_Ta. Ceti Gamers accustomed to gouraudnation to fill those roles and compensate for \"Famalhaut HR 1703 Epsilon Indi shaded, texture-mapped objects in the game's lack of a plot, Frontier should offer Settor: -1,0 their gaming products will be in for months, or even years, of galaxy-trekking fun. 12-06:26 1910u Rasi 154 Dist. 0.00 light years 11 Iperes ar somewhat of a disapCGW a ulunit ite and natudTurism and fishina. ZONAVESE pointment with Fron SHIP EQUIPMENT STATUS -Eagle long range fighter In Elite, docking a spacecraft without the tiers graphics. The Amiga version Drive System Class 1 Hyperdrive (max.B.00 1g) Holl Condition: 100.0% [current 8.00 19 aid of an autopilot was a challenging task, appears to use not much more than Shield Generators:0 units] bordering on the impossible. Thankfully, one Stanner 16 colors, with no support for Rotomalle plot of the starting positions in Frontier (RossAGA, and the IBM palette is only Atmospheric Shielding 154) supplies the player with a functional slightly more colorful with 256 autopilot. While the autopilot does make shades. It may not be exceptionally navigating through vast tracts of space a pretty, but Frontier more than Front Gun Mounting 1MH Polte Later point-and-click operation, it is better in thecompensates for this lack with a Remaining Used Cargo Spare 3 1 Cash ory than in practice. Using the autopilot to surprising amount of graphic deCabins 0 001000 land on a planet with an atmosphere, for V Manual LORTO tail. Starbases are covered with tiny WWW example, is usually a recipe for disaster. On advertisements and other placards, US LE DEW.585 Aster Relative to Aster TANTSULTY 12 LIKES -1123759 ve 10 Ross Manual control L 1204:45 120 3200 Page 20 Computer Gaming World "


"PILOT THE NAYY'S FIRST LINE OF DEFENSE. LEET DEFENDER The F-14 Tomcat Simulation! MEISTY Yoer det Thirsitat CONSIGN Uheither La formativa con E lena Actual screens may vary. IMAIS It's all up to you! The skies are swarming with bandits. Only you stand between the threat and your carrier battle group. Lock on your radar and launch the Navy's advanced weapons to destroy the most sophisticated enemy targets ever developed for a MicroProse simulation. Roll, turn, climb, and dive to out-maneuver enemy aircraft using an artificial intelligence developed right out of Soviet and Third World military doctrine. A computer-controlled wingman responds to your every command. And, you'll interact with strike packages that include F/A-18 Hornets, A-6 Intruders, A-7 Corsairs and E-2C Hawkeye AWACS. Featuring the latest in 3-D terrain technology derived from digitized information taken from LANDSAT geological surveys, you'll pilot your F-14 through actual locations. Fleet Defender from MicroProse. We brought you the F-15 Strike Eagle, now try the F-14 Tomcat featuring the most authentically modeled F-14 systems available anywhere outside of the Navy. MED PROSE I To got our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY Mon-Fri., 8:30 am 5:00 pm EST i or fill out the coupon and mail it to: MicroProse Software, Inc., 180 Lakefront Drive . Dept. D10. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 Name: i Address: City: State. Zip: ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE  1993 MicroProse Software, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. For IBM-PC/Compatibles. Circle Reader Service #91 -----AAY) "


"REVIEW Space Operetta Nomad Explores The Lighter Side Of Galactic Genocide by Douglas Seacat 1135LC LOADING JAMI 1.SI NON OHRODIN new space exploration epic can evoke a number of emotions from gamers, Lamong them fear. It seems that few gamers these days have the time or energy to explore the thousands of stars, planets, and alien empires such games boast. While it's amazing to see games attempt to capture the scope of space itself, most players can be overwhelmed by the cosmic scale. Into this precarious niche comes Nomad, a space epic aimed at those who enjoy hurtling through space and interacting with alien races, but would rather not make a career of it. In the time-worn tradition of space games, Nomad begins with a 5,190 close encounter of an alien kind. In this case, it is a starship from an advanced civilization that craps out near Earth and crash-lands, no doubt in a Kansas wheat field. After determining that the ship can be repaired, the Earthling authorities select you to take command of an ambitious project to explore the universe. Your unbridled enthusiasm at becoming the first interstellar human traveler is tempered only by the fact that, once you leave, no help can be expected from Earth. SWEET and organic. Opposing the Korok are almost small menu box in a corner of the screen and a dozen alien races, all coming from various can be activated by pressing the appropriate civilizations and technology levels. These behighlighted letter, or by using the mouse. ings are not completely unified, as petty racial The primary ship functions are: Navigaprejudice and hatreds divide them in ways tion, Communication, Scanning, Combat all too familiar to humans. and Engineering. While these features are Of course, humanity isn't likely to remain common to many space exploration games, uninvolved; this conflict is too serious to Nomad's use of them is particularly simplistic. ignore and will eventually make its way to Toscan a ship, for example, you simply select Earth. However, this doesn't mean Nomad is a ship by tracking through all the eligible ships nearby, then activate the scanner. The other commands are slightly more involved, but equally painless. Once a ship or planetary representative has been hailed, a portrait of the targeted alien is displayed with a box containing the \"translated\" dialogue. Through another series of menus, aliens can be questioned on any subject with which the player is familiar, divided into the categories: People, Places, Objects and Races. Trading may be initiated with an alien at any time and is the best method to upgrade equipment. Since all trading is hannecessarily a violent game. You can try to dled by bartering, there is no worry about solve the crisis through exploration, trading, alien currency; an item's worth can be deterand conversation, as well as combat. A mix of mined by comparing it to other items. strategies is recommended, even though it is Navigation can be handled in two conventheoretically possible to solve the game withient ways. You can access a map which can be out fighting zoomed between three levels: Galaxy, Sector and System. This is useful for finding planets From Dark Mess To Light Play based on limited information or when blindly In spite of the dark and ominous plot, the exploring the galaxy. The other method ingame's mood is actually quite volves a list of known planets which can light. While the wacky alien perNomad be indexed, allowing you to focus on sonalities (almost a bald rip-off of those in Starflight I&II) have a lot SYSTEM: to do with this, the game's quick $39.99 REQUIREMENTS: IMB EMS memory (1.5 MB and easy menu-driven interface recommended), VGA graphics, adds to this airy feel. At five pages, 8MB hard drive space, mouse; supports Sound Blaster and the game's manual is more of a Sound Source Papyrus pamphlet, but this is actually all PUBLISHER: Gametek, Inc. you need to play. All of the game's North Miami Beach, FL (305) 935-3995 commands are displayed in a HARMEK HALT MASTNORTE What A Korok! GMTEN IBM PRICE: Once in space, it becomes clear how isolated Earth has been from current galactic events. While humanity has been myopically focused on its own petty concerns, the rest of the galaxy has been moving steadily toward war. At the heart of the melee is a race of machines known as the Korok. Originally designed to serve a now-forgotten civilization, they have since been reprogrammed for death and destruction. Controlled by a single malevolent mechanistic entity, the Korok plan to exterminate all that is soft and gooey DEVELOPERS: Picha Page 22 Computer Gaming World "


"larger and more abstract issues. For one thing, Nomad is decidedly unoriginal. Playing it invoked tremendous nostalgia for Starflight, perhaps the first and best great space exploration game. The resemblances are glaring and cannot be considered accidental. Paying reHOHE MAIOR DOL P ERNETE NORGE SOROS SPACE DIFICAD PARTENEN TELPURZE KGRICULTURE MINERALS LICEORMSSONO exactly where you want to go. As soon as the seeking out certain aliens just to shoot the appropriate planer is selected, the ship leaps breeze. into nyperspace and arrives at the planet autoNomad is well balanced between allowing matically. Theres no navigational fuss, no freedom of choice and imparting a feeling of need for a pilot's license, and only a minimal progression toward the conclusion. The game wait. can be approached from a variety of angles Combat is almost childishly simple comand solved at your own pace. Many pared to other games in this genre. Nomad players will find a mission apdoes not pretend to be a space combat simuproach to be easiest, since various lator. The only weapons are missiles, which important missions, usually comautomatically track a target once they have bat related, are posted at most civbeen \"locked on.\" The only other considerailized worlds. Taking this direct tion during battle is activating the ship's jamapproach works well for people not mer to prevent enemies from calling in inclined toward random explorareinforcements. tion or dialogue. Alternatively, the Engineering serves the dual purposes of replot can be pieced together solely pairing the ship and choosing which devices from conversation. These options to activate. Graphic bars demonstrate the aren't mutually exclusive; most relative usefulness of each piece of equipment, players will use a mixture, taking so the most powerful or effective technology missions for excitement, with some is obvious. This frees you to trade lesser pieces of equipment for more important goods. Can We Twalk? This simple command structure allows the player to concentrate on the story line that unfolds through conversations with aliens. These alien encounters are where Nomad really shines. Each race has a distinct appearance, from the nebulous Altec Hocker to the sensuously feline Phelonese, and each has its own personality and mode of speech. The E LOSLITE pitiful Pahrump are almost always complaining about imagined illness, while the Chantiexploring between adventures. As missions are accomplished, the criPom Deo s sa Tran sis escalates, and new opportunities DOW! I could certainly exet ange for DR-109 become available. In this way, the or Grocolate Good enough what about 7 Hunter gamer is pushed gently but firmly assales for 2 Chocolates? If The less Ten aren't rece it is a toward the Endgame. good trade. Doug! A Small Galaxy After All Although Nomad has been nicely designed and is easy to use, there CESTO are a few technical problems. Missions are not always erased after KELIGT MEME they are solved, nor are all missions solvable. Also the Ship's Log is less cleer are an eminently practical and serious useful than it should be. The text group of clones. Even within the same race, editor was supposed to eliminate individuals have different styles and colors of the hassle of taking notes, but since clothing and hair, giving each alien a unique the log doesn't record conversaidentity. Animation is minimal, but portrays tions, it is of minimal use. The such a range of emotions that it is readily game saving feature is primitive, apparent if an alien is happy, angry or neutral with only a single save slot per to you. The ability to question individuals on player without resorting to some nearly any subject is a nice change from the DOS manipulations (copying and general «multiple choice\" method found in renaming files). The game also most games. It would have been nice if there lacks a Load Game option, requirwas a wider variety, as most of the responses ing you to restart the game are exactly the same from person to person ever you want to restore. within the same race. Still, I found myself My greatest concerns involve spect to a classic is well and good, but there is an important line between homage and imitation, which Nomad comes dangerously close to crossing. Given Nomad's presentation, it is reasonable to expect a broader, deeper and altogether more involving game. But in comparison to other Space Exploration games, most notably Frontier and Privateer, Nomad comes up short. It simply isn't as large, doesn't pay off in as many hours of play, and doesn't have the same detailed atmosphere and scope. So Nomad is clearly not a game for veterans of the Space Epic, though it does have a lot to offer the casual gamer. Its play mechanics are well designed and easy to use, it doesn't require practiced flight simulator skills, nor an inordinate time investment. It's a game with an old but reliable plot, interesting characters, and a good deal of charm. Those who look to long-term commitments from their space epics should set a course for another star system, but those who actually work for a living and game \"on the side\" may find Nomad a fulfilling affair. Cow SECRETS SHIL STATUS DAMAGE ELDE May 1994 Page 23 "


"CLEARLY, SOMETHNG HAS STARTLED MR. Cow, AND T Ain't A PAIR OF COLD HAJDs. you GOT A VLLAGE. FARMS. HUTS. KniGHTS. PEOPLE TO BOSS AROUND. AND A COW. LFE S GOOD. BUT THE YOU GET THESE VISITORS. THEY'RE FAT. THEY DROOL, BURP, AND SMELL LKE AI OUTHOUSE. THEY COME II HORDES, EATING YOUR 3D TEXTURE MAPPED HUTS, TREES, WOME, CHILDREN, AND WORST OF ALL, YOUR COW. YOU TRY TO TRASH THEM WITH YOUR SWORD, BUT IT AIN'T EASY, AND THEIR GUTS GET ALL OVER YOU. LIFE STARTS TO SUCK. You've met \"THE HORDE\", IMY FRIEND. AN ORIGINAL GAINE WITH CD QUALITY LIVE ACTON VDEO, DGTZED MUSIC AND DISGUSTING EATNG SOUNDS. AND A CAST OF ACTORS WHO CAI ACTUALLY ACT; LKE KIRK CAMERON AND MICHAEL GREGORY. You BUILD WALLS, NOATS, AND DEATH PITS. AND YOU HIRE AN ARCHER TO HELP FEND THEM OFF. AGAN THE HORDE ATTACKS. YOU SAVE THE COW, BUT THEY EAT YOUR HUT, YOUR "


"THE HORDE 1994 Crystal Dynamics Inc. All rights reserved IBM PC gate screenshown. Crystal Dynamics and The Horde are trademarks of Crystal Dynamics. DO, the 3DO logos and interactive Multiplayer are trademarks of The 3DO Company. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corp. CORI CROP, AND THAT GRL 11EXT DOOR YOU HAD YOUR EYE on. IBM PC PC-CD How LFE REALLY SUCKS. AND IT AIN'T ABOUT & 3DO TO GET ANY EASIER. THE EVIL HORDLINGS GROW BIGGER, FASTER, EVER SIN ARTER. (AND YOU HAVEN'T EVEN HET THE Evil CHANCELLOR YET.) DEAR READER, WE PRAY YOU'RE THE SORT WHO LEARIS QUICKLY. 'CAUSE THIS STUFF'S CRYSTAL DYNAMICS\" HAPPENING on 32 BITS. Enjoy, MY FRIEND. AND GOOD LUCK Circle Reader Service #58 "


"REVIEW Profits Of Damnation Feel The Wrath Of Origin's Righteous Fire TE ***** by Bernie Yee amers tired of playing the blueSteltek drone in Privateer. While enjoying the Gameplay is, of course, identical to Privahaired good guy in Origin's Wing fruits of his labor on the Jolson Pleasure Base, teer, which itself was an improvement over Commander universe got a nice our privateer is robbed of his brand new the Wing Commander II engine. Still a step break with Privateer. Playing the pirate, Steltek cannon that he worked so hard to below what is planned for Wing Commander smuggler, mercenary or merchant of their get—and he's mad! As you once again jump III, and lacking the smoothness of a pure choice, Privateer allowed space combat fans into his boots, it is your job to keep the chance to stray off that straight and naryour ears open and find people row path that galactic saviors must tread. who might know something about Instead of fighting the good fight against all what's going on, and use your skills that is wrong in the universe, the player's to persuade them to help you request was one of greed: make the fortune, cover your weapon. earn the money, and upgrade the rickery old space craft into a top of the line Centurion, Mo' Money bristling with weapons, for the sole purpose Righteous Fire is as open-ended as of making another buck. Privateer. You can immediately Of course, there was a story too. Eventually, start accepting missions from Jolall that star-hopping gor the player to the son to build up your bank account, game's plor line which involved the recovery which is a good idea, as you'll need of a mysterious alien map, a derelict alien the extra cash despite the fact that polygon graphics engine like X Wing and Tie starship, a salvaged alien weapon, and finally you can import your hero from Privateer with Fighter, Righteous Fire is nonetheless very encontact with the Steltek, an ancient and techhis ship and credits intact. Righteous Fire injoyable to watch. Sound and music are well nologically advanced alien race. Pilots also troduces new technology, including a new implemented too, with Origin's General became acquainted with the flora and fauna cannon, stronger shields and engines, and MIDI support for the next generation of of the seamier side of the Wing Commander speed and weapon enhancers that all cost big music cards like the Creative Labs Wave Blasuniverse: pirates, bounty hunters and Retros. bucks. ter. The game's continuity with PriMy only gripe about this game is its lack of vateer is maintained nicely. Veterchallenge for the experienced privateer. A ans of Privateer will remember combination of stronger shields and engine that the last series of missions to made my Centurion feel almost unstoppable, stop the Steltek drone were asso that some of the missions seemed like signed by the Confederation Adtrivial exercises that got in the way of the miral at the Perry Naval Base. Now advancing storyline. Still, the new storyline is that the Steltek cannon has been fun, and the new ship elements breathed a bit stolen, my first instinct was to head of fresh cosmic wind into the game, ensuring back to Perry for an audience with that Privateer will avoid wrath of the «DEL\" the military. Sure enough, some command for some time. It is certainly recmilitary official was waiting at the ommended for privateers who just can't get bar for me, and he assigned a series The Retros were the worst of the lot, a fanatiassigned a series enough of life on the edge of the Wing enough of life on the edge of the Wing Comof missions. Over the course of cal religious organization dedicated to wiping mander universe. CGW these missions I began to get a Righteous Fire out technology. They always flew directly at picture of the nasty political goyou, making an easy target. If you purchased ings-on that took place while the Privateer's optional speech pack, you could PRIVATEER PRICE: $29.95 \"hero\" was lounging around some SYSTEM: hear them yell «Die by the very weapons you brothel on Jolson. As Oxford was REQUIREMENTS: Original Privateer game, 386-33. 4MB RAM, VGA graphics; 4MB adore!\" or the catchy battle cry, \"Taste rightinstrumental in learning about hard drive space; recommended: 486-25, joystick: supports most eous fire!\" the Steltek in Privateer, so is the major sound cards DESIGNER: These space zealots get their own spin off in university planet again useful in Tom Kassebaum, Phil Wattenbarger Origin's Privateer add on, Righteous Fire. The learning about who might have PUBLISHER: Origin Systems Austin, TX story takes place one year after the player stolen your artifact in Righteous (512) 335-5200 successfully defeated the green egg shaped fire. E **** GLT S90 IBM the Statel:.. 25 Page 26 Computer Gaming World "


"GREAT WAR PLANES YOUR BELLY TANK IS ON FIRE. YOUR RADIO IS GONE. YOUR AIR FIELD IS 135 MILES AWAY. GODSPEED. FREE Limited Collector's Edition Discovery Channel \"WINGS OF THE LUFTWAFFE: FIGHTER ATTACK\" Video Offer FREE with Aces Over Europe purchase after March 1, 1994 while supplies last WINGS AVIATION B MILITARY COLLECTION OAR THROUGH FLAK-FILLED SKIES IN THE COCKPIT OF YOUR SUPERMARINE SPITFIRE. P-51 MUSTANG. FOCKE WULFE 190. OR ONE OF 13 OTHER AIRCRAFT FROM THE INFAMOUS SECOND WORLD WAR. FLY ALL NEW AIR-TOGROUND MISSIONS, TAKE OUT ENEMY BRIDGES, AND STRAFE ARMORED VEHICLES. FACE OFF AGAINST THE MOST FAMOUS ACES IN THE EUROPEAN THEATER. ACES OVERE WINGS VIDEO OFFER. FOR A LIMITED TIME, YOU'LL RECEIVE FREE THE DISCOVERY CHANNEL'S \"WINGS OF THE LUFTWAFFE: FIGHTER ATTACK\" ON VHS TAPE WITH YOUR PURCHASE OF ACES OVER EUROPE. THIS SPECIAL OFFER BRINGS ALIVE GERMANY'S DEADLIEST W.W.I FIGHTERS IN GRIPPING HISTORICAL FOOTAGE. SEE THEM BUILT. SEE THEM FIGHT. THEN FLY THEM YOURSELF IN ACES OVER EUROPE ! EUROPE SEE YOUR RETAILER, OR CALL NOW AND MENTION OFFER D818. 1-800-757-7707 Dynamix ACES OVER EUROPE THE LATEST IN THE GREAT WAR PLANES SERIES. PART OF THE SEARA FAMILY TM AND ARE TRADEMARKS OF, OR LICENSED TO, DYNAMIX, INC 1994 DYNAMIX, INC Circle Reader Service #110 "


"REVIEW Shoot-out At The UR Corral by Martin E. Cirulis . .. Velocity's Multiplayer Game of Virtual Mayhem, Spectre VR T he original Spectre ran like a Battlewhat by running over special tiles that repair warp to safety or even a gateway into Negative Zone out of hell, enabling you and up damage and reload ammunition. UnfortuCyberspace, a strange realm beneath the surto seven of your caffeine-fevered nately, this was all there was to Spectre, when face of the arena. Spectre VR has managed to friends to face off in real time on the same you had defeated a level of opponents, you turn a usually overlooked and passive aspect battlefield, blasting each other's polygon were faced with another level filled with more of most arcade games the playfield-into a graphic tanks to twirling shards. Tiring of of them. Not exactly a feast of variety. dynamic and troublesome enemy that has to mindless destruction, you could collect flags In the realm of Spectre VR, this limitation be actively dealt with. while fighting, or divide into teams and try to has been addressed with gusto. Now a player breach each other's home base. Spectre beis not only faced with enemy tanks, but Suicide Machines came a Mac sensation, and later was transhunter-killers that can fly, tanks that are inBut the pesky computer is not the only one lated into the realm of DOS and Windows, visible to radar and sight, mines resembling sporting improvements. Spectre VR has graUnwilling to abandon this hyperkinetic Bouncing Betties, automatic gun turrets, and ciously given its players a few added options arena, Velocity has gone back to the shop and slicers that cruise across the landscape like to even the score, or at least to help run up overhauled Spectre for all it was worth. The shark fins, peeling open any tank unlucky the score. In addition to the familiar cannon result: Spectre VR...and probably a and grenade launcher, you can now fire smart whole new batch of strained wrists Lives: 3 Score: 65 missiles, heat-seeking cannon rounds, arc-firand friendships. Damage: Level: 01 ing scattershot, proximity mines that can be Ano: 29 D Bonus: 240 H dropped in front of pesky pursuers, and spinVirtually Meaningless PULSE DURSTS ONLINE ners that can turn a deadly enemy into an Despite the extremely liberal use amusing top until you are more prepared to of the term \"Virtual Reality\" and deal with them. What's more, there are now the pretensions of cyberspace Cyber Blasts which can be dropped from the spread throughout the documenair like bombs and PulseBursts that function tation, players should make no like air-to-ground missiles. mistakes about the nature of this Why the need for these last two weapons? product. Spectre VR is distilled esThe maniacal designers at Velocity have sence of video game, especially in added a third dimension to this adrenalinesingle player mode. It is to Battlefest: your cybervehicle is now capable of limZone as fine Scotch is to juniper berries. The enough to bump into them. Even the terrain ited flight. Certain tiles in the action is pure and uncluttered by anything itself has become decidedly unfloor of the arena send your velike plot, depth or even realism. Instead we friendly with the addition of acid SpectreVR are treated to a form based on 15 odd years pools that will melt you to slag in of arcade tradition, embodying all the mind a few seconds, intelligent walls SYSTEM: IBM, Macintosh less, addictive action that has swallowed so that crowd and corral unwary REQUIREMENTS: IBM: 286-16 or better (386/486 recommended), VGA graphics, many quarters. players, and last, but far from 3MB hard drive space Mac: Classic or better (Mac II The player controls a single battlerank in least, the deadly Cyber Mud, an recommended), System 6.0.7 or the depths of cyberspace and fights hordes of intelligent form of acid pool that higher, 2MB RAM (4MB System 7), 2MB hard drive space computerized enemies in ranks both weaker tries to be on you like hype on PROTECTION: 1-8 (network) and stronger than his own. Ammunition is game boxes. DESIGNERS: IBM: Pierre Maloka, limited, as is the amount of damage a tank And if things in the arena get Mac: Green Dragon Creations PUBLISHER: Velocity can receive before being \"de-rezzed.» These too hot for you, you can always San Francisco, CA limitations can be compensated for somespot a teleportation diamond to PRICE: $59.95 None PLAYERS: (800) VLOCITY Page 28 Computer Gaming World "


"The Ultimate Roadtrip To Superfluous Knowledge. HOLLYWOOD CADILLAC RANCH Why WORLD'S LARGEST PEANUT BUTTER &  va Oregancia a lomach the EASCE the bio tenh o how of D FURIVIA Pack your brain—you'll need it. Here's a roadtrip that'll bombard you with hundreds of arcane, wacky trivia questions about America's \"unadvertised\" attractions. In fact, as you trek down the interstate you'll have bits of trivia hit you like bugs on a windshield. SPLAT! And once you've ventured through all 48 states? Well, Mother Maybelle and Coach Clamphead will be waiting to present you with trophies and prizes. But remember, it's not horsepower that'll get you there...it's brain power. So hitch a ride with Media Vision's CD-ROM title Road Scholar.\" Visit your local software dealer or call us at: MEDIA VISION 1-800-845-5870. Now, that's multimedia! Media Vision, the Media Vision logo and Road Scholar are trademarks of Media Vision Technology, Inc. All other trademarks and registered trademarks are those of their respective companies. @ 1994 Ken Bell Productions.  1994 Media Vision, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Circle Reader Service #85 "


"which the person with the most Score: 1028: Lives: 3 of which is that the product is missing the Damage:D Level: 0 kills won; a form of flag rally where terrain editor promised on the outside of the AMMO: 06 D Bonus : 478 HF the same open warfare existed, but box and the set of protocols that will allow the victor was the first one to colthe game to run on an IPX network (an BOMBS ONLINE lect a series of flags scartered across omission that cuts the compatibility of the the arena; and a team game where product in half). The note states that Velocity the first side to touch the other's will be glad to ship the aforementioned to home base won the point. The first registered users free of charge, but it is a scenario was by far the most popudisappointing revelation after purchasing a lar and intense (I have the wrist new $60 toy. damage to prove it), while the last If this were all, it would simply be an inconwas the weakest, as the designers venience, but there are more drawbacks the longer you stay in this virtual new world. The hicle aloft for a short while. AlScore: 18098 terrain lacks the snappy graphic kick of the though it's not Falcon, it is more Damage:Level: 13 original and is completely devoid of the feathan enough to open up a whole AMMO: 03 m Bonus:90 tures shown on the box. One can hope this new realm of tactics. Flight resemwill come with the terrain editor. Though the bles helicopter movement more SPINNERS ONLINE documentation gives a cautious green light to than anything else. Idle, your vehioperations under Windows, even to the excle rises to maximum altitude, tent of providing an icon for the game, it is in moving forward accelerates it but fact severely unstable on all but the most lowers your altitude until you muscular computers and often violates sysreach a maximum speed just above tem integrity. Other small glitches and omisthe surface of the arena. You are sions mar an otherwise beautiful piece of incapable of loops and stalls, but software. Hopefully by the time you read this, strafing runs become an art form in and of themselves. seemed to have neglected to conScore: 3852 A player's tank is rated in three attributes: sider the durability and speed of Damas: Level: 12 Speed, Armor and Ammo capacity. The game most vehicles. AMMO: 18 Bonus:58 offers three standard vehicles representing the Spectre VR retains these basic sceMISSILES ONLINE philosophy of the fast, the well protected, and narios and adds another ser with the Jack-of-all trades. Experienced players the introduction of the flight have a fourth choice, customizing their own model. There is a free-for-all level vehicle, changing the three values to suit their where players have access to most own tastes. In my modest experience I have of the weapons available in the sinfound that ammo capacity should generally gle-player game. These are the logibe traded for speed and armor in single-player cal improvements to be found in a games. Of course, all bets are off when faced sequel, and most companies would with opponents of the human kind. stop there, but not these guys. They also added scenarios like Tag, Keep-Away, editors, protocols and patches will have been Net Yourself Some Friends! Bumper tanks and a form of full combat sent to loyal consumers. To their credit, Vetic-tac-toe for the violent inner child. People locity seems eager to deliver on this as soon as The original Spectre shone its brightest of a more team-minded spirit can find manic possible. when hooked up to a network environment, pleasure in games like Bitball, a kind of cyberand Spectre VR has lost none of that. There is rugby with a single goal in the middle of the still room for eight computers to link together \"It's Cyber-riffic!» arena where the final word in defense is to and form an electronic gladiator's den where blow up the ball, and Cyber Soccer, which is Despite the poor decision to release the victory is to the swift and sneaky. Once there very much like the traditional sport except were only three games you could play in the game too soon, I cannot help but be more that goalies come equipped with land mines enamored of this game every time I play it. land of Spectre a no-friends free-for-all in invisible to the opposing team. Spectre VR seems to represent a true step forLives: 3 Score: 00: The addition of these new sceward in a genre drowned in endless streetDamage: Level: 10 narios increases the longevity of AMMO: Bonus: 528 fighting and slide-n-shoots, an intelligent 23 this product by at least three-fold video game where you are free to act and react MISSILES ONLINE while the game twists and turns to keep you The Fly In My Cyber Soup entertained. With the promise of add-on disks giving new features and scenarios, this For all the improvements, enproduct could have a solid future with a hancements and care put into this hard-drive life measured in years instead of sequel, Spectre VR still has one glarthe usual weeks. ing flaw that I find hard to ignore-it's not finished. Spectre VR The author would like to thank Craig Reece was released too soon, the first hint and his networking wizardry. cow Page 30 Computer Gaming World "


"Mutants. Biohazards. Cyberspace. SHODAN. There's no time to rest when your foe doesn't sleep ... SYSTEM SHOCK dag 'n System Shock, biological engineering and automation merge in a raging storm.completely out of human control. As the game begins, you awaken from a healing coma on the space station Citadel, only to find yourself in the twisted aftermath of a terrible mutiny. Somehow, you've escaped the fate of your companions, who have been mutated beyond recognition to serve SHODAN, the ruthless computer that now controls all station operations. With your neural interface, you can \"jack\" into cyberspace, SHODAN's realm, to steal clues to the mystery and stop a plot to enslave Earth. Actual screens may vary. Marvel at the first person, 3-D, smooth-scrolling viewpoint as you jump, lean around corners, look up and down, climb ledges, crawl through shafts, and even fly with rocket boots.  Experience the most sophisticated physics system in a computer game, complete with variable gravity, recoil effects, explosions, and moveable, destructible objects.  Listen to explosive sound in ORIGIN's new dynamically layered music system, and view realistic illumination effects pools of light, shadows, flickering lights and flashes. FOR A GREAT GAME EXPERIENCE, USE AN INTEL486\" DX2 OR PENTIUM\" PROCESSOR-BASED SYSTEM. FOR LITERATURE ON INTEL PROCESSORS, CALL 1-800-756-8766 AFET DIE UN79 Copyright 1994 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. System Shock is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin and We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts, Intel, Intol486 and Pentium are trademarks of Intel Corporation. ELRIEINT We arcaic worls. Available at a software retailer near you, or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 Circle Reader Service #99 "


"REVIEW Frigid Heirs Of The a Robber Barons Train-to-Train Warfare in ReadySoft's Arctic Baron by H.E. Dille and John P. Withers The year is 2714, and the brave new couple of trading cars and 10 troops for deplayer must look at a map screen, but to add world has gone horribly awry. In the fense. But up to 100 cars can be attached to coal to the boiler the player must be in the early years of the 21st Century, scienthe engine, and one of the player's first priorengine control section, which overlays the tists attempting to reverse the greenhouse ies is to get more cars to make the train more map. To change the speed, yet another layer effect make a terrible miscalculation, plungformidable, both as a trader and a weapon of of display must be accessed, which only coning the world into a perpetual winter. Before war. tains the speed control and some warning they can repair the damage, society lights. The whole process is cumbersome and falls into chaos. Over the chilled could have been easily avoided by adding centuries, a new society emerges, speed and coal controls to the map screen. dominated by the Viking Union, a EMR To determine the destination of the Tranfederation controlling the only sarctica, track switches must be ser on the working global transportation sysmap display. This is a simple process, but in tem—the rail system. The Unions' many situations the Transarctica is sitting giant trains form the only trade right on a switch that must be changed. connection between the world's When the switch is obscured by the train, frozen nations, giving the Union a figuring out its position is a matter of squintmonopoly that makes them de 1930 ing at the screen, trying to see the edge of the facto rulers of the planet. 430 position indicator around the train icon. Is the planer doomed to become 172 a frigid hunk of permafrost, lorded Over 20 different types of train cars are Paying The Bills over by an ice age railroad tycoon? Perhaps available, and their multiplicity is one of the The most important commodity in Arctic not. Rumor says that there might be a chance more interesting elements of Arctic Baron. Baron is coal, and it comes in two varieties: of activating an old project that would bring Different types of cars, from tankers, to aniLignite which is used for money, and anthrathe world back into the light and break the mal haulers, to cargo wagons are available to cite, which is used exclusively for fueling spell of winter that encircles the globe. The haul a variety of trade goods from town to Viking Union, seeing a threat to its power, trains. In an emergency situation, the Trantown. Unfortunately, the Viking Union isn't sarctica can be run on lignite. This gives Arctic does everything it can to suppress any knowltaking the theft of their train and threat to Baron the amusing distinction of being the edge of this project, going as far as eradicating their power lying down, so there are also cars only game on the market where money can all references to the sun. The last hope of designed for train-to-train combat. Weapons be burned as fuel. Lignite is most useful, as it sunbathers the world over is the Arctic Baron, range from machine guns to medium range can be used to buy additional cars and troops. leader of the faction trying to save the planet, missile launchers that can smite an enemy Though very simplistic, the trading aspect of who steals one of the Unions giant trains. train over 500 kilometers away. Arctic Baron is the game's strongest point. Guided by the player, the Baron sets off into While the cars are interesting, the actual the frozen wasteland in search of the secret The map features many difoperation of the train leaves someArctic Baron that will doom the Viking Union to a frostferent town types; some supply thing to be desired. The only conbitten footnote in history. trols are forward/reverse and the speed control. With such a simple ARCTIC BARON PRICE: I've Been Freezin' $49.95 SYSTEM: Amiga, Atari ST, IBM (reviewed) set of controls, it would seem imREQUIREMENTS: IBM: 386 or better, VGA On The Railroad graphics, 2MB hard drive possible to make them hard to space, mouse; supports Sound The most important element of Arctic use, but the Transarctica's control Blaster and Adlib sound cards PROTECTION: Documentation look up Baron is the Transarctica, the train the Baron panel seems to be designed to be PUBLISHER: ReadySoft, Inc. Ontario, Canada has stolen from the Viking Union. At the intentionally annoying. In order (905) 731-4175 outset, the Transarctica is a small train with a to see where the train is going, the Page 32 Computer Gaming World "


"STAR TREK JUDGMENT RITES Movie & SOUND PACK AN EXPLOSIVE NEW ADDITION TO THE JUDGMENT RITES EXPERIENCE. TARTREK JUDGMENT RITES D OTAR TREK Movie & SOUND PACK Star Trek: Judgment Ritesh goes to warp speed with the addition of the new Movie and Sound Pack. A cinematic explosion of sight and sound, the Judgment Rites Movie & Sound Pack plugs into your original Judgment Rites program, expanding the experience with fantastic new cinematic sequences and digitized sound effects from the original television series. It's the ultimate expansion disk for the ultimate adventure. 17922 Fitch Avenue Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 553-6678 The Judgment Rites Movie and Sound Pack requires the original Star Trek: Judgment Rites program. Software  1993, 94 Interplay Productions, Inc. All rights reserved. 0 & 1994 Paramount Pictures. All Rights Reserved. STAR TREK is a Registered Trademark of Paramount Pictures, Interplay is an authorized user. Circle Reader Service #124 "


"391 troops, others hold information, a few produce train cars, but the vast majority are trading centers. At any given trading center there will be a few products produced there, and others that are in demand. One of the tricks of the game is finding out what products are in demand at each town. In most places, for example, fishing rods will be worth 5 to 10 Baks (a unit of lignite coal measure), but in Alexandria they are worth 50 Baks. Unless you stop in a trading town with the right product, there is no way of knowing ahead of time what any particular city will want. There are very few actual market forces operating in Arctic Baron. If a town will buy 50 units of mammoth dung for 40 Baks at one time, they will continue to do so as the game progresses. However, towns only produce so much in the way of goods to sell and restocking takes quite some time. As such, after a product line is traded out, there is a long lull before you are able to round up enough of that same commodity to make another trading circuit profitable. Another complication in the trading process is car type. Certain goods can only be carried with certain types of cars. Deciding the proper proportion of livestock cars, liquid cars, greenhouse cars, and standard cargo cars to add to the Transarctica is a major decision, particularly when balanced with the defensive and offensive cars required to survive trainto-train combat. Then there is the matter of slaves. In Arctic Baron, slave trading is an important part of the game. Slaves are used to dig mines and build bridges—small but necessary tasks. While a cheap allusion is made in the documentation to these slaves being of some kind of inferior race, it becomes apparent during play that captured enemy soldiers are the stuff of which slaves are made. Training For War Combat occurs whenever the Transarctica meets a train of the Viking Union on the tracks. Victory is achieved by destroying all the weapon and troop cars on the opposing train. There are two attack options for train combat: troops and weapon cars, with troops as the most versatile option. Disgorged from troop cars either as a whole or in smaller squads, troops can plant bombs on opposing trains and attack enemy troops directly. A bomb set on a car goes off after a small delay, destroytheir cargoes become a part of the Transarctica. The train combat is not, in and of itself, badly designed, but it is painfully slow. A simple combat on a 386-33 can take over 15 minutes to resolve, despite the fact that the actual combat routines are rather simplistic, and no great graphic or sound effects are in evidence. To the game designer's credit, there is an option that allows the player to skip O 1353 1353 combat all together. 0 Quest For Fire ing with a single blast the entire car and any troops left on it. Friendly troops that discover The quest, freeing the world from perpetual a bomb on their own train have a chance to winter, isn't particularly notable in either a disarm it before explosion. Thus, it behooves positive or negative sense. It is a typical matter the smart player to not only send out troops of showing up at the right places and gatherto the opposing train, but to keep some back ing the parts to make Operation Sun work. for defense. Of course, there are the requisite battles with Weapon cars come in two major varieties: the Viking Union to secure the day and save the world. Most players will probably not be machine gun and cannon. The machine guns that enthralled with the quest, but the game kill enemy troops within their fire pattern, doesn't lose replay value because of it. The quest really contributes little to the overall design other than some added motivation. While a solid game in general, Arctic Baron has a number of annoying rough edges. The main control icons are far too dark to be easily seen. When saving or retrieving a file there is no directory option, so a player just has to IN ORDER TO COMMIT SUICIDE remember their save names. The PRESS THE LEFT BUTTON OR THE RIGHT BUTTON TO CANCEL opening and closing music of the game is FM-generated and sounds while cannons destroy cars on the opposing tinny and weak. However, the sound effects inn train. As this requires multiple shots, and are superb and, to a degree, make up for the since guns are fixed so that they can fire in poor music. The sounds of the train on the only one direction, the placement of weapons cars in the string of the train is critical. A track are very well done and lend a real railroad feel to this game. group of weapon cars, when purchased, will all be hooked together in a clump at the end If this game were flawlessly constructed, a of the Transarctica, making them minimally player might easily be sucked into the reality effective. Going to a station and spreading of the background world, but the small, yet out the guns is a good idea that pays off annoying, quirks make one start to question handsomely. After combat is concluded, the the whole premise. If the world still has the remaining cars from the opposing train and technology for missiles, why isn't air transport a bigger factor? Why is there plenty of light on many of the outdoor scenes when there is supposed to be no sunlight? Since gasoline is a trading commodity, why aren't there gas-powered vehicles competing with the Viking Union's trains? At the end of the line, the heat of our enthusiasm for the originality of the game concept met with a small cold front of disappointment, resulting in this rather lukewarm review. Arctic Baron can still provide some fun play on a fast machine, but its small blemishes derail an otherwise original and delightful premise. Cow HAY Page 34 Computer Gaming World "


"Paranoid population Psychotic criminals. Power hungry corporations. Big Brother government Haves and have nots. America? Close. BENEATH A SKY in a city only. The Watchmen's Dave Gibbons could create. In a future only Virtual Theatre could make real. In a world only you can save. Available on PC CD-ROM BENEATH STEEL SKY. 1994 Fan Bow W r acalo Prieten in Wi nd. You can harderol Revolution . Le para a mondatore enterprise Circle Reader Service #118 "


"CD-ROM REVIEW Spock's Vox by Charles Ardai Tt's a little like getting a phone call from eyes and...yes, it really is them!), Star Trek Kirk tells them to, dogging his heels like so an old friend: the voice out of nowhere, 25th becomes a piece of the myth. many loyal puppies. (Such are the perqs of the moment of startled recognition, the being the best-known captain in Starfleet.) swarm of memories rushing in, the smile that Kirk's Perqs Most episodes start with a dogfight between spreads slowly across one's face. There's an In most ways, the CD-ROM edition is the the Enterprise and one or more alien craft. instant of dislocation, then the wonderful same as the original game. The player climbs These battles, though true enough in spirit to plunge into a familiarity that is part nostalgia into the vinyl boots of the one and only nly the so often pyrotechnic TV series, are a and part curiosity-so much to remember, so «James T. Kirk of the Starship...Enterprise ship...enterprise frustrating lor The Romulans are surpr frustrating lot. The Romulans are surprismuch more to discover! (as Shatner introduces himself to any alien in ingly easy to defeat (especially considering The catalyst that produces this cffect when earshot), directing his crew and his ship on a that their craft is invisible for much of the the CD-ROM edition of Interplay's Star half dozen missions that correspond roughly, time) and the Klingons can be talked out of Trek: 25th Anniversary opens is William Shatin scope and theme, to a half dozen typical fighting, but the ubiquitous Elasi Pirates are ner's voice, intoning Gene Roddenberry's faepisodes of the original series. There is also an as annoying and hard to hit as mosquitoes. mous prologue («Space...the final introductory starship battle and a concluding Unfortunately, there is no way to proceed in frontier...\"). When the first edition of the encounter which, though basically just anthe game without beating them in space comgame was released, players praised its fidelity other battle in the original version of the bat; adventurers with no particular arcade to the look and sound of the TV series, and game, here is fleshed out to full-episode skills just have to hope their hand-eye coorrightly so; but the original, as good as it was length. can't hold a candle to the new version. On While in space, the player runs the show dination improves before their patience exCD-ROM, with not only Shatner returning from the bridge, getting assistance from varito the role that made him famous but ous crew members by clicking on them. Once past the combat hurdles, the stories Leonard Nimoy, DeForest Kelley, Nichelle When the Enterprise reaches the site of its offer a rich and varied pastiche of Star Trek Nichols, Walter Koenig, George Takei, and mission, the interface switches to birs. There's the one about the machine that Jimmy Doohan stepping up to the mike as a more traditional adventure Star Trek: 25th Anniversary well, the game is much more than it was game scheme with commands before. such as «Take», «Use», «Look At\", PRICE: $64.95 STANL TIRER and \"Talk To\" executable with a SYSTEM: IBM with CD-ROM In its original form, Star Trek: 25th was just an REQUIREMENTS: 386SX, 2MB RAM, CD-ROM a game like any of the countless others that click or two of the mouse. drive, supports Sound Blaster and Pro Audio Spectrum have surfaced regularly since the series first Though a landing party always sound cards PROTECTION: consists of four people (Kirk, Documentation look up appeared, though it was quite possibly the DESIGNERS: E. Danforth, J. Patel, best of the lot. Now that the banter between Spock, McCoy, and a generic seB. Schlickhernd, M. Stackpole, Spock and McCoy or between Kirk and the curity officer), Kirk is the conduit PUBLISHER: Interplay Klingons is not just typed out on the screen for all of the player's commands. Irvine, CA (714) 553-6678 but performed by our old friends (close your The other characters do what pires. 2STERNSIVE ARRES S. Bennie Page 36 Computer Gaming World "


"GET REAL BLASTER . Upgrade up to a Sound Blaster» 16, and you've got PC audio as real as it gets. Real CD-quality, 16-bit stereophonic sound. Real built-in upgradability. And best of all, real 100% Sound Blaster compatibility. All of which may just be why we're the 16-bit PC audio standard. And why those other manufacturers spend so much time comparing themselves to Sound Blaster. Sound BLASTER THE 16-BIT SOUND STANDARD. B ut like the man says, Get Real. Because there's only one card that's \"as good as a Sound Blaster 16\" And that's a Sound Blaster 16. For information, call 1-800-998-5227. ound CREATIVE CREATIVE LABS, INC. PC2 U.S. Inquiries: Creative Labs, Inc., Tel: 1-80X-998-5227 or 1-408-428-6600. International Inquiries: Creative Technology Ltd., Singapore, Tel: 65-773-0233, Fax: 65-773-0353. Sound Blaster, and the Sound Blaster and Creative logos are trademarks of Creative Technology Ltd. All other trademarks are the property of their respective holders. Copyright 1993 Creative Technology Ltd. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #57 "


"primitive aliens think is a god; there's the one about the ancient god who turns out to have been an alien all along; there's the one about the virus that quick-thinking McCoy has to cure; there's the one about Harry Mudd gerting in over his head while trying to turn a profit from some alien salvage; and so on. Misunderstandings explode into bloodshed and are then cleared up while characters soliloquize about honor and compassion, just like on TV. Everything is slightly abbreviated, with most episodes taking place in only four or five rooms and containing only a handful of puzzles, and the soliloquies are shortened to a couple of lines apiece, but the feel is Star Trek through and through. McCoy's Poise Part of this authenticity comes from the ser design, full of red metal buttresses, bulky desktop computers, square panels covered with blinking lights, and sliding doors that whoosh open at a touch. More of it, however, comes from the soundtrack, which now contains layer upon layer of digitized bloops, whirrs, hisses, and clicks taken straight off the TV. Phaser fire sounds like phaser fire. Communicators trill the way communicators ought to. The Enterprise computer emits those weird, mechanical ratcheting sounds that no computer except the one on Star Trek has ever made. Supplementing the sound effects are snatches of music imported from several episodes of the series-not just Alex ander Courage's theme music, but samples of various battle, suspense, and reads the entry for «Daystrom, Richard\" \"comic relief\" themes as well. when you look up \"Chekov, Pavel» in the The heart of the matter, ships library. Other glitches turn up here and though, is the voice acting. Even there—the computer only reads the first of if poor Chekov has little to say three sentences in a library entry on tribbles, other than \"Weapons armed, capKirk calls an object a \"trans-MAH-grifier\" tain and Scotty spends most of while Spock calls it a \"trans-MOW-grifier\" the time interrupting battles in but these are minor and excusable. mid-phaser blast to announce Even given the above complaints, the per\"Engines repaired, sir!\", the voices formances, by and large, are solid. Trekkers are the voices of our beloved commay wish they were stronger bur in the end rades and therefore a delight. will be rapturously grateful to have them at Spock, Kirk, and McCoy each all. Non-Trekkers may not be hurled into have plenty to say, particularly Kirk, who comparable costasies, but why would a nonoccasionally lands in situations in which the Trekker play this game in the first place? No, player gets to select from a menu of two or this game is for true believers only—and for three dialogue choices. Almost all the diathem it's a satisfying climax to years of fantalogue rings true: the scientific doubletalk, the sizing about the ideal Star Trek game. sarcastic asides, the idealistic speeches, the Trek's Next intense brainstorming to get out of a crisis, and the rest. Of course, the recently released sequel to My only regret is that all three actors sound Star Trek: 25th, Star Trek: Judgment Rites, is oddly sedate, plodding through the delivery a better game in any number of ways. There of lines that call for more vigor than they seem able to muster. A than th cynic might suggest that the years A LA min .) have taken their toll on our heroes; I'd prefer to think that Shatner and crew were just unaccustomed to drumming up the appropriate tone of urgency and passion without props, sets, and costumes around to ignite their performances. Under the circumstances, the always cool Spock naturally comes off the best. Shatner's turn is less ship combat and you can bypass what as an uncharacteristically contemplative Kirk there is; there are more episodes and more is somewhat odd but not unpalatable. The locations in each; there is a unifying plot disappointment of the bunch is DeForest thread running through the stories; and the Kelley, who recites lines that call for McCoy supporting players have larger roles in the to be irked or enraged as though calm and goings-on. Logic, as Mr. Spock would tell us, poise were acceptable substitutes. Once in a might suggest that even true believers would while McCoy manages to kindle some of the want to wait for that one to come out on CD, old fire for a jab ar Spock (\"Why, you pointy especially since the actors are already in the cared...»), but too often he is just a shell of his recording studio as of this writing. former feisty self. Still, logic only goes so far. I can't imagine The game's other voices include an unthe Star Trek fan who will want to miss the credited actress sounding regret CD version of Star Trek: 25th. For all that it tably Canadian as Kirk's old could be better, it's still a heck of a good flame, Carol Marcus; Tom game; and with the original cast unlikely to Wyner doing a creditable Roger regroup for another movie, it may be one of Carmel imitation as Harry the last chances we'll have to see the old crew Mudd; and various essentially inwork together again. terchangeable voice actors filling And if they're a little creakier than they used in the blanks as Lieutenant This to be a little slower and a little more wound and Ensign That. Joyce Kurtz, down, what of it? It is in the nature of the whose voice is not nearly as agreeuniverse for stars to decay. Call me softable as Majel Barrett's, sounds in hearted, but in this fan's eyes, these particular need of a tune-up as the Enterstars still shine brightly enough to light the prise computer; furthermore, she way back home. CGW BBÉ Page 38 Computer Gaming World "


"The Elder Scrolls \"I've played role-playing games since they first appeared on mainframes a decade ago. The Elder Scrolls: Arena is quite simply the most captivating, well-designed, realistic world available on home computers.\" ---Russ Ceccola, Associate Editor. Electronic Games \"The most impressive showing by any company...Bethesda's Fall line-up is one of the best going. 0000 -Computer Game Review Circle Reader Service #47 BECHESDA SOFTWORKS Copyright 1992 Delete soltworks. All rights reserved. Bathesda Softworks and The Elder Scr a bademaison Nigia Technology Limited "


"1 9 4 2. *TE ? 1942, The Pacific Air War from MicroProse. Who says you can't fight for both sides? KICK BUTT. The battles of Coral Sea, Midway, Eastern Solomons, Santa Cruz, and the Philippine Sea! Capture territory for the glory of the Emperor! THE PACIFIC AIR WAR\" In 1942, The Pacific Air War, you can command Japanese forces, too. The sky's the limit as you perform gravity-twisting air combat maneuvers in your Zero. Drop 800 kg bombs on heavily defended U.S. carriers. And take on the same death-defying challenges that World War II Japanese fighter pilots faced. PILOT any of 3 historically-accurate Japanese planes, each with its own cockpit and flight characteristics! SWEAT over the comprehensive strategy for all naval forces! GO HEAD-TO-HEAD against a friend via modem! Your tour of duty includes some of the most heroic battles ever fought. Battles that will push your skills to the limit as you master WW II air combat in an innovative Virtual Cockpit. MICROPROSE  1994 MicroProse. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. For IBM-PC/Compatibles & CD-ROM. 1-800-879-PLAY. "


"It's 1942 In The South Pacific Whose Side Are You On? Defend the U.S. honor! In 1942, The Pacific Air THE PACIFIC AIR WAR\" War take full command of U.S. forces. The sky's the limit as you pilot Corsairs and Wildcats in gravity-twisting air-to-air combat. Drop 1000 lb bombs on heavily defended Japanese carriers. And take on the same death-defying challenges that World War II American fighter pilots faced. 1942, The Pacific Air War from MicroProse. Who says you can't fight for both sides? KICK BUTT. The battles of Coral Sea, Midway, Eastern Solomons, Santa Cruz, and the Philippine Sea! PILOT any of 7 historically-accurate U.S. planes, each with its own cockpit and flight characteristics! SWEAT over the comprehensive strategy for all naval forces! GO HEAD-TO-HEAD against a friend via modem! Your tour of duty includes some of the most heroic battles ever fought. Battles that will push your skills to the limit as you master WW Il air combat in an innovative Virtual Cockpit Circle Reader Service #90 MICROPROSE  1994 MicroProse. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. For IBM-PC/Compatibles & CD-ROM. 1-800-879-PLAY. "


"L127, Never Trust A Gazfluvian Flingschnogger! Strategic Space Games From 2000 To Infinity by M. Evan Brooks ~B Clarke "


"BREAGU2 V That exactly constitutes a futuristic subjective, and a discriminating reader should Int/Tac-Op-Str/1 strategy or wargame has proven to be able to remper the ratings with this writer's Not a game as much as a gamer's aid, this be most difficult to define, benormal reviews in order to ascertain the inutility program will assist in the conversion of cause so many science fiction simulations inherent biases. any board wargame to computer output, alcorporate elements of role-playing games or If any readers have additions/correc beit without the Al. Once files are created, arcade sequences. I have tried to cover those tions/modifications, please send them to me games can be played castly simulations that emphasize the strategy asin care of this magazine or via modem on of conversions by dedicated users is already pects and rely less on quick reflexes or intenGenie (address: M.E. Brooks) or Prodigy (adunder way. Copyright laws make it difficult sive role-playing. While some games fall in dress: HFTN43A). to publicly disttribute such conversions, but the inevitable gray area, you won't find any LEGEND: the product is gaining support from pure \"shoot-em'-up\" or adventure games LINE 1: Title/Rating boardgame publishers. With this product, listed. Even though space simulators are not Ratings: you might, for example, actually find oppostrategy or wargames, I have included games The Black Hole Of Gaming nents for a few scenarios of Starship Troopers. such as X-Wing, mainly because of their sig. ARMADA 2525 (1 = Avoid nificant combat elements, as well as the im) (1; #87) Interstel; R.T. Smith; 1991; $49.95 mense popularity the majority of these games = Marginal Adv/Str/1-6 enjoy. More traditional flight sims were forGood Space colonization, R&D, production and merly covered here, but I have decided to y galacric battles--it's all here in an ambitious place them in their historical milieu. The rare = Very Good fantasy simulation, such as Dragon Strike, is p = Highly Recommended package. Both multi-layered and detailed. included simply because it does not fit into ARMOUR-GEDDON (1) another period and is more akin to science(Am/ST/I; #85,87) Psygnosis; Paul Hunter fiction than anything else. and Ed Scio; 1991; $49.99 Futuristic strategy games have a tendency to Int/Tac/1-2 blend into one another. After all, what is the A simulation of aircraft, tanks and hovercraft basic difference in a game based on destroying in an attempt to destroy the \"mad scientists\" Krellans or Kzinti or whatever race happens who will otherwise destroy the planet. In to be the villain: Futuristic simulations must addition to combat elements, you must detercreate their own environments. While a hismine research and production priorities. torical product has an underlying reality With a heavier emphasis on tactical battles which assists in creating the mood, the futurrather than cerebral considerations, it can be istic product must do so by itself without an fun, but resembles a Chinese meal: A halfexternal reference. An attractive game today hour later and you're hungry for something can grow obsolete faster than a historical with more substance. simulation simply because it lacks the intrinAUTODUEL (11) sic linchpin of reality. Of course, this also (Ap/C/M/Am/1; #26,28,29) Origin; Chuck allows the designer a great deal of latitude; Bueche; 1985; O/P how he handles his created world will deterMINDCRAIT Inc/Tac/1-2 mine how long-lived a product he develops. A computer rendition loosely based on Steve Certain views of the future, such as Star Trek, LINE 2: (Machine Format [(A)rari/(C)omJackson's classic Car Wars board game, this Star Wars or Dune, have their own reality due modore/(Ap)ple 11/(T)RS-80/II(GS)/(Am)igal simulation panders to the harried commuter to their literary roots. While this can make the (ST)/(M)acintosh/(I)BM/(Sega)-Genesis; in us all. Arm your vehicle and destroy the gaming universe easier to recognize, ir simulIssue of CGW in which that game was menopposition—carjacking before the term entaneously runs the risk of not living up to the tioned; bold print refers to major article. tered the language. The graphics and game fan's expectations. Company/Designer/Date of Publication/ play now appear very dated. The computer market is quick-changing, Price;O/P (if out of print) LINE 3: Difficulty: (Beg)inner/(Int)ermediBATTLE ISLE ( unforgiving, and the state-of-the-art changes +) rapidly. Futuristic simulations seem to be ate/(Adv)anced (Am/I) UbiSoft; Blue Byte; 1991; $49.95 among the most short-lived of all games. Environment: (Tac)tical/(Op)erational/(Str) Int/Op/1-2 ategic) Simultaneously, they are also those that are A more traditional wargame with a hex-based often used for graphic innovations. It should map in a futuristic conflict. Detailed air, # of Players (M = modem oprion) be noted that the ratings given here are an No table of unit sizes has been presented ground and sea units compel you to adopt a individual preference. Also, please note the because the scope of futuristic simulations comprehensive combined-arms strategy for platform availability; a five-star game on an ranges from man-to-man to galactic empires. victory. Enjoyable for the seasoned gamer Arari 800 that is several years old is not of the Generally, a tactical simulation will range looking for new worlds to conquer, the sysfrom a man-to-man to ship-to-ship; opera tem was later used for Great War 1914-1918. same sophistication as a new product designed for a PC 486/66. However, it has been tional simulations cover squadrons to fleets; Easy to learn and play, yet there is still a given its rating for what it did and, to a lesser strategic simulations cover entire planers to blandness in the final result. extent, what it still does. Of course, the decomplete universes. BATTLES OF DESTINY (277) signers look askance at these ratings, and AIDE DE CAMP (NNN) (1; #104) QQP; Several Dudes Holistic often deluge the magazine with voluminous (I; #108,112) HPS; Scort Hamilton; 1993; Gaming; 1992; $59.95 complaints. But again, these are intrinsically $79.95 Int/Land/Tac-Op/1-6; M zsi May 1994 Page 43 "


"Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence SF Games for '94 Empire in a form truer to the sci-fi background, the technology is contemporary but the scenario is futuristic. Smooth playing, although the frustration of airborne assaults (with the random dropping of assault troops into the ocean) virtually «killed\" the game for me. BATTLE TECH, MULTI-PLAYER ( mm) (I/M; #95) GEnie; Kesmai; 1993; $4.00/hour Int/Tac/1-Many; M An on-line version of BattleTech, with the excitement of a simulation plus the depth of a role-playing game. The latency perspective problem found in many on-line sims is mimimized by the lower frame rate, due to the movement occuring on land instead of sea or air. The licensed BattleTech universe is put to good use here, complete with upward movement through the various houses or by joining elite mercernary groups. MPBT offers the long-term satisfaction of role-playing combined with the quick-playing thrill of a simulation. BATTLETECH: THE CRESCENT HAWK'S REVENGE ( +) (I; #76,79) Infocom; Barry Green and Tony Van; 1990; $49.95 Int/Tac/1 Ser in the BattleTech universe, this has strong role-playing elements, but still remains the tactical flavor of mechwarrior combat. BREACH (17) (Am/ST/M/I; #41,45) Omnitrend; Thomas R. Carbone and William Leslie III; 1988; O/P Int/Tac/1 Tactical man-to-man space marines simulation; superseded by later releases. BREACH 2 () (Am/ST/I; 65,68,70) Mindcraft; Thomas R. Carbone; 1991; $49.95 Int/Tac/1 A newer revision, and one which fits into Rules of Engagement as a tactical subset thereof. Easy to learn and fun to play, it is reminiscent of SSI's Six-Gun Shootout, but moved from the Old West to Outer Space. A design-your-own scenario option and on-line availability of scenarios makes this a continually fresh product. CARRIER COMMAND (*) (C/ST/M/I; #52) Micro Play; Clare Edgely; 1988; $39.95 Int/Op/1 Carrier warfare in the 22nd century, this British import included air and sea options plus provisions for the production and manufacturing of armaments. Although it combines arcade and strategy elements, it just ALIEN LEGACY: A potential Civilizaevidently will offer more than just arcade tion-in-Space, this simulation emphasizes action. IBM, Imagitec. colonization and development of a fasterG-NOME: Welcome to the life of a 22ndthan-light drive in a strategic contest. century lawman. Not only do you have to Whether Joe Ybarra's creation will match chase down a villain who can modify his the addictiveness of a Sid Meier game reDNA, and thus his shape, but you also have mains to be seen. IBM, Dynamix. to deal with local crimes as well. Unruly BATTLE CRUISER: 3000 AD:Combin space aliens may pay an untimely visit as well, ing both strategic and flight simulation asjust to keep you hopping. IBM, Mallard. pects, this release has been delayed by a year MECHWARRIOR 2: The Clans: It's and a change of publisher. Over 5MB of sometimes hard to explain, but even gamers data in the gaming universe offers the exwho generally don't like action games find plorer plenty of discoveries. The neural-netthemselves enraptured by robotic warriors. worked Al allows both the computer players This entry should have even better animaand members of the player's crew to imtions and graphics than the first Mechwarprove according to his actions as captain. rior, if only because the technology is more See the cover story for more info. IBM, refined. Sixteen new mechs and new camrefined. Sixteen new mechs and new ca Mission Studios/Interplay. paign scenarios look to create a surefire hit. BATTLEDROME: From Captain MidIBM, Activision. night to the present, robots have had their METALTECH: EARTH SIEGE: An exown special appeal. Players will go mech-apanded Battledrome, but more strategic in mech against computer or other human nature. The player fields teams of robots, players, making wagers on the ourcome. rather than a single metallic beast. The game IBM, Dynamix. will possibly be released as an on-line verBREACH 3: The latest rendition of the sion as well, which may delay its release until popular space marine saga has a campaign 1995. IBM, Dynamix. builder, as designer Thomas R. Carbone OUTPOST: A sober and realistic view of tries to offer a sense of continuity to the galactic colonization. Based on hard scienproduct. The scenario designer, one of the tific information, you must develop galactic strengths of Breach 2, has been retained, and outposts economically, maximizing rethe game mates with Rules of Engagement 2 search potential while keeping a close eye on for boarding actions. Real-time combat may morale. Bruce Balfour's design is remarkscare away some gamers, but with the addiably thorough with the details of the chine tion of contemporary graphics, the pros and colonies brought stunningly to life with pects for a winning product look bright. 3D Studio and Softimage graphics. Hard SF IBM, Impressions. aficionados can only hope that the final COMMAND AND CONQUER: Folpackage is unified and coherent, and fun to lowing on the success of Dune II, this stratplay. IBM, Sierra. egy game will utilize its predecessor's game RISE OF THE ROBOTS: In order for engine. The background for the game will this game to stand out versus the opposinot include the Dune universe, however, so tion, it will have to avoid the sound and fans of the novels may be disappointed graphics bugs which have recently plagued IBM, Westwood/Virgin. Accolade. At least the 3D models of the DELTA V: In this forthcoming actionrobots are impressive. Even so, it faces a stiff packed spectacular, you portray a \"runner\" challenge from Mechwarrior II, which its in the cyberspace world of corporate espiohorizontal scrolling may be too limited to nage and destruction. Mirrors within mirovercome. IBM, Accolade. rors...like any plotline associated with this TIE FIGHTER: Just to show it isn't bigenre. The initial release will contain 40 ased, LucasArts offers you an opportunity to missions, and additional mission disks are be seduced by the Dark Side of the Force. planned. IBM, Bethesda Softworks. A fine follow-up to X-Wing, wherein you FREELANCER 2120: Although very learn how fragile the unshielded Imperial early on in the project, this game appears to mainstay fighter is. Luckily, you are offered be a first person \"search & destroy\" mission other craft to fly in a variety of missions in space. Hot graphics, and the gameplay against those pesky Rebels. See CGW #115 for a Sncak Preview. IBM, LucasArts. Page 44 Computer Gaming World "


"TANK HEAVEN. Prepare for armored conflict, past and present-any way you want it! WARGAME CONSTRUCTION SET UI: TANKS This incredible offering from SSI serves up limitless small-scale tactical armored confrontations using all of the various tanks and tools of mechanized warfare from 1918 to 1991. In short, welcome to tank heaven! Our powerful random scenario generator allows you to create a custom map, choose one of three climates, pick opposing forces, and assign objectives for each combatant. Scenarios are created according to your specifications, and no two scenarios will ever be exactly alike. Not enough control for you? Then give the custom scenario editor a try. It places all the resources of the game under your control — which means the only limit to what you can create is your own imagination! Of course, if you're not in the mood to create scenarios right away, there's still plenty of intense armored action over twenty ready-to-play historical scenarios wait to test your armored mettle! STEEL Available for IBM S COMPATIBLES. TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call SSI Direct Sales at (408)-737-6800 (in USA & Canada) with VISA/MC. TULUNG CODE 1904 1948 IBM 256-color VGA Displays ETCH 23 101980 BRE  Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #129 "


"WARPOINT: Cosmic war in the year CYBER EMPIRES ( +) as you take a ruling House in the Dune uni2049, from the point of view of either a (Am/I) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Silicon verse and attempt to achieve dominance. single ship or a task force. The hook would Knights (Dennis Dyack and Rick Goerts); While some of the latter scenarios tend to seem to be development of combat tech1992; $59.95 approach attritional warfare, the overall style nologies in real-time, perhaps reminiscent Int/Tac-Op/1 and flair of this program cry out for a sequel of Haldeman's Forever War. Tim Jacobs RISK with robots. Build teams of mechanoid (see Command & Conquer in ET sidebar). of Harpoon fame has designed a game fighters in the far future and resolve conflicts which offers both different weapons platin an arena-style battle format. A quick fade, (C/Ap; #25) Firebird; Ian Bell and David forms and an emphasis on strategy. The it simply did not stand out in the marketplace. | Braben; 1986; O/P main question now is how long the 32-bit CYBERSTRIKE ( ) Int/Tac/1 graphics will take. IBM, Mallard. (1;#106) GEnie; David Whatley; 1993: Interstellar trade and combat with two thouWING COMMANDER III: Chris $6.00/hour sand planets in eight galaxies. Using wire frame Roberts could hardly have imagined that Int/Tac/1-Many; M graphics for space flight, it was one of the first Wing Commander would become such a Game play is similar to that of a primitive space games with a large universe to explore. phenomena that it would have, among on-line Ultrabots. Gamers pilor 'mechs and ELITE PLUS +) other things, its own line of paperback radio in for energy tower drops. The more (1; #86) MicroPlay; Chris Sawyer; 1991; books. The biggest problem is in keeping towers added to one's network, the more $49.95 up with the tremendous expectations. If likely the player is going to be able to enInt/Tac/1 the Strike Commander engine can be succroach on a neighbor's territory. CGW's OnAn update of the original with better graphics cessfully adapted to the plot and characline Game of the Year for 1993, the game is and sound (although they were still not up to terizations of the WC universe, then we'll very competitive in a multi-player environstate-of-the-art). More detailed and complex, have an early candidate for hit of the year. ment but lacks the long-term rationale of it was also more tedious than the original. See Still, don't even dream about this one Multiplayer Battle Tech. until at least autumn. IBM, Origin. the review of Frontier in this issue for a look at the newest version. ZEPHYR: An action-oriented game GI. OBA I. where you try to outwit your opponents E.O.S. ( 7 ) in the world of mega-corporations. Tech(C/Ap; #40) Electronic Arts; Karl Buiter; nology is the key-should you fall behind, 1987; O/P your battle tanks will quickly meet their Int/Tac/1-4 demise. What sets this game apart is the An interesting failure, Earth Orbit Station is a A Game of Strategy and Exploration by Dan Bunten capacity for multi-player involvement via game of logistical space station building. Yes, hot-seating and perhaps network play. amateurs think tactics and professionals think IBM, New World. logistics. The problem is that, even considering the clunky interface, the logistics are just never seemed to stand out from the crowd. not that much fun. The user interface is quite unfriendly, FEDERATION (1) COMBOTS () (Am/ST; #70) CinemaWare; Paul Blythe; (C; #74) Avalon Hill; John Huff; 1990; 1990; O/P $19.95; O/P Int/Tac/l Int/Tac/1 MOROPLAY A space ship flight simulator with good RobotJox without élan. Players design their graphics and decent gameplay, but it just own robots and scenarios, but the whole is didn't stand out from the crowd. less than the sum of its parts, and the genre is DRAGONSTRIKE ( +) FEDERATION II (0 ) more suited to a first person perspective as in (C/Am/I; #71,77) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Westwood Associates; 1990; $39.95 MechWarrior or Multi-Player BattleTech. (1; #97) GEnie; Alan Lenton and Ken Inc/Tac/1 Farnen; $6.00/hour COMMAND ADVENTURES: STAR( Although this product is set in a D&Dworld, Beg/Tac/1-Many; M SHIP (+) it appears to be an Anne McCaffrey clone of An on-line economic and role playing simula(I; #115) Merit; Tom Lima; 1994; $69.95 the Dragonriders of Pern genre. Jousting atop tion in the far future. Players determine the Int/Tac-Op/1 a dragon with different weapons systems economic viability of trading, bounty hunting, A graphic and sound delight, this galactic (fireballs, gas, etc.) often resembles a World tactical ship-to-ship battles and commodity arconquest game is flawed by weak gameplay. War I fighter duel. Sadly, this product did not bitrage while increasing the wealth, power and It's a shame there isn't a game to go along receive the attention or play that it deserved. influence of their personal character. with all of the bells and whistles. FIRE AND FORGET (+) DUNE II (nn ) CONQUERING WORLDS () (Am/ST/I; #52) Titus; 1988; O/P (I; #105,106) Virgin; Westwood Studios; Int/Tac/2 (Ap; #4.2) Datamost; Walt Hochbrucckner; 1992: $59.99 A futuristic tank simulation. At least the title 1984 Int/Tac-Op/1 was half-right. Beg/Str/1-3 A darkhorse, as its prequel was strictly a roleDestroy the enemy civilization. Hardly origiplaying game. However, this simulation is a FIRETEAM 2200 ( 0%) nal when released, and time has done nothing wargame par excellance; superb graphics and (I; #81,82,99) SimSystems; Dave Nielsen; to make it more attractive. sound make an enjoyable gaming experience $49.95; 1991 GARBERAGERED Page 46 Computer Gaming World "


"DARK LEGIONS A Masterful Blend of Subtle Strategy and Wickedly Ruthless Action! IBM 256-color VGA Displays A Templar faces three deadly opponents on the main strategy screen. rivals the For 1 or 2 players, DARK LEGIONS boasts modem play. Demon Sophisticated artificial intelligence. Pre-set scenarios with variable difficulty settings. And a wide range of set-up choices to make every game different and playing time limitless! Think you can cut it? You'll need brains and brawn to survive in this alternate dimension, where hidden traps and lurking creatures make every move unpredictable and hazardous! Wizard DARK LEGIONS. A Savage Battle for Ultimate Power! brawn KILLER GRAPHICS. OUTRAGEOUS ANIMATION. SIZZLING SOUNDS. That's DARK LEGIONS from SSI. It's got the maneuvering, trickery, and deception of the best strategy games. Plus blazing combat so Troll Troll realistic it rivals the hottest arcade mega-hits! Create an army of up to 50 beings from the realm of dark fantasy. Choose from 16 different characters, such as the six we took right from the game to show you here! Each character comes with unique powers and abilities.  Then, let the mayhem begin! Your goal: seek out and destroy V Orc the opposing, legion's master and wrest ultimate power for yourself! HTTP Scratch one Troll it's about to be roasted by a Fire Elemental! Then, let METE TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call: 1-800-245-4525 with Visa or MasterCard (U.S. & Canada only, please). Stay away from a Troll's huge club! This Wizard's learning the hard way. Conjurer Available for IBM & Compatibles on 3.5\" disks and CD-ROM. = ee RL 1994 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. Developed by Silicon Knights Circle Reader Service #130 "


"Adv/Tac/1-2; M Tactical ground combat in the 23rd century. A detailed and complex wargame, but one which could have benefited from a mouse interface and a scenario builder. FIRST EXPEDITION (7) (1; #53) Interstel; Steven Englestad; 1988; $49.95 Int/Tac/1 A slow-moving simulation of planetary exploration. Elements of navigation, management and role-playing struggle for attention, and the overall program simply cannot decide which facet to emphasize, subsequently succeeding at none. FULL METAL PLANET (1) (Am/l; #80) DataEast; Hitech Productions; 1991; $49.95 Int/Op/1-4 A tradititional hex-based military simulation occurring on a mining planet. Based on a popular European board game, FMP is wellbalanced and fun to play, but seems to lack to lack that essential spark. GALACTIC FRONTIERS (7) (M: #99) Soft Stream; Russel Lowke: 1992: $59.95 Beg/Str/1-4 A strategic space conquest game, it offered an easy interface and a simple economic model, GLOBAL EFFECT (6) but absolutely nothing original. (Am/I; #99) Electronic Arts/Millenium; Toby Simpson; 1992; $49.95 Int/Str/1-2;M A simulation of economic and ecological warfare in the near future, with poor documenThe Building of A Dynasty tation and a clumsy interface. The modem ability of the program is questionable, but it hardly matters, since the planer freezes over sooner or later anyway. Poor beta testing yields an ecological and game design disaster. HYPERSPEED ( ) (1; #92) MicroProse; Sandy Peterson and Andy Hollis; 1991; $59.95 Adv/Tac/1 An expanded Lightspeed, its strategic aspects are often overshadowed by role-playing clements. Emphasizes trade and diplomacy more than combat operations. IMPERIUM ( +) (Am/ST/I; #71,75,80) Electronic Arts; Mat(I; #93,97,99) MicroPlay; Dani Bunten: (1#93.97-99) MicroPlav: Dani Bunten: thew Stibbs and Nick Wilson; 1990; $49.95 thew Sribbs and Nick 1992; $59.95 Adv/Str/1 Adv/Op/1-2; M A very detailed simulation with military, ecoThe futuristic element is limited to combat nomic and diplomatic aspects. Sadly, its operations on another planet, but this prodgraphics were mediocre and it seemed to uct's main strength is modem play coupled quickly disappear from the market, yet its rich with detailed military operations. texture and gameplay deserve a second look. mauri $15 pleti Dryers 1.3 PEDALETTER uttotie Insceptor ZIURRET ideal cael At FORT RTE O07*4641407842475 448611491 til MAU! 117011441 MIRTUQL ENCODU EQUILD 200 "


"IMPERIUM GALACTUM () tion of a renegade starship. An aggressive AI (A/C/AD: #5.3) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; and quick CD-ROM access times help to Paul Murray; 1984 enhance the game environment. Still, the Adv/Str/1-4 game would have been more enjoyable if it A successor to Cosmic Balance II, this detailed had more replay value. strategic simulation of space empires simply lacked sufficient \"chrome\" to make it an enduring product. Build an empire to span the galaxy MASTER INFILTRATOR (*) (A/Ap/C/I; #29) Mindscape; Chris Gray; 1986 Beg/Air/Tac/1 A futuristic helicopter simulation with emphasis on arcade aspects. Tongue-in-cheek documentation quickly grows tiresome, as does the program itself. James Bond-like aircraft in an arcade mode. INFILTRATORII () (C/Ap/1; #41,44) Mindscape; Chris Gray; 1987; O/P Beg/Air/Tac/1 A sequel to Infiltrator—more of the same. MICROPROSE Even worse than the original. IRON HELIX (**y+) (I/M CD; #104,112) Spectrum Holobyte; JUST ANOTHER WAR IN SPACE (+) Drew Huffman; 1993; $79.95 (ST; #82) Azeroth; Robert Parkins; 1991 Int/Tac/1 Int/Tac/1 A cinematic extravaganza, this simulation inA tactical level space combat game whose title volves the collection of clues and the destrucdescribes it all. LIGHTSPEED (O) (I; #74,76,82) MicroProse; Sandy Peterson and Andy Hollis; 1991; $54.95 Adv/Tac/1 The lamentable predecessor to Hyperspeed, its utility and game play have been more than superseded by its successor. LUNAR COMMAND ( 7) (1;#110) Mallard Software; Wesson International; 1993; $34.95 Int/Op/Op-Str/1 A re-release of Moonbase, its economic modelling is excellent. Overall excitement is on a somewhat lower plane. MAELSTROM (7) (I; #108) Merit; Andy Blau; 1993; $69.95 Int/Str-Tac/1 This planetary combat/resource management game featured real-time combar. Its decent premise was marred by poor execution. MANTIS: XF-5700 EXPERIMENTAL FIGHTER (1) (I /CD) MicroPlay; Glen Dill, Mark Seremet, Paul Conklin; 1992; $69.95 Int/Tac/1 A ship-to-ship flight combat simulator, it accomplished its mission adequately, but without style. The CD version is much more doesn't simulate is ear popping. If it were any more real, your chair would be in a 30° bank. Our new Microsoft Flight Simulator has four planes, each with its own instrument panel created digitally from actual photographs. There are storm clouds and sunsets to fly into. Crashes are scarily real. And you can fly to airports anywhere in the world. It's just one of the realistic simulations we have waiting for you to take control. Everything is at your reseller. So, take off. COMPASS 1141 STROBES 200M 2.0 LIGHTS AUTOF. Microsoft Home COM 20 11 NAMSO DE  1994 Microsoft Corp. All rights reserved. Microsoft is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corp. Flight Simulator is a trademark of Bruce A. Artwick. "


"Artifacts Of The Ancients The universe may be infinitely large, scenarios for this game in the early years). It but we must still publish in a finite played fast and easy. space. That being so, we had to put GALAXY our ACME disintegrating editor's pens to (A/Ap/I: #2.1) Avalon Hill; Tom Cleaver; the games published before 1984. But there 1982 were a few of those ancient games that, Beg/Str/1-20 because of their historical interest or popuA simpler predecessor of Reach for the Stars, larity, we just couldn't zap. Here then area wherin you must conquer the galaxy. Vicfew ancient alien artifacts from the early tory goes to the empire with the most plandays of computer gaming. ets at the end of either a preser or random CRUSH, CRUMBLE & CHOMP number of turns. (A/Ap; #1.1) Epyx; 1982; M.U.L.E. n early release which put the player in the (A/C/Ap/1; #3.4,4.1) Electronic Arts; Dan role of the traditional \"Hollywood monBunten: 1983 ster\" (or should that be \"Tokyo Monster\"?). An all-time computer classic, this was one Ar any rare, an enjoyable time could be had of the only games ever devised that was by destroying New York, Washington, playable and entertaining for four humans. D.C., or other cities. Obsolete by any stand Economics made fun! A semi-space game of ard, but I still remember stomping our mareal estate and production, it still holds up jor cities with pleasure. well after all these years, and by itself proCYTRON MASTERS vides justification for holding onto the 8-bit (A/Ap; #2.5,2.6) Strategic Simulations, Atari. Talk of a new version of M.U.L.E. has Inc.; Dan Bunten; 1982 gone on for many years, but definite plans Combined arms tactics in a futuristic milieu have yet to crystallize. Rumor has it that a with robot warriors. Players control robot SEGA Genesis has been completed, but EA warriors in real-time combat in the attempt is debating over its release. to control foreign planets. The last game ROBOTWAR Dan Bunten programmed while working as (Ap: #1.1.2.2.2.4,2.5) Muse; Silas Warner; an engineer for the City Hall of Little Rock, 1981 AK. Dan would quit his job and program An early game of user-programmed robot his classic M.U.L.E. for the newly founded war, similar to Omega. Touted when reElectronic Arts. leased, it is now relegated to slow disintegraDELTA SQUADRON tion on the shelf of \"lost games\". Still, it (Ap; #3.5) Nexa; Gilman Louie; 1983 holds a place in the hearts of the CGW staff, A tactical simulation in which the player as it was the second review in our very first must duplicate the Star Wars destruction of issue, and we supported a series of Robotwar the Death Star. The names and premise tournaments for several years. were changed to avoid copyright infringeSTARFLEET ORION ment, but there was an obvious resem (1) Automated Simulations; Jon Freeman blance. There were nine different scenarios, and Jim Connelley; 1978 but the objective was the same in every case. A tactical space combat game published for Note the designer's name; he went on to the Commodore PET on cassette tape, it design Falcon and co-found Spectrum launched Automated Simulations as a softHoloByte. ware publisher, which later became Epyx. GALACTIC ATTACK STAR RAIDERS (Ap; #3.3) Sir-Tech; Robert J. Woodhead; (A) Atari; 1981 1983 The game that started it all. Some strategic An early real-time space war, with your ship maneuvering, but primarily an arcade prodand men freeing the galaxy from the invad uct that tried to capture the feel of a Star ing Kzinti fleets. One of Sir-Tech and Wars space battle and did quite well considWoodhead's first forays outside of the realmering the hardware limitations. of Wizardry. STARSHIP COMMANDER GALACTIC GLADIATORS (Ap; #2.5) Voyager; Gilman Louie; 1982 (Ap; #2.5) SSI; Tom Reamy: 1982 A starship simulator with individual crew Tactical combat between individuals and rankings and a more detailed playing envialiens, this versatile product allowed gamers ronment. It was the first design by Gilman to produce their own scenarios from SF Louie, president of Spectrum HoloByte. literature (CGW ran some unauthorized challenging, although even here, the challenge seems to be more of the same. MASTERS OF ORION ( my+) (I; #110) MicroProse; Stephen Barcia; 1993; $59.95 Int/Op-Str/1 Civilization in Space! A surprise (and unheralded) hit from MicroProse, this simulation of galactic exploration, development and warfare is a richly-textured product. Graphics coupled with high play value yield a high recommendation. MECHWARRIOR (2) (1; #65,66) Activision; 1989; $59.95 Int/Tac/1 Dynamix developed this robotic combat simulator in 3-Space. The game featured simulation-style action and allowed the gamer to use limited role-playing to explore a mystery set in the Battle Tech universe. MEGA LO MANIA (77)+) (Am/l; #107) UbiSoft; Sensible; 1993; $49.95 Int/Op-Str/1 A Populous-clone, this offers a short diversion into strategic whimsy before degenerating into an also-ran. MIDWINTER (ON) (1; #87) MicroPlay; Mike Singleron; 1989; $49.95 Int/Tac/1 Be a «Freedom Fighter» and restore democracy to the planet. Role-playing aspects are included, but the strategist will enjoy the variety of ways to get at the enemy. A detailed and extensive world can be traversed by skis, cable cars, snow buggies, or hang-gliders. MIDWINTER II: Flames of Freedom ( +) (Am/l; #82) MicroPlay; Mike Singleton; 1991; $49.95 Int/Tac/1 More role-playing with strategy and conflict, but in a more temperate environment. As a result, less interesting than its predecessor. MODEM WARS ( +) (C/I; #56) Electronic Arts; Dani Bunten; 1988; O/P Int/Tac/2; M War as \"Capture The Flag,\" this game required gamers to use quasi-football tactics in fast-playing attempts to annihilate enemy communications modules. Even strong modem capabilities could not save it from a rapid demise, but it may have been ahead of its time. MOONBASE: The Lunar Colony Simulator ( ) (I; #80,83) Wesson International; Robert Green; 1991; $49.95 Page 50 Computer Gaming World "


"OPERATION CRUSADER The Total Combat Experience LD at WAR De Alexand Y LIBYA zoom Middle leve nom map of North Africa. The Daten staff Duties in these LANACULAR IN THE UNITED KOMPATHWAAR Tactical map featuring combat units near Tobruk The per farl tiles Planung aus II Hot on the heels of the industry's first \"Game of the Year\" for a computer wargame, the team that brought you the award-winning V for Victory series has joined forces with The Avalon Hill Game Company for yet another blockbuster! Atomic Games and Avalon Hill are proud and excited to Real-time batte reports from the front. present OPERATION CRUSADER, the first in the new World at War series covering great USB campaigns of WWII. Set in the expansive reaches of the Libyan and Egyptian deserts, OPERATION CRUSADER sweeps you into the role of German Field Marshal Erwin Rommel or British General Sir Claude Auchinleck as they commit their nations' finest E infantry and tanks in an all-out struggle for the Mediterranean port city of Tobruk. A series of six historical scenarios will show you first hand what open field tactics and desert combat are REALLY like. Experience for yourself the cursed Hellfire Pass and in the end see if you, too, can earn the title, «The Desert Fox\". Available at Leading Resellers, including: . Babbages. Comp USA Computer City  Time Reference Calendar Electronics Boutique  Egghead  Radio Shack Software Etc. . Walden's Software, gives you weather forecasts and reinforcement alerts. Available on: IBM PC compatibles. Required: Processor 386 or better, Min. 4MB memory. HD.3.5\" Floppy, DIVISION OF MONARCH AVALON, INC. Hard Drive, SVGA-VESA graphic card & monitor, support Adlib. 4517 Harford Road, Baltimore, MD 21214 Roland & SoundBlaster cards. If Operation Crusader cannot be found locally, call TOLL FREE 1-800-999-3222 AND Ask for Operator CGW5 Available on: Macintosh Color Systems. 4 MB RAM. HD req'd. Circle Reader Service #44 The Avalon Hill Game Company "


"Adv/St/1 OVERLORD (+) briskness of Master of Orion or Reach For The Probably the most detailed and realistic space (C/Am/ST/I; #82,83) Virgin; David Perry Stars, and a good tutorial is sorely needed. \"construction set\" ever produced. Not for the and Nick Bruty; 1991; $49.95 PLANETMASTER (1) joystick crowd, but recommended for the Adv/St/1 (Ap; #4.3) Magnetic Harvest; 1984 user willing to engage his brain. See also Lunar A game of strategic conquest with well-done Int/Op/1 Command. graphics and a rich and broad texture. HowAn early game of planetary ecology in which ever, the program does not seem to adjust well OGRE (* ) the player must choose to save six endangered to computer clock speeds, and on an interme(A/C/Ap/Am/ST/M/I; #36) Origin; Steve species. A unique simulation, bur one which diate or faster machine (16 MHz), the comJackson and Steve Meuse; 1987; O/P has grown old ungracefully. puter opponent is simply too quick. A great Int/Land/Tac/1-2 concept ruined by technical oversight. PRIVATEER (AN+) Based on the MetaGaming boardgame, this (1; #113,114) Origin; Scott Russo, Erin is a faithful rendition of futuristic tank warPAX IMPERIA: THE GALACTIC EMAX IMPERIA: THE GALACTIC EMRoberts er al.; 1993; $79.95 fare. However, its inability to design or modPIRE SIMULATOR (M ) Int/Tac-Op/l ify the OGRE tank and its graphics in today's for the OGR rank and its oraphics in today's (M/I; #10 (M/I; #107,108) Changeling Software; Pete Commercial mercenary enterprise in the market condemn this product to a dusty & Andrew Sispoidis and Jeanine DeSocio; Wing Commander universe. A little of Pirates! shelf. Fans of the game will find the Al to be 1993; $69.95 a dash of Elite, and the usual Origin plot surprisingly effective and challenging. Int/Op-Str/1-16; M elements combine to create a pretty exciting A strategic space conquest simulation, currently game. Still, the product was plagued with an OMEGA () only for the Macintosh, which rivals Reach for unusual number of incomparabilies with (C/AP/ST/M/I; #64,65) Origin; Stuart the Stars in scope. The game can be played sound cards and joysticks, even for such a Marks; 1989; $49.95 turn-based or real-time. The latter is pretty complex product. Adv/Tac strange fora galactic-scale game, but it does offer PROTOSTAR () Programmers loved this \"simulation.\" Desome variety. Shin desion is so derailed | some variety. Ship design is so detailed that it (1: #109) Tsunami; Vas Nokhoudian; 1993; sign-your-own tank and program it in quasimakes the specifications for vessels in Master of $49.95 computerese to survive the combat Orion look simple by comparison. This comLike so many of Tsunami's products, this environment. If «Androids Dream of Electric prehensive simulation involves the player in game lacks its own identity. Excellent graphics Sheep\" and you personally «Dream of Assemboth internal and inter-galactic politics—you can't hide the fact that these ideas have all been bly and C,\" you'll love it. Otherwise, it's all may even define your homeworld's racial used before. Invading aliens, indestructable Greek to me. characteristics. Rich as the play is, it lacks the super-ships, trading with different space-farIF YOU THINK WHACKING, SLASHING, SHOOTING, BLOWING UP, KILLING AND OTHER ATROCITIES IS A CRIME AGAINST CREATURES BIG AND SMALL EVERYWHERE* * "


"ing races are all classic sci-fi themes. Where is combat game, wherein you expand, explore ROBOSPORT (9 +) the panache of Wing Commander, the depth and extinguish your enemies. The GMs keep (M/I) Maxis; Ed Killam; 1991; $59.95 and variety of Star Control II? This game the universe quite lively and entertaining. Int/Tac/1-4; M doesn't even stand out as an adventure game, so RENEGADE LEGION INTERCEPTOR This game offers a friendly Windows interface muddled is it in concept and execution. ( +) for point-and-click robot battle programPSI-5 TRADING COMPANY ( +) ming. Sort of paint ball meets cybernetic wars. (Am/I; #79) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; (C/I; #29) Accolade; 1987; O/P Todd Porter; 1990; $59.95 The ability to save and play back movies of victories over your networked friends is a riot. Int/Tac/1 Int/Tac/1-2 One of the first \"alien trading\" games, it was Ship-to-ship combat in space. Sequential RULES OF ENGAGEMENT ( +) interesting in its time. turns coupled with simultaneous execution (Am/I; #84) Mindcraft; Maurice Molyneaux; make this product reminiscent of early space 1991; $59.95 REACH FOR THE STARS (\"\")) simulations, but it can provide an enjoyable Adv/Op-Str/1 (C/Ap/II/M/I; #3.6,5.4,51,55,81) Strategic interlude. Studies Group; Roger Keating and lan Strategic starship combat in the Breach world. Trout; 1983; $45.00 ROADWAR 2000 (1 The interface is detailed and takes time to ) learn, although it is logical. The gameplay is Adv/Str/1-4 (A/C/Ap/I; #32,49) Strategic Simulations, One of the best science fiction games ever Inc.; Jeffrey A. Johnson; 1986; O/P extensive. released. Galactic conquest through detailed Int/Tac/1 RULES OF ENGAGEMENT 2 exploration, economic and production modGang warfare in a post-Holocaust, \"Mad ( n n ) ules coupled with planetary invasions and Max\" world. Quite entertaining when origi(1;#110,111) Impressions; Thomas Carbone space battles make for a product still worth nally released, but its primitive graphics have and Maurice Molyneaux; 1993; $49.95 playing. Initial reports contend that Pax Imrendered it obsolete. Adv/Op-Str/1 peria may well be its successor in terms of An updated version, featuring a very detailed gameplay. A worthy update would no doubt ROADWAR EUROPA ( +) simulation of starship command. One of the raise this game again to 5-star status. (A/C/I) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Jeffrey best of its type released. The game's campaign A. Johnson; 1987; O/P REBEL SPACE (Nm) builder insures that scenarios will never beInt/Tac/1 come repetitive. European cousin of Roadwar 2000, this was (I/M) Prodigy Int/Tac/1 a hit when initially released. It is quite dated SECOND CONFLICT (*) An on-line space simulation. Basically an extoday, although it can be fun as a semi-\"no (T; #87) jSoft; 1991; $49.99 tension of a play-by-mail exploration and brainer.\" Int/Str/1-10 WAIT 'TIL YOU TRY IT IN 3D! CYBERMAN SUPPORTS AND INCLUDES TRIAL VERSIONS OF THESE GAMES. A mouse and keyboard are fine for tackling spreadsheets, not teeming legions of blood-thirsty marauders, State of the art CyberMan puts an unlimited range of motion within your grasp. three directions (xy, and 2) and three rotations (pitch, yaw and rollj. Just move and twist it MECHWARRIOR 2 CYBERMAN. PUT THE 3RO DIMENSION IN THE PALM OF YOUR HAND. any way you want to go Plus it's the only controller with vibrating feedback that lets you feel the action CyberMan plugs into your serial port, and comes with 3D game software that will SHADOWCASTER pull you into the next dimension in PC entertainment. CyberMan is available DOOM now at your local dealer, or call 1-800-936-0020. [00TECH TERMINATOR RAMPAGE The Senseware Company Trademarks belong to their soggered owners Ccircle Reader Service 183 "


"additional suspension of disbelief beyond the fractal-generated planets that, themselves, provided a depth of reality to exploring the Starflight universe. STARFLIGHT II ( * ) (A/C/I/M; #66) Electronic Arts, Greg Johnson; 1989; O/P Beg/Tac/1 Sequel to the Hall of Fame original. More wacky aliens, and a larger universe make for even more exploration, alien communication, and simplistic ship-to-ship combat. Still a good buy if you can find it used or in a bargain bin. (TARONTROL Similar to Reach For The Stars or Armada The sequel to Star Control, it combines the 2525, it runs in a Windows environment. A action combat sequences of the original with scenario editor allows for modified victory the exploration and role-playing aspects of conditions, alterations to the starting galaxy, Starflight 1-11. More deeply textured than the and different opposition. original, it offers hours of «simple, hot and deep\" play. Winner of CGW's Best AdvenSPACE HULK ( +) ture Game of 1993, and deservedly so. (Am/1; #112) Electronic Arts; 1993; $49.95 Better than many games of a similar cut, STAR FLEET I STAR FLEET I ( +) because it combines real-time combat with a (1; #5.4,5.5,30,33,37) Interstel; Trevor limited ability to pause the action. The tutoSorenson; 1985; O/P rial is good, and the product is an excellent Int/Tac/l rendition of the popular boardgame. Squad Move from cadet to admiral in a superb rencombat in space versus aliens is old hat, but dition of the venerable main-frame Star Trek, this game is as authentic as you'll find, with with names changed to protect the innocent. great graphics and sound. All the bells and whistles one could wish for; this reviewer still plays it today, even though SPACE MAX (1 ) the graphics are primitive. A real shame that (I; #35) 2FS; T.L. Keller; 1987; O/P this product hasn't been updated like Empire Adv/Tac/1 Deluxe. A very detailed space station construction simulator. Its main flaw is that it tries too hard to be very educational and intellectually stimulating, losing entertainment value in the process. SPACEWARD HO ( mm) (I; #107) New World Computing; Joe Williams and Peter Commons; 1992; $59.95 Int/Str/1-4; M. Possibly the worst computer concept ever, but executed in the best manner possible. Adapting \"space cowboys» to a game of galactic conquest would seem to be pure drivel, and the cover art alone almost prevented me from ever booting this game. Actually, it turns out to be an entertaining conquest game that one will return to again and again. Spaceward Ho!, with all of its horse opera cliches, offers a fine \"beer and pretzels» game of eco STAR FLEET II ) nomic/military space conquest. Better yet, ir (I; #60,65) Interstel; Trevor Sorenson and supports network play! Great gameplay and Mark Baldwin; 1989;$59.95 graphics with a touch of crass. Int/Tac/1 STAR COMMAND (7) This product is the stereotypical sequel-al(I: #47) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Winston most indescribably awful. As part of an onDouglas Wood; 1988; O/P going planned series, the product was Int/Tac/1 sufficiently underveloped as to destroy the Science fiction drama with heavy emphasis parent company. Released with major lockon the role-playing aspects. There is some up bugs and inability to access certain elements of the program, Interstel promised to subordinate to the adventure. make it good. They sent our revised disks, and never did get it to run correctly. STAR CONTROL (min) STARFLIGHT ( nn) (I/Sega; #76,77) Accolade; Paul Reiche; (A/C/I/M; #35) Electronic Arts, Greg 1990 Johnson; 1986; O/P Int/Tac/1 Strategy takes a back seat to arcade action in this Beg/Tac/1 be In addition to the elements of role-playing, graphically intense ship-to-ship combar simulats of role-playing, exploration and economic management, tion. Despite (or maybe because of) its lack of depth, it remains an enjoyable challenge. Starflight was the first exploration/adventure game that required players to use a diplomatic STAR CONTROL II ( 9 +) strategy. The game featured some very alien (1) Accolade; Paul Reiche; 1993; $49.95 races conceived in the very imaginative mind Int/Tac/1 of Greg Johnson. Such rich NPCs offered STAR KING (7) (1; #85) Spaceware; Walker Vanning; 1991; $39.95 Int/Tac/1-7; M Battleship in space, only with more problems and less play value. STAR LEGIONS ( +) (1; #105) Electronic Arts; MindCraft; 1993; $59.95 Int/Tac-Op/1 A module of Star Fleet II, it was released years later as an independent entity. Less cluttered and confusing than its parent game, it retains some play value. The game is marred, however, by an unusual number of bugs and a numbing sameness to the scenarios. STELLAR CRUSADE (+) (Am/ST/I; #48,50) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Norman C. Koger, Jr.; 1988; O/P Adv/Str/1-2 Mr. Koger's first professional design effort was severely marred by a manual which deleted 11 pages of necessary information and made the game an effort to play. Even with the documentation, playing \"Space Ayatollah\" in this game of religious, intergalactic jihad was simply not fun. STRATEGIC CONQUEST PLUS ( mm) (M; #35) PBI; Peter Merrill; 1987; O/P Int/Str/1 A RISK-like game of conquest, with many Mac gamers preferring it to Empire. STRIKE SQUAD (7) (1; #114,115) Electronic Arts; Mindcraft; 1993; $59.95 Int/Tac/1-2 Space Marines strike once again. Is there any wriginality left to Space Leathernecks? originality left to Space Leathernecks? TEGEL'S MERCENARIES (M) (I; #106,115) Electronic Arts; Mindcraft; 1992; $59.95 Int/Tac/1 Space Marines yet again! Fairly well-done as Page 54 Computer Gaming World "


"It's not a game. It's war. NEW YORK, Monday. Stat LE SPECIAL| Bliter LEY'S Mo, 12.041 TUESDAY JUNE 6th 19:44 TUESDAY JUNE 6h 1941 NDITION PAPERS Ame It's D-DAY. It's The Beginning of the End. DOAR of gun mingled Wit barrage on and vals as the great dome loomed two released my shutter.\" Here is his picture, one that jes pilots. e fire to * It's here. \"A great number of fires we May, 1994Parachutes open in the Norman Impressions Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234, Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service 176 "


"com hal IDE DELUXE L EDITION now. Special Operatiu 1. 2. Speed keerssery Pad far as it goes, but there are better games of this type out there. TRUST & BETRAYAL (M) (M; #47) Mindscape; Chris Crawford; 1988; O/P Int/Tac/1 A Chris Crawford design which emphasized personal interrelationships and verbal discourse between aliens. Innovative concepts were marred by slow and obtuse game play. UFO () (1) SubLogic; Bruce Artwick and Hugo Feugen; 1989; O/P Adv/Tac/1 Tired of Flight Simulator? Then try UFO — same mechanics, but a very different type of aircraft. Personally, I found flying around looking for fuel to have the same appeal as waiting in a gas line during the Oil Embargo of the 1970's. ULTRABOTS ( +) (1; #108) Electronic Arts; John Butrovich, David Seeholzer and John Garcia; 1993; $59.95 Int/Tac/1 Any similarity to Mechwarrior is superficial The game requires network building a la Cyberstrike and only features three types of robots. early near-classics, albeit flawed. It spawned two sequels, both strictly role-playing games. UNNATURAL SELECTION ( +) (M/I) Maxis; Jim Simmons, Peter Fokos and Nick Corea; 1993; $49.95 Adv/Tac-Op/1 Gene splicing for the combat pool, this gives new meaning to the term \"Survival of the Fittest.\" A different concept, almost carried off with success. VGA PLANETS 3.0 ( ) (I; #111) Tim Wisseman; Tim Wisseman; 1993; $15.00 Int/Op-Sur/2-11; M Shareware, but one with a growing number of fans, this will probably become commercial shortly. An excellent exploration and galactic combat game for up to 11 players. It is easy to learn, tough to master. UTOPIA ( +) (A/I; #98) Konami; Gremlin Graphics; 1992; $49.95 Int/Tac-Op/1 A cross between Moonbase, SimCity and Powermonger, Utopiaallows players to create cities on several different planetary types and to face three or four different alien opponents in defending those cities. IN\" UNIVERSE ( +) (A; #4.3) Omnitrend; Thomas R. Carbone; 1984 Adv/Tac/1 A detailed simulation of space exploration and trading. Multi-faceted and very deep, its playability suffered from documentation which was hard to interpret, as well as an unforgiving game system. Build your own ship to specifications, but a wrong move can waste hours of previous play. Still one of the Introducing... THE UNIVERSAL COCKPITTM STRAP I.AND TAKE OFF!!! ZAS The LINIVERSAL COCKPIT Allows you to Take Command of Your System Three Ways (stick, yoke or steering). Now You can have Complete Control whether on the Track or in the Air. FEATURES:  Tough Aluminum Construction  Free-Standing System. No Clumsy Desk Mounting Clamps or Suction Cups! FLIGHT SIMS Stick/Rudder/Throttle (not shown , yoke configuration) AUTO RACING SIMS Steering/Brake/Throttle Push Button Shifting  3-in-1 Modular System, Easily Converted Coming Soon: The UNIVERSAL JOYSTICKTM \"Complete\" Control of Auto Racing and Flight Sims in an Economical Desktop Package. ASK FOR DETAILS! SIMULATION SYSTEMS 1-800-647-7623 SIMULATION SYSTEMS 791 E. Brokaw Rd. San Jose, CA 95112  1-800-647-7623  Fax (408)441-0650 Circle Reader Service #113 "


"ARE YOU READY TO EXPERIENCE THE ULTIMATE IN SQUAD-LEVEL SPACE COMBAT? The sequel to the immensely popular Breach 2, Breach 3 puts you in command as Squad Leader of the Federated Worlds. Do you have what it takes to command your marines in 200ZW(X dangerous missions against destructive enemy forces? All new features in Breach 3 include a unique combination of turn-based and real-time play; individual personalities for each marine; stunning 256-color VGA graphics; tree-structured campaigns containing up to 511 scenarios; support for all major sound cards; SU COZU and modular terrain, objects and opponents. VAP DELOUEUX The fate of the Federated Worlds is in your hands. CEILOCO ne EI SETTIN Food so 51 JUTT SIT WETY Choose from exciting missions or use the scenario builder to create your own! Watch marines carry out your orders according to their own unique personalities! Stop the graphically stunning combat at any time to change your orders! OMNITREND Impressions The latest module in Omnitrend's Interlocking Game System, Breach 3 allows you to Interconnect with Breach 2 and Impressions! INTERLOCUING GAME SYSTEM Rules of Engagement 2! Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment  1993 Impressions Software Inc. Screenshots may vary Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234, Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #75 "


"OVEISLIOL Livetlollandi 1-2 WAR OF THE WORLDS (+) WING COMMANDER ACADEMY (At) Task Force; Joseph Delinski; 1984 (nn) Int/Op/1 VING (1; #112) Origin; Thomas Blom; 1993; H.G. Wells' Martian invader novel brought $49.95 to the computer. Do yourself a favor and curl Int/Tac/1 up with the book instead. A space combat simulation set in the WC universe. Interesting, but lacks the depth of WHEN TWO WORLDS WAR (7) (I; #107,111,115) Impressions; Ed its parent games. For those who don't need a Grabowski; 1993; $59.95 plot. Int/Str/1-2 WORLDS AT WAR () Aside from the tongue-twisting title, this is a (1; #70,94) RAW; John Almberg; $39.95 detailed strategic simulation of planetary conAdv/Str quest with emphasis on economics, R&D and production. The problem is that the world A newer and more competitive version of and its combat units are so bland that one Reach For The Stars, but ultimately less sucquickly loses interest in the clash of planets. cessful than its ancestor, primarily due to its lack of scope. WING COMMANDER (MOND+) (I; #77) Origin; Chris Roberts; $24.95; 1990 WING COMMANDER II ( +) X-WING (INN) Int/Tac/1 (1/CD; #88) Origin; Chris Roberts; 1992; (1: #99,107,108) LucasArts; Lawrence HolThis program set new standards in graphics $59.95 land and Edward Kilham; 1993; $69.95 and gameplay. Graphically intense and luxuAdv/Tac/1 Int/Tac/1 Origin followed up its classic with a sequel rious, it places the player in the role of a space worthy of the name. The graphics are even Use the Force! A superb rendition of the combat pilot in an intergalactic war. Albetter, but the main improvement has been Star Wars universe, albeit victory conditions though the plot follows a «branching tree,» the richness of the plot and gameplay. Again, in the scenarios are a bit too structured and the richness of the entire package makes this machine speed is critical, and a 486/66 may rigid. Newer technology than Wing Coma must-have. Be aware of machine speed be too quick. Probably the game responsible mander 1 means you get digitized spec problems: a fast 486 is simply too much for for putting the Sound Blaster on the map as without the purchase of an additional speech this game. the de facto standard for sound cards. pack.cow Live-Action Players Entertain And Teach All At Once!. Learn Poker From The Best In The West. Sit down at the Cowboy Casino. And play high-stakes poker against five wise-cracking card sharps. Your opponents are tough. A mean Cowboy. Cunning Riverboat Gambler. Sneaky Bandito. Sarcastic Dude. A crazy Prospector and his mule. They insult you. Show no mercy. Make you laugh at your mistakes. But Ace the bartender's your edge. He teaches you the odds. When to open, raise, check, Cowboy Casino fold or bluff. Plus winning strategies for FiveCard Draw...Five and Seven-Card Stud...Texas Hold 'Em...and more. Hundreds of action scenes, T great graphics and sound make Multimedia PC this game a sure bet. Call 1-800-886-4956 now for the location of your nearest dealer, and get Cowboy Casino in your choice of Multimedia 3 DO PC or 3D0 for just $59.95. And start playing to win. Total Interactive Instruction IntelliPlay Published by Intimedia Sports, Inc., Two Piedimont Center, Suite 300, Adonto, GA 30305 Phone (404) 2620000. Fox (404) 261-2782 IntelliPlay a registered trademark of timedia Sports, Inc. The Multimedia PC logo is a certification mark of the Multimedia PC Marketing Council, le 300 and the 300 logo are trademarks of the 300 Company Page 58 Circle Reader Service #79 Computer Gaming World "


" Medieval England A time of castles and conquest. The throne is empty. The serfs are restless. Rebellion is in the air. The Lords of the Realm invite you to join their ranks. Build your castles. Cultivate your lands. Marshal your resources. Take the risk. Go for the Crown. postavy LORDS the REALM Coming soon Impressions Circle Reader Service #77 "


"rough, relative comparison of the cards quality. To Illustration by I. E. Galindo The Sound Card and The Fury Making Sound Choices In Sound Cards A Tone By Any Other Name Before we get into the information on cach individual card, I should explain a few things about sound cards in general. For any one sound technology, there are often several companies which sell it under different brand names with slight variations for each card. This is further complicated because each brand often has a number of models to choose from. If you were to look closely at every one of these models, however, you would soon realize that they all use a few sets of sound chips. If you listen to music played on the Yamaha OPL-2 synthesizer chips of two competing sound cards, the only difference you will hear will be a bit less background noise from the card with the cleaner circuit board design. When a game box says it is AdLib or Sound Blaster compatible, it is saying that the music will play the same on any card with an OPL-2 chip. So it would seem that all we have to look at are the chips used on a sound card to determine whether it is the same as, or better than, another sound card. This is only partially true. Some sound chips can be reprogrammed by software run on your PC from a simple upgrade disk; some require software to be run every time you boot your PC for the card to work properly; some require software to be run only when you want to make some advanced feature available (like extra instrument sounds); and others require almost nothing but to plug them in. Before you say that the last one sounds the best, you should consider that each strategy has its own strengths and weaknesses. All of these sound chips are generically called DSPs (Digital Signal Processors). Sometimes a sound card manufacturer will buy a DSP from a chip manufacturer and program it to do their bidding. These general purpose chips tend to work more slowly than custom DSPs designed by the manufacturer for a very specific purpose. Both general P purpose and custom DSPs can come in reprogrammable and non-reprogrammable varieties. Once you learn about a few DSPs, you will be able to better judge which card is up to your standards. Donald S. Griffin is the owner of Computer Music Consulting in San Francisco. He has composed music for over 20 games and multimedia products, including Aladdin for the Genesis and Mario's Time Machine. Griffin is a registered developer with nearly every sound card maker. by Donald S. Griffin, Computer Music Consulting Then I tell people what I do for a The Sound Card And The Jury living, the first thing they often ask is «what's the best sound Sound quality varies from card to card, and card?\" You would think I'd have a quick the differences are certainly discernible if answer handy, but my usual reply is «It dethey weren't, we'd all be using the same card), pends.\" What do you want it for? Games? but in any comparison, there is room for Multimedia presentations? Making your own personal bias. So, rather than telling you what music? Playing with sound effects? All of the I think sounds the best, I worked with CGW above? to devise a \"blind taste test,\" if you will, of Since this is CGW you're reading, I suppose music synthesis quality. I selected a collection I could assume that you want the best quality of original General MIDI music, not progame music that you can get at a reasonable vided by the manufacturers, to play through price. But even with this simplification, things can be complicated. There are ease of each card and record onto a quality cassette installation issues, concerns about compatitape tape with no noise reduction. I also recorded bility, expectations for future expandability, examples of OPL-2 emulation from those anxieties about backward compatibility, and cards that provided it. A group of listeners special sound card features to consider. So, to from the gaming community and the CGW simplify things even further, I'll assume that staff were then asked to compare the music sound quality is your number one concern. from each card and decide which was of Besides, there are plenty of articles which just higher quality. This data was used to rank the list features, but I'm a composer, so I'll take cards in order of preference. The results can that perspective in looking at the different be seen in the table that accompanies this qualities of sound chips in today's sound article. Keep in mind that this data does not cards. represent «God's truth,» but can be used as a Page 60 Computer Gaming World "


"NA 9.0 4th A Note About MIDI Sound Card Comparison MIDI (Musical Instruments Digital Inter Chip Set Card Brand Card Model MSRP Rank Order Average FM Emul face) is a system for cross compatibility beRank Rank cween unlike makes and models of Sound Canvas Roland SCC-1 499.00 1st synthesizers. MIDI data is not a recording of RAP-10 599.00 the music itself, rather it consists of simple instructions for playing music. When you play Kurzweil MASS AVM Summit 389.00 2nd Tie 4.3 NA a MIDI file you are sending a stream of MIDI Wave Blaster Creative Labs Wave Blaster 249.95 2nd Tie 4.3 NA messages that \"play\" your synthesizer chip (Req. SB16) (+199.95) much like the paper roll in a player piano. Yamaha OPL-4 Logitech SoundMan Wave 349.00 3rd 4.4 2nd MIDI files are much, much smaller than Aria 1 Meg. Viva Maestro NA 4th 5.9 3rd Tie digital sound recordings, and MIDI dara can Ultrasound be altered in meaningful ways on the fly. Advanced Gravis Ultrasound 199.00 5th 6.0 6th MIDI is a powerful tool for providing inter Ensonic Reveal Sound Fx Wave 299.00 6th 6. 1 7th active music in computer games, because Aria 512 K. Diamond Sonic Sound 299.00 7th 6. 4 5th there usually isn't space for digitally recorded Analog Devices Orchid GameWave 32 | 179.00 8.3 3rd Tie music on the game disks or in memory, and + Invision Upgrade + Invision Upgrade (+39.95) because it allows the music to be modified as Analog Devices Orchid GameWave 32 179.00 9th you play the game. Standard ROMs General MIDI (GM) is a set of guidelines for synthesizer design that allows one GM OPL-3 Yamaha (many) NA 10th 10.1 1st music file to play reasonably well on different models of synthesizers. GM was designed to allow friends to share MIDI music files with The sound quality of 11 popular sound cards was compared by a \"blind\" group of listeners and ranked in order of preference. The first rank refers to wavetable synthesis; the second, to FM-emulation. out requiring all manufacturers to make their synthesizers sound exactly the same. Roland quality digital audio which can be synchro512K of sample RAM (upgradeable to 28 later designed an enhancement of GM called nized to the MIDI portion of the card. The megabytes) which can be used for additional GS which is essentially \"GM with some extra digital audio can also be fed through the instrument sounds or sound effects, whatever stuff.\" Any synthesizer which is GS compaton-board reverb and chorus processors to add the task requires. ible is, by definition, also GM compatible. All a lifelike ambiance to the recordings. of the cards reviewed in this article have GM Since the RAP-10's digital audio playback MASS Appeal sound sets with the exception of the OPL-2 was not designed with Sound Blaster comThe Kurzweil MASS (Multimedia Audio and OPL-3, which can be programmed by patibility in mind, it will not automatically your software to imitate General MIDI to a Sample-Playback System) is a set of chips and work with your game's sound effects, but its a reference designed to guide other manufaccertain extent. music synthesizer will work in your game if it turers in use of the MASS technology. MASS The MPU-401 MIDI interface designed by supports GM. The real power of the RAP-10 bas arguably the biggest guns in this race with Roland is the most commonly supported comes from its software which makes full use six megabytes (compressed) of sound samples six megabutes MIDI input/output format. The MPU-401 of the card's potential to allow you to comon ROM chips compared to three for the is supported in nearly every new sound card bine MIDI music with recorded, edited, orSound Canvas and two for the Wave Blaster. as a means of getting MIDI data from your ganized and re-mixed digital audio with your Other cards in this survey have as little as a software to the synthesizer on your sound MIDI music. As a result you can use the music. As a result you can use the half megabyre of samplesSince each card hoc half megabyte of samples. Since each card has card. RAP-10 alone to make commercial quality to build the full GM list of instrument sounds music including singing, live instruments and from these samples, the more ROM space you Meet The Players sound effects! In the right hands the RAP-10 have for samples the easier it is to make each With these considerations in mind, it's time can be a powerful musical weapon which instrument sound realistic. The MASS also to consider the various families of sound cards certainly sounds much better than the multihas a special chip just for effects like reverb and how they may or may not meet your track cassette decks being used in most amaand chorus, and there are 48 different effects gaming needs. teur home studios. algorithms available by setting a controller to The Roland Sound Canvas is a line of syndifferent values. The MASS also has three full Protean Blast thesizer products which includes the SCC-1, sound sets including GM, MT-32 and KurRAP-10 (Roland Audio Producer) sound The Wave Blaster is a synthesizer based on zweil's own Super Orchestra mode which zweil's own Super Orch cards and many external synthesizers like the E-MU Systems' Proteus Technology. The favors orchestral instruments. The MASS also SC-55, SC-155 external sound modules and Wave Blaster is a small \"daughter card» that has the full compliment of drum sets found thcW-50 workstation. They all have in complugs into the Sound Blaster 16. While it lacks on the Sound Canvas. The real kicker for you mon the Sound Canvas chips and sounds. The reverb and chorus, the instrument sounds are audiophiles out there are the 18-bit DACs audiophiles out there are Sound Canvas cards all have excellent quality very good. By the time you read this you may which give professional synthesizer quality instrument sounds and effects like chorus and be able to buy Creative Labs' new AWE32 reproduction of the digital data as analog reverb. The SCC-1 comes with the full GS sound card, which is sort of a Sound Blaster sound. sound set. The RAP-10 is similar to the SCC16 ASP plus the new E-MU 8000 synthesizer The MASS is designed as a daughter card to 1 except that it has only the GM sound set, chip with integrated reverb and chorus. It will plug into the Sound Blaster 16. The MASS not GS, and it adds two channels of high have one megabyte of ROM samples and implementation we used for this comparison May 1994 Page 61 "


"was the unique Summit Daughter Box by price of the equivalent stand alone model sion in this comparison are not present beAVM Technology, which puts the MASS (usually retailing for ca. $2,000-$4,000). A cause, well...they are not present! As mencard into a simple but elegant black box that few games are starting to support the Ultrationed, Creative Labs' new AWE32 will be connects to the joystick port of any sound ystick port of any sound sound in its native mode, which is where it sound in its native mode, which is where it out very shortly. Turtle Beach, makers of the card with MPU-401 implementation and a 1 implementation and a really shines. Gravis now offers a 10-bit re really shines. Gravis now offers a 16-bit reMultisound PC card have a new product Sound Blaster format joystick port. The cording module which comes with patch edicalled Maui. Maui is a wave synthesizer daughter box also receives power from this tor software for editing your Ultrasound connection so no additional electrical sockets instruments. By the time you read this, the meant to sit in a 16-bit slot next to your are required. In spite of this configuration. I new Ultrasound cards like the Ultrasound present sound card so you can add wave found the Summit to be extremely noise free. CD and the Ultrasound Max (with 48khz synthesis for $199. MediaVision just ansynthesis for $199. The Summit also has a joystick extension port recording!) will have 16-bit recording ability nounced that they expect to introduce a 16and an additional joystick port-type connecbuilt in. Advanced Gravis has recently anbir sound card in the first half of 1994 which tor for plugging in a MIDI cable, which nounced a deal with Advanced Micro Dewill include wavetable synthesis and effects comes with each unit, with IN, OUT and vices to incorporate Ultrasound technology like reverb and chorus. This is the result of a THRU connectors for connecting external into a new AMD chip set, which will be on joint marketing and development agreement MIDI devices. A simple connector may be many motherboards in the future, so it looks with Korg, and the card will use the \"identih will allow the Summit to like the Ultrasound will continue to be with cal\" chips found in Korg's line of professional be powered from an electrical socket and us for some time. synthesizers. Media Vision's Waveguidefunction as a stand-alone MIDI module. I The Orchid SoundWave 32 and Gamebased sound card, discussed last month, is still was very impressed with this unit both in Wave 32 incorporate the Analog Devices in the works. sound and design. chip ser. Orchid has joined with Invision Interactive, designers of sound for many proThis test yielded some surprising and some OPL And Other Gems fessional synthesizers, to make a $39.95 not so surprising results. The Aria IMB chip Yamaha's new OPL-4 chip, which is backROM upgrade available to Game Wave 32 sec scored higher than the 512K chip set, as and Sound Wave 32 owners. I already had a one might expect. Orchid's Invision upgrade ward compatible with the OPL-2 and OPLcard with the old ROMs, so Orchid sent me ROMs show an improvement over the stock 3, is being used by the Logitech SoundMan another card with the new ROMs. We ROMs. Not surprisingly the OPL-3 and Wave. The OPL-4 adds what is essentially a thought the comparison might help people OPL-4 do a nicer job of sounding like an Yamaha TG-100 synthesizer to the chip. with the old ROMS decide whether to upOPL-2 than any emulation scheme. Roland Having all this on one chip helps to keep costs grade. Interested parties should contact Inviis still the king of GM as the more than 3 down. Logitech did a wonderful job with sion Interactive (nor Orchid) at (800) both the hardware implementation of this point gap between the Sound Canvas and any 468-5530. technology and the installation software. The other card clearly shows. But number two SoundMan Wave seems to me to be the most The Ensoniq chip set is represented by came out of the blue. There was a tie between reliable, stable, and easy to install sound card Reveal's Sound FX Wave 32. Ensoniq is well MASS and Wave Blaster, but when I dropped of the bunch, and usually works fine even known for their professional synthesis prodthe high and low scores for each, the MASS with other cards in the system. There are no ucts. inched ahead. If you want great music at a low jumpers at all on the card, and all configuraSierra Semiconductor's Ariachip set comes price and already have Sound Blaster comtion is done through simple and easy to use in 512K and 1024K versions, and we listened patibility covered by your current card, the software. Many hardware manufacturers are to both. The 1024k version was on the Viva AVM Summit seems to be the way to go unless taking this jumperless approach Maestro 16VR and the 512k version was on you already have a Wave Blaster-ready card. The Advanced Gravis Ultrasound doesn't the Diamond Sonic sound card. the The EMU 8000 based AWE32 is an improvehave an actual OPL-2 or OPL-3 chip on the For comparison the Yamaha OPL-3 was ment on the Wave Blaster, so Roland may yet board, so it is not compatible with older included in the test, since most sound cards see some competition in the music market. games. This is unfortunate, as it would have today have the OPL-3, and most of you have Logitech's very compatible OPL-4 based only added about $20 to the price tag and heard it. Since eight of the eleven cards in the SoundMan Wave, which has everything at a would have made it a sort of Sound Blaster comparison have true OPL-2 support or with lots of real neat new stuff. Instead Gravis OPL-2 emulation, I decided to include a moderate price, was very close behind the top provides software like SBOS to emulate the separate comparison to see how effective each three. Below that you will want to balance Sound Blaster. SBOS doesn't sound very card's OPL-2 emulation was. Since all of price versus performance. much like an OPL-2 at all but, to be fair, none these comparisons were blind, there was a fair \"There are lots of other considerations when of the other OPL-2 emulation schemes we opportunity for any of the OPL-2 cmulations buying a sound card, and other CGWarticles tested sounded very good either. The differto be rated higher than the OPL-2 itself, but will attempt to address those, but keep in ence is that the others were all in hardware on as you can see, that didn't happen. Also, note mind why you are paying the extra money for the board and didn't require loading a driver that the quality of a card's waverable synthesis first. The new Mega-Em software allows the has no relationship to the quality of its FMone of these cards when older, cheaper ones Ultrasound to emulate Sound Blaster PCM synthesis, or vice-versa; some companies may will do a decent job with your current stack sound effects and either MT-32 or Sound go all out for high quality waverable hardware of games: If you want to dance, you have to Canvas GM. Mega-Em works only in DOS and skimp on the FM-synth chip. pay the piper. and not with 32-bit software. Special Thanks to Tony Farmer, Sherry Huss, The Ultrasound is really a one MB sampling Missed It By That Much Melissa Lean, Joe Szuecs and the CGW Staff synthesizer which sells at a tiny fraction of the Several new sound cards worthy of incluCGW Page 62 Computer Gaming World "


"\"if you want to go all out for games, the Falcon is the best bet for your money.\" -Computer Gaming World MACH V THE FASTEST GAMING MACHINE JUST GOT FASTER! NOW WITH EVEN HIGHER FRAMERATES 45+ VGA FRAMES PER SECOND!! & FASTER HARD DRIVE TRANSFERSOVER 4 MEGABYTES PER SECOND!! THE FALCON MACH V: THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE If you need the fastest computer performance for your gaming, personal, or business software, you need to fly a Falcon! «The MACH V Is Complete For Only $2,495 Pu:: To Order Call: 1-800-258-6778 VISA & MasterCard Accepted Financing Available on Approved Credit. Standard features: ntelTM 486 DX/2-66 Processor, P247 Pentium Upgradable 00% Compatible with All IBM PC Software Falcon VESA Local Bus Motherboard, 256K Cache, AMI BIOS VESA Local Bus Graphics Board with 1 Megabyte 16.8 Million Colors! alcon VESA Local Bus Hard Drive Controller Card Megabytes of RAM expandable to 32 .2 & 1.44 Floppy Drives 250 Megabyte 12 ms Hard Drive with 128K Cache MPC Level 2 Compliant 250 ms Double-Speed CD-ROM Drive NEW! boundBlaster PROTM with Multimedia Encyclopedia on CD-ROM NEW! Shielded Multimedia Speakers CH Products FlightStick PRO 4 Button Joystick with Viewing Control CH Products Automatic Speed Sensitive Dual Gameport Mini-Tower Case with 250 Watt Power Supply Two Cooling Fans with Temperature Sensing 14\" NonInterlaced Super VGA Monitor, .28dp, Edge-to-Edge Display NEWI 101 Key Keyboard with Dustcover MS-DOS 6TM 3 Button Mouse with Mousepad One Year Parts & Labor Warranty One Year On-Site Service Policy NEW! Upgrades for Memory, Hard Drives, Monitors and many other components are available each MACH V is custom tailored to fit your game! FALCON NORTHWEST L epo otwarte wws COMPUTER SYSTEMS 263 South Bayshore Dr. Coos Bay, OR 97420 Circle Reader Service 164 "


"APPROVED 3 BY THE COMICS EVOLUTION THE DEFINITIVE ADVERT! Cook LOST IN TIME 3 AUTHORITY FREE *1 1994 IMAGITECT COMIC GROUP . Available on PC and Amiga now! IMAGITEC DESIGN IN IMAGITEC DESIGN INC 2103 "


"POUR I GHTLC DESIGN INC W TEC DESIGN INC Hot on the heels of Humans\" comes Evolution Lost in Time In Lost in Time you control a Caveman who is kidnapped by Aliens to be added to their freeze-dried collection of famous historical figures. Fortunately the Caveman turns the tables on the Aliens by virtue of his wit, skill and a big club, and the ship crash-lands on the moon where the Aliens secret base is located. There he discovers and frees various other historical figures such as Confucius, Robin Hood and Brian the Viking Your mission should you choose to accept it is to guide these characters through seven different time zones collecting pieces of a time machine so that they can all go home to their own time, before the Aliens cotton on and throw them all back in the icebox. Each character has a special ability, and you must use these in conjunction with each other to solve the puzzles that stand between you and your trip home. In addition, you can find wonderful bits of useful. dangerous and amusing Alien technology scattered around the various time zones to help you in your task. task. A simple yet powerful point and click interface makes the game a joy to play, and Lost in Time is so packed with puzzles and laughs it ll keep you glued to the screen for the rest of your natural life (well, maybe not that long, but for a really long time. Hilarious spot-animations and animated cartoon sequences, combine with more additional features than you could shake a stick at, making Evolution-Lost in Time a game so good you should buy it even if you don't own a computer! trenpiro oppy BIRTH brir or nocting Wisnurra BHEALABARAN GOOOOOOOR aaa METALEPH Available From Your Local Dealer Now!  Iluminare Ol Games  1994 Imagtec Design Inc. Evolution Lost in Time is a Trademark of Imagitec Design Inc. Circle Reader Series #72 "


"STRATEGY EVEN MORE Machine Politics In The 21ST CENTURY Under The Hood Of SimCity 2000, Part Two by Robert L. Hayes, Jr. Photography by Susan Zurawik ast month we looked at the basic infrastructure of a city in SimCity 2000: its transportation system, power and water works. This month we'll get our hands dirty in the guts of the program, even going so far as to rip out a few formulac and examine them in detail. We'll examine the key factors-city growth, city services, basic city layout, pollution that can mean the difference between a struggling burb and a thriving a thriving metropolis. Conventions and Terms First, a few conventions need to be explained for greater clarity. SimCity2K uses a 0-255 point system to rank most of the important variables within the game. Land values range from 0 to $255,000/acre, pollution levels from 0 (nonexistent) to 255 (highly toxic), etc. These 0-255 rankings are also used for the characteristics of a given square on the map. Thus, a square may have a population density of 255 (an arcology), a land value of 133 ($133,000/acre), and a pollution level of city center, but it is more important to some 21 (mild pollution). With a few exceptions, than to others. Commercial zones have a high these variables are not available to the player, predilection for being at the city center, resibut they can be generally determined by using dential zones have a moderate preference, and the map overlay function. On an overlaid industrial zones have the lowest preference. map (the crime rate map, for example), no In SimCity2K terms, the closer a zone is to the coloring indicates a very low value (perhaps center, the higher its basic land value will be. less than 20), while near-black indicates an extreme value of possibly 225 or more. Police And Fire Departments An important concept in the SimCity2K Your police and fire departments have a model is that of the rent-bid gradient (and fixed range of effectiveness, with the exact here you thought this was just a computer effectiveness level diminishing with distance game). The rent-bid gradient (RBG) encapfrom the station. Stations are not effective sulates the economic model of a business and further than 12 squares orthogonally, 8 the psychology of a building's owner. Basisquares diagonally. Stations do combine their cally, the closer to a city's center a building is, cally effects arithmetically, however; if a square is the larger the number of customers it fecs it receiving 24 points of police protection from can reach (or, for residential structures, the one station and 40 from another, its total more goods and services available to dwellprotection level will be 64. ers). The city center in SimCity2K is weighted Fire stations help prevent fires in their proby land value; you can see your city center on tection areas. In general, their location is not the land value grid in the map section (it's the a major consideration as fires are easy to put red crosshair). However, as you get closer to our and even the largest cities won't have the city center, it is more expensive to build enough fire departments to cover most of or rent a building; thus, a business owner their city in their protective envelope, so there must decide how much access to customers is no real harm in simply placing them wheror services is worth how much rent. Some ever convenient. The locations of your police businesses (office buildings, for example) will stations, on the other hand, are very imporbid very high for access to customers and thus tant. The crime level of a tile has profound tend to be located at the city center, while effects on its land value, and you must site others (widget manufacturers) could care less, your stations so as to maximize their effective as their customers either have to come to coverage. them or don't deal directly with the building. Exactly where to put your stations depends In SimCity2K this is somewhat simplified in large part on the type of zones in the area (thankfully). All zone types want to be at the in question industry tends to be somewhat Corrections and Clarifications Water pumps can produce less than 12,000 gallons of water if they are above sea level; last month's article assumed the pumps were built at sea level. Larger cities do require additional wastewater treatment facilities. To determine if your city needs an additional wastewater plant, watch your pollution graph for a sudden unexplained rise. Page 66 Computer Gaming World "


"File Speed Options Dinosters Windows Newspaper Jan 3146 <BFD$3,191.163 1 B less sensitive to crime, so you won't need quite good, but be sure you need it before you overloaded. Libraries are easier to gauge than so many stations to keep people happy), the implement it; if your residential areas are all museums, in that you get a grade rating for population density of the arca, and budgetary no-crime or low-crime, then it is a complete the system. Keep the ratings high (they aren't considerations. The multiplicity of factors waste of funds. If needed, however, it will expensive and you won't need more than 12 makes general advice difficult to give. I gengreatly reduce the expense of building police even for an enormous city). erally place a station every 12 squares or so, stations in residential areas if all modest crime giving a strong overall level of protection. In is taken care of by vigilant citizens. buys. Enact them all as soon as your city is high value areas, you can scatter your stations making a healthy profit. more thinly, as high land values deter crime. The Educational System The basic crime level of a given tile is calcuThe educational system is the beast that can The Health Care System lated using the formula: bring down a city; either (a) build an expenLuckily for you, in the health care departCrime Level = Population Density (Police sive one and watch your finances crumble ment SimCity2K is considerably more forgivProtection / 2) (Land Value 14) under the assault of teacher's unions, or (b) If there is a legalized gambling ordinance in build an inadequate one and watch your city ing than the real world (Bill and Hillary would find it a piece of cake). Hospitals aren't force, it adds 12 to the crime value of each crumble into a vast wasteland inhabited by very expensive and you don't need hundreds squarc. A neighborhood watch decreases people who think Gilligan's Island represents of them, so you may as well build one whencrime by 12 in residential square. the pinnacle of Western civilization and who ever the existing facilities fall below tip-top Thus, a square with a population density of work at jobs suiting their talents. Not a pretty choice, but hopefully these guidelines will 100 (a 2x2 apartment complex, for example), condition unless money is tight. For some odd reason, however, sims like to live in places enjoying no police protection at all, with a make it easier. In general, you want the best land value of $80,000/acre in a city with where the life expectancy tops 90 years, so school system you can afford, and you want bear in mind that keeping your health system legalized gambling and a neighborhood to make improving it your first priority if it is going provides a large boost to your residenwatch will have a basic crime value of (100 inadequate. tial desirability. The health care ordinances, 0 20 + 12 12) = 80. a moderate level. A Your city can get by without any educalila | commercial square with a density of 160 (pertional services for the first 20 years or so, but buys. I haps a 3x3 office building) with 140 points of after that point you are courting disaster if police protection and a land Sims Just Wanna Have Fun value of $240,000/acre in the When it's time for relaxation, your sims same city will have a basic have an array of options: they can go to the crime level of (160 70 60 + park, take in a ball game, go to the zoo, or race 12) = 42, a much lower level. sailboats. All of the recreational items in the These basic levels are further game are good things. They boost tourism, modified by an averaging procincrease residential desirability, and raise land ess that takes place across the values. Build them when you can afford them entire SimCity2K map. Each or when your sims request them. Just bear in square is compared with its mind that few cities of 100,000 people boast neighbors, and the values beseven stadiums, eight zoos and docking space tween them are smoothed. for 1,000 yachts. Thus, a high-crime building can corrupt its pristine neighCity Layout and Block Design bors (and be itself somewhat The design of your basic city block is very elevated). important. While it is possible to mix and Once your city reaches a cermatch block designs, this makes it hard to tain size, you will need to build Grotesque Fruit Of An Obsession: One of the author's prized implement a coherent zoning mix and diffia prison. I generally build one cilies boasts a population of 9 million sims and 150 arcologies. cult to tell exactly what is going on in the city. when the city reaches about you don't make up for the lost time. Build a Furthermore, such patchwork cities often end 50,000 population, but your experience will school or college whenever the rating of your up with massive traffic problems (see last vary with the amount of crime you are willing to tolerate in the city. Stamping out all crime existing facilities falls below a B. As a personal month's article for an explanation of traffic is possible, but is very expensive and conpreference, I keep them all at A+ and enjoy mechanics) due to the labyrinthine layout of sumes a lot of real estate for police stations. In EQs topping 135-140 as a result. When you intersections and Oddly-shaped blocks. general, it is better to set a goal of a low crime build education facilities, generally place Through extensive play, I've come to find them in residential areas as they provide a several basic block types to be useful. All of rate, and to tolerate occasional pockers of the zones discussed here are of regular (i.e., high crime in your industrial slums, rather modest boost to land values around them. square or rectangular) shape; oddball zone than litter the landscape with police stations. However, their physical location is irrelevant types are certainly possible but won't be as Fire coverage is easier to allocate; ignore the to their educational effectiveness, so place efficient given the basically orthogonal nature first request for a fire station for a while (or them on mountaintops if you like. of the SimCity2K universe. build it and set its funding to 0%—your sims In general, 5% of your populace will use The 3x3 block (Figure 1) is the simplest don't care) and after that build a new fire libraries and museums. If attendance at those possible block design. It has the advantage of department only when your sims request it. facilities is less than that, you don't have permitting the zone within to develop a 3x3 The neighborhood watch ordinance is enough of them and the existing facilities are building, but maximizes traffic problems by RENCES May 1994 Page 67 "


"City Block Configurations O 1------000 CCC -ccc   ccc ppt CCC Ccci ii Ccci i i Ceci i    ccc IT Icec [ TCC I----------------------Figure 1 3 X 3 Block Figure 2 4 X 4 Block Figure 3 6 X 6 Block Figure 4 6 X 7 Block ZONE legend c = commercial = industrial = residential -----------CCC cccccc COOC Ccccc CCCCCC CCCCCC... CCCCCCHCO cociccctc.cc ceci coreco Cocicccccc Cecicccccc ce HECCHCSC = parks = roads = etc. Figure 5 6 X infinity Block Figure 6 6 X infinity Block ensuring that each and every trip must be leges, arcologies) all fit nearly within the On balance, I favor the 4x4 block for almost made by car. Additionally, a large portion of block, removing the need to break up your all city building. Its compactness makes for your city will be roadway, thus increasing city's pattern when you need to rezone for a cheap incremental additions to your city, it is your investment in transportation infrastrucnecessary building. extremely convenient for later upgrades to ture. The 6x6 block (Figure 3) is the most effiarcologies, and its traffic-killing properties The 4x4 block (Figure 2) has room for a 3x3 cient zone design in terms of maximizing don't hurt. building, a couple of parks, and most impordensity. All four 3x3 zones can develop into tantly, a few tiles of another zone type. Why 3x3 buildings (remember that you must have The Big Picture put in a few tiles of another zone type? Bean intersection nearby for a 3x3 building to Every city designer will have his or her own cause of an important hole in the way transdevelop). If you mix your zone types within preference for what the \"ideal city\" should portation is handled. Any number of sims can the block, you can cut down on traffic problook like. To some people, maximizing land generate a successful trip terminating in the lems; unfortunately you will still have some values and quality of life will be most imporsame, lonely 1x1 square of another zone type. since you don't have much road for all of that tant, others will want to get as many people Five million Angelenos can all be considered zoned land. Also on the downside, larger in their city as possible, while still others will to be commuting to work in the same indusbuildings don't fit comfortably into the 6x6 simply want to concentrate on accruing as trial warehouse. As long as your overall bal zone; you'll have to demolish four 3x3 buildmuch money as they can. ance of zone types is acceptable, your sims will ings to put a college or arcology into an already developed zone (rather than one as in Like real city planners, SimCity2K mayors happily develop their zones despite being unthe 4x4). In general, the 6x6 block is not a have a limited land area to work with. If you reachable distances from their real places of work, play or residence. This allows you to winning proposition due to these downsides. aren't trying to get a lot of people in your city, this is not generally a problem, but most build more realistic cities, ironically, as you The notched 6x7 block (Figure 4) compeople do have at least some desire to build a can have large-scale industrial zones without bines the efficiency of the 6x6 with the zone big city and end up filling the map. Here is having to break them up with housing and mixing of the 4x4. It has many of the same where some foresight can pay enormous divicommercial areas, and that in turn allows you problems as the 6x6 but can be a good zone dends. To reach maximum city size (around to keep your pollution and crime areas away design if space is tight, since less room is 10 million in the current version), it is necesfrom the expensive real estate where people wasted on roads than for 4x4s. sary to build arcologies. Before arcologies beactually live. The 4x4 zone is the smallest \"The 6 \"infiniry\" block (Figure 5) is an come available, your city must first reach a zone capable of permitting this kind of cheatopen-ended block that is unfortunately not population of 120,000, which is possible, but ing. These 4x4s can halve your traffic probvery efficient, as only your endpoints can requires a bit of planning. These massive lems (and obviate the need for any mass develop into 3x3 buildings. Additionally, latstructures take up quite a bit of room, and the transit at all) since fully half your trips will eral traffic is completely impossible. The budding Ed Koch may have a tough time never set foot on a roadway; the residents will notched version of this block (Figure 6) is finding space to fit enough of them to reach do much of their business within their own fairly efficient, allows easy zone mixing, but his or her lofty goals. block. An additional bonus of the 4x4 is that still has traffic and large-building placement Due to the RBG mechanics described the larger city buildings (stadiums, zoos, colproblems. above, it is important to place your zones in Page 68 Computer Gaming World "


"File Speed Options Disasters Windows Newspaper WALD Aug 1983 <Simmetry $1.2009 wry Teal what will eventually be the right part of the city. Using zone mixing, there is no problem with isolating parts of your city from one another; as long as the necessary zone diversity is available locally it doesn't matter that your industrial zone is five miles from the residents who work there. For optimal land prices, with their concomitant effect on land development, it is best to follow the RBG concept fairly closely. The very center of your city should be an almost entirely commercial core, with only enough zone mixing to allow buildings to develop. Surrounding the core should be your residential zones, and on the outskirts of your city, industrial zones should be turning the air black (and not incidentally, sharing some of their pollution with the nonexistent spaces off the map, rather than only with your city). Figure 7 shows a small city that roughly follows this principal. The Pollution Solution Pollution is nasty stuff. It has negative impact on land values and reduces life expectancy in your city. Keeping it minimized is always a good idea. There are five things you can do to keep the pollution levels low. First, and easiest, is to implement the pollution controls ordinance. Second, make sure you have adequate wastewater treatment facilities. Third, change your industrial tax rates so that polluting industries (steel, textiles, petrochemical, etc.) have a higher S rate than nonpolluting industries (finance, media, etc.). Fourth, isolate your heavy industry far from your city core, putting as much of it as possible at the very edges of the map. This means that at least part of your pollution will disappear from the statistics of your city. Finally, keep traffic levels low by intelligent street planning and/or mass transit use. The exact pollution level generated by a given square Bantumisen 22 can be generated, though the Fig. 7: This city is zoned for maximum land value and growth. procedure is complex. An inDense commercial has been placed at the center of the city with residential to the immediate north and south, and industrial terim pollution value is generreaching out to the east and west. ated for each square on the divisor can be as high as 6 for a very clean city map, according to the formula: to as low as 2 for a very filthy one. Pollution Value = ((Previous Pollution The interim value, divided by your city's Value + Traffic / 5) + Square Pollution Outpollution divisor, becomes the new value for put) * 2 that square. Add 200 to the result if there is radioactive waste nearby (found only after a fission plant An example: let us assume that a brand new coal plant has just been built in an otherwise meltdown). The traffic term in the equation relates to the traffic level of the road nearest empty city which has added wastewater treatthe building; heavy traffic pollution adds to ment, has a pollution control ordinance, and the building's pollution output. Table 1 conhas a pollution divisor of: tains the pollution output for the various 0 (there was nothing here before, so no buildings and facilities. Note that each square prior pollution) + 0 (no traffic) + 0 (no radioof a polluting building generates the polluactivity) + 50 (it's a coal plant), times two, for rion value shown in Table 1; a 3x3 industrial a total interim value of 100. Our city's divisor building generates a great deal of pollution is: indeed. 4 0 + 1, for a total value of 5. We're This interim value is then smoothed with working with a central square of the plant, so the interim values of the adjacent squares, the smoothing won't affect the calculation; \"spreading\" the pollution a bit. The this leaves us with a total pollution value of smoothed value is then divided by the overall 20. Had our city had a more polluting induscity pollution divisor, another involved for trial mix, no ordinance, and no wastewater mula. treatment, the total value would have been Pollution Divisor = 4 Pollution Bonus + 50-quite a difference! Note also that we're Sewer Bonus getting a break due to their being no prior pollution; over time (about three iterations of Add 1 to the divisor if a pollution control the pollution cycle) the pollution will increase ordinance is in effect. The pollution bonus to about 63 in the case of our foul city. term relates to the mix of industries in your cities; it ranges from +2 (a very heavy level of Land Value And polluting industry) to -1 (a very clean level of Zone Development polluting industry). For purposes of the pollution bonus (only), the only industries which Whether a given zone will develop, and factor into this are steel, textiles, petrochemihow far it will develop, is decided by only two cal and automotive. If these industries are factors. The first factor is the zone's accessientirely absent from your city (a difficult, but bility to other types of zones. High density attainable goal), then you will have a -1; if commercial zones need to be accessible to those industries are all you have, then you will either high density residential or high density have a +2. Most of the time, you will be industrial; low density commercial needs low somewhere in between. If you have adequate density residential or industrial. Similarly, wastewater treatment, your sewer bonus will residential and industrial zones need either of be 1; if you have no plants or inadequate ones, the other two zone types. Only one type of your bonus will be 0. Thus, the possible zone type is needed; it isn't necessary to have 10 5 5 TABLE 1 Pollution Output of Buildings Stadium 4 Prison 10 Water pump Runway 10 Pier Crane Port building Hangars Subway station Bus depot Train depot Port parking lot Port warehouse Coal plant Oil Plant Gas Plant 10 Nuclear Plant Fusion Plant Water treatment Plymouth Arco 25 Forest Arco 10 Darco Arco Launch Arco 15 1x1 Industrial Small 2x2 Industrial 12 Large 2x2 Industrial 18 3x3 Industrial Buildings or facilities not mentioned on this table have a pollution output of 0. SONG 10 6 24 May 1994 Page 69 "


"access to both of the other types. If a zone misses making a connection (see trip-generation discussion in previous issue, the consequences depend on the ones density; small buildings will not become abandoned until they miss several connections, while buildings will shrink if they miss even one tions to neighboring cities, give a powerful boost to your commercial and industrial development. The total boost for commercial development is: # of Runway Tiles + # of Runway Inte tions + Commercial Connections where a commercial connection is a road connection to a neighboring city. Note that it does not matter how big your neighbor is or how many connections you have to that neighbor; a road connection is a road connecneighbors , road connection in road connnn. tion. (Similar openhandedness is industrial connections). rial development, the total boost to If a building is adequately Connected, then the determining factor becomes the value of the square(s) it is on. Land value is relatively easy to determine; each one has its own formula, and there are a few special cases. The basic land value is taken directly from the RBG; the closer to the center of the city, the higher the value, as modified by type. Industry receives a small additional boost to its RBG value if it is close to The value of each tile flood waters, quelling rioters, and exploding alien space monsters. He doesn't seem to want to fight Nessie, however, Quick-witted mayors can get a look at the old girl anytime after they build a marina or seaport. Just wait until you hear the distinctive bellow of a sea monster in lust, and you can Zoom over to your lake or river and see the familiar coils of the Loch Ness Monster sinking beneath the surface, leaving behind the wreckage of some poor boater's pleasure craft. facintosh SinCity2K users report that reral financial cheats in the he only one we were able to verify was PORNTISGUZZARD0 cheat. Type this phrase ( at anytime and you will be granted a half million dollars. Be warned, though; as in the original game, it is rumored that abuse of such cheats can have disastrous side-effects. IBM users have been so far stymied in the search for such gems. Anyone finding such a thing should definitely drop note at my e-IThail address (be# of Seaport Cranes + Industrial Connecones. Industry Value = BasicValue dditionally, dense industrial ones commercial ones, the total is: Commercial Value = Basic Value /Parks/Water is a difficult to untify variable which has to do with how rces, parks and water iles are found where an industrial connection is a railroad or highway connection to a neighboring city. Again, duplication and neighbor size are no ing. This bonus can vary from 0 to +30. For residential Zones, the total The total boost you can get is limited by the size of your city and the size of the global economy; if your commercial or industrial development starts to sag, lay another road or expand your seaport. If the demand picks up you needed another connection and if ither you didn't or somethi like high taxes or a zone Imbalance ng the problem S) Crime Residential ones get an inherent bonus of 21 if population density is below 64 (p much single amily dwellings). R ZOnCS also  SIT s from feducational For example, a dense industrial zone with a pollution levelof 160, a crime levelof40, and basic value of 90 would have a total land value of (90 16 40 + 2) = 56, or $56,000. commercial one with a pollution of 10, of 21, basic level of 140 and a populaensity of100 would have a value of(140 33) : 163.5, rounded up to Now Leaving SimCity Limits The best advice I can give a new Imayor is to take things slowly at first. Rather than blowing your entire initial wad on laying out your dream city, zone a few areas with minimal if any, and slowly build your city block, maintaining profitability at all times. Generally speaking, dont start funding your services (it's all right to go ahead and build them to keep your citizens happy) until you are showing a balance of about $500/year in profits. Keep that $500 figure in mind, and only increase funding to the point where you will still be left with $500 income for the year. Handling growth slov like this, your city will remain mar and you won't go broke. Finally, when you're debating a new addition to your city, ask the simple question: Would I want to live there Using that as a touchstone, you can often abort an unfortulnate decision and keep making your city  better place to live. Special thanks to SiCityKdesigner Will Wright for help with the technical issues on this article, and for explaining rent-bid gradients 18 of 9 times untilIoit. Any errors are mine, however. Anyone wishing to discuss Captain Hero vs. Nessie Players who hate to be deprived of the love chance to find cute things or tricks in the um on their own should skip the following parar When you are offered the chance at a military base, don't talke it if you have disasters turned on. Captain Hero, the man enigmatically mentioned in your carly newspapers, apparently conscientious objector won't help out your city in times of need. If it higlier the land value, the more likely the building is to develop further, from a lxl residence or office to (if oned properly and at an intersection) a 3x3 monolith. ng should feel free to send CompuServe 4.2302@con userve.com on Ports And Connections there is about a lin 3 chance that a brightly clad flying man will appear, driving back Your airport and seaport, and your connec"


"May lma \\ noun 1: the 5th month of the Gregorian calendar 23 in the movie business, traditionally the release date for the first of the summer blockbuster hopefuls Carey Deluono's Hollywood Mooul RUN YOUR OWN HOLLYWOOD MOVIE STUDIO Past the studio gate with your name on it lies your personal dream factory. Go for it: * Buy original scripts and blockbuster bestsellers or steal ideas for yourself. Set vastly padded production budgets. Choose enough special effects to hide the lack of plot. Play God with producers and directors. Make and break superstars' careers, or enslave stars of tomorrow. Shoot on Sound Stage 10, in London, or on the slopes of the Himalayas. Have marketing and distribution grovel at your feet. Attend your world premieres. Grab it all: * Sit back and watch the grosses roll in. Snag that Beverly Hills mansion, Malibu beach house, 40,000 acres in Montana or your own Greek island. Collect the most overpriced art on earth. Find you can't live without that 4th studio jet. * Keep the biggest names in Hollywood waiting outside your studio gate. Or Gamble it all! Sell your shirt just to stay alive. If you've got what it takes to make it in Hollywood... Carey DeVuono's Hollywood Mogul is gonna take everything you've got. Circle Reader Service #60 To purchase, visit your local software retailer, or call 1-800-350-5550. De Vuono De Vuono Available For IBM And Compatibles. MS-DOS and Microsoft Windows versions available. 600k required, mouse suggested, 3 meg hard disk space required, EGA screens. Carey DeVuono's Hollywood Mogul is a trademark of Devuono DeVuono Games, all rights reserved. Other brands and product names are trademarks of their respective holders. 1 GAMES 1 "


"DESIGNER PROFILE Ace Over The PC Dynamix's Damon Slye Speaks An interview by Tom \"KC\" Basham ris name is synonymous with \"3Series. Why did you pick the World War I by a lot. It did real well. It also established Space.\" \"Simulation\" is his middle era? our reputation because, up to that point, no I name. He has been pushing 3-D DS: Well, there were a few reasons. One one really thought of us as a simulation images across computer screens since the was that no one had done a good WWI company. Even after A-10 they said, «Oh, wireframe days of the early 8-bits, and he game up to that point, an air combat game, they did a cool sim there, but you know...\" has worked for Dynamix ever since its so the market was wide open. Another reaMicroProse was coming out with Knights of inception as a computer game developer. son was that I knew that it would make for the Sky at the same time as Red Baron so So, when Damon Slye recently took a leave interesting interaction because it has there was a lot of press about this battle, of absence from Dynamix in order to finish machine guns, and it is just more suspense\"the battle of WWI» where MicroProse is his degree and catch up on some longful to get into a dogfight where you're so doing one, Dynamix is doing one, and delayed chess matches, we decided to interclose to the other plane. It's more challeng. Three-Sixty is doing one, and they were all view him and create our own personality ing than learning to operate the electronics supposed to release about the same time. bitmap for the successful programmer. on a modern-day jet. And, it just seemed So, because we came out with a real high like a really cool era, too, with all those vinquality product that compared pretty well CGW: So, how'd you get into the flight tage aircraft. It had a cool look and feel with its competitors, I think it established sim world? about it. our reputation and gave us prestige. Damon Slye: Let's see, we had been CGW: Flight itself was a mystery in those CGW: Now when someone hears doing products for, probably, 5 years before days, no one knew how to fly, let alone fight, \"Dynamix\" they immedoing A-10 Tank Killer. Something like in the air. diately think \"flight that. Maybe even 7 years. I always wanted simulator.\" to do flight sims because they seemed cool. DS: Yeah, right! All the evolution of tacDS: Yeah, up to They seemed challenging to do, because tics took place during that era. That s kind you have to have a good frame rate, and of a cool backdrop to the whole thing. that point we'd been sorta all over the you have to develop a good flight model Learning the history was interesting tooboard with differand stuff like that. Up to that point we'd about Oswald Boelcke, and how his basic for principles that he worked out in World ent only been a developer, making games for products. P. Some arcade other companies, but decided to do A-10 War I are still in use games, some under our own label because that's really today. adventure the only way you could survive. It's hard to CGW: Red Baron is games, stuff like make money as a developer. So, we decided still on shelves, and it's to do a flight sim and didn't want to get been really popular. It's a really caught up in doing a modern, fancy jet like great place to start learning ACM. How everyone else at the time. successful bas it been from your point of view? CGW: Red Baron was your next flight DS: It did well. Pacific outsold it, and sim, and the start of the Great Warplanes Europe will probably outsell it too, but not Page 72 Computer Gaming World "


"here's a cally did let us know on, and t that, but I think the success of the Great instead of maneuverable fighters. So we cost involved, like modem play. There's a Warplanes really identified us in the cuswanted to get that asymmetry into the couple that we muffed on, and [laughs) our tomer's minds with flight sims. game which wasn't present in WWI. I customers let us know about those! But we CGW: When did Dynamix join with ith think everyone then just used... really did. If we went back and compiled a Sierra and how did the purchase affect you? CGW: Whatever worked. list, they'd see we hit about 90% of the stuff they talked about. But that missed DS: I think it was actually during the WAS mually during the DS: Yeah, whatever worked. 10% seems to really sticks out in people's development of Red Baron. We were proba CGW: How does the flight modeling differ minds. bly six months from completion when the in Pacific over Red Baron? deal went through, so Red Baron went out CGW: The same question as before: how through the Sierra deal. A-10 had been does AOE differ from AOTP underneath the model, but we enhanced it quite a bit. released under our own label and distribI hood? flaughing I can't remember exactly w uted by Mediagenic and then Red Baron we did because it's been so long ago and DS: Underneath the hood? Well, for one was the first GWP flight sim out under two products since then. I know we worked thing, it's a lor cleaner. That was sort of the Sierra. There wasn't a lot of impact. The on that thing quite a bit! For one thing, emphasis: to put out a really bug-free prodbiggest thing was they had more capital. there were more control surfaces. We mod uct, because our initial version of Pacific We didn't have any capital at the time. We eled more control surfaces, dive brakes and had a fair number of bugs in it, and to were able to put out a higher quality prodcompressibility—things refine the concepts in Pacific, then adapt uct in Red Baron, because we would've had we didn't have to them to Europe. We had more play testing to cut development short if we hadn't had worry about on Europe, by a lot, so I think the product that funding. Creatively, we've maintained with  just plays a lot better. The dogfighting has our autonomy. We were an organization aircraft. really been fine tuned, and just the inherent that was creatively doing well, and they differences that we had to model between respected that—that was the reason for the the Pacific and European theaters. The tacacquisition. I think the creative thing is the tics were a little bit different. It wasn't as hard thing. That's the part of the equation asymmetrical in Europe as it was in the you can't just go out and buy. You can't Pacific. Then, there were the feature things just manufacture it, so when you find it you we did, like 320x400 (video resolution). let it go and you fund it. They didn't mess And flaps. We That was one of the additions that wasn't around with us at all, which was cool. added flaps. that much work, but it stood out real well, CGW: Moving on up to Aces Over the Landing gear up and so players appreciated it. It's the features Pacific. Although you used the same basic down, things like that. that are visual that people really appreciate. interface, how does it differ \"under the hood?\" There's probably more. It was the same basic bit of code, but it had been CGW: Why did you pick the end of the DS: Let's see. We stuck with the original reworked quite a bit. war for Europe? user interface and basic framework because we thought it was successful. We tried to CGW: What ever happened to the RAF in DS: Let's see. Well, the tactical cammake the interface easier but with enough the Pacific add-on? paign seemed interesting and different layered complexity that the user could DS: It was an opportunity cost iss because it hadn't been touched as much by decide how much they wanted. I guess the you know? Finite development resources other products. SWOTL focused on the biggest difference, really, was just what we and what are we gonna do with them? And strategic campaign, and we wanted to get were modeling. WWII air combat is a lot we decided to do the 1946! instead. We more of the tactical stuff in there. Also, we more complex than WWI, and more so thought that, as a stand alone, it had more still want to do a Battle of Britain product than we originally anticipated. It went over market potential than RAF in the Pacific. at some point and we didn't want to schedule a fair amount. We were going to have a modem option in include everything in one product. I don't know what the time frame is, but we will RAF in the Pacific. That plus the RAF serCGW: What doesn't these days? vice would be enough to warrant an expando a Battle of Britain product at some DS: (laughs) Ycah, I know. It seems like sion disk. But the modem option turned point products are taking more and more time. out to be a lot of work when we really C GW: That kind of leads into the next But, there's torpedoes and bombs and looked at it. Our original code wasn't writquestion. Are there going to be any add-ons to ground attacks and multiple mission gunsten with multiple players in mind and to Aces over Europe? on the aircraft and more complex instruretrofit something like that is just a lot of mentation and carrier takeoffs and landings. work to put into a data disk. DS: I don't think so. I'm sort of out of (laughing] Stuff like that we said, \"Yeah it CGW: Let's head on to Aces over Europe, the loop now that I'm on sabbatical, but I would be easy to add» and then it turned then. How did the feedback from Pacific affect don't think they're going to do them. I'm out to be a ton of work! Mainly the differnot actively part of the decision process Europe's design? ence was what we were modeling and the right now. tactics. They had more tactics in WWII, DS: It did quite a bit. I mean we really and we wanted to model that. We wanted CGW: So, the Battle of Britain product poured over the Pacific comments on to model the way the Japanese used the CompuServe and GEnie and tried to make will be standalone? \"angles\" fight and just turned, and the up a list of the really important features that at DS: Yeah, it'll be a standalone. There's Americans had to use the \"hit and run\" tacpeople were asking for that we could do. enough good stuff there to warrant doing a tics because they had high energy fighters tere Some things we couldn't do because of the of the full product with it. May 1994 Page 73 "


"NO COPS NO LAWS IMIEIGIA RACE RASTER THON NO WIMPS The Software golworks CD/ROM \"MEGARACE goes beyond conventional driving and shooting games...like a roller coaster from hell!» Electronic Games "


"Delwat tooks Civa Lintown 1974 Nork in ARE YOU A GIRLIE-MAN OR A MEGARACER? Cryo upoon in AcTION tehes Choose your vehicle wisely. Along with your speed and cunning, it may be the only thing that keeps you alive when you battle evil enemies like The Eviscerator and Rabies. hodin Welcome to a future where anything absolutely anything goes. MEGARACE is the auto combat game that combines mind-blowing driving with no rules, no holds barred combat and the most depraved road gangs ever assembled. MEGARACE goes light years beyond today's generation of games with visually stunning cyberscapes, surreal track layouts and the kicker of them all you're actually a gameshow contestant on VWBT (Virtual World Broadcast Television) with your host Lance Boyle. Host Lance Boyle You get real \"television look\" graphics with smooth action made possible by advanced compression techniques and real time data transfers from CD-ROM. Thrill to more than 25 minutes of digitized video that will forever change the way you look at video entertainment. Spectacular fully rendered animation, amazing 3-D graphics and pulse pounding sound effects make MEGARACE a rowdy, super-charged, one-of-a-kind virtual driving experience. APS: 3 SCORE: 6540 With MEGARACE, it's your speed, your aggression and your cunning that will get you through. Winning is the only thing that counts. It's either that or die. Strap in and get ready for a rollercoaster ride from hell. WIN OR DIE! nes Over 25 minutes of full-motion digitized video commentary by MEGARACE host Lance Boyle, 15 full rendered tracks, hot rock music track and the virtual ride of your life (or death). Available on 3DO\", IBMCD-ROM, and Sega CD For the store nearest you or to buy, call 1-800-234-3088 TM MEGA RACE Cepatich C95 The Software Two Copyright Con Crafterative Interim Mil rights teenind a registro traduit et stort in Stutt vippe 1932. the ratewitnete i mati put Negarsitat el Seca Enterprises. It Circle Reader Service #1 "


"CGW: Are there any plans to port new they weren't really designed with an end enhance the quality of the simulation expeAOE designs and features into a revised user in mind. It'd take a lot of work. I rience, that's the key to the longevity of AOTP? think the closest thing would be like the what we're doing. DS: No, it's pretty hard to retrofit that mission builder for Red Bar mission builder for Red Baron, where you The one peripheral I'm still waiting for stuff onto an older version, then retro-marcould build your own missions, but not a is the helmet. Once we have that I think ket it. It costs a lot of money to do somesim from the ground up. we'll be set! thing like that, and usually your returns CGW: Are we going to see any mission CGW: On that note, what do you think aren't that great. If we had our system builders for the Aces! flight sims will be like in five or ten years? down, if the software was more malleable DS: Yeah, maybe. It's still one of the Will virtual reality devices play a role: than it is, that might be possible. But, we ideas floating around. will do another version of Pacific at some DS: To me, \"virtual point. Each product will probably get done reality\" just applies to a once every three or four years, you know, piece of hardware, to getrevisited. We'll just re-release it as a full ting a helmet with a disblown product, like that. play inside so you can move your head around. CGW: When a new sim comes out, there's When we get that piece of always a host of questions about, \"why did hardware, it's going to be you do this...\" or \"why didn't you do that....\" great. You know, I flew in Could you go into a little more detail about an air combat school the factors that influence design decisions where you actually fly DS: You have to weigh a whole bunch around in a real airplane of different factors to make your decision. and do air combat. You It's not like you have a simple set of criteria don't have time to find a to use. But, the main trade off is how diffikey on a keyboard or anycult will it be to implement a feature-how thing like that. When we much is it going to cost—versus how valuhave something that capable you subjectively think that feature is. The Dynamix team as they appeared on the \"album jacket\" of tures that feeling, it'll realHow valuable you think it is is based on Articfox in 1985. Left to right: Kevin Ryan, Jeff Tunnell, ly enhance the experience feedback from your customers and your Damon Slye and Richard Hicks. a lot. When's it going to own personal sense of how it fits into the happen? I dunno. Five producr design. Some features really add a CGW: Where is the Great Warplanes years, ten years maybe? When it's cheap lot. Some things sound good when you talk Series going from here? enough. To me, that's the one thing that's about them, but when you actually put DS: They're still talking about what the mi them into the game they re not really per next product in the line they wanna do lot. The first one was a joystick. Now those ceived by people at all. So you have weigh They're still talking about Red Baron II. or are out there in large this. Everything you do is cost. So, if you Pacific II. or Aces Over Korea, then Battle step is the helmet. do feature A you probably have to leave out of Britain, too. CGW: So, you say you're going on a sabfeature B. That kind of thing. So, cost, schedule, every feature impacts all these CGW: How far into the modern day is batical. You going to do anything interesting? things. We're working with a finite develthe Warplanes series going? DS: Well, let's see. I'm going back to opment budget, so you have to make these DS: Probably through Korea, and school, but my studies don't start for a tradeoffs. Dynamix will probably get into modern while, so I'm going to be playing chess, and but not the stuif I'll be working jets, too, but not the stuff I'll be working CGW: Red Baron, and both Aces games skiing, and playing basketball, and doing a on. I like historical stuff. It's more interesthave been pretty well \"hacked\" by players. lot of reading. That's got me pretty excited, There are tons of patches that change aircraft ing to me. actually, just taking some time off to do things I've always wanted to do. Then, colors, weapons, pilots, etc. How do you view CGW: How does the proliferation of flight when I go back to school in a couple of these after-market \"products\"? sim gear, like the Thrustmaster gear, impact months I'll be studying math and physics. DS: I think it's pretty cool! It's great your design work? Physics is something that interests me a lot, that people like the games enough that they DS: It takes a little bit of work, but I and it applies to what we do with flight want to do that. I think a lot of these guys think it's really worth it. I think it's coolmodels. I think it's important to do a think its really worth it. I think its cool models. I think it's cnioy. or at least it seems that way, tailoring that all this stuff is coming out. It really renewal every so ofren I've the game to their own needs. I think it's enhances the market and the quality of for 10 years. You need to recharge the batpretty cool. experience for the user. Thrustmaster hasteries and get a new perspective on everyCGW: Have you ever considered releasing really done a great job with all their stuff. thing, then come back. In a year I'll buildyour own internal editing tools, like Domark They've really taken care of their cusing products again, and they'll be a lot bettomers, which means they're taking care of did with Flight Sim Toolkit? ter because of the time off. DS: No, I think it's an opportunity/cost our customers too. We talk with those guys CGW: Thanks, Damon, for taking the quite a bit. And there're other companies , thing again. The effort going into that that are doing similar kinds of things. It's a time to do this! wouldn't be as good as just putting out little bit of work, but it's worth it. It just DS: Thanks a lot, Tom, that was fun! another product. Plus our tools, I dunno, helps everybody out. As long as you can CGW Page 76 Computer Gaming World "


"LHEXICON For the Perceptive IT LN Perception is everything. It can turn a simple word into a complex game of strategy. 5 5 02 WAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA CAN'T LIVE WITHOUT IT! Only the perceptive mind will understand the complexities in Lhexicon. The ultimate challenge in word games, Lhexicon provides new patterns of play, phenomenal scoring opportunities and expanded tactical strategies. It's easy to play, but complex to master. MB The challenge begins as up to four contestants face off to engage in a battle of wits to become master of a high strategy word game. Letters on the Lhexicon playing surface may be placed in a straight linc, staggered, reversed or turned upside down to earn points based on the accumulated word total. Claim the title of SUPREME LHEXICOLOGIST by mastering the ultimate goal, THE LHEXICON TRAP. M. Couar 94 THE ULTIMATE 2. ENTRE IN COMPUTER Super VGA screen WORD STRATEGY DAMES Recommended for ages 8 through adult with approximate playing time of one to two hours. Lhexicon is the most engaging entertainment that your family may enjoy. Lhexicon may be played with your favorite Lhexicologist or against the ultimate adversary, Lhex the Computer. And with a standard configuration that includes VGA or Super VGA modes, Lhexicon will run on any 286 or higher IBM compatible cybernetic device. Any way you play, you'll experience hours of fun and excitement. LHEX-T-CON SE BESTE GAMES Ordering information 1-800-WEB-FEET A simple concept... depending on how you look at it. Circle Reader Service #84 "


"FREE Visa/MC Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders same as cash. COD $8. Detectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Price availability may change. All sales final. OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PA, HI. AK, APO, FPO $4 per order 4-8 day Worldwide shipping $6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment E OFFER \"See Last Page For Details Es SNES ROLE PLAYING SNES SPORTS $56 $56 'ACES OF THE DEEP' Between September 1939 and May 1945, Germany launched over 1,000 U-boats into combat against the Allies. Dive deep to avoid attacks and measure your succes in tonage as you take command in the most realistic and advanced WWII German U-boat simula tion created. S42 \"RAVENLOFT'Unveil and destroy Straud, one of the most nefarious of all gothic horror characters, or you'll never escape the terror of the AD&D Ravenloft game world. Features inventory management for the whole party on one screen, extra large 3D gaming window and digitized sound effects. CD $52 Lufia 2 Might & Magic 3 $59 Obitus $58 Paladin's Quest $52 Runes of Virtue $59 Secret of Mana $59 Seventh Saga $56 Shadow Run $56 Spellcaster:Aspct Valor $49 Super Dragone Crom S54 Ultima 6 or 7 ea S59 Uncharted Watrs 1 or 2 S59 Wanderers from Ys 3 $29 Warrior of Rome 3 $52 $52 ACES of the DEEP Madden Football 94 $52 Mega Man Soccer NBA Jam Session 562 NHL Stanley Cup $42 Pele Soccer $54 Pro Sport Hockey $54 RappBall $49 Riddick Bowe Boxing Slam Masters $54 Soccer Shootout $54 Sports Illustrated Kids S56 Sports Illustrated:Golf $56 Super Bases Loaded 2 $59 Super Goal! 2 $54 Tecmo Baseball Tecmo Super NBA Bball $56 WWFSW2:Royal Rmbl $59 Winter Extreme $54 Winter Olympics $54 World Cup USA $54 SNES SHOOTERS $47 SNES STRATEGY 'GREAT NAVAL BATTLES 2 takes you to the South Pacific for 5 tactical battles, 3 carrier battles, one full campaign and limitless hours of cutting-edge naval combat simulation. Features play screens with digitized WW2 photo backgrounds and fully animated realtime damage control screens. $45 Bio Metal Citadel $52 Contra 3 $46 Cybernator $49 Exo Squad $54 Fire Power 2000 $39 Fire Striker $52 Galactic Defenders $52 In the Hunt $54 Lethal Enforcers w/gun $64 Operation Logic Bomb $39 Parodius $54 Soldier of Fortune $57 Super Metroid $56 Super R-Type 3 $54 Supr Sonic Blastman 2 $54 Total Carnage $52 View Point $54 \"STAR REACH' You are on a quest to conquer & colonize a galaxy of alien worlds in a mind-bending, real-time universe. First you must overcome hostile climate conditions, ward off enemies, calculate risks & make tactical decisions. $36 $45 SNES HARDWARE SNES ADVENTURE SNES ADVENTURE SNES KICK & PUNCH SNES SIMULATIONS Aero Biz Supersonic $59 Jeopardy 1 or 2 ea $52 Jeopardy Sports Edition $52 Liberty or Death $59 Loopz $46 Mario's Fun w/Numbers $49 Mario's Time Machine $54 Metal Marines $59 Monopoly $4 Nobunaga's Ambition $49 Operation Europe $59 Pac Attack $35 Pachi Slot Pinball Dreams $45 Railroad Tycoon $50 Risk S52 Romance 3 kgdm 20r3 $55 Shanghail 2 $44 Sim Ant SimEarth $5 Spindizzy Worlds Super Battleship S44 Super Bomberman 2 S5E Super Caesars Palace S4C Utopia S45 Vegas Stakes Wheel of Fortune 2 S49 Where Time Carmen SD S5 Wild Snake $49 $52 $42 $79 Fire Te $59 S45 Championship Joystick $56 Lethal Enforcers Gun $18 Power Plug $34 Pro Action Replay Program Pad $32 Super Advantage $39 Super Multitap $32 Super Nintendo Sys $139 Super Scope Wireless Control Pad $42 King of Day King of Dragons $59 King of the Monsters 2 $54 Kung Fu:Legend Contins $56 Mortal Kombat Mortal Kombat 2 $69 Ninja Warriors S56 Peace Keepers $54 Power Instinct $54 Ranma 1/2:Hard Battle S54 Rise of the Robots $54 Samurai Showdown $59 Sengoku $49 Shadow of the Ninja 2 $54 Streetfighter 2 Turbo Ed $59 Super Street Fighter 2 $69 TMNT:Tournamnt Fightes S56 Ultimate Fighter WCW Super Brawl $49 World Heroes 2 $58 S4C Soulblazer $51 Space Ace $52 Spiderman & Venom $59 Star Trek Next Genertn $59 Star Trek: Deep Space 9 $56 Steven Seagal $54 Super Adventr Island 2 $52 Super Empire Strks Bck $55 Super Godzilla $54 Super Mario All Stars $54 Super Return of Jedi $59 T2:Arcade Game S49 T2:Judgement Day S42 Tales of Spike McFang $56 Tazmania $48 Terminator $44 The Shadow Time Killers $56 Twn Bee:Rainbw Bll Adv $52 Untouchables $52 X-Kaliber $49 Young Merlin $56 Zero Kamikaze Squirrel $54 Zombies Ate Neighbor $49 $49 8 Hours $52 Aero Fighters $52 Al Unser Jr Racing Choplifter 3 Choplift $44 F-1 Pole Position $52 Freeway Fly Boys $49 Monster Truck Wars $58 Nigel Mansell WCR S49 Pacific Theatr Operatns $59 Rock & Roll Racing $49 Solo Flight $49 Spectre VR S52 Speed Racer $56 Super Battle Tank 2 $52 Super F12 $58 Top Gear 2 $49 Transformers 2 $56 Turn & Brn:No Fly Zone $52 Wild Trax $56 Wing Comm Secrt Mis $46 SNES ADVENTURE FREE GAME OFFER Dragons Lair $36 Dream Probe $49 Fido Dido Fire Team Rogue $59 Flintstones $49 Generation 2 $54 Ghetto Blaster $49 Home Improvement $52 Hurricanes $49 Impossible Mission $56 Incredible Hulk $54 Inspector Gadget $49 James Bond Jr $32 Jetsons $49 Joe & Mac 1 or 2 ea $49 Jungle Book Jurassic Park $56 King Arthurs World $50 Knights of Round Table $56 Lawnmower Man $42 Legend $49 Legend Mystical Ninja 2 $56 Lion King $54 Mario & Wario $54 Mega Man X $59 Metal Combat $48 Mighty Max $54 Nosferatu $54 Operation Aliens $52 Pirates of Dark Water $52 Popeye $49 Radical Rex $49 Ren & Stimpy Shw 10r2 $52 Robocop Vs Terminator $56 Rocko's Modern Life $49 S.O.S. $52 Sky Blazer $52 $54 $52 SNES ROLE PLAYING Spend $60 on any in stoc software and choose a free IBM game from the list below Offer subject to change o cancellation without notice Valid from Mar 1st through Ap 31st or while supplies last. SNES SPORTS ActRaiser 2 $49 Addams Family Values $54 Advent of Dr Franken $52 Aladdin $54 Alien vs Predator $44 Aliens 3 $49 American Tail:Feivi Wst $49 Arcus Odyssey $54 Asterix the Gaul $54 Beauty & the Beast S56 Bonk's Adventure $54 Bubsy 2 $56 Bugs Bunny:Rabt Rpg $56 Capt Amer & Avengers $42 Castle Wolfenstein 3D $54 Chester Cheetah 1 or 2 $49 Chuck Rock 2 Claymates $49 Cliffhanger S52 Crazy Chase $49 Daffy Duck/Marvn Martn $49 Death of Superman $59 Dracula $49 Zool SNES KICK & PUNCH Brain Lord Breath of Fire Equinox Eye of the Beholder Eye of the Beholder 2 Final Fantasy 3 First Queen Gaia Fantasy Gemfire Genghis Khan 2 Inindo Journey Home King Arthur/Knts Justo Lord of the Rings $59 $59 $52 $59 $69 $64 $54 $56 $49 Barkley Basketball $56 Baseball Stars 2 $54 Brett Hull Hockey $52 Brutal Football $52 Diamond Challenge S52 ESPN Baseball or Fball S54 Hardball 3 $56 Jamm It $56 Ken Griffey Baseball $52 Kick off 3 Kirby's Tee Shot $52 Legends of the Ring $46 MLBPA Grnd Slm Bsball $59 Art of Fighting $59 Battle Blaze $39 Battle Toads/Dbl Dragon $52 Clayfighter Doomsday Warrior Dragon $56 Fatal Fury 2 $59 Final Fight 2 $52 $56 Artura, Sound Source Grndmstr Chess, Rings of Me dusa, Airborne Ranger, Gun ship, Free DC, Big Business 5.25, SDI, Jeopardy, Wheel Fortune 1 or 2 5.25. Backgam mon by George. Earth Rise Vid Poker, Obliterator, 3 in Players Pack, Video Poke Villa Crespo, Magic Johnson Fast Break, Dusk of the Gods Punisher 5.25 CGW MAY 1 $56 $59 $56 $49 S59 $54 "


"CHIPS& BITS 12.1989 Jose Fan Source 1062 Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10052 PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Dept 10052 IBM HARDWARE IBM HARDWARE Thrustmstr Weapons UP $19 Video Blaster $349 $61 Voice Blaster $48 Voiceblaster Bundle $52 'MYST', The surrealistic adventure that will become your world. Journey to an island world tinged with surrealistic mystery, where only your wits and imagination will unlock an ancient betrayal of the past. Features 3D photorealistic graphics, original soundtrack and non-linear gameplay. CD 548 IBM ADVENTURE BIOFORGE' After breaking free of your security cell, you enter the ruins of an ancient civilization. There is a hostile alien on the prowl & an emergency situation to get under control. 3-D synthetic actors & rendered backgrounds. $48 The Sturrealistic Adventure That Will Become Your World kingmaker $39 Threrst for ile Creu $52 'KINGMAKER Step back in history to the time of the War of the Roses. In England, racked by civil war, the crown hangs by a thread and the throne is there for the taking. Features high quality digital graphics, intuitive icon-based user interface, infinite replayability and adjustable difficulty levels. $39 AMAZON' recaptures the fun & ex citement of the 1950's drive-in movies. Travel to unexplored regions of the Amazon, fight 10 foot ants and find emeralds sto. len by Cortez. Amazing cinematic effects such as multiple camera angles,flashbacks, pans & fades. Fully digitized voices & sound effects. $9 $25 E IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE Acoustic Research P 22 566 Acoustic Resrch P 42 $159 Acoustic Resrch P 570 $319 Acoustic Resrch P 622 $239 AdLib Sound Card $34 Advancd Gravis Ultrsd $129 Altec ACS 100 Spkrs $109 Altec ACS 150 Subwfr $109 Altec ACS 200 Spkrs $209 Altec ACS 3 Spkr Sys $169 Altec ACS 300 Sp wSb $299 Altec ACS 50 Speakers $79 CH Weapns Control Sys $44 Cyberman $69 Fighter Stick $79 Flight Control Stand $18 Flight Stick $36 Flight Stick Pro $57 Game Card 3 Automatic $28 Gravis Analog Joystick $29 Gravis Anlog Pro Joystk $34 Gravis PC Game Pad S19 Jet Stick Labtec CS-1000 Spkers $75 Labtec CS-1200 Spkers $84 Labtec CS-1400 Spkers $89 Labtec CS-150 Spkers $17 Labtec CS-550 Spkers $24 Labtec CS-700 Spkers $32 Labtec CS-800 Spkers $30 Labtec CS-900 Spkers $63 Mach 3 Joystick $27 Maxx Cobra Flightstick $54 Maxx Control Yoke S54 Maxx Ruddr Pedis Drivg S39 Maxx Ruddr Pedals FLT $38 Media Concpt SBist clon $39 Nec3XE MItSpn Ext CD $599 Nec3XI MitSpn Int CD $499 Notebook Gameport $39 PC Symphy Adlib Comp $37 Pilot Control Stand $19 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 $139 Pro Audio Spct 16 Bas $109 Pro Audio Spectrum Plus$89 Pro Audio Studio 16 $169 Reel Magic CD Upgrad $599 Reel Magic Vid Upgrd $385 Rudder Pedals Driving $39 Sony MDR E414 Hdphns $9 Sony SRS7 Speakers $9 Sony SRS9 Speakers $14 Sound Blastr 16 (ASP) $214 Sound Blastr 16 Basic $129 SBlastr 16 MCD (ASP) $169 Sound Blaster Deluxe $79 SBlaster Omni CD Dry $239 SBlaster Powerd Spkrs $25 Sound Blaster Pro Dlx $124 Snd Blaster Voice Assist $49 Sound Galaxy BX2 $59 Sound Galaxy NX2 $79 Sound Galaxy NXPRO $109 SGlxy NXPRO16 Mmd S449 Snd Galaxy NXPRO 16 S139 SGlxy NXPRO Mmd Kit S349 Sound Machine 594 Sound Machine Pro 16 $139 Sound Star Snd Enhancr $9 SoundMan 16 $99 Thrustmstr Driving Sys $129 Thrustmaster FCS Pro $99 Thrustmstr FCS Pro UP $19 Thrustmaster Flight Sys $59 Thrustmstr Game Card $27 Thrustmstr Ruddr Sys $99 Thrustmastr Weapn Sys $94 CGW MAY 1 $32 7th Guest CD $48 7th Guest 2:11th Hr CD $54 Advent Will Beam VGA Advent Will Beam CD $24 Alone in the Dark $33 Alone in the Dark CD $48 Alone in the Dark 2 $36 Alone in the Dark 2 CD $48 Alone in the Dark 3 CD $48 Altered Destiny $29 Amazon Trail $29 Animation Classics Awful Thngs frm Outrspc 536 Beneath a Steel Sky CD $39 Beverly Hillbillies $19 Bioforge $48 Bioforge CD Bloodnet $39 Bloodnet CD $43 Blue Force: Next of Kin $42 Blue Frc: Next of Kin CD $39 Blues Brothers Buccaneers CD Castle Wolfenstein CD $42 Castle Wolfstn-Spr Dest $29 Chaos Continuum CD $46 City 2000 CD Companions of Xanth $32 Compans of Xanth CD $36 Conan CD $26 Conqusts Robin Hd VGAS24 Conquests of Camelot $15 Conspiracy CD S41 Critical Path WIN CD S48 Cruise for a Corpse $19 Curse of Enchantia CD $23 Daemonsgate $32 Daemonsgate CD $32 Dark Seed $36 Dark Seed CD $39 Darkseed 2 $42 Day of the Tentacle $35 Day of the Tentacle CD $42 Deja Vu 1&2 WIN $34 Doom $45 Doom Episode 1 $12 Dracula $34 Dracula CD $35 Dracula Unleashed CD $47 Dragon Knight 3 $46 Dragon Knight 3 CD $46 Dragon's Lair 2 Tm Wrp $34 Dragonsphere $42 Dragonsphere CD $39 Dreamweb $36 Dune CD $54 Earth Invasion WIN S24 El Grito DJagur CD WIN $46 Elf $24 Epic $32 Eric the Unready $21 Eric The Unready CD $36 Escape Dead Zone CD $48 Evolution $39 Evolution CD $39 Fascination CD Flashback $32 Fourplay WIN $19 $45 $34 $28 Fred Phrks Front Phrm $24 Freelancer 2120 $42 Freelancer 2120 CD $42 G-force $19 Gabriel Knight $39 Gabriel Knight CD Gateway $13 Gateway 2:Homeworld $32 Gateway 2 CD $29 Gateway Collct 182 CD $36 Gobliiins CD $19 Gobliiins 2 CD $19 Goblins 3 CD $19 Guy Spy CD $29 Hand of Fate $29 Hard Day's Night CD $25 Harvester CD $52 Heart of China EGA $34 Heart of China VGA $19 Heaven and Earth $32 Heimdall Hell Cab CD ROM Hired Guns $36 Hook $32 Horde $42 Horde CD $49 Inca $19 Inca CD $19 Inca 2 $19 Inca 2 CD $19 Indy Jones Fate Atlantis $36 Indy Jones Ft Atlants CD$42 Inherit the Earth $45 Innocent Until Caught S34 Inspector Gadget $34 tron Helix CD $56 island of Dr Quandry $26 Isle of the Dead $38 Jack the Ripper $39 Jagged Alliance $48 Journeyman Project CD $48 Journeyman Projct 2 CD $52 Jurassic Park $39 KGB $17 King's Quest 5 VGA $32 King's Quest 5 WIN CD $41 King's Quest 6 CD $39 King's Quest 6 Upgd CD $24 King's Quest 6 VGA $45 King's Ransom King's Ransom CD $38 Kronolog : Nazi Paradox $36 Labyrinth of Time CD $48 Laura Bow 2 Laura Bow 2 CD $24 Leather Goddesses 2 $39 Legend of Kyrandia $32 Legend of Kyrandia CD $39 Leisure Suit Larry 1 EGAS16 Leisure Suit Larry 1 VGAS19 Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGAS24 Leisure Suit Larry 6 S42 Leisure Suit Larry 6 CD $46 Loom $19 Loom CD $39 Lost Files Sherlck Hims $26 Lost Treasures Infocom $39 Lost in Time $19 Lost in Time CD $19 Magic Death CD $26 Magic Pockets Man Enough CD $39 Manhole $27 Maniac Mansion $18 Mario is Missing CD S 44 Martian Memorandum $24 Microcosm CD $49 Mixd Up Faery Tale EGA $14 Mixd Up Faery Tale VGA $29 Mixd-Up Mother Goose $29 Morph Man CD $32 Myst CD $48 No Mouth&1 Must Screm $44 No Mth&1 Must Scrm CD $44 Noctropolis $48 Noctropolis CD $52 Nomad $39 Out of this World $36 Out of this World 2 CD $45 Pepprs Adv in Time VGA $29 Phantasmagoria CD $59 Police Quest 1 VGA $19 Police Quest 3 VGA $24 Police Quest 4 DOS/WIN$39 Police Quest 4 CD $45 Prince of Persia $25 Prince of Persia 2 $42 Quantum Gate WIN CD $45 Quest for Glory 1 $18 Quest Glory 1 VGA CD $39 Quest for Glory 3 $24 Quest for Glory 4 $42 Return of the Phantom $34 Return of Phantom CD $38 Return to Zork $42 Return to Zork CD $48 Rex Nebular Master Edit $32 Riftwar Legacy VGA $39 Ringworld S35 Ringworld CD S38 Robinson's Requiem $42 Robinson's Requiem CD $42 Robocop 3 Sam & Max Hit Road $36 Sam & Max Hit Road CD $45 Screen Antics WIN $19 Secret Monkey Island 2 $21 Secret Monkey Isind CD $39 Secret Monkey Isl VGA $25 Secret of 7th Labyrinth $42 Shadow Caster Shadow of Comet CD $48 Sid Meier Trilogy $34 Simon the Sorcerer $32 Space Quest 1 VGA $16 Space Quest 4 VGA Space Quest 4 CD $37 Space Quest 5 VGA $36 Spellcasting 101 $19 Spirit of Excalibur CD $22 Star Reach $36 Star Trek 25 Anniversary S32 Star Trek 25 Anniver CD $55 Star Trek: Judgmnt Rits S33 Star Trek: Str Fleet Acad S36 Star Trk: Str Fit Acad CD S52 Starship $29 Stellar 7 $21 Stellar 7 CD $24 Superheros of Hoboken $38 Sprheroes of Hobokn CD$38 System Shock System Shock CD $54 Terminator 2029 $37 Terminator 2029 Opr Scr $19 Terminator Rampage S42 Terror of the Deep S 36 Terror of the Deep CD S36 $52 S18 $39 "


"Visa/MC Accepted Checks Held 4 Weeks Money Orders same as cash. COD $8 Delecs tives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary Price availability may change. All sales finall. OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR, HI. AK, APO, FPO S4 per order. 4-8 day Worldwide shipping $6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment FREE GAME OFFER *See Last Page For Details IBM ADULT IBM BUNDLES 'FLIGHT SIM TOOLKIT' gives you the power to design every aspect of your sim world down to the finest detail from cockpit instrumentation and aircraft aerodynamics to trees, trucks, moun. tains and skyscrapers. Features hundreds of clip-art planes and terrain and sophisticated 3D editors. S58 Strip Poker Pro Dt Disk 6$16 Super Smutware CD $19 Sweet Dreams CD $29 Tracy I Love You CD S32 Tropical Girls CD $26 Wickd Q-Time Movie CD $42 Wicked Whispers CD $29 Womn Who Lov Men CD $26 Women of Venus CD $22 X-Rated Bloopers CD $27 IBM BUNDLES *THRUSTMASTER'S FORMULA T1'is the most realistic control for all of today's driving simulators. Features fully functional steering wheel, brake and gas pedals and turbo boost gauge used in supporting games. $129 DIMARK CREARE TERONS PLANES, CATTLEITELAS GRANDESTI FLEET 'THE GRANDEST FLEET' Experience the grueling campaigns, the agony of defeat & the exhilaration of victory! Allocate natural resources to build missile sites, radar stations, shipbuilding facilities and superships. It is up to you to destroy your nemesis. Modem play and random maps. S36 \"WARLORDS' is a huge eight player strategy game of empires, castles, armies, heroes. monsters and drag. ons. In the fabled land of Illuria, an unconvincing peace treaty has just expired. Now, eight mighty empires contend in a ruthless struggle for supreme power. And only one will prevail. $12 Perfect General Greatest Battles of 20th C WW2 Battles Power Hits: Battletech $32 Battletech 1, Battletech 2. Mech Warrior Power Hits: Movies $17 Rocketeer, Hare Raising Havoc, Die Hard, Ghostbusters 2 Power Hits: Sci Fi $19 Prophecy, Tongue of Fatman, Circuit's Edge. Mines of Titan, Death Track Power Hits: Sports $19 Face Off, Pro Tennis Tour, MotoCross, Powerdrift Secret Weap Luftwff CD $39 DO 335 Pfeil P-80 Shooting Star P-38 Lighting HE 162 Volksjager Space Quest Bndle 1-4 $42 Spellcasting Bundle $34 Spellcstg 101, 201, 301 Spellcasting Bundle CD $32 Task Frc 1942 WRSR CD $35 The Victory Pack $34 Turning Point $29 Gettysburg, Spanish Armada, Waterloo Ultima Bundle 1-6 CD S59 Ultima Trilogy $39 Ultima 1-3 Ultima Trilogy 2 $48 Ulrima 4-6 Wing Commander 1 Dix $48 Wing Commander Secret Missions 1 & 2 Wing Commndr 1 Dix CD$29 Wizardry Trilogy $32 Wizardry 1-3 Wizardry Trilogy 2 $33 Wizardry 4-6 Steve Fawkner $24 Tadi IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADULT IBM ADULT IBM ADULT $32 The Dig $40 The Prophecy $19 Treasure Huntrs, Inc CD $48 Tuneland CD $36 Under a Killing Moon CD $55 Voyeur CD $48 Walker Warriors of Legend $18 Where in Spac Crmn Dlx $44 Where in Time Carmen $32 Where in USA Crmn Dlx $45 Where in USA is Crmen $29 Where in World Carmen $29 Where in Wrld Crmn Dlx $44 Where in World Dix CD $54 Who Killd Sam Ruprt CD $21 Wing Comm Ultm 6 CD $24 Wing Commdr U UW CD $55 Wrath of the Gods CD $39 Yserbius $26 Zombie Dino CD $48 IBM ARCADE Amorous Asian Girls CD $32 Animated Fantasies CD $34 Animatd Fantasies 2 CD $34 Bare Assets CD $32 Best of Inferno CD $39 Best of Vivid CD $32 Best Barlow Affairs CD $39 Betrayal CD $29 Busting Out CD Busty Babes CD $32 Buttmn's Euro Vactn CD $29 CD Brothel CD $36 Cafe Flesh CD $32 California Daydrmer CD $29 Camp Double D CD $29 Cat and Mouse CD $42 Centerfold Squares $21 Come Play With Me CD $36 Condo Cuties CD Creme de la Creme CD $29 Debby Does Dallas CD $38 Deceptions CD $29 Deep Throat CD Devil in Miss Jones CD $34 Digital Dancing CD $36 Femme Fatale $26 Femme Fatale Dt Disk 1 $18 Femme Fatale Dt Disk 2 $18 Femme Fatale Dt Disk 3 $18 Femme Fatale Di Disk 4 $18 Femme Fatale Dt Disk 5 $18 Femme Fatale Di Disk 6 $18 Femme Fatale WIN $29 Flame CD $25 Gifly Gold CD $28 Gifts That Keep Givg CD $25 Girlfriend Suzie $36 Girlfriend Teri $42 Girls Steven J Hicks CD $29 Girls of Mardi Gras CD $32 Girls of Risque CD $32 Girls, Girls, Girls CD $29 Glamr Girls of 1943 CD $36 Heavenly Bodies 2 CD $45 Hidden Obsessions CD $32 High Volume Nudes CD $26 Hooter Heavens CD $36 House of Dreams CD $24 Hse Sleepg Beauties CD$29 Insatiable CD $32 Intractv Ad Semr Bts CD $39 Jigsaw Pinups $19 Kama Sutra CD $34 L.A. Strippers CD $32 Legends of Porn 2 CD $29 Loads of Fun CD $32 Lovely Ladies II CD $39 Mark of Zara CD Mark of 2 $38 Massive Mellons CD $29 My First Time CD $29 Mystique of Orient CD $29 New Wave Hookrs 1 CD $32 Air Combat Classics $39 Their Finest Hour Battle Hawks Secret Weap of Luftwaffe Allied Forces $9 M1 Tank Platoon, Gunship Award Bundle $44 Kings Quest 5, Red Baron. Rise of the Dragon Combat Classics $19 F15 Strike Eagle 688 Attack Sub Team Yankee Dynamix Bundle 1 A-10 Tank Killer Heart of China Stellar 7 Eye of Beholder Collctn $52 Eye of Beholdr Trilgy CD $51 Falcon 3 wThrstmst FCS $99 Gateway Collectn 1 & 2 $36 Land Sea Air 2 S19 Command HQ Red Storm Rising F15 Strike Eagle Lost Treasurs Infocom $39 Infidel, Lurking Horror, Deadline, Witness, Suspect, Ballyhoo, Hitch Hiker's Guide/Galxy. Suspended, StarCross, MoonMist, PlanetFall, StationFall, Enchanter, Sorcerer, SpellBreaker, Zork 1-3, Beyond Zork, Zork Zero Lost Treasurs Infocm CD$39 Lost Treasurs Infocom 2 $29 Border Zone, Plundered Hearts, Bureaucracy, Cutthroats, A Mind For Voyaging, Hollywood Hi Jinx, Seastalker, Sherlock Holmes: Riddle of Crown Jewels, Wishbringer, Nord and Bert. Trinity Lost Treasrs Infcm 2 CD $29 Lucas Classic Advent $36 Indiana Jones, Secret Monkey Island 1. Maniac Mansion Magnetic Scrolls Bundle $16 Fish, Corruption, Guild of Thieves Max Pac $16 Star Control, Hoverforce, Test Drive 3 Maximum Overkill wDisk $45 Megafortress Mega-Pak $38 Megafortress Megafortress Mis Disk 1 Megafortress 3-D Editor Perfect General Trilogy $36 New Wave Hookrs 2 CD $32 Nightwatch Intractv CD $36 Nova Collection V. 1 CD $26 Nova Collection V.2 CD $29 Othr Side of Chelsea CD $29 Overexposed CD $39 Pandor....AAAH'S CD $27 Paradise Club CD $36 Penthouse Intractiv CD $69 Penthouse Jigsaw PG $21 Phone Sex CD Audio $15 Physical Therapy CD $19 Playboy Electrnc Datebk $34 Porkware V.2 CD $29 Princess of Persia CD S29 Racquelle Released CD S34 Rimfire Pacific Video CD S32 Scissors N' Stones CD $44 Secrets CD $34 Sex Olympics $19 Sexiest Women on CD $24 Sinfully Yours CD $29 Sizzle CD $29 Southern Beauties CD $26 Strip Poker 3 $19 Strip Poker 3 D1 Disk 1 S16 Strip Poker 3 Dt Disk 2 $16 Strip Poker 3 Dt Disk 3 $16 Strip Poker 3 Dt Disk 4 $16 Strip Poker 3 Dt Disk 5 $16 Strip Poker 3 Dt Disk 6 $16 Strip Poker Professional $34 Strip Poker Pro Dt Disk 1$16 Strip Poker Pro Dt Disk 2$16 Strip Poker Pro Dt Disk 3$16 Strip Poker Pro Dt Disk 4$16 Strip Poker Pro Dt Disk 5$16 $36 IBM ADULT 500 CC Race Bike $29 Alien Breed $19 Aliens Ate My Babysitter $27 Crazy Cars $25 Creepers $34 Dragon's Lair 3 $34 Dragon's Lair CD $39 Dragn's Lr Esc Sngs Cst $34 Eight Ball Deluxe $38 Fast Action Paq $24 Fire & Forget $24 Galactic Conqueror $31 Geekwd Gms of Galaxy $19 Geekwd Gms Galaxy CD$21 Gobliiins VGA $16 Gobliiins 3 $19 Guy Spy S24 Highway Patrol 2 S29 Incredible Machine 2 $28 Incredible Mach 2 WIN S29 Incredible Toons S29 Innocent S38 Jurassic Park CD $44 Kye Deluxe WIN $33 Mad Dog Mcree CD $32 Mad Dog Macree 2 CD $39 Metal & Lace M etal & Lace Upgd $5 CGW MAY 101 Sex Positions CD $36 101 Sex Positions 2 CD $34 94-95 CDX Calender CD $29 Adult Movie Almanac CD $52 Adult Palate CD $22 Adult Palate 2 CD $29 Adult Reference CD $24 Advent Brad Stallion CD $39 After Dark Trilogy CD $34 All Beauties CD Amateur Models CD $19 American Girls CD $29 Digital Seduction CD Double Play Vol 1 CD Double Play Vol 2 CD Dream Girl CD Dream Machine CD Ecstacy CD ErotiCafe CD Erotica CD Exotic Girls 3 in 1 CD Expose CD Extreme Delight CD S34 $36 $36 S32 $39 $29 $48 $34 $19 $24 $24 "


"CHIPS&BITS online store Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10052 PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Dept 10052 IBM ARCADE IBM HINT BOOKS TIIULUI! Pebble Beach S8 \"PEBBLE BEACH GOLF LINKS' is the first in a series of LINKS CLASSIC EDITION courses made for the LINKS 386 PRO with VGA graphics. Designers and programmers spent more than a year reproducing every nuance of Pebble Beach. Users will feel like they've actually played the course! \"UNDER A KILLING MOON' Transports you to the virtual world of the feisty detective Tex Murphy. New feature allows you to save and splice scenes together. Digitized voices & sound effects and an amazing level of detail & freedom of movement make this game visually & aurally stunning. CD $55 Microsoft Arcade WIN $29 Mirage Thunder $39 Mortal Kombat $39 Paper Boy 2 $19 Prehistorik $29 Raiden $32 Rebel Assault CD $44 Rise of the Robots Silverball $29 Space Ace S32 Space Ace 2 S34 Street Fighter 2 $34 Super Cauldron $25 T2:Arcade Game $29 Take-A-Brk Pinball WIN $19 Tetris Gold CD $32 $29 Titus Fox $25 Tristan Pinball $19 Who Shot John Rock CD$36 Wild Streets $24 Winball WIN $28 Zool $34 $39 UNDER,A Championship COURSE 528 se! S24 Titan $6 MRSM THE CIANS IBM CD $10 'MECHWARRIOR 2' Climb into one of 16 Battle Mechs and prepare to set your imagination on fire. You're strapped into a 100-ton machine that can annihilate a squadron of F-15s in a heartbeat. And you're about to battle your way across the planetary terrain. From ice to desert to urban land. $46 Stop 19 he 'ACROSS THE RHINE' Control history's famous tanks or entire companies & experience the fierce combat & tough decisions that gripped WWII tank commanders. Blast your way through enemy units across war-torn Europe. S48 $55 GEN IBM HINT BOOKS Curse of Azure Bonds $10 Dark Queen of Krynn $10 Darklands $14 Death Knights of Krynn $10 Dracula Unleashed strat $16 Dragons of Flame Dungeon Master $10 Dynamix Great War Pins $16 EcoQuest Search Cetus $10 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $10 Elvira Mistress Dark $10 Eye of the Beholder $10 Eye of the Beholder 2 S12 Eye of the Beholder 3 S10 Fascination $10 Fred Pharks Fron Pharm $8 Gabriel Knight $10 Gateway Savage Frontr $10 Global Conquest w/disk $21 Gobliiins $10 Gold Rush Gunship 2000 $16 Hand of Fate $10 Harpoon $16 Harpoon 2 Stratgy Guide $16 Heart of China Hillsfar $8 Immortal $10 Indi Jones 4 Ft Atlantis $10 Indy Jones Grfx Adv $10 Inherit the Earth $16 Island Of Dr Brain $10 Jetfighter 2.0 $16 King's Quest 1 $10 King's Quest 2 S10 King's Quest 3 $10 King's Quest 4 $10 King's Quest 5 $10 King's Quest 6 $10 Laura Bow 2 HintBook $10 Leisure Suit Larry 1 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 2 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 3 Leisure Suit Larry 5 $9 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $10 Lemmings /disk Loom $10 Lord of the Rings V1 $10 Lord of the Rings V2 $6 Lost Files Sherick Hims $10 LucasArts Adventure Bk $16 LucsArts Air Combt Strat $16 Magic Candle 2 $10 Magic Candle 3 $10 Manhunter New York $10 Manhunter San Francsc $10 Martian Dreams $13 Master of Orion Strategy $16 Matrix Cubed MS Flight Sim 5 Stratgy S16 Might & Magic 1 & 2 S10 Might & Magic 3 $16 Might & Magic 4 $16 Might & Magic 5 $16 Might & Magic Compndm$16 Off Bk Leisr St Lary 2nd $14 Off Bk of Ultima 2nd Ed $16 Off Gde Wilcs Spac Adv $14 Off Gde King's Quest 3rd$16 Off bk of Police Quest $12 Pacific Strike Playtestrs $12 Patriot $16 Pepper's Adventure Time S8 Phantasy Star 3 $16 Planet's Edge $16 Police Quest 1 $10 Police Quest 2 $10 $42 IBM HINT BOOKS IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING 7th Guest 2:11th Hour $54 Al-Qadim $49 Alone in the Dark 2 $48 Companions of Xanth $36 Darklegions $39 Dragonsphere $39 Falcon Gold Fantasy Fiefdom $48 Inferno $39 Interplay's 10 Yr Anthol $48 Iron Angel $39 Links Pro 486 Lords of Midnight $55 Mechamander $42 Mechwarrior 2 $46 Myst $48 Outpost $39 Privateer $56 Ravenlott Rebel Assault $44 Robinson's Requiem S42 Sam and Max Hit Road S45 Sea Wolf S52 System Shock S54 Tetris Gold $32 Under a Killing Moon $55 Who Shot Johnny Rock $36 Wild Blue Yonder $49 World of Xeen $40 $24 $52 $18 S46 $32 $16 Space Quest 1 HintBk $10 Space Quest 2 $10 Space Quest 3 $10 Space Quest 4 $10 Spellcasting 101 Official $14 Spellcasting 201 BK $10 Star Trek 25th Aniv $9 Startlight 1 $10 Starflight 2 $10 Strike Commdr Off Book $14 Stunt Island $16 Summoning $16 Tales Magic:Prophc Shd $12 Time Quest $10 Treasures Savage Frontr$10 Tunnels & Trolls $16 Ultima 4 $10 Ultima 5 $10 Ultima 6 S10 Ultima 7 $12 Ultima 7 & Uworld Book $16 Ultima 7.5 Balancg Scis $16 Ultima Avatar Advt Book $16 Ultima U Stygian Abyss $12 Ultima Uwrld Wrld of Lab $12 V Victory $16 Wizardry 6 Cosmc Forge $12 Wizardry 7 $16 X-Wing Olf Strat Guide $16 Yeager Air Combat Hdbk $16 Yserbius $12 IBM HINT BOOKS Police Quest 3 $10 Pool of Radiance $10 Pools of Darkness $12 Populous 1 & 2 Off Strat $16 Power Monger Strategy $16 Powermonger $10 Privateer Playtesirs Gde $16 Protostar $8 Quest For Clues 2 S21 Quest For Clues 3 $21 Quest for Clues 4 S21 Quest for Clues 5 $16 Quest for Clues 6 $16 Quest for Glory 3 $10 Quest for Glory 4 $10 Quest for Glory Strategy $19 Questbustrs Bk of Clues $18 Railroad Tycoon $12 Realms of Arkania $14 Return to Zork Return to Zork Advt Gde $16 Rex Nebular Cs Gn Ben $14 Rise of the Dragon S10 Sea Wolf Strategy Gde $16 Secret Monkey Island $10 Secret Monkey Island 2 $10 Secret Silver Blades $10 Sentinel Worlds 1 $10 Shadow Caster $18 Shadow Sorcerer $10 Simcity 2000 Strat Gde $16 Simcity/Simearth Book $20 Simearth $16 Simfarm Strategy Guide $16 Simlife Official Strategy $16 Simon Sorcerer Hint Gde$10 Sonic Strategy Guide $16 S10 Access Super Bundle $34 Al-Qadim CD Al-Qadim:Genie's Curse $45 Amberstar $19 Arborea Journy Inr Snct $34 Arena: Elder Scrolls $44 Bard's Tale Construction $29 Black Crypt $32 Blackmoore CD Bloodstone $27 Celtic Legends Challenge of 5 Realms $39 Champions $37 Cobra Mission $34 Curse of Azure Bonds $15 Cyber Empire $16 Cyber Space $39 Cyber Space CD S38 Dark Queen of Krynn S32 Dark Sun $47 Dark Sun Grey Isl Ex Pk $34 Dark Sun CD Darklands $29 Darklands Mastr Ed wbk $51 Daughter of Serpents $19 Death Knights of Krynn $21 Demon Hunter Disciples of Steel $35 Dragon Knight 3 CD $46 Dragon Tales CD $38 Dragonsphere CD Dungeon Hack S38 Dungeon Hack CD $34 Dungeon Master $29 Dungeon Master 2 $36 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $19 Eternam $19 Eye of the Beholder 1 $14 Eye of the Beholder 2 919 Eye of the Beholder 3 $42 Eye of Beholder 3 CD $48 Fire King Flames of Freedm MWII $24 Forgotten Castle $49 Forgotten Castle CD $55 Four Crystals of Trazere $16 Gateway Savage Frontr $32 Gods Hero's Might & Magic $45 Hero's Might & Magic CD $45 Hunters of Ralk CD $54 Interactive Movie 1 $52 Intrplay's 10 Yr Anth CD $48 Jorune $45 Jorune CD $48 Lands of Lore $34 Legacy of Necromancer $17 Legacy: Realm Of Terror $39 Legend $22 Lord of the Rings V1 $32 Lord of the Rings V2 $37 Lord of the Rings V182 $35 Lord of the Rings CD $45 Lords of Midnight $48 Lords of Midnight CD $55 Loremaster $29 Lure of the Temptress $16 Megatraveller $18 Might & Magic 3 $19 Might & Magic 4 $37 Might & Magic 5 $36 Pirates Gold $39 Planet's Edge Pool of Radiance $15 $49 $42 A-Train $16 Advent Willie Beamish $10 Altered Destiny $10 Bard's Tale 1 $10 Bard's Tale 2 $10 Bard's Tale 3 $10 Bargon Attack $10 Blue Force: Next of Kin $10 Castle Wolfenstein 3D $10 Castle of Dr Brain S10 Champions of Krynn S10 Civilization $16 Codename Iceman $10 Colonel's Bequest $10 Comptr Advt Gm Secrts $16 Conquests Robin Hood $10 Conquests of Camelot $10 CGW MAY 3 $39 IBM ROLE PLAYING $22 All Character Editors $16 ADD Collectors Editn 3 $19 "


"Visa/MC Accented Checks Held 4 Weeks Money Orders same as cash GOD 88 Delec4 tives teplaced with same product. Most items shipped same day Shipping times may vary Price availability may change. All sales final: -OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US S4 per order. Mail to Canada PR, HI AK, APO, EPO SA per order 4-8 day Worldwide shipping so peritem. Handling $2 per shipment es capaced will came product Man domes Sumed same day shipping lines may FREE G AM E OFFER \"See Last Page For Details IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS *7th GUEST: 11th HOUR' Sequel to 7th Guest except the stakes are higher, the puzzles more clever and the return visit even more unsettling. Solve puzzles and investigate clues that take you through Stauf's haunted house with movie-like plot twists, special effects and music soundtrack. CDS54 \"GENGHIS KHAN Il There's a new bully on the block and it's you! You're one awesome Mongol by the name of Genghis Khan and you're hungry for conquest. Play one of twelve world-class rulers. Lead knights, samurai and elephant units into battle. Play overview or head to head battle options. $34 STAR LEGIONS $32 'STAR LEGIONS From the creators of the Star Fleet series. You command a mighty Imperial invasion fleet assigned to detroy the hated Alliance and cure the galaxy of the plague of democracy. Only the strong deserve to survive and rule! Guide your legions tactics' as they conquer a crucial strongpoint. $12 TO CUSSIONS $36 SYSTEM SHOCK' You receive a neural implant that allows you to enter cyberspace. Upon awakening, you discover that a super-intelligent computer has seized control of the station and is planning to release a deadly virus. S48 *MNICRAFT IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM SIMULATIONS F15 Strike Eagle 2 $15 F15 Strk Eagle 3 Acs Pk $52 F15 Strike Eagle 3 CD $48 F15 Strike Eagle III $42 F19 Stealth Fighter $18 F40 Pursuit Simulator $29 FA 18 Homet $54 FA 18 Hornet CD $54 Falcon 3.0 $46 Falcon 3 Sc1 Fling Tgr $24 Falcon 3 Sc2 MiG 29 $32 Falcon 3 Sc3 FA18 Hrnt $32 Falcon 4.0 $59 Falcon AT $16 Falcon Gold CD S55 Fast attack CD S48 Fire & Forget 2 S29 Fleet Defndr F14 Tomct 548 Flight S52 Flight Adventures 825 $39 Flight Planner $24 Flight Sim Flight Shop $29 Flight Sim Toolkit $58 Flight Sim Toolkit CD $54 Flight of the Intruder $16 Fly the Grand Canyon Flying Circus $39 Formula 1 $24 Frontier Elite 2 $38 Grand Canyon Scenery $18 Great Nav Bat Ships Atl $19 Great Naval Battles CD $55 Great Naval Battles 2 $45 Great Naval Battls 2 CD $42 Great Naval Batt Sc Bld $24 Gunship 2000 Scen Disk $24 Gunship 2000 VGA $37 H.A.W.C. $32 Harrier Assault $32 Harrier Assault SVGA $47 Harrier Assult SVGA CD $44 Heroes of the 357th $18 Hyperspeed $16 Indy Car Racing $39 Inferno $39 Inferno CD $39 Iron Angel $39 Iron Angel CD $39 Jet Fighter 2.0 $39 Jet Pack CD $44 Jump Jet $39 Jump Jet Aces Pack $46 Jutland CD $48 Lawn Mower Man CD $42 Life and Death $19 Life and Death 2 $24 Lunar Command $24 M1 Tank Platoon Classic S19 M4: Sherman Tank Sim $34 Mantis Exp Speech Pak $19 Mantis Exper Fighter CD $46 Mantis Experim Ftr VGA $29 Maximum Ovrkll Bdi CD $59 Maximum Overkill MD 2 $32 Mechwarrior 2 $46 Mechwarrior 2 Add-on $19 Mechwarrior 2 CD $46 Megarace $36 Metal Tech: Battledrome $29 MiG 29 (Stand Alone) $44 Mig 29 Gold CD $52 MigN29 Fulcrum $32 MS Flight Sim 4 Japan $19 MS Flight Sim 5.0 $46 MS Flight Sim 5 LsVegs $29 MS Flight Sim 5 Nw Yrk $29 MS Flight Sim 5 Paris $29 MS Flight Sim 5 SnFrnc $29 MS Flight Sim 5 PortInd $32 MS Flight Sim 5 DC $29 MS Flight Sim Fit Shop $32 MS Space Simulator 1.0 $44 Nomad CD $39 Operation Airstorm CD $42 Pacific Strike $49 Pacific Strike Spch Pak $17 Power Boat Simulator $39 Praxim $32 Privateer $48 Privateer CD S56 Privateer Special Oprtns S22 Privateer Special Oper2 $22 Privateer Speech Pack $17 Rally S29 Reach for the Skies S19 Real Weather Pilot S29 Red Baron VGA S36 Red Storm Rising ODCP $14 Road & Track Grnd Prix $24 Sailing Simulator 3 $42 Sailng Sim 3 East Coast $32 Sailng Sim 3 West Coast $32 Scenery Enhancmt Edit $21 Sea Wolf $48 Sea Wolf CD $52 Seal Team Secret Weap Exp He 162 $21 Secret Weap Exp P38 $21 Secret of Dinosaurs CD $44 Shuttle $26 Shuttle CD $29 Silent Service 2 $19 Space Racers CD $44 Spectre Virtual Reality $38 Spectre VR CD $45 Speed Racer Star Fleet Acadamy CD $45 Storm Troop Storm Troop CD $54 Strike Commander $34 Strike Commander CD $55 Strike Comm Spec Op 1 $22 Strike Commdr Spch Pk $19 Stunt Island $37 Sub War 2050 $36 Syndicate $39 Syndcate Sct Amer Rvit $22 TFX CD $45 TEX: Tactical Flr Exper $39 Tank $16 Task Force Admirals Pk $45 Team Yankee 2 $19 Team Yankee 2 CD Test Drive 2 $30 Test Drive 2:Collection $19 Test Drive 3 Test Drive 3: Passion $19 Theme Park $42 Tie Fighter Top Gun Danger Zone $24 Tornado $48 Tornado CD $42 Tower $42 Tracon WIN $28 Ultrabots Sanction Earth $36 Vette Voice Commder Bundle $18 WC 2 Operation 2 $22 WC 2 Speech Mod S13 WC Secret Mission $20 WC Secret Miss1&2 Bdi $20 WC Secret Missn 2 HD $20 Wild Blue Yonder CD $49 Wing Commander $21 CGW MAY 4 $34 $54 Ultima Uwrld 2 Labyrinth $48 Ultima Uwrld Stygn Abys $21 Uncharted Waters $42 Unlimited Adventures $37 Veil of Darkness $37 Waxworks $19 Wing Comm 2 UUW CD $34 Wizardry 4 $19 Wizardry 6 Cosmc Forge $22 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $29 World of Xeen CD $42 IBM EDUCATIONAL Pools of Darkness $38 Protostar Ravenloft $48 Ravenloft CD $52 Realms of Arkania $36 Red Crystal $29 Riftwar Legacy CD $25 Rome: Pathway to Powr $29 Secret Silver Blades $15 Shadow Caster CD S45 Sherick Hims nDt 1 CD $36 Sherick Hlms CD 2 CD $36 Sherick Hims OnDt 3 CD $51 Spacewrecked $19 SpellJammr:Pirates Rim $16 Spellcraft:Aspect Valor $19 Star Saga 2 $19 Star Trek Next Gen CD $46 Stonekeep $52 Stonekeep CD Stronghold S36 Summoning S16 Sword of China $42 Syndicate CD S48 Tales Magic:Prophc Shd $16 Twilight 2000 VGA $32 Ultima 4 Quest of Avatar $35 Ultima 5 Warriors Destn $38 Ultima 6 False Prophet $19 Ultima 7 Black Gate $47 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue $16 Ultima 7 Series CD $42 Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle S48 Ultima 7.5 P 2 Silvr Seeds20 Ultima 8: Pagan S48 Ultima 8 Speech Pack $17 Ultima Uworld 1 & 2 CD $59 $29 Last Chnc See WIN CD $38 Mario Teaches Typing $26 Mario Tches Typing CD $48 Mavis B. Tches Typing $29 Mavis B. Tches Typ WIN $34 MS Art Gall: London CD $45 Microsoft Dinosaurs CD $42 Mmedia: Vivaldi WIN CD $24 Orbits: Voyage Solr Sys $29 Oregon Trail WIN 9 34 Oregon Trail WIND CD $39 Print Shop Deluxe $49 Print Shop Dix Bus Grph $29 Putt Putt Goes to Moon $42 Putt Putt Gs to Moon CD$44 Putt Putt Joins Parade $32 Putt Putt Jns Parade CD $48 Putt Putts Fun Pak $19 Putt Putt's Fun Pack CD $34 Quarky Quays Sci VGA $29 Reader Rabbit 2 WIN $29 Rodney's Funscreen $32 Scooter's Magic Castle $32 Secret Isl Dr. Quandry $29 Slater & Charlie CD $42 Slater & Chrl Go Campg $29 Software Tlwks Rei CD $79 SS: Gizmos & Gadgets $26 Stickybear Prts of Spch $32 Stickybear Reading $24 Stickybear Spellgrabber $29 ... $30 A10 Avenger A10 Avenger $46 A320 Airbus $29 AH-64 B Longbow $54 AH-64 Helicopter $46 Aces Europe Miss Disk 1$27 Aces Europe Miss Disk 2827 Aces Over Europe $39 Aces Pacific Miss Disk $19 Aces of the Deep $42 Aces of the Pacific S44 Across the Rhine S48 Air Combat Pacific 1942 $48 Air Duel $33 Air Warrior SVGA $34 Air Warrior SVGA $35 Armored Fist $52 Armour Geddon $32 Art of the kill $24 Assignment Miami $19 B17 Flying Fortress Cisc $19 B17 Fly Fort WSS2 CD $37 Backroad Racers CD $29 Battle of Britain $34 Battlecruiser 3000 $45 Chopper Pack CD ROM $37 Coaster $32 Combat Classics 2 $29 Cyber Race S29 Cyber Race CD $39 Delta V $42 Design Your Own Railrd $19 Earthquake Simulatr CD $42 Elite Plus $19 European Racers CD $29 Eye of the Storm Fit Sim $29 F117A Stealth Fir VGA $29 $29 $48 Aesop's Mmdia Fabls CD$30 Ancient Empire $25 Annabl's Ancnt EgyptCD $52 Auto Map S39 AutoWorks $49 Boom Box Boom Raw $12 Castle of Dr Brain VGA $19 Children's Write/Publish S42 Clock Works Dinopark Tycoon $34 Dinosaurs CD $48 Don Quixote CD $24 Dyno-Quest $29 EcoQust Srch Celus CD $29 EcoQuest VGA $32 Fatty Bear's Bday Surp $32 Fatty Bear Bday Srp CD $38 Fatty Bear's Funpack CDS34 Fatty Bear Wrld Gms CD $44 Island Of Dr. Brain VGA $29 Jack and Beanstalk CD $34 Jungle Book WIN CD $19 $48 $19 $15 IBM SIMULATIONS ATP 2.0 ATP Flight Sim 1.00 $29 $19 "


"CHIPS&BITS Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10052 PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Dept 10052 IBM SIMULATIONS IBM STRATEGY WARBAME CONSTRUCTION SETU: FIGHTERS $34 $36 Wing Commander 2 $26 Wing Commander 2 Bdi $29 Wing Commdr 2 Dlx CD $29 Wing Commander 3 $52 Wing Commander 3 CD $54 Wing Commder Acadmy $32 Wings of Glory $52 Wolf Pack CD $42 World Circuit $32 World Circuit CD $34 X-Wing $42 X-Wing Mission Disk 1 $19 X-Wing Mission Disk 2 S19 Zephyr \"TIE FIGHTER Sequel to the acclaimed X-Wing, players fly under the direction of the Dark Lord himself, Darth Vader. Defy the Rebel Alliance in training, combat missions & tours of duty that strengthen the Emperor's hold on the galaxy. Six Imperial starfighters to fly under the strategies of the Empire. \"WAR GAME CONSTRUCTION SET 11' A tactical tank. based war game constrution set. Players construct an army and participate in small scale confrontations using tanks and tools of war from 1918 to 1991. Features authentic tanks, random scenario generator and choose from 12 different time periods. $42 S42 S45 IBM STRATEGY Cardell WINNER \"MAGIC CANDLE III The ancient lands around the Solian Sea have been stricken by a mysterious blight! Crops are failing, illness is spreading and strange beasts lurk in the hills. Can you find the source? Explore the southern homelands, unearth valuable treasure and stop the blight before it consumes the world! $12 'WINNER TAKES ALL' A fascinating interactive adult video game of chance. You score the points and a host of vivid megastars like Racquel, Justine Lenay and Ashlyn Gere pay off in exciting visuals that will leave you breathless! Round and round you go, risking it all for a host of sizzling beauties. CD $34 $29 $34 ATTER MINEIRAFT W intetitz IBM STRATEGY Dominus $39 Dune 2 El Fish $34 Empire Builder Empire Deluxe $34 Empire Deluxe WIN $35 Empire Deluxe Scen1 $21 Empire Dix Mastr Ed CD $45 Fantasy Empires $39 Fantasy Empires CD $45 Fantasy Fiefdom CD $48 Fields of Glory $34 Fifth Fleet Fort Apache S19 Gemfire $37 Genghis Khan 2 S36 Gettysburg $29 Gettysbrg: Inter Batt Gettysbrg: Inter Batt CD $42 Global Domination $34 Gobliiins 2 Princs Butto $16 Gold of the Americas $24 Grandest Fleet $36 Great Nav Bit Admirl Pk $49 Harpoon 2 $48 Harpoon 2 Battle Set 1 $26 Heirs to the Throne $32 HUMANS $24 Humans: Insult to Injury $14 Humans CD $28 Kingdoms of France Kingdoms of Germany $36 Kingmaker $39 Koshan Conspiracy $36 Koshan Conspiracy CD $48 $37 Lemmings 2: Tribes $29 Lemmings Datadisk $19 Lemmings ODCP $19 Lemmings wDtadisk CD $45 Liberty or Death $37 Lost Admiral $19 Lost Admiral Enhanced $44 Lost Admiral Scen Disk $23 Lost Vikings $24 Maelstrom $36 Master of Orion $39 Mechamander $42 Mechamander CD $42 Mega Lo Mania $19 Merchant Colony $17 Merchant Prince $39 Napoleonics $34 New World Order $38 Nobunaga's Ambition Nobunaga's Ambition 2 $37 Nuclear War $16 Objection $19 Objection Enhanced $19 Operation Crusader $34 Operation Europe S42 Outpost $39 Outpost CD $39 Paladin 2 $34 Patrician $34 Patrician CD $36 Pax Imperia S42 Perfect General $34 Perfect General 2 $44 Perfect General S2 20th $23 Perfect General WW2 S21 Populous 2 Powermonger S19 Protostar CD Purest Wargame 536 Rags to Riches $36 Railroad Tycoon 2 $39 IBM STRATEGY IBM TRADITIONAL 18th Air Squadron $36 A Train $34 A Train Constructn Set $32 Advanced Civilization $35 Aide de Camp $42 Airbucks 1.2 $24 Ambush at Sorinor $42 Ancient Art of War Sky $26 Archon Ultra $34 Arctic Baron $29 Arctic Baron CD Armada $22 Armada 2525 $34 Ashes of Empire $29 Battle Group Commndr $45 Battle Isle Battle Isle Scenario Disk $22 Battle of Chickamagua $38 Battle of Chickmgua CD $42 Battles in Time Battles of Destiny $34 Beyond Squad Leader $38 Black Beard $36 Breach 3 $36 Buzz Aldrin Race Space $38 Bzz Alden Rac Spac CD $54 Caesar $34 Campaign 2 $36 Capitalist Pig WIN $19 Carriers at War $24 Carriers at War 2 $39 Castle Conquest $42 Castles $18 Castles 2 $36 Castles 2 CD $49 Celtic Tales: Balr of Evil $42 Chssmstr 4000 Trb WIN $36 Civilization $44 Civilization WIN $42 Clash of Steel $39 Cohort 2 S18 Colonization $45 Colonization CD $45 Command HQ Classic $18 Command and Conquer $42 Conquer for Windows $19 Conquered Kingdoms $32 Conquered Kingdoms 1 $24 Conquered Kingdoms 2 836 Conquest $36 Conquest of Japan $36 Crisis in the Kremlin $32 Cybergo $39 D-Day: Beginning of End S42 Darklegions S42 Darklegions CD S42 Detroit $34 Discovry Stp Columbus $34 Dominion: King's Life $41 CGW MAY 5 IBM TRADITIONAL Railroad Tycoon Classic $19 Rampart Reach for the Stars S24 Realms S16 Red Ghost Red Zone $32 Robo Sport WIN $34 Romance 3 Kingdoms 2 $39 Romance 3 Kingdoms 3 $39 Rules of Engagement 2 $34 Rules Engag2 Cpgn Dk $19 Second Conflict WIN $34 Seven Cities Gold 2 S19 Sid Meir's Civil War $58 Siege With Exp Disk S19 Sim Ant $29 Sim Ant WIN $34 Sim Ant CD $48 Sim City $27 Sim City WIN $34 Sim City CD $48 Sim City Classic $26 Sim City Classic WIN $26 Sim City 2000 $39 Sim City 2000 WIN $42 Sim City 2000: Disasters $18 Sim City 2000 CD $45 Sim Earth $29 Sim Earth WIN $29 Sim Earth CD $48 Sim Farm $29 Sim Lite $29 Sim Life WIN $29 Smokin' Gun WIN $28 Space Hulk $19 Space Miner $36 Space Raiders CD $42 Spaceward Ho! $36 Spaceward Ho! WIN $36 Star Control 2 S34 Strike Squad $39 Stronghold CD $36 Sub Version $36 Tac Ops $42 Tank $36 Task Force 1942 $36 Tegel's Mercenaries 2 $44 Term 2 Chesswars CD S27 The Complete UMS $44 Theatre of War $16 Tigers on the Prowl $42 Unnatural Selection $29 Utopia $29 Viking Conquest $36 Vikings 2 $36 Vikings Fields of Conqst $19 Walls of Rome $39 Warlords 2 Warlords 2 Scenario Ed $29 When Two Worlds War $34 Worlds at War $19 $37 Bridge 7 $24 Bridge Olympiad $36 Bridgemaster WIN $29 CD-Romix 1 Hardcase $18 CD-Romix 2 Prime $18 CD-Romix 3 Free X CD $18 Casino Game Pak WIN $32 Casino Mastr Gold WIN $43 Checkmate WIN $36 ChessManiac 5 Bill & 1 $39 ChessManc 5 Bill& 1 CD S34 Chessmaster 2000 S24 Chessmaster 3000 $29 Chessmaster 3000 WIN $35 Chessmaster 3000 CD $46 Classic 5 $32 Classic 5 WIN $30 Classic Solitaire WIN $18 Clue Master Detective $16 Coffee Break Collin CD $29 Cribbage Master $29 Den Millr: Nws to Me CD $25 Dr Floyds Desktop Toys $14 Dr Thorp's Blackjack $32 Faces Tetris 3 S15 Gambit $39 Game-Maker Ver 2.0 $49 Go Master Dix Vr 5 WIN $79 Go Master Jr Vr 5 WIN $19 Go Master Tool Kit $39 Go Master Tool Kit WIN $79 Go Master Ver 4 WIN $39 Hong Kong MJ Pro $32 Hoyle's Book Games V3 $29 Hoyle's Bk Games Clssc $29 It's a Wonderful Life CD $39 Jeopardy 25th Aniversry $14 Joseki Genius $39 King's Table S24 Lawn Mower Man SS CDS36 Lexicross $24 Lucky's Casino Advent $38 Monopoly Deluxe $29 Monopoly Deluxe WIN S29 Omar Sharif Bridge WIN $32 Omar Shrt Bridge Dix CDS46 Origamo $39 Oshkosh '92 CD $39 Pinball Dreams $29 Pool Shark S15 Positronic Bridge $30 Positrn Bridge Cmptit SES60 Risk WIN S26 Russian Six Pack $26 Russian Six Pack WIN $19 Sargon 5 $13 Scrabble Deluxe $26 Scrabble Deluxe WIN $19 Scrabble Deluxe CD $25 Shanghaii 2 $29 Solitaire Royale $19 Solitaire WIN Solitaires Journey $34 Solitaire's Journey WIN S38 Solitaires Journey 2 $36 Stan Wongs Video Pokr $19 Star Wars Chess $38 Star Wars Chess CD $44 Super Jeopardy Super Tetris $29 Swap Tactical Wizard $39 Take-A-Brk Crsswd WIN $19 Terminatr 2 Chess Wars $37 $37 $26 IBM TRADITIONAL $19 Americans in Space CD $41 Battle Chess EGAVGA $18 Battle Chess 4000 VGA $24 Battle Chss 4000 SVGA $36 Battle Chess CD $45 Battle Chess WIN $18 Beat the House $29 Bridge 2: wOmar Sharif $28 Bridge 2: wOmr Shri CD $52 S36 $29 "


"Visa/MC Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders same as cash. COD SA. Defec lives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Price/availability may change. All sales tinal. OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order Mail to Canada, PR, HIAK, APO FPO $4 per order 4-8 day Worldwide shipping $6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment: FREE GAME OFFER See Last Page For Details IBM SPORTS IBM BUDGET $12 SS LINKS 386 PRO offers SUPER VGA graphics and advanced features designed for your 386 or 486. New features include computer opponent, save game option that allows your friends to play against you in an existing game. Play at Harbour Town or use the course disks for extra fun. $32 'ULTIMA VIII: PAGAN' You are imprisoned on a distant world where the forces of the Guardian hold absolute command. Without allies or even a familiar frame of reference, you must learn to defeat the ruling Elemental Titans on their own terms in your quest to bring the battle to the Guardian. $48 LINKS (386 sc go $12 SE Brian Vodnik's $ Kingdoms $ \"DETROIT is the ultimate automobile simulation that lets you design and build the car of your dreams! Create a powerful Empire and amass fortunes! But first you'll have to face strikes, wars, new laws and competition from up to 3 opponents. Features 9 types of vehicles. Research engines, brakes, saftey & more. $34 KINGDOMS OF GERMANY' is the second in the Kingdoms series of medieval conquest games. Kingdoms of Germany follows the addictive, award winning Vikings with improved & refined point & click interface, gameplay & computer opponents. Features huge map that you actually play on Can You Change Automotive History erman SS IBM TRADITIONAL IBM WAR GAMES IBM WAR GAMES IBM SPORTS ML 1970s World Series $17 Blackjack ML 1980s World Series $17 Blue Max Aces Great War $ ML BB 4 USAT Fan Man $25 Bodycello CD $12 ML BB 4 USAT Gen Man$19 Boom Box $12 ML BB Pro Teams ea. $20 Breach 2 ML Personal Pro Golf $28 Captain Blood MicroL 82-88 BB Ssn ea $17 Cardinal of the Kremlin SE MicroL 89 FB Season $17 Carrier Command s MicroL BB 4 USA Today $28 Carriers at War Const Kit $ Microleague Basketball $28 Castles Northrn Campgn $ Microsoft Golf WIN $48 Champions of Krynn $12 Microsoft Golf CD $48 Charge of Light Brigade $12 Mike Ditka Power Fball $34 Chess Net WIN NFL Chall Premium Ed $59 Chess X Colossus NFL Coaches Club $34 Combination Lock NFL Cches Club Exp Dk $19 Conflict: Korea $12 NFL Cches Club FB CD $34 Conflict: Middle East NFL Football $19 Conqueror Multi Tank NFL Football '94 $29 Corporation NFL Video Football $19 Covert Action SE NHL Hockey $44 Crash Course Nascar Challenge $29 Crime City $12 PGA Tour Golf $21 Crime Does Not Pay $12 PGA Tour Golf Ltd Ed $32 Dark Half PGA Tour Golf WIN $38 Das Boot Submarine $12 Pga Tour Crs 1 WIN $17 Dealer's Choice Pro Tennis Tour 2 $19 Demon Blue Proleague Football '94 $29 Dognapped QuarterPole $26 Don't Go Alone Road to the Final Four 2 $41 Dr Doom's Revenge Strat-O-Matic Bsball 4 3 $29 D r Thorp's mini Blackjack S Summer Challenge $34 Dr Wong's Jk&Vid Pokr 5 SC The Games Winter Chall S29 Dr Wong Jk&Vd Pkr WIN$12 Time Out Sports Bsball $39 Dragon Force $12 Time Out Sports Bball $39 Dragon Lord Tom Landry Football $29 Dragon Strike $12 Tom Landry Football Dix $29 Dragons of Flame $ Tony LRussa Baseball 2 $35 Dune $12 Tony LRussa BB 2 CD $46 Dusk of the Gods Tony LRussa BB2 92 Tm $14 EMotion SE Tony LRss BB2 Fan Man $14 Earthrise Tony LRss BB2 Stadium $18East vs West Berlin 1948 SS Tony LaRussa NL Stad $15 Electric Jigsaw S12 Tony LRssa BB 2 1993 $16 F15 Strike Eagle Unnecessary Roughnss $34 Face Off Wayne Gretzky Hocky 3 $42 Fast Break Weaver Baseball 2.0 $17 Fighting for Rome $12 Weaver Commsnr Dk 2 $16 Finale Wilson Pro Staff Golf $23 Free DC $ Gamma Force SE Gofrs Winkl Adv CD WINS12 IBM BUDGET Gold of the Aztecs $12 Grandmaster Chess S12 007 James Bond Stlh Aff$12 Hearts $12 3D Pinball $12 Heatwave 3 in 1 Players's Pack $9 Hole In One Mini Golf SE A Train Construction Set $9 Hole In 1 Mini Gif Crs Dk $3 Acquire $9 Hole in 1 Mini Golf Dix $12 Action Stations Scen 1 $3 Intractv Adult Spl win CD$12 Air Force Commander $ 9 Internatnl Ninja Rabbits $12 Airport Facilities Dir $12 Internatnal Sports Challs Allied Forces $9 Jack Nicklaus Cr Dk1-3ea SE Amazing Spiderman S12 Jack Nicklaus Cr Disk 5 SE Amazon $9 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art SS Aracnaphobia wSnd Src $12 Jack Nicklaus SE Crs 1 SE Armada Villa Crespo $9 Japan Scenery Disk $12 Artura $4 Jeopardy 1 or 2 ea Back to the Future 3 $12 Joan of Arc sia Backgmn By George WIN $9 Killing Cloud se Banzai L.A. Law Baseball Card Collector $12 Laser Squad $12 Baseball Facts $9 Leather Goddesses B.A.T. S6 Lightspeed Battle Command $6 Line in the Sand $1E Bball Chall 87-89 Tms ea $9 MacArthur's War Bermuda Square $9 Madden Player Stats '89 SE $9 Marianas Turkey Shoot $13 CGW MAY $12 SC $29 Terminator Chess $34 Tesserae WIN $16 Tetris $15 Tetris Classic $26 Tetris Classic WIN $26 Trump Castle 3 $29 Trump Castle 3 CD Trump Cast Collectn CD $14 Vegas Entrtnmt Pk WIN $21 Vegas Games Pak WIN $21 Video Cube CD Videogame Solution CD $29 Virtual Reality Studio 2 $64 W elltris $15 Word Tris $27 Wrath of the Demon CD $29 Zig-Zag $34 Blue and the Grey $36 Borodno Napoleon Invds $29 Bravo Romeo Delta $24 Campaign $32 Campaign CD $35 Campaign Mission 1 $18 Carrier Strike $39 Carrier Strike Exp Pak $19 Civil War No Greatr Glry $21 Decision at Gettysburg $18 Dreadnoughts Dreadnoughts Bismark S29 Dreadnoughts Deluxe $59 Dreadnoughts Ironclads $29 Drums of Glory $44 Fall Gelb $36 Fifth Eskadra $36 Fleet Med $27 Gary Grgsby Pacifc War $36 Gary Grgsby War Rssia $45 German Raider Atlantis $26 Gettysburg: Turning Pnt $36 Golan Front $36 Grand Fleet $36 Grey Seas, Grey Skies $36 Halls of Montezuma $24 Harpoon Designer Srs 2 $25 High Command $45 Kampfgruppe $59 Kriegsmarine Kursk Campaign $36 Long Lance $39 Main Batt Tank C Grmny $36 Main Batt Tank MidEast $36 Main Ball Tank N Grmny $36 Malta Storm $36 Man of War $36 Mare Nostrum $26 Marianas Turkey Shoot $12 Midway $12 Moscow Campaign S36 Northern Fleet $36 Operation Overlord $36 Pacic Strm Midwy Cpgn $36 Pacfc Strm Solmn Cpgn $36 Panzer Battles $19 Patriot $14 Patton Strikes Back S14 Prelude to Jutland $26 Red Sky Morning $36 Return to Falklands $28 Rising Sun Rd Sumtr to Appomattx $45 Romml Batt for N Africa $24 Rommel at El Alamein $36 Rommel at Gazala $36 Second Front $21 Seventh Fleet $36 Squad Leader $48 Stalingrad Campaign $36 The Great War S39 Third Reich To The Rhine $36 UMS 2 $19 V Victory: Gld, Jno, Swd $39 V Victory: Utah Beach $44 V Victory: Velikye Luki $44 Victory at Sea $41 War in the Falklands $26 Warpoint $36 Warship Changd History $26 Waterloo $19 White Death $19 WW2 Batt of Sth Pacific $32 APBA Baseball $24 APBA Baseball Innovatr $34 APBA Bsball Stalmstr 2 $29 APBA Bowling $14 APBA Hockey $34 APBA Micro Manager $32 All Amer College FB '94 $42 American Gladiators $21 Barkley: Shut Up & Jam S42 Baseball WIN $46 Blood Bowl $39 Brett Hull Hockey S42 Dave Robnsn NBA Actn $44 Dirk's Baseball Encyc $19 Front Page Football Pro $45 Greens $34 Hardball 3 $34 Hardball 3 Collection $39 Hardball 3 Players Disk $16 Hardball 3 Stadium Disk $16 Hardball 25 Hardball 4 Jack Nicklaus Signtr Ed $27 Jack Nicklaus SE Crs 2 S16 Joe Montana Football 2 $42 Links Crs 2 Firestone $17 Links Pro 386 Golf $32 Links Pro 486 CD $42 Links Pro Crs1 Mna Kea $19 Links Pro Crs2 Pinehrst $16 Links Pro Crs3 Bnff Spr $19 Links Pro Crs4 Belfry $19 Links Pro Crs5 Innsbrk $19 Links Pro Crs6 Firesine $20 Links Pro Crs7 Peb Bch S24 Links Pro Crs8 Cast Pns $19 ML 1950s World Series $17 ML 1960s World Series $17 IBM WAR GAMES $34 $ Action North Atlantic $26 Action off River Platte $26 Aegis: Guardn Fleet CD $54 Air Raid Pearl Harbour $22 American Civil War V1 $24 American Civil War V2 $24 American Civil War V3 $24 Battle Stations $20 Battle Tank Barbarossa $36 Battle Tank Kursk $36 Battle of Austerlitz $26 Battle of Leyte Gulf $24 Battle of the Atlantic $36 Battles of Napoleon $24 Battleship Bismark $26 Blitzkrieg Ardennes $19 $36 S12 "


"CHIPS&BITS Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10052 PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Dept 10052 IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET Every day you survive is a vidory UTPOST 'OUTPOST' You only get one chance to destroy civilization. Players explore new worlds. research new technologies and strive to colonize distant planets. Based on NASA research, Outpost is a realistic simulation of the complexities in volved in building a self-contained colony on a hostile planetary surface. CD $39 'ARMORED FIST' plunges you into the modern battlefield in command of a company of armored units. Features complete driver's station simulation of the American built M1A2 Abrams, M3 Bradley IFV, and the Soviet built T-80 and BMP. Remote artillery and air support night vision optics and amazing Voxel Space terrain. $52 S9 Thunderhawk Tie Break Tennis Time Quest Tony LaRussa Baseball S9 Tony LaRussa BB 1990 S12 Tony LaRussa BB 1991 $12 Tony LRssa Classc Stad S12 Treasures Savge Frontr $12 Trump Cst 2 Casino Bay $6 Trump Cst 2 DD1 or 2 ea. $4 Turn-n-Burn $9 Typhoon of Steel $12 UMS 2 Planet Editor $12 Under Fire $12 Uninvited $6 Vaxine $12 Video Poker Villa Crespo $9 Video Poker by Masque $9 Visions of Aftermath Wacky Funster $9 War in the Gulf $12 War of the Lance $9 Warlords $12 Weaver Tm/Playr Sts 89 $3 Wheel of Fortune S6 Wheel of Fortune 2 Wheel of Fortune 3 Wild Wheels $12 Wrath of the Demon $12 Xiphos $6 FIELDS OF THE ROAD TO WATERLOO \"INHERIT THE EARTH' A fantasy adventure that will introduce players to a new world of breath taking scenery and excitement... Earth. Accompany Rif the fox as he attempts to uncover the mystery surrounding an ancient human artifact. Features intuitive interface, puzzles and overhead perspective. $45 'FIELDS OF GLORY' An intrigu. ing action game with a miniature feel. Command the French, British or Prussian in the roles of Napoleon Wellington, or Blucher. Choose from 4 historical or 2 fictional battles. Use a modem for head to head competition. Fight a single battle or an entire campaign. $34 AMIGA $12 ANICROPROSE S6 Breach 1 Scenario Disk S3 Fast Break Heatwave Jack Nicklaus Course 1 S6 Test Drive2:Muscle Cars S3 3DO 3DO Marvel Trilogy $12 Magic Candle 2 59 Magic Candle 3 S12 Magic Johnson Fast Brk $6 Matrix Cubed $9 Medieval Lords $12 MegaFortress $12 Mega Traveller: Zhodani $6 Mega Traveller 2 $12 Midway $12 Millenium $6 Mines of Titan AL Baseball All Stars $12 AL Baseball Seattle 13 $12 AL Football 2 $12 As PacMan Jever Mind $9 Jew Facilities Locator S9 JFL Chall Col Alumn Tms S9 JFL Chall Pre Season 91 $9 IFL Chall All Star Team $9 JFL Chall Dream Teams $9 IFL Proleague Football $12 linja Gaiden 2 $12 linja Rabbits 59 bliterator S6 Dligopoly $9 On Target $9 Operation Combat 'ac Man $9 'enthouse Jigsaw XXX $12 Pick'n Pile $6 Pictionary $12 Pirates Playmaker Football $12 Power Drome Power Hits: Kids Power Politics WIN S12 Predator 2 ProFball Analyst 92 Edt 99 Punisher $6 Puzzle Gallery 1 $9 RBI 2 Renegde Legion Intercp $12 Rodeo Games S9 Rotox $9 Rules of Engagement S9 S.C. Out S12 DI S6 Favage cenery Collection Set A S9 cenery Collection Set B S9 cenery Collin California S9 cenry Coll Great Britain $9 Sentinel Worlds 1 Shadow Sorcerer S9 S12 Sleeping Gods Lie $12 noopy's Fun Pack 59 Forry $12 pace Vegetables porting Triangle pot $6 tar Legions S9 torm Across Europe $12 treet Ball $9 aking of Beverly Hills $6 eam Yankee $12 meenage MNT Man Miss S12 meenage Mut Ninja Turtis S12 egel's Mercenaries 59 erran Envoy est Drive 2:Euro Chall S6 est Drive 2:Muscl Cars $12 Fost Drive 3:Road & Car $9 The Tinies $12 Think Cross $12 CGW MAY 7 Sg JAGUAR TURBO GRAFX % MACINTOSH Tiny Toon Adventures Ultimate Brain Games Ultra Vortex $44 $56 $54 % Troddlers $49 Twisted Way of the Warrior $49 Who Shot Johnny Rock $49 Wing Commander $49 WorldBuilders, Inc $49 TURBO GRAFX JAGUAR S6 $44 $34 Bridge 7 $19 Dragon's Lair 2 S19 Go Master Deluxe S49 Harpoon Scenario Editor S14 Jack Nicklaus CrDk 1-3ea S6 Jack Nicklaus Crs Dk 5 S6 Lexi Cross S19 Omar Sharif Bridge Dix S19 Out of this World $19 Robo Sport Shadowgate $19 Sherlock Holmes OnDt 2 $19 Sim Ant $19 Spirit of Excalibur $14 Test Drive 2: CA Chaling $6 Test Drive 2: Super Cars $6 WordTris $19 $14 $42 $24 $9 $52 Fiege $19 Escape Monster Manor $49 Gridders $49 HUMANS $49 Horde $49 Intelliplay Football $49 Jurassic Park $49 Kingdom:Far Reaches $49 Lemmings $49 Lost Files Sherick Holms $49 Mad Dog McCree $49 Mad Dog McCree 2 $49 Madden Football $49 Megarace $44 Microcosm $49 Night Trap Oceans Below $44 Orion Off Road $49 Out of this World $49 PGA Tour $49 Pataank Peter Pan 544 Red Baron $49 Rise of the Robots $49 Road Rash $56 Sewer Shark $49 Shadow Caster $49 Shock Wave $56 Shuttle Space Ace $49 Space Pirates S49 Star Control 2 $49 Star Trek Next Genern $49 Star Wars Chess S49 Stellar 7 S49 Syndicate Theme Park $49 Total Eclipse $52 Jaguar System $249 Jaguar CD System $299 Jaguar Controller $24 Alien Vs Predator $54 Barkley Basketball $46 Baseball $54 Basketball $54 Batlle Wheels $54 Battle Zone 2000 $54 Brett Hull Hockey $46 Brutal Sports Football S56 Bubsy $46 Car Wars S49 Checkered Flag 2 $54 Club Drive $44 Crescent Galaxy S44 Dungeon Depths S54 European Soccer Chall $56 Evolution:Dino Dudes $44 Hardball 3 $46 Hosenose & Booger S54 Jack Nicklaus Goll Jaguar Formula 1 Racg $54 Kasumi Ninja $64 NFL Football S54 Raiden $44 Tempest 2000 $44 Turbo Duo $289 TurboGrafx 16 CD Plyr $149 Turbo Duo Adaptor $13 Turbo Duo Intell Lk IBM $99 Turbo Duo Intil Lk MAC $99 Turbo Duo Pad $18 Turbo Duo Tap Turbo Extension Cable $9 TurboBooster $16 Turbo Express S199 TurboExpress AC Adapt $27 TurboExpress Car Adapt $36 TurboExpress Link Cbl 19 TurboPad S16 TurboStick S19 TurboVision S65 A Train 3 CD $47 Addams Family CD $19 Adventure Island S36 Air Zonk Air Zonk CD $44 Ballistix Battle Lode Runner 943 Beyond Shadowgate CD $45 Black Hole Assault CD $47 Blood Gear CD S47 Bomberman 2 S39 Bonk's Adventure S19 Bonk's Big Adventure S44 Bonk's Big Adventre CD 544 Boxyboy Bravoman Buster Brothers CD Cadash $19 Camp California CD $34 Camp California Yo Bro $29 Chase HO $42 Cosmic Phantasy 3 CD 546 Cotton CD Darkwing Duck Dead Moon Dragon Slayer CD Drop Off $12 Dungeon Explorer 2 CD $44 Dungeon Master CD $44 Dynastic Hero CD $44 Exile 2 CD $46 Falcon Fantasy Star Soldier CD $44 Fighting Street CD $34 Final Zone 2 CD S42 Forgotten Worlds CD Gao CD Ghost Manor Godzilla CD Gradius 2 CD Impossamole JB Harold CD JJ & Jeff Jack Nicklaus Golf Jack Nicklaus Golf CD $34 Jck Chan Actn Kung Fu $34 Jim Power Lost Dim CD $47 King of Monsters 2 CD 546 Legends of Hero Tomma $33 Loom CD Lords of Thunder CD 544 $42 $44 $19 $14 11th Hour $52 3D0 Gun $39 3D0 System S599 Aces over Europe $49 Air Warrior $49 Alone in the Dark $49 Battle Chess Conquered Kingdoms Demolition Man Doom $49 Dragon Tales $49 Dragon's Lair $49 Dragons Lair 2:Tm Warp $52 $46 $49 $49 $46 $49 "


"Visa MC Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders same as cash. COD S&. Deleclives replaced with same produci. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary Price/availability may change. All sales final OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR HI, AK, APO, FPO $4 per order 4-8 day Worldwide shipping $6 per item Handling $2 per shipment FREE GAME OFFER *Sec Last Page For Details NEO GEO GAME GEAR S32 'ALONE IN THE DARK 2 Descend into the terrifying depths of the ultimate 3D virtual mystery. Become the detective, Edward Carnby, embarking on a sleuthing quest to rescue a kidnapped child Features frightfully eerie soundtrack, 70 characters, 15 levels and hundreds of detailed 3D objects. $36 SIMCITY 2000' is the long awaited follow up to SimCity that takes urban planning into the next century. SimCity 2000 adds a new level of realism & sophisticated gameplay. New features include underground water and transportation systems, 3D views & SVGA graphics $45 $32 $32 $32 Ili Ishule Hanggere tuth Burning Fight $149 Crossed Swords $129 Cyber Lip $129 Fatal Fury $129 Fatal Fury 2 $199 Fatal Fury Special $199 Football Frenzy S129 Ghost Pilots s129 King of the Monsters S149 King of Monsters 2 $179 Last Resort $149 League Bowling $129 Magician Lord $149 Mutation Nation $149 Nam 1975 $129 Heroes 2 $569 Ninja Combat $149 Riding Hero $129 Robo Army $129 Samurai Shodown $199 Sengoku $129 Sengoku 2 $199 Soccer Brawl $129 Super 8 Man $129 Super Sideks Soccer $179 Super Sideks Soccer 2 $199 Super Spy $129 Survivor $199 Thrash Rally $129 Top Hunter $199 Top Players Golf $129 View Point $199 World Heroes 2 $199 THE WAR IN EUROPE 'STORM ACROSS EUROPE' covers every part of the blitzkrieg that Hitler unleashed in 1939. You control every facet of the war including amphibious landings, u-boat campaigns and strategic bombing strikes. While the battle rages you must juggle limited resources between production and research. $12 'SAM & MAX HIT THE ROAD' Sam: \"You know Max, ever since we've been CD-ROMed. 1 feel an urge to say everything out loud!\" Max: \"Me too! Technology is a beautiful thing. Sam\" Now hear their wacky banter as they search for a bigfoot on the lam. Now in CDROM Talkie Version. CD $45 SL STRATEGIC SOTEZATIDASI GAME GEAR $45 TURBO GRAFX TURBO GRAFX LYNX LYNX Geo Foreman Boxing S19 Global Gladiators HUMANS $32 Halley Wars $19 Hook $25 Hurricanes Incredible Crash Dumies sa Incredible Hulk $34 Itchy & Scratchy Jeopardy Jungle Book Jurassic Park $3 Klax $14 Majors:Pro Baseball $3 Marco's Magic Soccer S4= Mickey Mouse Land Illsn $32 Micro Machines $32 Monster Truck Wars $3a Mortal Kombat $3E Mortal Kombat 2 $35 Ms Pac Man S2E NBA Bball Dave Robinsn$32 NBA Jam Session $3E NFL Fball Joe Montana $36 Off the Wall $25 Outrun Europa $32 PGA Tour Golf $32 Pac Attack S25 Paper Boy 2 S32 Pinball Dreams $32 Pinball Wizard $32 Pokr Face Paul's Blckjck S2 Poker Face Paul's Pokr $2 Pokr Face Paul's Solitre S2 Predator 2 $21 Prince of Persia $24 Pro Action Replay Psychic World S1E RC Grand Prix S29 Ren & Stimpy Show $32 Riddick Bowe Boxing Road Rash RoboCop 3 $32 Robocop Vs Terminator $3 SeaQuest DSV $3 Side Pocket $32 Simpsons:Krstys Fun Hs $29 Solitaire Poker $2 Sonic Chaos $3E Sonic Hedgehog 20r3 ea $32 Space Harrier $19 Spiderman & X-Men $30 Spiderman:Arcds Revng $33 Spidrmn:Ret Sinister Six $3 Star Wars Strider 2 $3Super Battle Tank Super Off Road $25 Surf Ninjas $25 Sylvester & Tweety $25 T2:Arcade Game T2:Judgement Day Talespin Terminator Tesserae $35 Tom & Jerry $32 Trunski Vampire WWFSW:Stl Cage Chall $3: Wayne's World 2 $25 Wheel of Fortune Winter Olympics $3World Cup Soccer $35 World Cup USA $3 World Series Baseball S3 X Men Zool CGW MAY $25 $34 World Class Baseball World Heroes CD Xak 1 & 2 CD Ys 3 CD Ys Book 1 & 2 CD $19 $46 $47 S42 $36 $36 LYNX Scrap Yard Dog Shadow of the Beast Shanghai Space War Steel Talons Super Asteroids Super Off Road Super Skweek Switch Blade 2 Todd Slime World Toki Tournament Cyberball Turbo Sub Ultimate Chess Viking Child Vindicators War Birds World Class Scccer Xenophobe Xybots Zarlor Mercenary $32 Lords of Rising Sun CD $39 Madden Football CD $44 Magical Chase $39 Might & Magic 3 CD $47 Monster Lair CD $29 Mystic Formula CD $45 Neutopia 2 $42 Nexzar CD $47 Order of the Griffon $39 Ordyne $19 Panza Kickboxing $39 Parasol Stars $14 Populous CD $48 Prince of Persia CD S39 Raiden $46 Rayxanber 3 CD $48 Riot Zone CD S36 RoboTech 2036 CD RoboTech Lov Song CD $47 Samurai Ghost $39 Shadow Beast CD Sherlock Holmes 2 CD $42 Shockman Silent Debuggers $19 Simearth CD $42 Soldier Blade $32 Somer Assault $29 Splash Lake CD $24 Street Fighter 2 $79 Super Volleyball $21 Talespin $29 Terraforming CD $44 Time Cruise Turbo 6 Button Pad $39 Turrican $14 Vasteel CD $46 Wizardry 1 & 2 CD $44 $39 $36 $29 $39 $39 $36 $36 $39 $39 $28 $36 $39 $39 $36 $39 $28 $36 $28 $29 $39 $25 $32 GG System no Software S89 GG Sports/Sonic Sys $139 GG System Sonic 2 $129 Addams Family $32 Akira $34 Aladdin $32 Aliens 3 $34 Andre Agassi Tennis $29 Arch Rivals $29 Ariel Little Mermaid $32 Asterix & Great Rescue S32 Bart Meets Radactv Man $32 Bart Simpsn Spac Mut $26 Bart vs the World $32 Battle Toads Caesars Palace $29 Captain Amer & Avengr $29 Chakan Forever Man $29 Chessmaster $29 Choplifter 3 $32 Chuck Rock Chuck Rock 2 $32 Cliffhanger $29 Columns $26 Cool SPOT $29 Cosmic Spacehead $32 Dp Dck Trouble Do Duck $29 Desert Demolitn Rd RunrS29 Desert Strike Devilish $24 Dolphin $34 Donald Duck $32 Dr Robink's Mn Bn Mach$29 Dracula $29 Dragon $32 Fantastic Advent of Dizy $32 Formula 1 $32 GP Rider $27 Game Genie $39 Gear Works $29 Full Court Press $36 Gates of Zendocon $25 Gordo 106 Guardians $44 Hard Drivin' $39 Heavy Weight Contendr $36 Hockey $36 Hydra $36 HyperDome $39 Ishido $29 Joust $39 Klax $25 Krazy Ace Mini Golf $36 Kung Food $39 Lemmings $39 Malibu Volleyball $36 Ms Pac Man $28 NFL Football $36 Ninja Gaiden $36 Ninja Gaiden 3 $44 Pac Land Paper Boy $28 Pinball Jam $39 Pit Fighter $44 Power Factor $36 Qix $32 Raiden $36 Rampage $36 Rampart $32 Relief Pitcher $38 Road Blasters $39 Road Riot 4WD $36 Robo Squash $25 Robotrn 2084 $25 Rolling Thunder S36 Rygar S36 STUN Runner $36 $27 Lynx System $89 A.P.B. $39 Alien Vs Predator $44 Awesome Golf $36 Bad Boy Tennis $39 Baseball Heroes S32 Basket Brawl $39 Batman B Batman Returns $44 Battle Zone 2000 $38 Bill & Ted's Excelint Adv $39 Blockout $25 Blood & Guts Hockey $39 Blue Lightning $36 Cabal $39 Castle Wolfenstein 3D $39 Checkered Flag $36 Chip's Challenge $29 Crystal Mines 2 $39 Demons Gate $36 Desert Strike $44 DinoLympics Dirty Larry $39 Double Dragon $36 Dracula $44 Electro Cop S25 European Soccer S36 Eye of the Beholder $44 Fat Bobby S36 $37 $33 $32 $43 NEO GEO $2 S32 $24 $36 Neo Geo Gold System $569 Neo Geo Control Pad $46 Neo Geo Demo Vidlape $3 2020 Super Baseball $119 3 Count Bout $189 Alpha Mission 2 $129 Andros Dunos S199 Art of Fighting $199 Art of Fighting 2 $199 Baseball Stars Pro S129 Baseball Stars Pro 2 $149 Blues Journey $129 $43 $3 "


"CHIPS&BITS Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'I 802-767-3033 Source 10052 PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Dept 10052 GENESIS DRAGON FORCE 'CYBERMAN 3D CONTROLLER This revolutionary input device allows you to move freely in 3D. High resolution and absolute mapping provide maximum precision. Tactile feedback that lets you feel all the action from a bump against a wall to the full impact of being shot or attacked from behind. $69 4 Way Play Adaptor $29 6 Button Arcade Pwr Stk $44 6 Button Control Pad $19 Arcadian Joystk 6Button $54 F-16 Wireless Contri Pd $42 Game Gun CD $22 Genesis Activator $84 Genesis CD Sys 2 CD $229 Genesis CDX System $399 Genesis Menacer $49 Genesis System 2 core $99 Genesis Systm Sonic 2 $119 Genesis Team Player S26 Mega Mouse $36 Power Plug S34 Pro Action Replay S79 Remote Arcade Pad S19 Remote Arcade System 536 SG Program Pad 2 S32 Saturn System 32 Bit $499 Sega Steering Wheel 539 Turbo Touch 360 S24 $44 GEN ADVENTURE \"1942: THE PACIFIC AIR WAR' Dodge relentless gunfire of Japanese Zeros. Execute gravity twisting dive-bomb attacks. Attack enemy bombers in a desperate fight to save your car rier. Virtual Cockpit allows viewing in all directions. S48 S52 $49 GEN ADVENTURE D.R.A.G.O.N. FORCE They're Pirates of Dark Water $54 armed, dangerous Police Quest 3 CD S54 and ready for acPrince of Persia CD $39 tion. They're the Puggsy or CD $49 Drastic Response Rebel Assit:Str Wars CD $46 Assault Group OpRen & Stimpy Show $46 erations Network Return to Zork CD S49 Force an elite in Rise of the Dragon CD 546 ternational strike Roar of the Beast $39 force against terrorism. Lead your Robocop Vs Terminator $56 team of top-secret Rocket Knight Advent $39 trouble shooters on Rocky & Bullwinkle S46 special operations Secret Monky Island CD 542 to the hottest hot Shadow of Beast 2 CD 549 interstel spots worldwide. $12 Shinobi 3 $44 Socks the Cat $46 Sonic Hedgehog CD S46 Sonic the Hedgehog 3 $56 \"BREACH 3' As Space Ace CD $49 Squad Leader of Space Pirates CD $49 an elite corps of Space Quest 4 CD $54 marines waging war Spiderman & Venom S54 against the UDP Star Trek Next Genertn 549 you must direct Star Trek Next Gen CD 564 your men in misStar Trek:Deep Space 9 S54 sions from rescueSteven Seagal S54 and-support to Stone Protectors S46 seek-and-destroy. Sylvester & Tweety S54 Combines the best T2:Arcade Game S46 of turn-based and TMNT:Hyperstone Heist 546 real-time gaming. Technocop:Final Mission S49 Features tree-strucTerminator CD S49 tured campaigns & Time Killers S56 individual marine Time Trax personalities. $36 Tom & Jerry Virtual Bart $49 Who Sht John Rock CD $49 Wolf Child CD GEN ROLE PLAYING GEN SHOOTERS X MEN $46 Young Indy Jones Chron $43 Eye of the Beholder CD $54 Soldier of Fortune $54 Zero Kamikaze Squirrel $52 Genghis Khan 2 $59 Stellar Fire CD $46 Zombies Ate Neighbors S44 Lord of the Rings $59 Subterrania $49 Zool $49 Lunar 2 CD T2:Arcade Game CD $49 Might & Magic 3 $59 Total Camage or CD $49 Phantasy Star 4 $69 View Point $54 GEN KICK & PUNCH Pirates! Gold $48 Powermonger CD $43 GEN SIMULATIONS Beast Wrestlers $49 Ramses 2 $49 Brutal CD $49 Rings of Power Clayfighter Star Quest $49 688 Attack Sub $56 Double Dragon 3 Treasures of Isis CD $49 Al Unser Jr Racing $46 Dragon Unchartd Watrs Nw Horz $59 Battle Corps CD $44 Eternal Champions $56 Vampire Killer $52 Choplifter 3 $49 Fatal Fury 2 $54 F117 Night Storm $52 Fighting Master S42 F19 Stealth Fighter $59 King of the Monsters 2 $54 GEN SHOOTERS Formula 1 or GP CD $49 Kung Fu:Legend Contns $56 Ground Zero Texas CD $54 Mortal Kombat CD $46 Black Hole Assault CD $42 Harrier Assault CD $49 Mortal Kombat 2 $69 Blaster Master 2 $46 Indy Heat $44 Ninia Warriors CD $49Cobra Command CD $39 Jungle Strike $49 Power Instinct S52 Crime Patrol CD $49 Lotus Turbo Challenge 2 $44 Rise of the Robots CD $46 Death Duel S49 MIG 29 Street Ftr 2 Champnship 562 Drug Wars CD S49 Mario Andretti Racing $54 Streets of Rage 3 S59 Exo Squad S54 Megarace CD $44 TMNT:Tournamnt Fightrs 556 Galaxy Force 2 $46 Monster Truck Wars $49 World Heroes 2 $56 Gauntlet 4 $46 Nigel Mansell WCRacg $49 Gunstar Heroes $44 Pacific Theater Ops $57 Lethal Enforcers w/gun $66 Powr Modir:Euro Rer CD $42 GEN ROLE PLAYING Lethal Enforcr w/gun CD $64 Powr Moders:Spc Rcr CD$42 Mad Dog McCree 2 CD $49 Road Rash 1 or 2 ea $42 Battle Fantasy CD $42 Mega Turrican $46 SeaQuest DSV $56 Battletech $52 Microcosm CD $49 Sewer Shark CD $46 Black Crypt $59 Predator 2 $29 Skitchin' $44 Dark Wizard CD $43 Robo Aleste CD Speed Racer $56 Dominus $49 Skeleton Krew $46 Super Battletank 2 CD $44 Dungeon Master CD $42 Soldeace S49 Super Monaco GP2 $39 GEN SIMULATIONS GEN SPORTS S42 Tomcat Alley CD S49 Top Gear 2 S46 Virtua Racing S79 Wing Commander 2 $56 World Champ Rally CD $44 $49 Tecmo Super Bowl S49 Tecmo World Cup Soccr 44 Unnecessary Roughnss $56 Vitale Basketball $52 WCW Super Brawl $49 WWFSW:Rag Cage CD $43 Wimbledon Tennis $39 Wrld Champship Soccr 2546 World Cup USA CD $46 Wrld Series Bsball or CDS49 GEN SPORTS Addams Family $44 Aladdin $49 Alien Trilogy CD $49 Alien Vs Predator $49 Asterix & Great Rescue $49 Blades of Vengeance $42 Bubba & Stix CD $44 Bubsy 2 $52 Castlevania Bloodlines $44 Chakan Forevr Man CD $49 Chester Cheetah 2 $46 Chuck Rock 2 CD $44 Citizen X CD Cliffhanger CD Demolition Man CD $54 Dolphin CD $39 Dracula or CD $49 Dragons Lair $46 Dragons Lair 1 or 2 CD $49 Dune:Battle for Arrakis $49 Fido Dido $46 Fire Team Rogue $59 Flintstones $39 Golden Axe 3 $49 Goofy $49 Heimdall CD $44 High Seas Havoc $46 Home Alone 2 $43 Hook CD Hurricanes $49 Incredible Crash Dumies $43 Incredible Hulk $54 Indy Jones Ft Atints CD $44 Itchy & Scratchy $43 James Pond 3 $42 Joe & Mac $46 Jungle Book $54 Jurassic Park CD $49 Justice League $56 Keeper of the Gates $49 Kings Quest 5 CD $54 Lawnmower Man or CD $52 Leisure Suit Larry 1 CD $54 Lion King $54 Looney Tunes CD $49 McDonald Land $46 Metal Fang CD $49 Micky & Don Wrld Illusn $32 Mickeys Magical Quest S52 Operation Aliens S49 Out of this world or CD 549 CGW MAY $56 $52 $39 S56 Treas GEN STRATEGY $42 $49 $42 $47 Barkley Basketball $52 Bill Walsh Coll FB or CD $49 Brett Hull Hockey $54 Brutal Football $49 California Games 2 S49 College Football 94 S52 Double Dribble S52 ESPN Bsball or FB CD 549 FIFA Internatnal Soccer $52 Hardball 4 $54 Jamm It $56 Joe Montana Fball CD $49 Links Pro Golf CD $54 MLBPA Baseball S52 MLBPA Grnd Slam Bsbll $54 Madden Football 94 $54 Marco's Magic Soccer S46 Mutant League Hockey $49 NBA Baktball or CD $49 NBA Showdown S58 NFL Greatest Teams CD $49 NFL Sports Talk FB 94 $49 NHL Hockey 94 CD $52 GA Tour 3: Europe $49 Pebble Beach Golf $44 Pele Soccer $54 RBI 94 $52 Tecmo Hockey $54 $36 Aero Biz Supersonic 59 Animals CD $44 Caesars Palace Cascade Chessmaster Columns 3 Dragons Fury 2 Dune CD $49 Fun N Games General Chaos HUMANS 2 Jeopardy CD $49 Liberty or Death $59 Monopoly $44 Operation Europe $59 Risk CD $52 Romanc 3 kgdm 2or3 ea$59 Shanghaii 2 S44 Sonic Spinball S43 Star Wars Chess CD $49 Virtual Pinball $43 Warrior of Rome 3 CD $52 Wheel of Fortune 2 $49 $41 "


"REVIEW WOOOOOOOOOGOO. It's Hip To Be Sphere AMIT In Dongleware's Oxyd magnum! by Ken Hill atronisers of mid-80s arcades will cermarble has to team up with a white tainly remember Marble Madness—the counterpart to yin and yang its way trackball game of maneuvering a marthrough the puzzles. ble through a perilous 3-D world. Almost 10 There is no shortage of enemies to years later, it seems as if a wayward marble has foil your efforts. Death blocksfallen through a wormhole in space-time and dressed in skull and crossbonesappeared in a new game. Oxyd magnum! takes cause our marble friend to shatter on the basic concept of Marble Madness and puts contact, and hidden pits, spinning its own spin on the spheroid, creating a fine wheels, and other dangerous traps lie game sure to please puzzle fans who don't in wait for an errant marble. While mind using their reflexes along with their you are trying to keep the marble in DI minds. play, you must figure out how to open The basic concept of Oxyd is simple. Each the oxyds on each level to continue on; of the 100 levels has target squares called red herrings and clever distractions are \"oxyds» which, when touched by the player's here in abundance, just to keep you guessing. Oxyd is a game with very few flaws. The little black marble, open to reveal a color. To graphics are clean, and the mouse control is solve the level, the player simply has to find We're Here! We're Sphere! crisp. Some objects could have been porall the matching oxyd blocks on each level Be Amused By It! trayed a bit larger, such as seeds, which are so ke a The levels provide a variety of challenges. small that I found my first one entirely by game of Concentration. Of course, it's never never Sam Some levels call for manual dexterity to maaccident. The quality of the sound support as easy as a roll in the park. neuver objects on the screen, while could have been better as well (only Sound others require more input from the Blaster and AdLib sounds are available), but higher brain centers. There are levels it was adequate. that test your patience, penalizing Marble Gladness hasty moves and impulsive decisions. To make things even more interestIn these days of hard-drive-hungry games, ing, the terrain can change drastically it's refreshing to find a product that can be from one level to another: some this much fun and yet take less than one screens have icy surfaces that make the megabyte on your hard disk. Oxyd magnum! marble hard to control, while others is a top notch puzzle game that will keep have swamps and quicksand to swalplayers up to the early hours of the morning low our ebony pal if he lingers too attempting to solve just one more level. long in one spot. All of the levels are Puzzle gamers with any marbles left upstairs ZuZ22 well-designed and have lors of clever would be remiss not to give this one a roll. tricks thrown in to keep your brain on The marble, which you control with the a rolling simmer. Oxyd magnum! mouse, can have a number of special powers. Every tenth level is a deceptively named Spread over the game levels are dozens of «meditation\" level. Rather than providing a PRICE: $59.95 tools that your spherical subject can use to meditative break from the rigors of problem SYSTEM Amiga, IBM, Mac, Atari ST overcome obstacles. Simply touching the tool REQUIREMENTS: IBM: 286 or better, 2MB RAM, solving, they actually require you to manipuVGA graphics, 1MB hard drive adds it to the marble's inventory. There are late four marbles at once. The objective is to PROTECTION: hammers for smashing blocks, umbrellas for place the four marbles in four different spots DESIGNER: Dongleware Publishing floating over chasms of endless blackness, at the same time. As you can imagine, mediCambridge, MA explosives for blowing holes in enemy detation levels aren't exactly exercises that will (617) 497-1130 fenses and many others. Sometimes the black promote inner serenity and mental clarity. C6W space, mouse None Meinol Schneider PUBLISHER: Page 88 Computer Gaming World "


"DON'T BUY A SOUND BOARD UNTIL YOU'VE HEARD US TOOT OUR HORN. FM SYNTHESIS OF SOUND BLASTER 16 WAVE TABLE TECHNOLOGY OF SOUNDMAN WAVE SOUNDMAN WAVE: GENUINELY BETTER SOUND, FULLY LOADED. WE Maybe you've read* how wavetable synthesis uses actual recordings of instruments to create synthesized sounds Sound Man Wave And how fantastic it sounds versus regular FM synthesis. Well it's true. SoundMan Wave lets gamers rock and roll with the real thing for an affordable price. And it comes loaded with great software like compatibility guarantee, and to back that up we'll give $500 to the first person that comes across a game with which SoundMan Wave isn't fully Sound Blaster compatible. Right now, hot games like X-wing, 7th Guest, Doom and Space Quest 5 already take full advantage of our wave technology. Dozens more are expected to hit the market each month. DON'T BELIEVE US? CALL NOW FOR OUR FREE SOUND ADVICE AUDIO CD AND GET A $10 REBATE. Recording Session and MCS MusicRack Listen to expert advice about adding sound to PCs, and hear for yourself the incredible difference COMPLETE COMPATIBILITY GUARANTEE. GUARANTEED 100% ADLIB/SOUND BLASTER COMPATIBLE SoundMan Wave's Yamaha OPL4 chip is completely compatible with the Adlib/Sound Blaster standard so it is backed by a 100% money back between SoundMan Wave and run-of-the-mill 16-bit boards. Call for our Sound Advice Audio CD before supplies run out, and we'll enclose a $10 rebate coupon: 1-800-889-0051, OFFER #5E \"See PC Magazine, 12/21/93, p 95. /-properties of registered owners. LOTECH COMPUSA ECHIELD SANTWARE The Senseware Company Circle Reader Service #82 "


"SURROUNDED BY ANTI-AIRCRAFT. HUNTED BY SAMS. EVEN MACH 2 ISN'T FAST ENOUGH. IT'S A STORY CAPTAIN DEAN PENNINGTON DIDN'T THINK HED LIVE TO TELL. WOULD YOU? 3.0, up to six players can mano. May the OENOSTVA A TRUE STORY capabilities of the F-16 Fighting life. Like real pilots, you'll fly Kuwait, May 23, 1991. Captain Falcon. Nothing, aside from a true with a wingman, allowing you Dean \"D-Dawg\" Pennington dives F-16, captures the \"hair-on-fire\" feelWith Falcon SPECTRUM to engage in to take out an Iraqi 85mm gun ing of flying America's most deadly aerial tactics emplacement below. \"Flares, break fighter like Falcon 3.0, Spectrum go mano a like bracket left!» his wingman screams. He HoloByte's computer simulation. best man win. HOLOBYTE maneuvers. wrenches the stick just as a SAM Instead of enemies who fly in explodes 10 feet behind his F-16. circles, Falcon 3.0 adversaries fly Anti-aircraft batteries now open up according to true fighter doctrine all around, engulfing him. Too low to so they're no pushovers. And avoid the anti-aircraft, too slow to Kuwait looks like Kuwait since evade another SAM, he's faced with real geographic theaters are a hopeless choice and less than a faithfully mapped. quarter of a second to make it. NOT JUST A SIMULATION Lighting afterburners, he rockets to OF A WARPLANE safety before they can lock on again. Spectrum HoloByte A SIMULATION OF WAR THE STANDARD BY Falcon 3.0 lets you fight as part WHICH OTHER FIGHTERS A HIGHER LEVEL OF FLIGHT of an entire campaign. The misARE JUDGED Unlike some sims, which more sions you fly play a crucial role in Captain Pennington survived closely simulate the arcade expeyour side's success. But they're not on skill, nerve and the awesome rience than the flying one, Falcon hard-wired. Each result affects the 3.0 features a depth of play overall war effort-and determines that almost rivals real your next mission. Succeed FALCON For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week: (800) 695-GAME. For technical questions call (510) 522-1164 (M-F: 9AM-5PM Pacific Time). "


"and go on to hit the enemy in his Go head-to-head over a modem or media guide to air-to-air combat own backyard. Fail and find the bad with up to six players over a netcalled Art of the Kill* to help you guys breathing down your neck. work. It's possible because each fly like an ace. It all starts with FALCON 3.0 vs. MiG-29 Electronic Battlefield Series Falcon 3.0. title works with the others, from The simulation for people who OSX MiG-29 FALCON MiG-29to the upcoming F/A-18 want to fly the not-so-friendly simulation. There's even a multiskies. Electronic Battlefield Series simulations link up. So you don't just choose your mission, you choose your aircraft. Care to fly for the other side, comrada! Spectrum HoloByte NONE FALCON 30 STIDA ARTKILL THE ELECTRONIC BATTLEFIELD SERIES: THE ULTIMATE MiG-29 FALCON CYBER-BATTLEFIELD Choose from multiple aircraft, multiple theaters, even which ELECTRONIC BATTLEFIELD SERIES multiple theaters, even which side of the conflict to fight on. The fight of your life. Circle Reader Service #116 "


"GAME DESIGN Build a Photo by Rale Tomsett Your Own Hornet Unleashing the Power of Flight Sim Toolkit Second In A Three-Part Series by Matt Miller of Domark C i r, we've got an unidentified outbound over the Aleutian Islands heading toward Soviet airspacebendinde over high altitude,\" the SAC radar officer said. \"Anything on AWACS?\" asked the Colonel. \"Data coming in now...SIR! It's been identified as a U2!\" \"There are no scheduled intelligence gathering missions today. What the hell's going 15 minutes.\" The Colonel was nearly screamtwo editors in our kit, the Color Editor and ing now, doing his best to maintain compothe Shape Editor. This month we will consure in front of his men. tinue to work on our scenario, delving into \"Only thing we can get armed and airborne the Cockpit and Flight Model editors. We'll that quickly is a lone Hornet out of the that quickly is a lone Hornet out of also show you a few sound editing tricks you Aleutian base.\" can do with the Recorder program that comes \"Do it Lieutenant!\" as standard equipment in Windows. Let's first explore the Cockpit Editor. Here \"Yes Sir! Sir, radar is picking up several Soviet Blackiacks inbound! Probably to take we will place instruments over a cockpit image in PCX file format. Keep in mind that a out our SAMs. I doubt they'd be expecting fic flight sim doesn't necessarily need a cockpit. an air-to-air engagement.\" In fact, a real-time instrument panel and the \"Excellent,\" a semi-wave of relief came over cockpit itself can sap a lot of processing the Colonel, «Launch the Horner!\" power, which can slow down your simulaNo, this isn't an excerpt from a mid-80stion. Of course, without the cockpit you cantechno-thriller. but a fictionalization of th techno-thriller, but a fictionalization of the not evaluate your plane's vital signs, leaving Coldwar flight sim scenario we began build your weapon status, fuel capacity, and altiing last month with Flight Sim Toolkit. In the rude a mystery, and so greatly reducing your previous article we showed you the basics of chances of survival. The best ber is to reach a on?\" \"Sir. Intel confirms a U2 is missing from Moffett Field NAS. Norad is on the horn. Stillness settles over the command center as the Colonel picks up the phone, \"Yes sir, right away.\" «Lieutenant, scramble everything available, that plane will be in Soviet airspace inside of Page 92 Computer Gaming World "


"HEADS, IT'S REAL. TAILS, IT'S FAKE. It's your choice. A little more than 50 percent of all business software in use today is pirated. You might save a few bucks on it—but when phony software doesn't work, forget calling for product support. When it infects your computer with a deadly virus, it'll be your work that gets lost. The documentation is nonexistent or inadequate, so that won't help. And, of course, there will never be any product upgrades. Selling or copying software without authorization is against the law, with severe criminal and civil penalties including imprisonment of up to five years, fines of up to $250,000, or both. If you suspect the sale or use of pirated software, call the BSA Anti-Piracy hotline: A (800) 688-BSA1 (2721) Business Software Alliance Busines software Alliance 1993 Business Software Alliance. All rights reserved. "


"FST Cockpit hornet.id View Help File Edit Options FST Cockpit hornet.igd View Help File Edit Options HEADING NDICATO Figure A: The FST cockpit is highly customizable, offering choice of cockpit, resizable displays, configurable HUD, variable gauges, and optional indicator lights This figure shows an example of an avionics suite for the Hornet. EXO VERTICAL GNGING ORONANCE ENGINE APS TORDOItibit PRETETE DIR EUR OCTUBRO GNONG PAL ELECTRICS FAIL LOW FUEL B DOTT GALILEO ETTO FST Cockpit-horneltyd GIL File Edit Options View Help happy medium between display options changing as it is, like the HUD, a preand simulation speed. determined gauge. We now need to add To reach our happy medium we will be a Horizon Ball to the center of the conusing the supplied «AV8B.PCX» file lotrol panel, so create another dial and cated in the clip art library for our Coldchange its type to Horizon Ball. HYDRAULIC FAIL war scenario, on which we will paste our GEAR UP You will want to add several other instruments. Remember to draw your WHEEL BRAKES ON gauges, as noted in Figure A. Once you cockpit in the 256-color mode of your AIR BRAKES ON have figured out how to place a gauge paint program and use only the first 16 and re-size it, you should be able to colors on the default palette. Also keep in design your own custom instrument mind the general shape of your cockpit, panel. If you would like to fly with warnas the larger the cockpit, the smaller your ing lights, simply select the Add Lamp view on the world. Toolkit enables you to option on the Edit menu, then select customize your cockpit/sim world ratio either Square Lamp or Round Lamp on to your personal specifications. HUD (Heads-Up-Display). The HUD is the the gauge type. You can make any of the In most modern sims, the computer looks backbone instrument on all modern fighters, following gauge variables as lamps: Gear Up, at the cockpit line by line, beginning at the as it purs all vital flight information in the Wheel Brakes On, Air Brakes On, Aircraft bottom of the screen. As soon as there is a line Stalled, Low Fuel, Engine Fail, Hydraulic pilot's field of view. Start by selecting Add Fail or Electric Fail. Place these lamps over it has just one pixel of background color, Dial from the Edit menu on the menu bar. the sim world will be drawn from that point the left and right warning strips on the cockGrab the new dial and place it in the middle up. The higher that first pixel is on the screen, pit and you're all finished. Save your work as of the HUD display in the cockpit picture. the faster the sim. Also, lots of curves in the HORNET.FGD. You can easily save all files Now go to Change Gauge on the Edit menu cockpit edges and on the HUD can slow associated with one aircraft with the same and select the Gauge Type of HUD. The down the sim considerably, so try to avoid name in this case HORNET), because the HUD is a pre-determined instrument so you them when possible. file extensions are all different. don't need to tell it what the variable is—it Start off by opening the Coldwar project we can only be a HUD. Envelope Pushing 101 started last month. You are going to need to copy the AV8B.PCX file from the Library Now, click on the edges of the HUD gauge Now that we have the cockpit built, we into your Coldwar directory (use in the window. Stretch the HUD so that it need to design and instruct our aircraft to fly SAV8B.PCX if you are planning on running fits properly in the section of the cockpit to our preference. To illustrate this, we will an SVGA sim). Now open the Cockpit Editor where it will be placed. We want to be able to be using the F/A-18 Hornet we have been and select the Background picture you will be see our Airspeed, Altitude, and what weapon working with in this article. First, load up the using. We've already copied the AVSB cock we have selected at a glance. To add these Model Editor. The opening screen of the pit into our directory, so choose that one three dials, use the Add Dial menu item outline of the jet may look a bit imposing at from the list of backgrounds in the Attributes under Edir, then change two of them to Large first sight, but don't worry, it's very simple. section of the Options menu. Once this is Digits in the Change Gauge option. Place one Since you may not know the exact dimenselected, the AV8B cockpit should appear in of these gauges in the upper left corner of the sions of the aircraft you want to model, you the editing window. Since the full cockpit is HUD (we'll call this \"gauge one\"), and one may want to look up the characteristics of the not being displayed in the window, we must in the upper right (gauge two\"). Change the aircraft in a source such as Jane's All The select Views from the menu bar, then select variable on gauge one to Airspeed, with a World's Aircraft. This book gives detailed and Fit from the menu; this re-sizes the window minimum value of 0 and a maximum of accurate flight information on nearly every around the picture so it's easier to edit. 2000. Change gauge two's variable to Altiaircraft ever flown. tude, with a minimum of 0 and a maximum The scale of the squares determines the size Once A HUD, Always A HUD of 30,000. The third dial should be changed of the aircraft you are building. To change the The first instrument we'll tackle is the to Weapon Select; its variable does not need scale, select Edit, then Blueprint. This will Page 94 Computer Gaming World "


"PICK-UP THE PHONE AND PICK TWO GAMES FREE! SDPA EUROPE Crawl Inside the Mind of & Sarial Killer fun-filled adventure where PARMEE GATES ARYL E. GATES POLICE QUEST 1-800-795-5979 SHADOWS OS DARKNESS GABRIEL KNIGHT SINS OF THE FATHERS sa SERRA ASIERRA Choose Any Two Sierra Games FREE When You Switch to Sprint!* directory assistance, customer service, even instant credit for wrong numbers. And we do it 24 hours a day! Sprint\" long-distance service just became more valuable up to $159.90** more! Now, when you switch your home long-distance service to Sprint, you can select any Sierra game, free! After enjoying six months of highquality long-distance, you may qualify for a second free Sierra game.*** Only Sprint can offer you a nationwide 100% digital, fiber optic network that provides the long-distance quality and reliability you need. Experience for yourself Sprint's \"fiber-optic\" clarity that makes both your long-distance calls and PC data transmissions crystal clear and virtually error free. Unsurpassed call and data clarity is just one of the many benefits you will enjoy as a Sprint customer. the most, including international calls-even if the called person is with a competitive long-distance carrier. The Most will also provide an automatic 20 percent discount off all calls to Sprint's millions of dial 1 customers, anytime and anywhere, When the person you talk to the most in a given month is a Sprint Customer, Sprint will combine both discounts for an effective overall savings of 36 percent on calls to that number.**** No Risk Guarantee Your satisfaction is guaranteed: we'll pick up the cost of switching your long distance to Sprint, and will even pay to switch you back if you are not completely satisfied. (Some restrictions apply.) So why not sign up for Sprint and receive the clarity, savings and service you want while getting two Sierra games you enjoy? Sprint Save on Long Distance When You're away from home too! Sprint's FONCARDSM lets you continue to take advantage of long-distance calling and savings even when you're away from home. The FONCARD is free, with cards available for every member of your family. SIERRA The Most A Unique Calling Plan Sprint offers an unprecedented longdistance calling plan called The Most available now for all customers. The Most will save Sprint Customers 20 percent off already low rates on calls each month to whomever you talk to The Service You Deserve At Sprint, we make no compromises when it comes to dependable, personal service we do it all; operator services, Ofrer valid only in the U.S. and for new Sprint customers. Not valid for F ONCARD-only orders. One offer per household. Certain restrictions apply. Retail value of Sierra Games. Offer valid on any current Sleura product with a retail value of $79.95 or below To qualify for a second game, the customer must bill $20 per month in 3 of the first 6 months. THE MOST discounts apply to in-state/intraLATA calls only where authorized Circle Reader Service #108 "


"25,000 pounds of thrust out of upward from a forward view. A high FST Model hornet.frnd Dihedral will make your aircraft more twin engines, so we will give our jet File Edit Help the appropriate numbers. By stable, as it has a natural tendency to marking the engines as «Jet\" we do level itself out, but conversely makes the away with variables such as prop plane increasingly difficult to maneuver. wash, but must now concern our Aircraft may be designed with Anhedral, selves with hear-seeking missiles or Negative Dihedral, which gives a betlaunched at us by enemy fighters; ter shape for maneuvering. Anhedral is if you give an enemy aircraft a input as \"#\" and represents the angle flight model with \"Prop,\" then he downward that the wings droop. Some only has cannons with which to aircraft, such as large jumbo jets, may shoot you down, but if you mark it look like they have Anhedral, but this is as «Jer,\" the fighters are armed with only due to the weight of the wings Top spd = 10 various missiles as well. It is possi when the aircraft is resting on the Stall spd = 113 ble to create a Sopwith Camel ground. Your aircraft may have up to armed with AIM-OM Sidewinders; 20.0 degrees of Dihedral, or -20.0 An12.50, 0.00 it's just a matter of labeling the hedral. engine as Jet instead of Prop. Wing Incidence: This is the other variFigure B: Designing the aircraft's shape using the Force Model Editor. Notice that the Top Speed and able that affects wing angle. This repreThe quadrahedron at bottom represents the vertical stabilizer. \". Stall Speed of the aircraft have adsents the \"side view\" angle of the wing. allow you to determine the size of the aircraft, justed their values for the new enValues here range from -5.0 to 10.0, with level flight, at cruising speed, beand the distance from the right of the grid to gines you have installed. A Hornet has a stall where the Center of Gravity lies. speed of around 130 knots, so fine-tune the tween 1.0 and 3.0. Wing Efficiency: This number dererThe Center of Gravity on an aircraft is of Force Model until the Stall Speed reaches that great importance, because if it is in the wrong mark. In order to tune the craft down to the mines the aircraft's stall speed and how finest detail, we will have to visit the Aircraft much speed is lost in High-G turns. It place, then the aircraft will be inherently unProperties screen where we will see a very stable. Such aircraft are actually more mancucan range from 0.3 to 3.0. imposing set of words and values: Stall Angle: This is the angle the aircraft verable than normal aircraft, but the loss in  Aircraft Weight: How much the aircraft has to achieve to stop the airflow over stability ultimately renders them useless. Airthe wing, thus stalling the aircraft. weighs without fuel. The minimum craft like the F-16, F-117, and the B-2 bombControl Power: This determines how er are fly-by-wire jers, which means they have value here is 500, with the maximum sensitive the joystick will be in controla flight computer that is constantly calculatbeing 100,000. ling the aircraft. A sluggish ing the small corrections needed to make the commercial aircraft will have aircraft stable during flight. These sophistiAircraft Properties a low Control power, while a cated aircraft are reproducible in Toolkit, but the numbers must be manipulated a bit to AC Weight 22541 lbs Control Power 4.00 military fighter will have a 0.1-10.0 higher one. make them fit into the program's parameters. Airframe Drag 1.70 05-100 Roll Inertia 4.00 0.1-10.0 Roll and Pitch Inertia: One UC Drag 2.10 02-100 Pitch Inertia 2.00 0.1-10.0 of the unique aspects of The small rectangle at the bottom of the Toolkit flight models is that grid is a cross section of the tail plane, directly Airbrake Drag 2.00 02-10.0 uc Retracts Biplane aircraft inertia is taken into in line with the tail on the fuselage above it. Wing Dihedral -3.00 degrees flaps Taildrag account when the aircraft atThis can be very helpful in determining the Wing incidence 0.00 tempts to maneuver. High degrees size of the rail, should its exact dimensions be Airbrakes Ejector values make the aircraft slow unknown. For our Hornet, we want to shape Wing Efficiency 2.90 0.3-3.0 to start and slow to stop once the aircraft to resemble an F/A-18, and so Stall Angle 30.00 degrees OK Cancel started. High values will make adjust the grid accordingly: the aircraft harder to fly, but  Width: 30 M can allow for some neat aeroThe screen that breathes life into your aircraft and  Grid Size: 1 M determines its flight dynamics. batics like the MiG-29's fa Center: 12 M Airframe Drag: The Airframe drag remous \"Cobra.\" Now select the points on the Force Model  Biplane: Checking this box effectively flects on the drag efficiency of an airand shape out a top view of an F/A-18. Note doubles the wing area. craft. The scale is from 0.5 to 10.0, that the Force Model is a rough repreUndercarriage Retracts: Allows user to where 0.0 represents no drag (no fricsentation of an aircraft, not an exact dupliretract the landing gear if checked. If left tion) and 10.0 would be a perfectly flat catc. For instance, in the case of the Hornet blank, then the Airframe Drag and U/C where the craft has a large control surface on shape (perpendicular to the airflow). Drag are added together permanently, its wings, you would draw the wing slightly U/C Drag: These values are the same as with a maximum value of 10.0. larger than normal. When you are finished, Airframe drag, and are added to airframe Tail Dragger: This determines where your screen should look similar to that shown drag when the landing gear is lowered. the wheels in the undercarriage are loin Figure B. Airbrake: Similar to U/C, this value is cated. If checked, the aircraft will land The next step is to input the Engine data. added when the airbrake is deployed. easier, but may be more difficult to get Hornets on afterburners produce around  Wing Dihedral: The angle of the wings off the ground. Page 96 Computer Gaming World "


"LUNICUS They Stole Your Planet. They're Trashing Your Country. Theyre Going To Kill Your Family. 1. There's Only One Thing A Civilized Person Can Do.. HA MACWORLD C66 WASTE 'EM \"FASTEST GAME ON CD-ROM.\" -New MEDIA MAGAZINE -MacHOME JOURNAL \"THE KING OF CD-ROM ADVENTURE GAMES.\" tttt1/2 -MacUser MAGAZINE Vou're one of the last free Earthlings left: your team on Moonbase Lunicus will have to save the world. Grah your cybersuit. Strap on the ol' plasma cannon. Jump in your shuttle and scream into the fire-fight of your dreams. AVAILABLE FOR MACINTOSH AND WINDOWS ON CD-ROM This lightspeed arcade movie brings you the best of both universes: butt-kicking action with CD-ROM intensity and all of it with killer attitude! Hyper-real environments. Skull-crushing music-tracks. Rick droid-butt against tough odds that keep rising to match your skill. There's no waiting for anything, not even if you need to breathe. Paramount Interactive Circle Reader Service #121 It's a dirty job but somebody's got to do it. "


"1.50 sec. For our Hornet we will need to modify the basic flight data to read as follows: Aircraft Weight: 22,541 Aircraft Drag: 1.7 (experimenting with this allowed me to choose a top speed) U/C Drag: 3.1 (Gear will hinder greatly, remember to raise it!) Airbrake Drag: 3.0 (allows for rapid speed deceleration) Wing Dihedral: -3.00 (solid maneuverability) Wing Incidence: 0.00 Wing Efficiency: 2.7 (a decent, efficient wing) Stall Angle: 30° Control Power: 4.0 Roll Inertia: 4.00 Pitch Inertia: 2.00 U/C Retract? Yes Flaps? Yes Airbrakes? Yes Biplane? No Taildragger? No Ejector? Yes Engine: 24,000 Fuel Weight: 1000 lbs. # of Engines: 2 Type: Jet Once finished, save your file as HORNET.FMD. You may want to take your new Horner up for a test spin. To do that you need to first create a world in which to fly. We'll go into further detail on world creation next month, but for those who can't wait, follow these simple directions: 1) Open the World Editor. 2) Select the \"Raise Land» tool. 3) Make a large patch of land in the middle of the screen. everytime you fire your cannon, Sound Recorder AFTERBRNWAY Sparky will pipe up! File Edit Effects Help To customize sounds for your sim, you just need to record a Playing sound, then save it with a filename that FST can recognize. You also have to make sure that you save Position: Length: your sound as Mono and sample it 4.62 sec. at 11KHz. Some 16-bit sound cards may give you unusual effects if you attempt to record in 16-bit mode, so it's best to use 8-bit sampling. Even better, use an 8-bit sound card, such as Sound Blaster. Before you begin, you need to plug cafe scene in When Harry Met Sally) and program FST to a microphone into the Input jack play it back, say, when hitting the aiterburners. on your sound card, load up the 4) Change the toolbar to «Object\" mode. recorder from the Accessories icon, and get 5) Place an object on the raised land. ready to do some recording. Make sure the room is nice and quiet, then plug a micro6) Change the object to \"Runway.FSD\". phone into the Input jack on your sound 7) Zoom in near the bottom of the runway. card. Click on Record. Now record your 8) Place an object at the south end of the od of the voice saying \"Eject! Eject! Eject!\". Save this as \"EJECT.WAV» in the Coldwar directory. runway. Now when you eject, Toolkit will play back 9) Edit this object so that it has a Flight this sample instead of the default sound. You Model of HORNET.FMD and a Cockpit of can use the editing option to clean up your HORNET.FGD and the shape A-18.FSD. sound. If there is a long pause at the beginMark the Horner as the Player. ning, move the bar on the sample until it is where your voice begins, then choose the Breaking The Sound Barrier \"Delere Before Current Position\" in the Edit Toolkit lets you add realism and excitement menu. If there is some noise after you finto your sim through the clever use of sound. ished, then you can \"Delete After Current Rather than create our own sound editor for Position after moving the slider to the end Toolkit, we decided to simply use the one of the sample. You can add some simple designed by Microsoft for Windows. The special effects to the sample by choosing \"Add Sound Recorder in Windows is able to handle Echo\" to the sample. Or you may even want all the Toolkit sounds, and save them as WAV to mix the sample of the default Eject (with files for playback. All you have to do is realize your voice) giving a more realistic punch to that the computer only looks for a certain the sound. Once you've mastered recording filename whenever it plays a sound. If you one sound, try recording the following: record your dog barking in the Sound Re\"Eject! Eject! Eject!\" saved as EJECT.WAV corder, then call this \"CANNON.WAV,\" \"Fox One Mike!\" saved as FIRE. WAV \"FMV-103 Ready for takeoff\" saved as START.WAV \"Pull Up!\" saved as LOWWARN.WAV Save these files with the names given. Consult the Toolkit Manual, page 12, for even more file names of sounds. Next month, we'll finish off our three-part series with an in-depth look at the World Editor, the backbone of Toolkit. You'll soon be soaring through the air, engaging the enemy U2, and sharing your creation with friends. Polish up your Flight Sim Toolkit skills, because CGW and Domark are introducing a design contest along with the final installment of this series. CGW Page 98 Computer Gaming World "


"VOCABULARY ENHANCEMENT POLITICAL CORRECTNESS CATCH UP IN YOUVE MESEC SPIRITUAL AWARENESS BUTT-KICKING EXCITEMENT Grand Prize Winner: The Apple-Japan CD-ROM Award Chosen over IRON HELIX, HELL CAB, and MYST. \"Downright outrageous.\" 12 Inside MacGames MacHome Journal I elcome to the future. V America's on close-out sale. Everything's going to hell on afterburners. The Skins and the Neos have stolen the last gene samples of Earth's wildlife. If you ever want to hear a bird go tweet again, you'll have to do something fast. Fire up your hovercraft and blast through an incredibly realistic, grungy 3-D New Yorkof-the-future in a non-stop firefight. Your hand-picked Co-pilot is screaming with attitude. Your custom-chosen soundtrack is turning your brain to plasma. The Weapons Lady has 24 different forms of destruction for your selection...if you can handle it. All you've got to do is stay alive long enough to save the world...and make a few bucks while you're at it. FROM THE AWARD-WINNING CREATORS OF LUNICUS Inquiries please call 415-813-8040 DOLAN Paramount Interactive AWARD-WINNING CD-ROM MACINTOSH ADVENTURE NOW AVAILABLE FOR WINDOWS Circle Reader Service #102 "


"Just looking at My (Imagine what pla ou stumble upon I a battered old book and find yourself transported to the island of Myst. Now you have no other choice but to explore. As you do, it quickly becomes apparent that some thing has gone wrong. Terribly wrong. An ancient betrayal must be unveiled. Secret books concealed on the island of Myst lead the way to worlds born of a master storyteller's imagination. Yet one by one, they're being destroyed through the treachery of his sons. But which one? BroderbundCYAN Myst is a trademark of Cyan, Inc. All rights reserved. Macintosh and QuickTime TM are registered trademarks of Apple Computer, Inc. MPC is a registered trademark of the Multimedia PC Marketing Council.  Copyright 1994, Braderbund Software, Inc and Cyan, Inc To order, see your local dealer or call 800/521-6263 and refer to code 354 "


"Now Available on MPC st is an adventure ing it must be like) Only you can untangle the web of lies and deceit that shrouds the 5 worlds of Myst. So stop imagining. And live the adventure that tens of thousands of Macintosh\" users have already experienced. Available on Macintosh and MPC CD-ROM 5 complete worlds to explore No inventory or time constraints Over 2,500 photorealistic images Non-linear game play Original soundtrack QuickTime\" video and animation MYST CHOICE ITORS USERER The Surrealistic Adventure That Will Become Your World MAC AWARD BEST GAM Circle Reader Service #49 "


"und View Enter The Gladiator! Scorpion Se Scorpia Battles In Bethesda's The Elder Scrolls: Arena se I na time when most companies are bring. body, pulling the mouse from top to bottom the information needed to discern the whereing out shorter and faster-playing rolegives an overhand shot, while a quick move abouts of the staff piece dungeon. playing games, Bethesda has gone against from bottom to top makes a thrust. It's the The staff retrieval section is completely linthe grain by creating The Elder Scrolls: Arena, most natural way of fighting that I've seen in ear. After you have one piece, you receive a a game that could almost be a lifetime project a first-person game. It doesn't move as fast as clue to the location of the next, and so on. for some players. the combat in DOOM, but it's satisfying There is no way you can do these out of Think of it as \"MightéMagicmeers Ultima nonetheless. sequence, nor stumble on a staff Underworld\" on a very large scale. Those who dungeon by accident. Only after have played a Might & Magicgame know they you've tracked down the \"helpful are designed as a main quest surrounded by item\" and returned it to whoever smaller, optional ones that provide experineeds it does the dungeon show up ence, money, and the occasional neat item. on your map. Arena is much like that, except it has many, Speaking of maps, there are four many, many side quests you can do, from of them in the game. The first is running errands around town, to exploring the town map, which you can call the wilderness, to taking on jobs for the local up any time you're in a city. This ruler. You could easily spend as much time displays the entire town, although on just these side activities as you would on a only in layout; you still have to complete game from anyone else. Fortuwalk around to find stores, temnately, these are all optional, and you can do ples, etc. Then, you can write their as many or as few of them as you care to. names (and any other notes you Graphically, the game could almost pass as Arena differs most from Ultima in its plot. wish) on the map itself. The second map is a new version of Ultima Underworld, with its Arena, for all its size, is a typical \"treasure the wilderness map, which comes up when first-person perspective, scrolling, animations hunt/kill Foozle\" expedition. Jagar Tharn, you're outside the city gates looking for small and cursor control. The comparison is not, or the emperor's Battlemage, turns traitor. He dungeons or other interesting places to plunhowever, complete. For instance, you can't imprisons the emperor in another dimension, der. This isn't quite as detailed, showing only Forechen uses magic to impersonate the ruler. Outlines, and only a small section of the area in UW, and the keyboard movement controls Your mission is to travel across the continent, at a time. The third map is the dungeon map, are not fully implemented. Using key compicking up the eight pieces of the Staff of which operates much like that in Ultima Unmands, you can only move forward, back, or Chaos, and then use the staff to rescue the derworld. As you walk around the level, it turn and move. So, there is no way to turn in emperor from Tharn's evil clutches. place, or \"slide\" to either side, obviously a This is no easy task, as obtaining the The Elder Scrolls: Arena considerable drawback in combar. Fortupieces requires you to trek through a nately, those who prefer to wield their mice minimum of 16 dungeons. Naturally, $69.95 will have no such problem. each staff piece is in a dungeon, but be SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: 386-25MHz or better, 4MB RAM, VGA graphics, Arena's combat is an improvement on the fore you can get to the hellhole in which 25MB hard drive space, mouse; recommended 486-33 or better; supports Aria, Ensonig, Roland, Ultima model. Blows are controlled by hold the piece is imprisoned, you have to help Sound Blaster and Ultrasound sound cards ing down the right mouse button, and then the people who can tell you where the PROTECTION: DESIGNER: VJ Lakshman just moving the mouse in the way you want dungeon is. Invariably, that means enterPUBLISHER: Bethesda Softworks to swing your weapon. A fast horizontal ing a \"prequel\" dungeon to find the tabmovement produces a level slash across the let/map/scroll/whatever that contains PRICE: IBM None Rockville, MD (301) 926-8300 Page 102 Computer Gaming World "


"$34900 Suggested Retail Price You've got the sound. You've got the CD-ROM. Now get the picture with ReelMagic Lite! all from your standard CD-ROM drive. That's what gives your interactive MPEG entertainment \"walk-in\" realism and puts your favorite movies on CD-ROM.* Reclligiga You've got the 16-bit sound card and CD-ROM drive-now all you need is ReelMagic Lite to join the MPEG revolution! ReelMagic Lite is the world's first ReelMagie MPEG video MPEG video playback card. It will change the way you look at multimedia forever, at a price you can afford today. The MPEG process delivers 200:1 monster data compression for full-screen, full-motion TV-quality video, along with CD-quality audio playback30 fps MPEG (D Quality Adub, DOS video playback MPEG odio garne-compatible ReelMagic Lite ReclMagic ReelMagic Multimedia Kit *Plays popular Sound Blaster-compatible games, The MPEG experience sets the new industry standard in visual excitement-send Top Gun rocketing across your entire screen or watch the first lunar landing on Compton's interactive encyclopedia! And many more next-generation ReelMagic MPEG interactive entertainment and movie titles are on the way. As an added bonus, when you get ReelMagic Lite you'll also receive the MPEG version of a thrill-packed, live-action adventure game FREE! Call 1-800-845-8086 ext. 407 for your nearest ReelMagic dealer-and blaze into the future now DESIGNS with MPEG! Blue Speed Drive Stereo Speckers SIGMA ZORK noe BENZERELE CUBE Comptons BC Eurydia These are just a few of the many exciting ReelMagic titles available now. \"Call Sigma Designs to inquire about CD-ROM drives compatible with movies on CD. MPEG, the Motion Picture Experts Group is the industry standard for data compression and decompression 1994 Sigma Designs, Inc. The Sigma Designs logo is a registered trademark 94 Sigma Designs, Inc. The Sigma Designs logo is a registered trademark and ReelMagic is a trademark of Sigma Designs, Inc. All other brand and product names are property of their respective owners. Specifications subject to change without notice. Circle Reader Service #128 "


"simply pick a profession and a race, and go to the stats screen where you have a random number of points to distribute among the character's abilities. If you don't like the numbers, you can reroll as often as you want Tristynak Greensly Breton Healtk. 2001200 Healer fatigue 77 Levej 10 Gold: 50 Ste:42 Sot 62 VIS 58 099990 +0 Dozie: 63 Spell Pico Magic Ocf: +1 10 Hit:+0 folchead:+0 oostki+ O deos 1985+0 Chorisni+O Ead 35 Per 1 Expo ngis slowly fills in, showing what you've uncovered so far. However, neither this one nor the other two are scrollable through prior maps. You can only display the map for the area you're actually in at the time. The fourth map is the travel map. This brings up a display of the entire continent, showing all the provinces. Clicking on a province gives you a close-up of it, with all the cities, towns, and villages to which you can travel. Clicking on a location tells you the distance and gives an estimate of the time needed to get there. Clicking on the \"travel\" button takes you there, with a minimum of fuss. While it may take weeks (depending on how far you're going) of game time, in real time it's a matter of seconds. Talking About My Character Generation Arena offers a nice spread of character classes based on the standard trio of Fighter, Mage and Thief. You can create a pure character of a single class or one with mixed class, such as a fighter/thief, mage/fighter, or even mage/thief/fighter. Each has certain advantages and disadvantages. Add in the eight races to choose from, and you have a lot to work with when building your character. The creation process can be as short or as long as you desire. The short method is to SI TU Codi+0 Poizea: +1 Shockit + very difficult, meant to provide some experience and a bit of treasure to get you started. A magic portal (when you find it is the exit, and sends you to whatever your home province happens to be, where the game proper begins. At this point, you could begin asking around for clues to Fang Lair, the first staff dungeon, or take out some time to explore and make money. The latter is the better course, and you won't have to look hard or long for opportunities. Every village, town, and city has something for you to do, but the best jobs are handed out by local rulers. These usually pay the most. However, this part of the game is afflicted with problems, so it's always best to save before accepting a noble's quest, just in case. Essentially, some quests are impossible. The usual culprit is travel time. All quests have deadlines, and there are occasions when you just can't travel from here to there, or from here to there and back again, within the time limit. It doesn't matter if you're escorting someone to another town, fetching an item from somewhere else, or rescuing the royal heir from a dungeon—the time allotted is simply too short. In one case, the estimate Band until you're pleased with the results. The long way is to answer a series of ten questions about your character. These are drawn from a pool of questions, so the same ones don't always come up. Each describes a situation and gives you three choices as to your actions. At the end of the question your action naire,\" the game gives its estimate as to the most suitable profession based on your re\" sponses. After creation, all characters begin in a sewer/cell area. This is a small dungeon, not ACCESS Brings You the Virt UNDER,A Killing LIUCIIL This category-creating Interactive Movie from ACCESS Software goes light years beyond any other product labeled \"interactive.\" Under a Killing Moon takes you to the streets of post World War III San Francisco and casts you into the role of Tex Murphy, Private Investigator, who first appeared in Mean Streets, then Martian Memorandum. Under a Killing Moon is a Virtual World full of people and places so richly detailed, you'll feel like you're actually there. Format: 3 CD-ROMs MS-DOS "


"for travel was woefully underestimated; what was supposed to take 70 days actually went over 90. This one was especially irksome, as I lost out on almost 20,000 gold. Ouch! The software isn't very stable, and even with three patches so far, problems still exist. The game is prone to crashing at inopportune moments, such as when you pick up those tablets/scrolls/etc. to get the staff dungeons on your map. I made it a habit early on of saving just before I grabbed the item, and that's a good habit to have. It is also a good idea to save often just on general principles, as the game can lock up or crash for no obvious reasons. While this doesn't happen a lor, it does occur often enough to make regular saving a necessity to avoid losing progress. Another problem is that sometimes the dungeon auto-map is not saved properly. Upon restoring a game you may find that most of the level you mapped is not there any more. All you see is a mostly blank parchment. This happened to me in the final dungeon, but fortunately, you only have to get through this dungeon, not out again. It can happen elsewhere, though. It's Not The Size Of The Dungeon... fighting the same opponents over and over as The real problem, however, is that in a you go through dungeons. To make up for game of this size, everything eventually be the lack of variety, the monsters grow in comes mechanical and repetitious. Conversapower as you do. Thus a skeleton, for intions, on the street with passersbystance, will do as much damage to you proor in taverns with the barkeepers, portionally when you're 10th level as when are limited to a fixed menu of you're 4th level, and with about the same choices. In every town, you must chance to hit, even though your armor class walk around to find all the stores (at least for warriors) is considerably better at and inns. The towns themselves are the higher level. much the same, with little to disMoreover, the game is very disconnected. tinguish them from one another. Every quest, be it in town or for a staff piece, Even the quests become repetitive seems to exist in its own little universe. Nothafter awhile. ing has any relation to anything else. Nothing There is only a limited number you do in one place has an effect on another, of monsters, so you find yourself except that noble quests are a little easier to MKOA al World Interactive Movie! Q: What do film stars Brian Keith, Margot Kidder, & Russell Means have in common? What Reviewers Are Saying: \"Lots of games push the envelope-Under a Killing Moon blows it to smithereens!\" -William Trotter, PC Entertainment «A ground breaking CD adventure!\" --Joyce Worley, Electronic Games \"Under a Killing Moon combines the best elements of movies and computer games... It literally pulls you into the screen.\" -Denny Atkin, Entertainment Editor, Compute Magazine A. They all star in ACCESS Software's new CD thriller Under a Killing Moon! ACCESS Coming Spring 1994! to a Software Dealer Near You! SOFTWARE INCORPORATED Call 1-800-800-4880 for details "


"come by as your experience increases. Everything is isolated, and there is no sense of a coherent whole here. For all that, Arena does have some nice individual touches. The magic system, for instance, allows you to buy spells «off the rack\" or make your own (if you can afford it). Further, thieves have more opportunities in Arena chan in any other game. The towns can be a wonderland of wealth for the skillful and lucky picker of pockets, burglarizer of homes, and plunderer of shops. Also, the wilderness isn't just empty space as in other games. There are roads, farms, wayside inns and temples, as well as mysterious places to explore. It was a pleasure to see UW style graphics used for outdoors, both town and country, complete with weather effects such as rain, snow, fog, and even occa10 sional thunderstorms. Music and sound effects are HERE good, especially in dungeons. Each monster has its own particular sound, so even if you can't see it, you have a pretty good idea of what's waiting for you in the darkness. The tune is always the same in the dungeons, but different music provides audio-ambiance in difsophisticated dungeon crawl with minimal ferent towns, and there are signature tunes for plot. Still, the game is impressive as a first the various shops, temples, and other specific effort. Most of the pieces of a good CRPG are locations, as well. there. What is needed now is a tightening of On escort duty, especially for a the code, a little polishing up of the basic ruler's progeny, you are likely to be engine, a little scaling back of the size, and the attacked by opposing forces if you inclusion of some real role-playing elements have to spend the night at an inn (some of those perfunctory convers: (only inns are open at night, and with the NPCs just beg to be followed up you can never be sure what time of with further questions) with a solid storyline. day you'll arrive at your destinaThese are well within Bethesda's abilities, and tion town). their addition to furure products would make Overall, Arena is a game of amazThe Elder Scrolls a dynamite series. In the ing detail, with spurts of brilliance meantime, Arena is likely to appeal most to that can be lost in its huge scope. It those who enjoy extended dungeoneering is too big to offer real variery, and with occasional breaks for fresh air and sunthus becomes no more than a very shine. CGW SPECTRUM CAM-11PM PST 593912-6295 THE MOST COMPLETE ADVENTURE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM ON THE MARKET TODAY! INTRODUCING... THE TRIAD CAMPAIGN SYSTEM FOR GAMEMASTERS ELECTRONICS CURRENT PRICES SCOW Yerus USES Windows 3.1* BMS SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS IBM/Comp with Windows 3.1' . Min. 2 megs hard drive space for install 4 megs RAM RULES Designed to implement detailed campaign backgrounds and scenarios Alaptable to multiple campaign backgrounds or worlds MAPS World size to tactical Markers display key locations, characters and creatures Sizcable display windows Zoom Applicable sound, graphics and text with map markers SPELLCASTING Adjustable parameters to create different effects. System calculates spell characteristics and appropriate level, area and Fu SYSTEM FEATURES Example adventure  Formula calculator Rules documented in context sensitive help files with cross-references. Encounter generator loads all data, no need to consult charts. Game clock 'Windows and calendar. Player's Guide . Gamemaster's Guide is a registered COMBAT trademark of Microsoft Corp Damage calculated and subtracted from target. Combat results returned in text form suitable to read to your players Spell effects applied automatically to all creatures in effect area  Set character destinations and targets and let the system perform the movements and attacks CHARACTERS Character creation quick and easy oras detailed as desired. Detailed skills, professions, stats and abilities  1 300 System HOURS: P.O. BOX 6295 6AM-1 1PM PST SALINAS, CA 93912-6295 7-DAYS 1-800-983-4321 CALL FOR CURRENT PRICES ask for catalog Womack 10 Yeu Colection-replay JEWEL CASE Sage & Dogs of Wa Bunde) in Guest Dune Saime Huk ADSDA Czom: Geries Curse Gursrio 2000 Someward Ho-WN DOS ADSD Dark Sun ton Han Sprekeep ADSD Dungeon Hack Kng's Quest 6 Sea  ADD Eye dhe Beholder | Lg C  Kraca Subuar 2060 AD&D Eye of the Beholder Tri Rice Assa: Syndicate: American Ravon ADSD Ravenlot Rem DZork Task Force Admiral Pack Alone in the Dark $49 Score Wespons of the Luthede TEX (lacical Fighter Experiment Amored Fist Space Quest 4 Tie Fighter Aric Baron CD 3.5 Sar Wars Chess V Victory Gold Line Sword Boodnet Vel of Darkness Comanche wespended Missions AD&D Dungeon Hack Vctory Pack (V. VILA Daeronsgate $56 ADSD: Ravindt Warlord I Dark Legons Alone in the Dark When Two Worlds Wa Dracula Unleashed Boodne! Wing Commander kademy Dune Daemonsgate Gaaa | Hd Cab V1.1 Escape rom Monster Menor Doom Episode 1 John Madsen Foobal hon Hoix $S6 Duneli Lemings Joumeyman Poect 548 Dungeon Master Lost Fleso Sherlock Holmes Labyrino Tmé 58 Eyed the Berader la Mad Dog McCree Merits: Erper manal Fighter 20 Front Page F.B.Pro Quotis Word Reol Assault 8 Harpoon Ford Rash Reum o Zork 548 Be of the Dead Shariocaster Shadowcaster  ws Gmbit Shock Ware Srce Commander W/ Tactical Opions S8 Legends d' Yaou TFX (Tactical Fighter Equal Master of Orion Super Wing Commander Ultma $58 Microsoft Acade-WN The Horde Uima Underworld I&I SSB Ondris Word Toal Edipse Uima Underword WWng Comen. SS8 Populous t Trals of the Olympian Gods ATARI Wing Commander 1 Dette  Power Morge Jaguar System Wing Commander 2 Delne $397 Cies of God commem.ed) Mens Predator Wer Commander I/Uima V1 $39 Shadowcaster 540 WE ALSO SELL MAG SEGA SNES WE SELL ALL COMPUTER & VIDEO ENTERTAINMENT PRODUCTS ALL SALES FINAL, NO REFUNDS PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE, CONTACT PUBLISHERS FOR DEFECTS 20% RESTOCKING FEE ON RETURNED & REFUSED ITEMS PAYMENT: CHECKS (ORDERS SHIPPED WHEN CHECK CLEARS) MONEY ORDERS (TREATED AS CASH) CA residents add 7.25% sales tax/HANDLING $2 PER ORDER SHIPPING: FREE GROUND SHIPPING WITH $100 PURCHASE, UNDER $100 ADD $5 PER ORDER, 2ND DAY AIR ADD $7. OTHER SHIPPING TERMS ARRANGED. COD ADD $6 Circle Reader Service #115 Computer Gaming World danasxa&&&&&8228 R&&&&&&&&&&& Lan hea ORDER NOW! Mail check or money order for $39.95. Add $4.00 for shipping and handling Call or write for GAMEMASTER'S Clip Art and Sound more information Clips Disks Available $12.00 a $10.00 (904) 494-3165 2165 with TCS order. (Specily 8 Bit Mono or 103 8 Bit Stereo for Sound Clips) Additional player's Guides available, 3 for $10.00 Nawu Triad Institute PO, Box 11246 Pensacola, FL 32524-1246 Circle Reader Service #96 Florida residents add applicable sales tax Page 106 "


"GTM ZANEJS IC Clasic Arcade Action On Your PC & Amiga! IMAGITEC DESIGN INC IMAGITEC DESIGN INC *. Raiden: Available from selected retailers NOW! IBM PC & Amiga Disk & PC CD ROM Available From Your Local Dealer Now! Circle Reader Service #122 Copyright FABTEX INC & Sebu Kalusu Inc. 1994. Licensed to imple Design "


"REVIEW Bob's Your Bovine Uncle Crystal Dynamics' Action/Strategy/Cinematic Game, The Horde cows. by Chris Lombardi aul Reiche, Fred the serving boy Chauncey who races over to task is to protect the community from seaFord and the rest give the royal rotunda a heave-ho, saving sonal raids by the Horde. To this end, you 1 of the rabble at the King's life. As reward, Chauncey is can dig moats, build fences and walls, hire Toys For Bob are nothing but granted vast tracts of land in the Shimto knights and archers, among other defensive trouble makers to we organizationally Plains. This would be a quick and dirty tasks. obsessed editors at CGW. We've gone to Happily Ever After if the Shimto Plains Each season you have two minutes to do great lengths to set up a rigid taxonomy of weren't currently being overrun by the currently being overrun by the your terraforming, plan your defense, and games-action, adventure, role-playing, Horde. place your grazing cows out of Horde's way. strategy, etc.--so that we can classify, rate, The Horde is a family of beasts best When the time is up, the hunting call of sort, peg, and pigeon-hole games. We like described as land-sharks without the the Horde rings across the plains (and to keep things nice and tidy, you see. Candy Grams. Like the sea predator, the stereophonically across your speakers). But the guys at Toys For Bob, and espehordling is a grotesque set of teeth in a conhordling is a grotesque set of teeth in a Then, on an overhead map you can see the cially their ring-leader. Paul Reiche, have tinual quest for something to chew. red devils racing directly toward the nearest gone our of their way over the years to sub. Though there are several species of tasty bit, be it tree, crop, farmer, or cow. vert our system. Witness Reiche's first hordling, each shares this rapacious appetite Wielding the Ki Wielding the King's mighty sword game, Archon. Is it chess or is it a joystick for anything and everything, especially Grimthwacker, Chauncey races about the jammer? Well, it's both. How about Reiche land under your direction, grimly thwackand Ford's Star Control-strategy game or Now, about cows. Though the game is ing hordlings before they wipe out the action game? Both. Star Control 2-advenentitled The Horde, it could just as easily town. The mouse is the preferred method ture or action game? Both!!! To maintain been called The Herd, given the obsession of control, and the mouse-interface is quite the integrity of our system we have to the game has for all things bovine. As menelegant once you get used to it. By clicking choose a single category, so we usually go tioned, cows are the favorite snack of the right mouse button and moving the with \"action,\" but we don't feel good about hordlings, but they are also central to the mouse side-to-side, you can cycle through it, and we don't sleep well as a consequence. economics of the realm, as they are the sinaction options. Moving the mouse up and Well, Toys for Bob, along with their gle most profitable commodity in the game. down changes the view from ground-level new parent entity Crystal Dynamics, have They also have a special place in the heart to overhead map. That's all there is to it. thumbed their collective nose at us again of Chauncey, as they are kin; an orphaned Joystick and keyboard control are also availwith The Horde. This game is very much an boy, he was suckled at the teats of a wild able, but both are irritatingly slow and intense hack n' slash action game, but it's but mothering herd. clumsy when compared to the mouse. also a strategy game in the Populous tradiFancy swordplay will serve you well, but tion. To beat the batter further, it's a \"mulHere's The Beef the key to success is resource management timedia extravaganza\" with a half hour of The humor is several miles left of center, and planning. At the end of every year, the full-motion video footage. The Horde is a but the gameplay hits the mark dead-on. b King's Chancellor (who we find is actually hybrid of the most editor-baffling kind, and Your job as Chauncey is to colothe Evil Chancellor) will exact a tax from what's more aggravating, it's good. nize a virgin tract of land and Chauncey with no little pleasure, Extremely good! ensure that is develops into a The Horde and making enough coin to keep thriving community. Rather Heimlich Heroics than having complete control $59.99 IBM (reviewed), 3DO The Horde's story begins with a wild over the development of your REQUIREMENTS: 386-33Mhz, VGA graphics, 4MB RAM, CD-ROM; supports feast around a king's table. As the King's town, as in SimCity, you can Ultrasound, Sound Blaster, chancellor, Kronus Maclor, relates a ribald only perform small feats of terSound Board, and Sound Master tale of courtly doings, the pudgy King raforming to ensure that your PROTECTION; Winthrop tries to guffaw and gulp a hunk settlers have clear plots upon DESIGNERS Toys For Bob PUBLISHER: Crystal Dynamics of turkey at the same instant. When the which to build their houses and Palo Alto, CA nobles fail to notice the king's gagging, it is plant their crops. Your primary (415) 473-3434 PRICE: SYSTEMS: sound cards None Page 108 Computer Gaming World "


"You've Trashed Their Homes, Left Their Police Force in Ruin and Laughed While a 300 Ton Monster Trampled Their Streets and Residential Zones... Now, Those Quiet Little Citizens of SimCity Have a Few Words For You. "


"up with his increasing tax demands is no be dropped and kicked, even aerial easy task. Money is earned when crops, support from a dopey dragon with cows, or trees survive a season of hordling a lot of flame but an undiscriminatinvasions. Money is spent to build defenses, ing aim. Add these special items to hire knights and archers, buy cows, or use the unique environments and special items during battle. The successful hordlings, top with random events Chauncey is one who carefully balances the that both help and hurt your cause, cost to defend a commodity against how and you've got a game with a lot of much that commodity will yield. staying power and a ton of charm. Many games have used resource manageThe only criticisms I might have ment and action as the underlying structure are that: 1) it doesn't have a diffiof their design, but The Horde is catapulted culty setting, so those without above the rest by its variety of play. The Olympic-calibre reflexes may find it game is constantly changing, and new sura bit too tough and 2) it uses the prises are doled out at regular intervals, age-old action game convention of pulling you along like a path of sugary only allowing you to save at the end of sevChancellor who makes this a must see. His sweets. Once Chauncey has survived two eral levels. So, if Chauncey is killed by the character, as nemesis of Chauncey, is cut years in the Shimto Plains, he is moved on last hordling in the Winter month of a year, and pasted from the Prince John role in to the Tree Realm of Alburga where the it's back to Spring to start over again. Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves with a little environment offers new challenges. The animation of Chauncey, the bit of Prince Humperdink of The Princess Whereas in the Plains Chauncey could hordlings, and the local farmers are wonBride throw in. Gregory obviously had fun plant and harvest trees for cash, in the Tree derful. Chauncey awkwardly swings his toowith the role, and it's that energy that carRealm he cannot harm a single tree lest he heavy sword around in a full looping circle, ries the story. sacrifice some hit points. Likewise, the killing hordlings in the radius. The adolesIn addition to the main storyline are a other regions (swamp, desert, and arctic) cent hordlings lope awkwardly along like handful of brief birs for random events. A have unique limitations and require that they've yet to grow into their overly large newscaster will pop up to report on you use very different strategies. feer. When a hordling gets hold of a cow or increased immigration, crop yields, rainfall, The hordlings offer their own surprises farmer, he'll shout out (\"Ooooo, num and the like. The Evil Chancellor will tell as well. Each environment has a species of nums!») and rub his belly in glee. Watching you, with obvious pleasure, that there has hordling that is endemic to it. There are hordlings die is the real treat: they apparbeen an increase in the hordling population pygmy hordlings that hide in trees and fire ently have an extremely high internal presor in the tax rate, or that he has borrowed blow guns; desert hordlings that burrow sure, for whenever a sword pierces their skin one of your items for his own needs. The underground and poke Chauncey with they burst like a bubble, their eyes popping real gems, though, are a couple of segments their drill-bit heads; and arctic hordlings out of their skulls and their hides falling broadcast by a hordling-run pirate TV stathat specialize in snowballs, both large and flaccid like spent balloons. tion in which they announce an \"Adopt A small. The funniest creature has to be the Hordling\" campaign and spread propaganshaman hordling that shoots fireballs, teleAt The Moovies da about Chauncey. ports around the screen, and raises slain A round this solid game Crystal \"Taken as a whole, The Horde is remarkhordlings from the dead with a little witch a little Witch Dynamics has wrapped video segments that Dynamics has wrapne ably well-rounded. The gameplay, music, doctor mumbo-jumbo. tell the saga of Chauncey and his struggles. graphics, and video are all, individually, Variety is also introduced through speAt the end of every game segment, and at outstanding, and they only amplify each cial items that you can buy at the end of the beginning of the next, you'll be treated other when combined. It's refreshing to see each year. Among the dozen or so items are to some of the best made-for-CG (that's a game hyped for its \"multimedia\" a flamethrower for nicely broiled (never computer game) footage yet. The sets, enhancements actually deliver on the fried!) hordlings, Boots of Boogy to ensure directing, cinematography, acting—the advanced billing. So many times we've seen Chauncey is \"scaying alive\", bombs that can whole cinematic package is amazingly good. video segments misused, so that either the It's not Oscar winning stuff, mind video becomes the \"game\" (which is to say you; it's standard fare for a TV no game at all) or it adds little, if at all, to show, but it really stands out P play. The key to The Horde's success, it against other computer game proseems, is that Crystal Dynamics started ductions. with great gameplay and then added the whipped cream and \"multimedia\" cherry Kirk Cameron's work on TV's Growing Pains earns him top billing properly, as garnish. on the packaging, but his isn't the So, while we may struggle over the taxomost impressive performance. As nomic classification for The Horde, and the awkward, teenage Chauncey while we might curse the punks at Toys For who stumbles over sword and fumBob for their wanton disregard for our age bles over words in the presence of old system of categorization, The Horde, royalty, he is occasionally too conwithout question, will be at the top of a carvincing. It's Michael Gregory as the egory for 1994, whichever category that egory throneand show-stealing Evil mig nd show-stealing Evil might be. Cow Page 110 Computer Gaming World "


"system OPTIONS TIDISASTERS WINDOWS PEEK City Graphs Jun 2799 SEALAHD2 Funds: 21,285 UCICE FRAG BPD Gron Residential s100 «Welcome to SimCity CD-ROM!» VIDEO TAPE DJERARY: INC. Men Sure, Sure. It's all fun and games when you can play lord-god-king to a bunch of pixelhigh people and text boxes. Now lets see how that Mayoral muster The SimAction News keeps you posted on daily disasters and other headline news. holds up when you're faced with the real thing... Real disasters. Real Chaos. Real people. Introducing SimCity Enhanced CD-ROM from Interplay Productions. It's SimCity with a whole new attitude as the award-winning classic goes Hollywood with professional actors, location shooting, full Full motion video brings your city officials to life Police Chief Fire Chief and more! motion video and reallife footage of those natural disasters you find so irresistible (come on, admit it...we won't tell). Unleash a killer quake. Meltdown a few nuclear power Mess up and you'll watch as natural plants. Heck, wreak citydisaster and crime destroy your creation. wide havoc while you're at it... just don't expect your SimCitizens to sit around and take it because in this SimCity, your citizens are anything but quiet. You'll make headlines on the nightly news, come face-toface with vein-popping city officials and truly experience the lives you rule SIM CITU with each click of your mouse. SimCity Enhanced CD-ROM. The all new original city simulator. 868 Available for IBM PC & compatibles. CD-ROM and Hard Drive required. ENHANCED                    . DOS Software 1994 Interplay Productions, Inc. 1989, 1991, 1992, 1993 Sim-Business and Will Wright. All rights reserved worldwide. SimCity is a registered trademark of Sim-Business dba Maxis. All other TM's are properties of Interplay Productions, Inc. 17922 Fitch Avenue Irvine CA 92714. (714) 553-6678 Circle Reader Service #123 "


"BEST Heaving The Compact Discus Shareware Compilations on CD-ROM OF THE REST by Chuck Miller En T T Te're back again after a one month utilities, printer and video drivers, icons and be their titles PC Games 2 The Maxx, with hiatus to look at the best buys in bitmaps. over 1000 DOS-based games, and Winshareware gaming. This column Walnut Creek takes on an English air with dows Ware 2 The Maxx, featuring 200-plus had to step aside for the enormous CD-ROM Libris Britannia ($69.95), a disk containing Windows-based games and many other Winround-up last issue, but shareware gaming on the entire software library of The Public Do dows programs. Each CD is a steal at only CD-ROM will have its say this month as we main and Shareware Library of Sussex, Eng. $12.95. Though they lack the nifty Megalook at the wealth of shareware collections on land, if you can imagine. Six hundred Search Retrieval Software of Profit Press' this new delivery medium. Among the conmegabytes of games, graphics, and other promore costly Mega offerings, finding and using grams covering agriculture, astronomy, ham the programs on this disc is still a breeze. Both around are discs from Aces Research, Inc., radio, home finance, word processing—it's titles are also available in a six-disc set for $49 titles are also available in a six-di Walnut Creek CD-ROM, Profit Press, and all here. Tust be forewarned that a few of the that includes Sightso-Sounds 2 The Maxx, Wizardware Multimedia. Let's spin up these titles are aging, and not very gracefully. Swimsuits 2 The Maxx, Business Ware 2 The compact wonders and see whar they've got. If the Brits aren't your bag, Walnut Creek Creek Maxx, Maxx, and Share Ware 2 The Maxx. Aces Up Your Sleeve may bring much joy to Amiga owners with If you're not Maxx-ed out by this point, CD-ROM drives. The Aminet CDROM Profit Press might tempt you further with \"Ollowing on their previous releases, Aces ($29.95) is relatively inexpensive, while offerMega Windows 2 ($29) and Mega CD-ROM Research brings us yet another title focusinging classics like Drip, Lamatron. Mega Ball. 3 ($29). Both offer a wide selection of shareon ease of use as opposed to volume of titles. Pom Pom Gunner and Moria. This platter ware programs, including games, though the Games Expert for Windows Volume 1 emphasis is clearly on variery. All of the ($25.95) has a user-friendly interface for above discs can be ordered direct and are loading games directly from CD. highly recommended. To place your orThough the collection is rather limited, der, contact: Profit Press, 824 E. Ft. including only 87 games in total, no deLowell Road, Tucson AZ 85719, (800) compression or installation is necessary 843-7990. There is a $6 shipping and prior to play, making this a good choice handling charge. for the Windows novice. Included are several well-know games, including CanInto The Mix field, Castle of the Winds, Destroyer for Though not specifically a game collecWindows, and Search & Destroy. Conrion, The Mega-Mix CD-ROM ($29.95) noisseurs of shareware games will have from Wizardware contains over 150 seen most of these games before and may games among its accumulated assortfind this offering lacking in bang to the ment of graphic images, paint, capture megabyte. Contact Aces Research, Inc., Apogee's Monster Bash from PC Games 2 The Maxx and fractal software. Like the discs from 4480-C Enterprise Street, Fremont CA Aces Research, these programs are all 94538, 610) 683-8855 for more informa contains several hundred Amiga games, plus ready to run directly from the CD-ROM. tion. a smattering of software gags, game hints, allowing you to check out a program before cheats, game editors and commercial game inere installing it to your hard drive. Like trail mix, demos. With the scarcity of CDs available for Up the Right Creek however, the flavor may appeal to those with the Amiga, this certainly fills a niche for longWalnut Creek also has some Windows suffering Amiga users. le for longa less discerning palate, as this CD is rather dressings in store for its customers. Their limited in what it has to offer the more savvy F or orders or information, contact: Walnut CICA Microsoft Windows CD-ROM ($29.95) player. While some good shareware titles can Creek CD-ROM, 4041 Pike Creek Lane, be found here-Duke Nukem, The Orion Odoffers a boatload of games for Windows enSuite D-820 Concord CA 94520, (800) 786rhusiasts—157 unarchived titles ready to play 9907. Be sure to include $5 with your order yssey, Galaxtix, Commander Keen, Talking and an additional 200-plus compressed files. ABC'e and the Huon adventures—this disc is ro cover shipping and handling Whether you enjoy Boggle, Canfield, Taipei, much more expensive than those of Profit Ishido or any of the dozens of other games on Press and Walnut Creek, and is also more this CD, this Windows collection offers a Making a Profit difficult to navigare and lacks the user-friendsuperior value to many of its counterparts. Profit Press shows that their name is approliness of its contemporaries. If you would like For those souls who use their computers for priate, coming through once again with some more information about this CD-ROM colsomething besides gaming, included are hungreat CD-ROM packages. The all-time winlection or others from this vendor (including dreds of utilities, screen savers, diagnostic ners of CDs on a value-per-cost basis have to image CDs like Desktop Magic, GIF Galaxy, Page 112 Computer Gaming World "


"SO MANY TARGETS, SO LITTLE TIME! Ultra-detailed, smooth scrolling VGA graphics RAPTOR GALL OF THE SHADOWS Explosive cinematics and sound tracks Supports all major sound cards and game controllers 27 enormous levels, each with at least one boss ship This ain I no dinosaur game! CYGNUS There are times when the best weapons just aren't enough. To answer the Mega Corp's call, you'll need nerves of steel, an itchy trigger finger, and the strength to stand till the end. Your equipment: The Raptor, a super-tech bird of prey with enough state-of-the-art firepower to crush any foolhardy opposition. As if twin machine guns that can rip holes through 6-inch steel plate weren't enough, the Raptor can be upgraded with 14 hard-core weapons that go beyond intense, straight to overkill! Your mission: Kill for cash, and leave nothing standing in your wake! If your looking for a game with unbelievable graphics, fierce combat, and a pulse-pounding sound track, Raptor: Call of the Shadows is all that and more! Grab your gear. Head for the flight deck. Raptor awaits! CALL 1.800-GAME.123 IT'S TOLL FREE (We're here all the time!) For the cost of shipping and handling, only $5.00, you'll receive the first mission. Or download the first mission and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out the FREE Apogee file section. The BBS phone lines are: (508) 365.2359 (508) 368-7036 (508) 368.4137 2400 BAUD 9600-14.4K 14.4-16.8K Further episodes are sold separately and can be purchased by calling Apogee's toll-free number. APOGEE SOFTWARE  THE HEIGHT OF GAMING EXCITEMENT Raptor: Call of the Shadows requires an IBM or 100% compatible 386 or better computer with 2 MEG RAM (4 MEG recommended), a VGA graphics card and 12 MEG free space on a hard disk drive. Joystick and mouse are optional, Supports all major sound cards. All trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Ciclo Dondoe Santico #2 A002CGW SOFTWARE P.O. BOX 4 9 6 3 8 9 GARLAND TX 75049 "


"Ouatra Command and Pixel Perfect Graphics), contact: Wizardware Multimedia Ltd., 918 SCORE: 10650 LEVEL: 3 Delaware Avenue, Bethlehem PA 18015, (800) 548-7969. With all of these CDs, remember that the price you pay is for the CD-ROM as a distribution medium and does not constitute the purchase of the software on the disc. You are responsible for registering each shareware program with its author according to his or her stipulations. main feature lacking is the ability to ser individual play difficulty levels, such as beginner, intermediate and advanced (the game is difficult even on the easiest levels). If you like a challenging action game in a science fiction setting, Quatra Command is an excellent choice. System requirements are a bit demanding, the ideal being a 486/33DX, 6MB RAM and a fast video card, but you get what you compute for. For a registration fee of $17, plus $3 shipping and handling ($7 outside the USA), Quatra Command warps in at a great price. Those daring to enlist should register with Doe Entertainment, 2412 Desert Oak Drive, Palmdale CA 93550. Checks and money orders in US currency only. Waves In A Stellar Sea Since this issue has a science fiction Quatra Command from Doe Entertainment bent, I would be remiss if I didn't include at least one game review style. Planets scroll slowly by, but you generalong this particular theme. Quatra Comally have little time to admire the scenery, as mand from Doc Entertainment rockets away the different enemy ship types become more from its competitors, offering a high-powand more numerous, flying at higher and ered Windows action game. So fast and furihigher speeds with each level. What sets this ous is the action, with commercial-quality game apart from the norm are the stray mevisuals and 16-bit stereo sound, that you'll teors that cross the screen a la Asteroids makfind yourself looking for the slot to drop the ing the contest even more difficult and quarters in. addictive. Graphic detail can be increased or Quatra Command is slow to load, even on decreased and the number of objects on a 486 system, but no holds are barred once screen can be raised or lowered. Sound can be the game begins. A sultry female voice draws set for stereo, mono, QSound or can be you into the game, whereupon you slay wave turned off, a real plus considering that stereo after wave of alien attackers in classic arcade sound is a real speed and memory hoy. The Send Us Your Best If you have authored a shareware or public domain game for MS-DOS compatible, Macintosh or Amiga computers and would like to have it considered for review in this column, please send two complete copies on 3.5\" disks with printed documentation and a cover letter to: Best of the Rest Computer Gaming World 130 Chaparral Court, Suite 260 Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. CGW PREMIUM TEMPLATES\" FALCON, MIG OR HORNET COMMANDER UTILITIES\" *Finally! Total control of your Falcon 3.0, MiG-29 or Hornet squadrons and campaigns!! + P3 TE ORS $19.95 PER SET! ad of Falcone 3.0 spadrone PER SET! WE For one low price you get all six: FALCON COMMANDER OR + FALCCALC/MIGCALC/HORNETCALC: Superb campaign intelligence gathering MIG COMMANDER UTILITIES tools, Viewable/Printable theater map with detailed info, on every site, ground forces & all flight paths! Printable fuel consumption, Waypoint timing, Strategic/Tactical reports + F3 TEMPLATE and \"Kneeboard sheet\". Even tells you the conditions for victory or defeat!! 13/MIG/HORNET REQUISITION: Take full command of Falcon 3.0 squadrons! ONLY $24.95!! Customize squadron names and pilot's roster, including names, callsigns, skill ratings and status. MMPORTANTI WECU is com US IMPORTANTI: *FCU is compatible with Falcon3.0: Operation Fighting Tiger Replenish supplies including F-16's! Sort/print roster by rank or skill, Sierra Hotel list and more! MCU is compatible with Falcon.0 AND MIG-29: D.A.F.M + FALCON MAPPER: The famous Red Flag, Instant Action and HUD customizing HCU is compatible with Falcon 3.0 AND Hornet: N.S.F. utility! Change default theaters for Red Flag and Instant Action. \"Declutter\" HUD. Sel delault I difficulty level. Auto-generates Red Flag missions in any theater. New graphical Premium Templates TM standardized, color-coded layout map shows entire Red Flag theater, flight paths, enemy positions and m destroys \"Keyboard Confusion\"!! SHOWP3: Viewer for screen-shots taken with Falcon's secret screen-capture program! PM View shots individually or in 'slide show. New conversion feature saves screenshots to popular Re : Temnda .GIF or PCX formats. Includes easy instructions for Falcon's hidden capture commands! RECE P : $12.95. Anypecial: + KCCMENU: Fantastic menu-shell that brings it all together! Use ready-to-go menus Keyboard Commander Templates reduce confusion or customize to your preference. Add new menu items or create sub-menus to add other and increase one's gaming pleasure -CGW sims, games, TSRS or bat files. Completely unloads from memory while running selection!! + Falcon 3.0/3.01/MIG-29 Acos of the Pacific KCC'S COMBAT MISSIONS: All new gut-wrenching action-packed Red Flag Sirike Commander Secret Weapons Luftwallo missions, Includes all type missions in different theaters. See if you've got what it takes to Privateer MS Flight Simulator 4.0 & 5.0 fly these \"volunteers only thrillers! Tornado A.T.P. Strike Eagle III Jetfighter I & II X-Wing B-17 Flying Fortress To Order Call Computer Express: DIICOVER Gunship 2000 I&I VISA CY Air Combat Comanche: Max. Overkill F117A Stealth H  1-800-228-7449, Ext. 522 Mon-Sat POLHUSSALAM 8:30-6:30 EST All other inquiries to: Keyboard Commander Corp. 4839 SW 148 Ave.. 1402, Davie, IL 31110 100-262-6066 M Fun, e rita Penum lesen * High-Quality, 3-D Graphics * Color Coded Layout * Laminated Stock * sollte mandor Core is a potentiale mukof Spectrume, MA: Dedy Mayollaan Homst: Navastike Tharko S t yle * Fits all AT101 Keyboards * Standardized Format * Affixes to Keyboard Template Special: fusion z Any 3$30.00, Any 4 or more $9.25 each!! 209 Circle Reader Service #80 Page 114 Computer Gaming World "


"MORE ENERGY MORELELELS POWER ACTION REPLAY GIVES YOU THE POWER TO BUST YOUR GAMES WIDE OPEN! JUST IMAGINE THE POWER TO FREEZE ANY PROGRAM AND TAKE TOTAL CONTROL:GORE MORE LILES GAME BUSTING CODES $89 PLUS VON INFINITE-CHEAT GENERATOR Action Replay has a powerful CHEAT FINDER feature that actually scans through the game in its FROZEN STATE and finds the lodations that control lives, ammo, objects etc. etc. in fac anything within a game that can be counted! The unique CHEAT GENERATOR then gives you a cheatcode for that game. Simply press a key to restart the game and you are invinciblell Cheats can be saved to disk or entered again at a later date. ACTION PROGRAM SAVE Freeze your program at any point and save entire contents of memory, including extended memory, to floppy or hardrive. When you reload the program.it will resume at the point it was frozen. Ideal for saving a game at a difficult point or for programs with tedious password loading systems MONITOR FEATURE Display the entire contents of memory in its frozen state. View as HEX or disassembly includes a memory search facility. Output to printer ovailable. SCREEN GRABBER At the press of the Action Replay freezer button you can grab a standard VGA screen from any program and save it out as a standard Pax file suitable for your graphics package. FREEZER DOS GOMMANDS Directory, format and save commands are available even when the program is frozen SLO MO FUNGTION Allows you to play a game at your own pace, Select from about 10% to full speed. POWERFUL HARDWARE Action Reploy is a powerful plug-in card with both advanced program freezer circuitry and over IMB of its own on board Ram so it uses less than 1K of the PCs own memory! VIRUSCHECKER Powerful virus scanner searches for viruses and allerts the user if detected, SIMPLE INSTALLATION System requirements Plug-in and go! 286/386/486 DOS 3.2 and above Circle Reader Service #38 ADVANCED CHECKS MADE PAYABLE TO.... ADVANCED CONSOLE TECHNOLOGIES INC. -24 HOUR MAIL ORDER HOTLINE ACT 1 To 0120 ORDER CONSOLE TECHNOLOGIES INC. FAX: (708) 706 6 7 2 1 PLEASE ADD $5.00 S&H hoco Fast waaDEELDLROAD LSULTE 10.2 SCHAUMBURG IL 60173 "


"CODS COMPUTER Express WRATH OF THE GODS Take the role of a hero on a quest to regoin your kingdom. In this photo reol istic adventure game based on the Greek myths, you'll    hundred scenes created from original photographs of Greece. Fight monsters, encounter over 60 live action characters, and match wits against challenges based on the exploits of the greatest heroes of all time. Sixty live action charaters, on line hints and information, 300 digital movies of heroes, gods, and monsters. Fight the Hydra, outsmart Medusa, and defeat the Minotaur Max IBM CD, MAC CD HANNA-BARBERA ANIMATION WORKSHOP Bring the Hanna-Barbert power of ani mation to your LION WORKSHOP computer in a form that is fun and easy to master Simple instruc tions ollow everyone lo quickly learn how to pro duce animated scenes just like Cimpin the profession als. Includes over 200 frames of sample animation from The Flinstones, The Jetsons, Scooby Doo and Yogi Bear, plus clip art and colored backgrounds of your favorite Hanna Barbera shows. For the first time a truly professional animation package at an affordable price. Since 1985 800-228-7449 Ex TOLL FREE ORDER LINE $42 $45 Empires DOS LANWORDS NOVENTUS GREAT COMPUTER ADVENTURE Begin a heart pounding OMPUTERS udventure when you find the secret mes sage from the lost children. In your quest to save the children, you challenge the gremlin, search the coveanic and other hiding places, solve riddles, puzzles and unravel trou bling mysteries. Learning about computers has never been so exciting! Teaches and entertains children ages 7.12. Pit your skills against the gremlin and play the game again and again for hours of fun and learning. GUS GOES TO CYBERTOWN CD An interactive multimedia CDRom for the TO\" whole family with learning activities for those under eight years old. Join Gus, the hippest most lovable dog over created for an exciting learn ing experience in Cybertown. Search for the elusive cyber buds, three of the most original and intriguing friends your kids will ever love samogical town with lots to explore! Experience the Pet Shop, the Toy Store, and the Time Travel Park. Features complete interactivity, captivating graphics and animation, rich digitized soundtrack, full motion video, digi tal photos and spoken directions CREATIVE WRITER Incredible tools to help put your ideas into words and pictures, publish illus trated stories, and create newsletters. You've got custom fonts, different type sires, special type effects like sparkle and fade, plus lots of formatting options. Add a finishing touch to projects with tons of borders and back. grounds Undo mistakes as far back as 20 steps Includes over 100 pieces of clip art and more than 8000 story starters. There's a spelling checker, a thesaurus, and a quick way to find any word in your project Microsoft WIN, MAC Fosspoced, challenging, entertainment value that's fun for all ages. Seven word game varis tions, or create your own version. Offers 20 dif ferent computer opponents with increasingly sophisticated vocabulary and skill containing 160,000 words. Online help, best plays, ano grom finders, and word finders are also includ ed. If you've got network support, you can receive and send messages to your opponents via a chat windows screen Saber Software: WIN ATIDOS $21 Modern Media Venturat DOS, MAC OD 34 $33 $23 ..... TEST PREPARATION MACINTOSH TITLES Moth Blaster Plus Math Rabbit 2.0............ Millie's Math House... Mind Castle Multimedia Workshop...... Multimedia Workshop CD My First World Atlas My Own Stories New Kid on the Block CD. Odell Down Under... Oregon Trail............ TYPING Easy Working Typing..... Easy Working Typing WIN...... Mario Teoches Typing Mavit Beacon Typing 3.0 Mavis Beacon Typing CD ... Typing Tutor V Plus........... Typing Tutor V Plus WIN 3D Dinosour Adventure...... Body ilustrated ... Company of Whales CD SCIENCE Space Adventure.... Space Adventure CD..... Space Adventure Il CD.. Time Riders American History Time Treks............ Undorsed Adventure WIN...... Webster's Dictionary WIN... Where in America's Past Carmen.... Where in Space Carmen Deluxe Where in Time Carmen?... Where in the World is Carmen?... Wild Science Arcade w/T-SHIRT Zookeeper........ Zugs Race Through Space... 34 * PATRUN COC 3882 DN Request your Free T-Shirt when purchasing one of these titles: ROCK 'N BACH MYSTERY AT THE MUSEUMS WILD SCIENCE ARCADE : Wal ACT W/Chill Notes... Biology Studyware...... Calculus Studyware...... Chemistry Studyware........ GMAT W/Cliff Notes... GRE w/Cliff Notes. LSAT w/Ch Notes...... Physics Studyware.. . SAT I NEW Personal Trainer WIN SAT I Studyworo...... Score RX for ACT at Home... Score RX for GRE at Home...... Score RX for LSAT at Home ............. Score RX for SAT at Home ................ Your Personal Trainer/SAT2 CD. American Heritage Dictionary Americans in Space CD.... Animals: Sun Diego Zoo CD........ Body Works 3.0 Body Works 3.0 CD CNN Newsroom Global View CD. Compton's Encyclopedia CD......... Creep Crawlies CD...... Cute 'n' Cuddlies........ Dictionarios & Languages CD........... Dictionary of Living World CD...... Dinosour Adventure CD. ... ... Dinosaurs by Microsoft CD ........... Dinosaurs MPC Encyclopedia CD..... Discovery CD Pack............... Encaria MPC Encyclopedia CD Greatest Book Collection CD... InfoNotion. Roting USA to 2 JFK Assassination CD..... Key Dictionary Plus .... ........ MS Dinosaurs Multimedia CD Orbits: Voyage the Solar System. Webster's Dictionary... Addition & Subtraction.............. Advanced Spelling Tricks............. Advanced Spelling Tricks CD. Algebra... Algebra Blaster Plus.... ... Alphabet Blocks Alphabet Blocks CD ......... Animal Toles CD.... .. Basic Spelling Basic Spelling CD... Beginning Reading Beginning Reading CD Body Works 3.0. Calculus Studyware Cuckoo Zoo CD Dinosaur Adventure..... ....... Eagle Eye Mysteries London CD Early Moth Early Math CD. Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise... Fatty Bears Fun Pack KidKeys   Kid's Art Center Kid's Studio... Kid's Typing KidDesk Litemap: Animals CD.... Lifemap. Animals w/Backbones Mac USA 20.. Mario Teoches Typing 29282 BINARY ZOO MATH 2nd Math Alge Blaster 3..... Alge Blaster 3 WIN .... Alge Blaster Plus........ Algebra Algebra By Example Bull's Eye Math Calculus WIN Championship Blackjack...... Chemistry Works DOS/WIN..... Cruncher WIN...... ...... Dinosoft Addition & Subtract...... Dinosoft Math Flashcards Dinosoft Multiply & Divide... Emily Mut Ct. Early Math WIN Geometry Concepts ... ....... Kid Cod WIN.. . Learn About Fractions... Line & Shape Eater CD Math Blaster Spot WIN.. Math Bloster Spot/Kid Works Il... Math Blaster WIN... Math Rabbit Enhanced Math Rabbit WIN......... Mathology Mega Math. Mentol Math Games 2.0....... Millie's Math House... .. . Operation Neptune... StickyBear Moth Tutor Super Solvers: Midnight Rescue ........ Super Solvers: Out Numbered. Treasure Math Storm! Treasure MathStorm! WIN..... Treasure Mountain... What's My Angle. Young Math... Aesop's Foblos CD.... ... Aladdin and His Lamp CD... Always Arthur CD.. Amanda Stories CD.. ..... Arthur's Teacher Trouble CD Bailey's Book House......... Beauty and the Beast CD ............ Beginning Reading CD Beginning Reading WIN............. BookMaster for Speed Reading....... Cinderella CD... Dinosoft Phonics... Dragon Tales CD Follow the Reader... Gus Goes to Cyberlown CD....... Heather Hits Homerun CD.... MACINTOSH TIMES MACINTOSH TITLES Odell Down Under... Oregon Trail.... Peanuts: Yearn to learn CD Phonics.. Playroom 20. Pun Putt Goes to the Moon... Reader Rabbit I.... Reader Rabbit Ready for Letter SAT I Studyware........ Spell It Plus..... StickyBeer Reading Room Super Solvers: Out Numbered..... Super Solvers: Spellbound. Treasure Math Storm.......... Tree House..... ... ...... Vocabulearn French I............ Vocabulearn Italian L. Vocabulearn Spanish I.... Where in America's Past 333... Where in Time is Carmen? Where in the World Deluxe Where in the World is Carmen Word Anack 3 World Alive CD......... Zookeeper... 3D Dinosaur Adventure..... Body lilustrated............ Company of Whales CD .... Computer Works.... . . Concentrate...... Dandy Dinosaurs CD.......... DinoPark Tycoon. Discover Space EZ Cosmos 4.0............ Earth Treks Eco Quest Search for Cotus CD Ecology Troks Great Computer Adventure Jurassic Dinosaurs CD Jurassic Dinosaurs WIN Kid's Zoo CD..... Kid's Zoo DOS/WIN... Oceans Below CD Odell Down Under WIN.... Oregon Trail Deluxe........... Pepper's Adventures in Time Planetary Taxi CD.. Prehistoria CD Quarky & Quaysco's Science Science Adventure 2.0..... SCIENCE READING "


"TALKING PHONICS PLUS FA Ages 4 to 8. Build award-winning reading, spelling. and vocabulary skills and teach children to love to tead! A playful rewarding and invigorating explo ration into essential GAME BLASTER Converts the VGA output from your PC to a video signal so you can play all your favorite PC games on any TV set. Display online services like Prodigy, America Online, and CompuServe. Includes $150 worth of FREE gamos: Prince of Persia, Jetfighter and Spectre Challenger I. Supports 640 X 480 VGA resolution in 256 col ors, outputs NTSC video in RCA composite and S. VHS. Includes S-VHS and VGA Y cable, all soft ware drivers, and A/C power supply. Supports TV Auto Blanking. Toggling between VGA monitor and TV display lons } Se   ALGE BLASTER 3 Ages 12 to adult Nowest version of the world's best ALGE-OLASTER selling algebra program Guides you through an entire year's alge bro curriculum, using an interac tive tutorial approach. Four unique activities with all new SVGA graphics animations and sound will help you develop a better understanding of the ulgebraic process. Learn how to solve equations and translate word probloms into algebraic expressions. Two chal lenging new graphic games will ensure that you become a graphing expert Covers all subject areas and features on-screen hints MARIO'S TIME MACHINE Join the Mario Brothers on a wild ride through MARIO'S time as they re TIME MACHINE live great moments in histo ry in this new series, Toke o romp with the dinosaurs during the Jurassic peti od, stop off in ancient Egypt to meet Cleopatra, and arrive just in time to witness the first successful powered flight of the 20th Century-allina day's work for the popular plumbers Sea Mario Visit the workshop of Thomas Edison, ride along with Neil Armstrong and cheer for Babe Ruth, in addition to witnessing scores of other historic events, Entertaining and educational for the whole Teaches beginning, middle and ending consonant sounds, as well as long and short vowels. Voice enhanced see and say technique with special rewards offer encouragement overy stop of the way. Five multiple level activities keep learning fun and challenging. Motivatus with lively. imaginative graphics, games, and sounds family $27 $79 $33 $28 Stone & Associates: DOS ADS: IBM Compatibles Davidson: WIN Software Toolworks: DOS NO. 11 DOWNING STREET CD IMA Join Ninja 11. ! Bonning Street Nanny and Shortloch Sheltie in \"No 11 Downing Street, the premier episode of a continuing mystery series, sot in exotic loctions around the world, as our heros pursue the secret of Ninja Nanny's heritage and hot rumored for tune in lost treasure. Historical facts and notorious tidbits linked to the story are contained in the online DictioPedia Ninja Nannica. Features more than 90 videos. Animations of wucky characters are drawn in detail and shown full screen COMPANY OF WHALES The Discovery Channel, the leader in real world enter tainment, takes you on a spell binding multimedia journey with nature's most spectacu lar creatures Experience extraordinary encounters, never before captured on film, with some of the rorest wholes on Earth Investigate their intriguing social behavior and intelligence, listen to whole communications and understand the mystery of their songs, Includes 45 minutes of exclusive video and more than 200 compelling photos and illustro tions. Discovery Channel: DOS CD MULTIMEDIA STARTER PAK MPC Wizard 2.0, WinTutor 3.1. und WorldView togeth er in one package. MPC Wizard 2.0 will test and tune your multimedia PC with trouble shoot ing techniques to get your system configured fast. WinTutor 3.1 helps you learn Windows 3.1 at your own pace It's an ideal com panion to quickly get started or to improve your skills Windows beginners with MPC based systems will cut their learning curve dramatical ly. World View allows you to explore our world from space with an archive of NASA's stills, audio, and video clips 40 AMAZON TRAIL Journey through time from the mouth of the Amazon to its lofty sources in the Andes high country. Find the medicinal plant that will save the ancient Incas from extinction and deliver it to the Inca king. Meet as many as 30 other historic explorers, naturalists, scientists, and natives. Exercise problem-solving and reading comprehension skills. Develop navigational abilities. Introduces ecosystems and provides insights into South American history from the time of the Spanish Conquistadors to present WHALES      $44 $31 S24 Compton's Now Media: IBM CD Silicon Alley DOS CD $33 MECC: DOS, MAC READING CREATIVITY Print Shop Deluxe 1.2 WIN... Print Shop Deluxe Comic WIN.... Print Shop Deluxe Comics... Print Shop Deluxe Companion Print Shop Deluxe Companion WIN. Print Shop Deluxe Sampler... Print Shop Deluxe Sampler WIN Show & fell for Kids.... Sound Source.......... Story Book Weaver..... Student Writing Center CD Wild Learning Safari.... Advanced Spelling Tricks CD Advanced Spelling Tricks WIN.. Alphabet Blocks WIN........... Basic Spelling.............. Basic Spelling CD........... Mario's Fun with Letters .... Mickey's ABC's Enhanced EXT. VOICE: 508-443-6125 000220\"/447 604 FAX:508-443-5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 ERO . 1011 FAX:0011-508-443-5645 Xit,CompuServe ID:70007, 15340 WHO Blahab a .  FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS 3r High Grade Builder 3 Pack.. Just Grandma & Me CD.... long Hard Day of the Ranch CD.... Mind Castle..... Moving Gives A Stomach Ache CD.. Mud Pubble CD..... Now Kid on the Block CD Once Upon A Time il Paper Bag Princess CD Pefer and the Wolf CD Phonics Plus Reader Rabbit ............... Reader Rabbit I WIN.. Reader Rabbit II WIN... Reader Rabbit lll..... Reader Rabbit Ready for Letter ......... Reading Adventures in Oz.... Reading and Me Tolking... Ready, Set, Read WIN.......... Rusty & Rosy Volume 1 WIN...... Rusty & Rosy Volume 2 WIN Scary Poems for Rollen Kids CD... School House: 30 Programs.. Sleeping Beauty Storybook CD... Sound li Outland 11 CD.... Speed ... Speed Reader WIN SlickyBar Reading Tutor, Story Book Weaver .................... Super Solvers: Ancient Empires.... Tale of Benjamin Bunny CD Tale of Peter Rabbit C Talking Classic Tales CD. Talking Jungle Safari CD... Talking Phonics Plus..... Tell Tale Heart CD Thomas' Snowsuit CD.. Tortoise & The Hare CD.... Treasure Cove.... Ugly Duckling CD.. Who Wants Arthur CD Zugs Dinosaur World....... ONTBdS Stickbear Preschool CD ........ Stickybear Preschool..... Thamas' Snowsuit CD.... Tortoise & The Hare CD... TreeHouse Word Munchers... Spell It Plus...... Super Solvers: Spellbound Super Solvers: Spellbound CD Word Attack 3....... Word Munchers Word Toles CD Yobi's Spelling Tricks WIN Across the USA... Discovering America... Eagle Eye Mysteries London CD Expert Maps.................. Lost Tribe ...... ...... My First World Atlas..... Mystery at Museums w/T-SHIR PC Globo Mops & Facts PC Globe Maps & Facts CD PC USA 3.0..... ... Scavenger Hunt: Africa CD Where in USA Carmen Where in World Deluxe ...... Where in World Deluxe CD... Where in the USA Deluxe World Atlas 4.0 WIN... EARLY LEARNING legend of Oz CD ...... Mario Early Years Collection CD Mario Preschool Fun ...... Mario's Fun with Numbers. Mcgoo Sorios Bundle...... Memory lone Mickey Mouse Mousepad... Mickey's 123's Enhanced.. Mickey's ABC's Enhanced Mickey's Jigsaw Puzzles.... Mixed Up Falry Tales .... Mixed Up Mother Goose CD... My Letters, Numbers and Words Number Munchers....... Peanuts: Yearn to learn CD.... Peanuts: Yearn to learn WIN... Playroom 2.0....... Power Hits Kids. Putt Pult Goes to the Moon Putt Pult Goes to the Moon CD. Putt-Putt Fun Pack.... Putt. Putt Fun Pack CD.... Put Putt Join the Parade Race the Clock CD... Scooler's Mogic Castle Show & Tell for Kids..... Slater & Charlie Go Camping Snoopy's Game Club GEOGRAPHY LANGUAGE Berlitz Think & Talk French CD Berlitz Think & Talk Italian CD Berlitz Think/Talk Spanish CD. language Assistant. French 5.0... language Assistant: French WIN Language Assistant German 5.0 Language Assistant: Gurman WIN.... language Assistant: Italion 5.0.... Language Assistant: Italian WIN. Language Assistant: Spanish 5.0 language Assistant: Spanish WIN Learn to Speak Spanish CD..... Lyric language French CD... Lyric language Spanish CD Vocabulearn French Vocabulearn French I WIN..... Vocabulearn Italian L............ Vocabulearn Japanese ........... Vocabulearn Japanese I WIN Vocabulean Spanish Vocabulearn Spanish I WIN... Aladdin Print Kit Animation Studio WIN. Betty Crocker Boys & Girls. Creation Stories CD.... Creative Writer WIN Fine Artis! Hanna Barbera's Animation Shop Kid Cuts... Kid Doodle WIN........ Kid Fun CD Kid Pictures... Kid Pix ....... .. Kid Rhymes Kid Works Il.... Learn to Play Guitar CD Lenny's Music Toons CD Lonny's Music Toons WIN. Logo Writer... MetroGnomes' Musie..... Miracle Piano System ..... My Computer Diary... My Own Stories ....... PC Crayon... Poler Pan: Story Painting Adv. Peter Pan Story Painting CD Print Artist WIN...... Print Shop Deluxe 1.2........ CREATIVITY EARLY LEARNING AJ World of Discovery.......... Alphabet Blocks CD ......... Animal Tales CD Backyard ............ ... Barney Bear Goes to School.. Berenstain Bears Fun LunchPok Berenstain Bears Junior Jigsaw Berenstain Beurs Learn Ar Homo... Buster's First Thunderstorm CD Cuckoo Zoo............... Cuckoo Zoo CD ............ Dr. T's Sing Along WIN Fatty Bears B Day Surprise CD.... Fatty Bears Birthday Surprise. Fory Boor Fun Pack CD First Letters & Words First Shapes... Fisher Price Classics... Fisher Price Picture Dictionary. Kid Keys. Kid Pix Companion WIN Kid Pix WIN. Kid's Stuff ............... KidDesk.. 800 228 7449 Orders Only. 508 443 6125 all other business. Sales Dept. Hours Monday Friday 8AM till BPM, Saturday & Sunday 10AM till SPM. All other Business Monday Friday 9AM 5PM. Most orders ship within 24 hours. Temporary shortages are normally filled within 10 days Books, Memory chips, and some cleo tronic components are not returnable. We ship only to venfied billing addresses International orders welcome Airborne Express Shipping charges $7 per order up to 6 lbs. $1 per ib. above 6 lbs. UPS ground handling chargo $5 per order. Actual freight charges apply for computers, hard disks, Burnoulli's, tape back-ups, printers. Multimedia kits, monitors, oto. Alaska, Hawaii, outside continental U.S. APO/FPO call for information Prices subject to change without notion. Some product not available outside the U.S. Picaso call for more VISIT information. Not responsible for errors or omissions Mastercard, Vis, Discover, American Express, pro paid orders, purchase orders, wire transfer, cash, and cashiers check accepted Personal and Company Mancare checks allow 14 days to clear. No surcharge for credit card orders. Your credit card is not charged unti the merchandise is shipped. We check for stolen credit cards. All returns for credit, repar, or exchango must have a return authorization number. Returned orders or ordered wrong items are subject to a 15% restocking fee. We ship latest versions of software nvailable. Over nine years of service. Thousands of satisfied customers. Send your Fax today! All quotes answered immediately. Product covered by manu facturer's warranty. Dotoctivo Homs replaced immediately. Al item numbers represent 35 floppy, except where noted. Educational, government, and corporate purchase orders welcome. DUCOVER Circle Reader Service #56 "


"REVIEW -TIME LEADER PENNANT FEVER! Cards courtesy of The Upper Deck Co. 1990 CGW's Box Score for Pursue the Pennant 5.0 Baseball HEROES by Jim Gindin For the baseball simulation enthusiast, Pennant provides several screens of numbers for every player, including a full set of batting, pitching and fielding statistics. The simulation uses these stats properly, assigning RBI's, errors and other criteria with a sure understanding of the often confusing rules of baseball. After selecting game lineups, the program allows for different weather effects, designated hitters, relief pitcher warm-ups, Player Transactions Sara Rang STATENS Park: Sportsman's Park Era: 61956 N Games 1 Daltcd Ga n crst Sachants: Sac Flies: 1873 11841 091 111 1 3 17 1 Total w 175 Tot walks: 15 Hit bu pitch: 13 Strikeoutat -139 NILE on the marker at knowing when to replace a pitcher. Oddities like sticking a closer in the game in the second inning and leaving him in for the rest of the game for a 20-run pounding are nowhere to be seen. Pennant bases lineup decisions on the closeness of the game, the specific situation, and how late it is in the game. While it fails to recognize \"hot\" players, this is hardly a problem given the variety of decisions where it makes the right call. Game play from the human side is not so smooth. For instance, you sometimes need to decide whether the runner on second should try to score on a single to center field. The text provides only a couple of clues whether this base advance is reasonable, with your runner often being thrown out by more than ten feet. Pennant needs to tell you where the base runner is when the fielder reaches the ball. In real baseball, pinch-hitters are always announced before the pitcher places his foot on the pitching rubber. Pennant requires that you replace your pitcher before knowing who the pinch-hitter is, putting you at a disadvancage. The computer also never warms up its pitchers before use, which makes your pinchhitting decisions a little tougher. Even with Pursue The Pennant 5.0 D P grounders: Doubles: Triples! Home ES Stolen bases 12 Caught steals: B1 133 1 LG 127 619 wrounder: 0 Change Ern > D ack in the dim recesses of computer gaming's past, baseball simulations were almost exclusively text-oriented, statistics-based affairs. Beginning with the classic Earl Weaver Baseball, base hits on the computer required more in the way of graphics and sound, and even stressed action-oriented physics models. Still, baseball text games were able to carve out a niche, largely because of the statistical nature of the game. Pursue the Pennant began as a boardgame and has since developed into one of the most accurate baseball simulators on the marker today. This most recent version (5.0) features a redesign of the game's simulation engine, but is but is just as completely rexe-based as its predecessors. There are no spectacular bit-mapped ballparks or digitized photos of players that you would expect in higher-profile baseball products. What you do find is that Pennant, while not a large game, uses every byte possible to build a vast library of play results. The traditional radio-style transcription is presented in a text area below the hitting team's lineup and fortunately, the library is thorough enough that play description is rarely redundant. It even avoids those tired baseball clichés like \"can of corn\" for a high fly ball and \"rater\" for a home run that have plagued us since the like of «Dutch\" Reagan recreated games from telegraphed statistics. The game's replay value is also enhanced by a number of special situations, where players sometimes argue with the umpire or tumble down the dugout stairs while reaching for a foul ball. < Change l'ark> chilla purting MCHEURETANO Und data Crom the Sporting Meus Yearbook and injuries, which can wreak havoc with fragile catchers and pitching staffs. During game play, the batting team can steal bases, bunt, or try a hit-and-run. The pitching team can challenge hitters or pitch around them, an option that increases walks and decreases extra-base hits. The infield may be moved in to prevent a runner on third from scoring, the baselines can be guarded to decrease the chance of a double down the line, and corner men may be positioned to defend against a bunt. All these features are fairly common in text baseball games, though their implementation is much more clear and accurate here. Where Pennant shines is that the Al makes a surprisingly good manager, by far the best PRICE: SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: PLAYERS: PROTECTION: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: $79.95 IBM 286 or better 1.2 None Tom Tippelt Pursue the Pennant PO Box 19703. Greensboro, NC, 27419 (910) 299.4388, (800) 765.4787 Page 118 Computer Gaming World "


"BRING YOUR FAVORITE GAMES TO LIFE ON THE BIG SCREEN! | TM GAME ZAPPER ZAPS COMPUTER GAMES FROM PCS TO BIG-SCREEN TVs! LIMITED TIME OFFER! These sensational computer games are FREE-a $150 value-inside every GAME ZAPPER package! Prince of Persig Jet Fighter 11 Spectre Challenger\" COMPUTER GARIS DE GAME ZAPPER turns your living room into a virtual reality gameroom by boosting your favorite PC games from your VGA monitor onto your big-screen TV. GAME ZAPPER converts your PC's VGA output to a video signal and supports 640x480 VGA resolution. So plug in GAME ZAPPER — your favorite games will be larger than life! 821911119 GAME ZAPPER by Brderbund by Velocity by Velocity Recommended for DOS applications only Circle Reader Service #39 ADVANCED DIGITAL SYSTEMS20204 State Rd. Cerritos, CA 90701 (310)865-1432 (3101809-6144 (Fax) [800888-5244 Available at:  Best Buye CompUSA. Computability. Computer City . Computer Express Eglwad Software. Try's Electronics Insight J.D.R. . Mier Center Tiger Software. USA FIN "


"Mille NIVEL Delibaca keeping track of injuries and demotions as they happened in real life, you will end up with an incredibly accurate simulation. This enormous amount of work is necessary, since Pennant provides no mechanism for automatically adjusting an active roster at a given date in the schedule, which is the game's biggest omission. Efter 133 I mariner Chirat harelu hit t er be there and third Law Fitur: vidual player situations through an event table, created through modification of the three stat forms available. When it's time for league simulation, Pennant can complete a 1000-game league schedule in under two hours. Pennant also allows you to enter league information, so that it can adjust results to reflect league averages. This allows more realistic play when teams from different time periods play each other. If a shortstop from 1905 makes 40 errors when the league average was 50 for shortstops, he is likely a better fielder than a shortstop from 1991 who made 25 errors when the league average was 20. Thus, he will perform berter than the 1991 shortstop when they play in the same league. Calleje TEXAS these quirks, the program plays a fine game of baseball. As with any good baseball simulation, Pennant is a natural for league play. Players can be created and moved throughout the league via a free-agent pool. Each team has a 40-man roster, with at least 25 players active, with manager profiles and primary lineups included for use against left or right-handed pitchers. These lineups have associated depth charts, which the computer manager uses to start a particular player in a certain percentage of team games. You can also designate lateinning defensive replacements and platoon players. Pitching rotations are generated through another set of profiles. You can choose the size of a rotation, spot-starter percentages, and depth charts for long relievers, set-up men and closers. The computer will ser these up upon request, but is very likely to stick players who pitched only a few innings in reliever roles that garner 60-to-80 innings of work per season. Therefore, it's better to put together all the depth charts yourself, which will reward your hours spent with a truly interesting and realistic season replay. During league play, Pennant handles indiNolan Ryan Like most games, Pennant can be abused. A player who had two hits in five at bats during a season is a .400 hitter, and if allowed 500 chances, can garner 200 hits. Worse, if one of those two original hits was a home run, expect about 100 home runs from that player over the course of a season. On the whole, you can expect about 10 percent variance in a player's statistics over the course of a season, easily in line with other stat-based games. Home runs vary more than any other statistic, because weather and park effects tend to alter home run production more definitely than they Steve Sax Range factors are even more crucial than error rates when determining how fielders affect a game. A poor shortstop will watch and wave at a ground ball hit up the middle, whereas an excellent shortstop takes away certain base hits. A Pennant team composed of fielders with excellent ranges will win 2030 more games per season than a team filled with lousy fielders, correctly emphasizing the importance of defense in baseball. Further, the discussions of the \"elite talent pool effect\" and the \"perfect hindsight effect\" in the game rules, are must-reads for anyone who has ever expressed frustration at Sandy Koufax's inability to match his 1966 Cy Young Awardwinning numbers in a simulated season. While Pennant does provide an accurate baseball simulator, it does require a lot of input from the user. If you go to the trouble of adjusting active rosters about once a week, Finally, like most games these days, bugs still lurk in the final product. Batters are sometimes skipped in the lineup, errors are charged that did not occur during the game, the league disk fails to include a National League schedule, and there is an occasional program hang-up when using auto-play. These are relatively minor and, to the company's credit, the designers have a good record of providing prompt upgrades to their games. So, in spite of a few errors, Pursue the Pennant 5.0 is a Golden Glover. Its overall accuracy and attention to detail is impressive, and it deserves a starting spor in an serious fan's lineup. CGW Dave Stewart Page 120 Computer Gaming World "


"HOLY CHEATS THE WORLD'S FIRST GAME UTILITY JAXIS SAMEL TEATER You're not playing by their rules anymore... Baseline Axis the Gamecheater gives you a few new tricks in your favorite games special powers, enhanced weapons, and extra lives. So now you can get on with the adventure, past that nasty spiked pit, without burning your last life in a bad Super Dave imitation. Or you can loose your vengeance with that outlaw turbo laser cannon you've always wanted. With Axis the Gamecheater, you get the little boost you need to keep the game fun! Superpowers are yours on demand — with just the press of a key! Axis the Gamecheater provides custom cheats for dozens of the most popular games, on PCs or Macs, and we're adding new games all the time. Ask for it at your favorite software source! For more information, call 800-926-9677 or 901-682-9676, Fax: 901-682-9691 Baseline PUBLISHING Circle Reader Service #46 Copyright 1993. Baseline Publishing, Inc. All rights foreign and domestic reserved. Axis the Gamecheater and the Baseline logo are trademarks of Baseline Publishing, Inc. All other names are trademarks of their respective holders. Help! I'm being held captive in the line-print disclaimer! "


"Letters from Paradise 1 ESPANA Open Letter To Charles Ardai namics and now, he is, in my opinion, the review (\"Never before has there been a game so best flight sim reviewer in any magazine (and movie-like in its construction') but carefully I recently obtained a copy of the LucasArts I read them all). Congratulations and keep up avoid quoting the subsequent lines which game, Sam  Max Hit The Road. After playthe good work. explain in what way the game is \"movie-like:\" ing the game, I can assure you that Sam & Richard Ordway Never before has there been a game so movie-like Max will «Play in Peoria.\" Boulder, CO in its construction. There are great stretches of Kent Hoffman, M.D. action during which the player literally does Peoria, IL Wd We don't think Tom was necessarily the first, nothing... Even when the player's input is rebut we know he's one of the best. We're glad to quested, it is often irrelevant... Skywalker Ranch be able to publish his extremely knowledgeable Take a trip to Skywalker Ranch and write views. Tsunami may wish to note that this letter, an article on the developing technologies at if selectively excerpted, could produce the LucasArts and Industrial Light and Magic. I'll Wind In Their Sales blurb, \"In... Ringworld..., Tsunami has...a go for you! masterpiece...\" I invite them to slap this on Joe Lombardo I am agog at the chutzpah of Tsunami all their promotional material. I could cerMedia, Inc. In the latest advertisement for rainly use the laugh. Oceanport, NJ Ringworld (CGW #114), Tsunami has deCharles Ardai To paraphrase a former President, we could played a masterpiece of selective blurbing in New York, NY go to Skywalker Ranch, but it would be wrong. what appears to be a bald attempt to mislead It really wouldn't do a lot of good since neither readers about what CGW had to say about Not only was the game \"movie-like,\" but so ILM nor LucasArts Games are located on the the game. They quote one line from my was the subsequent advertising campaign! If film ranch. We do, however, make periodic road trips to the game companies and we try to keep you The 5th Wave By Rich Tennant informed through Company Profiles and READ.ME news articles. Of course, anytime ORKTENANT George wants to invite us over to visit with This year's award for the most Spielberg, Coppola and the gang, we'll be glad challenging word game software to show up. We might even rent a Tucker for the goes to the BrainSoft Corp. occasion. for their product, \"Word Wiz? That was our word Basham Smash 'Em! processing Software, I want to congratulate CGW and Tom Basham for being the first magazine and reSHUT UP! An viewer in the entire history of computer game reviews to present an accurate and knowledgeable article on a flight sim in your coverage of Aces Over Europe (CGW #115). Never before has a reviewer clearly explained about SOFTWARE aerodynamics and how they affect game play. PUBLISHERS ASSOCIATION Basham spoke of the aerodynamic progression from a buffet to a spin and how aircraft can lose altitude in nose level and nose high positions. This shows that Tom and CGW take their jobs seriously. Tom is professional enough to take the time to deal with aerodyawards an award! Page 122 Computer Gaming World "


"The Invasion begins May 7th. CORRIDOR TM Alien Invasion Technology licensed from ID SOFTWARE, creators of WOLFENSTEIN\" 3D Capstone THE L'INNACLE OF ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE At a software dealer near you or call: (305) 591-5900. (800) 468-7226. BBS (305) 471-8962 (2400-14.4 Baud Rates) Wolfenstein is a trademark of id Software. All Rights Reserved. Corridor 7: Alien Invasion and Capstone are trademarks of IntraCorp, Inc. All other trademarks acknowledged. Circle Reader Service #51 "


"FREELANCE TM &  1991 By: Steve HCE POLICE LETTERED BY: L. Lois BUHALIS . WELL, HERE WE ARE IN THE LOST CITY OF ATLANTIS! PLENTY OF PARKING THAT'S WHAT I LOVE ABOUT MOST MAJOR LOST CITIES. A WHY ARE YOU DRESSED LIKE THAT, SAM? I GUESS I'M FEELING ALL.. ADVENTUREY 20 NOT TEASE TLANTEANS WOW, SAM. YOU SOUND LIKE SOME CLAMMY OLD THESPIAN. GREETINGS MY FRIENDS REALLY? I DON'T REMEMBER EVER DATING WITHIN MY GENDER WHADDAYA KNOW? A TALKING SEAHORSE MAN! I AM BATHESPHERE -HIGH PRIEST OF ATLANTIS. AS YOU CAN SEE, THE GREAT BEAUTY OF OUR SURROUNDINGS ENHANCES OUR MOIST LIFESTYLE BUT ALAS. THE INTRUSIVE CASTOFFS FROM YOUR WORLD ARE DESTROYING THE IMMENSE SERENITY OF OURS. THAT IS WHY WE CALLED yo SAM. HAVE YOU EVER SEENA PREGNANT SURINAM TOAD? Whew. Wii SAM, DID YOU KNOW THAT THE MALE SEAHORSE CARRIES THE YOUNG UNTIL THEY SUDDENLY 1SSUE FORTH FROM THE BELLY LIKE CONFETTI?! JUST ANOTHER OF NATURES TALES TO MAKE THE HAIR STAND ON END.\" SHUT I CAN SEE WELL. THE RIGHT TUNA CASSEROLE ALWAYS TASTES BETTER EATEN ON-SITE. HEAD. TIME TO CONVEY OUR SIGNIFICANT MESSAGE. DELAREN'T PEOPLE OF THE EARTH! STOP THROWING YOUR OBSOLETE CRAP INTO OUR PRECIOUS OCEANS. REMEMBERDISCARDED PLASTIC AND ALUMINUM BEVERAGE CONTAINERS CAN BE FASHIONED INTO SAFE. AFFORDABLE CARS OF THE NINETIES -AND NUCLEAR WASTE COULD BE WORTH BIG MONEY SOMEDAY IF WE CONSIDERIT \"COLLECTABLE.\" YOU MUST CONVEY THE MESSAGE TO THE SURFACE WORELD LEST WE WITHER AND PERISHA WE'LL DO ITIF YOU FEED US! HOW WAS THAT? NEVER MIND. axy? publicists can selectively blurb Charles Chamemphasize \"babes\" and seems to ignore the (Lace was irrelevant to computer gaming. I plin and Rex Reed, I guess we have to expect other things which make anime great. Me, I'll think games that serve as vehicles for cheap, \"movie-like\" treatment from software publicists. be waiting and hoping for a game worthy of adolescent sexual thrills should be ignored by Frankly, we doubt that gamers are as gullible as the anime label. Kei And Yuri Save The Gala magazine of this caliber. While many «A» mainstream movie-goers. quality games go unreviewed in your pages, The Commodore your decision to give precious space to such Arsenic And Old Anime Ft. Worth, TX an obvious \"B\" quality game is puzzling. I hope gaming will not embrace the concept Regarding your review of Metal & Lace, it's Actually, with Kei and Yuri (The Infamous that \"sex sells» as TV and the movies have, at sad to see anime so abused (exploited). \"Dirty Pair\" of Japanime Fame), it would be the expense of real content. Anime, at its best, is a wonderful and fascinecessary to destroy the galaxy in order to save it. Brett Berger nating art form with gorgeous scenery and Since Toren Smith (translator of several manga, Strongsville, OH animation, exciting stories and fascinating including the Dirty Pair, into English comic characters (with the occasional scantily clad form) has been known to read CGW, maybe this Frankly, we aren't aware of any \"A\" quality cartoon babe, of course). I regret to think that will inspire him to find a software publisher. games that have not been reviewed by CGW. many people will get their first exposure to For that matter, we aren't aware of very many anime through a product which seems to only I think that Charles Ardai's review of Metal \"B\"quality games that have not been considered Page 124 Computer Gaming World "


"\"This game is brilliant. Daemonsgate captures the essence of good role-playing like no other game.\" \"Daemonsgate will grip you and it won't let go.\" Kevrl Perry 'Computer Game Revie ' CD ROM (92%. Golden Triad Award SUERG Of Meyear 1993. 3 \"Daemonsgate is a role-player's dream. It is a complex and masterfully done game which must be experienced to be appreciated.\" Mark Camron ladronames' (94%) GREREN A Roleplaying Game of Epic Proportions.... IMAGITEC DESIGN INC Journey through a hostile land, to liberate your people from a malevolent foe of unparalleled savagery Circle Reader Service #74 Daemonsgate: Available from selected retailers NOW! IBM PC Disk & CD ROM IMAGITEC Product available in North America & Canada through BAKER & TAYLOR AFFILIATED LABELS 3850 Royal Avenue Simi Valley CA 93063 Tel. 805 526 8700 Tel. 800 775 4200 Fax. 805 526 9300 "


"games? by. in our pages. Finally, we wonder how a magabased on responses equal to or greater than aptertainment media, it would be a great moral zine can make a statement in favor of real proximately 10% of the cards tabulated. If the stance for the entertainment software induscontent without pointing out some games with sample size is less than that, the title will not try to put self-imposed limits on what people, limited content. Metal & Lace had some conappear on the Top 100. It is well-known that especially kids, interact with. Try to make an tent in addition to the racy art, just not enough an increase in the number of questions within a effort to positively affect the kids and society. content in addition to the sexy anime females. survey reduces the number of responses to that Cameron T. Brett survey. So, we have elected not to break down Working For Scale Campbell, CA the questions into the detailed categories you have suggested. We would rather have a more How do I scale my grades for games, compared to current releases or what was available How about an N-17 rated patch for Leisure representative sample than to be too ambitious when the game was new? For example, and receive a poorer response. Also, since these Suit Larry 6? are cumulative ratings and come from numerous Dave Wolfenstein-3D was an A+ when new, but sources, there is no way of knowing (short of Celina, OH now it can be considered as an Aat best. asking lots more questions) exactly which version Michael Connelly people are using. Like democracy, we know our There you have the gamut of opinion on sex, dale, NJ poll isn't perfect, but we still think it is the best violence and computer games. Again, CGW Since the Top 100 is based upon a cumulative there is. does not want to become the moral arbiter of score, you should rate games for how you perceive them at the present time. The scores which they appropriate subject matter for computer games. Bias-Sphere That would be costly and unproductive (like the have already accumulated will provide the Why all the complaints about computer local Motion Picture Classification Board that weight that indicates how they were rated at the game magazines pandering to game publishcost Dallas, TX so much money in legal fees and beginning. ers? If I could find coverage of politics (in maintenance costs up until the last year or so). news magazines) as unbiased as your game I subscribe and get CGW about a week We simply advocate a voluntary, across-thecoverage, I'd read Time and Newsweek. early. How long should I wait before mailing board ratings system for all interactive enterthe CGW Poll card for that month? Kirk Thomas tainment that would inform consumers about H. Shim potentially controversial elements within the United States Air Force Academy, CO Does that mean you'd quit reading about games. We do not want to see the rise of a new bureaucracy. We just think publishers ought to Send it right away! Postmasters are standing be more candid about what they're placing on Ahead Of The Game the market. Why isn't the CGW Top 100 Poll QuesPlease do an overall review of WWII games. tionnaire in alphabetical order? Jeff Zlatkin The Larger Gaming World E. Choy Newark, DE Portland, OR As a diehard wargamer, I would love to see M. Evan Brooks provided such an overview in Would you believe we flunked kindergarten? an article/issue on PBM/PBEM/BBS warDon't answer that! The questionnaire is dea two-part article that ran in CGW #110 and gaming. I know there are many quality games #111. Back issues are still available. signed to rerate the top games every month, and available on the BBSs. Quite simply, World as many of the new games for which we think Conquest is the best wargame I've played in Aces Higher we can get sufficient responses. We alternate the years! The biggest reason for that is the fact placement of the game titles on the questionnaire You might want to let Aces Over Europe fans you are playing a game vs. real live other to avoid \"Top of the Ballot\" syndrome. In many know about a file called AOEREA.ZIP domineering types! elections, local officials are elected as much be(found on CompuServe) that modifies flight Stuart K. McNeil cause of ballot position as because the voters handling and flight characteristics of enemy Dothan, AL approve of their platforms. We don't want games planes. AOE now feels really great, more like to score artificially high because they are at the what I loved about Red Baron. top of the list. We are working toward covering some of these Dan Cumpian types of games in our Telegaming Issue which Richmond, VA It would make the CGW Poll Ratings more will appear in the Fall. Thanks for the tip on useful as a \"Buying Guide\" if the rating numRatings Game World Conquest. We haven't tried that one bers could be explained. How are possible yet. sample size biases corrected? The poll could The controversy over ratings in computer have more detail: ratings for graphics, sound, games is grossly overblown. Most prime time Silence Of The Lame case of use, documentation, repeat play value, TV dramas are more vulgar than any comand historical accuracy. Please list the versions puter game. Thank goodness gratuitous of games rated in the polls. swearing and obscene gesturing hasn't found Thanks to your magazine, I don't end up Bruce Kohrn its way into computer gaming (at least, not wasting my time with lame games. I can now Baltimore, MD on the computer screen). waste my time in other lame ways. Clyde Dodge \"Tater The ratings numbers are a cumulative rating Corona del Mar, CA Melbourne, FL based on all responses to date. We usually tabulate about 500 cards and only print ratings With all the sex and violence in other enC6W Page 126 Computer Gaming World "


"Conquer Memory Nothing masters memory like QEMM\". And now, for just a few dollars more than you would pay for QEMM alone, get QEMM7 with some of the hottest games around! Game Game Pack 1 Pack 2 Pack 3 Game ** EAQEMM & QEMM & 2 HOT GAMES QEMM & 2 HOT GAMES INCRED SPEC PRIVRIEER (SOLD OUT Game Pack 3 features Shadow Caster, the exciting . QEMM was once the power users' secret. Now it's the power players' secret. As Compute Magazines reviewer said: \"If you're a Power user who wants to play with the monster games, then MemMaker probably won't free enough memory. You'll need Quarterdeck's QEMM 7 memory manager utility, which not only will free up more than enough memory but will even optimize parts of your multiply-configured system.\"No wonder it's the number one selling PC utility. And now, it's virtually free when you buy our game packs. Check with your favorite retailer or call Quarterdeck direct With QEMM on your side, you'll never be defeated by the memory monster again. Game Pack 2 includes the hot Aces of the Pacific, a realistic World War II fighter simulation and Front Page Sports Football, a superdetailed sports simulation simulation. graphic roleplaying game and Privaleer, a challenging space adventure in the Wing Commander Series. alo -40 Quarterdeck MicroWarehouse (800) 367-7080 PC Connection (800) 243-8088 800 Software (800 888-4880 Circle Reader Service #105 (800) CompUSA for the dealer nearest you Quarterdeck Direct: (800) 354-3222 01993 Quarterdeck Office Systems. Trademarks are property of their respective owners "


"WHY THE T' IN FM SOUND BOARDS MEANS 'FAKE. appreciate the CD quality vnnd delivered by the JAX With a headline like the one you just read, you might think an ad such as this represents a slanderous assault on the makers of FM synthesis sound boards. Well, it isn't. It's really more of a story about how all good things must come to an end. If only to make room for better things. Like the Ultra Sound MAX sound board. Until recently most, if not all, PC sound boards used a technology developed in the 1970s called FM synthesis (frequency modulation). In fact, the most popular sound board on the market today still generates sound via FM synthesis. However, UltraSound MAX (also known as just the MAX), the newest sound board from Advanced Gravis, incorporates a higher technology called wavetable synthesis. Even Van Gogh could What's the difference? Put simply, FM synthesis fabricates or «mimics» sounds with tone generators using mathematical formulas, while wavetable synthesis creates sounds using digital recordings of the actual sounds, known as samples. Therefore, the sounds created by the MAX are real, while the sounds created by FM synthesis boards are fake. (Thus, the impetus s in many cultures forgers and other for this advertisement.) fakers are sentenced to life imprisonment. And whether it's a guitar or a gorilla, the digitally-recorded sounds you hear will come F = ASIN (20/1 = + IsiN (2 ) straight at you in 16-bit, 44.1 kHz sound with over 90 dB of dynamic range. In essence, compact disc quality. (Say goodbye to those This is the mathematical formula och by Flaundlvarlito horrible, tinny game sounds you thought you were stuck with.) create the vnd of a piana. We prefer to record a real piane. "


"Sarunas Flynthesis originated when people thought Recording with the MAX exceeds industry standards as well -16-bit, 48 kHz and 4:1 ADPCM hardware compression. Which means your recordings sound remarkable, yet use only a quarter of the disk space. Then there's also the general MIDI patch set included with the MAX. Basically, it's like having a 192-piece orchestra in your computer. What's more, the MAX's unique RAM-based there wounded god. Need we say more? system lets you modify any existing instrument, as well as create entirely new sounds. (Try that with a ROM-based sound board.) Now for those a little less into music and a little more into gaming, rest assured our engineers haven't Forgotten you. UltraSound MAX features two technological breakthroughs destined to adically change the nature of gameplay for years to come. The first allows you to experience 32 digital or synthesized voices at once, a feature exclusive to the MAX. The second is a revolutionary new concept called 3D Holographic Sound, which is simply the audio equivalent of virtual reality. Together, they will not only add substantial depth and dimension to your gaming experience, they will revolutionize how games are developed from now on. Imagine. You're on night patrol, deep in the jungle. It's pitch black. When suddenly, you hear the rustle of leaves above you and to the right. It's the enemy. You immediately turn and act, as if on reflex. Now that the MAX is here, such encounters can and will happen. No wonder Psygnosis, SSI, Sierra On-Line and LucasFilm are only a few of the developers starting to capitalize on the MAX's vastly superior performance. Of course, it's going to take some time for all software developers to unleash the powers of Ultrasound MAX. But until then, you'll be happy to know the MAX will run games designed for prior sound board ULTRASOUND technologies like Ad Lib, Sound BlasterTM and Roland MT-32. In fact, PC journalist John C. Dvorak wrote, «...the Ultra Sound has a Sound Blaster emulation mode so good that it sounds better than the Sound Blaster itself.» So if you have yet to put sound on your computer, or you're simply looking for the best way to gear up for the future, visit your favorite computer retailer and take home the Ultra Sound MAX. Advanced You'll discover that while imitation may indeed be the highest form Witba full 192-instrument MIDI, ww could become the word: acat great compaver. Or not. CRES Thank gume we're not fake. We'ne formal. GRAVIS of flattery, it doesn't remotely compare to the real thing. Il brands and trademarks are the property of their respective owners. For more information, contact a local computer retailer or all (604) 431-5020. O 1994 Advanced Gravis Computer Technology, Ltd., 1790 Midway Lane, Bellingham, Washington 98226. Circle Reader Service #40 "


"BETTER TO SERVE YOU! CGW needs to know more about you so we can continue to tailor our reviews to meet your gaming needs. For taking the time from your busy schedule to fill out the attached reader survey, we will enter you in a contest. One CGW reader will win a beastie of a gaming rig, a FALCON MACH V from FALCON NORTHWEST (see specs and details below). Four lucky readers will win a Sony speaker/sub woofer system that will make anyone's rig sound great! No matter if you get a prize or not, everyone will win because our staff will know you better and review the latest games with you in mind. Enter by filling out the accompanying reader survey front and back. Fold, seal and mail it back to us by June 15,1994. We've already stamped it for you. If you do not want to give us your name, that is OK. We would still like you to fill out the survey, but you won't be entered in the contest. If there are two readers for the magazine, photocopy the front and back of the survey and send it to the same address using your stamp and envelope. e Survey First Prize The Falcon Mach V: The Ultimate Gaming Machine Four Runner Up Prizes: Sony Speaker/Sub Woofer system . 1 ENTER NOW! Standard features: Intel 486 DX/2-66 Processor, P241 Pentium upgradable Falcon VESA Local Bus Motherboard, 256K Cache, AMI BIOS VESA Local Bus Graphics Board with 1 MB 15.8 Million Colors! Falcon VESA Local Bus Hard Drive Controller Card 8 MB of RAM expandable to 32 250 Megabyte 12ms Hard Drive with 128 K Cache MPC Level 2 Compliant 250 ms Double-Speed CD-ROM Drive SoundBlaster PRO with Multimedia Encyclopedia on CD-ROM Shielded Multimedia Speakers CH Products FlightStick PRO 4 Button Joystick with Viewing Control CH Products Automatic Speed Sensitive Dual Gameport MiniTower Case with 250 Watt Power Supply Two Cooling Fans with Temperature sensing 15. Non-interlaced Super VGA Monitor 3 button Mouse and 101 Keyboard "


"ARMED AND DANGEROUS GRAB THE LATEST IN IBM CAMES CALL 1-800-247-5447 TITAN GAMES MAY'S TOP 50 STRATEGIC STUDIES GROUP CARRIERS AT WAR II  RADO ST-AG PACIFIC 1942 PACIFIC AIR WAR ACES OVER EUROPE AD&D GENIES CURSE (MAY) AD&D RAVENLOFT ARENA: THE ELDER SCROLLS BIOFORGE BREACH 3 CARRIERS AT WAR 2 DARK LEGIONS (MAY) DARK SUN DUNGEON HACK DUNGEON MASTER 2 (MAY) EYE OF THE BEHOLDER TRIL. CD F14 FLEET DEFENDER FANTASY EMPIRES GABRIEL KNIGHT GENGHIS KHAN 2 GRANDEST FLEET GREAT NAVAL BATTLES V 2 HAND OF FATE HARPOON 2 HEIRS TO THE THRONE KASPAROV'S GAMBIT KINGMAKER KINGS QUEST 6 MASTER OF ORION MAXIMUM OVERKILL MECHWARRIOR 2 MERCHANT PRINCE M&M 5: DARK SIDE OF XEEN PACIFIC STRIKE POLICE QUEST 4: DARYL GATES PRIVATEER REBEL ASSAULT CD SHADOW CASTER SIM CITY 2000 SSN-21 SEAWOLF STAR REACH STRIKE COMMANDER SYNDICATE THRID REICH TIE FIGHTER (MAY) ULTIMA 8 PAGAN V FOR VICTORY: G, J, S VICTORY AT SEA (MAY) WARLORDS 2 WING COMMANDER ACADEMY WIZARDRY 7 WW2: BATTLE OF S. PACIFIC X WING $41 TITAN GAMES 1 WEST SEMINARY ST. BRANDON, VT 05733 ORIGIN CITY 2000   OPEN 9AM-9PM MON-SAT (EST)  FED-EX SHIPPING S7 PER ORDER  ALL RETURNS REQUIRE AN RMA  NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR ERRORS OR OMISSIONS BEBERAL VISA MasterCard BOB Circle Reader Service #117 "


"HARDWARE REVIEW Keep Your Eyes On The Game And Your Hands Upon ProWheel Photograph by Larry Malone by Gordon Goble nyone who takes their racing simulaPro Wheel permitted me to go into linear cions seriously should know about a steering mode, both with and without steerI little company from Gaston, Oregon ing assistance. I actually came away winning called Wizard Racing Their new ProWheel one 8-lap event from the back of the pack. Steering Controller is one of a precious few On to IndyCar territory. The ProWheel wheel control devices currently in the marsoon had me turning in lap times equivalent ketplace, and its appearance continues an on to my times with other control devices. These going thrust toward increased realism in all promising stats followed just a few hours of aspects of the simulation environment. Pro Wheel rehearsal, whereas I had spent years The most enticing component of the Prowith joysticks. The natural feel of the wheel Wheel is its authentic go-kart steering wheel and shaft, which have been ser ar a comfortable driving angle into sleek black ABS plastic housing. On the back side of the padded wheel are four fingertip switches, two on each side, that accommodate throttle, brake and gear change control. Aside from a serial connector and on/off switch on the rear of the wedge-like housing (for connection of foot pedal units), the rest of the unit is free of exterior fluff. Weighted and equipped with non-skid rubber seemed to make up for any lack of long term feet, the Pro Wheel does not require a table experience. At Michigan, my best average clamp to lock it in place, and the review unit speeds in a default Ace car with a quarter tank remained absolutely immobile throughout its of gas were 229.076 mph for the Pro Wheel entire testing period. The wheel itself is sol versus 228.864 with a Flightstick. At Milwauidly anchored, and x-axis movement offers kee, a 165.993 Pro Wheeltime narrowly edged graduated resistance, successfully mimicking the 165.821 mph speed attained with the the feel of the real thing. Flightstick. ProWheel currently works with the rwo preAs with most products, the rest unit was not mier racing simulations, Micro Prose's World completely flawless. While screaming Circuit and IndyCar Racing by Papyrus (they through a sixth gear right-hander at Adelaide, are the only two sims with the control conall steering control suddenly, and without figurations necessary to use Pro Wheel). The warning, disappeared. Needless to say, the learning curve isn't nearly as tough as Wizard resulting destruction of my zillion-dollar Forsays it might be, so I decided for a practice mula 1 car did not please my financial sponrun on World Circuits Adelaide track. Prosors. Upon post-race inspection, it was Wheel performed admirably, with my default discovered that the culprit was a small screw McLaren turning in consistent lap times bebonding the steering shaft to the potentiomelow 1:17 while racing with Ace competition. ter rod. The tiny offender had apparently Substantially less twitchy than a joystick, the wiggled its way loose and as a result, my frantic flailing at the wheel had ceased to be transferred into electronic signals. Ironically, falling out of the race with steering problems is an all too common occurrence at any level of racing. Without delay, a distress call was made to Wizard proprietor Bob Boulanger, and his assurance of immediate modifications before the ProWheel enters heavy production alleviated worries. I was also notified that NASCAR driver Bobby Labonte hadn't had any problems with his Pro Wheel, and, after further discussion, I discovered that the familyrun Wizard Racing is busy developing a pedal system (the ProPedal) that should be ready in the first half of 94. The world of digital racing has most definitely been improved upon with the ProWheel, and the above-average speeds seem to bear that out. The only problem is a slight loss in the pinpoint precision drivers have become accustomed to with a quality joystick. Although negligible in World Circuit (or in practice/qualifying with either sim), IndyCar racers may detect a subtle drift in their vehicle that becomes noticeable when battling heavy traffic. The additional practice necessary to overcome this drift is minor compared to the huge increase in «realism\" provided by the racy feel of a real wheel when pulling highspeed turns. The Pro Wheel is priced at $119.95 and comes with detailed setup instructions for IndyCar and World Circuit, a utility disk packed with car setup tips, graphic upgrades, instructions for F1SA competition on CompuServe, and other assorted shareware goodies designed to enhance both World Circuit and IndyCar Racing. Wizard Racing can be contacted by telephone at (503) 985-7156 or CompuServe e-mail ar 73304 2311. CEW Page 132 Computer Gaming World "


"DISCOVER THE BIG PICTURE DISCOVER THE BIO PICTURE AMER PL US PLAY COMPUTER GAMES ON YOUR FREE BONUS GAME WITH PURCHASE SEE PACKAGE FOR DETAILS IGARETTE YOU Just Plug It In AND THE ULTIMATE COMPUTER GAMING EXPERIENCE IS YOURS! GET READY FOR YOUR MOST AMAZING GAMING ADVENTURE EVER WITH TV GAMER PLUSTM PLAY COMPUTER GAMES LIKE THEY WERE MEANT TO BE SEEN: BIGGER AND BETTER ON YOUR TV! EXPERIENCE COOLER COLORS, BIGGER BOSSES, MEGA MAPS AND SUPER-SIZE SWORDFIGHTS. TV Gamer Plus Features 5 YEAR WARRANTY WINDOWS SUPPORT (IBM VERSION) IBM & MAC VERSIONS AVAILABLE EXTRA-LONG RCA CABLE TO TV ALL CABLES INCLUDED 5 SGneste som navn. From SIIG, Inc. 6078 Stewart Ave., Fremont, CA 94538 510/657-8688 PUIG, Inc.  1994 by SIIG, Inc. TV Gamer Plus is a trademark of SIIG, Inc. TV Gamer Plus' Is Available At The Following Locations Frys American BrandsMartUSA. MICRO GNER COMPUTER CITY Circle Reader Service #112 "


"BRIDGE OLYMPIAD THE WORLDS FINEST COMPUTER BRIDGE GAME 14.0AL11 CUTATE 464 OOP W Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. The finest computer bridge game ever created! Take part in the world renowned \"Bridge Olympiad\" tournament right in the comforts of your own home. Bridge masters are calling this bridge game the most challenging ever! The computer will test bridge masters' abilities while being the mentor for novice players. Practice slams, defensive play, and how to play no trump hands. Choose the type of partner you want to play with. Each partner has different bridge techniques and styles. \"A great way to practice before an upcoming tournament\" \"I have never seen such a clever computer partner and opponent\"  Masterful Computer Opponents Complete Player History Largest Number of Bidding Conventions On the Market The Bridge Game For A Lifetime Tournament Play A Myriad of Computer Players, Each With A Different Playing Style and Personality Circle Reader Service #103 \"Bridge Olympiad\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: 1-908-788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1994 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. "


"ORIGAMO 11 < < . VIP 200p, Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. Enjoy this enticing visual puzzle game from QQP. Explore the graphically rich maze with a unique puzzle in every room. Forge through the maze by successfully completing each puzzle. As the conveyor belt moves along with a myriad of blocks and shapes, you must place the blocks on the puzzle, or your blocks will stack up and time will run out! Continuing through the maze you will discover beautiful and sensational, graphics and animation throughout this exciting multileveled puzzle game. . The Puzzle Game With Great Replay-ability  Vivid Player History Infinite Puzzle Combinations  Myriad of Strategies Three Unique Ways of Playing State of The Art Super VGA Graphics Indulge Yourself in This Addicting Puzzle Game \"Origamo\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: 1-908-788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1994 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #104 "


"Microforum Presents the Latest Dream Girls Do you have what it takes to be with two of the most beautiful models around? Now you can find out thanks to the latest in computer technology! This advanced multimedia game features incredible live video, hit songs, sound effects and amazing graphics! in CD-ROM 3995 MoMicroforum Medeauna NEW! G.O.R.G. Experience the adventure of a lifetime and venture into the dark threatening planets of the G.O.R.G. galaxy. This \"Out of this World\" CD-ROM game will keep you playing for hours. Includes an extensive collection of sound effects, animation, incredible graphics and over 35 planets to explore. Super Arcade Games The ultimate CD for video games. INCREDIBLE GRAPHICS, SUPER SOUND EFFECTS & FAST ACTION! Have hours of fun. Hundreds of the very best games such as: Doom. Blake Stone Gotcha Helius Stellar Defense Ken's Labyrinth-Megatron SeaQuest Captain Keen and MANY MORE! 2995 NEXO NEW VERSION! SUPER ARCADE GAMES The Programmer CD The \"PROGRAMMER CD\" is a great way to learn, develop or upgrade your programming skills! Learn how to program your own computer or extend your current knowledge. POWEH UTILITIES 2995 Toppers the  Programmer The World of Computer Software Explore the latest software from all over the world! Comes in 4 volumes. Each volume contains the following catagories Business, CAD, Clip Art, Games, Desktop Publishing, OS/2. Languages and Many More! Over 1GB of software for each volume. Vol. I.Vol. II. Vol. III, and Vol. IV are AVAILABLE! 2095 EACH Power Utilities One of the most useful collections of utilities on the market. All utilities are carefully selected, tested and organized in an easy to use menu system. Included on this CD are a wide variety of powerful and useful computer utilities: Copy, Virus, DOS, Disk and many more. wes Prihe POME The TIL COMPLETE 2995 WINDOWS SET Complete Windows Set \"The Complete Windows Set\" is for the Windows lover! The set contains hundreds of the very best windows Programs carefully selected and fully organized in a menu driven system for easy access. HE WORLD OA DE COMPLETE WINDOWS SET AWIN MEMBETAR FOR 2995 MENONE The World of Mac Software \"The World of Mac Software\" contains over 200 of the best programs exclusively for the MAC. This is an incredible collection of software for the MACINTOSH. This CD includes: Word Processing, Graphics Programs Utilities, Educational Programs, Business Programs, Games and SO MUCH MORE! NEW VERSION! THE WORLD OF ASUS MAC SOFTWARE 2095 ATTENTION PROGRAMMERS : DO YOU HAVE A SOFTWARE PROGRAM SUITABLE FOR CD-ROM? MICROFORUM IS LOOKIN Microforum 1 Woodborough Ave. Toronto, Canada Tel: (416)656-6406 Fax: (416)656-6368 Tel: (416)656-6406 Fax: (416)656-6368 "


"Via CD NEW! The Ultimate Trivia CD N Take the Ultimate Trivia Challenge and test your knowledge. The Ultimate Trivia is the most advanced, challenging and exciting trivia game you'll ever play. This advanced multimedia trivia game includes live Video questions, incredible sound effects, breathtaking photography and Over 500 Trivia Questions ! EACH MICROFORUM CD INCLUDES COMPLETE TECHNICAL SUPPORT ACROSS NORTH AMERICA AND EVERY PURCHASE OF A MICROFORUM TITLE ENTITLES YOU TO PARTICIPATE IN A FREE DRAW TO WIN OUR COMPLETE COLLECTION! THE ULTIMATE TRIVIA 4995 NEW! Sounds of MultiMedia A complete collection of exotic sounds, pictures, animation and video clips for your MultiMedia programs, presentations, desktop publishing, word-processing programs, or just for pure entertainment ! You can finally bring your computer to new levels of entertainment ! Sounds of Multimedial The Video Game Solution CD This CD-ROM includes easy to follow instructions to use hints and tips on how to solve the most popular games on the market! Also included are special editors which allows a player to have an unlimited number of lives and makes each game more exciting. Sounds of Multimedia?! 2995 The VideoGame GOLUTION 2095 JESIGN T Fonts NEW! .) Business Business Designer Fonts Explore the latest fonts designed by top graphic designers ! This CD package contains an impressive variety of new typefaces for both TRUETYPE and POSTSCRIPT FONTS. Improve you presentations with this incredible font collection. A great way to create a lasting impression ! \"Designer Fonts\"contains over 400 customized designed fonts by top Designers. Simple and easy to use. The Business CD Tired of wasting money on expensive business software? Then maybe it's time to try our \"Business CD\" ! Over 50 of the very best business programs, carefully selected and tested, including accounting programs, spreadsheets, word processors, desk-top publishing and one complete communication package all under an easy to follow menu. DESIGNER OT FOR WINDOWS Lp bankans by logo OVER 400 FONTS Business 3995 2095 ATTENTION DEALERS! CD-ROM Get into the Microforum ection CD-ROM Collection Educational Multimedia Program! With over 20 fabulous Educational Disk The Educational Disk is a fun way for children to become familiar with the computer. This disk contains over 50 programs math, alphabet, word-processing, geography computers, etc... Includes great graphics, sounds and actual human voices. This CD includes a user friendly menu and all programs are easy to use ! Disk any tities to choose from, this carousel will prove the Educational Disk 2095 to be a hot new item Ed Ciliono Disk among your customers. TO ADD TO ITS INTERNATIONALLY DISTRIBUTED CD-ROM COLLECTION. FOR MORE INFO. PLEASE CALL 416-656-6406 Circle Reader Service #126 TO ORDER CALL 1-800-465-2323 DEALER INQUIRIES ARE WELCOME ! SOLD AT BETTER COMPUTER STORES EVERYWHERE "


"COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD AI, AI, Oh! How Much Smarts Can A Wargame Really Have? Art tsy Rodger MacGowan; O 1994 RBM Graphics by Alan Emrich These days, it is more reasonable to demand I can forgive the \"crackable,\" often ahistoria competent computer opponent, as opposed cal, AI found in most wargames today. to a brilliant one. A computer opponent charA lthough I won't stop hoping that proavoids basic gaming blunders, uses sound and grammers develop a military mind of their appropriate strategies and tactics, and retains own through a study of their subject before a certain degree of unpredictability should be they try to program an artificial military a programmer's ultimate goal. Of course, getmind, I am prepared to give up on my family ting there is seldom a cakewalk for these and friends ever becoming a large, happy hackers in historical simulations. group of wargamers. All we can do, of course, \"I Came, Part of the problem is that many program is go out and make one conve is go out and make one convert at a time. Cow mers aren't students of military strategy, nor I Played, do I expect that most could pass a quiz on the Intelligence tactics for the era they're simulating. Since I Conquered» Caesar, Napoleon, Sun Tsuand von From The Front Clausewitz did not write their works in BA Those wild and crazy guys at Modem T was recently in an on-line discussion SIC, I really can't expect programmers to get Games continue to take MicroProse's about what is possible and reasonable to a C++ when programming these games that Command HQ to new heights. They've expect in wargaming artificial intelligence are, in essence, military history tests. That is started a bulletin board that every CHQer (AI), and since I've been misquoted and had really too bad, because employing history's should call at (407) 736-1205. Not only words put into my mouth during that discussolutions in designing the AI would not only are they in the midst of a mighty inter-netsion (and here I thought only my kindred in supply these beleaguered programmers with work CHQ tournament, but they've upthe press were capable of this sort of thing), I sound principles for constructing Als that graded the game to version 2.07, adding thought I'd set the record straight. will serve as savvy military opponents, but features like city names for the ???? sceI assume that we, the wargaming commuwould make wargamers embrace that game nario, speed 7 (for the young of reflexes), nity, are reasonable people with some unreaall the more and gush about its \"simulation and a color-blind palette option for playsonable expectations. One of those value.\" ers who have trouble with the colors in the unreasonable expectations is that our family When I play a war or strategy game today, default palette. Also, their work continues and friends are not only going to try to unI'm always hoping to find a good computer on a version 3.0 of Command HQ, slated derstand our hobby, but actually embrace it. opponent that doesn't overtly cheat and puts to include a map and scenario editor Another is that we're going to see Al in our up a helluva fight that I can ultimately win. among other enhancements. wargames that's truly challenging to our level (After all, who would want to fight a great Dave Landry, co-designer of SSI's Batof play. While either of these could happen, campaign only to lose most of the time?) tles of Napoleon, has announced that the I'm not holding my breath. Often, however, we find ourselves \"cracking much loved Battles of Napoleon is available We would all love to play against a digital our favorite games. Usually, we can overcome once again for the IBM. SSI has granted Sun Tsu—an Al that was educated in the art predictable computer opponent strategies his company, Novastar Games, license to of war, was flexible, unpredictable, and creaand develop techniques that consistently copy the original game disk and manual. tive in its approaches to a game, but is that at prove a computer opponent's undoing They're selling it for $15, along with their all realistic Heck, chess has been around for techniques that would never work so consis five recently reviewed scenario disks (see ages, studied and scrutinized every which tently against a more adaptable human mind. CGW issue #116) at $10 a pop, or the way, and has been a popular object of study So, there is one thing that I also expect from whole 5-pack for $45. For more informafor computer scientists for 30 years. As a a computer war or strategy game these days, tion, call (916) 624-7113. consequence, there are computer chess games multi-player options. I want to be able to find If you haven't gotten the latest version with amazingly strong Al. However, those a friend, connect with him by modem, and (V1.1) of Clash of Steel-get it. The who care to master the game can still beat play either head-to-head or by e-mail. Any changes that allow for the rebuilding of these programs. How, then, can we reasongame that allows me to send my move to an lost transports and the strengthening of ably expect a new computer wargame, one opponent and replay his moves that he sends Gibraltar's defenses make the game much that has only been tested by a handful of souls me has, in my opinion, achieved a higher less susceptible to \"perfect plans.\" The for a short period of time, has more positions, plane in computer wargaming. No set of AI patch is available on the networks and more unit types and more options than chess, routines will ever be as wise, bold, or inscru from SSI. CGW to offer an Al that can truly challenge an table as a human opponent. By leaving me the experienced wargamer: We can't. option to find my own enemy to fight against, Page 138 Computer Gaming World "


"WHEN YOU'RE REALLY SERIOUS ABOUT PLAYING GAMES Subscribe to America's #1 computer game magazine... and score up to 47% savings! Get ready for some serious action with Computer Gaming World the spectacular monthly magazine that helps you pump-up your computer gaming expertise. Brought to you by the publishers of PC Magazine, PC/Computing, MacUser and Windows Sources, every monthly issue of Computer Gaming World  Reveals special \"winning secrets\" for your favorite games  Provides \"first looks\" and in-depth reviews of new computer games  Explores the latest in multimedia, CD-ROM and interactive game environments  Helps you make the leap into cyberspace with on-line gaming  Explains how to turbocharge your system for faster action...and much more! Whether you're into fantasy, action, sports or strategy. Whether you use DOS, Windows or a Mac...it's time to start racking up the points with Computer Gaming World. Subscribe now and save! One year/12 issues $27.94 — You save 41% Two years/24 issues $19.97 -You save 47% Savings based on annual cover price of $17.40. Please mention this 4-digit key code to operator when placing your order: 4294 CALL NOW TOLL FREE 1-800-827-4450 Special Sports Games Section COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The Premier Computer Game Magazine 100 GAMES RATED CONFIG FILES TO SOLVE 19.GAMERS MEMORY PROBLEMS WG takes EMPIRE DELUXE BWARD einer-New Medias XXX 666 "


"Opponents Wanted Those wishing to place their own (free) ads need only send us a postcard (or use the Notes section of the RID card), letter, FAX (714-283-3444) or E-Mail (Prodigy [EXPT40B), CompuServe (76703,622), The Sierra Network at Box 1048, GEnie or America On-Line at (CGW]). Generally, we run them only once, so send another cach time if you want to keep your name listed! The ads themselves should serve as reasonable examples as to how to write your own. However, . Include a brief description of the types of opponents and games you are interested in playing. Games being played other than direct by modem can be listed (trading save game disks or even face-to-face).  At least one (possibly more) telephone number(s) must be included. Do not forget the area code and mention whether they are Home, Work or Modem numbers.  Include your city and state so that people who call you will both: a) have a clue as to what time zone you are in and b) recognize it when they see it on their phone bill. We reserve the right to edit all Opponents Wanted ads to our standards of taste (such as they are). The Networks The following are voice contact numbers for many of the various on-line network services that connect gamers. Call them for more information on these networks. America On-Line: (800) 827-6364 CompuServe Information Service: (800) 848-8990 Novalink (formally Digital Dreams) Network: (800) 274-2814 GEnie: (800) 638-9636 The ImagiNation Network: (800) IMAGIN-1 Multi-Player Games Network: (800) GET-GAME National Videotex (NVtel): (800) 336-9096 Prodigy: (800) 822-6922 X556 USA Today Sports Network: (800) 826-9688 Bulletin Board Systems Check out The Informer BBS at (415) 468-6713/14/15. We have all of the latest flight sim updates and hacks, plus flight simulations conferences. Find new drivers, diagnostics and more. For more information, contact John Custer, 264 Oriente Street, Daly City, CA 94014-1531. The Impress BBS at (918) 437-3754 has the latest Apogee, id, Software Creation and Epic MegaGames. We support 2400 to 14400 Baud modems. FX/Term is strongly recommended and can be downloaded when you first log on. Hey, Southern California, check out the Techno Surfing BBS! We have six phone lines available. There are tournaments scheduled for War in Russia, CHQ, Conquered Kingdoms, War in the Pacific Air Warrior, Falcon F-16, MiG-29 and others, plus a games hint information section, game forums and multi-player BBS games. Check out our large shareware and .GIF library and our fantastic new online viewer section. We support 1200 to 38400 Baud and offer a free trial period. Call (818) 769-0691. The Assault BBS is looking for game players! Play Trade Wars 2002, an exciting space adventure game. Challenge other fighters in The Pit. Go head-to-head in Chess. Play golf or bowling and challenge other players for the best casino score (yes, we have an on-line casino!). New games are always being added. Call (703) 490-8304 at 2400 Baud. Shaun McDonald SYSOP. We need you now! Modem Gamers Forum BBS: Home of the Game Matcher Door for finding head-to-head gamers like you. A message arca devoted to every modem capable game known to mankind. Find opponents for games like 688 Attack Sub, Scawolf, F-29. Knights of the Sky, The Perfect General, Command HQ, Populous, Powermonger, Tom Landry Football, MechWarrior II, etc. Tournaments, hints, tips, and strategy articles available, along with patch files and updates for your modem gaming software. Two versions of 7W2002 on-line (one exploiting the software bugs, one cleaned up game)! Mention CGW for long distance validation. Seeking Amiga, Mac and Atari users to form an even larger opponents base. Running Renegade BBS 7-17 software. Sysop: King Crumb Babylon, NY (516) 893-4120, 14.4k, 8-N-1, 24 hours. If you are looking for the best military PC Hight simulators coverage, then you must check out SimNet based in the San Francisco Bay area. This new network is expanding nationwide currently with 20 BBS systems around the country and still growing. SimNet is originating from the Trade Center BBS (SimNet Headquarters). Call (415) 340-0197. There are four nodes, 2400 to 28800 baud, 24 hours per day. Full access on your first call, no fees. SysOp: Gabe \"Joker\" Turk. Modem opponents wanted section online. Over 1.2 Gigs of files, including instant support from Thrust Master, Inc. The Dakota Central Telenet BBS in Carrington, ND (58421) is a BBS with many challenging on-line games and over 30,000 files available to download free of charge. On-line games include the massive Land of Devastation post-nuclear war RPG with an available EGA graphic user interface, plus you can battle other traders and aliens in Trade Wars 2002 (tournaments start frequently). Explore with your character in the combat-happy RPG Wizard's Arena, and make big booms with others like Nuke War and Nawal Battle. Trivia and card games are also on-line. Huge games file area. Free access, with a small fee for total access. 3 nodes: 300-14,400 Baud, 8-N-1, Call (701) 674-8115, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Call Little Caesar's Nightclub at (416) 238-8238. All wargamers should check out message base #13 for discussions on computer wargaming. Find an opponent or leave a review. All computer platforms welcome. The Elfspire Tome is a Fantasy Role-Playing Game Master's resource bulletin board. We feature role-playing echoes, on-line games, fantasy clip art and much more. 1200-9600 Baud. (415) 595-2387. The Electronic Estates BBS in Oak Lawn, IL invites you to join their Tradewar 2002, Global Warand Chessgames. Many files available for download, Netmail, instant access and more. \"A world class, American BBS\" (pmc 11/93). Call (708) 424-6136. Will you hack and slash your way through a real-time, multi-user dungeon (MUD) or attempt to conquer an entire galaxy? It's your choice when you call The Batboard BBS in Columbia, MO. Enjoy the true AD&D action of Legends and the professional e-mail game VGA Planets (with an off-line VGA interface) or tackle over 30 other on-line challenges, including ANSI Pro Football, Chat Roulette, BandWurz, role-playing, strategy, trivia and casino games. Prizes awarded for highest monthly scores, with full access on your first call (and it's free)! Two CD-ROMs on-line, with the latest in quality shareware games! FidoNet echoes (including GAMING), multiline chat, the adult role-playing game Wild Side visit today for the best in multiline diversions! We're always open 24 hours at (314) 446-0475 with 14400 bps supported. The Delphic Oracle is an all-gaming BBS. Play RPGs (ADD, GURPS), play-bye-mail games (Diplomacy, ASL), Empires at War (a Napolconic on-line game) and other games on-line. Find modem game players. Gamemasters and players wanted. Simi Valley, California (805) 582-9004 [2400 8-N-1] Free access. The Gaming Connection BBS in Everett, WA specializes in connecting modem-tomodem players. Give it a call at (206) 742-4044, twenty-four hours a day. Join a Gaming Ladder and make new friends to challenge. Empire Deluxe and Harpoon scenarios, plus access to everything (including over 5,000 files) available on your first call! The Ho-Down BBS wants you to \"test your metal\" in multi-player games of Spaceward, Ho! Are you tired of beating 19 smart computer players in a small galaxy? Want a real challenge? Try competing against the most deadly, devious, dastardly, dangerous, diabolical, double-crossing dealers of death and destruction this side of Deneb. In other words, against players just like you! Call with modem set at 8-N-1, up to 14400 bps, (206) 577-8868. The Imperium BBS is looking for modem gamers like you! Tournaments are run for Knights of the Sky, Command HQ, The Perfect General and Global Conquest (just to name a few!). We have on-line games, message base and 3 gigs of files, too. Call one of our three nodes in Middleton, NJ at either: 1200/2400 (908) 706-0342: 9600 v.32 (908) 706-0305; HST Dual Standard 38.4 (908) 706-0321. The Mac Commonwealth BBS in metro New Orleans, LA is sponsored by the National Home & School Mac User Group, a nonprofit organization promoting leisure and learning on the Mac. Our multi-line system features over 1 gigabyte of downloadable files, with emphasis on games and educational material. On-line magazines, Usenet newsgroups, OneNet conferences and Internet e-mail. Support file sections for over 60 commercial games! FirstClass graphic user interface. All lines support 1200 v.32bis 14.400 access. For information on BBS and group activities, send inquiries to NHSMUG, P.O. Box 640641, Kenner, LA 70064. BBS line 1: (504) 837-7984. Call the Missile Silo BBS. Contestants wanted for Command HQ, F-29 Retaliator and many others. Tournaments to be held soon. Files, message base and (soon to come) on-line games. Running on Telegard 2.5 7 days a week, 24 hours a day. Located in Skokie, IL outside of Chicago. Call (708) 581-1735. Mention this ad in CGW for no-hassle access validation. By Area Code I'm seeking fellow Flight Simulator 4.0 or 5.0 pilots to hook up with via modem for some pleasure flying. I also have Falcon 3.0, but have yet to try it in modem action. I'm in North Arlington, NJ, close to Giant Stadium. Call Jeff Baker at H-(201) 997-4964 or try me on Prodigy at NWTS67A or America Online at FLYING ACE. Wanted in the Denver area: Modem gamers for Falcon 3.0 and MiG-29. All challengers are welcome. Call Fred at H-(303) 782-5213. I would prefer local area opponents (although my long distance carrier wouldn't (grin)). Omaha modem warriors sought for F-15 111, Command HQ, Spectre VR, 688 Attack Sub or Seawolf. Contact Greg Seewald at H-(402) 597-2837. Local opponents wanted to play any game playable through modem linkup. These might include Falcon 3.02. MiG-29 1.01, 688 Attack Sub and F-15 III. Voice call Rich Fairbanks in Norman, OK at H-(405) 366-7475 or write to me at 712 Westridge Terrace, Norman, OK 73069. I seek dedicated Spectre VR players in the South Florida arca. Please call Matthew Shannon at H-(407) 747-0233. Seeking opponents in the Northern Virginia area for Pacific War, Second Front, Western Front, Battles of Napoleon, The Perfect General and/or Warlords II. Contact Pat Beekman at H-(703) 680-0178. Looking for all oppoents for a good match of Conquered Kingdoms and other strategic modem games. Please call Bill in the Chicago suburbs at H-(708) 599-6558. I'm looking for opponents in the Rochester, NY area for modem or face-to-face gaming. I enjoy Empire Deluxe, Clash of Steel, Indy Car Racing, Command HQ, NFL Pro League, and many others. Please contact John at H-(716) 223-2543. CGW Page 140 Computer Gaming World "


"ALLE 1 E AMP ETTO EUROS Ba Too many board games and not enough time or space to play them? Aide De Camp is for you! 28 Light are CO 1A-LWR SITIO WIT: *JESH EDIT \"Civil War Brigade Series\" Add-on TICHE ANTOINE \"Perryville\" Add-on ide De Camp is a revolutionary game assistance program which enables you to take virtually any HEX OR AREA based game and play it on your PC, The secret to Aide De Camp is in its tremendous built-in power and flexibility. YOU create the terrain and unit symbol graphics. YOU set up and edit the map. YOU determine how movement, combat, and other game functions operate. Aide De Camp also opens up new possibilities for playing by mail. Forget about writing (and erasing and rewriting) all of your moves and unit positions down. With Aide De Camp all you do is send a diskette. No errors, no trouble, and no wasted time. Better yet, you can use a modem to transfer your moves instantly. Aide De Camp features: * Capacity to hold maps of up to 30,000 hexes. * No limit on the quantity of units per game. * Placement up to 7 types of terrain in each hex. * Definition of up to 200 custom terrain types per game. * Unconstrained unit stacking, with the ability to create unique stack symbols. * Multiple user defined zoom levels. * Automatic mapsheet and hex numbering. * Save of game set-ups and turns forever. * Opportunity to easily design your own games, or modify your existing ones. * ADD-ON DISKS FOR MANY GAMES ARE BEING MADE AVAILABLE BY THE BOARD GAME PUBLISHERS. Aide De Camp is a playing aid only. It does not include a computer opponent, or the ability to enter the rules or charts for any specific game. You must first own a copy of the board game in order to enter and play it on Aide De Camp. Aide De Camp requires an IBM or compatible computer, with at least 500K free conventional RAM (additional RAM may be required for large games), VGA display, and a hard disk. A mouse is optional. $79.95 Available only by mail. Please add $4.00 shipping and handling. CA residents add state sales tax. Please specify disk spec when ordering. VISA/MASTERCARD CALL (408)554-8381 Mail checks/money orders to: HPS Simulations P.O. Box 3245 SIMULATIONS Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 sht 1993 by Scott Hamilton/HPS Simulations. All rights reserved. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. TENBELS EU! HPS "


"AEGIS CD SUPRAFAXMODEM 14.4LC EXTERNAL COMPUTER Express Since 1985 Guardian of the Fleet naval simulation. Pushes you to the limit of real time strategic and tactical combat simulation. Puts the latest in military technology and the ultimate high-tech warship at your fingertips. Features historically accurate battle sequences. Based on newly declassified military Information and historical accounts of actual battles. Challenges you to use the arts of deception, intelligence and warfare in this high tech high thrill military simulation. Time Wamor: DOS-CD External 14,400bps data and 14,400bps send/receive fax/modem. V.42bis data compression for up to 57,600bps throughput. SilentAnswer supports receive tax and voice calls on one phone line. Caller ID, when supported by the phone company, displays information abou! incoming calls. LED display lights track modem activity. Package includes WinFax Lite, FaxTalk, COMit and CompuServe information Manager software. 5 year warranty Supra Corp. WIN/DOS, MAC $759 800-228-7449 XT TOLL FREE ORDER LINE $53 BREACH 3 F-14 FLEET DEFENDER record ISLE OF THE DEAD A South Pacific Island hopping adventure takes a strange twist as you're forced to crash land on a jungle island. The good news is you servived the plane crash. The bad news is you're on the Isle of the Dead, which is inhabited with ghoulish zombies and a host of terrifying creatures. Traverse dense jungles and treacherous caves, while exploring the local village to unlock riddles that could aid your escape. If you're lucky, you may even rehabil itate a beautiful zombie baba! MYST Journey to on island world surrealistically tinged with mystery. As you explore this world, you'll learn that MYST WOS created by man who perfected on amazing art of writing books that transport readers into fantastic worlds. Only your wits and imagination will serve to stay the course and unlock the ancient betrayal of ages past. Experience a first person point of view with no distracting controls or windows. Delight in an original soundtrack and sound effects that enhance the sense of realism. Unlike other adventure games, there's no inventory and players don't die Pilot the Navy's first line of defense, the F-14 Tomcat Experience all the excitement of a catapult launch, realistic oir to air combat and the challenge of ACROPROSE landing on pitching deck Features the latest in 3-D terrain technology derived from digitized information taken from LANDSAT geological Surveys. You'll pilot your F-14 through actual locations. In air to air combat, you'll interact with F/A 18 Hornets. A o Intruders, A7 Corsairs, and E2C Hawkeye AWACS Realistic enemy Al patterned after Soviet and Third World military doctrine. You are a squad leader of the Federated Worlds Special Forces, on elite corps of marinos woging war against the United Democratic Planets. Usa courage & insight to direct your men in dangerous missions against hostile alien races, hunter Killer robots, & merciless UDP Marauders Each marine has his own unique personality traits that determine how for he'll really go for you, 50 remember to give you orders carefully Impressions: DOS $31 Merit Software: DOS Brodorbund: IBM CD, MAC CD $49 Microproso: DOS $45 loom Lord of the Rings..... Lost in Timo MPC IBM CD-ROM IBM CD-ROM Fun CD Pack Gabriel Knight Gateway II..... Global Explorer.... Goblilins. Goblilins II... ..... Gobliiins lll....... Great Naval Battles Il........ Great Naval Battles Pack. Greens Golf CD Gunship 2000 w/Scenario.. HAM Radio Shareware.... Hand of Fate.... Harvester CD ... Hell Cab Homo MHumg INCA cunos IBM D-ROM Lyric Language French MPC Lyric language Spanish MPC ........ MPC Wizard Diagnostic Mad Dog McCree........... Man Enough...... Mantis Experimental... Mayo Clinic Family Health 1.2 Mayo Clinic Total Heart MechWarrior il......... CD HOSSRO IBM D-ROM SACAQSAN LOOK! INC Ind 164 AMERALCA 10-Yr Anthology CD... 11th Hour 20th Century Video Almanac. 7th Guest... AD&D Eye Beholder Trilogy... AD&D: Dark Sun Shattered lands... AD&D Dungeon Hack... AD&D: Genie's Curse Adventures of Willy Beamish. Aegis: Guardian of the Fleet Air Warrior AirWorks.... .. Alone in the Dark.. Animals MPC .. Art Gallery Windows.. Arthur's Teacher Trouble..... B17 & Silent Service II...... Battle Chess... Beethoven Microsoft .......... Beneath a Steel Sky..... ... Berlitz Japan Alive Berlitz Think & Talk French Better Homes Healthy Cooking Bibles & Religion Shorewore ........ Biolorge Interactive Movie.......... Blood Net.............. Blue Force... Booksholf Windows 94 Budget Guide USA 1993.... Buzz Aldrin's Space.. . CNN Time Capsule 1993 Campaign Capitol Hill.. Castles Il..... Challenge CD Pack Cinemania Movie Guide '94 Coffee Break CD Collection Comanche w/Mission 182 Command Starship ............... Companions of Xanth........ Compton's Inter. Encyclopedia Conspiracy.. Coral Reef ................ Critical Path... Curse of Enchantia...... CyberRace D&D: Fantasy Empires.. D&D: Stronghold ........ Daemonsgate Dare to Fly... Dark Legion Dark Seed.. Day of the Tentaclo Deathstar Arcade Battles Dinosaur Adventure 3-D Dinosaurs! Encyclopedia DireciPhone... Discovery CD Pack.......... Dracula Unleashed Dragon's Lair ... ........ Dragon's Lair for Reelmagic DragonSphere CD Dune............ ... Eco Quest Search for Cetus. Encarta Encyclopedia '94 F-15 Strike Eagle III................ Family Doctor MPC ............... Five on 5. Flight ATP w/Eost & West CD FreePhone............... METHIS Request Your Free America Online Membership (includes 10 Hours Online) With Any Purchase Pill Book.. Police Quest IV........... Publisher 2.0............... Quantom Gato ROMIX Comics Freex #1 ROMIX Comics Hardcoso #1.. ROMIX Comics Prime #1 Ravenloft. Rebel Assault.......... Redshift... Return of the Phantom... Return to Zork. Rich & Famous CookBook.. SVGA Harriet...... Sam & Max Hit the Rood Saurus............. Scrabble Deluxe ... Secret Weapons Luftwaffe. Secret of Monkey Island ... Select Phone... Shadow Caster CD.... Shadow of the Comet.. Short Attention Span Theatre Shuttle SimAnt Enhanced SimCity Enhanced....... SimEarth...... . Space Quest IV. Space Shuttle MPC...... Spear of Destiny Super CD Pak... Spellcasting Party Pek ...... Spirit of Excalibur.. Sporting News Pro Football Star Trek 25th Enhanced.... Star Trek: DSN . The Hunt... Star Trek: TNG Tech Manual Street Atlas 2.0 USA... Strike Commander/Tactical.. Tetris Gold Compilation...... The Patrician .................. Time Almanac of 20th Century Tony LaRussa Baseballll.. Too Many Typofonts! Shareware.... Total Distortion U.S. Atlas 4.0 UFO Close Guide ..... USA Today, The 90's Vol. 1 Ultimal. ........... ... Ultima Underworld 1 & 11... Under a Killing Moon CD Viper: Assault on the Outfit Whoro in World Deluxe ....... Wing It/Ultimo Under World Woll Pack. . . Works 3.0... World Atlas 4.0... World Circuit Grand Prix Wrath of the Gods. Lunid Lyric Lyric language IBM CD-ROM IBM CD-ROM SONO IBM CD ROM Hand of Fale Harvester CD Hell Cab Home Medical Advisor Pro. Humons.. INCA INCA 2..... ... Indiana Fale of Atlantis..... Iron Helix... J.F.K Assassination...... Japan Business Travel CD Journeyman Project... Jump Raven... .. Just Grandma & Me..... Jutland King James Elect. Bible King's Quest VI. King's Quest VI Upgrade King's Ransom... Labyrinth of Time ...... Lands of lore. Laura Bow ....... . . Lawnmower Mon.............. Legend of Kryandia...... Loisure Suit Larry VI..... Links: Pinehurst Country SVGA IBM CD-ROM MechWarrior ... Mechamander CD Mega Race Microcosm..... .......... Microsoft Baseball WIN. Microsoft Golf Windows MPC Might & Magic World of Xoon......... Monopoly Deluxe ............... .... Multimedia Dinosaurs....... Multimedia Mozart Multimedia Stravinsky... Musical Instruments .......... Myst... Naval Pack...... Newsweek Interactive #1 Newsweek Interactive #2 Nomad... Oceans Below... Omar Sharif on Bridge ...... Outpost... Oxford English Reference Penthouse Interactive..... PhoneDisc USA: Business... Photo CD Access DOS Photo CD Accoss WIN PhotoEdge Color WIN IBM PRODUCTIVITY After Dark After Dark 2.0 WIN AutoMap 3.0 WIN AutoMap Ski Resorts WIN Auto Mop Upgrade 3.0 WIN....... Betty Crocker Cookbook WIN. Click & Drag WIN.... Clipart Warehouse Corel Draw 4.0 WIN.. Delta Companion WIN Delta WIN..... "


"AIR COMBAT PACIFIC 1942 JOHNNY ROCK UNDER A KILLING MOON CD GRAVIS ANALOG PRO JOYSTICK PC Analog Joystick Fec rhon ohin Ara Gamer Interactive movie takes you to the streets of post World War III San Francisco into a Virtual World full of people and places so richly detailed you'll feel like you're actually there. Hollywood stars add credibility and the necessary talent Create a personalized Tex Murphy mavie which can be replayed at any time. Rich, original music, high quality digitized voices and sound effects make this interactive movie as exciting as it is visually stunning GRAVIS Take on the challenges that will fighter pilots faced, Performing high-speed dives upon heavily defended carriers and chasing down Wildcats, Corsairs, and Zoros. Challenge the enemy at the battles of Coral Sea, Midway, Eastern Solomon's, Santa Cruz, and the Philippine Seo. Command U.S. or Japanese forces, or experience the thrill of head to head dogfights with a friend via modem connection, Pilot any of ten historically occurote plones, each with its authentic cockpit and flight characteristics. Who shot Johnny Rock Interactive live motion picture action! It's the Rollicking '30's and someone has killed popular singer Johnny Rock in this action packed gangster whodunit. Navigate the back streets, gaming halls, funeral parlors and the dirty sections of this city to get at the clues held by a number of shady characters and solve this murder mystory. Bod guys with machine guns provide a high level of challenge Am. Laser Games: DOS-CO $38 Designed specifically for flight simulation and action arcade games, the Gravis Analog Pro includes a built-in throttle control, five fire buttons, including a trigger, eight adjustable tension setting, throttle off leature that helps to avoid conflicts with multiple joystick configu rations, six feet of cord, and a foam padded handle, Microprose DOS $49 Accoss DOS-CD $56 Advanced Graris IBM $36 FANCARD 11 M4 SHERMAN TANK Designed to dissipate heat in today's personal computers packed with odd-ins With so many of today's I/O cords using VISI chips which have a tendency to become very hot, the FanCord will eliminate overheating programs. Lowers internal temperatures by 65 degrees by circulating 27 cubic feel of air per minute over the hottest components. Keeps your hard disk or hard disk card cool. Equipped with 2 fans, and a large LED to show that the power is on. Features 12 volts and fits into any 8., 16. or 32-bit slot. Draws only a tiny amount of power. l your replacement warranty VIRTUS VR Imagine the world of virtual reality on your desktop computer Remodel your homo, office or just create fantasy worlds! Walk around in your model immediately Design your space using hundreds of included Gallery pieces FREE tutorial video included Simple drag anddrop drawing, Comes with its own set of 3D worlds: swim through an underwater sea odyssey, or live the drama of JFK's motorcade passing through the streets of Dollos. You control the action, like a flight simulator or a movie that you direct. You are in charge of your own M4 Sherman tank. Try to stay alive day by day avalding German Tigers and Panther 16th December 1944: somewhere in the Ardennes: A pala dawn is just breaking over the distant treo lined hills. Your engine roors to life as your tank pivots out of its hiding place in the tree line. The familiar squeak of the track links ocho in your cars as you move slowly down the road one more day closer to Germany. THE HORDE Hordlings are loud, red, ridiculous, and hungry. With a particular laste for your village. They swarm from all direc tions, munching your cows and your corn crop it's your turl, so fight back by building moats, rows of spike lined pits, setting up archers, or use you trusty sword Grimihwacker. Features 35 minutes of live action digitized video starring Kirk Cameron of TV's Growing Pains as Chauncey and Michael Gregory as the Evil High Chancellor. Also, available on IBM CD for $46.00 T.S.Microtocht DOS $29 Virtus: WIN, MAC $61 Deadly Games: WIN, MAC $34 Crystal Dynamics: DOS $39 IBM PRODUCTIVITY IBM RECREATION 800-228-7449 331 FAX:608-443-5645 EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 HORIO I RAT FAX:0011-508-443-5845, Xix, CompuServe ID:70007.15340 U B ADHT). , FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS 150 M &M Dark legion... Day of the Tentacle: Maniae l.. Delia V. Detroit. Dimension... Disciples of Steel...... 34 Doom .33 .CALL CALL CALL CALL Disney Collection Screen Saver ........ Forever Growing Garden CD... Gifs Galore Sharowaro CD... Holy Bible King James Version........ Home Survival Toolkit...+++++ Key CAD Complete.... Libris Brittannia Shareware CD Lotus 123 Rel 4 Upg WIN Lotus 123 Release 4 WIN... MS DOS Upgrade 6.2..... Nortoh Desktop 3.0 WIN Norton Unilities 7.0.... Office Professional 4.0........ Office Standard 4.0.. Paradox 4.5 WIN Personal Golf Analyzer... Photo CD Alaska... Photo CD Animals.......... Photo CD Auto Racing...... Photo CD Butterflies...... Photo CD Fireworks Photo CD Japan. Photo CD Porsche Racing. Photo CD Sailboats... Photo CD Underwater Photo CD WWII Aircraft.. Plan i Paradise WIN. Print Shop Deluxo ....... Print Shop Deluxe CD Ensemble Print Shop Deluxe WIN.... Procomm Plus WIN.. Publisher 2.0 WIN................ Publisher Special Occasions WIN.. QEMM 386 7......... Scenes Impressionists Collect Scenes Outer Space Collection....... Sconos Sierra Club Collection.. Star Wars Scren Saver WinFax Pro 3.0 WIN Windows 3.11..... .. Windows 3.11 Upgrade ...... Word 6.0 WIN........ .. Word for Word 6.0 WIN. WordPerfect 6.0 DOS 308 WordPerfect 6.0 WIN...... 308 AD&D. Dark Sun Shattered Lands...........48 AD&D: Dungeon Hack. AD&D: Eye of Beholder Trilogy..... ..4 AD&D. Genie's Curse APBA Baseball WIN... Aces Over Koreo... CALL Aces of Pacific 1946 WWII Miss.... Aces of the Deep... Aces of the Pacific ..46 Aces over Europe..... 40 Aces over Europe: Mission #1. Aces over Europe: Mission #2 CALL Across the Rhine.... Advanced Civilization Adven. of Willy Beamish ..... Adventure Pock. Air Combat Classics..... Air Combat Pacific 1942... Air Strike Pacific 1942...... Air Warrior... Alone in the Dark..... Alone in the Dark II. Arborea 2 Archon Ultra. .. Arctic Baron Armored Fist .............. Art of the Kill... Ashes of Empire...... Axis the Gamecheater B-17 Flying Fortress Balor of The Evil Eye ..... Barkley Basketball Baseball Card Collector WIN Battle Chest 4000 SVGA Bottle Chess 4000 WIN Battle Chess WIN... Battle Cruiser 3000AD........ Bottles of Destiny Beothoven II. Betrayal at Krondor Bicycle Bridgo WIN ....... Bicycle Poker WIN......... Blake Stone....... Blood Net...... Blue & the Gray....... Blue Force: The Next of Kin. Bram Stoker's Dracula.... Breach 3..... . Bra Hull Hockey Brutal Sports Football Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space... Coesar ... Caesars Palace WIN Campaign II.... Cannon Fodder .......... Captive 2: liberation..... Captive 2: Liberation... Captive 2: Liberation Card Shop Plus Carrier Strike........... Carriers at War II. Castle Conquest Castles I: Siege & Conquest Celtis Talos: Balor Evil Eyo... Challenge of the 5 Realms.... Chessmaster 4 WIN Civilization Civilization II. Civilization WIN . Clash of Steel: WWII 1939 Classic 5 WIN Classics Fun Pack WIN Coaster ... .... Cobra Mission.......... Cognito WIN.... Comanchu & Mission Disk #1 Comanche: Mission Disk Comanche: Mission Disk II Combat Classics II Command HQ Classic... Command Starship........... Companions of Xanth Conquered Kingdoms Conquered Kingdoms Scenario ...... Crosswords Deluxe WIN.... Cyber GO............... Cyber Race CyberSpace..... D Day: Operation Overlord........... D&D: Fantasy Empires........ D&D. Stronghold ...... . D-Day: The Beginning of End Daemonsgate.... . Dagger of Amon Ra, Laura Bow II.... IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION 4.40 El Fish... .CALL 36 CALL 42 Doom Episode .. Dragon Knight III DreamWeb....... .. Dune .............. Dune Il..... Dungeon Master .... Earth Invasion Arcade WIN Eco Quest ll: Rainfores! Eight Ball Doluxo........... Elder Scrolls: Voll Arena... Empire Deluxe........... Empire Deluxe Scenario...... Empire Deluxe WIN..... Eternam..... Evasive Action..... Evosive Action: Duel for Sky...... Even More Incredible Machines..... F. 14 Floot Delunder....... F-15 Strike Eagle Il Classic..... F-15 Strike Eagle Ill.............. F.19 Stealth Fighter Classic ... Falcon 3.0 Falcon 4.0.......... ..... Falcon FA-18 Hornet........ Falcan: Mig 29/Deadly Adversary Falcon: Operation Fight Tiger... Fast Action Pag: 13 WIN FlashBack.. Flat Top... Flight Adventure 825. Flight Light Flight Screen Sover... Flight Sim: Los Vegos. Flight Sim: New York Scenery Flight Sim: Oregon..... Flight Sim: Paris Scenery....... Flight Sim: San Francisco... Flight Sim: Washington D.C. Flight Simulator 5.0.... Flight Simulator Flight Shop... Flight Simulator Guide... 39 Flight Simulator Toolkit..... Flying Circus.............. Forgotten Castle .......... Formula One Grand Prix 2 Four Play Freddy Phorkos......... Front Page Sports Footboll Pro Frontier Elite II. Game Maker 2.0..... ... Gary Grigsby's Wer in Russia.... Gatoway ........ Geekwad Games of the Galaxy Genghis Khan II............ Gettysburg WIN................ Giga Games Shareware CD Global Dominations. Global Response. Goblins.......... Goblilins III ..... Goblins Il The Prince Buffoon Grand Slam Bridge II WIN Grandest Fleet.. Great Naval Battles Il... Great Naval Battles Pack Great War HAWC Hand of Fate Kyrandia II... Hannibal .......... HardBall HardBall Ill Big League Parks.............. HardBall Ill Diamond Collect..... HordBall Ill Player Disk... HardBall i... Harpoon II................. Head Cooch Football WIN...... Heavy Hockey................. Heirs to the Throne............ High Command..... Hayles Book of Game 1 Classic......... Human's Like You've Never Soon... Human's: Insult to Injury... INCA. INCA 2.. .. Incredible Toons ........ Indiana Jones Fale of Atlantis..... Indy Car Racing Innocent Until Cought... Isle of the Dead .. . Jack Nicklaus Contest Tour....... NONSW IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION CALI 40 Circle Reader Service #55 "


"STAR TREK: COMPUTER Express THRUSTMASTER WEAPONS MARK II User program mable throttle and weapons Functions. Compatible with 5 pin keyboard connectors. Program your joystick for any current or future game. Your gaming peripherals fjoystick and WCS) will be instantly compatible with current or future games Features LED lighting system indicates when certain functions are activated; Screw. down connector Handle moves fore and aft for throule control: Sturdy sevenfoot cables: Allows joystick programmobility through joystick interface, Digital/Analog mode toggle switch: User programmable functions, One year warranty STAR TREK COLLECTIBLES GUIDE CD The CD-ROM GREENBERGS version of Greenberg's Guido to Star Trek Collectibles which Includes all three COLLECTIBLES volumes. Designed for all types of Star Trek collectors and enthusiasts! Encyclopedia style format combined with a sophisticated image text database M for easier reading and quick reference, 4 Browse from over 400 color and black & white photos of collectibles from the original Star Trek TV series, six Star Trek movies and the current Star Trek: The Next Generation TV. Series Detailed listings for over 3000 collectibles, including the issue and current market prices. Need to learn about a Tricorder made by Mego? Just click and browse! MCS: DOS-CD Since 1985 800-228-7449EXT TOLL FREE ORDER LINE $92 $32 Thrustmaster IBM MORPHMAN CD  HACKER CHRONICLES CD Over 12 years in the making! Contains stories of how they did it, actual break ins, arrests and prosecutions. Most articles wore written by the actual people who committed these acts. Access articles and software with an easy to use menu system Areas of information include Phone Phreaking. Computer Hackets, Satellite Communications, and \"Underground\" General Information. Many subjects all very technical in nature and explained in detail, such as ATM's, credit cards, voice mail, etc. You cre the super hero Morphmon and it's your job to rescue the kidnapped Professor, destroy scien. tilic oxr ments, and blow up a research fortress. The world is depending on you and your Morph technology to accomplish this task before the experiments reach civilization. Your only weapons are your wit and the molecular sampler on your sleeve that allows you to alter your own molecular structure and that of objects Ground you. Features realistic 3D animation with Microsoft Video for Windows. Realistic 3D explosions, disintegrations, glowing and other special effects seen only in movios. FLIGHT SIMULATOR 5.0 Feel the thrill of full throttle Flight with photo-realistic scenery and authentic Flight sounds. Take control of a detail instrument panel, digitized from actual aircraft Find ou! where you are and identity destinations worldwide with the longitude and latitude coordinate system. Try your hand o piloting the Cessna 182 RG, Learjet 35A, Schweizer 2-32 sailplane, und vintage Sopwith Camel. Fool right at home in the cockpit, whether you're now lo flying or an experienced pilot, with the improved intorface Microsoft DOS GAMEMAKER 2.0 Uses o graphical interface to let you croate adventure and arcade-style gomes in 256 color VGA graphics without programming The games you create are only limited by your imagination, Comes with a large selection of ready mode basic elements such as hero characters, monsters, weapons, landscapes and more Create full screen scrolling scenes completo with background animation. Import graphic images into games, and include Sound Blaster compatible music and digitized sounds, Plus you'll enjoy the sample games included. $24 $44 528 Dynamic Dimensions: DOS-CD S&S Publishing: DOS-CD Recreational Softwaro Designs: DOS NE IBM RECREATION 24 NFL '94. NFL '94 WIN......... NFL Coaches Football NFL Pro League Football NHL Hockey '94.... Nano Tank.... Nomad.... Open Dialogue WIN ... Operation Combat 2... Origamo..... Outpost IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION Realms of Atkania Red Baron....... Red Baron Mission Builder Red Crystal Red Storm Rising Classic.... Remind Me... Return of the Phantom..... Return to Zork................. Rise of the Robots.. . Road & Track Grand Prix... Road to the Final 22. IBM RECREATION Oxyd... PGA Tour Golf II..... Pacific Strike KUSSion Six Pack WIN SSN 21 Sea Woli. 46 Per Per! Pha. Pirald Pool Popi Pow Pow Print Prive Prive Prive Toll Free Order Line: (800) 228-7449 :36 ..20 CALI Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf....... Jack Nicklaus Signature Tout 1.... Jagged Alliance.... Jeopardy Deluxe............... Jeopardy Deluxe WIN..... Jeopardy Sports Ed. WIN Jeopardy Sports Edition .... Jeopardy with Alex Jeopardy with Alex Trebeck WIN Jot Pack Joe Montana Football Jump Jet.. Jurassic Park... Kasparov's Gombit. Kid Pix King's Quest V.VGA King Quest VI... King's Ransom........... Kingdoms of Germany.... Kingmaker ........... Kings Table.. Kronolog... Kyo Deluxe... Lands of Lorem Leather Goddesses of Phobos Il Legacy Realm of Terror Legend of Kyrandio..... Leisure Suit Carry 1... Leisure Sult Larry V Leisure Suit Larry VI.......... Lemmings.... Lemmings II....... Links 386 Pro.. . Links: Banff Springs SVGA Links: Bellroy Course SVGA..... Links: Castle Pines Course...... Links. Firestone Course SVGA, Links: Innsbrook Course SVGA links: Mauna Kea Course SVGA Links: Pinehurst Country SVGA.... Lord Of The Rings/Two Towers.... Lords of Midnight.. . Lost Treasures of Infocom I... Lost Treasures of Infocom II......... Lost Vikings.. Lost in Time. Lucas Arts Classic Collection........ Lucky's Casino Adventure ...... Lure of the Temptress.... M4 Sherman Tank Magician's Castlo.......... Master of Orion...... MechWarrior II MechWarrior II Add On.. Mechamander Merchant Prince......... Metal & lace... Michael Jordan Flight... Microleague Baseball/Football Microsoft Arcade WIN............. Microsoft Space Simulator .... Mig 29 Stand Alone Version...... Might & Magic Clouds of Xeon ........... Might & Magic DarkSide of Xeen..... Mike Ditka Football..... Miracle Piano Teaching System.. Monopoly Deluxe ............ More Inciedible Machines More Vegos Gomes WIN Mortal Combat Now Available 7 Days A Week For Your Convenience Space Ques! V Spear Of Destiny Mission 2... Spear of Destiny .......... Spear of Destiny Mission 3 Spectre VR..... Speed Racer Challenge Racer X Spellcasting Party Pak Spiral Arm... Sports Works Siar Reach Star Trek: 25th Anniversary..... Star Trek: DSN . The Hunt Star Trek: Judgment Rites....... .33 Star Trek: Starfleet Academy..... CALL Star Trek: The Next Generation ....... Star Wars Chess................ Stonekeep Street Fighter .......... Strike Commander.... Strike Commander Speech Pack ..... Strike Commander Tactical #1 Strike Squad ........................ .... ..36 Subwar 2050 ....... Superhero: league of Hoboken Syndicate...... Syndicate. American Revolution........ System Shock...... T2 The Arcade Game TFX: Tactical Fighter... The Dig The Patrician Theatre of Death Third Reich... Tio Fighter Space Combal..... Tony LaRussa Baseball Tony LaRussa II: 1993 Players...... Tony lakussa II: AL&NL Stadiums... Tony LaRussa Il Fantasy Draft Tornado... Tower............. .... . UFO Enemy Unknown ....... Ultima Underworld.. . Ultima Underworld : Labyrinth Ultima VII Part 2: Serpent Isle ........ Ultima VII Part 2: Silver Seed.... Ultima VII: Forge Virtue............. Ultima VII: The Black Gate ................. Ultima VIII Pogon... Ultima VII: Pagan Speech Pak.. Ultimate Domain.................. Ultrabots..... ... . Unnatural Selection............ Unnecessary Roughness........ V for Victory Pak... Vegas Games WIN Victory at Se... Vikings: Fields of Conquest Virtus VR WIN WW2 Air Force Commander WWII Pack............ Walls of Rome... W arlords ll ........... Warpoint. Warriors of legend.... Washington D.C. Scenery ...... Wheel of Fortune Deluxe WIN. When Two Worlds Wor.. Wing Commander Academy...... Wing Commander II w/Speech Wing Commander lll.. & Prog QEN QUC Quc Que Que Raili Rail Outpost....................... Oxyd..... PGA Tour Golf I... Pacific Strike ...... Pacific Strike Speech Disk Pacific War... Perfect General II. Perfect General Trilogy Phantasmagorio. Pirates! Gold........ Police Quest IV... Poal Shark Populous II..... Power Gomell................ Powermanger.............. Prince of Persia 11 ............ Privatoer Privateer Operations 2 ................... Privateer Righteous Fire Addon. Privateer Speech Pack Prophecy QEMM 386 Game Pack 3 Quarter Polo Quest for Glory ... Quest for Glory Ill........ Quest for Glory IV........ Railroad Tycoon Classic Railroad Tycoon Deluxe Rally: The Final Round...... Ravenloit... Reach for the Skies.. Real Weather Pilot.... CALL CALL Road to the Final Four 2 Romance Three Kingdoms II.... Rome: Pathway to Power .... Royal Flush..... Roles of Engagement il... Russian Six Pack Russian Six Pack WIN SSN 21: Sea Woll. SVGA Harrier Sam & Max Hit the Road Seal Team Secret of Monkey Island I Seven Cilies of Gold.. Shadow Castor Shadow of the Comet 2 Silent Service ll Classic..... SimAnt WIN............... SimCity 2000. SimCity 2000 Scenario l... SimCity 2000 WIN SimCity Classic SimCity Classic WIN..... SimEarth WIN SimFarm..... Simtife WIN.......... .. Simcity 2000: Great Disasters Simon the Sorcerer... Smokin' Guns. Solitaire WIN..... .... Solitaire's Journey WIN Space Hulk Space Quest IV...... CALL IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION "


"FRONTIER AXIS THE GAMECHEATER Allows you to cheat almost all of the popular computer games. Supported games include: Prince of Persia, Lemmings, Hellcats, PGA Tour Goli. Spectre SimCity, Street Fighter II. Spear of Destiny Ultima VI, X-Wing. Civilization and many more. Overrides predefined game functions and parameters to give you more of what you need for each specific game. Add more time, money, ammo, shields, lives, or whatever else your favorite game requires. You could almost be immortall Mac version $33 HAND OF FATE Rejoin the LARISEER adventure in Kyrandia Il as Zonthia, the youngest and most impulsive of the THE LAND OF 'ATE Kyrgndian. Mystics Travel though swamps, farms, coastal towns and previously uncharted lands of Kyrandia while solving mysteries and deciphering puzzles along the way.. Adventure to the center of the earth and beyond to save the land from a curse that has been laid upon it. Fresh graphics and enticing animation with extensive sound effects and luxurious musical scores. Also, available on floppy disk for $31.00. FRONTIER ELITE 11 DAVID MARI NE Take on the role of a space trader known to moonlight as an intergalactic mercenary and watch the universe unfold before you very eyes. Vos ELITE creas of the galaxy remain unexplored ond with many thousands of worlds now settled in the cosmos, a rich and varied life of adventure awaits. All the planets and moons of the star system are generated in accordance with the current theories of planet formation. Play the gome in a variety of ways, including manning your spacecraft through 82 basic missions, or play without risking the missions at all RISE OF THE ROBOTS Your cyborg is the last hope to save mankind from a terrorizing robot which has overthrown a military and indus. trial robotics plant In o desperate attempt to save the building, the owners of the complex hove sent in an unormed Cyborg. Players control the cyborg in battles against enemy robots. As you progress through each floor of the massive Electorcorp building, you'll encounter more technologically advanced robot enemies. In the two player game choose which robot to be. Learn each robot's unique moves and powers!! Baseline Publishing: DOS $36 Virgin Interactives IBM CD $43 Gametala DOS $36 Accolade DOS $39 KEYBOARD COMMANDER TEMPLATES High quality, fullcolor keyboard overlays for flight simulators will turn any AT101 keyboard into a 3. D looking control panel\" Includes oll key commands in a logical layout und legend boxes for cockpit displays. Available for MS FS 5.0, FALCON 3.0. MIG 29. STRIKE COMMANDER, ATP, XWING, COMANCHE, F 15 III, ACES OF PACIFIC. JETFIGHTER, SECRET WEAPONS, B-17. GUNSHIP, ACES OVER EUROPE, TORNADO and more! Ask about Falcon 3.0's Keyboard & Utility bundles! Quantity Pricing: 2 @ $21.50 3 @ $30.00, any 4 or more only 59.25 each! Keyboard Commander Corp CARRIERS AT WAR II CARRIERS AT WAR II TRATROICITUDIES LOVE CARRIERS operation in AT WAR Southeast Asia 1936-1946. This sequel to the hugely Successful CARRIERS AT WAR uses a much improved version of the original mechanics Spons a decade that changed the world. Offers more tension, more excitement, tougher opponents and more dramatic Carrier battles. The uncertainty of war is vividly recreated. Eight scenarios included some hypothetical, others controversial. Explore all aspects of tactical and strategic combat between Japan and the United States and Great Britain OUTPOST It's 50 years from now and Earth has been destroyed. You're in command of our latest nuclear fusion space explo ration technology You must use it to discover new worlds and rebuild human civilization in nearby planetary systems. After successfully estab lishing your colony, keep your colonists alive and healthy while competing against rebel colonies for vital resources. Based on current NASA research in planetary science, robotics, terraforming and interstellar spacecraft designs in this sophisticated simulation of interstellar colonization BEAT THE HOUSE WINDOWS NOW AVAILABLE FOR WINDOWS Prepare yourself for a casino gaming experience! Includes the 100 poge study guide, Bear the House Companion Featuring slot machinos, blackjack roulette, video poker and crops. Beginners will learn the rules and terminology of casino play. Seasoned gamblers are schooled in strategic counting bachniques as well as profitable betting strategies. One to four people can play ogainst each other, or computer players will fill the empty seats. Tired of playing by the rules? Then turn off the coach and play with rockless abandon. Anyone can be a High Roller when they know how to \"Beat The House! Splrit of Discovery: DOS, WIN HORISO $13 SSG: DOS $39 Slarrat DOS, IBM CD $39 MACINTOSH TITLES MACINTOSH TITLES 40 SimCity 2000 Scenario .............. SimCity Classic SimLife Simcity 2000: Great Disasters..... Specte VR CD Star Trek 25th Anniversary.... Star Trek: DSNThe Hunt... Star Trek OSN . The Hunt CD Star Trek: TNG Tech Manual CD Star Wars Screen Saver .......... Street Atlas USA CD............ Strip Poker Pro #1 Data Disk Strip Poker Pro #6 Data Disk Strip Poker Professional Sword of Sodon .. The 11th Hour CD Thrustmaster Flight Cont. MK1 Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals... Thrustmaster Weapon Markll.......... Thunderstick ADB................. Triston MAC LC/MACII..... V for Victory Pak... Victory at Sea............. ............... Viper Assault on the Outfit Virtus VR. .. Wheel of Fortune w/Vanna White...... Wrath of the Gods CD... EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 331 FAX:508-443-5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 B*0*8.00 *15C FAX:0011-508-443-5845 XX.CompuServeID: 70007.153479 Balanta E il tuo 6 2786% HLUT. FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS ..20 29 29 104 104 43 55 ..489 629 . 480 7th Guest CD... A Hard Days Night: Beatles CD Alone in the Dark.... American Civil War III... Art Gallery CD Astrochase.............. AutoMap. Axis the Gamecheater BodyWorks 3.0 Bookshelf '94 CD .......... CNN Time Capsule 1993 CD Caesar ........... Caesars Palace ..... Carriers Al War Costles ........ Chuck Yeager Air Combat Civilization Coral Reef Cyber Race Dare to Fly CD... Dark Seed. Detroit Dracula Unleashed CD. Empire Deluxe.... F. 117A Stealth Fighter Flight Commander Flight Sim: Japan Scenery Flight Simulator 4.0....... Gabriel Knight...... Hell Cob CD... Indiana fate of Atlantis CD. Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis Iron Helix CD. Jeopardy Sports Edition...... Jeopardy with Alex Trebeck JourneyMan Project CD Jump Raven CD............... King's Quest VI... Lawnmower Man CD legend of Kryandia CD Legend of Kyrandio.... Leisure Suit Lorry VI...... Lunicus CD... M4 Sherman Tank ......... Mac Attack Mac Full O'Humans............ Mario Teaches Typing Maria is Missing... Micro Kitchen Companion '94... Micro Kitchen Companion 94 CD... More Incredible Machines. Myst CD ........ Oceans Below CD Oxyd Magnum PGA Tour Golf ........... Pathway into Darkness Planetary Taxi CD. Police Quest IV........ Populous....... Powermonger Print Shop Deluxe Pro Audio Studio 16LC.. Quest for Glory Quicken 4.0.... Railroad Tycoon... Redshift CD.... . Royal Flush.. Short Attention Theatre CD SimAnt... SimCity 2000................ MULTIMEDIA HARDWARE MULTIMEDIA HARDWARE $4 104 Flight Stick Flight Stick Pro........... GomeCard Ill Automatic...... Gameport 2000 Up to GOMEZ Gravis Analog Pro Joystick Gravis Eliminator Card Gravis Moc Gamepad ...... Gravis MouseStick'll MAC Gravis PC Gamepad........... Thrustmaster ACM Game Card.... Thrustmaster Flight Control... Thrustmaster Formula 1 Thrustmaster Pro Flight........... Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals............. Virtual Pilot.. . ........... Y Cable for 2 Joysticks..... ........ AR Partner 570 Speaker System ... Altee ACS100 Speakers Alec ACS200 Speakers.... Koss HD-4 Speakers..... Koss HD 6 MPC Speakers.... Labtec CS 1000 Speakers... Labtec CS-180 Shielded Speaker Labtec CS550 Speakers Labtec CS-800 Speakers...... Lobtec CS 900 Speakers.. 3028-AT16 Int 240ms 5028 AT 16 Ext 240ms... 5028 MVPAS16 Ext. 240ms... . 645 CDU33A/L CD Complete Kit............... CDU33A/LCD Starter Kit.. ...... DigitalEdge CD Mult. Kit. 745 Discovery Int. Dbl. 16 bit Kit 453 Fusion Double CD Internal kit................493 Memphis Multimedia Upgrade Kit...... 590 MultiSpin 3XE Ext. 195ms... MultiSpin 3X1 Int. 195ms ...... 529 MultiSpin 3XP Portable 195ms...... OmniCD Upgrade Kit Pro 16 ll Multimedia Kit...... 503 Pro 16 lll Triple Speed Kit Reelmagic CD-ROM Kit Rena CD ROM Portable Player.... Audio Magician Plus 16........... Geavis Ultrasound Gravis Ultrasound Midi Adapter Port Able Sound Plus................... Pro Audio 16 Basic......... Pro Audio Studio 16 .... Pro Audio Studio 16XL .... Pro AudioSpectrum 16/US Atlas Reelmagic Multimedia Playback Sound Blaster 16 Basic......... Sound Blaster 16 MCD. Sound Blastet 16 MCD ASP Sound Blaster 16 SCSI2... 185 A CALI ...52 43 Airborne Ranger SNES..... Aladdin SEGA... Art of Fighting SNES... Battle Chess 3DO Blades of Vengeance SEGA Bubsy in Claws SEGA Bubly in Claws SNES CPU Bach 3DO.............. Cliffhanger SEGA...... Durgeon Master SNES... Escape from Monster Manor 3DO. Eternal Champions SEGA F.15 Strike Eagle II SEGA Final Fight 2 SNES. Hardball III SNES... John Madden NFL '94 3DO John Madden NFL '94 SEGA John Madden NFL '94 SNES...... Jungle Striko SEGA Jurassic Park SEGA lawnmower Man SNES.. Lemmings 3DO......... MIBPA Baseball SNES Mad Dog McCree 3DO Metal Morines SNES. Micro Machines SEGA Mortal Combat SNES Mortal Kombol SEGA Mutant League Football SEGA Mutant league Hockey SEGA... NBA Showdown 94 SEGA NHL94 SEGA NHL '94 SNES... Normy's Beach SEGA Oceans Below 3DO... Pelel Soccer SNES Pirates! Gold SEGA RoboCop vs. Terminator ..... Shining Force SEGA... Sonic the Hedgehog 3 SEGA Space Shuttle 3DO . Street Fighter I SEGA......... MACINTOSH TITLES SEGA SNES/3DO CALL CALL CALL ..46 B00 228.7449 Orders Only, 508 443 6125 all other business. Sales Dept. Hours Monday Friday BAM till 8PM Saturday & Sunday 10AM till SPM All other Business Monday Friday 9AM till 5PM Most orders ship within 24 hours. Temporary shortages are normally filled within 10 days. Books, Memory chips, and some electronic components are not returnable. We ship only to verified billing addresses International orders welcome. Airborne Express Shipping charges $7 por order up to 6 lbs, $1 per ib. above 6 lbs. UPS ground handling chargo-$5 per order. Actual freight charges apply for computers, and disks, Bernoulli's, tape back-ups, printers, Multimedia kits, monitors, etc. Alaska, Hawaii, outsido continental U.S. APO/FPO call for information. Prices subject to change without notice. Some product not VISA Available outside the U.S. Please call for more information Not responsible for errors or omissions. Mastercard, Visa, Discover, Amencan Express, prepaid orders, purchase orders, wire transfer, cash and cashiers check accepted Personal and Company checks allow 14 days to clear. No surcharge for credit card orders. Your credit card is not charged until the merchandise is shipped. Wo check for stolen credit cards. Al returns for credit, ropar, or exchange must have a return authorization number. Returned orders or ordered wrong items are subject to a 15% restodung fee. We ship latest versions of software available. Over nine years of service. Thousands of satisfied customers. Send your Fax today! All quotes answered immediately Product covered by manufacturer's warranty. Defective tems replaced immediately. All item numbers represent35 Poppy, except where noted Educational government and corporate purchase orders welcome 286 CALL 44 53 Circle Reader Service #55 "


"REVIEW Blood, Guts and Petrol Avalon Hill's Operation Crusader Is An Oasis In A Wargame Desert by Terry Lee Coleman File Options Staff Dulles Planning Phone V Then I moved to California to join worlds. Now, Keith Zabalaoui and his boardgame. With the hexgrid option turned the CGW staff, I didn't look forAtomic Games crew does have access to those on, you almost feel as if you could move units ward to unpacking-until I got to Avalon Hill classics. The union which seemed by hand, rather than with the mouse. Aside the boxes (more numerous than I'll admit) so obvious and so natural has finally taken from their familiarity, cach unit counter is a that held my game collection. As I carefully place. Indeed, the union has already been so repository of information, with a single click pulled out the games and placed them on the fertile that, after one look at Operation Crushowing its current status. Units can be shelf, I came across an old friend, Avalon sader, you may pinch yourself to see if you're \"framed\" with different colors to show either Hill's Afrika Korps. Though showing its age, dreaming. The last time Rommel was portheir unit type, distance from headquarters, it looked no less beautiful than the day I trayed so well, James Mason was still on the supply state, organization (or lack thereof) bought it, my first wargame. The game had big screen. and even fatigue. Finally, units may be discollected little dust, since I always turn to this played with either military or pictorial symold favorite whenever I need my Desert Fox A Sea Of Sand bols, and like their board wargame brethren, fix. For years, I have hoped that Avalon Hill Rodger MacGowan, the renowned warunits may stack. would release a computer game that captured game artist who designed so many great packThe toolbar included is much easier to use the grand sweep of desert warfare half as well age illustrations, is doing work for someone than those of similar games, such as High else these days, but the cover art Command, but the results are more beneficial DmS9220 uses imagery reminiscent of his ilto the gamer. Some items are chrome, such as lustrative prowess. Strong and colwhen you bring up the map of the Mediterorful, it fits in well with the AH ranean Theatre, but still offer a welcome style and entices the gamer before sense of perspective. The weather is simulated BY SI QUI pole 1 the box is even opened. Afterwonderfully with both a forecast and the DOO wards, all you have to look forward current weather right at the gamer's fingerto is sand—but what sand! A group tips. Other options allow for instant location effort berween Zabalaoui, AH of leaders or a quick check of victory status. graphics ace Charlie Kibler and The most unique item on the toolbar is the others transforms the lifeless desert HQ Button, where players may check supply 09 into a sand painting. The subtle tonnage, stockpiles, and attach units to diftouch of exotic place names adds to ferent HQs cach morning. With the ability ode the feel that you really are in the to display all the HQs at once, this option desolate terrain between Tobruk justifies the toolbar by itself. as Afrika Korps. But, despite their vast gaming and El Aghelia. knowledge, computer games from The Hill The terrain features escarpments, wadis, Waltzing Matildas have previously been unsuccessful, to put it bunkers and the rocky hammada, all taken mildly. Thankfully, all the care that went into the from aerial photographs and British Army art and interface is paralleled by the strength Indeed, it seemed ironic that a developer archival topographic maps. Page after page of called Atomic Games was creating games for terrain descriptions give even the novice Operation Crusader a company called Three-Sixty that looked gamer a good understanding of how the terlike just the kind of natural union between rain affects the game. Unlike V For V, where SYSTEM: Mac, (IBM forthcoming) boardgames and computer games for which I information was often overwhelming, Cru$59.95 REQUIREMENTS: System 7, 10MB hard drive space, mouse had been hoping. If only, I dreamed, the saderoffers enough instruction to add to play, # OF PLAYERS: 1-2 (modem and e-mail) DESIGNERS: creators of the V for Victory series could get Atomic Games rather than detract from it. PUBLISHER: The Avalon Hill Game Company hold of some of those classic Avalon Hill The units look very much like-brace (410) 254-9200 designs, then we would have the best of both yourself-counters from an Avalon Hill DOW FOR PRICE: Baltimore, MD Page 146 Computer Gaming World "


"$Brian Vodnik's Kingdoms Kingdoms Die of Germania \"IITTITITUI 09N5X21 635X Vermane  1-6 Players, 196 Territories Features  7 Troop types and catapults  5 Difficulty levels with handicapping Ratings from 520+  Control of up to 20 armies and New England users group 5 flotillas per kingdom, 5 Castle types members  Toggle each kingdom between human, Inter 99% computer, and off Playa  Resource management of food, wood, Girap 99 stone, iron  End of turn checking for movable armies Rating Overall  Artificial intelligence (AI) that makes extremely Artificial Intelligence: 979 tough computer opponents at the higher Hold-interest: 95 difficulty levels 95%  Full sound and music support for SoundBlaster and others  Quick siege, QuickmoveTM and Double QuickmoveTM which greatly speeds up the computer's turn  Quick and easy food shortage/crop increase notification for faster turns + Dispatch/Gather troops to or from castle garrisons to adjacent territories  Immediate/Delayed catapult construction option  Beautifully HAND-DRAWN graphics  Simple point and click interface to an intricate and detailed game Brian Vodnik's istina lking pinions on et TS tava 95% Dating Owatt LOONITOR CANTO The BEST Medieval Strategy Game Series made. Period. Bealism entertainment Vikings ITM and Kindgoms of GermanyTM are available for IBM. Realism Entertainment, Inc. 6N522 Pine Street Bensenville, IL 60106 (708) 595-7487 VIKINGS ITM and Kingdoms of Germany are trademarks of Realism Entertainment, Inc. 1994 Realism Entertainment, Inc. All Rights Reserved Worldwide. \"The video game perfectionists... detalls, detalls detalls. Circle Reader Service #106 "


"File Options Staff Outles Planning Phese of the gameplay. When I play a Fly Air Alexandria WWII desert wargame, I expect fluidity of movement. Crusader Air operations are very similar to V For V. gives four different movement opMert CEPAT but have the advantage of being firmly intetions. The ever-helpful Executive grated into the overall design. The fog-of-war Officer will move units Automatelement is tied directly to how well each side ically, or you may choose to move is performing in the air campaign. If you them yourself. Strategic moveachieve air superiority, your units can see ment is similar to most wargames, farther, and you will have earlier warnings of allowing for quick movement along trails and roads, while stayimpending attacks. Conversely, if you fritter ing out of contact with the enemy. away your air units you may find yourself Moving Tactically retains combat blinded by more than a sandstorm. Air miseffectiveness, but at a cost in mosions consist of the classic ground support bility. Through the HQ button, bombardments along with interdiction of enhere where Crusader really breaks new units can move by division, recommended for ground. Eric Young and Keith Zabalaoui emy units, restricting their supply and movelarge offensives. Movement is certainly not show the importance of supply to the camment. dull; as with the Limited Intelligence option, paign, but in an unobtrusive manner. The Sending planes on missions is pretty much units may run into hidden enemies long beuden enemies long beinterface shows visually how supply limits a click-and-go affair, but your trusty comfore reaching their intended destination. ation movement, leaving you to concentrate on puter Executive Officer may ground squadUnlike many WWII games, desert warfare how to move those Panzers out of Sollum. As rons for refit—often without any input from is well-suited to fog-of-war rules. The fluidity you move units, they come into contact with you. In addition to fatigue, air combat effecof the overall situation resembles a naval camthe enemy, who pops up on the screen at tiveness varies significantly with morale and paign more than a series of land actions. generally inappropriate times. Thus, with a with weather. Those would-be Luftflotte Much of Rommel's success was his unpresingle game mechanic, the AI takes on the Commandants who wish for clear blue skies dictability, invariably showing up at the role of a wily opponent, playing cat-andmay find themselves grounded by Anti-Air wrong place, at least for the Allies. As the mouse with your Matilda ranks outside of units, who also appreciate good weather. All British became more adept at disguising their Tobruk. As a two-player game (either by in all, it's a good system that profits from its movements, the tide began to turn, and it is modem or e-mail), the tension is exquisite directness and lack of fluff. A Rommel Perspective ield Marshall Irwin Rommel was marquee deal more could have been done to make this of coordinating campaigns with armored colmaterial for wargames long before Operainteresting and entertaining without worrying umns in the vast sea of sands. Despite some tion Crusader. Flamboyant, daring and about the serious Wargame angle. Instead, Desert crrata, the game has held up well as a campaign imaginative, he was respected by warriors on both Fox is a typical example of a great game title study and is fairly entertaining, even though the sides of the conflict. Sifting through the sands of looking in vain for a decent game system, a game lacks graphics. computer games gone by, we find that capturing problem which sadly is as prevalent today as it Desert-style fog of war also worked rather well Rommel's charisma has at times seemed almost was 10 years ago. for Strategic Studies Group's Rommel: Battles for as difficult as facing the great general himself in One of the biggest disappointments in comNorth Africa, which used the Battlefront engine. combat... puter wargaming was GDW's epic Rommel: BatThe Battlefront system emphasized command Among early efforts, Chuck Kroegel's Knights tles For Tobruk. One of the greatest designers of perspective and limited intelligence. Control of the Desert (1983) garnered a lot of attention, board wargaming, Frank Chadwick, did the refreaks resented the system's use of AI routines to winning Best Computer Game from the Game search and design. This was a game that set out to simulate subordinate commanders and hated the Manufacturers Association. Despite the game's establish a new standard for computer wargames, inability to step into play from an almost divine relatively high sales and some fine packaging for and it did—but not how GDW intended. The perspective, but the system seemed even more the era (including excellent cover art), CGW and game tried to be detailed on both tactical and justified in Rommel: Battles for North Africa beits readers were put off by the awkward interface. operational levels, losing its focus on both counts. cause the scenarios included were designed to Desert games should be brisk affairs, yet Knights The rules for air combat and supply are almost too simulate the amount of confusion and miscomlacked any sense of ebb-and-flow, being largely intricate for even a vereran wargamer to decipher. munication to be found in the desert war. static and boring. In a recent interview with Worst of all, the game failed to showcase many of Of all the games to portray (or betray) Romdeveloper David Landrcy (CGW # 116), he rethe strengths of the computer, while simultaneously mel, however, the most successful prior to Operamarked that the game had not aged well. Both lacking similarities to desert board wargames. tion Crusader was Decision in the Desert from Landrcy and Kroegel went on to fame (if not A company which can never be accused of MicroProse. Sid Meier worked his usual magic fortune), designing SSI's Battles of Napoleon and lacking focus is Simulations Canada. Targeting with gameplay, and Ed Bever provided a solid various American Civil War games. a more mature audience, their games feature research base upon which Sid could draw. The end At the other end of the spectrum was Accohistorical command restrictions and fog-of-war, result was a wonderfully entertaining game which lade's Desert Fox (1985), which tried to capture Normally seen in naval wargames, this approach still manages to convey a good sense of the revoluthe excitement of desert warfare with arcade se worked quite well in Rommel at Gazala (1987) tionary impact Rommel had on mechanized warquences. Interesting, but then they had to spoil and Rommel at El Alamein (1988), since desert fare. As with most of Sid's games, Decision proved it all by trying to layer a simulation on top of the tank warfare often resembles surface combat at that good game design can often outlast breathtakgame. While it is largely unfair to criticize a game sea. Designer Stephen St. John correctly emphaing graphics and sound something that players of which had only 64K with which to work, a great sized the importance of supply and the difficulty Sid Meier's Civilization certainly take to heart. Page 148 Computer Gaming World "


"The Most Realistic Tennis Simulation Ever Created for the PC... Innerprise Software For the Ultimate Challenge!  Choose from simulation mode, arcade mode, or automatic mode.  Win P.T.A. points and cups, just like Pro Tennis.  Take a course with an experienced trainer or play against the automatic ball throwing machine.  Choose different tournaments and matches for your season.  Split screen or full screen play.  Training mode and practice mode allow beginners to improve their play.  Realistic graphics with superb action play and animation.  One or two players with the use of one or two screens using double camera option. Available for IBM PC & compatibles Innerprise Software 1994 Innerprise Software, Inc. All rights reserved. Innerprise Software, 10815 Beaver Dam Road, Suite 11, Hunt Valley, MD 21030/410-785-2266 Circle Reader Service #78 "


"Fie Options Starr Duties Planning Phase Running The ZOC Gauntlet If there were any doubts that Crusader is a wargame cut from classic cloth, they are soon dispelled by the attention given to that boardgame icon-the Zone Of Control. To wargamers, the ZOC is the modern equivalent of «The Game's Afoot!\"No, there is none of that area-movement silliness here, folks. ZOCs are restrictive towards enemy movement, but at different levels of effectiveness, dependent on who's doing the delaying. Units using Strategic movement have weak ZOCs, as they are considered to be in column. Units in defensive mode are very tough to get around, and a line of fortifications purs a big clamp on enemy movement. Weak ZOCs can be exploited by armored and motorized units, thus reflecting the terrain challenges of desert fighting. The rub is thar those weak ZOCs still affect supply, causing a multitude of tactical decisions to be made in a hurry by both sides. Such is the substance of which good wargames are made. At least units in enemy ZOCs are not required to attack, since this is an operational-level game. When you do make the decision to attack, you may: Probe: The tried-and-true method of gathering information about enemy disposition with minimal losses. Assault/No Advance: Either a holding acthey have made all of the terrain effects and tion, or where you cannot advance due to other combat modifiers available to the playterrain restrictions. Useful for sorties out of ers in a simple, casily digestible format. forts, or around escarpments. Unit variety is an unending delight, mainly because of the ways in which the different types interact. Each engi2009 OR neer involved in an attack on a city or improved position improves the odds by one in your favor. There are over two columns devoted to the intricacies of anti-tank combat. There are overrun rules for Panzer freaks, morale rules, troop quality modificrs (since the Italians are involved, these had to be there), and even combat bonuses for regimental integrity. My favorire bit of chrome, though, is that New Zealand units get a one-column shift Assault: Exactly what it sounds like. after dark because of their special All-Out Assault: Like the above, but with the kitchen sink thrown in. Operation Crusaderis an early contender for Now, when I get a game that offers me not wargame of the year, and not so much beonly the above options, but also allows for cause of its accuracy, though that is readily combined attacks involving units with differapparent, but because it marks the coming of ent attack orders, I call that one incredible age of a group of designers and artists who wargame. As if that weren't enough, the odds enjoy what they do, and whose games exude computation algorithm retains fractions, so I that effervescence. My old copy of Afrika don't have to worry about missing that 3-to-1 Korps may actually collect a little dust now. attack by one factor. To the designers' credit, CGW Flight Yoke 2000 $299 Conversations! NEWI Artificial Intelligence game: FREE ACES OF THE PACIFIC SOFTWARE 526 529 Girlfriend Teri The World's First Talking Virtual Woman! Features: DSP Dual 16 Multimedia Kit *Functions like 2 separate joysticks *The 16 bits, DSP Based Sound Card (Wavetable Upgradable) Full horizontal-vertical control \"Dual-SCD-ROM Drive Includes sturdy desktop clamp and suction cups Shielded Speakers *Microphone Direct Way Top 30 CD-Titles *loystick Titles DW Price *4 CD Titles: ChessMaster 3000 7th Guest... Mavis Beacon Teaches Typing Animal San Diego Zoo.... $22 US Atlas Authur's Teacher Trouble Business and Economic Atlas.... 518 World Atlas CD-Rom Drive Business Assistant......... Business Ware to the Max.... Frou CD Title with selected CD ROM Drive Purchase CD Deluxe Bundle 4 Titles in 1 CD......... A CD Drives are Dual Specil nless otherwise noted CD Duo2 (Mario's Missing. World Atlas)... Mits tiini EXOID S187 Chessmaster 300)..... Panasonic CR 562/563.......... $179 Compton's MPC Encyclopedia V.1.01 NEC Tnple Speed 195ms. S199 Compton's Family Choice Sony CDU-33A S179 Comptons's Interactive Encye. V 2.0L.... Teac intemal DI-CD-SOS SCSIL. S289 Dinosaur's Adventure......... Plextor 3028 int. 240ms SCSIL.................... Dinosaurs Encyclopedia.... Toshiba 4101 SCSI (Caddyless)................. $269 Dracula Unleashed......... Toshiba 3401B 200ms SCSIL........ $345 Gruliet's EncyclopediaVer..... King Quest VI.............. Sound Cards Kock Photo CD......... Cardinal DSP 16...... $189 Macmillan Dictionary for Children SoundBlaster 16 MCD..... $179 Mavis Teaches Typing.... Advance Gravis UltraSound...... $139 Mayo Clinic-Health book........ Turtle Beach Monterey.... $399 Mortal Kombat........ Orchid Sound Wave 32 $239 Playing Language, Japanese... Prometheus ARIA 16 SE... $179 Playing Language, Spanish..... Publisher's Powerhouse (Fonts) Children's Pack Fun Pack Rebel Assault......... Animal San Diepsloo $949 Return To York Reference Library... Macmillan tictionary Rebel Assault Return To Zerk. Secret of Monkey Island SAT (Scholastic Aptitude Test).. $59 CD Mario's Mining Mantis, The Experimental fighter World Atlas Sceret of Monkey Island Space Quest IV.............. Business Pack Education Pack Star Wars Chess... Bloss and Economic Atlas Tiroller's Encyclopedia Ver. 1 Tracle Opportunities (Business)..... Groller's EncyclopediaVer. US Atlas with Automa....... Kodak Photo CD) The Animals Ver US Atlas 4.0... les Assistant Maris New Teacher Typlat US & World Atlas............. Reference Library Chemster 1000 US Atlas Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego......... $21 Wall Atlas World Atlas.. . Terms and Conditions 1.10-day money back guarantee 2. Not responsible for miprint. All Products with manurer warranty 4. No merchandise accepted for return without a REMA. S. Pre d uvailability are subject to change with the F rickell, Ontario, Ca. 91761 Stulpping and handling charges are extra and non-refundable. lar. (2 25 Purchasing the 1909,461.2595 TEST M-F 8:30am-5:30pm PST Circle Reader Service #61 30-DAY LOWEST PRICE GUARANTEE $69 Sure, you can get diskloads of Unlike other mute girls you bathing beauties. But they could put on your PC, this one don't have Girlfriend Teri's learns every conversation is ability to talk to you thru your different due to sophisticated sound card! Tell her to put on AI. Warning: mature subject a nightgown and sit on her matter, but graphics are bed, and you've got a stimu PG-13. Requires VGA. lating evening of delightful | $69.95 + $4 shipping. Add conversation in store! ( Much $29.95 for Voice Output kit. more fun than scanning GIFs!) Ask about our adult add-on! AldeaLabs, Inc., 709 Lingco #106, Dept CG405, Richardson, TX 75081 (214)235-4999 Fax (214)235-4992 CompuServe: 71334,1136 $86 20 $79 DMCW 3000 ESPROBAT 1-800-882-8108 Circle Reader Service #42 "


"Cao Cao Genghis Khan It took 1400 years, but we finally got them together! SAMOWIE CLAN OF THE GRAY WOLF Romance Dicture this, two of history's most ruthless and ambitious leaders in the same room Now throw in the fact that both are looking towards world domi nation with massive armies following their every command. Sounds interesting, doesn't it. This winter, Koei's bringing Genghis Khan and Cao Cao together to a store.ncar you, and it's going to be Of The Three kingdoms exciting. After all, Genghis Khan is out to lead his DRAGON OF C DESTINY Win Mongol hordes victoriously across Asia and Europe in GENGHIS KHAN II: CLAN OF THE GRAY WOLF and Cao Cao's devising new ways to reunite China after the collapse of the Second Han Dynasty in ROMANCE OF THE THREE SEAL AN ALLIANCE. PREPARE FOR DISEASE & DISASTER! p! KINGDOMS III: DRAGON OF DESTINY. The KINGDOMS : DRAGO contest for world domination is about to begin. Are you ready? ONQUER THE WORLD! SEIZE THE BATTLE ADVANTAGE. VGA color NI NA Buble blowulen er en Mouse support Sound Blaster & AdLibTM sound support KOEI ALSO AVAILABLE FOR SNES & SEGA. KOEI Games are available for all systems in retail outlets nationwide! If you can't find the KOEI product you are looking for, call us at (415)348-0500 (9am to 5pm PST). PC Compatible KOEI Corporation, 1350 Bayshore Highway, Suite 540 Burlingame, CA 94010 Gonghis Khan Il and Romance of the Three Kingdoms Il are trademarks of KOEI Corporation Circle Reader Service #81 "


"REVIEW The Old Man And The Sea Can James Dunnigan Claim A Victory At Sea? At which point, of course, I woke up. Games do reach their players in various states of incompleteness, and Three-Sixty's Victory At Sea is a case in point. It's a rather extreme case, unfortunately, and my disappointment is magnified by the high hopes I had for this project. Can it be salvaged? Keep reading! The cover of the box says «James F. Dunnigan's Victory At Sea.\" This says a lot about the audience Three-Sixty Pacific is trying to reach. Dunnigan produced hundreds of boardgame designs back in the '60s and '70s, and he was one of the founders of SPI, a company that called its products simulations, not games, and promoted historical accuracy. Much of the appeal of Three-Sixty's games, particularly their V for Victory series, is that they measure up to the standards of the grognards who played Dunnigan's games in their youth. Victory At Sea is a simulation of WW2 in the Pacific, from the day after Pearl Harbor until the end of the conflict. It was conceived and designed as a campaign game, although by Bob Proctor there are also shorter scenarios of famous barrles. Both sides move simultaneously using a fast clock, and you stop the clock» when I was sitting in the reclining you want to give orders. Internally, the game chair watching Olympic skiing uses a six minute time-slice to compute moveI the other night, when my ment, combat, and all other events. Now just mind was lulled into reverie by the take a step back and admire that-240 turns two-six rhythm of the broadcastper day, 87,600 per year, or 323,280 for the you know, two competitors, six whole war! An average day, with no large commercials, two competitors, six battles, takes about 10 minutes on my Mac commercials. Since the ads were all Ilci, not counting the time you spend with very familiar, my thoughts began the clock off, of course. Figure on a couple of to wander towards new strategies hours to play a week of war. This is about the for the computer games I am curlength of a typical battle scenario, so these are rently engrossed in. casily played in a single sitting. On the other Suddenly, my attention was hand, if you play the entire campaign, plan to drawn back to the TV; the screen spend 350 to 400 hours in front of your was flashing images of what had to even see meatballs on the wings! Then the ad computer. Not everyone can make that kind be wargames! There a map of the Pacific cut to an overhead view of a task of commitment, but some Ocean, then one of New Guinea and the force in formation. Several ships of us would do it to study a Solomons, several more of islands I didn't seemed to be smoking or trailing Victory At Sea recognize. The colors and detail were fantasoil in the water and the carrier in tic! A deep voice droned on about \"All the the center had several large holes forces that were engaged in the Pacific are PRICE: in its flight deck. The screen $79.95 SYSTEM: Macintosh, IBM (forthcoming yours to command. Control as much or as jumped and I stared into the REQUIREMENTS: Mac LC or better, System 7, VICTURE 4MB RAM, 11MB HD space little as you want...\" The screen was now steely eyes of Orson Welles, the PROTECTION: None showing a number of small ships on a sea of man himself! Once again, I was James F. Dunnigan PUBLISHER: Three-Sixty Pacific bluc. Small aircraft appeared near a carrier mesmerized by that rich sonorous Campbell, CA (408) 879.9144 flying the Japanese naval ensign and flew voice: \"We will sell no game betoward another carrier labeled TF 17. I could fore its time!\" File Star Watch Display Command Status GomeBook DORADRESSE LU fornet Car DESIGNER: Page 152 Computer Gaming World "


"THE LOCALS WOULD LIKE TO HAVE YOU FOR LUNCH. The good news is you survived the plane crash. The bad news is you're on the Isle of the Dead.. Now, as you search for survival items and a way off the island, you face a horrifying assortment of flesheating zombies, hideous bats, bloodthirsty wolyes and other unsavory locals. Can we help it if the press is calling it \"gory,\" \"gruesome, \"graphic\" and \"sickening?\" You'll traverse dense jungles, treacherous caves and explore the local village to unlock riddles that could aid your escape. And if you're lucky, you may even rehabilitate a beautiful zombie babe. But don't forget to keep an eye out behind you. Because on the Isle of the Dead, you're on the menu! SLEUFEL See your dealer or call today! WARNING: This game depicts scenes of graphic violence. DEAD \"Big, bright, oh-so-gruesome graphics ... enough blood and gore to make even George Romero blanch. A real tongue-in-cheek, teeth-in-flesh kind of adventure.\" *, PC Entertainment, October, '93 WIX DE X HEALTH SLEOF THE (152 IN 2 DEAD 1-800-238-4277 \"Definitely not for the faint-hearted. Sampled realistic sounds add to the sickening, bloody atmosphere.\" Video Games September '93 \"Brings new meaning to the term \"graphic adventure. PC Entertainment October '93 TM KUMAR bit Sot 13707 Gamma Road  Dallas, Texas 75244  214-385-2353 IBM 3.5\" HD disks. Minimum requirements: 386 PC or 100% compatible, AMB RAM DOS 5.0 or greater, hard drive and VGA graphics. Sound support: Sound Blaster and compatibles. 1994. Merit Software. Available at: Babbage's i Best Buy  COMP USA  Computer City . Nobody Beats The Whiz  Software Etc. Circle Reader Service #88 "


"OOST Cors 1:3 Din drap Loc 10'7\", 148 07' 1920 (TFD-1 Dettator 1027 600 Dauntlese) 026 FF wildest R021 SC Healt A H is File Stoffwatch Display Command Status GameBook TOIM09515843 O A TE CU Lexington Loe Ft detailed, accurate simulation of the Pacific with only six destroyers for protecWar. tion! I saw my chance, surmising that air power might be worthless, How Does It Sail? but Big Guns would sink them! I So will we students of history be spending formed up three cruiser groups to months at a time playing VAS? Bluntly, no. destroy the carriers. In a series of Consider the most important weapon system five battles, two night and three in the Pacific-carrier-based air power. In 60 daytime, this supposedly sitting or 70 major attacks, I have yet to see carrier duck sank 8 of my cruisers and 18 air groups sink a fleet carrier or cruiser! I know destroyers, all without losing a sinsuch attacks usually resulted in heavy damage gle ship! Call me a sore loser, but I and fires, with actual sinkings happening think something is wrong here, as hours later, but there is no such pattern here. Carriers can sink transports and sometimes a destroyer, with the ship sinking during the smaller ships, why should they same six minute turn, bur capital ships survive choose to attack the screen instead with only superficial damage. of the main targer? Meanwhile, the attacking air groups are for the record, land-based air being ground to pieces. The loss rate for a does better. The computer once single attack seems to depend more on what parked a British force of two carritype of plane is attacking than on what the ers and four destroyers within target is. USN torpedo bombers take 90% to range of land-based air in Sumatra. 100% losses in 1942 and, based on the Battle My first attack of 5 air groups, of Midway, that may be reasonable. But totaling some 150 Kates, simply Dauntless dive bombers average 75% to 80% blew away the destroyers. The seclosses, which is unprecedented! IJN Kate torond wave of 120+ Kates got hits, pedo bombers only lose about 20% to 25% and the third attack-still more per attack, but due to game mechanics, a than 100 Kates! sank the Victorious! The carriers are generally seen as a liability in single sortie may make more than one attack. other carrier took off for Ceylon at this point, surface engagements, particularly at night. If those Kates find The orders of battle seem all right as far as three US task forces, major warships are concerned, but I haven't they may attack all bothered to check all of the air groups, troops, three or the same TF transports and supply levels. With such more than once. Start weirdness in the combat routines, it's imposwith a group of 36 sible to judge elements like the amount and Kates, and after four or location of supplies, the timing of replacefive attacks, you're ments, and overall play balance. lucky to get ten of How could a respected designer like James them back! The US Navy is never this lucky. maybe because it was damaged or running F. Dunnigan create such a flawed design? He low on fuel! Thus, it is possible to sink carriSo your typical carrier battle consists of the claims he didn't. In December, Dunnigan ers, even those with armored flight decks, but carrier groups getting in range, maybe sinking publicly disassociated himself from the finit's hard to amass the necessary 350 to 400 a few destroyers, and then sailing home with carrier-based aircraft. ished design. He said he submitted a prelimidecks empty. Sound like any battle you've nary «specification\" over a year ago and was ever heard of? Part of the problem here is the Curiouser And Curiouser never allowed to finish the design. Three\"intelligence of the pilots on both sides. Sixty claims the original design was incomAnd there are more cxamples of strange When sent to attack carriers with a screen of plete or unplayable and that Dunnigan was combat results. B-17s, thanks uncooperative in correcting the problems. # File StafrWatch Oisplay Command Status GameBook to their heavy bomb loads, are Wherever the truth lies, both parties agreed the most effective bombers to leave Dunnigan's name on to leave Dunnigan's name on the box. against ships at sca, diametrically opposed to their real-life Now The Good News naval performance. Combat Apparently, the design of the interface and between air groups is deadly in graphics was done entirely by Three-Sixty, the extreme; there are rarely any who did a superb job. The screens are almost survivors when fighters meet breathtaking, with excellent detail. There are fighters. Battles between suralso Quick Time movies of real WW2 footage face forces are unpredictable, showing planes taking off and landing, and (which is OK for night battles), combat of various types. These clips correbut they are very one-sided, as spond with the events in the game and use the the winner never loses a ship! In lower left corner of the screen so as not to one game the Japanese sent six cover up the map or information panels. Alcarriers to raid New Zealand though this is a flashy use of video that adds How could a respected designer like James F. Dunnigan create such a flawed design? He claims he didn't. ELLER HONGIOTECTACT TOTAL US Mission briefing TUATION intelligence repor us through analysis of decaded Japanese Lesunications intercepto (Magie, an attack on our bone at midoyi insinent. The Japanese Combined Flest unter Aviral V ote hos been divided into alght task forces for the operation. In concert with the attack on 11 deuy, the Japanese Oro launching diversionary attack on the Alations. It TE OESund the attack on Midway is designed to draw your first into an anbush Rfter near Herculeon offer the docks at Pearl Harbor hava managed to partially repair the dance Vorktown recalved at Coral Sea, Roking hur available for this action. The Japonare Ore Ungare of the source of our intelligence MISSION Consonding Officer, U$ Forces Pacific is ordered to proceed insediately with alt assets and to the vicinity of Hiddy island. On arrival 0.0. US Forces in ordered to take recessary steps to a peditiously locale, engage and destroy thorstenents of the toparlal Japanese Hory that are proceeding towards Midway Island with the intention of attacking and resting the US Bare there and preventing thes from accomplishing hair sasion. .0. UB Forect la advised to carry out this ission under the Location IF 10 Table of Contonts Enterprise AL Sea B385985:8888 Mew Orleans Vincener Northampton Ellot Ruloin Monaghan ITELLETTO S Page 154 Computer Gaming World "


"THE ONLY THING MISSING IS THE DRIVE TO THE STADIUM. DISK #1 PRO LENGING 1994 BQ CABEL CHICAGO .298 ROI Juy con 2 The most highly detailed ballparks ever to be created. Each park consists of 9 full screens. Season Replay, Strategy Sheet, Head to Head vs. Human & Computer, and True Modem Play with Chat Mode. 2 Contains full rosters for all 1993 teams with over 40 categories of batting stats and over 30 categories of pitching stats per player. Draft module with \"Computer Draft\" Option, Trade module, Team editor module and League Set Up module including the NEW 1994 Division Alignment. C DALLS STRIKES OUTS TNNTAG Robin Ventura CI CHA TRONIN VENTURA The sharpest detailed animation ever in a baseball simulation. Includes both Simulation and Arcade modes. 0001 LU 15100 21. 9 KR CUC 192 1921 20 11 LETOV.00172 11 290 295 3 722 2 [ 10  211 .  S TOJOT FPCT RANGE SPEED BUMX h HIS HIGH Chicago (A) 91 Screens may vary. PLAYERS Micro Sports Inc.  One Northgate Park . Suite 103. Chattanooga, TN 37415 1-800-937-7737 Circle Reader Service #89 MICRO SPORTS "


"File Stofruatch Display Command Status GameBook wonderful simulation and no one but the computer to play it with. As an opponent, VAS is one of the weakest games in memory. It can't invade or manage supplies well enough to keep its troops from starving, and it loves ahistorical tactics like sending carriers on raids deep into enemy waters with almost no screening forces. This is a bad enough tactic for the Japanese, but it's inexcusable for the US Navy in early 1942! Although it's easy to make fun of such silliness, I am well aware just how hard it is to Loe 13011, 173701 O CU Danties) RO (10-1 C ustator> CV Hornet 0103 IC-1 Devastator) 15 Fratch Display Command Status GameBook 100 TORTUITA pizzazz to the short scenarios, you'll want to turn the clips off if you play a campaign. They make the game longer (each takes only a second or two, but the time adds up over the course of a campaign), and their repetitive sounds get a little tiresome. I was more impressed with the game's beautiful interface design. Accurate or not, VAS makes a tremendous amount of information available without being overwhelming or confusing. First and foremost is the map, which uses 16 colors to show topography and 6 levels of zoom. The highest level shows half the globe, from California to India, and you can zoom in to see smaller areas in greater detail. You have a lot of control over what is displayed, and the computer keeps the screen readable by arranging names so they don't overlap. Even so, there's not enough room for the names of every base in the Pacific on one screen, so base names appear only at lower zoom levels. Once you get a useful view, you can save it and return to it quickly. Getting more information on a task force or base is a simple matter of clicking it with the mouse. The display lists all units present, and simply clicking on any unit gives you a detailed status window. While a unit is seBase List Alicante Set Course OTTON 12H 01010 W, 120 59'C 006999H. 129996 00014N, 12448°C 010'37'H 125°04'E TISUAL oly Level: Coat yang conditions Tratni Polo TransPlures 202 00210 N, 120017 011'07\"N, 12502\" 01041' 121'52' 022'\" 1 '09' 090'30\"N, 12040 005021,1145E 11:34\" 100'OUE UN Com Fun Do 010\"N12710 Destination: Manila Bay Latitude 01438*N Longitude 120°54' Set Course Estimated Travel Time: 21 Hours Calculate FOT03CTR werger 2 (RX MALI File Stoffwatch Display Commond Status GomeBook 47307193 1100 0 02939542274 -28 nice touch. The menu also gives access to special screens where you may assign commanders, change the organization, allocate supplies, check replacements, order repairs, check replacements, order repairs. and upgrade ports and bases. Another key component is the message window at the bottom of the screen. Here, you'll see one line messages about significant events: Done sightings, radio intercepts, attacks, 100 bitcot bases captured, supplies delivered, and so on. You can get more information about a report--the results of the create a decent computer opponent for a attack, what was the make up of the enemy complex game like Victory At Sea. The comtask force?-but don't trust your pilots too puter opponent needs to be improved, but it much. If you don't like figuring latitude and will never challenge experienced gamers, longitude in your head, anwhich is the group Three-Sixty is trying to reach, right? The bigger problem is the abON other button lets you center sence of a human opponent. You'd think the screen on the location of NA any sighting or event, and Three Sixty would have learned a lesson from then \"return from view.\" V For Victory, which was also criticized as a weak opponent, but was salvaged for many Hope For The Future? because it was exciting to play against human opponents. Three Sixty has said they'll Three-Sixty has admitted that there are correct the problems with problems with crashes, particularly on Mac VAS. Let's be charitable and LCs. They said the game was released too assume that they correct all soon and promised to fix it. They have a lot problems with historical acof work ahead of them is they hope to salvage curacy as well as all remaining bugs. Would VAS then this one. Before this game will be worth anything, they must: 1) stomp the remaining be a game worth owning? Sadly, no. You'd have this crash bugs; 2) work on historical accuracy by correcting obvious errors in comFile StorrWatch Olplay Command Status GameBook bat results and playtesting the effects of supply and command; 3) improve the computer opponent, particularly in its tendencies to engage in tactics that are completely unrealistic; and 4) add multiplayer options, including a provision for play by e-mail or modem. If Three-Sixty can correct these deficiencies, Victory At Sea would give everyone, even James Dunnigan, reason to be proud. Until then, hang on to your money. CGW LO KN AG9 (85N Kale) CAP Allend Loc: Dest/Torget: IFlected, you can give orders through easy-tounderstand buttons. Clicking the Ready button for an air group will reveal four additional buttons to select the type of mission. Clicking on the Formation indicator presents all possible ship configurations. The Sextant selection changes the cursor into a cross hair, which you use to set a course by clicking on the map. Sometimes, you'll want to order a task force to return to a base off the map. A menu command lets you set the destination from a list of bases and gives you an ETA, a 01 -42 1300 Toweville IF 11.2 er ved at ledes TF 17.2\" has arrived at iu destinati colier delivered to Kenia Boy Eusalier deler to h olo Page 156 Computer Gaming World "


"Advanced Dungeons Dragons Edition COMPUTER CAME Ravenloffa Strahd's Possession inmask and defeat Strahd, one of the most nefarious of all gothic horror characters, or you'll never escape the terror of the AD&D RAVENLOFT\"game world! Presented in High Resolution 320 x 400 256-color VGA, STRAHD's Possession delivers twice the quality of VGA without the cost of a Super-VGA card! So you experience gothic horror role-playing at its best in this visually stunning game. Bask in the glow of an exceptionally large 3-D gaming window. Explore bonechilling dungeons. Challenge 30 authentic RAVENLOFT game world creatures. Cast over 60 mage and priest spells. Let automapping keep track of your travels with maps that print complete with any notes you made on them along the way. All this plus a haunting musical score and digitized sound effects will keep you on edge for hours and hours! Just be careful, things get pretty eerie when the sun sets! Available for IBM & Compatibles on 3.5\" disks and Enhanced CD-ROM. IBM HI-RES 256-color VGA Displays REECRATICI PANTEROM. CORO o TO ORDER: Visit your local retailer or call: 1-800-245-4525 with Visa/MC (U.S. & Canada only). use 100.2154585 ELIT SRL   WECAN WARN NET DATAS INSIDE 2 IL DPE Technology developed by DreamForge Intertainment. ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, RAVENLOFT the TSR logo and all TSR characters, character names, and the distinctive likenesses thereof, are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR, Inc.  TSR. Inc. 1994 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #131 "


"STRATEGY A Little Piece of Vulcan, A Little Piece of Sol If you haven't yet experienced this multiplayer game of space conquest, it might be time to look up a private BBS in your area and log in. VGA Planets version 3.0 and up is a wonderful blend of Reach for the Stars, Master of Orion and Diplomacy. Up to 11 people can play this game by making their moves on their computers and then sending those moves to a host BBS. The host then compiles the moves and returns the results to the player. Each player takes the role of a specific alien race, and each race has its own special ship designs and talents which must be fully exercised in order to win. A sound strategy for building up a production base, defending your empire's perimeter, and going on the offensive is a requirement for success. In this article, I'll discuss some general strategy tips and follow up next month with tips tailored to each race. Spaceward, Whoa! As in most space battle-fests, early expansion is the first big task of the game. If all 11 races are being played, there is a good chance you will run into opponents very quickly, so it's important to grab as much territory as soon as possible. Special attention should be given to those worlds with native populations, especially those with ordered governments of Monarchy and above, as these will be your prime sources of money and future starbases. The first item of business is to examine the messages concerning the game's configuration carefully. This configuration will determine how effective your race's special abilities will be (particularly for players of game versions after 3.00). For instance, if you're playing the Crystalline Empire, the messages will tell you how effective your special web mines will be and if it is possible for them to be cleared. These messages will also tell you how often meteors will occur and therefore how many new minerals will be available as the game progresses. Next on the agenda will be the allocation of your resources to your production base. Initial funds will need to be divided between raising the technical level of your starbase, building ships, and planetary spending for mines, factories and defenses. Unless you are playing on the poorest settings, it is wise to increase some of your tech levels at your home world right from the start. By far the most important tech category at the beginning of the game is Engines, as this will dictate how fast you can colonize the surIllustration by N. Taylor Blanchard A Strategy Guide for Tim Wisseman's VGA Planets by Ted Foster ulletin boards have always been a forum for multi-human games. Whether rotisserie league sports games, trivia games, or strategy games, the local, private BBS has been a great place to find gamers with which to compete. It wasn't very long ago that ANSI graphics (crude pictures made of colorful text characters) were the leading edge in the displays on these games. Then along came Tim Wisseman's VGA Planets. Page 158 Computer Gaming World "


"The Hundred Years War NEWS & WEATHER  Commerce Business Daily  Execugrid Headline News Newsgrid Headline News Newspaper Library Newstand. People in the News. U.S. Government Center  Weather Reports SPORTS ARENA Fantasy and Simulation Sports Forum .Fishing Forum  Great Outdoors Forum NN's Baseball Pool Basketball Pool NVN's Football Pool  NVN's Hockey Pool NVN's Collesambal Pou m Baslao pol SA S aham Sports Headline News  BUSINESS & Akilan et les Libral, son tennides C Census Library Commerce Business Daily Computer Library Corporate Affiliates Corporate Directories. D&B Company Profiles D&B U.S. Business Locator  Employee Benefits  E-Span Job ich e cug dead he s Financial Markets  Franchise Handbook  Help Wanted-USA  Insider Trading Monitor  Investor Re p air Close  Mergers & Acquisitions Filings  Patent Library People in the News  Small Business & Entrepreneurs  Tax/Accounting Forum  Tax Library. Technology & Quality Managemechoman Now Indortrinlan dua Thumpen Register amark stby TRW Bu nas redlit Duofilm REFERENCE CE NR A DSI CIO nput Dr. norepira wes meer over General Medicine  Medical Librarypaper Library. Newsland. NVN Bookshelf. Patent Library. Phone File Reference Library. U.S. I wen ment Center OM UNICATIONS. CHub Forum ectro, il Fax A Letter Internet M. T.V Member, I ofilo O CO NI \"O d 1 ore ta nes whDS-HI FONTAWA FOL... Aquaria o n America Forum Astrology & Houstic Sciences Astronomy Foruni Automotive Forum Aviation Forum  Chat Club Forum BBS Forum . Computer Games Forum  Comprchophies Forum Computer Network forum . Computer Programming  Comedy Forum  Diabetes/Hypoglycemia Forum sabunicu l caufa . Fa 1 & Home Forum . Fantasy Sports Forum Fishing Forum  Food & Wine Forum  Gamickom alucing Forum GEMS Senior Forum  Genealogy Forum . General Exchange Forum  General Games Forum  Gift Education Forum  Creat Outdoors Forum  Ham Shack Forum  Hobby Forum  IBM PC & Compatibles Forum  Internet Forum  In A rs Our FO K m Le Forum  Macintosh Forum Maintenance & Home Repairs  Mental Health Forum  Momes N . wwwme Fore c Forum  Native American Forum  Needlecraft Forum  Numismatic Collectors Forum  Nursing Network NVN Help Forum NVN Member Profiles  Offline Reader Forum  PC Life Column  Pets & Animals Forum Alataca I P OD Phoog op rum  Poet's Forum  Politics Forum Quilting Forum  Real Estate Forum Dengan Meliai, drumul clinimascience Forum Science Fiction Forum  Small Business & Entrepreneurs  Soap Opera Forum Society For Creative Anachronisms  Sports Forum Star Trek Gaming Forum Substance Abuse Forum  Sysop's Picks  Tandy Fom Technology & Quality Management  Teen Forum Television Forum  The First Precinct  Travel For The L a he Unexplained UNIX Forum  Windows Forum Write Stuff Forum  TRAVEL SERVICES. Around America Forum EAASY Sabre  Mileage & Routing Official Airline Guide Travel Forum  ENTERTAINMENT YR VI ES rompe bodoyce Ji programlagi suyagof Cinema  Movies Forum  People in the News  Soap Opera Forum  smo 16 sion ACTUL SERVICES  Academic American Encyclopedia. American History. Computer Library. Dissertation Abstracts Education Forum Education Library. Historical Forum  ned i lution Forum NV Boolne World History WOR DOEG MES Adventure casino Galaxy Captain folgell .ames on mu red Yd rs' Wo Km I kid c ra ka O I: TI Que Fo I mo ali NIE SHOPPING kantage Catalog Handbook  Comp-u-Store  E-Span Jobsearch. HelpWanted-USA PC Catalog  FOR ADULTS ONLY. About A allrvices. CLAdult Entertainment Mught Rendezyous. MEMBER INFORMATION & ASSISTANCE. Account Manage en C u Pa . Serves me m i re proferices. Member Guidelines NVN Help Forum  Offline keauer Forum Online Bilimge Payment Policy Phone Access Directory Pricing Information Sysops Picks Online Terms and Conditions. Upgrade Your Subscription Online Customer Service Support Private Forums  Variable lowpriced subscription plans. Over 1,000 dial-in access points  NVN Classroom  Toll-free Customer Support NVN Help Forum If this isn't enough, how about the lowest online rates going? NVN Subscribe today by calling 1-800-336-9096. (In Houston, call 877-4444) Or register online using any comm software set at N-8-1 and full duplex. Dial 1-800-336-9092. When connected enter CG94LS and press <return>, A SERVICE OF U.S. Videotel A low select services cany additional charges. National Videotex is a service mark of National Videotex Network. Corp. All others are for identification purposes only and belong to their respective companies or organizations. Circle Reader Service #95 "


"to that I Planet Name Col S D tory 2 EOS Deranse Neutronom scan CASE rounding worlds. If possible, go to Tech 10 expansion phase, gaining control of the stars freighter early in my exploration. The engines early so that your ships will be able to immediately around your starbase is critical freighter can carry 1200 clans per trip, which reach stars visible from your homeworld in Your first ships should be freighters or war is usually enough to tax every native on most urns or less. These engines will also ships with a cargo capacity of 200 tons or more. worlds; this allows you to get maximum help you guard your perimeter with fewer These will allow you to build worthwhile settle money out of these worlds soon after you ships during the «Phony War\" phase of the ments in one trip to a neighboring star. discover them, without having to shuttle game. When establishing a new colony clans back and forth in smaller freighters. The Solar Federation I prefer to send a minimum of 50 As you explore your immediate surroundClose Starsiup colonist clans, 20 supplies, and a ings you should single out the worlds on up and down arrous scroll trough your slups 100 megacredits. On worlds with which you plan to build starbases. Choose Kenter to select no native races, this allows you to your best three colonies and devote much of Slutpr 11 start a colony that can build your resources into building them up quickly. NEXTINN ES DESTROYER enough mines and factories to beIf you are in a rich star cluster, it is probably es . 12) come a productive mining center. not a good idea to produce starbases at every On temperate or tropic worlds, populated world, as this will make for slow H S this population is large enough to growth and it will be many turns before the slowly expand if taxation is kept bases are ready to become production centers. Focus and be fruitful. | Wolf 359 KFL Starships: Temperate The ideal location of a starbase is a 12 e Planets i s site Message colony with a large native population F3StanlasesK S a Scones ME E (four million or more), government of k e Starcharts KP Password ESC ESC 153 Monarchy or better, decent mineral reDuring the first 10 turns it is helpful to Mineral Mines: sources, and natives that are Humanoid, Factories keep a running log of whatever intelliAmphibian, Ghipsoidal or Siliconoid, as gence you can get on the surrounding each of these will give you a tech level of Tritan uhi RS areas of space. If your exploration dis Duraniun. 13 RTS 10 in one category at your new starbase. Molybdenuhr ABSALS tance is great enough to cover 500 light Supplies years or more, try to note where your Nitive race Distance Goverment: Friendly coses neighboring races are and where their Native populationISSN Native tax Nte Funds HD homeworlds might be. This will allow Natives are s Build Stal you to make an educated guess as to Colony population: To Colonists tax rata R R KF8 Mining s which star clusters you will most likely colonists are meet them in and what size ships you can low. If you have too few colonists, expect. Use the F4 screen to search for enemy the colony's population will not ships, the Scores screen to keep track of planegrow, no matter what the climate. tary and ship rotals, and the messages detailBe sure to build sufficient factoing ships hitting mines and so on to monitor ries right away to provide supplies your foes. and money for your colony. WithFarat 3 out a source of supplies, no factoEX1840 ONS INC F25 Planet IK 56 If you are running on a host program verEcon HER KES Mining Survey sion 3.11 or later, you may also be able to ries, mines or defense posts can be FAB built at all. I should mention a bit RES E Search figure out if a race is being played by a comESCERET >> puter opponent. Tim Wisseman's artificial abour raxation here. When popuLarge Bovinoid populations should also be intelligence routines for computer players are lations are under one million, the amount of used, since they are monetary and mineral primitive at best, but these computer players tax money you will be able to get from your gold mines, and can be built up very quickly. colonists is negligible compared with the can help fill out an 11 player roster. The A flexible strategy should be followed as computer players \"cheat» to expand very money that can be raised by selling supplies. your empire begins to grow. It's helpful to Supplies cost nothing other than the initial quickly and to boost their tech levels, but they identify certain clusters of stars that you factory cost, and factories use no resources to would like to possess prior to hostilities. Look are notoriously bad at combat. The computer produce them. Because of this, I recommend for rifts between areas of stars that might be players also will not take advantage of their you keep your tax rate on small, temperate easier to defend and to launch an offensive race's special abilities. Clues to watch for are colonies at 0%, allowing their population to from. Voids that takes two turns to cross at a very rapid rise in the number of captured grow at its maximum rate. Income for the warp 9 make great defensive barriers; you will planets, erratic ship movements, and unexcolony will come from the factories, so maxibe able to see any ships trying to cross the plained increases in ship mass during transit, mize them first. As an added bonus, since barrier, giving you a turn in which to prepare and the repetition of obvious mistakes. your raxation is nil, your citizens will be for the attack. happy no matter how many factories and Screech For The Stars Watch your opponents' ship movements to mines you construct. see if they are building up individual planets As in most games of this type, play can be Planets with native civilizations should be into starbases; these will make nice offensive separated into three phases: Initial Expannurtured as quickly as possible. In order to objectives later. Usually players also fall into sion, The Phony War (when you first contact ensure that enough colonists are present to patterns of ship supply routes, and these other races), and Full Scale Hostilities. In the tax cach native, I like to construct a large should also be noted for raiding later on. Page 160 Computer Gaming World "


"Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 72nd Edition COMMITIR GAME Al-Qadim THE GENIE'S CURSE Explore a new game world in the style of the Arabian Nights! High magic and dark deeds reign as you face the evil Genie Lords in a quest to restore your family honor! A complex, pregenerated character grants you quick entrance into the all-new AD&D AL-QADIM\" game world. Encounter genies, sinister sorcerers, wise hermits, and many more mysterious beings, each with their own secrets and challenges. Use magical items to face the challenge of real-time combat and puzzle solving. And savor a tightly woven story line that's enhanced by grand cinematic musical themes all in the exotic new AL-QADIM game world! Flo K or  100 ANILA IBM 256-color VGA Displays   IBM & COMPATIBLES Available on 3.5\" disks and CD-ROM. DUNLULUULULLLLLLLLL TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call: 1-800-245-4525 with Visa or MasterCard (U.S. & Canada only). SA ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D. AL-QADIM, the ISR logo and all TSR characters, character names, and the distinctive likenesses thereof, are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR. Inc. 19947SA, Inc. 1994 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #132 "


"22 Starfleet Rattles Expansion is a good thing, but all good things must come to an end...at least for a while. There will come a time when your expanding empire will bump into one, two, or even three others. Usually this happens at a time when you have many more colonies than you do ships, and many of those ships have few or no weapons. Thus begins the period I call the «Phony War.» At this point few players are ready to mount an offensive and will have a devil of a time trying to protect the colonies they already have. There are two basic strategies for this phase, and both can have their problems. The first strategy applies to those races like the Lizards and Bird Men. Because of the smaller size of their battleships, these races can build capital ships before most other races. If you have a battleship ready and good intelligence on your opponent's homeworld when contact occurs, there is an opportunity to deal an early deathblow. One or two of your ships is enough to take out a starbase if the defending player hasn't maximized his defense. Since he may have some fighters around, consider sending in a sacrificial ship with light guns to clear the fighters for your capital ship's attack. Factories. Mining Supplies. Defense and Taxes TIF ESC! races enter into a protracted series Wolf 359 of skirmishes, they will sap each Minas: 10 Max: 229 other's strength until both are ripe Cost: 4 Megacredits and one supply unit for the plucking by other races who Supplies: 504 Kilotons have had the time to build up their Funds: 20 MC Factorics: 100 Colonist Tax Rate: 57. Max: 131 war machine. Native Tax Rate: 0%. Cost: 3 Megacredits Baise Colonist Taxes and one supply unit The risk that you run with this Louer Colonist Taxes Derense: 5 strategy is that, while you are conMax: 82 3 Raise Native Taxes Cost: 10 Megacredits tinuing to build, so is your enemy. Louer Native Taxes and on Supply unit Keep a careful eye on him for both Sell i Supply Unit Build Mine build-ups on your borders and for Sell 10 Supply Units Build Factory Sell 100 Supply Units opportunities for an offensive. If Colonists: Lun 18 MC Build Defense Post your opponent becomes involved Natives! Love H HC Help in a struggle with a third race, conShould your preemptive strike be successful, sider carefully which would be more benefiyou stand to reap substantial benefits. A race cial-sending aid to keep a large race from without a starbase is like a head with its overpowering you both one at a time, or chicken cut off. Even if some of the enemy attacking him on your front to divide and ships escape, it may be many turns before your conquer him with the other aggressor. opponent will be able to establish a new base (if at all), leaving you free to claim his colonies. Star Tricks But be aware that the risks are great as well. If When you have built up a comfortable level your capital ships are lost and the enemy base of defense on your borders, and when you remains intact, a major portion of your race's have ships left to expand, it will be time to resources will have been wasted and you will hone your combat skills. VGA Planets does be on the defensive when your opponent's not lend itself well to small unit tactics. Ships battleships come on line. in combat will fight one-on-one until all vesThe second strategy is a simple one-negotisels from one side are destroyed. There is no ate a time of peace. It may sound wimpy and retreat, no quarter, and no evasion. Once uninteresting, but the alternative is worse. If two combat begins you no longer have control, so BECOME THE ULTIMATE GAMER SIDELINE SOFTWARE D ORDERS 1-800-888-9273 ONLY 88 infiniti GABA YOUR PC IMPORT & CLOSEOUT CONNECTION NEW PC TITLES TYPE Battle Isle '93 War Simulation Break Line Breakout for the 90's Brutal Sports Football Arcade Simulation Daemonsgate Role Playing Game Elite 2 Space Strategy Fields of Glory Strategy Simulation Genesia Strategy Game In Extremis Adventure Ishar 2 Role Playing Game Jurrassic Park Arcade Strategy King Maker Strategy Lil' Devil Arcade Adventure Micro Machines Racing Arcade Rise of the Robots Fighting Game Simon the Sorcerer Graphic Adventure Star Lord Strategy Winter Olympic '94 Sports Simulation PC MAGAZINES Get the latest news on the best PC titles from the U.S. & Europe! These high gloss, full color magazines also feature demo-packed PLAYABLE cover DISKS with each issue Titles include: PC Format. PC Review, PC Zone, PC Player. PC Plus, PC Power, PC Action, and PC Games! Your choice! Only $10 each! SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Mastercard Visa $5.00.C.O.. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping. Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to change! No refunds of exchanges. Ofective products exchanged with some item. Products warrantied through Sideline FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Into Call (305) 491-9519 DEALER INQUIRIES INVITED! 540 NW. 57th Court, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33309 DON'T MISS THESE DISCOUNT PC DEALS! Four Crystals of Trazar 21.95 Castles 16.95 4Sports Boxing 18.95 Centurion Defender of Rome 18.95 A Train 26.95 Colossus Bridge 4 16.95 Action Stations 18.95 Colorado 14.95 Ancient Art of War in Swes 24.95 Command HO 18.95 ATAG (Microprose) 24.95 Conan the Cimerion 18.95 8-17 Bomber Mcroprose) 24.95 Creepers (Psygnosis) 18.95 Backpammon 14.95 Dave Ledbetter Goll (Greens) 26.95 BAT 14.95 Deluxe Strip Poker 2 18.95 BAT2 21.95 Dune 18.95 Battlechess 18.95 El Fish 21.95 Battlechess 400021.95 Elvira 2 18.95 Battle Isle 18.95 F16 Falcon 14.95 Birds of Prey 21.95 Fire Team 2200 16.95 Bloodwych 14.95 First Samurai 18.95 Carrier Command 14.95 Floor 13 18.95 Carriers at War 21.95 Global Conquest Micropose) 21.95 COMPSO4 GBEOGDCDE Greg Norman Golf 18.95 Heart of China 18.95 Hero Quest 18.95 Hook 16.95 It Came From the Desert 14.95 Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 16.95 Joe and Mac Caveman Ninja 18.95 Killing Cloud 14.95 King of Chicago 14.95 King's Quest 6 21.95 Legend of Kyrandia 21.95 Lemmings 2 28.95 Links 386 (Access) 29.95 Lure of the Temptress 18.95 Mantis 24.95 Mavis Beacon Typing Tutor 18.95 Mike Ditka Football 18.95 Mig 29 Fulcrum 18.95 Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix 21.95 Obitus (Psypnosis) 18.95 Pacific Islands 21.95 Populous & Data Disk 24.95 Power Manger 19.95 Pushover 18.95 RBI Baseball 2 14.95 Realms 18.95 Rex Nebular 24.95 Road & Track GP Unlimited 21.95 RoboCop 3 18.95 Rocket Ranger 16.95 Sarpan 5 18.95 Shadowlands 18.95 Sim Ant 21.95 Sim City Terrain Editor 9.95 Sim Lile 18.95 Sleepwalker 18.95 Sleeping Gods Lie 14.95 Spurwrecked 16.95 Spell Casting 101 18.95 Spoils of War (RAW) 18.95 Spot 16.95 Strike Fleet 19.95 Super Off Road Racing 16.95 Super Space Invaders 18.95 Super Tetris 19.95 Team Yankee 21.95 The Immortal 19.95 The Lost Admiral 21.95 T.V. Sports Baseball 21.95 T.V. Sports Boxing 21.95 T.V. Sports Football 14.95 Trump Casino 2 18.95 Twilight 2000 16.95 Wilima 6 21.95 Vette 14.95 WW.F. 2 Wrestling 24.95 Waxworks 24.95 White Death (Raw) 18.95 Winter Super Sports 92 16.95 Wukid 18.95 Wolfpack 18.95 World Class Leaderboard 14.95 World of Legends (Son E 24.95 Wrath of the Demon 16.95 Zool 21.95 From REM Software With the Infinity Machine\", you can make virtually any game bow to your every whim! With our easy to use real-time editing technology, you can add lives, edit character specs, and change weapons & abilities all without ever leaving your game. With our Infinity Code system, you can generate your own codes for easier access to game features! And when you're in a tough situation, Infinity Machine's slow motion feature gets the action back under your control. $32 MasterCard 5 MasterCard VISA u.s. VISA U.S. $34.95... 3 TO ORDER, CALL 313-457-1161 Page 162 Circle Reader Service #119 Circle Reader Service #107 "


"My son and I love this game!!! Great work!! Robert Strauss, Burbank Oxydo magnum! for PC, Mac, A500 A2000, ST, TT or Falcon Computers. Sequel of the award winning Oxyd, now at a store near you! Mac: 1MB RAM, color or monochrome! PC: 386 or above, 2.5MB RAM, EGA or VGA, Soundbla. or Adl. optional. My daughter (11 years old) and I have become \"Oxyd\" addicts. We cannot wait to begin exploring the many other levels. Thanks for creating such an excellent product. R. S., Germantown Tenjoy this game a great deal and so do my children and their friends. It is just what I have been looking for !! Jerome Wescott, Minneapolis My whole family enjoyed your game a great deal. Michael C. Moore, Columbia This is, without question, the most impressive game ! have ever seen. I am amazed at the audio, visual and action. George L. Tanty, Arlington Heights Outstanding program!!!! John Bernauer, Los Gatos Wow! That's all I can say about Oxyd. What an incredible game! Hurry! I can't wait to play!! Oxyd has to be the most artistically superb piece of programming that I have seen. From my position of having completed about one third of the single-player levels, the landscapes have been continuously varied with a marvelous attention to graphic and audible detail that makes each new one a continuing delight. I especially appreciate how the marble interacts in seemingly realistic but different ways when rolling over or bouncing against different \"natural\" (or unnatural) substances like stone, wood, swamp, freefall etc. At this point, I'm already worrying that I'll run out of levels (assuming ! keep solving the puzzles). Jeffrey R. Harrow Ord Credits: Best Brain Game Mar World Game Hall of Fame 1993 Game of the Year Computer & Pedagogik 06/93 Score this game a solid 10 Current Notes 06/93 \"A\" rating Wow! Exquisite. A must for your games library. Amigo Wodd 06/93 Game of the Month. MorWel 02/93 Top of the Charts Rrom Teaser Category, PC Gorries German edition This game is highly addictive. Stuart Ritchie, Canada One of the nicest games I have seen in a long time. Thanks for creating such a challenging piece of software. Steve Brannan, Canada Even our 3yr old enjoys the game. I'm completely hooked! Patricia B. Smith, NH 100 new landscapes New objects and gome elements to explore. nog The game is a blast! Excellent graphics, extremely well done. Interesting challenges in each landscape also. I look forward to the next 90 landscapes. David Mangini, a I just had to write to tell you how much fun I've had playing Oxyd. The attention to detail the sounds, the textures of the surfaces really adds to the fun of the game. It invites the imagination for a ride. Thanks also for making all of the landscapes challenging but not impossible. At first I thought that landscape 76 was unfairly difficult, but when I found the way through it, I really admired the ingenuity. Tom Phoenix, Portland Oxyd magnum! is on entirely new and riveting challenge for Oxyd experts and beginners alike. The game is really slick, well designed. Those first 10 levels alone were worth paying for! PRID Call 617-497-1130 for the Oxyd magnum! retailer nearest you It is rare to find such a visually appealing, addictive and playable game. Kathryn Wilson, Australia One of the most elegant games I've played. Thanks a lot for a great game. Jeffrey Jondahl, San Diego OK so we got hooked! I'm really impressed with your game, Oxyd. Congratulations on a unique and fun product, and best luck to you all. John M. Dodd, Thousand Oaks Get a free appetizer for PC, Mac, Amiga or ST: Send S 4.00 for shipping & handling for 10 challenging landscapes of Oxydto Dongleware, 35 Howard Street, Cambridge, MA 02139. Send S 4.00 for a 5 level teaser of Oxyd magnum! (PC or Mac only) Circle Reader Service #63 "


"Neutrodul Tritanium Haro Scatterid Nature Ore ined Duranium Bare Molybdenum Common Duranten: 10 KT Telp you had best be prepared prior to sending Wolf 359 Mining and Literor Survey Use mines to your advantage and your ships into the unknown. Some general be aware of their limitations. They rules to remember are: are a great defense against races  The biggest gun wins. that possess cloaking ships and can really mess up an opponent's trade Don't underestimate the power of higher Very Rare Concentrated routes. One good trick is to send in technology. More often than not, higher tech a vessel almost within reach of an weapons will swing the course of the battle to Population: 1606600 Bac: Hovinord enemy world, but rather than atone side or another. I have seen a tiny Cyborg Gou: Unity tack the world, stop the ship next probe with two tech-10 Heavy Phasers take Minos: Colonists: 105000 to it, lay a large minefield, and out a much larger Nocturne-class destroyer retreat. You have just shut down with tech-1 Beams. A Nova-class battleship Ncutronium 1117 KT small ship traffic to that world for with tech-10 Torpedoes can bring down the Tritantun: 20KT Concentrated concentrated some time. Ships being pursued by shields of an empty Colonial Battlestar with Molybdenum 10 KT Esc one broadside of torps and eliminare it with larger ships can use mines effecoxit tively as well. Be aware that mines two more. hilation-class battleship can be taken out by will not do much damage to a large capital  Intelligence is golden. a smaller ship when fighting without fighter ship. A single mine hit will only cause 10% Attacking in VGA Planets is always more support and torpedoes. damage to a battleship or carrier, so don't difficult than defending. Therefore, gather as  Respect SIZE. depend on them to slow down an enemy much intelligence (preferably with cloaked This is one game where you can send an This is one game where you can send an invasion if large warships will be coming. in and unseen ships) on an enemy system as you endless stream of smaller warships against a More To Come! can before launching your strike. large one without much chance of denting it.  Don't leave home without them If the battleships are in play, use your smaller With these general tips as your guide, you (weapons, that is). vessels to steal enemy freighters, lay mines, should be able stake a small claim in the VGA When sending warships into combat, make and so on, but don't rush headlong into a Planets galaxy. Holding onto that claim and sure they have plenty of torpedoes or fighters pointless fight against battleships or carriers acquiring more planetary real estate is another on board. Some commanders will send out unle unless absolutely necessary—that's what your matter, requiring cunning, luck, and the exploipoorly-armed vessels hoping to save money, battleships are for! battleships are for! tation of your race's inherent strengths. Next but this invites disaster. Even big-gunned  What's mine is mined, what's yours month, I'll discuss those racial characteristics ships like a Biocide-class carrier or an Anni is mined. and outline some general racial strategies, cow CONVERT YOUR DOS GAMES TO WINDOWS Conversions to full-fledged MS Windows Multimedia Games. (Including Artwork, Music & Sound Effects) UN THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit the 42 games listed below in boldface type. The price for this editor is $59.95. That's under $1.50 per editor. Upgrades will be available for new games as they are released for only $9.95 per game. CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1, 2, 3, 4, 5), Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3), Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3), Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasures of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I. Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Drakkhen, Keys to Maramon, Mega Traveller (1 or 2), Keef the Thief, Escape from Hell, Ultima Underworld (1 or 2). Twilight 2000, Gateway to the Savage Frontier, Planet's Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, Prophecy of the Shadow, Dark Sun, Martian Dreams, Realms of Arkania, Challenge of the 5 Realms, Bloodstone, Betrayal at Krondor, Lands of Lore, Dungeon Hack, Disciples of Steel. HINT BOOKS $9.95 each except where noted Might and Magic 1, Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Wizardry (1,2,3,4, 5, Bane or Crusaders ($12.95), Eye of the Beholder 2, Might and Magic 3 ($12.95). IBM listed. Apple and C64 versions also available. Mastercard Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. VISA Open from 9 AM 9 PM every day for your convenience. GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS P.O. Box 1083  Brighton, MI 48116 (313) 229.2453 * STRATEGY *PUZZLE * SIMULATION * ADVENTURE * ROLE PLAYING To learn more, contact: AESIR SOFTWARE, INC. 1003 COMMONS, EAST BRUNSWICK, NJ 08816 PHONE: (908) 238-1934 FAX: (908) 613-6134 VEZEAS Circle Reader Service #69 Circle Reader Service #41 Page 164 Computer Gaming World "


"TM Life is Feudal Sevdal Worid, only the smarte SIA In this feuda re you up for a real-time challenge? Command a feudal empire and Hattempt to dominate all other serfdoms! Your strategic planning and tactical prowess will determine your fate. Thousands of fully animated serfs are at your beck and call. Create your own personalized settlement by carefully managing activities such as mining, fishing, farming, and construction, Brave knights will be called upon to defend your settlement and conquer your enemies. So, plan wisely. Place new roads and buildings effectively. Use natural resources and maintain food supplies which will sustain your settlement. Your ultimate goal is conquest! Feudal fabulousness for the not-so feeble minded! Kowy IBM & Compatibles yy 3.5\" Disks Die Skai to negre. Visit your retailer of all I 800 215-4525 with VISA/MC (US & Canada only) Sef City: Life is Feudalis a trademark of Strategie Simolations, Inc. 1BM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corp.  1994 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #133 "


"REVIEW Pachyderm Platoon Microleague Brings Hannibal and His Famous Elephants To Your Hard Drive by M. Evan Brooks a simulation of this type. The map portrays the Roman and Carthaginian Empires, with an option to zoom in on geographic locations. Economic and military operations are depicted through use of static pictures. No one is going to be overwhelmed by the graphic opulence, but then again, a simulation of this nature does not necessarily require extravagant graphics. On the other hand, sound seems to be entirely absent, except for the occasional beep from the internal speaker. Again, an operational/strategic simulation of this nature does nor require much sound, but in this case, even a musical introduction is lacking. Hannibal's user interface is simplistic, yet somehow clumsy and obtuse. Mouse input via 11 \"hot buttons» accounts for the majority of actions. You may switch to a political overview map, view the main map, determine economic conditions (tax rate and allocations), leave winter quarters, march, switch to the market menu, split/merge armies, or negotiate/besiege cities. However, after each oprion is chosen, you must in effect reset the option menu by leaving the selected point of the menu.\" Easily forgotten, this can leave you continuously clicking the mouse button, wondering all the while why nothing is hapHannibal and the Second Punic War. Basic pening. game mechanics are delineated in four pages, A multitude of over 700 citiescach with its so understanding the interrelationships beown market conditions, is initially interesting tween army operations, economic status and en army operations, economic status and until you understand that the minutiae of political machinations proves very difficult. economic and political interactions are essential to game success. Historically, much of the data is a \"guesstimate,\" as the details of this period of history are unknown. While one may admire the designBUDGET ers for an interesting interpolation of economic and political history, it is after all only a guess. TAX RATES Game play may be summed up in a single word-boring. Carthage begins with three armies: one lo1.-One 213 3.C. cated in Carthage itself, and two in Hibernia (Spain). The home army will rarely leave its environs, being With the detail of the simulation, destined to provide defense to the a tutorial should have been prohome city of Carthage. However, Hannibal vided. Alternatively, a demo option would have allowed the user to watch the computer and observe basic operational mechanics entoni PRICE: SYSTEM: and strategy. Not only are these REQUIREMENTS: 286 or better, 2MB RAM, 7MB hard drive space; supports most options conspicuously absent, major sound cards making Hannibala difficult game PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: Claude and Clovis Cueni to learn and play, there is only one PUBLISHER: Microleague Interactive Software long scenario and one victory con(800) 334-6572 dition. The graphics are acceptable for EPIRE MONSTRATION Number of citiest Tunber of inhab. 1 5.318820 Fining revenue(pa) 1 nterest rev.(pa) : Arey Treasury 1 Subsis to a city treasury icroleague, previously known for sports simulations, has expanded V its product line to include historical simulations. Hannibal, a European import, is the first such release. It is a detailed simulation of the Second Punic War, and more particularly, of Hannibal's attempt to achieve Carthaginian hegemony over the growing power of Rome. Ancient warfare has never been a popular subject in computer wargaming, but this seems to be the year of pre-gunpowder simulations, both in the computer and boardgaming branches of the hobby. With the decline of the Cold War, player interest has focused elsewhere, and the ancient period has undergone a revival both in terms of releases and interest. The period has traditionally lacked commercial success, as ancient military maneuver was often limited to occasional movement, and even in the great battles. opponents literally bludgeoned their way to victory or defeat. The question for games of ancient war, and thus for Hannibal, is whether the designers can overcome this inherent difficulty and provide both an entertaining simulation and one that realistically depicts history. Maart far alt cities in country order separately for each cita $49.95 IBM None Newark, DE Looking Out Over The Med The documentation is somewhat briefconsisting of 16 pages of \"How to Play,\" followed by a 20-page historical treatise on Page 166 Computer Gaming World "


"14 AVE 15 13 21 FEED USED IBM GAMES COMPLETE & VIRUS FREE WITH THE ORIGINAL BOX DOCUMENTATION AND DISKS 18 GUNSHIP 2000 VGA HALLS OF MONTEZUMA HARD NOVA HARDBALL 3 HARPOON HARPOON DESIGNER SER HARPOON EDITOR HARRIER ASSAULT HEART OF CHINA VGA HEAVEN & EARTH HEAVY METAL HEROES OF THE 357TH HEROES OF THE LANCE HIGH COMMAND HILLSFAR HOOK HOVERFORCE HOYLE'S BK GAMES VOL 1 HOYLE'S BK GAMES VOL 2 HOYLE'S BK GAMES VOL 3 HUMANS HUNT RED OCTOBER HYPERSPEED IMMORTAL INCA INCREDIBLE MACHINE VGA INDIANAPOLIS 500 INOY JONES FATE ATLA INDY JONES: LAST CRUS ISHIDO ISLAND OF DA BRAIN VGA DOUBLE DRAGON 2 DRAGON FORCE ORAGON LORD DRAGON WARS DRAGONS OF FLAME ORAKKHEN DUNE DUNE 2 DUSK OF THE GODS EARTHRISE ELVIRA 1 ELVIRA 2 EPIC ERIC THE UNREADY ESCAPE FROM HELL ETERNAM EYE OF THE BEHOLDER EYE OF BEHOLDER 2 EYE OF BEHOLDER 3 MANTIS EXP FIGHTER-VGA MANTIS EXP SPEECH PA MARTIAN DREAMS MARTIAN MEMORANDUM MATAIX CUBED MAXIMUM OVERKILL. MAXIMUM OVERKILL MISS MEAN STREETS MECHWARRIOR MEDIEVAL LORDS MEGAFORTRESS MEGAFORTRESS MISS DK MEGATRAVELLER 1 ZHOD MEGATRAVELLER 2 MERCHANT COLONY MICHAEL JORDAN FLT SIM MIDWINTER MIG 29 FULCRUM MIGHT & MAGIC 1 MIGHT & MAGIC 2 MIGHT & MAGIC 3 MIGHT & MAGIC 4 MIGHT & MAGIC 5 MIKE DITKA FOOTBALL MILLENIUM MINES OF TITAN MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE ML BASEBALL 4 USAT ML BASEBALL GMOWNER ML BASEBALL MANAGERS ML FOOTBALL 2 RAILROAD TYCOON RAMPART REALMS REALMS OF ARKANIA RED LIGHTNING RETURN OF PHANTOM RETURN TO ZORK REVOLUTION 76 REX NEBULAR COS GEN RIDEAS OF ROHAN RISE OF DRAGON-VGA ROAD & TRACK GRAN PR ROAD TO FINAL FOUR ROBOSPORT WIN ROCKETEEN ROMANCE 3 KINGDOMS ROMANCE 3 KINGDOMS 2 ROME: PATHWAY TO POW RULES OF ENGAGEMENT RULES OF ENGAGMNT 2 SAVAGE EMPIRE SCRABBLE SEAL TEAM SEARCH FOR THE KING SECONO FRONT SECRET OF SILVER BLADE SECRET WEAPONS LUFTW SENTINEL WORLDS SHADOW CASTER SHADOW OF YSEABIUS SHADOW PRESIDENT 24 16 11 24 19 9 19 GAMER'S GOLD WE PAY CASH FOR USED GAMES WE'RE BUYING! IBM & MAC GAMES Got Something To Sell? Follow these Easy Steps We want your current used games 1-800-377-8578 1. Prepare a list of the games you are selling. Specify IBM or MAC. Call, fax, or mail your list to GAMER'S GOLD. IBM or MAC Of The games you are selling. Specity call for authorization before shipping or FAX list for current quolos to 605-334-8766 In Canada, call 605-339-2060 ULTIMA E SERPENT ISLE STORMOVIK STREET FIGHTER 2 STREET ROD 2 STRIKE ACES STRIKE COMMANDER STRIKE COMMANDER SP STUNT DRIVER STUNT ISLAND STUNTS SUMMONING SWORD OF ARAGON SYNDICATE TANGLED TALES TANK TASK FORCE 1942 TEAM YANKEE TEENAGE MNT ARCADE TEENAGE HT HANH Mis TEGEL'S MERCENARIES TERMINATOR TERMINATOR 2029 TEST DRIVE2 TEST DRIVE 3 TEST DRIVE 3. ROAD&CAR THE PROPHECY THEATRE OF WAR THEIR FINEST HOUR THEXDER 1 THUNDER HAWK THUNDERSTRIKE TIMES OF LORE TOM LANDRY FOOTBALL TONY LARUSSA BB TONY LARUSSAULT BB TOP GUN DANGER ZONE TORNADO TRACON TRACON 2 TREASURES SAVAGE FR TRILOGY TRISTAN PINBALL TUNNELS & TROLLS TWILIGHT 2000 VGA TYPHOON OF STEEL ULTIMA 4 QUEST AVAT ULTIMA 5 WARRIORS DE ULTIMA 6 FALSE PROPH ULTIMA 7 BLACK GATE ULTIMA 7 FORGE OF VIRT ULTIMA 7.5 SERPENT ISLE ULTIMA 7.5 SILVER SE ULTIMA TRILOGY 1 ULTIMA TRILOGY 2 ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 1 ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 2 ULTRABOTS SANCTIONE UMS 2 UNCHARTED WATERS UNDER FIRE UNLIMITED ADVENTURES UTOPIA V VICTORY: UTAH BEACH VEIL OF DARKNESS VENGEANCE OF EXCALIBR VIKING CHILD VISIONS OF AFTERMATH WAR IN MIDDLE EARTH WAR IN THE GULF 24 WARLORDS WARLORDS 2 WAXWORKS WC 2 SPEC OPERATION 1 WC 2 SPEC OPERATION 2 WC 2 SPEECH PACK WC SECRET MISSION 1 WC SECRET MISSION 2 WC ULTIMA 6 CD WEAVER BASEBALL 2 WEAVER COMMISIONERS WEAVER MLBPA PLAST WESTERN FRONT WHEN TWO WORLDS WR WHERE IN WORLD CSD WHERE IN WALD CSD-CD WING COMMANDER 1 WING COMMANDER 2 WING COMM ACADEMY WIZARDY 4 WIZARDRY 5 WIZARDRY E-COSMIC FOR WIZARDRY 7-CRUSADERS WOLFENSTEIN 30 WOLFPACK WONDERLAND WORLD CIRCUIT WORLDS AT WAR X-WING X-WING B WING X-WING IMPERIAL PURS YEAGER'S AIR COMBAT 40 BOXING 683 ATTACK SUB 7TH GUEST-CO A-TRAIN ATAC. A10 TANK KILLER 1.5 ABC BOXING ABC MONDAY NIGHT FB ACES OF THE PACIFIC ACTION SPORTS SOCCER ACTION STATIONS ADV OF WILLY BEAMISH AIR BUCKS AIR BUCKS VER 1.2 AIR FORCE COMMANDER ALL AMERICAN COLLG FB ALONE IN THE DARK ALTERED DESTINY AMAZON AMBUSH ANCIENT ART WAR SEA ANCIENT ART WAR SKY APBA FOOTBALL ARE WE THERE YET? ARMADA 2525 ARMOUR ALLEY BAT 817 FLYING FORTRESS BAD BLOOD BALANCE OF POWER 1990 BALANCE OF THE PLANE BARD'S TALE 1 BARD'S TALE 2 BARD'S TALE 3 BARD'S TALE CONST SET BATTLE CHESS BATTLE CHESS-CO BATTLE ISLE BATTLES OF DESTINY BATTLETECH 1 BATTLETECH 2 BETRAYAL AT KAONDOR BIG BUSINESS BLITZKRIEG ARDENNES BLOODSTONE BLOOOWYCH BLUE ANGELS BLUE FORCE NEXT OF KIN BO JACKSON BASEBALL BRAIN BLASTER BREACH 2 BREACH 2 SCEN DISK BUCK ROGERS 1 BUZZ ALDRIN PACE INT CAESAR CAESARS PALACE CAMPAIGN CAR & DRIVER CARRIER COMMAND CARRIER STRIKE CARRIERS AT WAR CASTLE OR BRAIN VGA CASTLES CASTLES 2 CASTLES-NRTHRN CMPN CENTERION DFNOR ROME CHALLENGE OF S REALM CHAMBER SCI MUT PRST CHAMPIONS OF KAYNN CHESSMASTER 3000 WIN CIVILIZATION CLASH OF STEEL CLUE MASTER DETECTIV COASTER CODE NAME: ICEMAN COLONEL'S BEQUEST COMMAND HO CONAN CONFLICT: KOREA CONFLICT: MIDDLE EAST CONQUERED KINGDOMS CONQUESTS OF CAMELOT CONQUESTS OF JAPAN CONQUESTS OF LONGBO CONTINUIM CORPORATION COUNTDOWN COVERT ACTION CRACK DOWN CRIBBAGE GIN KING CRIME WAVE CRISIS IN THE KREMLIN CRUISE FOR A CORPSE CURSE OF AZURE BONDS CYBER EMPIRE CYBERGENIC RANGER DAGGER OF AMMON RA DARK CENTURY DARX QUEEN OF KRYNN DARK SUN DARKLANDS DARKLANDS MASTER ED DARKSEED DARKSPYRE DAVID WOLF: SECRET AG DAY OF THE VIPER DEJA VU 2 LOST IN LV DEATH KNIGHT OF KRYN DICK TRACY DONT GO ALONE WE SELL USED GAMES All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked games are in original box with original documentation Call for current title availibility AMER'S WE ACCEPT ONLY SET 53 VISA/MasterCard/Discover USA Money Orders/Cashiers Check Most items shipped same day. $5 UPS/S9 2nd Day Air GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakota 57105 2. GAMER'S GOLD will quole the current buying prices & issue an authorization number for your shipment Games will not be accepted without an authorization no. Price quotes are good for 14 days. 3. Pack games in box. Write authorization no. clearly on outside of box. Mail to GAMER'S GOLD. 4. If you would like to use your money or credit to purchase gamos, includa a \"wish list of titles you are interested in. 5. Your check will usually be mailed within 5-7 working days of receiving your games. Games will be checked for virusos & completeness. Gamos must be complete with all disks, printed materials, & in original box. Incomplete games will be returned at your expense. 13 19 21 16 JCK NICKLAUS GRTST 18 JACK NICKLAUS SE CRS JACK NICKLAUS SIGNATU JACK NICKLAUS UNL GOLF JAMES BOND STEALTH JET FIGHTER 2 MISSION JET FIGHTER 2.0 JOE MONTANA FOOTBALL JUMP JET KEYS TO MARAMON VO KGB wo EYE OF BEHOLDER 3-CO F-117A STEALTH FIGHTER F15 STRIKE EAGLE 2 F15 STRIKE EAGLE 3 F19 STEALTH FIGHTER FALCON 3.0 FIGHT TIGER FALCON 3.0 FALCON AT FANTASY EMPIRE FIGHTING FOR ROME FINAL CONFLICT FI RETEAM 2200 FLAMES OF FREEDOM FLASHBACK FLIGHT OF INTRUDER FLIGHT SIMULATOR 4.0 FLIGHT SIMULATOR 5.0 FLOOR 13 FOUNTAIN OF DREAMS FOUR CRYSTALS TRAZER FREDDY PHARKAS FRTR FREE DC FRONT PAGE FOOTBALL FRONT PAGE FB PRO FULL METAL PLANET FUTURE WARS GARY GRIGSBY PACIFIC GATEWAY GATEWAY 2: HOMEWALD GATEWAY SAVAGE FRTR GENGHIS KHAN GHOSTS & GOBLINS GLOBAL CONQUEST GLOBAL EFFECT GOBLINS 2. VGA GOBLINS VGA GODFATHER GOLD OF AZTECS GOLD OF THE AMERICAS GRAIL QUEST GRANDSLAM BRIDGE GREAT NAVAL BATTLES GREAT NB AMERICA ATL GREAT NB SUPER SHIPS GREENS GUNBOAT GUNSHIP GUNSHIP 2000 SCEN DSK KILLING CLOUD KING'S QUEST 4 EGA KING'S QUEST S-VGA KING'S QUEST 6. VGA KNIGHTS OF THE SKY KOSHAN CONSPIRACY L'EMPEREUR LAKERS VS CELTICS \"LANDSEA AIR TRILOGY LANDS OF LORE LASER SQUAD LEATHER GOODESSES 2 LEGACY:REALM OF TERR LEGEND OF FAERGHAIL LEGEND OF KYRANDIA LEGENDS OF VALOR LEMMINGS LEMMINGS 2 LEXICROSS LHX ATTACK CHOPPER LIGHTSPEED LINE IN THE SAND LINKS 386 PRO LINKS GOLF LORD OF THE RINGS 2 LOST ADMIRAL ENHANCED LOST FILES SHERLOCK LOST IN LA MADDEN FOOTBALL 1 MADDEN FOOTBALL 2 MAELSTROM MAGIC CANDLE 1 MAGIC CANDLE 2 MAGIC CANDLE 3 MAGIC JOHNSON MVP MANHOLE MANHUNTER SF ML FOOTBALL DELUXE MONKEY ISLAND 2 MONKEY ISLAND VGA MOONBASE MURDER NASCAR CHALLENGE NFL COACH'S CLUB NFL FOOTBALL NFL PRO LEAGUE FB 191 NFL PRO LEAGUE FB '92 NIGHTBREED NO GREATER GLORY NOVA 9 VGA OBITUS OIL'S WELL OPERATION COMBAT OUT OF THIS WORLD PALADIN 2 PAPERBOY 2 PATRIOT PERFECT GENERAL PIRATES PLANET'S EDGE PLAYMAKER FOOTBALL POLICE QUESTI-VGA POLICE QUEST 3. VGA POLICE QUEST 4 POOL OF RADIANCE POOLS OF DARKNESS POPULOUS POPULOUS 2 POWER HITS: MOVIES POWER HITS: SCI/FI POWER HITS: SPORTS POWERHITS: BATTLETEC POWERMONGER PRINCE OF PERSIA PRINCE OF PERSIA 2 PAIVATEER PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL PROPHECY 1 PROPHECY OF SHADOW PROTOSTAR PSYCHIC WAR QUEST FOR GLORY 1.EGA QUEST FOR GLORY 1-VGA QUEST FOR GLORY 2.EGA QUEST FOR GLORY3-VGA SHADOW SORCERER SHADOWGATE WIN SHADOWLANOS SHERLOCK HOLMES -CD SHUTTLE SIEGE SIEGE EXP.DOGS OF WAR SIERRA ADV BUNDLE SIERRA FAMILY FUN PK SILENT SERVICE 2 SILPHEED SIM CITY SIM CITY GRAPHICS SET 1 SIM CITY GRAPHICS SET 2 SIM CITY TERRAIN EDIT SIM ANT SIM EARTH SIM LIFE SKATE OR DIE SOLITAIRE'S JOURNEY SORCERIAN SPACE 1889 SPACE HULK SPACE QUEST 1 VGA SPACE QUEST 2. EGA SPACE QUEST 3 SPACE QUEST 4 VGA SPACE QUEST 5-VGA SPACE QUEST BUNDLE SPACE ROGUE SPACEWARD HO! SPEAR OF DESTINY SPECIAL FORCES SPECTRE SPELLCASTING 101 SPELLCASTING 201 SPELLCASTING 301 SPELLCRAFT: ASPECT SPELLIAMMER PIRATES SPIRIT OF EXCALIBUR STAR CONTROL STAR CONTROL 2 STAR FLEET 2 STAR LEGIONS STAR TREK 25TH ANNIV STARFLIGHT 1 STARFLIGHT 2 STELLAR 7 Prices & availability subject to change. Call Toll Free for current titles and those not listed-we've got lots more! All Used Games are complete & virus free with original box, documentation & disks. All sales are final-defective games replaced with same title. Free shipping (Regular Ground) in the continental USA on orders over $150. wBuy & SELL 12 16 Circle Reader Service #68 "


"31 Start siege End sie Sign HCL Brza i cogliations Carthaw Nowa the two Spanish armies must move into Italy the documentation advise the player to take the consequences. Ignoring a plea for assisand attempt to defeat Rome. \"small cavalry detachments and send them tance will simply render future revolts less Since sea movement is dependent on ships ahead of the main army.\" They can be used likely, while an intervention may take away and the Carthaginian Empire lacks sufficient for scouting and preliminary negotiations. forces from the overall strategic goal. Only tonnage to move its armies successfully, you Good advice, except that the game system repeated playings and balancing of actions will generally rely on land movement. Rather does not allow it! Attempting to create a pure will give you a feel for optimal play. than selecting a final destination, you must cavalry detachment apart from the YESTER instead move armies from town to town. main army is fruitless, as the simuAUS Since the road from Hannibal's initial localation automatically merges it back tion to Italy is littered with over 25 towns, into the larger formation. Only by and since travel from one town to another can detaching both cavalry and infantake several minutes, it becomes apparent try units can smaller armies be that Hannibalis not going to be a quick play. made. Military movement, though, is only a small Since destinations are generally portion of this simulation. Since an army dozens of cities distant, the player \"travels on its stomach,\" the logistical details frequently falls into the trap of alof movement are also a player role, and you lowing tactical expediency to overmust constantly buy rations for your troops come strategic goals. You should to assure that morale remains at an acceptable write notes of what you intend to level. Why this could not be accomplished by do with your forces, and refer to it an automatic subroutine is unclear. What is each turn. If objectives change, at clear is that logistical operations have yet to least your reaction will be a conscious one, Victory is difficult to achieve, as Hannibal produce an interesting game, and Hannibal rather than simply getting lost in the pointhimself discovered. Placating allies, bribing illustrates this fact all too well. to-point movement maze. potentially hostile cities, and hiring merceEach turn consists of one day, naries all contribute to success. The problem and whoever determined the scale is that the game is so slow moving that you of time and movement was obviyearn for an early resolution, often caring less ously enthralled with long periods whether Rome itself succeeds, just as long as of tedium interspersed with short the game ends. military battles of equal tedium. When armies collide, your level of Hannibal himself may be considered the interaction consists of derermining Rommel or Napoleon of the Roman era. Fines: Silver an offensive/defensive posture, Feared but also admired by his opponents, his then allowing the computer to remere presence on the battlefield was worth Connecting roads : 2 solve the situation. thousands of troops. But this simulation apWhile the documentation dis parently lacks any sort of leader bonuscs. In cusses the effects of the various effect, you wear so many hats that you portray 2012 combat formations, they are not not only Hannibal, but every leader of the graphically portrayed. Instead, the Carthaginian army. The role of the Each new town brings an opportunity to two armies are arrayed by infantry, Cathaginian war elephants is also obscured by conquer or negotiate, basedupon the city's cavalry and elephants, with casualties mountthe game. Actually, the use of such weapons political alignment. Similarly, a tax rate maying by tote board until one army wins or of war were remarkably similar to chemical be determined on a city-by-city basis of deflees-about as interesting as watching a keno warfare; initially devastating, the great beasts sired. The rise of the bureaucracy goes back board or scanning groceries at the supermar became less and less effective, and in fact more to the first cmpires, yet Rome is popularly ket. Since the player cannot get information of a hindrance, as the enemy learned how to considered to have developed the bureaucon the formation the Romans have used in a counter them. Such lessons are hidden within racy to an unparalleled level. In keeping with battle, any particular success or failure may the scale of the game, and cannot be learned its stated premise of historical simulation, well be attributed to the gods. Hannibal allows you to play the bureaucrat except through the historical background Away from the front, you must assign rear to the extreme. Unless you are engaged in portion of the documentation. writing a thesis at the Wharton School of derachments to assure continued political staBusiness, or unaccountably enthralled by bility. Excess taxation will cause revolt and While Microleague deserves some credit green eyeshades, this portion of the simulaloss of revenue, yet Roman allies will also for publishing a historical simulation of antion becomes repetitious, tiresome and grow weary of paying for an expensive war. cient warfare, the company needs to learn When a Roman ally revolts, you must confrom this experience and provide more interdull-yet it is the basis for success. sider whether it is useful to offer aid, with esting products in the future. As it stands, Truth & Consequences For your main criteria being location. A revolt by Hannibal Lector would prove a more enterThe Commander a Roman ally too far from Carthaginian intaining houseguest than Hannibal. Designer fluence will wither away; aid cannot reach it Sid Meier has stated on numerous occasions Military operations, while seemingly more insufficient time. Should trouble brew that he emphasizes the \"fun parts\" of a simuinteresting, add little spark to counteract the within a geographic area capable of lation and throws our the rest. MicroLeague logistical redium. The \"Hints and Tricks\" of Carthaginian reinforcement, you must weigh could learn a lot from Sid's success. Cow Country: Hispania Status: Colony of car. city art inhabitants Tortifications: Tax ratet 5 Z Faabr 31000300 Emmipaent: 1933 Hercenary! City treasuryt 531 Location: Coast. existing part 101 Liephant citu. Daar. O Cartesian 1.-wue 21% 3.6. Page 168 Computer Gaming World "


"The Marketplace For Marketing & Advertising Information Call Marci Yamaguchi at 714-283-3000 x37. Games Too Expensive? The NEW Consider Pre-owned Software CAPE COD CONNECTION Save big SSS over new ELECTRONIC SHOPPING MALL Original disks and manuals IBM AMIGA C64 Our BBS is back 24 HOUR Electronic On-Line Hard-to-find classics plus Shopping is available. Download our complete all the latest releases new & used Software, Tabletop & Sports Apparel Call or write for free catalog Catalogs, updated daily with new products. OnLine Ordering 24 Hours . One of the largest used (specify computer) software listing available today. Have us sell your Bare Bones Software used software on consignment. 940 4th Ave #222 Huntington WV 25701 Robert Berry, Proprietor 21 PLEASANT VIEW AVENUE FALMOUTH, MA 02540 1-800-638-1123 BBS 508-548-2908. HELP 508-457-0738 Customer Service: 304-529-0461 BBS for comnlete list: 304-529-7050 24 HOUR FAX 508-457-4558 Circle Reader Service #45 Circle Reader Service #50 2. E NESEKRETERGEN:15:10: 10 FREE Software! FREE Hardware! Become a Beta Tester! It's easy! Companies can't afford to pay employees to play games all day in search of programming errors. They need you to test their newest games and hardware. You can keep what you test Free! For a complete information package on becoming a Beta Tester send $9.95 + $3.95 S/H to: CCB Enterprises PO Box 336 Saint Marys, GA 31558 GALEGA \"Powerful programs of growth and adventure\" MAGIC MIRROR I... a toolbox for your mind. E. Kinnie, PhD., Clinical Psychologist, $39.95. MAGIC MIRROR IL ... experiences for your mind, $39.95. THREE GATES ... skryeing, awareness shifting. I Ching and runes, $39.95. MERLIN ... an apprenticeship, $29.95. PHOENIX FIRE... high-tech Ouija Board, $39.95. MAGIC MOUNTAIN... weird adventure, male and female versions, not for children, $39.95. Blue Valley, 29 Shepard St., Walton, NY 13856 XXX MasterCard/Visa 1-800-545-6172 (alter 5 p.m.) MAIRIE Circle Reader Service #48 Circle Reader Service #120 Introducing the Cybership MIDNIGHT GAMES FINEST IN INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT SINCE 1984 \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" Encapsulated Computing Enviroment. An affordable virtual reality system for your home computer. Enhances the realism of games & simulators. Why do your computing at a desk when you can relax inside the comfortable cockpit of your own Cybership? Inexpensive. Easy to build. Fun to use. For detailed plans & instructions that include provisions for a built-in stereo system, and controllers send $26.95 to: Cybership Systems P.O. Box 166 Cottage Grove, MN 55016 (612) 768-0326 Circle Reader Service #59 LEGENDS A RICHLY DETAILED AND REALISTIC COMPUTER MODERATED PLAY-BY-MAIL GAME SIMULATION COMBINING THE FINEST ELEMENTS OF FANTASY ROLE-PLAYING AND EMPIRE BUILDING! RULES BOOKS $15.00 CAMPAIGN MODULE $15.00 (INCLUDES SET-UP AND MAP) EXCITING GAME CLOSEOUTS BRAND NEW GAMES NEVER USED ROLE PLAYING AND SUPER STRATAGY GAMES ALL FIRST QUALITY Do you know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't, we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 10 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies and more fill each issue. Not to mention the ratings of PBM games and companies that our readers participate in. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news So why delay and miss out on all the fun? Read Paper Mayhem and take advantage of PBM gaming. Send subscriptions to: PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG,1518 Adams St. Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: 1 year Canada $31.00: 1 year to Europe $51.00. 1 year to Australia $57.00. All Subscriptions to PAPER MAYHEM are to be paid in US funds and drawn from US banks. Forcign subscriptions are asked to use International Money Order in US funds. Circle Reader Service #101 MIDNIGHT GAMES PO BOX 280 DEPT G MEDFORD OR 97501-0019 BBS# 503-857-8537 PHONE# 503-772-7872 FAX# 503-772-0636 COMPUSERVE# 71241,455 IBM SELECTIONS MAGIC CANDLE III *STAR LEGIONS AMERCENARIES * AMBUSH AT SORINORMAGIC CANDLE II GAMES ABOVE ARE AVAILABLE IN 3 1/2 OR 5 1/4 AMIGA SELECTIONS RULES OF ENGAGEMENT PRICING: $15.00 EACH + $ 3.99 SGH CA. RESIDENTS ADD SALES TAX SEND CHECK TO: OR GIVE OUR MULTI-LINE BBS A CALL AND CHECK OUT THE LATEST IN WINDOWS AND OS/2 SHAREWARE, OR VISIT OUR GAMING SECTIONI Circle Reader Service #92 THE MERIT GROUP 2341 WEST 205TH ST 7104 TORRANCE, CA 90501 (310) 328-9664 COD ORDERS WELCOME Circle Reader Service #87 May 1994 Page 169 "


"ADVERTISERS' INDEX BY COMPANY Page RS# Company Phone Number Page 177 84 % % 104-105 115 179 09 % 119 128-129 169 153 155 136-137 40-41 164 6 150 21  48-49 169 5 2 3 4 169 100-101 169 123 172-173 175 159 106 97 7 169 19 9 9 8 78-87 116-117 142-145 Cover 4 169 9 37 102 3 6 9 RS# Company Phone Number 35 21st Century (716) 872-1200 Entertainment Access Software (800) 800-4880 Advanced Console (708) 706-6720 Technologies Advanced Digital Systems (800) 888-5244 40 Advanced Gravis (604) 431-5020 Aesir Software (908) 238-1934 42 Aldea Labs (214) 235-4999 Apogee Software (800) gam-e123 Avalon Hill (800) 999-3222 Bare Bones Software (800) 638-1123 Baseline Publishing (800) 926-9677 Bethesda Softworks (800) 677-0700 Blue Valley (800) 545-6172 Broderbund Software (800) 521-6263 50 Cape Cod Connection (508) 548-2908 Capstone Software (800) 468-7226 CCB Enterprise (508) 548-2908 Chips & Bits (800) 699-4263 Computer Express (800) 228-7449 Computer Express (800) 228-7449 Creative Labs (800) 998-5227 Crystal Dynamics, Inc (415) 473-3434 Cyber Ship Systems (612) 768-0326 DeVuono DeVuono (800) 350-5550 Games Direct Way 3000 (800) 882-8108 Dongleware (617) 497-1130 Epic Mega Games (800) 972-7434 64 Falcon Northwest (800) 258-6778 FormGen Corporation (800) 263-2390 G.E. Information Systems (800) 638-8369 Gamer's Gold (800) 337-8578 Gosselin Computer (313) 229-2453 Consultants 70 HPS Simulations (408) 554-8381 71 Id Software (800) 661-7383 72, 73 Imagitec Design, Inc. (800) 775-4200 74 Imagitec Design, Inc. (800) 775-4200 122 Imagitec Design, Inc. (800) 775-4200 76 Impressions Software Inc (617) 225-0848 75 Impressions Software Inc. (617) 225-0848 77 Impressions Software Inc. (617) 225-0848 Innerprise Software (800) 937-7737 79 Intellimedia Sports (800) 886-4956 123 Interplay (714) 553-6678 124 Interplay (714) 553-6678 80 Keyboard Commander (800) 228-7449 81 Koei (415) 348-0500 83 Logitech (800) 889-0051 24-25 169 71 Logitech (800) 889-0051 Mallard Software (800) web-feet Media Vision Software (800) 845-5870 Megatech (310) 539-7739 Merit Group (310) 328-9664 Merit Software (800) 238-4277 Micro Sports, Inc. (800) 937-7737 Microforum (800) 465-2323 MicroProse (800) 879-play MicroProse (800) 879-play Microsoft (800) 426-9400 Midnight Game (503) 772-7872 Mission Control (800) 999-7995 Multimedia Specialist (800) 233-0010 National Videotex Network (800) 336-9096 Nawu Triad Institute (904) 494-3165 Nova Logic (818) 774-0812 Nova Logic (818) 774-0812 Origin Systems (800) 7568766 Origin Systems (800) 756-8766 Paper Mayhem Paramount Interactive (415) 813-8040 Paramount Interactive (415) 813-8040 Quantum Quality Products (908) 788-2799 Quantum Quality Products (908) 788-2799 Quarterdeck (800) 888-4880 Realism Entertainment (708) 595-7487 REM Software (313) 457-1161 Sega of America (800) 872-7342 Sideline Software (800) 888-9273 Sierra Direct (800) 795-5979 Sierra Dynamics (800) 757-7707 Sierra Dynamics (800) 757-7707 Sierra On-Line (800) 757-7707 Sigma Design (800) 845-8086 SIIG (510) 657-8688 Simulations Systems (800) 647-7623 Software Toolworks (800) 234-3088 Spectrum Electronics (800) 983-4321 Spectrum HoloByte (800) 695-game Strategic Simulations, Inc. (800) 245-4525 Strategic Simulations, Inc. (800) 245-4525 Strategic Simulations, Inc. (800) 245-4525 Strategic Simulations, Inc. (800) 245-4525 Strategic Simulations, Inc. (800) 245-4525 Thinking Software, Inc. (718) 803-3638 Titan Games (800) 247-5447 Virgin Games (714) 833-1999 ** See advertisement for contact information. 135 127 103 104 105 106 119 . 107 108 147 162 150 163 11 63 Cover 2 63 Q 167 164 109 111 128 112 113 103 141 133 Cover 3 56 65 125 107 74-75 106 90-91 55 161 149 47 157 165 45 129 120 169 109-111 33 114 151 52-53 118 Page 170 Computer Gaming World "


"ADVERTISERS' INDEX BY PRODUCT RS# Product Company Page RS# Product Company Page 90 1942 Pacific Air War 110 Aces Over Europe Action Replay 27 38 70 52 0 % 164 Aide De Camp 132 Al-Qadim 47 Arena 117 Armed and Dangerous 46 Axis 109 Battle Drome 118 Beneath A Steel Sky 42 Best Girlfriend 75 Breach 3 103 Bridge Olympiad 44 Onarnt 4-5 163 187 179 89 98 Comanche CD Corridor 7 Cowboy Casino Cyberman 76 D-Day: The Beginning of the End 74 Daemonsgate 130 Dark Legions 65 Disciples of Steel 71 DOOM 86 Dragon Knight III 50 Electronic Shopping Mall BBS 115 Entertainment Hardware and Software Epic Pinball Evolution (DPS) 91 F-14 F Means Fake Falcon & MIG Commander Utilities 116 Falcon 3.0 64 Falcon Mach V Flight Simulator 105 Game Pack 39 Game Zapper Microprose 40-41 87 Mail Order Games Merit Group 169 Sierra Dynamics 61 Mail Order Peripherals Direct Way 3000 150 Advanced Console 115 107 Mail Order Products Sideline Software 162 Technologies 120 Mail Order Products Thinking Software, Inc. 169 HPS Simulations 141 Mail Order Products CCB Enterprise 169 Strategic Simulations, Inc. 161 54 Mail Order Products Chips & Bits 78-87 Bethesda Softworks Mail Order Products Computer Express 142-145 Titan Games Mail Order Products Gosselin Computer 164 Baseline Publishing Consultants Sierra Dynamics 93 Mail Order Products Mission Control 172-173 Virgin Games 35 94 Mail Order Products Multimedia Specialist 175 Aldea Labs 150 68 Mail Order Software Gamer's Gold Impressions Software Inc. 57 114 Mega Race Software Toolworks Quantum Quality 134 126 Microforum Family Microforum 136-137 Products of Products Nova Logic 1949 Myst Broderbund 100-101 Capstone Software | 123 95 NVN National Videotex 159 Intellimedia Sports 58 Network Logitech 52-53 Operation Crusader Avalon Hill Impressions Software Inc 55 Quantum Quality 135 Products Imagitec Design, Inc. 125 111 Outpost Sierra On-Line Strategic Simulations, Inc. 47 63 Oxyd Magnum Dongleware FormGen Corporation 101 PBM Magazine Paper Mayhem 169 Id Software 35 Pinball Fantasies 21st Century 177 Entertainment Megatech 45 Pre-owned Software Bare Bones Software 169 Cape Cod Connection 169 Pro League Baseball Micro Sports, Inc. 155 Spectrum Electronics 106 78 Pro Tennis Cup Innerprise Software 149 122 Raiden Imagitec Design, Inc. Epic Mega Games 43 Raptor Apogee Software 113 Imagitec Design, Inc. 65 131 Ravenloft Strategic Simulations, Inc. 157 MicroProse 21 128 Reel Magic Lite Sigma Design 103 Advanced Gravis 128-129 85 Road Scholar AD Media Vision Software 29 Keyboard Commander 114 81 Romance of the Koei 151 Corp. Three Kingdoms III Spectrum HoloByte 90-91 133 Serf City Strategic Simulations, Inc. 165 Falcon Northwest 63 123 SimCity CD Interplay 109, 111 Microsoft 48-49 124 Star Trek: Judgment Rites Interplay Quarterdeck 127 57 Sound Blaster 16 Creative Labs Advanced Digital 119 82 Soundman Wave Logitech Systems 108 Sprint Sierra Direct Sega of America 7 99 System Shock Origin Systems G.E. Information Systems 9 129 Tanks Strategic Simulations, Inc. 45 58 The Horde Crystal Dynamics, Inc 24-25 Blue Valley 169 119 The Infinity Machine REM Software 162 DeVuono DeVuono 711 96 Triad Campaign System Nawu Triad Institute 106 Games 112 TV Game Plus SUG 133 Merit Software 153 36 Under A Killing Moon Access Software 104-105 Paramount Interactive 99 113 Universal Cockpit Simulations Systems 56 Realism Entertainment 147 and Joystick Mallard Software 77 41 Windows To DOS Aesir Software 164 Conversion Midnight Game 169 100 Wings of Glory Origin Systems 188 Impressions Software Inc. 59 97 Wolfpack CD Nova Logic 17 Paramount Interactive 97 Cyber Ship Systems 169 No Reader Service Number. Please call advertiser for more Computer Express 116-117 information. 107 11 73 67 Genesis Shadow Run GEnie Multi-player Games Growth and Adventure Software Hollywood Mogul 60 88 102 106 84 92 77 121 59 56 Isle of the Dead Jump Raven Kingdoms of Germany Las Vegas Scenery Legends Lords of the Realm Lunicus Mail Order Products Mail Order Edutainment Software May 1994 Page 171 "


"MUSSHON Call 800.999.7995 FREE SHIPPING! ON ALL U.S. ORDERS OVER $50. VIA UPS GROUND WITH COUPON. NEURODANCER SUPER MODELS GO WILD! NEW MACHINE PRESENTS! DREAM MACHINE 0.30 M UI Join our 5 supermod es as they go wild of the California const. There's hiking, bilding climbing, boating and playing in the sand and surt. Breathtaking shots of beautiful locations and gorgeous women starring Jessica Watson, Tonya, Jena Behr & Keri Anne. CD ROW $49. MASHINE The most innovative CD ever! Navigate through a 3D world  ream where your ultimate  4 rth? fantasies come alive. Wow yn gallu decide TheDream Machine's beautiful hostess will lead you on an interactive journey through your imagination. The only CD chat adapts to your choices. As seen on Donahue, Joan Rivers and CNN. CD ROM $69. bal app . cele TEY IRIDINE BRON Roam the NeuroNET by backing into the forbidden worlds of dark mysteries & danger. Use your computer and VidFone to obtain enough credits to view the crotic Neurodancers who roam the computer networks in search of willing viewers. Featuring 3D animation, interactive game-play, TFUI Interface and live motion video. Requires: 486, SVGA, 4 MB of Hard Disk, 8 Mb RAM. CD ROM $69. SCISSORS N STONES Beautiful women engage you in an all or nothing, O SCISSORSTU STONES head-to-head competition of high stakes, the stakes are not for money but rather for articles of clothing. The first interactive erotic game that features full motion video merged with 3D PLEXIS generated animation that adds an extra dimension of realism. never before available. Includes, Realistic 3D walk through sequences, Full person pointof-view, Addicitve game-play, multipleopponent. CD ROM $69. T U WINNER TAKES WINN ALL NIGHT WATCH 2 We are back at the Inxurious ocean front resort of the stars. You will make the rounds with your host, the luscious PJ Spark. If you make the right choices PJ might consider extending your stay. This game utilizes the best video compression available. You will be amazed at the clarity and custom designed graphics CD ROM $69. A fascinating interactive video game of chance. You score the points and a host of megastars will pay off in exciting visuals that will leave you breathless! Round and Round you go, risking it all for a host of sizzling beauties. Osta $ 49 FC COPO ORUTSUKIDOJI Is there any han Poematy? WH the Legend of she TEDCOM replity from the LONGITU ho CTENOS P UROTSUKIDOUD W OF THE UNI tu MCADDAM'S FAMILY By Digital Playground Over 5 minutes of full motion video + over 40 high resolution houpholos Explore the gorgeons The Maddams Family 3D Family mansion and interact with Horticed Uncle L'ester State of the Aut production and inter.ction pur you there! CD ROM$49. Stware E SOFTWARE VAULT COLLECTIC GAMES COLLECTION Unscal this latest collection The Instany of the hottest games on the Games market today! Contains Library games of all types. Arcade on CD-ROM games, war games. Ilight sim: ulators, casino games, adventure games, puzzles and much, much more! Months of entertainment, hundreds of games packed on one CD ROM. CD ROM $34. Also Available: Software Vaulr: Windows Collection Software Vault: Gold Collection $34. each or 3 for $89. The PORT hely pode TO Fim De us CD ROM $49. RED Darlings C SIZZLE By Sweet Dreams Make your own Screen Saver and create wall paper. DOS or WINDOWS compatible. We knew you were sick and tired of cumbersome. troublesome viewers that were supposed to be casy to us. Say Good Night to the viewers of the past! Try Sizzle Now! CD ROM $39. WANNU 9 Spring Sale! SOFTWARE CD ROM A.T.A.C. 24 Bible Library AutoMap Windows 29 Learn Fly Fishing BattleChess 4000 24 Mystique of Orient Buzz Aldrin Race Wing Commander & Cash Biz Ultima 6 Bundle Dragon's Lair 3 F-18 Hornet ACCESSORIES F-15 Strike Eagle3 Mouse Mat Leather Goddess 19 Omega Joystick Lemmings 2 Surge Protector EMI 9 Rex Nebular 19 San Fransisco Scen 29 Cleaning & Vaccuum Dr. Quandry 24 Kit by Suncom 19 3-D DARLINGS Hundreds of 3-Dimensional images of 10 top glamour models, each posing sensuosly in bikini and lingerie with various backgrounds. With our user-friendly pro-XCD gram menu. you can choose a specific model. read all about her statistics, alternate between 2D and 3D images with a simple click of a key. CD ROM $44. Also Available: 3-D DreamGirlds $44. Buy Both and Save! $79. T S CALL US AND USE YOUR MC, VISA OR DISCOVER 800-999-7995 "


"IBM DISK GAMES C D ROM GENO RAL ......43 &&& CD GIF'S Cat and Mouse Condo Cutles Digital Dancing Night Watch Scissors N Stones ..35 ***** ***.54 ..47 MOVIES ..35 3D Darlings 3D DreamGirls ............ .... Amateur Models ...... American Girls ......... Bikini Beach ....... Bodaclous Beauties. .....44 B. Babes 2 .. Girls of J. Stephen Hicks II ..29 High Volume ..... .39 Island Girls 3 in 1 Local Girls 2 ........................44 More Northern Delights ......44 Northern Delights Bus -32 ......43 52 .37 .44 .39 *.35 Sizzle After Dark Trilogy Asian Girls .................... Betrayal ........ .... Busting Out ...... College Girls ....... Deception ........... Girls of Mardi Gras House of Sleeping Beautles 59 Inferno Insatiable Rom.. Kama Sutra ...... Legends of Prn II ......... Mystique of Orient........... New Wave Hookers Pinch of Pepper Princess of Persia ........... Racquel Released The Barlow Affair Traci I Love You Wicked ..... -37 Southern Beauties .............44 Sweet Dreams The Stills .......29 Tropical Girls Venus Model Search 93/94.44 Women on Wheels ...... INTERACTIVE ... 43 ....47 .42 * Movie Almanac ............... Sampler ....... ........ Adventures Seymore Btts ....69 Bttman's Euro Vacation .......69 ....37 NNN FREE SHIPPING On All US Orders over $50 via UPS Ground Simply send in coupon with your order! 29 ........37 ......43 ***.43 ...42 Offer expires 05/30/94 .35 Aces of the Deep ..... Aces Over Europe Across the Rhine. 7th Guest Flight Sim Toolkit ..................57 Quantum Gate ..... AD&D Al Qadim Genie's Curse 45 AD&D Al Qadim Genie's ........45 Gabriel Knight Rebel Assault AD&D Dungeon Hack... AD&D Dungeon Hack ...........40 Global Explorer Return to Zork AD&D Fantasy Empire........ AD&D Fantasy Empires .........45 Great Naval Battles 2 ...........45 Scrabble Deluxe ...... AD&D Ravenloft...... AD&D Ravenloft ...... Grollers Encyclopedia 8 .......79 Shadowcaster ........ Air Warrior.. Aegis Guardian of the Fleet .53 Hell Cab........... Sim City ...... .50 All-American College Football 40 Alone in the Dark ....... Inca 2 ............ Small Blue Planet .................49 Alone in the Dark 2. Arthur's Teacher Trouble ....40 Interplay's Classic Collect....47 Software Vault: Games .......34 Arborea II. Backroad Racer Intro to Wordperfect 5.2 .....37 Software Vault: Gold. ..........34 Archon Ultra Battlechess Enhanced Iron Helix .................62 Software Vault: Platinum .....34 Armored Fist .......... Bible Library ............ Software Vault: Windows .....34 Axis The GameCheater.... Blood Net ............ Labyrinth of Time............52 Star Trek 25th ... Beat the House ...... Comanche ...... Lands of Lore......... ...43 Street Atlas USA ........ Betrayal at Krondor ......... Conspiracy Lawnmower Man Strike Commander ...............58 BioForge Critical Path Learn Fly Fishing The Journeyman Project ....47 Blood Net Daemonsgate Lord of the Rings The Tortoise & The Hare ......40 Bloodstone ... ....... Dark Legions ............... Lost In Time Tony La Russa 2 .................50 Brix... Dark Sun Shattered Lands ..54 Mad Dog McCree..... ..42 Ultima Underworld 1&2 ......59 Buzz Aldrin's Race Space .......34 DarkSeed ...... ...45 Man Enough ..... Ultima Under/Wing Comm 2 60 Caesar ...... ... Dracula Unleashed ..............52 Mayo Clinic .................. Under a Killing Moon ............58 Carriers at War 2... Dragon's Lair ... Mayo Clinic Total Heart .......40 USA East/Wost/ATP ..............62 Champions Dune MM 2 Day of Tentacle ..........45 Where USA Carmen Dlx ........55 Chess Master 4000 Windows...40 Eric the Unready Myst .......52 Where World Carmen Dlx .....39 Clash of Steel ................ European Racer's ....... Oregon Trall ........ .......40 Wing Commander 2 Dlx ......34 Cobra Mission ..... Eye of Beholder 1,2,3... ..54 Peter Pan Story Painting ....30 Wing Commander Dix .........34 Comanche Bundle. F15 Strike Eagle 3 PhoneDisc Residential USA ..59 Wolfpack ... Comanche Mission Disk 2 .......35 Fate of Atlantis .... Putt Putt Goes to the Moon .47 World Circult Grand Prix .....45 Companions of Xanth. Fatty Bear Birthday Surprise 45 Putt Putt Jolns Parade .......39 World of Xeen ...... Cyber GO... Flight Light Plus Putt Putt's Fun Pack ..........39 Cyber Race Daemonsgate ... Dark Legions...... Dark Sun Shattered Lands ....52 Jeopardy Alex Powerboating Simulator III....49 Victory Pak.... Delta V. Jurassic Park.. Prince of Persia 2 ...................45 Warlords 2... Detroit Kasparov's Gambit ...... ...39 Privateer ................ .....52 Washington Scenery......... Dominion. ........40 King Maker.. Privateer Righteous Fire........25 WC 2 & Speech Pak.. Doom Shareware... ..........9 King's Quest 6 ................. ...47 Privateer Speech Pack............22 WC 2 Special Ops 1&2 Dragon Knight 3.... 43 King's Ransom...... ..... ..37 Pro League Football...............37 West Coast Voyage Disk ..........32 Dragon Knight 3 Upgrade.. King's Table 27 Putt Putt Goes to the Moon....35 When Two Worlds War ..........37 Dragon's Lair 3 5.25........... Kingdoms of Germany... ..37 Putt Putt Joins the Parade ....33 Where USA Carmen Deluxe Ed 47 Eagle Eye Mysteries London...35 Lands of Lore ............. Putt Putt's Fun Pack. ..25 Where World Carmen Deluxe 48 East Coast Voyage Disk...........32 Leasure Suit Larry 6.. Quarterpole ........ Wing Commander Academy ...30 Eight Ball Deluxe............. Legend Kyrandia 2 Hand Fate 40 Quest for Glory 4 Wings of Glory ...... .. Elder Scrolls The Arena..........43 Links 386 Pro. Railroad Tycoon Deluxe .........43 Wizardry Trilogy 2.. Empire Deluxe Windows........ Links Course Banff Springs ...22 Real Weather Pilot..................27 WW II Battles of South Pacific Eric the Unready ..... .25 Links Course Course Disks .....22 Return to Zork ..... X-Wing .......... Eye of Beholder 1,2,3 Bundle...52 Lost in Time..... .37 Romance 3 Kingdoms III..........42 X-Wing MD 1 Imperial Pursuit.22 F-18 Hornet..... Lucky's Casino... ...40 Rome.................... ... ......32 ....32 X-Wing MD 2 B Wing... Falcon 3.0 ...... Master of Orion.. Rules of Engagement 2 ...........43 Falcon 3.0 Mig 29........ .....37 Meadowlark Bridge Windows.52 Sailing Simulator III VGA .........49 JOYSTICKS Fatty Bear Birthday Surprise 35 Mech Warrior 2 Data Disk 1....22 Sam & Max Hit The Road.........37 Fatty Bear's Fun Pack........... ...24 MechWarrior 2 .47 San Francisco Scenery Disk...32 ACM Game Card ........ Flashback .. ... .............35 Metal and Lace.... .34 Scenery Enhancement Editor 27 Analog Plus ... Fleet Defender F-14 Tomcat...50 Metal and Lace Upgrade..........9 Scooter's Magic Castle ..........33 Flight Control Pro ..... Flight Light Microsoft Arcade Windows....34 Scrabble Deluxe Windows ....29 Flight Control System ....... Flight Light Plus Microsoft Flight Sim 5.0 .........49 Seal Team ..40 Flight Control Yoke Flight Screen Saver MM 2 Day of Tentacle .........40 Shadowcaster 35 Flight Stick.... Flight Sim Toolkit Windows......59 More Incredible Machine....32 Siege Walls of Rome.. .....40 Flight Stick Pro CH Products..65 Gabriel Knight.......... ...43 Mortal Kombat......... 40 Sim City 2000 ..43 Formula 11..... Gary Grigsby's War in Russia 47 New York Scenery Disk........... Sim Farm. .35 G Force Yoke. Great Naval Battles 2.............47 NFL Coaches Club Football.....43 Simon the Sorcerer......... ..34 Gameport III Automatic .. Great Naval Admiral Pk...........54 NHL Hockey '94........... Slater & Charlie Go Camping .32 Mach I.. Operation Crusader.... ...........47 Space Hulk ...... ..25 PC Command Control Origin FX Screen Saver 5.25...22 SSN-21 Seawolf Rudder Pedals Harpoon 2....... ...45 Pacific Strike .... ..........50 Star Reach................................37 Virtual Pilot .......................... Harpoon 2 #2 WESTPAC... ...30 Pacific Strike Speech Pack.....22 Star Trek Judgement Rights...37 Weapons Controller Mark 2...99 Harpoon 2 Scenario Editor.....30 Pacific Theatre of Operations42 Star Trek Next Generation......37 High Command .......... Paris Scenery Disk....... .....34 Star Wars Chess.....................45 House of Fortunes Perfect General Bundle. ........37 Stonekeep ..47 Inca 2......... Peter Pan Story Painting ....35 Street Fighter II Ad Lib Gold 1000... Incredible Toons ......... Pinball Dreams.. Strike Command Mission 1......22 Digital Edge CD ROM Kit......695 IndyCar Racing Pirates Gold ... Strike Commander Speech ....20 Discovery CD 16 bit Internal.595 Isle of the Dead... Police Quest 4... Strip Poker Disk 1 thru 8 each20 Edutainment 16 Internal .......595 Strip Poker Professional ........34 Pro Audio Spectrum 16.........189 Stronghold ... ......40 Sound Blaster 16..................138 Methods of Payment Sub Wars 2050... ......38 Sound Blaster 16 ASP ............219 We accept Visa, MC, Discover Card & Money SVGA Harrier.. ......52 Sound Blaster Deluxe Syndicate.......... orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to ..37 Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe.....122 Syndicate American Revolt.....25 Sound Blaster Pro MCA........258 clear. School, State & City purchase orders T2 Arcade Game...... .... .32 Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16.........159 accepted. Take a Break Pinball Windows 32 Sound Machine Sound Klt........99 Shipping Terminator Rampage............43 Soundman 16. .129 UPS Ground ($5 minimum)/UPS Blue ($7 The Blue and The Gray UltraSound.. The Dig... ....43 Voice Blaster.. minimum); APO & FPO ( $7 minimum); The Great War 1914-18... .47 Wave Blaster....... Overseas minimum $30 shipping (please faxi The Merchant Prince..... orders, Send money orders or checks to: Third Reich..... ACCESSORIES Tie Fighter... MISSION CONTROL Ultima 7: The Serpent Isle ......50 Art of the Kill. 356 Glenwood Avenue Ultima VII Silver Seed......... .........22 CD Rom Caddie... Dept. CGW0594 Ultima Vill Pagan............. Cyber Man....... Ultima VIII Speech Pack...... Gameblaster. East Orange, NJ 07017 Unlimited Adventures ........37 Koss HD/4 Speakers. Unnecessary Roughness.........37 Notebook Gameport Overseas & Military Orders given special attention! USA East Scenery Disk ............43 Sound Blaster Speakers......... V Victory 4: Gold Juno Sword 43 Supra V32 Int. Fax Modem.....169 Victory at Sea .......................45 Circle Reader Service #93 ........45 Get the facts via FaxBack... Call 201.676.7454 from your fax machine. Receive information on new releases, Adult CD rom, specials, and more. 24 HOURS A DAY 7 DAYS A WEEK 22 ......43 Hardball 3.................... COMMUNIQUE CONTROL *.47 SOUNDCARDS RULEGNO Our New Mission Control Communique is here! Order our color catalogue filled with New items, CD Rom, Adult CD Rom, Discount Coupons, Complete Listings and more! FREE with your order, otherwise send $2.00. (Outside of US and Canada send $5.00 MISSION UDINTIRDIL INTERNATIONAL 201-677-1400. FAX 201-677-9484 "


"space. IBM with Windows ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #2. HH Taking LA PEEK Tuneland FLIGHT Deadly Games 275 Community Drive Great Neck, NY 11021 (516) 482-4000 U-BOAT: Hey, is arra U-boat? Before you answer, know that Rene Vidmer (a founding partner of the board wargame company SPI) has added another simulation for the rest of us\" to his stable that already includes M-4 and Bomber. This time, you are the commander of a Type VII U-boat at the outbreak of World War II. The target pickings are initially ripe, but you must develop skills over the course of a campaign to deal with ever improving Allied ASW measures. Vidmer's U-boat is rich in visual and aural atmosphere (the box even includes a set of headphones), contributing to the «you are there» feeling of this easily learned and addictive little game. Macintosh ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #3. A quick look at titles now appearing on a store shelf near you. Feature Presentation: Flight Electronic Arts 1450 Fashion Island Blvd. San Mateo, CA 94404 (415) 571-7171 7th Level, Inc. P.O. Box 832190 Richardson, TX 75083-2190 (214) 437-4858 TUNELAND: Howie Mandel provides the voice for Little Howie, an animated bear in TuneLand, 7th Level's first release. This interactive cartoon environment for children ages 3 and up could easily be described as a Living Songbook. TuneLand uses traditional animation techniques and a lot of creative humor to teach the same kinds of songs and rhymes children would normally have to learn from Barney. IBM CD-ROM with Windows ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #1. U-Boat BOROV CLASS COX SELECT TORSCOOTO Colorado Spectrum 748 Whalers Way, E-201 Fort Collins, CO 80525 (303) 225-6929 SEAWOLF: After being in dry-dock for so long, the anticipated sequel to Electronic Arts' 688 Attack Sub has surfaced with some major changes. As the guiding spirit of a Uboat crew, you must manage weapons, sonar, navigation and communications, while keeping the overall picture of the engagement in mind. The familiar motif of individual stations is gone, replaced by small menus with pictures of the appropriate crew member. The game also features two-player games over a NetBIOS-compatible network. If you have a stereo sound card, you'll be treated to a dynamic underwater universe of sound, particularly in the sonar suite. Since both John Ratcliff and John Miles (providers of the majority of third party sound drivers on the market) were involved in the programming of Seawolf, you would be hard pressed to find an unsupported sound card. Certain hard-core simulation features have been left out to enhance overall playability, but the state-of-theart graphics, tremendous music by the Fat Man, and mind blowing sound effects all combine to lock this product dead on-target. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #4. LORD MISSLE FLOODIDOBE mig EDYFED 1 CAMERA EMPTY DIRECT FIRE PREVIOUS ABGSMAG.SE SATSA GADTAN Seawolf FOOTBALL TERNS FEATURE PRESENTATION: FLIGHT: It's a screen saver. No, it's a sound savor. All right, it's a screen saver that features sterco sounds. Feature Presentation: Flight includes over 40 aircraft images and 15 authentic stereo sounds of your favorire warbirds flying across your desktop from one speaker to the other. Aircraft aficionados can gaze at historic warplanes from the Fokker Dr 1 Triplane through the F-14 Tomcat. Each image can be easily converted to Windows wallpaper, while sound files can replace your regular system sounds. Another part of the package offers a visual aircraft reference containing vital statistics on each craft, and an air events calendar for the US available by aircraft category and region. If you're into aviation, this Windows enhancer will put some lift into your workWHAT IS THE POCKET? Gametek, Inc. 2999 N.E. 191st Street, Suite 500 North Miami Beach, Florida 33180 (305) 935-3995 JEOPARDY! SPORTS EDITION: Welcome, game show fans! The MVP of Merv Jeopardy! Sports Edition Page 174 Computer Gaming World "


"Multimedia Specialists Pro 161-800-233-0010 ... MEDIA VISION Pro 16 CD III The ultimate multimedia upgrade kit! Features the new triple speed NEC 3xi and the Pro Audio Spectrum 16. Includes Compton's Interactive Encyclopedia for Windows, BI7 Flying Fortress, Greens and Railroad Tycoon. 1-800-233-0010 Tech Support: (608) 233-8832 P.O. Box 55164 Madison, WI 53705-8964 Visa & Master Card welcomed! Hours: M-F 9am 6pm Sat. 9am -1pm CST $799 CREATIVE NEC CHINON PLEXTOR MultiSpin 3Xi CDS535 Double Speed CDROM drive CREATIVE LABS, INC. SB Edutainment CD 16 Unlock your EDUTAINSIENT CLIO PC's potential with this comprehensive 16-bit kit. Features a large library of entertainment titles as well as CD-quality audio components and a double speed CD-ROM drive. Power users. this is your CD-ROM drive! Lightning fast internal triple speed drive with 195ms access time, 450KB/sec transfer rate, and a continuousflow 256KB cache. Exceeds MPC level 2 specifications, and is PhotoCD Multisession, and QuickTime compliant. Switchable SCSI-1/SCSI-2 interface. $448 With an access time of 250ms, and a double speed data transfer rate of 300KB/sec and a 256KB buffer, the CDS-535 is one of the fastest drives around! PC Magazine Editor's Choice! DM3028 Double Speed Plus CDROM drive This high performance SCSI2 CD-ROM drive is intended for demanding multimedia applications such as animation, graphics. 3-D modelling and full motion video. It features a 240ms access time, a 64KB buffer and a 335KB/sec transfer rate. $459 $315 $259 MULTIMEDIA HARDWARE 339 197 5 MM UPGRADE KITS Reveal MMDO4 Int. kit Reveal MMD06 Int. kit Discovery CD 8 By Reveal DC101 Bus, PK Discovery CD 16 405 Reveal DC102 Edu. Pk Edutainment CD 16 459 Reveal DC103 Ent. Pk Digital Edge CD 629 Creative Omni CD int. CD-ROM DRIVES Creative Omni CD ext. Aztech CDA268-01A Int. MV Pro 16 CD 625 Chinon CDS 535 internal MV Pro 16 CD II 729 Chinon CDS 535 int, w/kit MV Pro 16 CD III (NEW) 799 Chinon CDX 535 external Double FusionLX 355 Chinon CDX 535 ext. W/kit Fusion DoubleCD 16 Creative Omni CD int. Memphis 599 Creative Omni CD ext. Reveal DM200 Int. kit 449 Reveal MMD02 Int. kit MicroSols. Backpack 355 Mitsumi FXOO1D 455 NEC Multispin 3Xi internal 448 SOUND CARDS Sound Blaster 16 Basic 545 NEC Multispin 3Xe external 543 Sound Blaster Pro Dlx 256 NEC Multispin 3Xp portable 418 Audio Magician Plus Sound Blaster Dix 256 NEC Multispin 4X Pro (NEW) 919 Aztech Sound Galaxy BXII 55 ASP Option 269 Plextor DM3028 internal 259 Aztech Sound Galaxy Basic 16 116 Wave Blaster Option Plextor DM3028 Int. w/kit Aztech Sound Galaxy Pro 16 Maui Wavetable Upgd Plextor DM5028 external Gravis Ultrasound 126 169 299 VIDEO CAPTURE/OUTPUT Plextor DM5018 ext. w/kit Pro Audio Studio 16XL 315 Reveal DC002 Int. w/kit Pro Audio Studio 16 154 50/50 PC TV+ 335 Toshiba 3401B internal Pro Audio Spectrum 16 ADS Game Blaster Toshiba 3401 E external Pro Audio Spect 16 basic 95 Creative Labs TV Coder 424 Sony CDU-33A Pro Audio Power Pak 59 Video Blaster for Windo 197 Sony CDU-33A interface 48 Sound Blaster 16 ASP/MulticD 189 Video Spigot for Windows 236 329 Sony CDU 33A w/interface 209 Sound Blastet 16 MultiCD 155 Pro Movie Studio 389 Sony CDU-561-01 int. Sound Blaster 16 SCSI2 175 Sigma Designs Reel Magic 365 185 Sony CDU-7811-10 ext. 489 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI2/ASP 205 Call for speakers, SCSI controllers, more! 205 c 2883 123 269 CD-ROM TITLES We only sell CD-ROM! 7th Guest 44 Desert Storm MPC 33 Indy Jones Fate Atlantis 37 Newsweek Interactive #2 27 Sports Illus Almanac MPC 7th Guest 2:11th Hour 59 Dinosaur Adventure CD 40 Interplay's 10 Yr Anth 45 Oceans Below MPC 27 Star Trek 25 Enhanced Adventures 27 Dinosaur Discovery MPC 27 Iron Helix 54 Oh No More Lmngs Dual Pk 35 Star Trek 25th Anniv Advs of Willie Beamish 37 Dinosaurs 41 Jet Pack 43 Oxford English Reference 92 Star Wars Chess MPC Aegis: Guardian of Fleet 48 Dracula Unleashed 45 Jones in the Fast Lane 36 PC Globe Maps & Facts 32 Stellar 7 Air Warrior 32 Dragon's Lair 33 Journeyman Proj. The 42 Patrician 36 Street Allas 2.0 USA WIN Alladin and His Lamp 30 Dune 47 Just Grandma & Me 32 Pill Book 23 Strike Commander w/Sec. Mis Alone in the Dark 44 Dungeon Hack 36 Jutland 46 Planit Adrenaline 34 Strike Commander/Tactical O Amanda Stories 34 EcoQuest Search Cetus 36 King's Quest V 39 Planit Earth 34 Stronghold Animals MPC for Windows 54 Empire Dix Scenario Dsk 19 King's Quest VI 42 Planit Paradise 34 System Shock Arthur's Teacher Trouble 37 Eric the Unready 32 King's Quest VI Upgd 22 Police st 4:Open Seas 41 T2 Chesswars Atlas of US Presidents MP 29 Espn Baseball Tonite 43 King's Ransom 33 Protostar, War of the Front 41 TFX B17 Flying Fort. W/SS2 32 Espn Sun. Nite Football NFL 43 Labyrinth of Time 45 Putt Pult Goes to the Moon 41 Team Yankee 2 Backroad Racers 39 European Racers 39 Lands of Lore 39 Putt Putt Joins Parade 42 Terror of the Deep Battle Chess Enhanced 42 Eye of Beholder Trilogy 49 Last Dinosaur Egg, The 32 Putt Pufts Fun Pack MPC 32 Tetris Gold Bloodnet 41 Eye of the Beholder 3 46 Laura Bow 2 36 Quantum Gate 44 The Horde Blue Force: Next of kin 37 F117&F15 Senario Disk 44 Lawnmower Man 37 Quicken CDROM 64 Tony Larussa BB 2 Buzz Aldrin Rce Space 55 F15 Strike Eagle 3 44 Legend of Kyrandia 33 Ravenloft 49 Total Baseball 1993 Edition C.I.T.Y. 2000 31 FA 18 Hornet 54 Lesuire Suit Larry 6 43 Rebel Assault 42 U.S. Atlas 4.0 CD-ROMIX! Freex 14 Family Doctor MPC WIN 43 LifeStyle's R&F Cookbook 29 Return of the Phantom 37 Ultima Under. 1 & 2 CD-ROMIX! Hardcase 14 Fantasy Empires 35 Lightning CD 53 Return to Zork 42 Ultima Vill w/Speech Pack CD-ROMIX! Prime 14 Fatty Bear's Bday Surp 36 Loom 38 Ringworld. Revenege of the 35 Under a Killing Moon Campaign 32 Gabriel Knight 43 Lord of the Rings 42 Rodney CD-ROM 25 Video Cube Capital Hill MPC 26 Game Paki 45 Lost Treasures Infocom Il 35 Romagain 16 Video Cube:Sports Castles 2 47 Game Pak II 56 Lost Treasures of Infocom 31 Routerial v1.0 14 Video Game Solution CD Chaos Continuum, The 40 Gateway 2 32 Lost in Time 37 Sam & Max Hit the Road 32 Wacky Funsters Chessmaniac, The 33 Geekwad Gms of the Glxy 25 MPC Wizard 14 Scrabble Deluxe 21 Where in World Dix Chessmaster 3000 MPC 44 Global Explorer v1.0 for Wi 87 Mad Dog Mcree 28 Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe 44 Where in the USA Carmen SD Cinemania Movie Guide '94 49 Goblins 2 27 Man Enough 43 Secret of Monkey Island II 38 Who Shot Johny Rock Commanche w/Mis. 1&2 57 Great Naval Battles pk vol 46 Mantis Exp Fighter 42 Seven Days in August MPC 33 Who killed Sam Rupert Compton's Int. Encyc. Upgrd 84 Groiler MM Encyclopedia v..2 24 Map Expert v2 for Windows 2 49 Sh. Holmes Con Det 3 49 WinCD Professional 1.1 Conan The Commerian 23 Grolier Ultimate Upgrade 97 Mario Early Years Collectio 27 Shadowcaster 44 Wing Commander II Complete Cong Robin Hood WIN 39 Gunship 2000 w/Scenario 35 Mario Teaches Typing 45 SimCity Enhanced 44 Wing Commander 11/UIT UW Conspiracy 41 Guy Spy 26 Mayo Clinic Family Health B 37 Slater & Charlie Go Camping 39 Wing Commander/Sec. Mission 36 Critical Path 44 Harrier Assault SVGA 42 Mayo Clinic: The Total Hear 35 Sneak Peak 65 Wing Commander/Ultima vi Curse of Enchantia 21 Hell Cab v1.1 46 Mega Race 32 Space Adventure 51 Wolf Pack CyberRace 36 Hi-Tech Aircraft 41 Microcosm 47 Space Quest 4 35 Word Tales Daemonsgate 36 High Command 48 Microsoft Golf for Windows 39 Space Shuttle MPC 26 World Atlas 4.0 Dark Seed 37 Humans, The 23 Mosaic Magic 31 Spellcasting Party Pack 32 World Circuit Gran Prix Darksun 47 Inca 37 Myst MPC 59 Spirit of Excalibur 21 World of Xeen Day of the Tentacle/M.M.II 37 Inca 2 36 Newsweek Interactive #1 27 Sporting News Pro Football 24 Wrath of the Demon No surcharge on credit cards. CODs accepted with $6 charge. Software shipping $5/order. hardware shipping is 5%. Personal and company checks allow 14 days. Returns must have on RMA#. Call for info. Software sales final unless defective. Returns subject to 15% restocking fee. Pricing and availability subject to change. Cialdasdar Canon "


"cling, and can do without graphics, this game might put a stranglehold on you. IBM ($39.95). Circle reader service #7. Griffin Enterprises, Alex Trebek, brings his digitized voice to an interactive version of his famed, intellectually-oriented quiz show. Digitized photos are hardly show stoppers, but are certainly better than the chcesy illustrations included with prior versions of this game. Gameplay itself lacks a high-tech gloss, but in fairness, much the same could be said about the TV show. The computer opponents run the gamut from imbecilic to reasonably bright, fairly typical for this type of game. The surprising thing is that the game, despite its many flaws, exudes a certain degree of charm, as it emulates both the good and corny aspects of an American icon. IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #5. Alone in the Dark 2 WTER FLIES tot 169, Endere 1620 Clasit 7.5 LILAR attempts the l uck! Masque Publishing, Inc. P.O. Box 5223 Englewood, CO 80155 (303) 290-9853 CASINO LITE SERIES: Evidently wouldbe riverboat gamblers don't have enough to keep them busy, since every month brings another poker program. Though the games in the Casino Lite series feature advice from such notables as David Sklansky and David Malmuth, the text-based information leaves much to be desired, and the interface plays too close to the vest, not being nearly as intuitive as one would prefer. The package does offer three serviceable games, however. The first is 7-Card Stud, familiar to anyone who knows much at all about playing poker. Opponents range from ignoramus to intelligent, with a couple of the players being very aggressive when betting. The other two games are variations of Hold'Em, from Texas and Omaha. Of the two, Omaha Hold 'Em is preferable, including excellent notes from Bob Ciaffone to help the novice form a decent strategy. IBM, $14.99. Circle Reader Service #8. I-Motion 1333 Ocean Ave., Suite J Santa Monica, CA 90401 (310) 576-1888 2) acrobatic lick ATOMIC DROP 51 le Rampage Wrestling :: 5 ALONE IN THE DARK 2: Edward Carnby, the Sherlock of the Supernatural, is back. The stalwart detective who made his debut in Alone in the Dark has to recover a child who has been kidnapped by One-Eyed Jack, the ringleader of a wretched band of smugglers, cutthroats and gangsters. In an effort to rescue the tiny tike, Carnby must negoriate some 15 levels of 3-D territory abounding with mazes, trapdoors and secret passages, while doing his best to simply survive. The animation looks smoother and more lifelike than in the original title and objects appear more realistic. While the control interface is still a bit crude, Alone in the Dark 2 offers plenty of game play for those who like their adventures with a dash of the macabre. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #6. Casino Lite Series WORLD SERIES OF POKER ADVENTURE: Cross-genre games are always difficult to pull off, and this combination advencure/casino gambling game ends up evoking love or hate. Gamers who want to get right into the action will hate it. Those who want something a little off-beat may like it. You arrive in Las Vegas a few days prior to a big poker tournament with only half the tournament entry stake in your pocket. The major challenge of the game is raising the other half in time, thus forcing you to mess around with preliminary fundraising chores. The utilitarian gambling programs used in this fast pursuit of wealth include blackjack, slots, video poker machines, as well as poker tables featuring Omaha, Texas Hold'em and 7-card stud. Good luck in the big game, if you make it that far. IBM ($39.99). Circle Reader Service #9. Lance Haffner Games P.O. Box 100594 Nashville, TN 37210 (615) 242-2617 JHUT ED DESDE World Series of Poker Adventure 12 Microforum 1 Woodborough Ave. Toronto, Ontario M6M 5A1 (416) 656-6368 RAMPAGE WRESTLING: Lance Haffner is one of the few designers still making a living from text-based games, largely because he sticks exclusively to sports. This game is as far out as Haffner is likely to get, since pro wrestling is as much entertainment as sporting contest. Similar to Haffner's TKO Boxing, the game uses little in the way of visuals, but displays blocks of text written in the style of an old radio show («The Warrior goes for the drop kick, and Hogan is down! He's moving in for the pin...\"). The system is quite clever, with different competitors awarded «stars\" that can be used like wild cards to break holds, make terrific leaps, and generally spice up the game. If you have any interest in pro wresHALL LOCATION HATH HODIFTED IMAGE SIZEHAX B40964096 THAGES LOADED HEHORY LEFT : 158K KE 12V STS O leo THE VIDEOGAME SOLUTION CD: Here's a hint! Don't be fooled by the poorly chosen title. This CD-ROM is definitely for the computer gamer rather than the console gamer. By far the most comprehensive collection of helps, hints, solutions and character editors yet assembled, The Video Game Solution CD is jam packed with frustration-bustTROLFEDITI 2.1 <C> 1992 BILL KIRBY The Videogame Solution CD Page 176 Computer Gaming World "


"inball EVATTISE ees eng TH 6: VAULT STONES & BONES GRAPHICS MODES SPEED DEVIL THIRD GENERATION PINBALL Fast, full-screen table scrolling Totally authentic ball movement Great sound effects and music High resolution color graphics 4 unique new tables with features that will keep you playing for hours: NEW! Variable table angles Variable table scroll rate Full table tilt 2 graphics modes to let you use each table in two different sizes RealMotionTM Pinball Fantasies is the first game to use exclusive ealMotion technology to bring to you the most accurate, realistic, dynamic arcade excitement possible on a computer. \"Now Available From A Store Near You, Or Call Us At 716-872-1200 For Ordering Information\" Ramps and Tunnels Ball Traps Flashing Bumpers Jackpots and Bonuses Rollovers Drop Targets PARTYLAND ACTUAL SCREEN SHOTS Comeletely receiines since simulcians and the rest ci the market will le sorelling to meet the stendere\" PC Enteticium BILLION DOLLAR GAME SHOW \"Many pinball games have alpeared none are so purely enjoyable as the one from 21st Century Electronic Games CENTURY 21st Century Entertainment, Inc. P.O. BOX 415 WEBSTER, NY 14580 Circle Reader Service #35 "


"96 Fie Piotrais. Control Car Sterce BE Susta IW TO ers for the weary gamer. Included are walkthroughs and hints for hundreds of popular games such as Alone in the Dark, Dune, Fate of Atlantis, most Sierra On-Line titles and more. A good collection of game editors allow you to have, for instance, up to nine balls in Epic Pinball or to raise your experience points and levels in Eye of the Beholder II/or Crusaders of the Dark Savant. In addition, some great shareware games are included (Doom, Blake Stone, Jill of the Jungle), as well as over 20 commercial game demos. Though the interface is not as polished as it could be and the collection lacks Jason Strautman's Universal Hint System, it is still one tremendous collection of helps to have on hand. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #10. own Crayon screen-saver is actually more fun to play. Now, for the good stuff: HighScore is a grid-based mathematical strategy game where 1-2 players vie for a cumulative high score. Players move horizontally (or in some games, vertically) across a grid and add the positive or negative numbers to their aggregate scores. At the higher difficulty levels, you can even end up winning with a negative score. Flipover is a traditional memory challenge game. It's a simple version of Concentration with no rebus to be solved in the background. Both High Score and Flip Over are highly configurable and offer one or two player options with \"smart\" computer opponents. These latter two games make the package a good purchase in spite of their weak-sister tag-alongs. IBM with Windows ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #12. Carriers At War II FHp Over Delsan leenth Player 1 Computer ELDBA GAN Strategic Studies Group Inc. P.O. Box 261 Drummoyne, NSW 2047 Australia Flip Over Ellb QAL At Play for Windows Stellar placer . Level d er CARRIERS AT WAR II: Just when you thought it was safe to cut the CAP, SSG sends lovers of WWII carrier battles scrambling to the flight decks once again. Not only is CAW II compatible with both the acclaimed CAW and the CAW Construction Kit, but its installation routine automatically updates the previous products. Both graphics and AI have been improved, with the option to upgrade older scenarios if you don't mind torpedoing your saved games. The \"Wardeck\" options for the computer opponent have been expanded, so that it is even less predictable than before. When combined with the scenarios, which are among the less known of the war, the game becomes a very tense contest. The sinking of Force Z, Kamikazes, night cngagementsthey're all here in an impressive wargaming package. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #11. STELLAR EXPLORER: Whether you are blasting Klingons, Krellans, or unidentified aliens, anyone who remembers the old Trek games (or even Interstels Star Fleet I) will know exactly what this game is all about. While the interface is much better than the old text-based version, and this new incarnacion does allow you to play under Windows, the gameplay really hasn't changed much, except that now you can fire photon torpedoes in only 8 directions instead of 16. As weapons are fired, the energy drain becomes more noticeable, and you must dock often with a friendly starbase. Beware though-on the higher levels, your enemies can actually move, rather than sit dumbfounded in a sort of galactic turkey shoot like they do early in the game. The product does have much better graphics than its ancestors, but it's hard to find fault with a game we enjoyed so much, so many years ago. IBM with Windows ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #13. RET ER Stellar Explorer Tiles and Tribulations Level EARNI POINTS Technological Computer Innovations Corp. 255 North Cherrywood Dr. Lafayette, CO 80026-2726 (303) 673-9046 051-31 India Tiles and Tribulations AT PLAY FOR WINDOWS: Included in this quarter of Windows games are two winners and two snoozers. On the sleepy side are Roulette and Tracers. Roulette may offer the quietest casino ever. There is no click as the ball migrates toward its numbered cache (or cash, assuming you've bet on the right number) and no patter from the croupier to signal the end of betting. In fact, there is nary a sound to be heard. The most tired title in the pack is Tracers. Tracers provides an archaic blast from the past reminiscent of the Tron lightcycle idea. Unfortunately, Windows' TILES AND TRIBULATIONS: Tiles and Tribulations may prove to offer more of the latter than the former to most gamers. The game features 50 levels of tumbling tiles. With the look and play of a modest shareware game gone commercial, this Tetris derivative features good music, fair graphics, modestly enjoyable play, and a few visual glitches that attest to its \"nor-quite-ready-for-prime-time\" status. Though it offers considerable variety in scoring opportunities (different tile configurations carn different point values), the playing experience doesn't seem significantly different from Tetris. Indeed, we thought the game was a bit pricey for what it offers. IBM with Windows ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #14. Whirlwind Page 178 Computer Gaming World "


"DRAGO MI NIGHT For centuries, war has raged among the demons and fairies, devastating this mystical land. Twin brothers, born to mortals, are separated at birth, chosen for the ultimate battle that will decide the fate of heaven and earth. They later meet, never knowing their true relation — or their own dark destiny. Fated to duel your twin to the death, you must fight to stay alive and rescue lovely, innocent maidens from the clutches of menacing foes. And perhaps, become the ruler of all. 00000 Enter a World of Demons and Damsels. If You Dare. So the challenge is on! An incomparable role playing fantasy game for your PC, with stunning, hand sculpted graphics throughout, numerous scripts and a thrilling plot. But be warned — with its voluptuous women and intense action, Dragon Knight III is for mature audiences only. And not for the faint hearted. Available now at your nearest dealer or call 1-800-258-MEGA. Or write Megatech, P.O. Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510. Visa, Mastercard, checks accepted. Systemtequirements: 286-20 or faster machine (386 recommended) with 640K RAM, hard disk, mouse recommended. Operating Sys.: MS DOS 3.3 or above, Windows 8.1. Graphics compatible with VGA. Sound support: Sound Blaster, Sound Blaster Pro, Thunder Board, Pro Audio Spectrum, Adlib Gold and Speed Master. MEGA TECH This game is not for the faint-hearted. Contains violence For a free demo, call our 24hr. BBS at 310-539-7739. (81) and some material inappropriate for minors under 18. Circle Reader Service #86 All companies and product names mentioned are trademarks or registered trademarks of the respective owners. "


"USA CRYTE PLURI Elapsed Tin :51 Hause nec TOKLUTUSTULUY Decoder 140 str DELL LATTE SWM BOLONNEN LET T OATE WHIRLWIND: There's little doubt that this game of galactic vorrices is anything else but a clone of Tempest, a game which recently resurfaced in Microsoft Arcade for Windows. As such, it must be judged against its competition. While Whir/Wind is as playable as Microsoft's offering, and while its vector-style graphics are just as faithful to the original, it comes up lacking on dollar-for-dollar value. Whereas Microsoft Arcade includes Asteroids, Battlezone, Centipedeand Missile Commandin addition to Tempest, all for $39.95, WhirlWind by itself retails for the same price. IBM with Windows ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #15. KOSZUNIR RITUA T ELP 77: EXIT USA-Crypto-Plus Virtual Media Works P.O. Box 70030 Sunnyvale CA 94086 (408) 739-0301 VIRTUAL TAROT: Divine your future and introspect on the course of your life with the aid of the mysterious Tarot deck. A great deal of background on the history of Tarot is included, in addition to the brief and eloquent descriptions of the meanings behind each card. The authors of the program say right up front that you are responsible for your actions, and that the Tarot deck is but a guide to interpret the various influences upon your life. The mystical mood is enhanced by appropriate music, somewhat less obtrusive than in many similar products. The artwork is stunning, and follows the classic style of Taror illustration, standardized by A.E. Waite in the 1800s. The pace of the program is slow, but this is hardly a distraction, given it's contemplative nature. In addition to a variety of divinations, you have the option to keep a personal diary, which you may update at will. Mac ($84.95). Circle Reader Service #18. Unicorn Systems Associates 433 Lincoln Ave. Erie, PA 16505-2449 (814) 453-5888 fire you from Gladstone? My brother Baccata studies with Down there! MORE Lands of Lore: The Throne of Chaos NIVONLY USA-CRYPTO-PLUS: It won't qualify you as a cryptographer with the US government, but having a copy of USA-CRYPTO-PLUS will provide you with many hours of word ciphering fun. Both a tool and a game, this program allows you to decode cryptograms from external sources, like magazines and newspapers, as well as from its internal database of 75 ciphers (additional cipher databases are available). The package also includes a frequency chart showing the number of times each letter is used in a given cipher, which is designed to assist gamers in the deciphering process, and a hint feature that allows three hints per cipher. While fully usable under DOS as it stands, it could have been much easier to use. IBM ($20.00). Circle Reader Service #16. sem selse wat Virtual Tarot Virgin Interactive Entertainment 18061 Fitch Avenue Irvine, CA 92714-9841 (800) VRGINOZ The Waite Group Press 200 Tamal Plaza Corte Madera, CA 94925 (415) 924-1724 ARTIFICIAL LIFE LAB: If Maxis' SimLife got your wetware cooking, you simply must take a look at the latest book/software package from The Waite Group Press. Written and programmed by Rudy Rucker-professor, novelist,\"mathenaut\" and cybermyth—the book and Boppers program explore man-made digital entities that exhibit life-like behavior. Sex, Death and Gnarl (Rucker's term for \"complexity\")—the fundamental characteristics of life are the items of Rucker's inquiry in both book and software. The writing is superb, the illustrations are fun and useful, and the Windows-based A-Life program is flexible and friendly. IBM with Windows ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #19. FRACTAL CREATIONS: This second edition to the Waite Group's Fractal Creations book/software package is the do-it-yourself source for the serious fractal explorer. The inner covers of the 450 page book contain both a diskette with the latest version of Fractint, the Stone Soup Group's powerful fractal generation software, and a CD-ROM disc packed with 1800 incredible images. The book is both an excellent tutor to fractal basics and thorough documentation for the software. For the programming adept, the source code of the Fractint program has been provided and documented for your hacking pleasure. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #20. CGW Artificial Life Lab LANDS OF LORE: THE THRONE OF CHAOS: The wait is over for the CD-ROM version of Lands of Lore to hit the shelves. Featuring the voice of Patrick Stewart (Jean Luc Picard of Star Trek: The Next Generation) as King Richard, Lands of Lore CD offers full digitized speech for its extensive cast of characters. In other words, it has all the gorgeous graphics, stunning sound, deep atmosphere and play value as the original release, plus quality voice-overs. Even if you've already finished Lands of Lore, the option of selecting a different character to play, combined with the enhanced version on CD may offer just enough freshness to tackle this superb RPG again. IBM CD-ROM ($74.99). Circle Reader Service #17. Fractal Creations Page 180 Computer Gaming World "


"* COMPUTER GAMING WORLD HALL Welcome to the Cooperstown of Computer Games. Here, raised upon pedestals, you'll find the games that broke the records, established the benchmarks, and held gamers in delighted trances for hours untold. War in Russia Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984 Apple The first \"monster\" wargame on the computer, War in Russia depicted the action on the Eastern Front during World War II. ExperSSL Cienced gamers came to discover that the Al could be faked out easily in an early move of subterfuge, but the game continued to have popularity because of its scale, subject matter, and suitability for playing by mail (players could easily save their moves, send a disk to a friend, and wait for the friend to return the disk for their next move). It was popular among wargamers for as long as the Apple II remained alive. Wasteland Interplay Productions, Inc., 1986 Apple, C-64, IBM The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Battle Chess (Interplay Productions, Inc., 1988) Chessmaster (The Software Toolworks, 1986) Civilization (MicroProse, Inc., 1991) Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Empire (Interstel, 1978) F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, Inc., 1988) Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Gunship (MicroProse, Inc., 1989) Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) King's Quest V (Sierra On-Line, Inc., 1990) M-1 Tank Platoon (MicroProse, Inc., 1989) Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Pirates (MicroProse, Inc., 1987) Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse, Inc., 1990) Red Baron (Dynamix, 1990) SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) The Secret of Monkey Island (LucasArts Entertainment Company, 1990) Their Finest Hour (LucasArts Entertainment Company, 1989) Ultima III (Origin Systems, Inc., 1983) Ultima IV (Origin Systems, Inc., 1985) Ultima VI (Origin Systems, Inc., 1990) War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) Wasteland (Interplay Productions, Inc., 1986) Wing Commander (Origin Systems, Inc., 1991) Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Zork (Infocom, 1981) It is difficult to speak of CRPGs without invoking the venerable title, Wasteland. The game proved the value of a skillbased role-playing system and created interesting algorithms for handling the non-player characters. One couldn't simply strip the NPCs of their items as in other games; the NPCs had «minds» of their own. Further, although the game was combat intensive and used a computerized form of Michael Stackpole's Mercenaries, Spies and Private Eyes game system, it was replete with ethical dilemmas and non-combat puzzle-solving of the most devious sort. The story was written by Mike Stackpole, and many of the maps were fleshed out by veteran game designers like Liz Danforth and Ken St. Andre. Now, years later, Wasteland is still held with great esteem by CGW's readers. The game has been recently re-released as part of the Interplay 10th Anniversary CD-ROM. May 1994 Page 187 "


"Top Adventure Games TACIE Reader Poll #116 GAME Day of the Tentacle Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis Gabriel Knight Quest for Glory III Sherlock Holmes CDI Star Control II The Seventh Guest Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes King's Quest VI: Heir Today.. COMPANY LucasArts LucasArts LucasArts Sierra Sierra Viacom Accolade Virgin Electronic Arts Sierra SCORE 9.97 9.91 9.79 9.59 9.56 9.55 9.33 9.32 9.20 9.17 Top 100 Games COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The #1 Computer Game Magazine NO Type AC SP 000 Under man Top Role Playing Games Ovo AWNGAME COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.29 Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix 9.74 Lands of Lore Virgin 9.55 Ultima Underworld II Origin 9.42 Might & Magic Ill New World Computing 9.41 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing 9.37 Ultima VII Origin 9.34 Eye of the Beholder II SSI 9.34 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing 9.34 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 9.10 RP ST WG ST SP AC AD ST WG AD ST AD SI WG RP WG WG AD SI WG AD,RP AD 9 10 Score 10.56 10.37 10.29 10.23 10.11 10.10 10.06 10.00 9.97 9.97 9.93 9.91 9.86 9.79 9.76 9.75 9.74 9.68 9.63 9.59 9.59 9.58 9.56 9.55 9.55 9.55 9.54 9.53 9.50 9.43 9.43 9.42 9.41 9.38 9.37 9.37 9.34 9.34 9.34 9.34 9.33 9.32 9.32 9.28 SCORE 9.76 Game Company 1 Doom Id Software Links 386 Pro Access Ultima Underworld Origin Master of Orion MicroProse Warlords II SSG 6 Sim City 2000 Maxis Front Page Sports Football Pro Dynamix 8 Wing Commander II Origin 09 Day of the Tentacle LucasArts Solitaire's Journey QQP 11 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty Pacific 12 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts 13 Dune 11 Virgin 14 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts 15 X-Wing LucasArts 16 The Perfect General QQP 17 Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix 18 Carriers at War Construction Kit SSG 19 V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Pacific 20 Gabriel Knight Sierra Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte 22 V for Victory: Market Garden Three-Sixty Pacific 23 Quest for Glory III Sierra 24 Sherlock Holmes CDI Viacom Lands of Lore Virgin Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 27 NHLPA Hockey Electronic Arts 28 Conquered Kingdoms QQP 29 World Circuit MicroProse 30 Privateer Origin War in Russia 32 Ultima Underworld Il Origin 33 Might & Magic III New World Computing 34 Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 35 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing Hardball III Accolade 37 Pacific War SSI Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing Eye of the Beholder II SSI Ultima VII Origin 41 Star Control II Accolade 42 The Seventh Guest Virgin Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks 44 Kasparov's Gambit Electronic Arts Indy Car Racing Virgin/Papyrus 46 Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade 48 Syndicate Electronic Arts 49 V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword Three-Sixty Pacific 50 Lemmings Psygnosis RP Top Simulation Games GAME COMPANY X-Wing LucasArts Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HaloByte 3 World Circuit Micro Prose Aces of the Pacific Dynamix Indy Car Racing Virgin Papyrus Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts Stunt Island Disney Aces over Europe Dynamix 10 Gunship 2000 MicroProse 9.50 9.38 9.28 9.27 9.19 9.00 8.99 8.95 AC SP WG,ST SI AC WG RP RP SSI SI RP SP Top Strategy Games WG RP RP HORION RP AD,AC AD ST von AWN GAME Master of Orion Sim City 2000 Solitaire's Journey Dune 11 Chessmaster 3000 Kasparov's Gambit Syndicate Hong Kong Mahjong Pro The Lost Admiral The Incredible Machine COMPANY MicroProse Maxis QQP Virgin Software Toolworks Electronic Arts Electronic Arts Electronic Arts QOP Dynamix SCORE 10.23 10.10 9.97 9.86 9.32 9.28 9.26 9.13 9.05 8.92 ST SI 9.28 9.27 9.27 9 10 9.26 SP STAC WG AC,ST 9.24 9.21 "


"AD Warlords AC WG RP vo AWTop Wargames GAME Warlords II V for Victory: Velikiye Luki The Perfect General Carriers at War Construction Kit V for Victory: Utah Beach V for Victory: Market Garden Conquered Kingdoms 8 War in Russia 9 Pacific War 10 V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword COMPANY SSG Three-Sixty Pacific QQP SSG Three-Sixty Pacific Three-Sixty Pacific QQP SSI SSI Three-Sixty Pacific SCORE 10.11 9.93 9.75 9.68 9.63 9.58 9.53 9.43 9.34 9.24 RP ST AD 9.20 9.19 9.17 9.14 9.14 9.13 9.11 9.10 9.10 9.09 9.08 9.06 9.05 9.05 9.05 9.04 9.04 9.04 9.01 9.00 9.00 8.99 8.98 8.98 AD Po 2BE52eeeeeeltageanle allegaalalta Top Action Games Electronic Arts LucasArts SI Sierra AD Spectrum HoloByte SSI Electronic Arts ST Sierra AD SSI RP Sir-Tech Sierra AD Origin Accolade AD Sir-Tech RP Sierra AD RP QQP Legend New World Computing WG Sierra Sierra AD Disney QOP WG,ST Dynamix Sierra AD SSI WG SSG WG Dynamix AD Sierra AD 1-Motion AD MicroProse Dynamix MicroProse Psygnosis Sierra Electronic Arts Electronic Arts Legend MicroProse MicroProse SSI SI SI 8.97 GAME Doom Wing Commander 11 Wolfenstein 3-D Privateer Lemmings Tetris Classic Oh No! More Lemmings Prince of Persia 2 Out of this World Rebel Assault 51 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes 52 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe 53 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... 54 Tetris Classic Clash of Steel 56 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro 57 The Castle of Dr. Brain 58 Eye of the Beholder Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant 60 The Dagger of Amon Ra 61 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle 62 Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. 63 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Quest for Glory I (VGA) The Lost Admiral 66 Eric the Unready Empire Deluxe Conquests of the Longbow 69 Police Quest 3 70 Stunt Island Battles of Destiny Aces over Europe 73 Space Quest IV Western Front 75 Carriers At War 76 The Adventures of Willy Beamish Freddy Pharkas Frontier Pharmacist 78 Alone in the Dark Gunship 2000 80 The Incredible Machine F-117A Oh, No! More Lemmings 83 The Island of Dr. Brain 84 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat 85 Indianapolis 500 86 Spellcasting 301: Spring Break 87 Rex Nebular 88 F-15 Strike Eagle III Gateway to the Savage Frontier 90 Tony La Russa Baseball II Populous II Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 High Command 94 Heart of China 95 Veil of Darkness Dracula Unleashed 97 Gateway 98 Starflight 11 99 Pools of Darkness 100 MiG-29 COMPANY Id Software Origin Id Software Origin Psygnosis Spectrum HoloByte Psygnosis Broderbund Interplay LucasArts SCORE 10.56 10.00 9.55 9.43 9.21 9.14 8.92 8.60 8.57 8.48 8.96 8.96 8.95 8.95 8.92 10 hgts  8.92 SI Top Sports Games 22 a SSI SP -Con GAME Links 386 Pro Front Page Sports Football Pro NHLPA Hockey Hardball 111 Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Tony La Russa Baseball II NFL Pro League Football The Games: Winter Challenge 4-D Boxing 10 Wayne Gretzky Hockey III COMPANY Access Dynamix Electronic Arts Accolade Accolade SSI Micro Sports Accolade Electronic Arts Bethesda SCORE 10.37 10.06 9.54 9.37 9.27 8.78 8.54 8.50 8.37 8.30 Electronic Arts Sierra Three-Sixty Pacific Dynamix SSI Viacom Legend Electronic Arts SSI Spectrum HoloByte ST ST WG AD RP AD AD RP 8.92 8.91 8.87 8.83 8.81 8.80 8.79 8.79 8.78 8.78 8.78 8.78 8.75 8.74 8.74 8.72 8.71 8.68 8.64 9 RP SI Poll is based on reader survey cards in each issue of CGW and published two issues subsequent. Data on more than 100 games is archived and top ten lists may contain games which scored below the Top 100 cutoff. Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. P = Top game of type. Magenta=New Game AD=Adventure, RP=Role Playing, SI=Simulation, ST=Strategy, WG=Wargame, AC=Action, SP=Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine. "


"Alhat's not PC Research Hits List Of Top-Selling Software January, 1994 PC Games (MS-DOS/WINDOWS) What You've Been Playing Lately Every month our mailbox bulges with hundreds of Reader Input Cards from our most loyal and outspoken readers. Over the years we've found these cards to be an invaluable source of feedback. Within 10 days of releasing our latest issue we can expect to see cards pouring in with suggestions, encouragements, tirades and many good laughs, in addition to the data for our Top 100 poll. Through your efforts, we know exactly where we stand with our readers (you don't mince words!), and we are treated to well-articulated opinions on anything and everything related to gaming. This column is a forum for these responses and for the results of our \"Playing Lately?\" query on the Reader Input Card. Thanks for taking the time to fill them out...keep em coming! Rank 1-aineidene cimone Title and Source SimCity 2000 (Maxis Software) Microsoft Flight Simulator 5.0 (Microsoft Corporation) Star Wars Rebel Assault (LucasArts Entertainment) X-Wing: B-Wing (LucasArts Entertainment) The 7th Guest (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Leisure Suit Larry VI (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Police Quest IV (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) X-Wing (LucasArts Entertainment) Wolfenstein 3D/Spear of Destiny (Formgen) Links: Pebble Beach (Access Software, Inc.) Master of Orion (MicroProse, Inc.) SimCity (Maxis Software) Microsoft Flight Simulator Scenery Disk. USA West (Sublogia Star Trek: Judgment Rites (Interplay Productions, Inc.) Links 386 Pro (Access Software, Inc.) Aces Over Europe (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Unnecessary Roughness (Accolade) Quest for Glory IV (Sierra On Line, Inc.) Microsoft Flight Simulator: New York Scenery (Microsoft Corporation) Front Page Sports Football Pro (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) 12. 16. oooNa 18. 19. 20. Rank Amiga Games Title and Source AD&D Gateway to the Savage Frontier (Strategie Simulations, Inc.) Hoyle s Book of Games 2 (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Medieval Warriors (Merit Software) Dick Tracy (Disney Software) AD&D Dark Queen of Krynn (Strategic Simulations, Inc.) i cinen Playing Lately? Results for CGW #116, March 1994 Doom (id Software) Master of Orion (MicroProse) SimCity 2000 (Maxis Software) Privateer (Origin Systems) X-Wing (LucasArts Entertainment) Warlords II (Strategic Studies Group) Merchant Prince (QQP) Aces Over Europe (Dynamix) Gabriel Knight (Sierra) Civilization (MicroProse) The Players Speak \"Will someone please design a baseball simulation that encompasses the world of fun off the field? Free agents, arbitration, trades with computer GM's, shuttling players to the minors and, best of all, firing managers!?!\" -G. Steinbrenner, Bronx, NY (postmarked Newark, NJ) \"Though impressive graphically, Terminator: Rampage is not fun to play. Even on my 486-50 with 8MB RAM, it runs agonizingTy slow. I have more fun with my Wolf 3D.\" -Matt Trainor, Ashland, MA \"Blake Stone is an improvement over Wolf in that it has map and re-enter level options. Very fun. Doom is without doubt the most realistic VR game yet. Only thing missing is re-enter level option. Otherwise it's spectacular! And it runs great on my 486SX-25 (unlike Flight Sim 5.0).\" Ken Marshall. Concord, NH \"Let's get the non-linearity back into role-playing games. Ultima IV, V, and VI are still unbeatable for non-linearity (esp. Ultima IV) and game play!\" -Jay Cook, New Castle, IN \"The perfect CRPG = Krondor world and story using the Underworld engine. Origin take note: Dante's Inferno using the Underworld engine-redeem yourself from Shadowcaster.\" Gree Whittier, Brookhaven, MS \"Red Crystalyuk! I bought the game sight unseen because most of QQP's products have been soooo good. Bummer! This game stinks almost as much as that Starship garbage! What is the point of modem play when you can't communicate with the other party?....And so it sits on my shelf next to the great QQP games like Conguered Kingdoms, Lost Admiral, Perfect General, Solitaire's Journey, and Heirs to the Throne-only the later are on my hard drive. Maybe QQP would let me trade RC for Merchant Prince.\" Bruce, Bozeman, MT 1 Rank rinn Macintosh Games Title and Source SimCity 2000 (Maxis Software) Myst (Broderbund Software, Inc.) Chessmaster 3000 (The Software Toolworks) Leisure Suit Larry VI (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) SimCity (Maxis Software) Rank + CD-ROM Products Title and Source Star Wars Rebel Assault (LucasArts Entertainment) Microsoft Encarta (Microsoft Corporation) The 7th Guest (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Gabriel Knight (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) King's Quest VI (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Mad Dog McCree (American Laser Games) Return to Zork (Activision) Wolfl'ack (Electronic Arts) Daemonsgate (Gametec) AD&D Dungeon Hack (Strategic Simulations, Inc.) Iron Helix (Spectrum Holobyte) WGN 10. This list is based on units sold by ten retail chams, representing over 1300 stores. For more informa tion please contact PC Data at (703) 435-1025. Page 184 Computer Gaming World "


"patches  The Patch File Tomputer game programs have grown so massive and the number of Merchant Prince Update: Corrects some minor bugs in QQP's latest. possible configurations has become so huge that incompatibilities 12/29/93 and glitches scem to be breeding at an exponential rate. Consumers Metal and Lace V1.42A Update: Fixes a few minor bugs and adds an Easy and publishers are both frustrated at the need for adding patches into and Hard mode. 1/20/94 \"buggy\" programs, but they seem to be an interim solution that is going to Mortal Kombat PC Update: Improves sound card support, fixes crash be with the hobby for a while (presumably, until a standard platform conbugs, and requires less conventional memory. 1/21/94 figuration is agreed upon). So, until the golden age of standardized plat*** forms and bug-free programs, Computer Gaming World will publish a regu**Nomad Patch: Gets rid of inventory bug for trade. 3/1/94 lar list of the latest updates of which we are aware. Police Quest 4 Floppy Patch: Corrects various memory allocation errors These patches can usually be downloaded from most major networks and lockups, and speeds up the game restoring process. 1/21/94 (e.g., CompuServe or GEnic), but can also be obtained from individual Police Quest 4 Floppy Handcuff Patch: Allows more time to handcuff software publisher's own BBSs or direct from the publisher with proof of Walker. 1/21/94 purchase. We continue to urge publishers to keep us updated on the latest Quest For Glory 4 Patch: Corrects various memory allocation errors and versions/patches to their games. lockups that some players have been encountering, in addition to a few (*** indicates new files) puzzle bugs. 1/21/94 **Air Warrior V1.13 Update: New execute files, fixes several problems. **Quest For Glory 4 Patch: Allows players to receive note from Katrina. 3/1/94 2/17/94 **Arena V1.2 Update: Fixes scrambled indoor map problem, missing **Real Weather Pilot Patch: Contains aircraft ID patch and fixes install music problem, Quadrant jerkiness, SHIFT +) standing long-jump diffiproblems with bios. 3/1/94 culties, and allows you to sell magic items and delete spells. Particularly **Real Weather Pilot Patch: Allows players to use letters only, as suggested helpful for 386 machine users. 3/1/94 by the FAA. 3/1/94 Comanche: Maximum Overkill Update: Includes several hardware fixes, **SimCity2000 V1.1 Update (Mac): Latest version fixes the budget probincluding a fix for the Pentium and the Diamond Stealth Pro video card. lem, among others. 3/1/94 1/27/94 TFX Patch: Fixes the unexpected interrupt error message due to hardware Companions of Xanth V1.1.0 Update: Corrects graphic corruption probconflicts, in addition to unexplained crashes. 1/24/94 lems associated with Microsoft (V8.2+) and Logitech (V6.13) mouse dri**TFX Patch UK V2.0 Upgrade: Makes UK version equal to USA V 2.0, vers. 12/23/93 including several new features in addition to bug fixes, but only works if Conquered Kingdoms Update: Fixes some save game problems that have you downloaded first patch as well. 2/24/94 been reported. 12/22/93 War in Russia V1.1 Update: Makes many adjustments to the game CyberRace CD-ROM V1.2 Update: Lowers the base memory requiremechanics and fixes minor bugs. 2/08/94 ments, fixes the save game problems, and remedies joystick problems (especially with Phoenix BIOS). 1/20/94 The PRODIGY Weekly Top Ten **Diamond Dreams Patch: Fixes all known 3.0 bugs. 2/24/94 Empire Deluxe V3.11a Upgrade: Updates Version 3.11 to Version 3.11a. Corrects a number of minor bugs and extends the sound card support. Computer Gaming World is Prodigy's on-line games expert. Look for us in their Game Center, a forum where users read articles posted on12/02/93 linc by CGW and exchange messages on the bulletin boards (we can **Front Page Sports Football Pro: Fixes player draft error and includes 26 be reached there at EXPT40B). The Prodigy Game Poll is run by AI enhancements. 2/11/94 Prodigy based on a list of games provided by CGW and is updated Gabriel Knight Floppy V1.0A Patch: Corrects various memory allocation weekly. Note that it is not a cumulative rating over time (like the and \"Fatal errors that some players have encountered. 12/16/93 CGW Top 100 Poll). Instead, the Prodigy Game Poll is a weekly \"Snapshot\" of game popularity with gamers rating their favorites on a Gabriel Knight CD-ROM Update: Fixes all known problems and speeds 1 10 scale. The highest total point earners make their Top 10. We up the game restoring process. 1/21/94 provide this data to our readers as another barometer of \"what's hot\" **Gobliins CD-ROM Patch: Fixes sound card and CD-ROM driver in computer gaming problems. 3/1/94 Hornet Patch: Fixes many bugs and adds several new features to Spectrum HoloByte's new combat sim. 2/07/94 **Lands Of Lore CD-ROM Patch: Fixes lockup problems on fast TOP TEN RANKED GAMES machines and allows use of Waveblaster/Soundblaster 16 combo. 2/24/94 Week of February 25 to March 3 Legend of Kyrandia V1.3 Update: Fixes random lockups and corrects RANK SCORE TITLE RANK SCORE TITLE some of the phrasing used by the characters. 2/04/94 Links 386 Pro Version 1.21: Corrects many major and minor bugs. | 3528 Castle Holfenstein-31 & 2223 Civilization 1/28/94 2 3843 Similu 28472887 Seventh Guest 3 2641 X-Wing 8 1871 11 11 4 [ n fitte II tet 2 Lost In Time CD-ROM Update: Fixes problems with several CD drives 4 2598 King's llues I VI 4 1585 Links 380 Pro (Mitsumi, Orchid) and certain Sound Blaster-compatible audio cards. S 2486 100g 18 1543 Front Pg Football 2/09/94 Lucky's Casino Adventure Update: Enables the program to recognize most VESA drivers, and allows the users to set the IRQ and Base address for any sound card. 12/30/93 Profiles and photos of missing children. Master of Orion V1.3 Upgrade: This parch features rougher opponents, Menu Jump Palli A-ZXref Copyl tools ? EX CORE adjusted playbalance, and legions of minor combat tweaks. 1/06/94 GAMETOLE ONLY ON PRODIGY Look] July 1993 Page 185 "


"THE RUMOR BAG Journalist flambé by Justin Graham Puck ometimes, the best laid plans of investimodern tank simulation under development escort? Had I been providing rumors of the gative journalists simply go awry. I by Micro Prose. Its working title is M-1 Tank wrong sorts of games? Would she have been hired on at San Jose's famous Il Fornaio II and it is supposed to use the Across The more interested in RAW Entertainment's restaurant in order to meet a certain redRhine engine for modern scenarios. It's sup2300: Cyber Wars: I remembered that it was haired lovely who had been refusing to take posed to be released by Christmas. a strategic game using area movement, reI volunteered to work as an Catching them off-guard with the aroma of source management and diplomacy, but it extra chef on an evening when the Sharks freshly steamed mushrooms in garlic, didn't seem her style. She might not even like were playing, because she usually dined there ca there dropped hints about two new dropped hints about two new science fiction the features like biological warfare, galactic before the game. games. I told them about RAW Entertaincommodity market or census reports that add done of the waiters if he ment's science fiction thriller. Blind lustice.ro to the realism of the late '94 product. Would was going to get off work in time to go to the be designed by a new developer called Illyby a new developer called Illy she have been interest she have been interested in Impressions' arena that night. He told me that the only mani Designs. When they didn't respond, I Lords of the Realm Shed probably have arena he would be visiting was the Elder assumed they didn't like products that were more interested in the fact that it was origiScrolls: Arena from Bethesda Softworks. He marketed solely by direct sales and mentioned nally going to be called Castle Conquest but talked about that game all the way through a non-violent space adventure called Terrorthe name was changed to avert any confusion the preparation of my special Chardonnay Byte that might even be bundled on an, as vet. with the Interplay line of strategy games. sauce and the only way I could shut him up unannounced game machine. It's being deWhile the waiter served their cappuccino, I was to tell him that the sequel would be called veloped by a new company called Digital brought out the Creme Brulee myself. I set it Mournhold. Blending Romano and a hint of Graphics Library, and is supposed to have a down before the charming, but quiet, couple basil into the sauce, I explained that Mournhuge game universe. and tried my last gambit. \"You know, this hold would connect to and expand Arena into While dishing up the pasta, I asked if either Sim World concept from Maxis is looking a World of Xeen-like universe, comprised of of them had heard about Cry Wolf Producpretty good. In addition to being able to fly three or four games, and that it will run faster tions' Twenty Thousand Leagues Under The over your city with that product from because they are revamping the engine to run Sea. I wondered aloud if it had anything to lard Software, you'll be able to fight your way under DOS protected mode. do with an abandoned project from Walt through your city with giant 'mechs using a As I was tossing the last of the fertucine, the Disney Software alumnus. They just compliproduct from Tsunami, drive through your waiter returned with exciting news. «There is mented me on the sauce. city in a different product, or build a skya couple out there talking about Wing ComI told them I'd heard from Micro Prose that scraper arcology in your SimCity using a Japamander III.\" he shouted. «They say it's going Multiplayer Civilization is dead. They sympanese conversion called The Tower.\" to make it for Christmas release and that thized and asked if I had any of that famous It didn't work. They listened patiently, but Origin is using Silicon Graphics machines to Il Fornaio Creme Brulee for dessert. I nodded as I offered my farewell and turned to leave, render the backgrounds and cinematic seand tried again. \"They're still working on I heard the gentleman say to the lady, \"So, quences.\" Colonization, but it may not have a multihow long have you known him?\" Decked out from the kitchen and noticed player capability.\" They ordered two cappuc\"I don't,\" she responded, \"I thought he was the lady in question had locks so red they cinos with dessert, and I nodded again and a friend of yours! would have done my clam sauce proud. Since told them that DragonSphere will remain a Then, to make matters worse, I noticed she had been talking about Origin Systems, MicroProse product. On my way back to the another beautiful redhead across the room, she must be my elusive contact. I quickly kitchen, I told them that the production team putting on her coat and getting ready to leave garnered the materials together and joined had finished recording the voices for the CDthe restaurant. She caught my eyes and smiled her and her escort at the table to prepare their ROM version. knowingly before she waved coquettishly and meal at a side table. Dropping capers into the What was going wrong? Was this woman left me bereft of both rumors and answers. piquant sauce, I dropped a hint about the afraid to tell me anything in front of her (GW Page 186 Computer Gaming World "


"FROM THE CREATORS OF THE AWARD-WINNING WOLFENSTEIN 3-D \"The graphics are superb, with lighting effects and art that could only come from dark and demented minds.\" Computer Gaming World \"You want action? You want gunplay? You want gore? ...DOOM has it all.\" PC Entertainment \"...if you have saliva, prepare to drool now.\"\"....an absolute musthave for PC action fans.\" Electronic Games WANT TO BE A HERO? GO TO HELL! DOOM is a lightning-fast virtual reality adventure where you're the toughest space trooper ever to suck vacuum. Scientists stationed on a far-off moonbase have opened a gateway to Hell, releasing a monster-infested holocaust upon the universe. You're the last marine remaining on the base after the invasion. Your mission is to survive!  Four-player combat over network  Two-player action over modem  Incredibly detailed 3-D world,  Blood-curdling stereo sound effects  Hair raising demonic denizens of Hell  Awesome foe-fraggin' weapons Call 1-800-IDGAMES Order the entire DOOM trilogy for $40.00 or get episode one, Knee-Deep in the Dead for the cost of shipping and handling. Or download episode one from Software Creations BBS. (508) 368-4137 @ 2400-14.4K baud Canadian customers call 1-800-661-7383. INC SOFTWARE Requires a 386DX PC compatible or better; hard disk drive; VGA graphics; 4 Megabytes of memory. A 486 is recommended. Multiplayer options require a network which uses the IPX protocol, a modem, or serial link. Digitized sound effects require a 100% Sound Blaster compatible card, Gravis Ultra SoundTM, or Pro Audio Spectrum«16. DOOM is a trademark of id Software, . Other trademarks are the property of their respective companies. Circle Reader Service #71 "


"SKIM THE CLOUDS, BUST A FEW BALLOONS AND DOGFIGHT YOUR WAY THROUGH THE GREAT WAR. WINGS OT GLORY limb into the cockpit of a Sopwith Camel and test your skills as a daring aviator in the War to End All Wars. Fly for the British and Americans, ilscovering the strengths and weaknesses of your different planes as well as those of the enemy. Earn the respect of both sides as you secure your place in the company of aces! Actual screens may vary.  4-channel digital sound gives you the roar of dogfighting the way WWI pilots heard it.  Instant mission generator lets you fly against any combination of enemies you choose.  Refined game engine generates realistic clouds, trees and increased plane detail. FOR A GREAT GAME EXPERIENCE, WE RECOMMEND AN INTEL4867 DX2 OR PENTIUM PROCESSOR-BASED SYSTEM. FOR LITERATURE ON INTEL PROCESSORS, CALL 1-800-756-8766 Copyright  1994 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Wings of Glory is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin and We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. Intel, Intel486 and Pentium are trademarks of Intel Corporation. LE GRIGIN Kleucate wolk Available at a software retailer near you, or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 Circle Reader Service #100 "

