October 1989

Number 64

Features
CGW's "Game of the Year" Awards

8

Our Annual Accolades for Great Games

Scorpion's "Vulcan"

14

The Desert War Continues / Lt. H. E. Dille

Scorpion's Mail

55

Cinemaware's "The Kristal"

56

"Kristal" Klear Komments / Roy Wagner

16

Helpful Hints for Apoplectic Adventurers / Scorpia

Quest for Firepower

Leisure Genius' "Risk"
Vital Variations on Classic Conquest / David M. Wilson

Sierra's "Manhunter 2: San Francisco"

60

Choice Cuts in a Violent Venture / Scorpia

18

Electronic Arts' "Project Firestart" / David Wilson

Omnitrend's "Universe III"

20

Departments

Dastardly Deeds in a Sci-Fi Sequel / Douglas Seacat

Special Football Section

24

Football Fever for Computer Coaches / Wyatt Lee

Cinemaware Spotlights "Speedball"

34

Rollerball Meets Jai Alai / Robert W. Struble

What Do You Do For "QIX"?

39

Subtle Strategies for Taito's "QIX" / Russell Sipe

Sport Time's "Omni-Play Horse Racing"
Tantalizing Tips on a "Sure Thing" / Johnny L. Wilson

49

Editorial
Contest
Taking A Peek
Inside The Industry
Rumor Bag
Game Ratings
CGW Hall of Fame
Conversions Received
Reader Input Device
Letters from Paradise

4
4
6
10
12
36
37
40
71
72

Contest

The
"Contest"
Contest
Bowing to consumer demand,
CGW announces
its monthly contest department.
You have told us
that you like contests and want to
see more, so more is what you will
get (as they say, be careful what
you ask for . . .).
Since we know we have the most
intelligent readers in the hobby we
have decided to pick your brains
(it's cheaper than hiring a consultant). We want you to help us put
together some fun filled contests.
The best ones will be used in the
magazine (with full credit to the
author). The reader that submits
the best contest idea will, in addition to being made forever famous
by having his/her winning contest
entry published, receive a three
year subscription or renewal to
CGW. Any contest which appears
in CGW will be copyrighted by
Golden Empire Publications.
Put on your thinking caps and
give us some good ideas. Multiple
choice? Essay? Brain Teasers?
Whatever! The only guideline is
that the contest must deal with
the subject of computer games.
Submit your contest ideas to:

Computer Gaming World
Contest #1
P.O. Box 4566
Anaheim, CA 92803-4566.
Entries must be mailed no later
than November 30, 1989.

Editorial

Kicking Off
The
Fall
Season
The State of the Industry: At the
Spring Symposium of the Software Publishers Association, a software retailer
opened his discussion about software
marketing by stating, "The shelf space
wars are over and the software industry
has won the victory." From CGW's
perspective, "It ain't necessarily so!" Shelf
space is currently at such a premium that
it is affecting the release schedules of
new products. Software publishers are
finding sales resistance to new conversions of older products. Last year's successful Apple II game may not be greeted
with enthusiasm as this year's new Amiga
game and some retailers may opt not to
stock it.
Therefore, the coming trend is toward
horizontal releases (i.e. as many formats
as possible released at the same time).
Origin, Inc. finished the first versions of
their Fall releases months ago, but has
resisted the temptation to market the line
one format at a time. Lucasfilm Games
plans a worldwide release of Loom in
three different formats during the first
part of 1990. Other publishers are expected to follow suit.
The bad news for CGW readers is that
they may have to wait longer to see some
of the breakthrough games that have
been under development over the last
year or so. The good news is that more
people will be able to participate in the initial excitement of the new products and
our reviews will be able to touch base
with more formats at the same time (at
least, we'll be able to note basic differences in sound, graphics, and interface).
The State of the Magazine: The sum-

mer issues of CGW also reflect the current state of the industry. The last three
"Taking A Peek" columns contained less
new titles than at any time in recent
memory and we find ourselves waiting as
anxiously as you are for that flurry of Fall
and Christmas releases. The current
bulked-up issue suggests that a rebound
from the summer "game recession" is on
its way.
The professional football season is just
under way, so this issue presents a look
at familiar titles in new formats (John
Madden Football, TV Sports Football,
MSFL Football and Pure Stat Football),
as well as ABC Monday Night Football,
Playmaker Football, and a strange version of monster football called Grave
Yardage. As a bonus for sports simulation fans, we take a look at Omni-Play"
Horse Racing.
That's the theme of the issue, but we
haven't forgotten the adventure game
fans. This issue, we look at Manhunter 2:
San Francisco, Project Firestart, and
Universe 3. Adventure fans will also want
to pay close attention to this month's
"Rumor Bag" for details about future Sierra releases.
Wargamers may feel shortchanged with
only Vulcan and Risk to consider, but
next month will be different. We'll look at
Decisive Battles of the ACW: Volume 2
(the MS-DOS version) and F-15 Strike
Eagle II. In the meantime, you might
want to try out your strategic options in
QIX, a real-time abstract strategy game.
Correction: The phone number for Computer Sports Network is 800-727-4636.

Taking A Peek

Accolade
550 S. Winchester Blvd.
Suite 200
San Jose, CA 95128
HARRIER 7: Terrorists are at it again,
capturing seven oil platforms and closing off the Gulf from any oil shipping.
Players can either get in line at the gas
station now, or jump in their VTOL BA
Harrier attack fighter and do something
about it! Maneuvering the fighter from
third person perspective, players battle
enemy fighters and ships to free the oil
platforms from the terrorists, and U.S.
civilians from the terrors of odd/even gas
rationing. IBM (pictured) & C-64
($14.95). Circle reader service #1.
MENTAL BLOCKS: This collection of
four spatially-oriented games will give
you a good right-brain workout. The
games include both a 2-D and a 3-D
block stacking challenge, a la Tetris, a
"fold the box" mind puzzle, and a
geometric sequence puzzle of the likes
found on standard 10 tests. Spatial illiterates need not apply for these mental
aerobics. IBM (pictured) & C-64
($14.94). Circle reader service #2.
SHOOT 'EM UP CONSTRUCTION
KIT: Arcade game addicts can create un-

limited joystick-bustin' action with this
construction set. The background
scenery and dozens of graphics sprites
can be altered to fit the action garners
fancy. Includes three pre-designed
scenarios for instant arcade gratification
or game design hints. C-64 ($14.95).
Circle reader service #3.

Broderbund
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903
WIBARM: The player becomes Eizel
Cloud, ace intergalactic investigator, out
to recapture an orbiting power plant
before it explodes and destroys the
planet. Using a Transformer-like Wibarm
(robot/land cruiser/star jet), players
search through 32 maze-filled buildings,
fight over 30 different monsters with 10
different weapons, and try to piece
together clues to solve their mission in

this action/role-playing game. Sharp
graphics and smooth 360 degree scrolling. IBM ($39.95). Circle reader service
#4.

California Dreams
780 Montague Expwy.
#403
San Jose, CA 95131
BLOCK OUT: Here's another Tetrisstyle game with customizing features.
Players decide how big the play area will
be (height, width and depth) and then
the multi-shaped blocks begin to fall.
Working in real time (also customized),
players must turn the different shaped
blocks that appear to fit the pit they've
created. The longer it takes to properly
(Continued on page 64)

Game of the Year Awards

n previous years, Computer Gaming World has
awarded "Game of the
Year" honors to outstanding
games in three different
categories and a grand prize
"Game of the Year" for the
game that stands out from
the rest. In addition, special
awards for artistic achievement have been granted
whenever the editorial staff
deemed games worthy of
extra praise. Games which
reached the market between
June of the previous year
and June of the year in
which the award is presented
are eligible for CGWs "Game
of the Year" awards.
This year, CGW revised its
"Top 100 Games" list. Now,
games are divided into five
basic categories (see the explanation of the various
categories on page 36).
Therefore, awards were
presented in all five
categories, as well as the
grand prize and two special
awards. In the course of the
nomination process, CGW observed that every category
had, at least, one company
with more than one nomination. This is not surprising since a company which excels in publishing one
game for a given genre should, logically,
be able to excel with other games in the
genre.

I

the nominees have been
singled out for Special
Awards.
CGWs 1989 Special
Award for Achievement in
Sound goes to Sierra (Ken
Williams, Executive Producer)
for Space Quest III: Pirates
of Pestulon—[Ed: This
award represents the first
time CGW has given an
achievement award specifically for the use of sound in
a computer game. Bob
Siebenberg, rock musician
formerly with "Supertramp",
has composed a score that
perfectly captures the silly,
tongue-in-cheek nature of
the game and Mark Siebert
has enhanced the enjoyment
of the game significantly
with aurally superior sound
effects which he incorporated into the game using
the system created by
Stewart Goldstein. The
Roland MT-32 reproduces
Space Quest III's sound with
quality that will delight the
most discriminating
audiophile. Although the Ad
Lib card's sound is not quite
as rich, the soundtrack on
the Ad Lib still shines exponentially better than any other game's
audio to date.

Game of the Year
Awards

Action Game of the Year
Nominees for Action Game
of the Year are: Accolade for Jack
Nicklaus' Greatest 18 Holes of Championship Golf—Ned Martin (designer)
and Keith Orr (producer), Cinemaware
(Phyllis & Robert Jacob, Executive
Producers) for Rocket Ranger—Kellyn
Beck (designer), Bob Lindstrom (music),
and John Cutter (producer),
Cinemaware for Lords of the Rising
Sun—Doug Barnett (designer), Bob
Lindstrom (music), and John Cutter
(producer), and Lucasfilm Games for
Battlehawks 1942—Lawrence Holland
(designer), Ken Macklin (Special Effects
Animation), and Noah Falstein (producer)
And the WINNER of CGWs Action
Game of the Year is:
Lucasfilm Games for Battlehawks
1942—[Ed: The realistically rendered
aircraft and ship images are marvelous,
the documentation is rich in detail, and
the "instant replay" feature with
user-definable perspectives make Battlehawks
1942 the winner in an extremely competitive category.]

Adventure Game of the Year
Nominees for Adventure Game of the
Year are: Sierra (Ken Williams, Executive
Producer) for King's Quest IV—Roberta
Williams (designer) and William Goldstein
(Music), Sierra for Manhunter: New
York , Dave and Barry Murry (designers),
Sierra for Space Quest III: Pirates of
Pestulon—Mark Crowe and Scott Murphy (designers), Bob Siebenberg (Music)
and Mark Siebert (Sound Effects),
Masterplay for Star Saga One: Beyond
The Boundary—Rick Dutton, Walter
Freitag, Andrew C. Greenberg, and
Michael Massimilla (designers), and Interplay for Neuromancer—Bruce Balfour,
Brian Fargo, Troy A. Miles, and Michael
Stackpole (designers), DEVO (music) and
Brian Fargo (producer).
And the WINNER of CGWs Adventure
Game of the Year is:
Interplay for Neuromancer—[Ed:
Neuromancer is faithful to its Nebula
and Hugo award-winning roots in the
cyberpunk novel by William Gibson, but
it stretches the adventure game genre
with its approach to skill development,
non-linear solutions to the puzzles, and
interface that successfully promulgates
the illusion of experiencing cyberspace.]
This year's Adventure Game of the Year
nominees were so competitive that two of

CGWs Special Award for Literary
Achievement goes to Masterplay for
Star Saga One: Beyond The Boundary—
[Ed: This is the first time CGW has ever
given an award for the fiction presented
in a computer game. Star Saga One is
the most marvelously well-written adventure game ever presented on a computer. Although the game lacks any onscreen graphics, sound effects, or technological chrome, this humorous, challenging, frustrating, exciting and addictive game holds its own as a benchmark
of adventure gaming on the computer.]

Role-Playing Game of the Year
Nominees for Role-Playing Game of
the Year are: Activision for Prophecy—
Richard L. Seaborne (designer), Alan J.
Murphy (graphics), and Terry Ishida, Stew
Perkins, and Kelly Flock (producers),
Mindcraft for The Magic Candle—Ali N.
Atabek (designer) and Ugur Atabek, Anthony Postma, and James B. Thomas
(graphics), New World Computing for
Might and Magic II—Jon and Michaela
Van Caneghem (designers) and Avril
Harisson and Jeff Griffeath (graphics),
Strategic Simulations for Pool of
(Continued on page 41)

Industry News

Inside the Industry
News, Notes and Quotes From the
Computer Entertainment Industry
Electronic Arts
Goes Public
A total of 1.94 million
shares of common stock are
expected to be offered in
Electronic Arts initial public
offering. Upon full capitalization, the public would own
about 21% of the total stock
issued and Electronic Arts
could garner as much as
$14 million from the sale of
the common stock. The capital generated is expected to
be used for software development and for the company's
long-term strategy of
developing videogame
software for the 16-bit dedicated game machines and
future products based on
compact disc storage.

Sierra
Licenses
Dynamix
Technology
Sierra On-Line, Inc., publisher of Leisure Suit Larry,
King's Quest, Police Quest
and other popular adventure
games, has announced an
agreement with Dynamix
Inc., (developers of Arctic
Fox and Abrams Battle
Tank for Electronic Arts, as
well as F-14 Tomcat for
Mediagenic's Activision
label) which will enable Sierra to use the three-dimensional technology (3-Space
Technology Software)
developed by Dynamix in future Sierra products. The
technology is expected to be
utilized in future animated
adventure games from Sierra, as well as unspecified future releases. No firm details
on future products were

Singapore
Game Show
Fights Piracy
Telahin Enterprises, Singapore distributor for
eleven U. S. software publishers (as well as CGW),
recently held Games Show
'89 at the Westin Stamford
Singapore (July 13, 1989).
The company, which has
assisted law enforcement

given, but the company is expected to enter the simulations market upon acquiring
this capability.
Ken Williams, Sierra CEO,
stated that "3-Space Technology will mean whole new
arenas in which Sierra can
produce software. This will
also expand the capability of
our current SCI language
and add a higher degree of
realism to our games. Our
goal remains the same—interactive films on high end
computers—and now we are
one step closer."

officials in raiding several
stores which were actively
pirating software, believes
that consumers who experience the added value
of production copies are
less likely to be satisfied
with pirated copies of
software in the future.
Therefore, one of the goals
of the exposition was to
offer enough special deals
for everyone to buy a
game. More than 10,000
people attended the
exposition.

CGW and
Origin To Host
Tournament
Computer Gaming World
and ORIGIN are jointly
sponsoring a National
Omega Tournament (see
Taking A Peek). The tournament challenges all gamers
to show off their expertise,
matching their designs and
programming skills against
fellow gamers across the nation. CGW will report on the
ongoing tournament and
will host the finals which will

be covered in the March
1990 issue.

Game
Show Debuts
The "Galaxy of Electronic
Games", an exhibition strictly
dedicated to computer
games and videogames, will
be held November 17-19,
1989 in the San Jose Convention Center. The show is
expected to offer several contests and demonstrate more
than three hundred entertainment software products. In
addition, hardware for the
new hand-held cartridge
games and 16-bit generation of videogames will be
shown. Admission is $6.00
per person. The information
number for the show is
(415) 346-4281.

Mindscape
Dispenses
with Disk-Based
Copy Protection
Citing disk-based copy
protection as ". . . a real sore
spot with consumers, . . ."
Mindscape President and
CEO Roger Buoy stated that
new titles to be published by
Mindscape will use manualbased or codebook protection for protection. Specifying the necessity of consumers being able to make
back-up copies or install
programs on a hard disk, he
announced the change in
policy. New titles developed
by Mindscape will now be
free of disk-based copy
protection, but new versions
of earlier titles and products
distributed by (yet, not
developed by) Mindscape
may still include disk-based
protection. Balance of
Power: The 1990 Edition,
Hostage: Rescue Mission,
Gauntlet ll and The Colony
already use manual-based
copy protection. Star Trek V:
The Final Frontier and Fiendish Freddy's Big Top 0' Fun
are expected to follow suit.

Industry News

ew Orleans seemed the perfect
place to start soaking up local
color in preparation for Roberta
Williams' upcoming The Colonel's Bequest, a tongue-in-cheek murder mystery
set in the bayou country. So, there I was,
in Napoleon House (the
restaurant located in the
house French loyalists inby Benjamin
tended for the exiled
emperor to live after the
pirate, Jean Laffite, was
to have rescued him), innocently sliding forkful
after forkful of delicious
jambalaya under the
edge of my bag and into
my mouth, when a
beautiful Creole woman
sat down at my table.

N

She told me she recognized me from my picture in the magazine and
asked me if I knew anything about Sierra's
new card game. Before I
could answer, she told
me that Hoyle's Book of
Games would enable
players to compete
against characters from
other Sierra games. She
figured Leisure Suit
Larry would be an easy
mark.

museum in the Big Easy could know
about Paul Reichie III's wild and crazy
outer space adventure. The game isn't
even supposed to be released until 1990.
Maybe there's more to this voodoo.. .
Naaah!

Horace Luce

The
Rumor
Bag

I told her I was more excited about Hero's
Quest, an adventure game with role-playing elements. Along with the kinds of
graphics and sounds that garners are
coming to expect from Sierra, are first
person style "arcade" combats and the
ability to play either a wizard, thief, or warrior.
She thanked me for the information
and noted the tourbook of New Orleans
resting beside my plate. "Looks like
you're on a bit of quest yourself. Need a
guide?" Considering it would have been
unchivalrous to refuse, I accepted her
offer of a whirlwind tour of New Orleans.
We stopped at the New Orleans Pharmacy Museum in the French Quarter. My
guide pointed out that voodoo and
medicine were curiously intertwined in
the early days of the Bayou State. In fact,
the docent at the museum noted the
numbered potion bottles with everything
from love potions to "goofer dust". "If you
performed poorly in school," our docent
told us, "you'd have to take a dose of
goofer dust to straighten you out." He
looked at me and whispered, "It's a good
thing the folks at Accolade don't have
any 'goofer dust' or the Adventures of
Elmo in Outer Space won't ever come
out." I wondered how a pharmacy

We called a taxi and headed for the
Louisiana Historical Association Confederate Museum. The cab driver noticed
my bag and asked if I was here early for
Mardi Gras or if I was the guy from "The
Rumor Bag". After my confession, he
pointed out the Superdome, home of the
New Orleans Saints. When I admitted
that I was only a casual fan, he asked he
asked me when Melbourne House was
going to publish Medieval Football. "Late
next spring," I guessed, "I suppose you
know all about it." He sure did. He told
me about stone sideline markers that
make the out of bounds look like a
horizontal Stonehenge and players in full
armor taking halberd and broadsword to
each other.
We stopped at the Confederate
Museum and entered the halls where Jefferson Davis' inaugural suit and other
memorabilia, General Braxton Bragg's
uniform, and other artifacts from the War
Between the States are enshrined. My
lovely guide smiled and pointed to a
Japanese artist carefully studying Bragg's
uniform and sketching it. "Koei," she said.
I wasn't exactly sure what she meant
until I realized that she was telling me
that the artist worked for Koei Corpora-

tion. I was thrilled. Here was just the confirmation I needed to verify that Koei was
working on an American Civil War game.
As we rode back toward Preservation
Hall, the home of the Dixieland sound,
we passed the statue of
Robert E. Lee. It
reminded me of Bob
Jacob from
Cinemaware. It seems
Cinemaware has just
become the latest Affiliated Label with
Electronic Arts. The
story is that the company is shooting for the
next wave of interactive
entertainment, so they
need someone to handle
distribution on the computer side. In fact, the
company is not only
hard at work on TV
Sports Basketball for
personal computers, but
they've already signed
with NEC to publish CDROM versions of Lords
of the Rising Sun and It
Came From Out of the
Desert (upcoming on
personal computers) on
the Turbo Grafx 16.
After the concert, we
strolled down World
Famous Bourbon Street.
It really didn't seem as
wild as I thought it would be until my
guide assured me that I needed to see
one particular "girlie" show. It was amazing! Here was a woman with tattoos of different colored dots placed strategically on
her upper torso. As she would move, the
dots would change colors in a prearranged pattern.
I told my guide that I would personally
be worried about infection if I had that
many tattoos. She laughed and lead me
backstage, repeating my story to the performer. She laughed and told me that Virgin Mastertronic had published an
abstract strategy game called Infection in
the U.K. It was apparently the inspiration
for her tattoos. "It's a great game," she
said, "sort of a cross between Reversi and
Go, but I don't think they're going to call
it Infection when they bring it to the U.S."
Not unless they plan on putting a picture
of the New Orleans dancer on the box,
I'd wager.
So, that's how I got the rumors for this
month's column. Nothing else happened
except for one mysterious thing. Do any
of our readers know how to remove
colored dots from a brown paper bag?

Review

D

uring February of 1943, the Axis forces in Tunisia,

under the command of General Kesselring, launched
a devastating counterattack along the Western Dorsal
and centered upon the Kasserine pass. Although territorially
inconclusive, this offensive inflicted severe losses upon the

ter improvement is perhaps the most welcome, as few, if
any, commanders ever possess the luxury of completely accurate intelligence concerning enemy movement and disposition.

Winning The War

Vulcan
by H. E. Dille

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

°

Vulcan
IBM
1-2
$39.95
R.T. Smith
Cases Computer Simulations, Inc.
(Scorpion)
19 Harbor Dr.
Lake Hopatcong NJ 07849

26th U.S. Infantry division and served as a major psychological victory for Axis forces. Vulcan: The Tunisian Campaign allows players the option of playing four scenarios (including
Kasserine) on a tactical level, or the entire campaign on a
strategic level. Scenarios last from one to four hours, while
the campaign game generally takes between eight and sixteen hours to complete.

Staff Briefing
Vulcan is a companion game to Desert Rats (reviewed in
CGW #58) which covers a supporting theatre of operations
and offers some significant improvements over its predecessor. Among these improvements is the addition of a much
larger map to display terrain features in greater detail. This
augmentation is important both tactically and logistically,
given the significance that roads played throughout the campaign.
As in Desert Rats, logistical planning is vital to success,
and the addition of rules covering zones of control further enhances the players' appreciation for the importance of
"beans and bullets". Zones of control relate to a unit's ability
to inhibit enemy movement through squares which are adjacent to the one occupied. Thus, as in reality, this allows
relatively weak units to establish strong defensive positions in
mountains overlooking vital supply lines, and thereby disrupt
significantly larger numbers of troops.
Other additions include a significant reduction in unscheduled withdrawals of troops, the representation of air
power (albeit in an abbreviated manner, to decrease enemy
efficiency through air raid), and hidden movement. This lat-

(Warning: This section contains
specific hints on strategy)
Assuming that one is playing the campaign game from the Allied point of
view, the primary concern must be aggressiveness. German forces are initially very weak, and fortifications in Tunis
and Bizerta are virtually non-existent.
Try for a rapid dash along the northern
road from Tabarka to Bizerta with the
first available units. If the Germans
have established defensive positions in
the mountains or forests along the
northern road, retreat, regroup, and
bypass them if you can through the
road to Mateur. An early success here
will allow you to divert more forces to
the assault on Tunis. Should you be
unable to accomplish this, a good
secondary strategy is to move
southeast and establish defensive positions along the Gabes-Tunis road, in
the hope that you can disrupt supply
and crush the German units arriving
from North Africa between you and the
British forces pursuing them. Care
must be taken in this approach, however, to ensure sufficient forces remain
in the North to prevent the Germans
from cutting allied lines of supply.

As the Axis player, the strategic approach is almost directly
the opposite. Defense is everything. It is possible to win the
game simply by precluding the allies from capturing both
Bizerta and Tunis by the end of April, 1943. Place crack
units in both of these objectives and fortify heavily. In addition, establish defensive perimeters along all of the key
routes to these cities, taking maximum advantage of the terrain features which increase your defensive posture whenever possible. Counterattack and pursue Allied units only
when you know they are weak, exploitable and undersupplied. Also, conserve armored units whenever possible in a
mobile reserve position to counter Allied thrusts. Even with
the influx of Rommel's forces from North Africa, Allied armored units retain a numerical advantage throughout unless
you can reduce them by attrition, utilizing fortified infantry
positions. Finally, do not forget about the British forces
which are in pursuit of those units arriving from North Africa.
If allowed, they can disperse along all of the north-south
roads to disrupt supply throughout the entire theatre of
operations, or spearhead a massive assault along the GabesTunis road.

The Final Trumpet
Vulcan is a fine game for novice and intermediate level wargarners, or anyone with a particular passion for this period.
The improvements made to the operating system are logical
and appreciated, although long term re-playability is still an
issue. Bottom line: Nothing truly innovative, but recommended nonetheless.

Game Hints

Scorpion's Mail
es

friends, it's time once again to
haul out the old mail sacks and see
what the postal carrier has brought
us. Now that the long, hot, days of summer are gone, he's probably going to be
overworked soon, especially when the
flood of Christmas games starts to arrive.
However, it's only October (Fred's favorite
month; he does so look forward to Halloween), so the post office has a short
breather before the tide rises.
First, though, I must extend my
apologies to several readers. Embarrassing to relate, I lost some mail. These
were letters sent to me around
mid-to-late July. How many in all, I can't say for
sure, but it was something like 5 or 6 of
them (ouch). This is an extremely rare occurrence, as usually I'm very careful
about these things. Unfortunately, it did
happen, and I'm really sorry about it. So,
for those who may have wondered why
you didn't receive a reply, that's the
reason.
Ok, now let's take a look in the mailbag.

Wasteland:
A number of people have been having
difficulties with the cylinders in the end
game. For this, you need four special
keys: blackstar, nova, pulsar, and quasar.
If you don't have them, there's no point
in going to Cochise just yet; you'll get to
the bottom and find you can't do anything (or not much, anyway). Also, regarding the password to Savage Village: if you
climb the sand hill in Needles enough
times, you'll find out what it is. Persistence pays off (many thanks to Michael
Liu of Ontario for passing this one along).

Ultima III
Some of you out there aren't reading
the manual carefully enough (tch!). The
only way to increase magic points is to increase intelligence; character level has
nothing to do with it. So if you're still
stuck with low-level spells, it's time to
start looking for a way to raise intelligence (and other attributes as well).

Prophecy
Several folks are having a hard time
finding the password to the Tower of Jed.
You can get this from one of the Jedist
prisoners being held by the goblins. Look
at what they say very carefully; one of
them actually does give you the word, although not straight out. You have to put
it together yourself.

Might & Magic II
Orb problems have been bothering a
few people. Specifically, getting the orb
out of the cavern. This puzzle is certainly
illogical, and it's not surprising that
people are having trouble with it. Fortunately, the solution is a simple one, as
long as you have a hireling in the party.

Wizardry V
It's amazing how difficult it is to put
together a working watch (grin). Of
course, if you knew the exact parts you
needed, it probably wouldn't be quite so
hard. A visit to the Mad Ballroom of
Manfretti's, and a chat with a certain
thief, should help enormously in this
respect.

Leisure Larry II
Some people have discovered that stuffing a wild bikini is not as easy as it
sounds (heh). This is basically a threepart problem. First, you need the proper
item. It can be found right there in the
guest room. Second, you have to do
your stuffing in the right place (careful!).
Finally, you also have to use the right syntax in your command (remember that the
parser in these games tends to be rather
unforgiving).

King's Quest IV
A few folks have been wondering when
they'll be able to play that organ (not to
mention, they're tired of climbing all
those stairs!). Or rather, play the organ
with a positive result. Well, you won't be
able to do much about that until after
you've taken care of all the ghosts in the
night time (if you're wondering if night
will ever come, see the Mail column in
the June '89 CGW). Also, the witches
aren't really as difficult as they may seem
to be. Mostly what you need here is good
timing. The one chasing you around the
pot is easy to avoid so long as you don't
get careless (remember, she can't see
you). Watch the other two carefully and
grab at the right moment.

Neuromancer
That Comlink 4.0 sure seems hard to
find. Then again, it's pretty important, so
maybe it's not surprising that it's well-hid-

den. Maybe you should try an ocean
voyage; I hear that the SEA is good for
your health (heh).
Well, that's it for this round of the mail
column. If you need help with an adventure game (adventures only, please; I
can't really help you with games that are
primarily arcade), you can reach me in
the following ways:
On Delphi: stop by the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie: visit the Games RoundTable
(type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
By US Mail: (remember to enclose a selfaddressed, stamped envelope if you live
in the United States) Scorpia, PO Box
338, Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

Review

"Okay, Jon," you tell
yourself, "Keep your cool."
So far this mission has
been pretty rugged. You've
fought monstrous genetic
mutations; rescued the
girl; and supervised her
safe exit from the ship.
You wish you could say
the same for yourself. You
set the Prometheus' selfdestruct mechanism
before discovering that the
monsters have beaten you
to the docking bay and
destroyed the shuttle craft
which was to have been
your lifeboat. Just now,
when you radioed for
help, mission control informed you that regulations forbid docking to a
ship that is set for selfdestruct. There has to be
a way out!
Electronic Arts bills
Project Firestart as "A Horror Movie in Outer Space".
This is appropriate, since
the game is slightly
reminiscent of the movie,
Alien. Play moves through
the various decks of the research ship, Prometheus. Occasionally, play will be suspended
while the scene changes to another part of the ship. The
cinematic style suspense builds as the scene changes allow the
player to catch glimpses of the enemy operation. There is no
beginning and ending theme music, but an entertaining musical
score accompanies the scene changes, as well as the monsters
during their attacks.

Quest for
Firepower

Electronic Arts' "Project Firestart"

The plot centers around a research ship experimenting in
genetic reshaping. The purpose of the reshaping was to produce
workers that were capable of working in environments which are
generally hostile to humans. When contact was lost with the
Prometheus, the System Science Foundation decided to deploy a
trained agent to investigate and defuse what could be an explosive situation.
The documentation assists the player by providing sketch maps
of the four levels of the ship. Players will have to pay close attention to these maps or they'll find themselves wandering aimlessly
throughout the large research ship. Even with the maps, however, it is easy to become disoriented and get lost on the decks.
Basically, Project Firestart is an action/adventure. Unlike early
games in this genre, there is some interaction with other characters. Unfortunately, players can read the ensuing conversations
on the screen, but only rarely do their statements have any impact on the story. This is particularly infuriating when (or if) the
player saves the girl. The girl is able to show the player the correct direction to go, but the player is given absolutely no opportunity to ask questions.
Of course, players won't want any opportunity to ask the
monsters any questions. These creatures are so tough that it
takes five or six laser blasts to blow one apart. Players are advised
to get into the healthy habit of closing doors behind them in
order to keep the nasty creatures from following them. Usually,
players will be able to outrun the creatures. If a player finds himself surrounded, though, he can sometimes run right through the
center of the creatures with a minimum of damage to himself.

by David M. Wilson

HUE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Project firestart
C-64/128
$29.95
Dynamix, Inc.
Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

Players always take some
damage using this tactic,
but there is always a
reasonable chance of escape.

"This Is
My Laser . . ."
Fortunately, players can
accumulate extra weapons
during the game. Characters can carry up to two
lasers at once, but the
"Catch 22" is that a
weapon cannot be disposed of until it is completely empty. This requirement not only detracts
from a feeling of realism,
but also defies logic. One
tactic may be to simply fire
the weapon into the air
until it is emptied in order
to be able to throw it
down and pick up a
stronger weapon. This
also doesn't make sense,
but it does work.

The First Aid boxes, located at various points
throughout the ship, are
quite useful, as well. Note
that they can only be used once, however, and they only restore
a limited amount of strength at that. Therefore, they should be
used in dire emergencies. At other times, players will be much
better off by getting their characters to the medical lab. The lab is
definitely the best place to heal wounds and restore strength.
Healing is faster and more complete in the lab.
Here are some helpful "Do's and Don'ts" for those who do not
mind hints. Do search every body. Don't raise the lead shield.
Do check the storage room. Don't shoot your laser in the same
room as the TNT (I know, you could have figured that one out
on your own). Do listen to the girl's ideas. Don't set the selfdestruct until you've saved the girl. Do radio mission control for
help.

Problems and Perspective
There are two basic problems with the floppy disks. The first is
minor, but irritating. The disk labels begin with Side 0. Since
most games have programs which begin with Side 1, there is a
very real danger of putting Side 1 in the drive when the program
has actually prompted one to put Side 0 into the drive. The
second problem involves disk swaps during a restored game.
Should a player want to restore a character who has died to the
last saved position, he will be forced to swap disks no less than
five times. Surely, this could have been avoided. One wants to
get on with the game, not swap disks all night.
Ultimately, however, Project Firestart succeeds because it is different. One might even be tempted to call it a genetic mutation
on its own. It is not traditional in any respect. While the game
may fail to satisfy devout action gamers because the pacing of
the action is slow or doctrinaire role-players because of the lack
of true interaction and character development, it is a suspenseful
blend of music, graphics, decision-making, action, clues, plot,
and even, romance. Project Firestart is not likely to set our world
on fire, but it will provide you with an interesting adventure.

Review

Universe In
A Bucket
Omnitrend's "Universe III"
by Douglas Seacat

Commendations

n many ways, Universe III is a "Catch 22" in outer space,
a no-win situation. The player assumes the role of a starship captain on a diplomatic mission, but is not informed
of dissident members within the diplomatic entourage or impending hostility on the part of the population he is sent to

I

keep the top
secret "Hyperdrive
Booster" as
a guarded
secret until
he ascertains
the success
of the
diplomatic
mission.
designerAs
Leslie told CGW
readers last
July (#49, p.
37), how-ever, "In this
product,
:vents just
happen to a
player. The
skill is shown
by 'riding
out' the cir-

who is more
adept at solving puzzles will probabTITLE:
SYSTEMS:

Universe III
Amiga, IBM
Atari ST (coming soon)
REVIEWED ON: Amiga
PRICE:
$49.95
DESIGNERS:
Torn Carbone
Bill Leslie
Omnitrend
PUBLISHER:
W. Simsbur
y. CT

course, contains objects necessary to complete tasks and
solve puzzles at later points in the game. So, thorough exploration and examination of all objects is important. This becomes even more critical due to the "no return" nature of
some of the locations. Once some areas have been left behind, they will never be seen again. Players are advised to
keep at least one save of each major location, in case an object has been forgotten. As the story progresses, the game
takes the player's character from his orbiting ship through a
deserted isolation habitat into a rundown town, and finally,
to the Hyperspace Booster and endgame.

ly be better equipped to win, but it
is still possible for anyone to succeed."

Game play itself is somewhat
reminiscent of the graphic Quest
series from Sierra with an interface
loosely taken from Breach and
Paladin, two of Omnitrend's earlier products. Players
primarily view an overhead view of the character on the left
side of the monitor screen and access command icons located on the right side of the screen in order to manipulate
the character. The icons allow the player to: move the character in the cardinal directions, pick up/drop items, check
status, fire a weapon, or choose from a short list of "verbs"
which allow more detailed action (e.g. "Examine", "Wear",
"Put", "Give", etc.). There are also keyboard commands for
those who do not like to use the mouse.
The simple-to-use interface enables the character to explore location by location in order to locate tools and discover clues of sabotage and intrigue. Each location, of

My favorite aspect of the game was the way the designers
included several ways to access the commands, particularly
the special movement commands which allow the character
to "jump" (move directly into a room) and "trace" (follow a
player-delineated path) in order to avoid being forced to plod
slowly back and forth between screens. In addition, there
with.Inado,esrquit
restablihdpomc
were several aspects
of the plot and
atmosphere which were
extremely well-done by the designers. Further, the entire
story shows a strong sense of humor with plenty of off-thewall puzzles and encounters. The humor offsets some of the
heavy-handed "intrigue" aspects of the plot and provides
some welcome comedy relief.

Reprimands
Unfortunately, the entire design does not work as well as
the movement features. The designers obviously wanted to
avoid using a parser to handle various commands, but the
"verb list" is so restrictive that it offers even more frustration
than some of the earliest parsers. The actions which a character can perform are severely limited and some of the commands that do exist are only used once or twice in the
course of an entire game. What the game really needs is a
ubiquitous "use" verb. One "use" verb would have been of
more service than half the ones in the present Universe III
verb list.
To further aggravate the problem, the game has the tendency to choose which objects can be used with which
verbs. Many of the objects do not seem to be available with
any verbs at all. For example, when the "Put" verb is activated, a list of objects which can be "Put" is shown. The
game will only display those objects which will need to be
"Put" in order to solve a puzzle. Not only does this frustrate
the player by limiting his apparent control over the game environment, but it actually makes the puzzles easier. By limiting the number of objects which can be acted upon by a
verb, the correct choice becomes that much simpler. Even if
only some objects are actually used with "Put" in order to
solve puzzles, the others should be presented for experimentation and only ruled out by the player's discretion.
Another disappointment concerns the almost complete
lack of character interaction. All dialogues are automatic and
happen at key times with virtually no player control. The verb
list contains an "Order" command which should have allowed the player's character to interact with his crew and passengers. Unfortunately, the command simply provides automatic responses that have little effect on game play.
The most disappointing aspect of the game is its extreme
linearity. Universe III allows almost no deviation from the required path and the linearity is made even more obvious by
the limited commands available. While it is understandable
that the designers were attempting to emphasize a strong
(Continued on page 22)

(Continued from page 20)

story line and stories are linear, it is regrettable that they
sacrificed player flexibility to accomplish this. Also, the abandonment of the strategic elements, so crucial to and successful in Paladin and Breach, seems an ill-conceived sacrifice
on the altar of storytelling. Where deemphasis of combat
would be
desirable in
some
CRPGs, it
seems like
Universe III
has gone
too far in the
other direction.
Another disappointing
element is
the limited
feedback
which
players
receive when an improper action is attempted. The game
simply reports that such an action is impossible. Given the
obvious sense of humor displayed by the authors in other
sections of the game, wouldn't some description of the negative consequences have been extremely entertaining?
Finally, this reviewer feels frustrated that there is so little

game to the game. Universe III only offers four major locations, each with only a handful of rooms. This tends to give
the player very little to work with and leaves him/her thinking
"Is that all?" One would think that a game with the audacity
to call itself a "Universe" ought to have enough flexibility and
room to back it up. [Ed: There seems to be a recurring
theme here. Alert readers will remember Charles Ardai's
review of Zak McKracken and the Alien Mindbenders in
CGW #52 and how it suggested that the environment of
the game was too big to be adequately simulated. Whereas
the same approach had worked well in Maniac Mansion because a house is limited enough for the simulation to be
rich and fully realized. Ardai noted that when Zak limited
San Francisco to half a dozen screens, it became a simulation that felt as flat as a movie town made of propped-up
facades. Perhaps, something of the same phenomenon is at
work in Universe III.)

Findings
Frankly, Universe III is not as good as its most recent
predecessors (Breach and Paladin). Where its predecessors
demonstrated flexibility and depth, Universe III is rigid and
narrow. Those who have played Universe and Universe II will
want to play this game to continue the series and some
Amiga and IBM owners will want to play the game as a diversion. Nevertheless, one cannot help but have the feeling that
Universe III is not what Omnitrend was shooting for.

Football Survey

Wishbone Warfare
CGW Revisits The
Electronic Gridiron
by Wyatt Lee

"It was a designed play!"
One of the best features of the latest
computer football games is the ability to
design one's own team and playbook
from scratch. Broderbund's Playmaker
Football, Electronic Arts's John Madden Football, Data East's ABC Monday
Night Football and Activision's off-beat
and not quite football game, Grave Yardage, all allow players to design actual
plays. Micro Sports, Inc.'s MSFL Pro
League Football allows players to design
a basic gameplan. In addition, all the
games mentioned previously, except
Cinemaware's TV Sports Football (Atari
ST version) and MSFL Pro League Football (which requires a separate MSFL Pro
Draft Disk), allow players to create customized rosters by either editing the
ability ratings of individual players or drafting from a player pool.

"We've assembled a team
with all the ingredients
necessary for a
championship."

As the gold, brown, orange, yellow
and red shades enliven the trees
with a brilliant palette, providing
the antepenult to their annual lifecycle,
it's once again time to visit those
gladiators of the gridiron and knights of
the nickel defense, computer football
games. There is plenty of news from the
"front offices" of entertainment
softwaredom and that means plenty of
"personnel moves" by CGW readers. This
survey is intended to supply an update
on what has happened since our last football survey (CGW #42) and general
sports survey (CGW #58).

Broderbund's Playmaker Football
(PF—Macintosh only with Hard Drive
highly recommended, to be released in
November, 1989, $49.95) offers the most
depth in terms of customizing teams.
Even the title offers a signal as to what
the game design is supposed to accomplish. The player is the one who
"makes" the plays. He is the coach and
general manager. Players do not have to
use anything "canned". Instead, they can
create the roster, the offensive and defensive playbooks, and the artificial intelligence that calls the plays when the computer is running games on the player's
behalf (particularly useful for league play).
The roster, of course, is built around
player attributes. In PF, the important
ratings are: Speed, Strength, Agility, Intelligence, and Discipline. The design works
well enough that each incremental
change is significant and different attributes affect the performances of
players at each position differently. In
fact, if offensive plays are already
designed when Speed ratings are
changed, the timing of that play will be
consistently off. So, rosters should be
built prior to the playbooks. Rosters are
built around a standard 7,500 total
points. Players can adjust that total number, but whenever teams that exceed
7,500 points face teams that have ad-

hered to the standard total, the computer
flashes a warning about the mismatch
before any actual games can take place.
The game can still be played, but the
handicap will be obvious.
An additional piece of chrome that
makes creating the player roster interesting is the ability to customize the player
photos. Players simply copy the "Team
Picture File" to their favorite Macintosh
paint program, edit it there, and move
the file back to PF as "<team name> Picture".
The playbook allows for tremendous versatility. On offense, linemen and non-ball
carriers can be assigned five different types of blocks: continuous
blocks, push left, push right,
standard blocks at a particular
location, or pass blocks. Herein
lies a disadvantage, however.
There are, unlike the Play Editor
in John Madden Football, no
provisions for making "group assignments" where several players
perform the same actions. Instead, each lineman must be assigned his particular block.
For rushing plays, "coaches" can
either set the exact path for ball
carriers to run (not advised) or
simply identify the path to the
"hole" and let the running back
"run to daylight" (preferred). On
passing plays, "coaches" can
design timed patterns where the
quarterback will throw at the
same time every time to one assigned receiver. Or, if the "coach"
prefers, the play can prioritize receivers so
that the artificial intelligence (Al) will look
to each receiver in turn and, if they
should all be covered, throw the ball out
of bounds. Just to round out the possibilities, the play editor also allows
"coaches" to program play-action fakes,
pump fakes and pauses at particular
points in the play and establish three
"Audibles" (plays from the playbook which
can be selected from the keyboard at any
point in the game).
On defense, "coaches" assign the
linebackers various "reading" commands.
Depending on the situation, linemen can
be ordered to "read" the running backs
or the offensive linemen. Then, on the
basis of the "reading", they can make
either a lateral pursuit (the conservative
approach) or execute a "run and shoot"
(the more risky method). For deep backs,
"coaches" establish the drop-back spot
and delineate a zone of coverage from
that point. If the "coach" prefers man-toman coverage, he can select standard
coverage (where the defensive player
lines up opposite the assigned receiver
and sticks with him), partial man-to-man
(where the backs who are not assigned a
particular receiver to cover must cover

potential receivers in a priority order
given in the documentation), total manto-man (backs try to spread coverage all
over the field according to the priority
list), and double coverage (two backs
guarding a particularly dangerous
receiver).

"You don't want to go away
empty in this situation."
The most revolutionary aspect of
Playmaker Football is the ability to
design an Al to call plays based on the
game situation (see illustration). Each

play is assigned values, related to each
possible down, for Priority (percentage
which indicates the frequency with which
the play will likely be called), Yards to Go
(modifies the Priority by considering yardage required for a first down), Field Position (determines if the play can be called
from a particular portion of the field),
Game Time (evaluates plays in terms of
which quarter the game is in), and Score
Difference (establishes whether a risky
play should be used with regard to points
to be gained or loss relative to the differential in scores).
As if this wasn't enough, the Al is also
set to evaluate plays on the basis of effectiveness. If the "Sample" number is set at
"1", for example, the Al will evaluate the
effectiveness every time the play is run.
At "2", the play would be evaluated every
second time it is run and so forth. The Al
can be set, as in the illustration, so that
the Priority percentage can be dropped
by one point if the play does not, at least,
average better than a loss of two yards
per play or raised by two points if the play
averages better than a gain of five yards
per play.
Although PF has few weaknesses, they
do exist. Those who want to be more actively involved in playing will find that the

minimal involvement of pointing and
clicking in a general direction to direct a
ball carrier or passer is not satisfying. Further, those who want to keep accurate
track of individual player statistics will find
that the game design has predicated in
favor of a team stat approach. Also,
those who want a game where weather,
fatigue, and player injuries impact the outcome will be disappointed that these factors are missing from PF. Nevertheless,
Playmaker Football is an exceptional
product for armchair coaches and
general managers. Its strengths should
be evident and its use of Al has revolutionary potential for future strategy games.

"It all comes down to the
individual matchups."
Electronic Arts's John Madden Football (JMF—Apple II, IBM, $49.95) offers a
product that offers somewhat less in
strategy, but somewhat more in terms of
action. Like PF, the "Chalkboard" (Play
Editor) allows "coaches" to assign pass
blocks, rushing blocks, and blocks to
trap left and trap right. It doesn't allow
continuous blocks, however. Like PF, it allows play action fakes and allows the
primary pass receiver to be identified, but
does not go as deep in prioritizing secondary receivers. JMFs capacity for assigning "group tasks" certainly speeds
playbook construction, though. One's
preference for these two games will
probably depend on how much detail
and control one wants in play construction.
As for rosters, "coaches" will want to pay
considerably more attention to individual
match-ups in JMF because a difference
of two or more points on the zero to nine
scale utilized in JMF indicates domination. Coaches that find a way to exploit
mismatches will be very successful in this
game. Further, the game's consideration
of weather, player fatigue, and individual
injuries will enhance the enjoyment of
replaying NFL seasons or running
leagues. The "Madden Report", a basic
Players who want to be involved in the
on-field action will be more satisfied with
JMF than with PF. Although JMF can be

played as strictly a strategy game, the
player can transform the game into an action game by moving the controller while
the ball is in play (Apple users must have
a joystick in order to operate the offense,
but IBM users may opt for mouse or keyboard control.). At that point, one can actually control the ball carrier or
passer/receiver. At this point, good joystick jockeys may be able to "make up" for
the coaching and play on a level field
with their more cerebral, pure coaching,
friends and vice versa.
A major weakness in JMF is the computer defense's poor capacity for adjusting to misdirection plays. Fortunately, the
graphics on the IBM version (received at
press time) are much clearer than the
muddled colors of the Apple II version
(pictured). Nevertheless, Apple II owners
will be impressed with what their 64K
machines can do. John Madden Football
is an excellent choice for those who want
both action and strategy elements in a
computer football game.

"He says that when things
go wrong, they fire the
coach and not the
quarterback, so he
calls his own plays."
Software Simulations' Pure Stat Football (PSF—C-64/128 and IBM, $39.95) is
a streamlined, menu-driven approach to
football with an emphasis on play calling.
It emulates the coach who wants full
responsibility for controlling the pace of
the game. Those familiar with Pure Stat
Baseball and Pure Stat College Basketball, as well as Avalon Hill's NBA will
recognize the basic interface. The
decision screen is divided into three
screen areas: 1) game and scoring information, 2) player statistical information,
and 3) play entry menu / result screen.
The beauty of the program is that
player ratings (for blocking, running, passing, catching, or defending) directly affect
the success of a given play. The
documentation notes which players'
ratings affect a given play, so "coaches"
can have a good idea of the potential effectiveness of a play before calling it. As
in JMF, alert offensive "coaches" can get
plenty of mileage (or yardage, anyway)
out of exploiting mismatches. On the
other hand, defensive "coaches" can
gamble and increase the defensive rating
for a given area by blitzing a linebacker in
that direction. In turn, the offensive
coach may exploit the linebacker's vacated area by throwing a short pass.
The upside is that the documentation is
the most thorough and useful of any
games in the Pure Stat series. The menu
(Continued on page 28)

Football Survey
(Continued from page 26)

interface makes the game accessible for
even the most casual football fan and, on
the IBM, the game plays faster than previous releases. The downside is that the
animation is, at best, crude and the IBM
graphics are CGA blue and magenta,
even in EGA mode.

"He's an expert at reading
defenses, a real field
general, and all the
players respect him."
Cinemaware's TV Sports Football
(NSF) is now available on the Atari ST
($49.95—the Amiga version was
reviewed in CGW #56). The game solidly
emphasizes the sound, color, and action
of professional football. Game play is entirely joystick-driven and "coaches" quickly
choose from four basic offensive and
defensive formations. After that, one uses
the joystick to select from four basic patterns. The name of the game is not play
selection in NSF, however. Action is the
by-word. Gaining yardage on rushing
plays is more dependent on a joystickcrunching left or right cut by the ball carrier than on a sophisticated game plan.
The advantage of this activity is the satis-

faction the "human" player gets when the
on-screen ball carrier beats the on-screen
defender. One feels as if they have made
that great run themselves.
Most of the weaknesses discussed in
CGW #56 still hold, but the active player
no longer flashes in the same color as
the opposing team and the machine language coding makes the movement even
smoother than on the Amiga version.
However, the view of the playing field is
still limited to about 25 yards or so and
this makes it difficult, but not impossible
to complete long passes. Also, the Atari
ST version does not allow access to the
team statistical data a la the Amiga version and the statistics compiler still does
not allow the league stats to be printed.
TV Sports Football is a colorful and exciting action product. It is ideal for the
casual fan who wants to compete against
his buddies, joystick-to-joystick. Unfortunately, it could be much more.

"Where did they dig him up?"
Activision's Grave Yardage (GY—IBM,
$34.95) is, at once, similar and dissimilar
to the programs discussed above. It is
similar in that the game involves smoothly animated players attempting to cross a
playing field and score against their opponents, as well as because "coaches"
can draft their player roster and build offensive and defensive playbooks. It is dissimilar in that teams are made of dwarves, elves, gargoyles, ghouls, goblins,
ogres, orcs, trolls, wizards, and zombies
in this farcical and fanciful look at the
game of football. Fields can be made of
mud, weeds, and grass, as well as land
mines. The "flyball" wings about like a
"Beholder" misplaced from a fantasy
game and skeletal-looking referees make
nasty comments when things aren't
going so well for your team.
In Grave Yardage, the game becomes,
very literally, a game of territorial conquest. Players do not simply carry out
their blocking assignments. They murder
their opponents. In fact, they receive 86
points for accomplishing that nefarious
(Continued on page 31)

Football Survey
(Continued from page 28)

deed (only 14 points less than scoring a
Smushdown). Ball carriers are not simply
tackled, but they may be hacked senseless or be blown up by a land mine
(which brings about a 25 point penalty
for "littering", by the way).
In spite of the farce, however, the reality
is that GY is a weird version of four-on-

four football. "Coaches" must exploit
matchups (each type of monster has different attributes which help in different
situations), utilize good play selection (it
is still a matter of run, pass, misdirection,
and options), design successful plays,
and execute the game plan effectively.
Even so, if it weren't for the playbook
editor, reviewing this game in this football
survey would be inappropriate. However,
the ability to draft monsters for a ball control, pro set, or aerial bombardment style
offense and the ability to create the plays
to customize just such offenses is part of
the game. With only four players per
team on the field and a very intuitive interface for designing the playbooks, it
doesn't take long to create a completely
customized team. "Coaches" can create
quarterback sneaks, crossing pass patterns, sweeps, and bombs using the
editor. Of course, the plays aren't called
by traditional football names. Instead of
"32 Blast" and "28 Sweep Counter", one
creates the likes of "Orcbutcher" and
"Fiendflyer" to match the atmosphere of
the "Monster Football League".
"Coaches" will need, at least, a 286
processor and EGA card to get the most
enjoyment out of Grave Yardage. The

program is unbearably slow between play
selection and actual action on the older
machines. In addition, the CGA palette
adds nothing to enhance the game (unless one considers the near-Halloween
colors to be appropriate). Further, although the program supports keyboarddriven action, "coaches" will want to coax
their monsters onward with the joystick interface. The response to the keyboard
commands is sluggish and the keyboard
commands themselves are awkward and
clumsy. However, for those who want
some of the action and excitement of
football with a funny fictional wrap rather
than the "serious" and sometimes sterile
strategic approach, Grave Yardage
should be an interesting choice.

"It's Monday night and we've
got a dandy for ya'!"
Data East is expected to release ABC
Monday Night Football (MNF—IBM with
C-64/128 to follow, no price given) prior
to Christmas. CGW has only seen a
demo of this game, but the VGA graphics
(Continued on page 67)

Review

The Sport
of Fiends
Cinemaware Puts the
"Spotlight" on "Speedball"
by Robert W. Struble

Robert Struble is a Staff Sergeant with Special Forces
training. Along with his military background, he has a
Bachelor of Science in Criminology.

Coming out of the
dark into the arena,
you blink in the hot
glare of the spotlights. The steel walls
resound with the
cheers and calls of
the crowd. You acknowledge them and
the stands grow wild.
You and your team
ire the favorites
tonight. This is more
than just a game, this
is the League Championship, the cumulation of a fifty week
bone cracking, head
crushing season. As
the ball launcher
rises from the floor
and begins to spin,
the ancient words
ring forth . . .

"PLAY BALL!"
Speedball is billed as "The
Fastest Growing Sport of the
21st Century." One can certainly
see why! Reminiscent of Jai-lai,
the game seems like a combination of "killer" racquetball
and "combat" hockey. Add the feel of the movie "Rollerball"
and you have one fast-paced rollercoaster of a game. Thankfully, this was never released as a coin-op game. It would
have been a serious quarter muncher. In EGA, you keep
looking for the coin slot in your keyboard. Even in CGA
mode, the graphics approach arcade quality.
The rulebook is concise. In fact, it's a bit primitive, but the
user friendly setup screens allow for quick start-up and play.
Using either keyboard (using four directional keys and a combination throw/block/jump key) or joystick, a player can find
themselves in the thick of things in no time at all. A choice
between "One Player Knockout" and "League Play" (Human

vs. Human or Human vs. Computer) insures a wide variety
of play.
The field of play features two Warp Tunnels. These cause
the ball to exit from the opposite tunnel with identical
velocity and direction. There is also a random selection of
Bounce Domes, powerful magnetic fields which can deflect a
thrown game ball. Depending on their placement (always
symmetrical), you may have partially shielded goals or even
be blocked off entirely from the Warp Tunnels.
Passing is accomplished by simply throwing the ball toward
another teammate. Whenever the ball contacts a figure, it is
received automatically and that individual becomes the active
player. The action key enables players to throw the ball, loft
the ball, jump to catch a loft shot, or tackle another player
and steal the ball. The latter is one of the most pleasing
aspects of the game. There is great gratification in watching
your opponent skid across the floor plates as you "slam
dunk" the goal.
Each team is characterized by levels of Stamina, Power and
Skill. Stamina allows your team to throw hard, run fast and
hang onto the ball after being blocked. Power controls the
amount of Stamina drained from an opponent after each
block. Skill Allows for more effective tackles by both the active player and the rest of the team. A highly skilled team will
show great initiative and tackle the opposition even when
not under direct control. This enables such satisfying thrills
as scoring a goal while another of your team has the goalie
cornered outside of the net.
Cheating is a major factor to the game. A player can actually bribe the game ref before, or even after, the game. During
a game, random floor plates will flip over exposing one of
ten Power Tiles. Running over a tile activates the specific
power. These range from decreasing your opponents'
stamina to protecting your team from tackles through turning the ball into a eight count stun weapon. An eleventh tile
is called a Power Token, these are accumulated to bribe the
ref. Bribes cost anywhere from two to seven Tokens and can
buy almost anything from an extra minute of game time
added to the previous game or extra Skill to an extra goal
added to your next game.

Major League (Pluses)
The outstanding graphics are an instant grabber and the
action (simple to play, but difficult to master) continues to
capture one's interest long after an ordinary action game
would be gathering dust. Nice touches like the ball growing
larger as it lofts nearer the ceiling and the different ways a
player can react to being tackled show great attention to artistic detail.
As for play itself, the independence and initiative of one's
own teammates when the computer is controlling them give
the game an amazing feel that the team is "alive." Also, the
stat board and descriptions of opposing teams aid in making
those difficult tactical choices.

MINOR LEAGUE (Minuses)
The most significant problem is an inability to continue
past ten weeks in league play. After the tenth week/game
your team rests for a week then resumes play on week one.
It should, however, be week eleven. Teams retain all their
stats, but find themselves unable to compete in the playoffs
which are supposed to take place at the season's end. This
affects the game concept considerably. Cinemaware's customer service department says that they have rectified the
(Continued on page 47)

Computer Gaming World's
See Reader Input Device on page 71

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first person perspectives of
real world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take your alter
ego through a storyline or
series of events.
Role-Playing Adventures
(RP): Adventure games that
are based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer gaines that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games In
CGW's Hall
Of Fame Have
Been Highly
Rated By Our
Readers Over
Time. They
Are Worthy Of
Play By All.

Review

What Do You Do for
IX (pronounced kicks) is a classic
mind game living in an action
game world. As such, it can be difficult to describe. While it is definitely a
classic style game that demands the
development of a strategy or strategies, it
can just as easily be described as an action game that rewards fast thinking and
fast reflexes. It is definitely addictive. I do
love and hate it so.

Q

From the strategic perspective, your
task is to trap the ever moving QIX (a
nervous little twerp that manifests itself as
a series of rapidly moving semi-parallel
lines). You trap the QIX by drawing a
series of "boxes" that isolate it from the
larger play field. If the QIX touches you
while you are in the act of tracing the
box, it kills you. The secret is to trap the
QIX into the smallest space possible. The
smaller the space the QIX is trapped in,
the higher your score.
The fiction supporting the game is
weak. But don't hold that against Taito
(this game is so unique that any fictional
background would be found wanting).
The fiction, in any case, is that the QIX is
a computer virus bouncing around inside
your computer; you isolate the QIX by immunizing your computer system through
the drawing of "boxes". In the meantime,
the QIX is spawning mutant offspring or
subviruses that race around the edges of
the playfield and your immunized boxes
seeking to destroy you. — Well, like I
said .. .
If QIX sounds familiar to you, it might
be that you remember when it was a coinop hit on many college campuses back
in the early 1980's. Back in those days,
college students poured quarter after
quarter into machines playing and
developing strategies to beat each other
at QIX. Many strategies developed over
time. The three most famous were/are
the MIT, Harvard, and Stanford strategies.
The goal in the MIT strategy was to
build a fork like structure that had many
slots which, hopefully, the QIX would
wander into. When the QIX got far
enough down into the slot, the player
could seal it off, scoring big bonus points
by isolating the QIX in a very small space
(often 10% or less of the playfield). In the

by Russell Sipe

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

QIX
Amiga, C-641128
$34.95
Taito
North Vancouver, British Columbia
CANADA

Harvard strategy, the goal was to build a
tree like structure that divided the
playfield into a number of trapping quadrants. And in the Stanford strategy, the
goal is to trap the QIX in an ever decreasing spiral.
I prefer the MIT Fork strategy. It can be
constructed more rapidly than the Harvard Tree (time is important as the subviruses multiply as time goes on). The
problem I have with the Stanford Spiral
strategy is based on the simple fact that
the QIX in a smaller area bounces more
often than in a larger area (sort of like a
bull in a china shop). As you paint the
QIX into increasing smaller areas, it tends
to be harder to avoid (gets kind of
crowded there). As I draw boxes to drive
the QIX deeper into the trap, I am actually exposing myself to the danger of it's
lethal touch (leaning into a left hook as it
were).
QIX is a fascinating game. It is highly
recommended to those who are at one
with the universe; to those who are
prepared to pursue purposeful strategy in
the face of intense action. I do love and
hate it so.

Conversions Received
Fast Break
(Accolade) Mac
Jack Nicklaus Course Disk
(Accolade) Apple IIGS
Shoot 'Em Up Construction Kit
(Accolade) Amiga
Where in Europe is
Carmen Sandiego
(Broderbund) Mac
Batman Data East) Amiga
Commisioner's Disk (EA) Amiga
Faery Tale Adventure
(Microillusions) IBM
Firepower (Microillusions) C-64
Balance of Power 1990
(Mindscape) ST
Hostage (Mindscape) C-64
Times of Lore (Origin) Amiga, ST
Pure-Stat Football
(Software Simulations) C-64

Red Lightning (SSI) Amiga
Rommel (SSG) IBM with new EGA
graphics

Game of the Year Awards
(Continued from page 8)

Radiance—Jim Ward and George MacDonald (designers), Tom Wahl (graphics),
and Chuck Kroegel (producer).
And the WINNER of CGWs Role-Playing Game of the Year is:
Mindcraft for The Magic Candle—[Ed:
The game's innovative use of a host of
individual statistics to measure character development (as opposed to the
more typical experience level promotions), emphasis on learning new skills,

ability to split the adventuring party to
accomplish simultaneous tasks, and
ability to have significant interaction
with non-player characters at almost
any point in the game make this an excellent game. It is extensive, well-written, and balanced.]

Simulation Game of the Year
Nominees for CGWs Simulation

Game of the Year are: Electronic Arts
for 688 Attack Sub—John W. Ratliff,
Paul Grace and Randall Breen (designers), Michael Kosaka and Wilfredo
Aguilar (graphics), Rob Hubbard (music),
and Paul Grace (producer), Microprose
for F-19 Stealth Fighter—Sid Meier,
Jim Synoski, and Arnold Hendrick (designers), Max Remington III and Murray
Taylor (graphics), and Ken Lagace
(music), Microprose for Red Storm

Announcing

Computer Gaming World's
1989 Game of the Year Awards
Action Game of the Year

Battlehawks 1942
Strategy Game of the Year

Romance of the
Three Kingdoms
Adventure Game of the Year

Neuromancer
Role-Playing Game of the Year

The Magic Candle
Simulation Game of the Year

F-19 Stealth Fighter
Wargame of the Year

Battles of Napoleon
Special Award for
Achievement in Sound

Space Quest III
Special Award for
Literary Achievement

Star Saga I

Game of the Year

SimCity

Rising—Sid Meier and Arnold Hendrick
(designers), Murray Taylor and Max
Remington Ill (graphics), and Ken Lagace
(Music), and Spectrum-Holobyte for Falcon A.T.—Gilman Louie (designer), Jody
Sather and Art Koch (graphics), and
Kevin Seghitti (sound).
And the WINNER of CGWs Simulation Game of the Year is:
Microprose for F-19 Stealth Fighter—
[Ed: F-19 Stealth Fighter is the perfect
marriage of modem technology and
game. It couples hot graphics with new
perspectives of the game action (TactiVue and SlotVue) and offers solid
documentation to enhance gameplay by
offering substance, as well as flash.]

And the WINNER of CGWs Strategy
Game of the Year is:
Koei for Romance of the Three
Kingdoms—[Ed: Koei has created a fascinating genre which blends strategy,
diplomacy, economic decision-making,
role-playing, and history into an appealing and stimulating gaming experience.
Romance of the Three Kingdoms
epitomizes the depth of play and
strategy of all Koei games and enables
players to discover the roots of historical
events by experiencing them rather than
simply reading about them.]

1989 Game of the Year

Wargame of the Year
Strategy Game of the Year
Nominees for CGWs Strategy Game
of the Year are: Koei for Genghis
Khan—Kou Shibusawa (producer), Koei
for Romance of the Three
Kingdoms - Kou Shibusawa (producer), Maxis for
SimCity—Will Wright (designer), Scott
Martindale, Don Bayless, and Will Wright
(graphics), and Steve Hales and Will
Wright (sound), Mindscape for Balance
of Power: 1990—Chris Crawford (designer).

And the WINNER of CGWs Wargame
of the Year is:
Strategic Simulations for Battles of
Napoleon—[Ed: Although the system
owes a heavy debt to SSI's popular
American Civil War series, the care with
which this program models the infantry
formations and cavalry charges of the
Napoleonic era, as well as the total constructability of the scenario editor,
makes this a heavyweight title in its
own right.]

Nominees for Wargame of the Year
are: Panther Games for Fire Brigade—
Dave O'Connor and Tony Oliver (designers), Strategic Simulations for Battles
of Napoleon—Chuck Kroegel and David
Landrey (designers), Strategic Simulations for Typhoon of Steel—Gary
Grigsby (designer), Dick Vohlers and
Graeme Bayless (producers), and
Strategic Studies Group for Rommel:
Battles for North Africa—Roger Keating and Ian Trout (designers).

And now, the most exciting award of
them all, CGWs Game of the Year. And
the WINNER is:
Maxis for SimCity—[Ed: "They" told
him it wouldn't sell, but Will Wright
wouldn't give up his vision of a game
that allowed the players to create their
own urban environments. SimCity is a
unique, dynamic toy which blends the
best in strategy with the best in
creativity. It models the reality well and
challenges the player to grasp new concepts in a fascinating way.]
Congratulations to all the winners and
nominees. Keep them coming!

(Continued from page 34)

Another useful tactic is tossing the ball to an oncoming
blocker in order to set him up for an easy tackle and steal.
Note that sometimes, Power Points can be worth more than
a goal. A hard lob can put the ball past an opponent and
enable you to grab a Power Point.

DRAFT CHOICE (Conclusion)
Speedball is worthwhile and offers an underlying feel of
reality beyond many action games. Most action fans will find
it addictive.

problem in their current production and that any customers
with problem disks can exchange them free of charge by
sending them direct to Cinemaware.

Listen to the Coach (Playing Tips)
By moving and shooting diagonally you are a bit faster
than the computer opponent (Remember that diagonal
movement is accomplished on the keyboard by a double key
press). Also note that by alternating left and right diagonal
movement, you can "tack" along the field like a sailboat and
easily elude the opposition. These techniques are important
because teams at the higher levels will consistently outrun
you on the straight-away.

Review

W

hat's the

matter?

Down on
your luck? Did your
"sure thing" pull up
lame on the back
stretch? Was the "Exacta" bet spoiled by a
48-1 longshot? Did
they pull the colors
down on your first
winner of the day
after a steward's inquiry? Psst! Need a
tip? Try Omni-Play"
Horse Racing (HR).

And . . . .
They're Off !

The creators of Superstar Ice Hockey
and Superstar Soccer for Mindscape
have created a unique horse racing
game/system under
their own label. The
basic product is
tremendous on its
own merit, but the
system allows the addition of expansion
modules which make
it a phenomenal
game.

You Can Bet On
It (Strengths)
What makes HR
tremendous? For
one thing, the 128
horses in the
database that comes
with the game each
have their own unique racing histories. Not only can a handicapper examine the past nine performances, but the database changes as the
race meeting advances. Some earlier
horse racing games did this much, but
HR goes one better. Players have the option of keeping the records from game to
game. This means that the way a horse
ran the first time you played may be significant for the second and third times
you play. HR also insures that a sprinter
consistently performs like a sprinter and a
distance runner performs like a distance
runner. Not all of the earlier programs
made this important distinction.
Also, HR takes into consideration the
impact of the jockeys. There is a dynamic
database that not only describes the
jockey's past performances in terms of
place positions, winning percentage, and
"In The Money" percentage, but it also
notes the current "mood" of the jockey. A
jockey can be anywhere from being in
his/her best form to being in his/her worst
slump. Monitoring jockey moods and

Sport Time's
"Omni-Play
Horse Racing"
by Johnny L. Wilson

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

results enables the would-be handicapper
to cash in on a particular jockey's "hot
streak".
Where earlier games may have ignored
the importance of post position, HR
takes this matter seriously. That is important because it is extremely exhausting
for horses to come across the track from
the outside post position and still finish
strong. Horses that run from the inside
positions are automatically "saving
ground" (i.e. not having to run as far).
Therefore, HR offers a dynamic statistical
summary of how the "favorites" from past
races have performed throughout the
meeting from the various post positions.
This summary allows would-be bettors to
track the effect of post position on order
of finish.
Further, even when the player is playing
solitaire, he/she is competing against up
to 19 software-driven experts with their
own betting styles. Players can access the
database of computer bettors and note
how much risk a given competitor takes,

Omni-Play'" Horse Racing
IBM
1-4
$49.95
Ed Ringler
Sport Time
3187-C Airway Avenue
Costa Mesa, CA 92626

as well as the computer bettors winning
percentage and current bankroll. If
things aren't going
well, the player can
even "purchase" a tip
from one of the computer bettors.
The animated sequences which show
the stretch runs on
both the back stretch
and home stretch
offer extremely realistic views. However,
unlike earlier games
where players must
watch the races all
the way through,
even when their
horse is out of the
running by the clubhouse turn, HR has
a number of options
to speed up the
game. Players can
turn off the detailed
animation and watch
arabic numerals
move swiftly around
the track, advance all
action to the home
stretch, or proceed
swiftly to the tote
board, disabling all
animation. This enhances play considerably.

The "photo finish"
option was well conceived. Not only can
players review the close finishes of the
horses in the money, but any position
can be reviewed. When a photo finish is
selected, the program enlarges the image
of the horses involved and displays the
result on the screen. It is impressive.
Finally, the program is impressive because of its modular construction. Not
only does the "Handicapper's Tournament" (which is included in the basic
package) offer more than any horse
racing simulation to date, but the add-on
modules insure that the game will have a
long play life. Tired of betting on the horses? The "Stable Owners" Module (Now
Available—$19.95) lets you decide which
horses will run and how far. Want to try
your hand as a jockey? The "Jockey Competition" (Late 1989—$19.95) should do
it. Want to match up the great horses
from history? A "Historical Racing" (Early
1990 - $19.95) module will grant the opportunity. Ready to hit the real track? A
"Prediction Analysis" (Late 1989—$19.95)
may meet your needs. Further modules
will enable players to compete against

to simply toggle Player 1 off after he
placed his bets.

other players in a networked betting competition and networked stable owners
competition.

Related to this problem is that of handling the tips which players can purchase
from the other computer bettors. For example, Player 1 purchases a tip from
"Trackman" and places a bet based on
the tip. If he does not specifically scroll
through the other horses and possible
bets prior to exiting the betting screen,
the tip will be there waiting for Player 2.
This problem is easier to work around
than the screen always resetting to Player
1, but it is an annoyance nonetheless.

Carrying Extra Weight
(Weaknesses)
Even a program as tremendous as
Omni-Play Horse Racing is bound to
have some weaknesses, however. The
first weakness extends strictly to the basic
product. HR uses an unsettling mixture
of EGA and CGA graphics for the animation on Track 1 (the basic data disk).
One screen offers a sixteen-color palette
and the next screen assaults one's senses with that sickening CGA
green/orange palette. Also, all horses are
bay in color. Fortunately, Track 2 offers
the sixteen-color palette throughout and
each horse has a distinguishing color.
The races are, as a result, easier to follow
and more interesting.
Other weaknesses involve the interface.
One problem surfaces whenever there is
more than one player. Assume that
Player 1 has placed all of his bets at the
betting screen. Then, Player 2 calls up

his name and starts to place a bet. Player
2 needs to check on a past performance
by one of the horses. If he backs out of
the betting screen, checks the past performances screen, and returns to the betting screen, he should be able to immediately place his bet. Unfortunately, doing
so places the bet for Player 1. Anytime a
player other than Player 1 leaves the betting screen and returns, he must reselect
his name. It would have been very easy

Another interface matter that could
have made the game more user-friendly
would have been an "Across The Board"
bet. As the current betting module
stands, one must place separate "Win",
"Place", and "Show" bets in order to place
equivalent amounts "Across The Board".
It would have been much easier to place
all of these bets in one selection, just like
at the track window.
Another feature that would have been
extremely useful is due in a future
module. The company will market a

separate "Print Utility" so that players can
print out any screen data that they want.
It would save a considerable amount of
time to have past performances, jockey
records, and post position records available without having to scroll through
dozens of screens.
Finally, there will be some who will quibble that the selection of exotic bets in
Omni-Play Horse Racing is too limited.
Frankly, with the traditional "Win, Place,
and Show" combined with three different
kinds of "Exacta" bets (normal, double,
and box) and two different kinds each of
"Quinella" and "Triple" bets (normal and
box), there is plenty of action for anyone.

The Post Parade
(Game Mechanics)
The game mechanics are simple with
an amazing number of options. In the
"Handicapper's Tournament", for example, there are three different possible
victory conditions: 1) first player to a userspecified money level; 2) player with the
most money after betting a user-specified
number of races; or 3) player with most

money after a certain number of races
have been run. In addition, players can
erase the records of all the horses and
jockeys and start over or add a new
player at any point. One can even set the
number of simulated days for the race
meeting and the number of races per
"day".
Once the options have been set,
players are free to browse through the
menus and screens that describe past
performances of each jockey and horse.
By observing the distance run, the statistics recorded, the speed rating, and the
track conditions, the player/bettor should
gain some idea of how each horse performs in terms of the variables which the
program utilizes (Acceleration, Top
Speed, Kick (the speed at which a horse
finishes a race), Endurance, and Track
Condition).
The speed rating for each past performance is handled quite well. It is
measured in fifths of a second off the winning horse's pace. Therefore, if a horse is
running in the high 90s, handicappers
know that the horse was extremely com-

petitive in the race. If a horse is running
at a low speed rating, one knows that the
horse was way out of contention. For horses that win, the past performances chart
tells players the "Margin" the horse won
by, whether by a head (HD), neck (NK),
or a nose (NO).
At this point in time, players can purchase a tip from their computer competitors (up to 19 different characters) or
simply move on to the betting screen.
After the bets are placed, the race is run
with all the available options described
above. Upon completion of the race, the
toteboard is displayed and the photo
finish can be accessed. After that, it's
check the cash, handicap the next race,
and try again.

The Ultimate Gamble
("Stable Owners")
The "Stable Owners" module is even
more exceptional than the basic program. The module takes into account
the characteristics of the horses, the different types of races available (in ascending order—Frequency, Maiden, Open,

Claiming, Allowance, and Stakes), the current attributes of the jockeys, and (if the
player is using the optimal difficulty level)
the way the stable owner cycles his/her
horses.
Stable owners can allow the computer
to automatically select the horses in their
stable or go through
an auction procedure.
The "Auction" is really
more like a draft than
an auction. Each
stable selects a horse
in turn and there really isn't any auctioning
to it. This may be just
as well, however, because there is plenty
to look at in considering which horse to
take and it takes a
while to make the
choices. If a player
gets tired of choosing
for himself, there is an
"Auto"-select command which can be
accessed at any time.
When the "Stable
Owners" tournament
begins, the options
are set similar to the
"Handicapper's Tournament". Each "day"
of the meet, the
player/owner(s) must
decide which horses
to run in which races
before any of the
day's races are actually "run".
Here are a few tips on making these
decisions. First, note which horses are
sprinters, medium, and classic distance
runners. Second, compare the fastest horses scheduled to run in the race at a
preferred distance and enter faster horses
if possible (It isn't always!). Third, make
certain that you are resting your horses
properly. Fourth, always check the times
of the opposing horses before the actual
race and don't be afraid to scratch horses
(i.e. take them out of a given race), particularly if the entry fee is steep and you
find that you are a heavy longshot.

Cycling one's horses properly works as
follows. If the simulated race meeting features eight races per day, every horse in
the stable should run every fourteenth
race (i.e. run one, rest thirteen). If this is
possible, the horse will run at 100% effectiveness. Of course, the fourteenth race

will not necessarily be at a distance that,
a given horse can run at its best. Therefore, the stable owner may choose to wait
a race or two in order to enter a race that
particular horse is more likely to win.
Naturally, there is a performance penalty
for each race run before or after the optimal number. (-5%, -10%, -16%, -21%,
and all the way to 75% off a given horse's
effectiveness).
Although actual race horses do not
usually race this often, the simulation
uses this constraint to offer some of the
kinds of training decisions which
owner/trainers must consider. This

strategic element to planning a racing
schedule adds an incredible amount of
fun and realism to the game.
In order to keep track of the race/rest
period, as well as keep track of performances, players may find that it is useful
to create a worksheet for each horse (see
sample). This will
enable a player/owner
to ascertain the readiness/effectiveness of
his/her stable at a
glance.

In addition to the
possible victory conditions where one
stable reaches a certain cash level first or
a stable has the most
cash at the end of the
meeting, the "Stable
Owners" module has
another possible victory condition. Cinder
this stipulation,
players play to win the
Sport Time Derby.
Would-be owners
must have their horses perform well
enough to be "invited"
to compete in the
nine horse field of the
most prestigious
stakes race in the
meeting and must
have them rested
enough to participate at top form when
the race cycles around. Just in case the
player hasn't done well, however, there is
a "Wildcard" race that even allows the
lowest ranking stables to attempt to win
a spot in the Sport Time Derby.

The Finish Line (Conclusion)
Omni-Play" Horse Racing is an excellent simulation of the Sport of Kings. The
number of variables factored into each
race and the entertainment value
provided put this product into the
'Winner's Circle".

Review

P

ublishing a computer adaption of a classic
boardgame is not without risks (no pun intended).
Players will always be comparing the product to the
tabletop version and unless the software package utilizes
options unavailable in the board version, the game will likely be perceived as a failure. Leisure Genius seems willing
to take the challenge and offer the computerized version
of Parker Brother's classic game of world conquest,
Risk™ .
Perhaps the most attractive option of the game is the
fact that the game can be played solitaire. Not only can a
single player battle the computer head-to-head for global
domination, but he can also tell the computer-opponent
what skill level to play. This is especially helpful for those
who wish to use the software to sharpen their skills in
preparation for tabletop tournaments.
Risk", for those unfamiliar with the boardgame, is a wargame that, unlike others, doesn't concern itself too deeply
with matters such as terrain and movement. It is not
meant to be a serious simulation of global warfare, but
rather a strategic meeting of opponents on a simplified
scale. The game could be called a global chess game that
calls for basic strategy and a little bit, or maybe a lot, of
Lady Luck.
Play begins with selection of territories. Each player, in
turn, selects one of the forty-two available territories. When
all of the territories are claimed, each player selects a territory for his armies to occupy and reinforces it. This is, by
far, the most tedious portion of the game. Nevertheless,
this initial set-up can strongly affect the outcome of the
game, so players should lend close attention.
When there are two players, the computer will generate a
neutral player that acts as a buffer between the two. This
gives a balance to the game because both players will be
seeking control of the neutral ground as well as attempting to overcome one another's armies.
Play moves only a little faster after the initial setup.
Players will reinforce countries on each turn with new armies. The number of new armies is based on the amount
of territories the player occupies. Players then may attack
another player's territory or move troops to adjacent territories.
Since the majority of the battle's outcome is determined
by the random roll of dice, attacking involves planning,
and luck. As in the boardgame, players may roll one, two
or three dice. The more dice the defending player rolls increases his chance to win the battle, but also increases the
number of armies he may lose in the battle. So, the player
must decide how many armies he is willing to risk.
Sometimes, of course, a player should not attack. The
urge to conquer must be balanced by reasonable thought.
Inaction is often the wisest action. Otherwise, the armies
can spread themselves too thinly to be efficient.
Players earn "Risk" cards at the end of every turn in
which they capture an opposing territory. Sets of these
cards may be traded for reinforcements. A set of cards is
one of each type: Cavalry, Artillery and Infantry. A set can
also be completed with a wild card. There are only two
wild cards in the deck. On each occasion that a player
turns in a set of cards, the number of reinforcements increases. So, it is clear that players should often wait for
their opponents to turn in cards, so that will increase the
number of reinforcements when they turn in their cards
on a later turn.

RISKY
BUSINESS
By David M. Wilson
The game's overall graphics are nice, with one drawback.
Players cannot view the entire world situation at a glance.
The world map can be viewed in its entirety, but takes a
long time to be retrieved from the disk and doesn't show
the strength in
each occupied
territory. Although this is
undoubtedly
due to the
limitations of
the machine, it
is an inconvenience. Instead, players
may view only
one section at
a time. This
greatly takes
away from the
playability of
the game, because players
are having to
scroll through
the different
sections of the
map to find
the territory he
is seeking.
Play may be
accomplished
using either
joystick, keyboard or both.
In a two-player
game, we
found that it was easier for one to
use the keyboard while the other
used the joystick, instead of passing
the joystick back and forth or changing seats for keyboard position.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Risk'"
C-64/128
1-6
$29.99
Gang Of Five
Leisure Genius
Virgin Mastertronic
Costa Mesa, CA

Game play can be modified for
several variants. A shorter than
average game is played with each player having a set number of headquarters and is over when one player captures
all of his opponent's territories.
The "UK Variant" lets the computer randomly choose territories for each player. This allows the initial setup of the
game to be quicker. In the UK standard game each player
is dealt a mission card. The player wins the game by fulfilling the mission described on the card.
(Continued on page 58)

Review

THE
KRISTAL
Cinemaware's Latest Import
by Roy Wagner

E

ven the best of studios have an occasional bad release.

Such is the case with Cinemaware, that top-ranked
producer of such great action hits as Defender of the
Crown, Rocket Ranger, The Three Stooges and Lords of the
Rising Sun. Even their "B" release, S.D.I was not bad and they
wisely added a new Spotlight label to release many of their "B"
products, usually titles with hot graphics from the European
market. In fact, one wonders why The Kristal was not released
under the Spotlight label, since it was originally produced in
Europe, as well.
Frankly, this reviewer believes that even Cinemaware's description of this game on the box stretches the reality of the game. In
order to review this game, one must address this product description. The italicized sentences in the remainder of this article are
taken directly from the package.
Become Dancis Frake, swashbuckling space pirate, in this
epic quest to find the fabled Kristal of Konos and return it to its
rightful resting place.
Nothing wrong there. That pretty much sums up the premise of
this game. The story behind the game originated as a British
play, but even as a play, it must have had a short life. The game
requires you to fly to several planets (10 provided) to find the
items necessary to complete your quest. In doing so, you must
kill off a similar set of aliens who happen to be in orbit around
each planet you attempt to land on and try to prevent you from
actually getting to the planet. If you get past the first wave of
aliens, you will face a second wave before you can reach the
planet. On many planets, you must also win a sword fight before
you can wander about and explore. Both of these "arcade" sequences are frustratingly difficult, particularly because of slow and
uneven joystick response.
You'll battle ruthless villains, woo a beautiful princess, and interact with strange, alien life forms.
Ruthless is right! To succeed in any sword fight you must learn
to skillfully orchestrate the sixteen different moves your joystick
provides. Granted that you probably need to really learn only a
few good moves, but the responses seem delayed and the "actions" are difficult to identify.
Fortunately, walking about and interacting with alien life forms
is somewhat interesting. This game gave me the feeling of a
Cinemaware version of Ultima. Your character can wander
horizontally across the screen and also move "into" the screen,
getting smaller to simulate depth as he does so. As for interac-

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

The Kristal
Amiga
$49.95
Prism Leisure Corp.
Cinemaware
Westlake Village, CA

tion, when Dancis Frake encounters another "alien" character, a
text window permits him to carry on a conversation. The purpose
of the interaction, of course, is to obtain specific information
necessary to complete his quest. In The Kristal, one has to interrogate everyone Dancis Frake runs into. You never really know
what to say and you usually end up using the same set of questions with everyone you meet. To me, that's too much rote
drudgery. And what if you don't think to ask that "key" question?
So much for interaction. Also, as with many games of this type,
there are many red herring. I, for one, have never enjoyed sorting fish.
The Kristal displays incredibly lifelike animation and gorgeous
graphics.
Frankly, the graphics in The Kristal are not state of the art for
the Amiga. They are interesting in spots, but this reviewer has
seen better on a Commodore 64.
The multi-disk, role-playing universe features an interrogative
parser and real-time action.
In fact, the game has four 880K disks for the Amiga version.
Fortunately, I have three drives. Even then, the game will access
two of them, just to return to ship. Further, whenever it was time
to save a game, it would only write one save to any one particular disk and that particular disk had to be in your zero drive.
The parser for text input seemed good, but it had a limited number of phrases that it would repeat when it didn't understand
what you entered. That limitation starts to wear on you as the
game progresses.
Fiendish puzzles, brilliant character interaction, and amazing
arcade-style sequences combine to provide the ultimate challenge to all of your game-playing skills.
This reviewer actively attempts to stay away from any game that
uses the word "fiendish" in its description. If "fiendish" happens to
be paired with the word "puzzle", players are destined for frustration. "Fiendish puzzles" translates to, "No one found this game
easy". Further, as noted earlier, the interaction was rather lackluster and pretty much two dimensional.
The "amazing arcade-style sequences" were amazingly crude
and frustrating. Again, the translation of "ultimate challenge" may
mean more precisely, "Nearly impossible to master". It certainly
doesn't mean "fun"! I don't know what the arcades are like in
England, but fortunately the types of sequences utilized in this
game have not been widely imported into America.
The documentation is adequate. It includes a few helpful tips
and a walkthru to get you started. However, the first time I
played, the events indicated in the walkthru did not occur.
Naturally, this greatly confused my first encounter. Fortunately,
additional help is available by calling Cinemaware and they may
even send you a much needed set of hints. The interface is obtuse. This is the first game that I have ever seen that uses the
number pad to request saving/restoring a game. The opening
scenes are quite impressive, but the game itself is only for a few
diehard garners.
These comments are those of the reviewer, but this game has
left a similar impression with all to whom I have shown the game.
The Kristal is virtually unplayable except to the master arcade
garners that might have the time and patience for the "challenge".
For the average gamer, this show is not worth the price of admission.

(Continued from page 55)

The accompanying game manual seems disorganized,
jumping from topic to topic with each detail of the game
instead of dealing in order. However, it has an index at the
end to help players locate specific information. The
manual also
seems to be incomplete in
some areas.
Some sections
of the manual
refer players to
another section
and fail to list
the page numbers. For example, under
the heading of
"Fixed Set
Value/Rising
Set Value", the
manual says, "The value that a set of cards are worth
when exchanged for armies (See pages )." This page
omission is repeated from page 20 on. Somebody didn't
do a good job of proofreading the manual.

For most players, the boardgame itself would probably
be more fun, especially with a number of players because
they won't have to all crowd around your computer
monitor. The broader view of the tabletop version makes
strategies easier to plot and reconnaissance of the
enemy's movement simpler. Still, the variations are useful
for a change of pace and the game does provide some
fun against a computer opponent when you can't get the
whole gang together. After all, that really is the purpose for
computerizing board games, isn't it?

Review

Y

ou thought life was
tough in New York.
First, the orbs invaded and took over
everything. Then, they
grabbed you and made
you a Manhunter. Why?
Who knows?! Maybe it
was just your lucky day.
After that, things got really interesting: what with
mine fields in Central
Park, robots in Bellevue,
bodies showing up in unexpected places, and
some nut running
around carving his initial
on the corpses. Before
long, you found yourself
in an alien spaceship,
which you could barely
operate, chasing that
selfsame nut (Phil, by
name) across the
country. Now, you're
about to find out just
how tough life can really
be . . .
As you've already
figured out, Manhunter
2: San Francisco picks
up where the previous
game left off. The long
chase across the continent ends with your
ship crashlanding on a
San Francisco street,
plunging you into
another bizarre escapade
full of bodies, puzzles,
and warped humor. It's
almost like being back
home again in New York
. . . almost.
This time, it's worse! You're in a strange
city where you haven't the least idea of
what is going on, except for a deep
suspicion it's something nasty. No one's
going to help you, of course, and those
who might be able to provide some clues
have the unfortunate tendency to turn
up dead, often horribly so. In fact, this
game is rather more gruesome than the
last one, and might well have been titled,
"Manhunter 2: Choice Cuts". Let's hope
you have a strong stomach.
The basic set-up and interface of the
game is the same as it was in Manhunter: New York. Almost everything is
controlled from a joystick or keypad.
Aside from the few occasions where
names have to be typed in, the keyboard
is hardly used at all. Travel is as quick
and easy as before: just move the marker
to where you want to be and poof! .. .
you're there.
Also, as before, you have to view every
screen with extreme care, and move the
cursor over each part of it, so you don't

The one big change,
and a very good one, is
the introduction of variable difficulty levels for
the arcade sequences.
YAY! For those people
(like me!) who grit their
teeth over arcades in an
adventure game, this is
a welcome addition. By
allowing the player to
choose difficulty level,
the Murrys have
managed to please just
about everyone (even
me!). The "Easy" level is,
indeed easy, and makes
most of the sequences a
breeze. You can zip
by Scorpia
through them and get
back to the good stuff
without wasting too
much time.
So, what's Manhunter
2: San Francisco all
about? Ah, that would
be telling! After all, a
large part of the game
revolves around discovering, little by little, just
what is going on here.
Ostensibly, you're still
trying to track down the
vicious Phil from New
York. You know he's
TITLE:
Manhunter 2:
San Francisco
here, especially after a
SYSTEMS:
IBM
few corpses with a "P"
REVIEWED ON: IBM
carved on the forehead
PRICE:
$49.95
DESIGNERS:
Dave & Barry Murry
start showing up.
PUBLISHER:
Sierra
However, other bodies
Coarsegold, CA
(and parts of bodies)
abound, and not all of
them are Phil's work. It
miss an important clue or item. This is
helps to have a scorecard handy so you
very important when trying to figure out
can figure out who is doing what to
people's names. Objects in the inventory
whom and for what reasons. For inare used by highlighting them on the instance, the dead men with the dragon tatventory screen. Usually, if the particular
toos: whose side are they on? And that
object has no use in a situation, nothing
corpse in the doctor's home, why is he
happens except a picture of it is displayed.
wearing a gray robe? And what happened
to his other arm (it's not attached
On those unfortunate occasions when
anymore)?
you meet an unpleasant fate (namely, a
grisly death), the game automatically
Add in, among other things, vicious
backs you out to just before your demise
dobermans, carnivorous ratmen,
to give you another chance. Even so,
necrophiliac shopkeepers, opium dens, a
and particularly with arcade sequences,
new breed of Orb (not only two eyes, but
there may be times when you can't get
a whole face!), mysterious doings at the
away from the situation entirely. ThereFerry, a few assorted ninja, and cryptic reffore, saving before doing anything potenerences to Hell, and you have quite a bit
tially dangerous is a good idea.
to sort out.
In fact, it almost seems more than a
Saving and restoring, by the way, is
poor ex-Manhunter can handle. Especialquick and you can save virtually
ly one who would probably prefer not to
anywhere, including during arcade seget involved anyway, after all the doings
quences. This is quite helpful at times,
back in New York.
especially when going through the lava
Overall, Manhunter 2 was a little easier
maze (see below). There are only twelve
than the previous game. This is probably
slots for saving, but you can create (on
due to being more experienced with the
the IBM) additional subdirectories for save
games if you need them.
style of play and graphic clues that make

up much of the investigative work
needed to complete the game. On the
other hand, the story line here is more involved and complex than in the original
Manhunter, and in some ways more satisfying, even though not all your questions
may be answered as to what is happening.
The arcades are a mixture of old and
new. Most were fun (kinda), but the lava
maze was definitely tiresome. It was done
as tunnels back in Manhunter: New York,
and that was enough. It's time for something new in the end game; the creative
talent that has so far produced two very
original games can surely come up with
something a little more imaginative.
Humor of the twisted sort abounds as
before, but the series appears to be heading into more morbid channels. Aside
from the higher body count, mutilated
bodies and parts of bodies seem to be
everywhere. Some restraint is necessary
here; after all, this is supposed to be a
game, not a slasher flick. Which is not to
say that the game is totally revolting (it
certainly isn't), but better to stop this unpleasant trend before it goes too far.
The manual is on the skimpy side, telling you just the bare essentials necessary
to get started. There is a short walkthru
in the back, which takes you through
some of the opening action; if you've not
played the previous Manhunter, you
might want to look at it to get some idea
of how this game operates.
Bottom line: Somewhat on the
gruesome side, and therefore not for
everyone, but otherwise an excellent followup to the previous game; a definite
"must have" for Manhunter fans.

Advice From An
Experienced
"Manhunter"
Warning: The following contains
specific hints.

O

course, it would help if you had
something to work with. By an
amazingly fortuitous coincidence,
your spaceship just happened to land on
top of another Manhunter. Splat! After
leaving the ship (and noticing that the
dead man does not wear ruby slippers),
you can pick up the MAD (Manhunter Assistance Device) and ID card that, also by
amazing fortune, didn't get caught underneath.
Now you're all set, because you can
fake being the unfortunate person you
just inadvertantly killed. The orbs aren't
very bright in some matters, besides
which they can't see your face under that
f

hood anyway. As long as you respond
properly at the right times, you can get
away with your little masquerade.
Most of Day 1 is pretty straightforward.
You won't be able to get into every place
you visit, at least not immediately. Just
remember that tomorrow is another day,
and if you can't enter a location at the
moment, you can always try again at
another time.
However, both on this and the other
days, it is important that you go to each
new location, whether you can get in or
not. The game is keeping track of where
you've gone, and the current day will not

end until you have been to all possible
locations. Particularly when restoring, it is
easy to forget that you haven't visited a
place or two in the save game you just
brought back. So make sure you know
where you've been.
The only real problem you may have is
at the Embarcadero Fountain. This is an
arcade sequence. I reached it early on
(after all, this is only the first day), and
came to a screeching halt. For uncounted hours, I tried to get through the
fountain. Whether I used the keypad or
the joystick, I always ended up going
down the drain. Literally.

Finally, I found out (after a frantic call to
Sierra; reviewers have their privileges!)
that all you need to use in this case is the
Enter key. Just that, nothing else. What
tripped me up here was some ambiguous wording in the manual.
The arcade sequences are normally set
to hard mode. By hitting the escape key,
you bring up the menu that changes the
difficulty level, and hitting the enter key
shuts the menu. Now, the manual says
that after each arcade sequence, the difficulty is re-set to hard again. So, each
time I went through the fountain, I was
hitting escape to set the difficulty to easy,
and enter to close the box on the screen.
What caused the problem was the notation at the bottom of the screen to "Hit
Enter to spin out". I thought it meant to

hit enter to clear the box and start the arcade sequence (because the game
freezes while you set the difficulty).
This brought on a lot of frustration until
I learned the truth, which was that (a)
only Enter was needed and (b) the arcade level stays where you set it, however
many times you have go through that
particular sequence. Difficulty changes
only when you go to a different arcade. I
mention all this because I'm not the only
one who was caught by this ambiguity,
and it's a good idea to make sure none
of you are, too.
The remaining arcades in the game are
nowhere near as troublesome or confusing, just occasionally deadly (grin). The
maze at the end is nasty, though. Yes,
there is a maze in this game, as well.
Those who have
played the previous Manhunter
will recall the joys
of piloting the
spaceship through
the tunnels. This
time, you can experience the joys
of piloting a rocket around lava
flows. It's about as
much fun as it
was before.
Day 2 is the
tricky one. There
is a lot of tracking
to be done on
MAD, and it must
be done carefully
to make sure you
don't miss
anyone. Replay
the scenes on the
computer as
many times as
you need to,
taking notes of
who is going
where. It will all
seem rather confusing at first, although as you
visit the various
locations, some of

the action should become clearer.
Day 3, on the other hand, seems to be
something of a stumper: you obtain only
one new location from the tracker. Of
course, you realize immediately this
means that now you can go back to
those places that were closed to you
before and get into them, one way or
another. It's just a matter of figuring out
the correct order.
Certainly, Ghirardelli Square should be
your first stop. However, I highly recommend saving the game before you do
much snooping around here, especially
on the roof. There was no way I could
find of exiting the arcade sequence up
there, except by going through it successfully. Since you don't have the right item
to succeed, you probably don't want to
get involved in climbing around any
signs right away.
You may also want to avoid the window
for the moment, especially if you happen
to be carrying anything of a fragile nature. Indeed, the best thing is to take a
quick peek around, then head off to
other parts (with parts, haha) for awhile.
After all, Ghirardelli Square and occupants aren't going anyplace; they will
be there later.
The most difficult task on this day is
probably "down under", fiddling with the
lava gates. The correct sequence of opening and closing them may take awhile to
get exactly right. This is not an arcade sequence, so difficulty level does nothing
for you here; it's strictly a logic puzzle. If
you find yourself being zapped by robots,
remember that the gates (even when
closed) will not stop them. Also, keep in
mind that the robots are coming from
above, not below (that's a hint).
So, do you finally get Phil? Well, not
quite, but you do get a bit closer to him.
You even discover something about him
that may be a revelation. However, exacting revenge for all his vile acts is going to
have to wait until you reach wherever it is
you're headed at the end of the game.
Destination isn't specified, but you can
bet it won't be anyplace congenial.
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

Taking A Peek
(Continued from page 6)

orient the block you're working with, the
farther into the pit it falls. So many
blocks, so little time! IBM (39.95). Circle
reader service #5.

Data East
470 Needles Drive
San Jose, CA 95112
HEAVY BARREL: Terrorists have captured a nuclear missile complex, dismantled the only weapon that can
defeat them (the Heavy Barrel), and hidden the pieces in lockers strewn
throughout the complex. One or two
players must fight their way past tanks,
over waterways and bridges, and
through hordes of terrorists to find and
reassemble the Heavy Barrel before successfully defeating the enemy. This
game features typical arcade-quality action and graphics. IBM (pictured)
($39.95) & C-64 ($29.95). Circle Reader
Service #6.

Digitek Software
104 W. Seneca, Suite 4
Tampa Florida 33612
POWERSTYX: Players must work
against time to uncover the picture that
lies behind the black computer screen.
Parts of the picture become visible as
portions of the screen are scribed with
the cursor. Skulls, scissors and crosses
chase the cursor along the scribed lines
and the player must avoid them and
reclaim the screen, or lose. This game is
sort of like Qix with underlying graphics
screens. Amiga ($14.95). Circle reader
service #7.

Free Spirit Software
P.O. Box 128
58 Noble Street
Kutztown, PA 19530
PLANET OF LUST: Brad Stallion and
his rocket, the "Big Thruster", once
again scour the galaxy in search of adventure. This time Brad must stop the
nefarious Dr. Dildo from crushing the
planet Erotiac with his impenetrable
force field. This adult-rated adventure
game has colorful graphics and lots of
humor. Amiga ($39.95). Circle reader
service #8.

Kyodai
58 Mitchell Blvd.
San Rafael, CA 94903
ANCIENT LAND OF YS: This neat little role-playing game (similar to
Prophecy) was a #1 hit in Japan and

comes overseas with attractive graphics
and a smooth interface. Players battle
the evil wizard Malificus to ultimately
regain the six books of Ys and restore
prosperity to the land. Players gain clues
from NPC's, battle monsters, gain gold,
weapons, and artifacts, while advancing
in attributes. The usual fare, done with
flair. IBM ($44.95). Circle reader service
#9.

MURDER CLUB: In this mystery/adventure game players assume the role of
a detective investigating the murder of
Bill Robbins, a high-standing member of
the community. As detective, players
must question suspects, recover physical
evidence, and obtain search and arrest
warrants in forming a case which will
both satisfy the DA and stand up in
court. The program rates players on
their gumshoing ability so that players

can keep tabs on their progress. IBM
($39.95). Circle reader service #10.

Mindscape
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, IL 60062
GAUNTLET II: This sequel to
Gauntlet adds over 100 new mazes, and
allows players to join in at any time
during play. Secret rooms, the magic potion of traps, monster generators,
transporters, force fields, and the usual
cast of villains all abound in this smooth
playing, colorfully animated action
game. Amiga (pictured), & ST ($49.95),
C-64 ($29.95), & IBM ($39.95). Circle
reader service #11.
(Continued on page 66)

Taking A Peek
(Continued from page 64)

Origin
P.O. Box 161750
Austin, Texas 78716
OMEGA: Join the ranks of cybertank
engineers at the Organization of
Strategic Intelligence assigned to the
Omega project. From the futuristic, underground design facilities, engineers
will attempt to design, test, and eventually perfect the ultimate cybertank. Building a cybertank chassis from a wide
selection of tank equipment is only a
minor step in the design of the ultimate
tank, A tank's true strength lies in its artificial intelligence programmed by the
engineer using an intuitive Pascal-like
command language. Only a shrewd Al
design and hours of testing in the battle
simulation module will produce a fearsome battle-ready dreadnought which
can be entered in a nationwide tournament sponsored by Origin and CGW.
See Industry News for more details.
Apple II (pictured), IBM, C-64, ST and
Amiga ($49.95). Circle reader service
#12.

Shodan
P.O. Box 4456
Berkeley, CA 94704
LEPRECHAUN: Aye friend, this be a
deceptively challengin' action game for
the Macintosh. Players must use their
noggins to help a wee Leprechaun
maneuver little pots o' gold over the rainbow, while avoiding lots o' deadly nasties. The game be includin a hundred
scenarios and an editor so ye can make
your own. Supports Mac II color, and
that be no blarney. Mac ($59.00). Circle
reader service #13.

Spectrum Holobyte
2061 Challenger Drive
Alameda, CA 94501
FALCON: OPERATION
COUNTERSTRIKE: Originally planned
as a simple data disk with 12 new missions, Operation Counterstrike became
almost a complete new version of the
award winning Falcon. There are many
improvements over the original program. In addition to new landscape, targets, and missions, the program has improved flight controls and easier landing
modes (and the Mig pilots will no longer
harass you on your way back to base).
On the other hand, the enemy has
upgraded their equipment from MiG-21s
to MiG-29s (ouch!). Amiga (pictured) &
Atari ST, 512K minimum, 1MB recommended. $24.95. Original game required. Circle reader service #14.
VETTE: Players race one of four different corvettes through the streets of
San Francisco over a variety of courses
in this hot driving simulation. Time pressure, obstacles (pedestrians, cop cars,

trucks..... the Bay!), varying difficulty
levels, buildings and landmarks, they're
all here in an incredibly detailed simulation of driving through the City by the
Bay. Watch out for Steve McQueen! IBM
($49.95). Circle reader service #15.

Taito
267 West Esplanade
North Vancouver
B.C., Canada V7M 1A5
RAMBO III: From the wide screen to
the computer screen, Rambo strides
through a heavily guarded Soviet compound on the Afghanistan border, searching for Colonel Trautman. Players
fight tanks, commandos and attack
choppers in this fast moving, highquality graphics, action game. ST (pictured) & C-64 ($29.95), Amiga ($34.95).
Circle reader service #16.
ARKANOID II: THE REVENGE OF
DOH: This sequel to Arkanoid comes

with 67 new, complex barriers to
breakthrough, and a construction kit
that enables one or two players to
design their own force barriers. AdLib
support is one of the enhancements to
the original classic. IBM (pictured) &
Apple IIGS ($34.95), C-64 & ST
($29.95). Circle reader service #17.

Titus Software
20432 Corisco St.
Chatsworth, CA 91311
F-40 PURSUIT SIMULATOR: In this
driving simulation/action game, players
must outrun and outwit ol' smokey in
an interstate car-chase spanning several
midwestern states. Flooring the Ferrari
F40 will rid players of a pesky cop on
their tail, but only quick planning and
liberal use of a scrolling highway map
will avoid their interstate roadblocks.
Amiga (pictured), ST & IBM ($44.95).
Circle reader service #18.

Football Survey
(Continued from page 31)

"It doesn't matter what the
game plan is, the players
have to execute in
order to win."

on the IBM are outstanding and the
game is expected to support both the
AdLib and Covox sound boards.
Designed by Scott Orr, veteran sports
game developer formerly with Gamestar,
the game is being designed to be simpler
to play than TV Sports Football. Modeled
after the coin-op arcade style play, play
selection and action will be joystick-driven

and so intuitive that "coaches" should be
able to play it without having to refer to
the manual. Do not get the idea that the
game will be a lightweight, though. The
game will have a statistical base, as well
as a Playmaker Utility which will allow
eight plays to be saved and kept in
memory. Unlike PF, JMF, or even GY, it
should only take about five minutes for a
"coach" to create a playbook.
Although the game will bear the title of
ABC Monday Night Football, the basic
game will not be packaged with an NFL
data disk. Since the game will be
designed in a modular fashion, this
should not be difficult to add at a later
date. Instead, the basic game will emphasize action over statistical/strategic
decision-making.

MSFL Pro League Football (MSFLIBM, Macintosh, $49.95) from Micro
Sports, Inc. was reviewed in CGW #55.
The game offers a marvelous capacity for
replaying entire seasons for statistical
analysis and attempting "What if?" experiments with various game plans. The
Game Plan generator asks 104 questions
about one's coaching philosophy and
develops a game plan from the answers.
Like Playmaker Football (PF), the
game's Al makes it an ideal game for running leagues. The Al is considerably different than that in PF, however. Where
PF allows "coaches" to customize each individual play by potential game situation,
MSFL emphasizes a basic coaching direction. MSFL is easier to implement for
NFL statistical replays for that reason.
The interesting fact about MSFL is that
there are regular leagues run via
Compuserve's Modem Gamers' Challenge Board. Dave Holt (76702,332),
designer of MSFL is the league's commis(Continued on page 69)

Football Survey
(Continued from page 67)

"Any reproduction or
rebroadcast of these
descriptions without the
express written
permission . . ."

sioner and he will assist interested
"coaches" who want to participate in
either Macintosh or IBM leagues.
For those looking for an action game
or even an action/strategy game, MSFL is
too strategy-oriented. For those who
want solid statistics, challenging strategy,
nice graphics, and a potential for league
play all rolled into one, MSFL is an excellent choice.

Finally, at the risk of repeating standard
information ad infinitum, "coaches"
should not overlook some of the computer football games which have been
covered previously in these pages. XOR's
NFL Challenge and vanilla version of the
same basic game, Pro Challenge, are
classics for statistical/strategy players.
Lance Haffner's Three-In-One Football
is the best non-graphic football game
available and the statistics are amazing.
Avalon Hill's Super Bowl Sunday and

Mac Pro Football (the latter from the
designers of MSFL) continue to be
popular. Sports strategy garners among
Apple owners who can manage to find
copies of Dan Bunten's Computer
Quarterback, published by SSI, will not
be disappointed, either. Amiga owners
looking for a statistically-based strategy
game will certainly want to consider Head
Coach.
Action fans will not want to overlook
Gamestar's GFL Championship Football with its "Inside the Helmet" perspective. 4th & Inches from Accolade continues to be popular with its overhead
view of miniature players. Melbourne
House continues to publish the fastmoving and beautifully animated John
Elway's Quarterback. Bethesda
Softworks, those wonderful folks who
brought us Wayne Gretzky Hockey, initially published Gridiron, an Amiga and
Atari ST game which emphasized the unfolding of plays as colored dots collided
on the football field. It was one of the first
football games to offer a true playmaking
utility, however, and is still worth a look
to those who love action.
In summary, "coaches" of computer
teams have numerous options when it
comes to selecting the right program for
their "Electronic Gridiron."

Reader Input Device

Letters

Avengers of the Mutant World
Upon reading your review of
Scavengers of the Mutant World, here is
our response. Your first complaint concerned the players, their attributes, and
pictures. Scavengers provides a set of
twenty players with randomly-generated
attributes in each "world". Each character's attributes are chosen so that no one
character is either a complete wimp or a
super-being. Such is the case with the
people you might find around you on
any given day. We felt that having the
game generate a fair set of characters
was more like "real life" and less time-consuming than having to "roll" for them—
over and over again. It was a design
decision and we stand behind it. And although each player is assigned to one of
twenty pre-defined pictures, the user may
elect to rearrange the pictures or even
draw new ones using the [M]odify option
from the Main Menu. Admittedly, the
drawing program is crude, but it was not
a high-priority part of the game.
The random-world generation routine
was indeed an attempt at replayability,
originally. During play-testing, however, it
became apparent that it was more interesting to create a unique world for each
user to play around in. Although the goal
of the game would remain the same, the
environment experienced during play
would change. Besides, some people like
exploring new territory.
One of your major complaints was that
the strength of the "monsters" increased
faster than the strength of the players.
This was also a conscious design
decision, forcing the user to use some finesse to win the game, rather than brute
force. It does appear, however, that we
were a tad overzealous in the amount of
increase, so that has been scaled back a
bit in the 1.1 version of the game.
Hacking at "everything that moves" is
decidedly not the way to win the game. A
good campaign requires planning and
staging. It is not necessary to return the
Party to Lau to pick up new members;
disbanding a Party of four members requires only 18 keystrokes and can be
done in any ruin. You may then form or
re-form a Party from players in Lau or
wherever else you have left them. Proper
strategy involves sending out scouting
Parties to map the area, then collection
Parties to gather loot and transport it to a
central location, perhaps Lau.
You also faulted Scavengers for not
having a "Save" feature. Frankly, we think
that a save-anywhere-anytime command

is a gigantic crutch which any true game
aficionado should not use. If there is no
"risk" in doing something, there is no
point in playing the game. Moreover,
Scavengers does allow the user to QUit
the game anywhere, at which point the
user can copy the database to a backup
file. The best-selling Wizardry games, for
example, only allow saves after you've
returned to a home base and few of the
current crop of home video games allow
any kind of "save" at all.
I would have to judge by your comments that you never completed a game.
There are several problems which must
be solved before you can complete your
mission, but unless you caught on to the
fact that killing everything in sight is not
the way to play the game, you'd probably
never find them.
Version 1.1 of Scavengers will be out
soon. It will include fixes to bugs reported
to us so far, as well as support for 16color graphics for EGA and Tandy adapters. With a new strategy towards winning
the game, you might find this new version more enjoyable.
Bruce Beaumont and Chris Stassen
co-authors of Scavengers
of the Mutant World
Webster, TX
Thanks for your perspective. We sure
can't agree with your opinion on "Save
Games", though. Convenience is part of
the value of playing computer games.

Old Genres Never Die
What's this nonsense about the pure
wargame being a fading genre? There
must be, at least, a dozen due for release
in the next six months—and they take a
lot of time to play. Let's try to avoid creating self-fulfilling prophecies.
Howard W. Levine
Jersey City, NJ
The declining sales figures for wargames are not omens conjured by COW.
There do seem to be seem bright stars
on the horizon, however. SSG's latest
IBM conversions (Rommel and Decisive
Battles of the American Civil War:
Volume 2), as well as SSI's Red Lightning (IBM, Amiga, and Atari ST) and an
upcoming IBM conversion of Battles of
Napoleon, look like they are going to do
very well. Nevertheless, some very good
wargames have had marginal sales
during the early part of 1989.

Tandy Is Dandy
Although not a Tandy owner, I applaud
your testing efforts to verify color
capability. This is a true service to the
gaming community and fits in well with
your policy of reviewing all games, not
just good ones. We need to know the

"good, bad, and the ugly" to make our
purchasing decisions. Your magazine
makes a great contribution.
Bill Murray
Fairfax, VA
I game on a Tandy 1000 EX. I very
much appreciate the Tandy color article.
Hopefully, software publishers will see
your article as evidence of the numbers
of Tandy color folk out there and support
the 16 color graphics even more. Such
support is a very big factor in my purchasing decision. I hate CGA!
The Magic Candle does support 16color!
Jeff Walter
San Jose, CA
Since The Magic Candle did not claim
to support 16-color, we took their word
for it. Next time, we won't take anyone's
word for it.

Deus Ex Word Processor
A question: What would have happened
to Biff [Ed: Author of the "Populous"
review in CGW #62] if he hadn't liked
Populous? Would the deity have zapped
him? Something nefarious about that line
of thought . . . Another question: Who
wrote the sneak preview of Dragon Wars
(CGW #62)? Could that deity have . .
Naaaah!
Dennis Owens
Houston, TX
Give a reviewer like Dennis the issue
off and these are the kinds of epistemological questions he conceives.
Biff is alive and well, playing with his
wolves. Where an article has no
authorial attribution, it is the work of
CGW's editorial staff.

I Dream of GEnie
I spend mucho dinero on Orb Wars, an
on-line multi-player game similar to
Sniper. It is found on the GEnie network.
I'd like to see a review published. Multiplayer games are the thing of the future!
Why not devote more than one page in
the history of CGW to them?
Eric Penn
Belmont, CA
Funny you should mention it! CGW
has covered gaming by telecommunications for more than six years. We once
had a regular column specifically on
that subject. We ran an Islands of Kesmai review over three years ago and
have a review of Air Warrior (another
GEnie game) in the works. By the way,
there was a news item about on-line
games on page 11 of CGW #63 and we
continue to try to be supportive of
modem-to-modem gaming.

