VOL. 2 NO. 2

MAR. - APR. 1982

Features
SOUTHERN COMMAND

6

Review of SSI's Yom Kippur Wargame

Bob Proctor

SO YOU WANT TO WRITE A COMPUTER GAME

10

Advice on Game Designing

Chris Crawford

NAPOLEON'S CAMPAIGNS 1813 & 1815: SOME NOTES
Player's, Designer's, and Strategy Notes

SO YOU WANT TO WIN A MILLION
Analysis of Hayden's Blackjack Master

ESCAPE FROM WOLFENSTEIN
Short Stay Based on the Popular Game

12
Joie Billings

16
Richard McGrath

18
Ed Curtis

ODE TO JOY, PADDLE AND PORT:

19

Some Components for Game Playing

Luther Shaw

THE CURRENT STATE OF
COMPUTER GAME DOCUMENTATION
NORDEN+, ROBOT KILLER
Winner of CGW's Robotwar Tournament

TIGERS IN THE SNOW: A REVIEW

21
Steve Rasnic Tern

25
Richard Fowell

30
Richard Charles Karr

YOU TOO CAN BE AN ACE
Ground School for the A2-FS1 Flight Simulator

BUG ATTACK: A REVIEW
Cavalier's New Arcade Game Analyzed

PINBALL MANIA
Review of David's Midnight Magic

32

Bob Proctor

34
Dave Jones

35
Stanley Greenlaw

Departments
From the Editor
Hobby & Industry News
Initial Comments
Letters
The Silicon Cerebrum
Micro Reviews
Reader's Input Device

2
2
3
3
27
36
40

From the Editor...
Each issue of CGW brings the magazine closer
to the format we plan to achieve. This issue (our
third) is expanded to forty pages. Future issues
will be larger still.
In this issue we add a new regular department,
THE SILICON CEREBRUM. THE SILICON
CEREBRUM, written by Bruce Webster whom
many of you will recognize from his writings in
THE SPACE GAMER magazine, will concentrate
on computer programming as related to game
design and artificial intelligence.
You will also note in this issue that most games
will have a small capsule description called "Basic
Information". This feature was added due to the
request of several readers. Your viewpoints are
important to us. Speaking of your viewpoints, the
last page of this issue is very important. We want
to know what you think of the articles in CGW,
what you think of certain ideas we have, and what
you think of the computer games being covered in
CGW. Please take time to respond to "Reader

HOBBY AND
INDUSTRY NEWS
Automated Simulations has announced plans to offer its EPYX
and MIND TOYS products for the
IBM personal computer. The award
winning TEMPLE OF APSHAI
will be the first release (March).
Automated Simulation's DRAGON'S EYE is now available for
the Atari 400 and 800 computers.
Computerware (1512 Encinatas
Blvd., Encinitas CA 92024) has released two new games for the Radio
Shack Color Computer, MAZERACE (board game on computer),
and STORM (arcade game).

Input Device". Not only will it help us to know just
what you want to read, it will also let the manufacturers know just what you think about the
games on the market.
Our congratulations go to Richard A. Fowell
whose robot, Norden+, won the Robotwar tournament. Richard shares in this issue the story behind Norden+. Thanks Richard. Those readers
who have been with us since 1.1 know that we also
have a tournament in progress called "The Greatest Baseball Team of All Time (GBTOAT). Readers
are encouraged to send in the results of their
tournaments, which will be published in our MayJune issue. If you do not have CGW 1.1 and 2.1, but
are interested in the tournament send $1.00 for
reprints of articles that list the eight teams and
ground rules of the tournament. You need SSI's
Computer Baseball or AH's Major League Baseball (modification needed on MLBB) to play the
tournament. No awards on this tournament; just
the opportunity to publish your replay results.

Avalon Hill's Jack Dott tells us
that AH will be releasing 6 new
arcade games in April for the Atari
and Apple computers. Also, according to Dott, current projects at AH
include STOCKS & BONDS and
MIDWAY CAMPAIGN for the IBM
personal computer, a naval game
called ALL HANDS ON DECK,
RICHTHOFFEN'S WAR, and
CLOSE ASSAULT (Squad Leader
type game). No firm dates are available for most of these.

In MISSION ESCAPE's rulebook, CE Software offered a prize to
the first player to get through all ten
levels of that game. Steven Allen, a
resident of Iowa (CE's home state)
won the prize. Don Brown of CE
states that the offer has been extended. Another prize of 5 CE Soft-

ware products will be offered to the
first player outside Iowa to win the
game. To check on the current status
of the contest contact CE Software
at 515-224-1995.
Volumes 6 and 7 of the Swordthrust series, entitled "The Eternal
Curse" and "The Hall of Alchemy"
will be out very soon according to
CE Software.
Synergistic Software announces
its new game APVENTURE TO
ATLANTIS. A to A, a sequel to
their popular ODYSSEY adventure
game, is an adventure game with
embedded arcade action (Apple 48K,
$40). Synergistic also plans two
March releases, NIGHTMARE GALLERY (arcade with supernatural
creatures) and U-BOAT COMMAND
(action/strategy).

INITIAL
COMMENTS
In addition to games mentioned
elsewhere in this issue the following
games have been received by CGW.
Most but not all of these games will
receive more detailed attention in
future issues.
Cavalier Computer
P.O. Box 2032
Del Mar, CA 92014
THE ASTEROID FIELD: Cavalier's version of the ASTEROIDS
arcade game. An excellent translation of the popular arcade game
to the Apple II computer ($24.95).
STAR THIEF: Arcade game in
which the player (or players)
take the role of guards. In your
spaceship you guard against the
theft of the powerpods. Apple II
48K, $29.95 .
Automated Simulations
1988 Leghorn Street
Mountain View, CA 94043
TEMPLE OF APSHAI: Award
winning hi-res fantasy adventure
game.
UPPER REACHES OF APSHAI:

LETTERS
Dear Editor,
I enjoyed reading Chris Crawford's
view of the future of computer wargaming in the November issue of
Computer Gaming World. This is
not necessarily because I agree with
his vision, but because Chris tries to
deal with most of the important
issues facing computer wargaming.
In fact, I disagree with many of
Chris' contentions and will discuss
this under the two broad categories
of programmers and hardware.
In general Chris seems to be quite
displeased with the quality of programmers currently writing wargame software. As an example he
states that he had not yet met a
programmer who had "solved the
mathematics of a hex grid for computer use". This is totally untrue, for
he has met several programmers
who have written games for SSI and
all of them have solved the hex grid
on the computer. In fact 8 of our 17
games use a hex grid and they were
programmed by four different
individuals.
Chris also stated that almost all

Four new levels and 150 new
rooms to add on to TEMPLE.
HELLFIRE WARRIOR: Sequel
to TEMPLE. Four levels, sixty
rooms, new commands.
THE KEYS OF ACHERON:
An expansion dungeon for
HELLFIRE.
RICOCHET: Abstract strategyaction game in which you maneuver blocks to set up a shot at your
opponent's goal and try to protect
your own. (Atari 400/800,
TRS-80,ApleI:$19.5)
JABBERTALKY: A programmable word game. Four different
programs are included, Alphagrammer, Cryptogrammer, Jabbergrammer, and Free Verse. (Apple II &
TRS-80).
BEZ
4790 Irvine Blvd. Suite 108B
Irvine, CA 92714
BEZ-MX: Strategy/arcade game
in which two players, or player
and computer plan and execute
attacks on each other's country.
Weaponry includes MX missiles
and Bez-1 bombers. Targets are
airfield, MX sites, factory, cities,
agriculture (Apple II, $29.95)

computer wargame designers are
amateurs. If he intended this to mean
that they are all-designing for the
love of wargaming and not for money
I would be forced to admit that this
is at least partially true. But I get the
impression his meaning is that most
designers lack professional skills.
Once again I must disagree. Would
he call Charlie Merrow (designer of
Computer Air Combat) an amateur
when he has over 22 years of commercial programming experience on
over 15 different computers. He may
never have designed a board wargame before, but he's been working
on computer games for a long time.
This kind of experience has been
more often than not the norm, at
least concerning the designers that I
have worked with.
As for pay, I agree that paying
someone what he is worth is very
important if you're going to get a
quality product produced. As for
SSI, our staff programmers receive
wages and benefits that are very
competitive with those received by
programmers in industry (quite a
feat considering that we are located
in Silicon Valley). As for royalties,
Chris paints a dim picture for the
part time game designer. Actually, a
designer stands to make between
$10,000 and $20,000 from a game,

half of which he will probably see
within six months after the release
of his game. I feel that this is ample
incentive for a programmer to commit his spare time for 4 months to a
year (especially if he considers the
project "fun" for at least the first few
months).
So, as for programmers I must
dispute Chris's claim that there
aren't enough good programmers to
write good wargames. I have dealt
with many good programmers writing wargames, and although I look
forward to working with more in the
future (and there certainly will be
more) the programmers we have now
provide a great deal of creative
talent.
As for the computers themselves,
Computer Gaming World should
have mentioned that Chris is an
employee of Atari and thus presents
his view of the world from a somewhat distorted vantage point. I do
not agree that the Atari is clearly
the better computer available today
for computer wargaming. The graphics used in Southern Command on
the Apple stack up against the
graphics of any computer wargame
available today. As for the disk I/O,
the Apple has the clear advantage,
operating at speeds up to 10 times
that of the Atari. This difference is
especially important when one is
trying to design a complex game
that will maintain a gamer's interest
during repeated plays.
Being able to chain programs is
essential, and the Atari is currently
clearly inferior. Also, an Atari disk
can hold only 75% of the information
stored on an Apple disk, forcing
simplification. I have no doubt that
as the Atari comes of age it will have
the potential of becoming a better
machine for wargaming, but at this
time I feel that the Apple is at least
equal to the Atari, if not considerably
better.
As for the statement that 16K
games are good enough I must once
again disagree. My work at SSI
allows me to talk with computer
wargamers everyday, and the general consensus seems to be that no
16K game to date (yes Chris this
includes Eastern Front) maintains
a gamer's interest past the first few
games. I attribute this to the lack of
variability in 16K games. With only
16K a designer must constantly
simplify his game, taking away
options until the game generally
follows the same course every time it
is played with little chance for a
gamer to encounter dramatically
different situations. On the other
hand a 48K game can allow for
different scenarios, more random

events, and most importantly, more
rules which cause each game to be
considerably different from the last
one played. Keeping a 16K game
from falling into a rut is in my
opinion almost impossible, and if
the people I have talked to are any
indication, I am constantly being
proven right.
As you have probably determined
by now, I disagree strongly with
Chris on many issues concerning
computer wargaming, but I do agree
with him that computer wargames
will continually improve, and that
the machines we are currently using
will eventually be replaced by newer,
more powerful machines, and I for
one can't wait to get my hands on
one.
Joel Billings
Strategic Simulations
Dear Editor,
I was grateful to see a magazine
devoted to the aspect of personal
computing I am most interested in —
game simulation (particularly sports
games).
Unfortunately, my home computer,
the TRS-80 Color Computer, has no
Avalon Hill/SSI type software. The
only obvious solution was to write
my own — in particular a baseball
and football replay program. Instead
of a batter-by-batter simulation, it
matches statistics for an entire team
to determine the winner of each
game. This allows replay of a complete 8-10 team league in less than 30
minutes, including entry of the team
data.
With my game I replayed every
major league season 1901-1976.
Using each year's winner, I organized them into 10-year groups for
each league. I played each of these
groups through a 162/154 game
season and these are the decade
champions:
National League:
1906 Cubs

1942 Cardinals

1920 Giants

1952 Dodgers

1928 Cards

1963 Giants

1935 Giants

1973 Reds

American League:
1910 Athletics 1948 Indians
1917 White Sox 1957 Yankees
1927 Yankees

1968 Tigers

1937 Yankees

1969 Orioles

Then I normalized the statistics
for each league's...winners (compared
them all statistically to the same
year — 1940 — then altered the
actual team data to get an accurate

replay of teams 67 years apart...like
the 1906 Cubs and the 1973 Reds).
I replayed these 8 team decade
winners through a complete 154
game season with these results:

National League
1906 Cubs
1973 Reds
1952 Dodgers
1963 Giants
1935 Giants
1942 Cards
1928 Cards
1920 Giants

88-66
83-71
78-76
77-77
76-78
74-80
71-83
69-85

American League
1948 Indians
1969 Orioles
1927 Yankees
1937 Yankees
1957 Yankees
1917 White Sox
1910 Athletics
1968 Tigers

87-65
87-67
83-71
80-74
76-78
73-81
66-88
62-92

I used the 1906 Cubs and the 1948
Indians for a 7-game "Super Series"
and the Cubs won in 4 straight! I
thought you might be interested in
this different approach to determine
"Baseball's Greatest Team".
L.V. Beatty
Norfork, VA

SOUTHERN COMMAND By Bob Proctor
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:

Southern Command

TYPE:

Wargame

SYSTEM:

Apple II with Applesoft
or Apple II Plus 48K

FORMAT:

Diskette

# PLAYERS: 1 or 2
AUTHOR:

Roger Keating

PRICE:

$39.95

PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations
465 Fairchild Dr. Suite 108
Mountain View, CA 94043
(415) 964-1353

Recent issues of computer magazines such as
BYTE and CREATIVE COMPUTING have been
been filled with praise for, of all things, a wargame
called EASTERN FRONT. The large map, the
ease of play, and the skill and speed with which
the computer plays make the game a new standard
against which others will be judged. If you're an
Apple owner, however, you're probably a little
envious that the game is only available for Atari
computers. You can relax now; Strategic Simulations Inc. has introduced SOUTHERN COMMAND for the Apple II (with 48K) and it is as
good a game as EASTERN FRONT!
There are more similarities than differences
between the two. EASTERN FRONT is better in
some respects — for example, the ability of the
computer to plan moves while it's waiting for you
— and SOUTHERN COMMAND is better in
others. For instance, it has a strategic map which
lets you view the entire map (EF does not) and it
has a Save Game feature which any game that

takes 2 hours or more should have (again, EF does
not). There's no need to say more, those who own
Ataris will buy one while Apple-owners will buy
the other.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
SOUTHERN COMMAND portrays 3 days of
fighting between the Israelis and Egyptians during
the Yom Kippur War of 1973. The war began on
October 6th when Syria attacked the Golan
Heights in the north and Egypt attacked in the
south. The Egyptian forces crossed the Suez Canal
into the Sinai (which Israel had captured in 1967)
and broke through the lightly-manned Israeli
defenses. Then, for reasons still unexplained, they
stopped. This gave Israel time to defeat the Syrians
in the north and transfer the units there back to
their Southern Command.
Even with one front cleared up, Israel could not
afford to sit passively on defense. Roughly 10% of
their total population had been mobilized and
these people were all needed back at the farms and
factories where they worked. Israeli leaders had to
find a way to end the war in a few weeks or the
country's economy would collapse.
They decided to counter-attack at a weak point
in the Egyptian line and cross the canal. By
threatening Cairo, they hoped to force the Egyptian
units to pull back on defense, allowing Israel to
re-establish a defensive line along the canal. This
plan, called Operation Gazelle, worked. SOUTHERN COMMAND gives you a chance to replay
the initial stages of the Israeli counter-attack.
GETTING STARTED
The game may be played by two people but the
emphasis seems to be more on solitaire play. With
just one person, the computer always plays the
Egyptian side. The Israeli objective is twofold: to
get units onto the west bank of the canal and to
reduce the number of enemy units on the east
bank. Victory is determined by a complex point
system but this is all handled by the computer.
You may, at any point during the game, ask for a
recap of the scoring and this includes an estimate
of the final outcome (nice touch!).
When you boot the game disk, you see a menu
which gives you 3 basic choices: start a new game,
continue one that had been saved, or play a
demonstration game. Demonstration mode is a
marketing tool; something you'd use to show off
the program in a store. Besides the number of
players, there are several options to choose from
when starting a new game. There are normally 20
turns in the game but you can choose to play 10
instead. The Israelis get 100 points to make up for
the 10 missing turns. Also, the game normally

starts with all forces in their actual historical
positions, but there is an option to let the Egyptian
move all non-infantry units to be in a better
position. This option gives the Israelis a 20 point
bonus and can be used with either the 10 or 20 turn
game. When playing solitaire, there are 2 levels of
difficulty and each may be played with or without
hidden units, giving 4 variations of
computer skill in all.
GRAPHICS
SOUTHERN COMMAND uses high-resolution
full-color graphics to display the map and units.
The map uses the hexagonal grid seen in most
board wargames and compared with these, it's an
average-sized map. It's 28 by 39 hexes but in
normal mode you can only see an 8 x 13 "window"
so it seems much larger than it is. You can move
the window around with scrolling commands or
by moving a cursor using 6 directional keys. The
cursor is used to select any one hex; as it nears the
edge of the map window, the window will move
with it.
The various kinds of terrain are distinguished
mostly by color: blue for water, green for forest,
orange for light and heavy rough, white for sand
and blank for clear. The pattern of dots which
mark the terrain is distinctive, though, and you
can quickly learn to recognize them in black and

white; thus, there is absolutely no problem playing
the game on a monochrome monitor. The "B" key
is designed to make colored terrain show up better
by changing it all to white. This might be useful if
it weren't for one error. The unit currently being
moved normally blinks to help you keep track of it,
and this blinking stops if you hit "B". I found this
to be a big nuisance, but fortunately, the game
looks better in color mode no matter what kind of
monitor you have so just ignore "B". In color, the
blinking unit flashes white, or green or orange so
it stands out against any terrain (nice touch!).
The units are represented by symbols which
remind you what type of unit it is . Thus, a soldier
with a rifle is an infantry battalion, motorized
infantry is represented by an armored personnel
carrier (APC), self-propelled guns are clearly
different from tanks, and artillery, rocket, antiaircraft and recon units have their own symbols.
Two units may be "stacked" in a hex and when
this happens an "S" is displayed there. You can
examine the stack by moving the cursor there.
Egyptian stacks have a box around the "S" to
distinguish them from Israeli stacks.
There are times during any game when you'd
like to be able to see the Big Picture and
SOUTHERN COMMAND lets you. A touch of
the "P" key will display the strategic map. This is

the entire map, and while it is too small to show
unit types, the positions of all Israeli units are
clearly marked by a solid square and Egyptians
by a hollow square. Major terrain types are shown
(again, readable in either color or monochrome)
but roads are not. This map requires quite a bit of
knowledge to interpret. You must know the map
and remember what kind of units are where to use
it well. Beginners may find it confusing, and the
fact that the picture of it on the rear of the game
box is upside down won't help! Still, it is an
invaluable feature. Using it, for example I was
able to learn that Egyptian units were behind me
on the second day. From then on I paid more
attention to the reinforcement schedule!
COMBAT
Combat is based on a step-reduction system,
where units lose combat factors in action and
regain them when they have a chance to "reorganize." If a unit's combat strength is reduced to
zero, it is eliminated. The number of factors lost in
combat will depend on the relative strengths of the
units, the type of units, and on the situation. For
example, bombarding an enemy with artillery
before you attack will tend to increase his casualties and decrease yours. Or, if you can attack an
enemy unit which is trying to reorganize, it will be
less able to defend itself. The combat system is
explained in an appendix in the rule book. A look
at it will tell you such things as: tanks are the best
units for attacking other tanks and motorized
infantry but the Israelis can get into real trouble
trying to use tanks to knock out Egyptian infantry.
Of course, you could learn this lesson on the
battlefield, too!
Much of the game's tactics involves choosing
the proper mode for each unit. Attack mode is the
best for combat, although Defensive mode is much
better against artillery or air attack. River mode
(for crossing the canal) is particularly weak, with
Reorganization mode and Transportation mode
only slightly better. Each mode has its use, however; it's up to you to learn the proper time and
place for it.
Besides being rated for combat strength and
movement, each unit is rated for efficiency.
Efficiency affects how well the combat strength
may actually be used in combat, how well the unit
can change from one mode to another, and how
quickly it can rebuild once it is pulled from the
lines and put in Reorg mode. It is in the area of
efficiency, and only here, that the Israelis have a
clear superiority. The Israeli commander who can
find the right time and place to rest and refit
depleted units will greatly increase his effective
strength. The computer, as an opponent, is particularly vicious about attacking these units with

artillery and they are very susceptible to this form
of attack while in Reorg mode.
THE PLAY
In regular play, you have complete control over
the cursor and may move your units in any order
you wish. Once you start to move a unit, however,
you must complete it. Just move the cursor to the
unit you want to move, hit "M", and then use the
direction keys to move the unit. It will stop moving
when it's movement allowance is reached, or you
may hit "Q" to end before then.
A very good feature, which speeds play quite a
bit, is the "auto-move" mode. This simply means
that after you finish moving a unit, the computer
will automatically move the cursor to the closest
unit which has not yet moved. If it happens to pick
one which you don't want to move yet, the "L" key
will cause it to skip to the next and come back to
that unit later. It is smart enough to select your
artillery units first so you can use them to soften
up this turn's targets. Auto-move can be turned off
and on at any time. Another nice touch.
Another innovation in SOUTHERN COMMAND is delayed orders! Instead of moving a
unit, you give it orders to move and attack (attack
only for artillery) a given hex IF an enemy unit
moves into it. I confess I haven't really mastered
this yet, but the computer uses it if you play the
most difficult level and it has caught me in several
nasty ambushes.
The computer plays faster than any other SSI
game I've seen. It is almost too fast to follow — and
would be if it didn't pause to let you read the
combat results. Of course, if you like, you can turn
this pausing off so that it will finish its entire
move in 15 or 20 seconds.
STRATEGY
There really isn't much choice about where the
Israelis will cross the canal. The Suez runs from
the lower left to the upper right of the map, but the
right half is dominated by the Great Bitter Lake
which cannot be crossed. Most units can cross
wherever the canal is narrow, but Israeli tanks
need a pontoon bridge. There is a group of
Engineers who can build one and their slow
progress toward a crossing sight is the focus of
attention on the first day.
The easiest place to clear a corridor for them is in
the center, right along the shore of the lake. Here,
only one Egyptian infantry unit must be pushed
back to open the way. Of course, this leaves a
rather narrow, vulnerable supply line and creates
a logical target for a counter-attack. The difficult
level strategy seems to be characterized by just
such an attack, delivered with a vengeance!

The Israelis must get units across the canal — 3
by turn 3, 7 units by turn 9, 11 units by turn 15 — so
a few units must use their advantage of surprise
on turn one to run past the Egyptians and cross
the canal. Once over, they can stake out a bridgehead and maybe wipe out some anti-aircraft missile
sites. These are worth extra victory points as an
incentive for the Israelis to do something on the
west bank besides camp. In fact, a powerful threat
will force the Egyptian to pull units back from the
east side, giving evidence that the game is successful as a simulation.
I haven't mentioned airpower yet. Airstrikes act
just like very powerful artillery barrages. The
Israeli Air Force can give ground support within
certain limits. It may be called in at most, one on
the first day, twice on the second, and three times
on the third. You may not get that many strikes,
however, as there is a random element at work.
Also, once during the game the Egyptian Air
Force may be ordered into the air and they will
disrupt (prevent) an Israeli strike if one is called in
that turn.
CONCLUSIONS
SOUTHERN COMMAND is an outstanding
game and a very realistic historical simulation.
The rule book and two reference cards are of SSI's
usual (high) quality. The only thing I could want
would be an option to play the Egyptian side
solitaire, but programming the computer to play
the Israelis would not be a trivial task. Still, it will
keep me busy trying to crack that Egyptian defense at the highest difficulty level. I urge you to
try it too.

SO YOU WANT TO WRITE
A COMPUTER GAME
by Chris Crawford

Chris Crawford is
an employee of Atari

You've had your computer for some time now.
You've used it to teach yourself how to program
and to handle a few household problems. You've
also used it to play games. You have noticed that
many of the games available for your computer
are less than perfect. Soon you begin finding the
technical flaws in them, and modifying some of
them. The day inevitably comes when you decide
that you could have done a better job than the
designer. You tell yourself 'Maybe I should write a
computer game.'

should be easy! Why then, when so many people
want to, have so few people been successful
designing games? There are four main reasons.

There's certainly plenty of motivation to write a
computer game. Perhaps you have heard stories of
the fabulous wealth awaiting the designer of a
successful game. Perhaps you have read magazine
articles about those wild and glamorous fellows
who design the games. Or perhaps you are
motivated by the simple pleasure of making people
happy with your own creativity.

First, the successful game designers work very
hard at their games. They are perfectionists who
spare no effort in the quest for excellence. They
have an eye for detail, putting in fine points that
few customers notice. They polish their programs
endlessly, rooting out all the bugs to achieve a
flawless product. I know a software evaluator, a
man of deep insight, who tells me that he can
always tell top-notch software submissions from
their user manuals; they are always carefully
typed and free of spelling errors. Inevitably, the
software accompanying such manuals is equally
flawless. I have seen many games by amateur
designers, some good and some bad, and the only
common trait of the bad games was insufficient
effort. There is no excuse for a half-finished game.

Whatever your reasons you are certainly not
alone. More than a million people own personal
computers. All over the country, thousands and
thousands of people are coming to the same
conclusions that you have come to. There is nothing
stopping anybody from doing it; you need no
special training to design a game, nor any special
equipment other than your personal computer. No
investment of money is required, nor will you need
other people to help you with the programming.
You can do it all by yourself in your spare time. It

The second distinguishing trait of successful
game designers is their technical expertise. They
all are completely comfortable with assembly
language and they all know their machines well.
No great paintings were ever painted with
crayons; no great symphonies were ever composed
with kazoos; do you really think that you can write
a great program in BASIC? I have yet to see an
excellent program written in BASIC. I have yet to
meet a good game designer who did not have total
mastery of the machine on which he worked.

Technical expertise is a means to an end, but
technical expertise alone does not qualify anyone
to write good games. I know a number of brilliant
programmers who have written wretched games.
The best game designers are really artists at heart.
Their games are an extension of their personalities.
These people are intensely creative because they
invest so much of themselves into the design
process. They disdain copying other people's ideas,
for that would detract from the clarity of their
self-expression. My advice to the beginning game
designer is similar to the advice a famous writer
once gave an aspiring young author: Write a game
about what you know, not what you think other
people admire — this is the third factor in successful game design. If all you know is ditch-digging,
then design a game about ditch-digging. If you put
your heart and soul into it, if you condense the
human essence of ditch-digging into that game,
people will like it. If you only copy an idea somebody
else has already used, people will see it for the
cheap copy it is.
The fourth factor in success with games is
marketing. Don't try to sell the game yourself;
turn it over to a software house for royalties. If you
are truly a good programmer then you are almost
certainly a poor businessman. Let a good businessman handle the business aspects of the job.
There is, unfortunately, an element of luck in the
marketing sector. Three years ago I pounded the
pavement trying to sell my games to any of a
number of software houses. Nobody was interested.
Now I have standing offers from a dozen houses. I
haven't changed that much in three years; what
has changed is my reputation. Three years ago I
was just another unknown software author. Fame
and reputation — these things can be arbitrary. Be
patient and make sure your product is good. Keep
pounding the pavement and your turn will come.
If you decide to go ahead and write that game, I
suggest that you follow these steps:
First, toss the idea around in your head for
at least a month before you begin any programming work. Think it through first! Don't
rush in and hack the program together. Make
sure you know what you are trying to
accomplish before you begin work. Ask yourself, what will people feel as they play my
game? What will the game teach them? How
will it challenge them?
Second, plan the game I/O before anything
else. I/O is the big bottleneck in all games; it
dictates what can and cannot be done.
Graphics are assuming increasing importance in all games. Carefully plan the graphics and animation that your program will

use. Pay special attention to the input structure of your program. Most poor programs
suffer badly from poor input structures that
confuse and frustrate the user. Don't let your
game be ruined by clumsy or overly delicate
input systems.
Third, lay out a memory map and stick to it.
Decide how much memory your game will
take. Less memory may reach a larger
audience, but more memory will allow a
better game. Allocate specific chunks of
memory for specific functions. If any function
needs more space, re-evaluate your entire
memory map before allocating additional
space to the function.
Fourth, develop the algorithms for critical
functions of the game. Algorithms are the
critical intermediate step between broad goals
and specific code. Many beginning programmers leap all too quickly from concept directly into code without taking the time to
properly frame their algorithms. If you think
that you can write code without thinking out
the algorithms behind it then you are either a
great deal smarter or a great deal dumber
than I.
Fifth, write the program. Are you surprised
that writing the program comes so late? Are
you surprised that I treat it so perfunctorily?
If so, you are in for many more surprises
when you do the game, all of them rude.
Sixth, playtest the game several hundred
or even a thousand times. Enlist the aid of
several friends to playtest it for you, and pay
attention to their criticisms. Some of their
criticisms will be bad; ignore those. Some will
be good; implement them immediately and
thank your lucky stars for good playtesters.
How do you know the difference between
good criticisms and bad ones? I don't know; if
you ever find out, please tell me.
Seventh, polish the game.
Eighth, polish it some more.
And finally, when you are truly and deeply
sick of the game and desperate to get it out of
your hair, polish it for at least another month.
Polish is the critical element, the final touch
that turns a good game into a shining beauty.
I have programmed four computer games
now; every single one gives me pangs of guilt
because I did not polish it adequately. Don't
repeat my mistakes.
Obviously, the process of designing and developing
a computer game is a long and painful one. Now do
you see why so few game designers are successful?

NAPOLEON'S CAMPAIGNS
1813 & 1815:
Some Notes

by Joel Billings
For years player's, designer's and strategy notes
have been a standard feature of wargames. Sometimes the notes appear in the rulebook itself
othertimes the notes are published elsewhere. Joel
Billings, of Strategic Simulations, shares his notes
on SSI's new game, NAPOLEON'S CAMPAIGNS
1813 & 1815. The numbers indicate the section of
the rulebook to which the note relates. Here's to
better campaigning!
PLAYER'S NOTES
3.1 Setting your Line of Communications can be
crucial early in the game, for your corps will try to
retreat along the corn line if possible. In this way
you can ensure that your corps that are far from
the main army will retreat towards the bulk of
your forces. An example of this is stretching your
corn line to the Allied 6th corps in Waterloo
through hexes 8,9 and 3,12. This will allow 6th
corps to retreat towards Brussels in the face of a
major French attack through Tournai. The corn
line can also be used to create forces, thus allowing
you to specify the march mode of the corps involved.
This is the best and only way of guaranteeing that
your troops will get to where you want them to go.
If for example as Napoleon you wish to pursue the
southern strategy in Leipzig, a good tactic is to
trace your corn line from Leipzig to 9,12 - 9,11 -10,10

- 9,9 - 8,9 - 10,8 - 10,4. This will allow you to give
force orders to 9 of your corps on turn 1, and will
allow a quick movement of troops from 10,4 to 9,12.
In this way you will have direct control over
whether your army force marches to a possible
battle south of Leipzig, or takes its time in order to
arrive fully rested.
3.4 and 3.5 The starting urgency and contact
mode can mean the difference between life and
death for a corps cut off from the main army.
Giving an urgency of 9 and a contact mode of
stand to the Allied 1st corps in Waterloo is
equivalent to signing its death certificate. The
same could also be said for the Allied 1st and 2nd
corps in Leipzig. Be very careful to keep your corps
out of a major battle until your army has been
united. Also, beware of the sucker strategy often
used against the Allied 2nd corps in Waterloo. If
this corps is placed in initiative or attack mode, all
the French player need do is send a cavalry corps
to hex 16,15 followed two turns later by 50,000 men
and suddenly the 2nd corps will find itself about to
be destroyed. Although there is no best initial set
up, especially in Waterloo, at least be cognizant of
the tactics you are set up to defeat, and those
which may be used to defeat you.
7.2 By moving your HQ as part of a force, you will
be able to keep that force stacked together as long

as desired. This will allow for rapid movement.
Without your HQ, your units will spread out along
the road, with the last unit moving only after the
first units have vacated the hex, thus slowing the
inevitable desired concentration of your corps.
7.4 In effect this means that units in a ZOC may
stack as much as desired. This allows you to
concentrate your troops adjacent to the enemy and
then attack with your entire force hitting the
enemy at one time. In order to do this, give your
units stand orders, and only convert to attack
orders after your army has concentrated.
8.0 (A) Movement is by far the most subtle
element to this game, and the part which gives
garners the most problems. If your units fail to
move as you thought they should check for the
following:
1) Is it or has it been raining?
2) Did you give a low urgency (don't expect a
leader to burn rubber if he has an urgency of 1,
in fact be happy if he moves more than once
a day)?
3) Is the corps commander unaggressive (giving
an urgency of 5 to Bernadotte is not much better
than giving an urgency of 1 to Napoleon, and
giving an urgency of 1 to Bernadotte will put
him to sleep for the rest of the game)?
4) Is the unit trying to cross a river?
5) Does the unit have stand or initiative orders
while constantly bumping into enemy units?
6) Is it night or 0500 in Leipzig?
7) Did you really give him orders to go somewhere?
8) Are you constantly sending him new orders
each turn thus eliminating the old order?
9) Did you initially give him an urgency of 1 with
his movement orders, and then send him a new
order to convert to urgency 9, and was that the
only order you sent him? Don't forget that a unit
will lose all previous orders whenever he receives
a new non-immediate order. This is the most
common mistake made by players. Whenever
you send a new non-immediate order, even one
as simple as increasing a corps' urgency,
remember to also reiterate the movement orders
you wish the corps to execute.
8.0 (B) Another problem many people face is
having their corps suddenly start to march off in
an unexpected direction. The usual reason for this
is that a unit moved somewhere due to combat
(attacking or withdrawing). Units in combat keep
their old orders (including orders previously issued
during combat having to do with combat). When
the unit is no longer facing an enemy it reverts to
these old orders. Example: A unit had started to
retreat to 3,4. The player gives an RT order for 3,5.
When the unit finishes retreating to 3,5 it will

move to 3,4. Use the SC command to check if this is
happening, and if your unit has 'bad' orders clear
them with a non-immediate order.
9.6.1 Ferocity is the key to combat in this game. A
good leader can hold off a poor leader despite being
outnumbered by as much as 10 to 1 simply by
keeping the ferocity low. Rear guards and blocking
forces should be given urgency 1 in order to
prevent the high percentage casualties required to
be routed. A player should only use a high urgency
in combat when he is willing to accept large losses,
or when he outnumbers the enemy sufficiently to
reduce his losses.
9.6.1.2 Be sure to place your fatigued corps in the
rear during a battle, for putting them in the front
will only decrease your odds while increasing the
chance that the units will rout.
11.5 The loss of a fatigue point from normal
marching at night is often an exceptable penalty
in exchange for speed. The ability to move at night
should be used especially in Leipzig, due to the
0500 restriction on movement (the fatigue gained
at night will be lost during the 0500 turn). Avoid
force marching at night if at all possible.
13.2.7 For those who desire to get a corps to force
march, simply begin a movement order with a
starting hex that is several hexes away from the
current location of the corps you wish to move. For
example, in Leipzig, if you wish a unit in 9,12 to
move quickly to 9,15, enter a movement order with
9,15 as the starting hex (and ending hex by
pressing the space bar). The unit will force march
until it reaches 9,15. This can be a very useful
technique when used in movement along a straight
line for short distances. If, however, the path is not
straight, your corps may end up traversing open
ground and crossing unbridged rivers while also
force marching at night, thus destroying the unit's
effectiveness.
14.3 The importance of this section cannot be
overstated. It is essential that players realize that
when a force is given orders to move at a set march
rate, the march rate is only used during the turn in
which the order was given. In order to keep a force
moving at a set march rate, the player must
continue to create the force each turn. In doing this
without giving further orders to the corps, a player
can ensure that his corps will move as he wishes
them to.
STRATEGY NOTES
Leipzig (French)
The key to French strategy is to develop an initial
plan involving the destruction of a major portion
of the Allied forces before the Allied armies are
able to unite. Once the plan is decided upon stick to

it, unless the Allied forces you hoped to destroy
have withdrawn in the face of your initial thrust.
Be sure to mask your true intentions as long as
possible. The game can be divided into two fronts,
the northern front facing Bernadotte and Blucher,
and the southern front facing Schwarzenberg.
Generally it is best to pick one and force march as
many corps as possible to mass for an attack on
the enemy forces in the front chosen. Leave only a
small rearguard to block the movements of the
other Allied armies, but be sure to leave at least
one strong leader (6 or Napoleon) with the rearguard. If it becomes impossible to destroy the force
you are attacking before other Allied armies begin
to surround you (blocking your retreat routes to
the west), pick a new corn line and escape before
your retreat becomes a rout. The French can win
by causing heavy Allied losses during the first
three days and then withdrawing the army to the
west intact.
Leipzig (Allied)
Withdraw I and II corps toward Altenburg, standing only after being united with Schwarzenberg in
hex 9,15. Use III and VII corps to disrupt French
movements west of Leipzig, or move III corps to
join the Allied corps in 9,15. Give high urgencies
(over 6) to corps VI and VIII and order them to
march towards Schwarzenberg. The key to the
Allied plan is the ordering of IX and X corps. If you
believe the French will attack south, order Blucher
towards Leipzig, but with a low urgency and stand
or initiative orders until you receive details of
enemy movements near Leipzig. If you believe
that the French will strike north, leave Blucher in
Halle with stand or withdraw orders, and move
Bernadotte to Halle as quickly as possible. As
soon as you feel you know where the French are
going, begin to attack his rearguard while trying
to attrition Napoleon in the area of his attack (but
don't allow your corps to be sufficiently fatigued to
rout). On the last two or three days your objectives
are clear, 1) take Leipzig 2) block the French
withdrawal (this can be done if you are able to guess
his planned retreat route early in the game). The
VII corps is ideally suited for disrupting a retreat
from Leipzig.
Waterloo (French)
Your only hope is to either crush the Prussian
army and take Liege, or attack Wellington before
he has time to concentrate more than three corps.
In either case a holding force must be used to block
a union of all Allied corps. Cavalry corps should be
used to screen French movements and to disrupt
Allied communications. They can also be used to
block Allied movements (II and VI corps are the
easiest blocked) and to capture Ghent, Liege, and
Brussels if they are ungarisoned. The French
player must keep his main force together and

move quickly until a decisive battle can be forced
on a portion of the Allied Army.
Waterloo (Allied)
The Allied player should concentrate corps 1-4 in
Namur (alternatively, leave IV corps in Liege to
guard your communications) and once there begin
a move toward Waterloo if the French player is
attacking Wellington. Concentrate corps 5-8 and
Wellington near 11,11 and fall back towards
Brussels if pressed early by the main French
army. If the French attack towards Namur, march
to Ligny and further once your corps have united.
It may be necessary to leave VIII corps behind to
secure Brussels and your communications line
from French cavalry raids. Avoid force marching
if at all possible, for your units have extremely low
morale and can be easily routed in combat. The
key is to withdraw early in the game, only accepting combat when your forces have united. Also,
do not allow your Prussians to be attacked by
Napoleon for long, for your leadership disadvantage will lead to the destruction of your army.
DESIGNER'S NOTES
7.0 It was decided that normally a corps would
occupy an entire hex of roadway while it was
moving, thus prohibiting others from moving
through the hex at the same time. The exceptions
to this involved either the concentration or withdrawal of an army in the face of the enemy, or the
use of the army headquarters (logistics staff) to
assist the movement of an army more quickly
than otherwise possible (allowing stacked
movement).
8.9 Orders to corps were usually vague, designed
often to be interpreted by the corps commander as
he saw fit. This is why we developed the idea of an
order consisting of a stated path of movement and
an urgency setting concerning the importance
(and thus necessary speed) of the movement. The
urgency is also affected by the aggressiveness of
the commander, accounting for the historical
tendencies of the commander's interpretation of
his orders. The affects of urgency on movement
and combat are the core of the game.
9.6 The key to the combat system is understanding our desire to enable an excellent leader with a
small force to hold off a poor leader with a large
force. The intent was to allow a well led French
corps to hold for at least one day against a force
many times its size, and this is why casualties
are directly proportional to the urgency, allowing
a good leader to lower the combat urgency and
thus sustain relatively light casualties despite
being outnumbered. Also, a good leader can force a

Continued on page 39

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:

Blackjack Master

TYPE:

Card Game and Tutor

SYSTEM:

TRS-80 Mod. I, Level II, 16K

FORMAT: Tape

Now the dealer glances toward the tight lipped
pit boss as he turns over the card hiding beneath
his black nine. The crowd gasps as it becomes
visible: the final eight in the deck, giving the
dealer a total of 17.
You breath an audible sigh as you accept the pit
supervisor's chit for $1,500.00 and turn to look
directly into the smiling blue eyes behind you.

# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:

Norman J. Wazaney Jr.

PRICE:

$29.95

PUBLISHER: Hayden Book Co.
50 Essex St.
Rochelle Park, NJ 07662

Calmly, you watch as the dealer flips cards to
each player around the table. Your table-limit bets
of $500 have attracted the attention of several
casino regulars, and a small ring of admirers has
gathered behind you. You detect a faint scent of
flowers as a soft hand gently touches your shoulder.
The dealer displays a nine of spades as he
begins his circle of the table. The three players to
your right each draw cards. Each, in turn, silently
pushes his hand and his bet to the dealer when his
total exceeds the conclusive 21 points. You carefully
tilt the corners of your cards upward; just enough
to glimpse the two red eights hiding beneath. With
just a moment's thought, you flip them over and
slowly push an additional $500 to the edge of the
green felt. The hand on your shoulder squeezes
gently.
The first card slides across the table and you
quickly lift its edge. Another eight, this time black;
not what you expected. Without hesitation, you
turn it over and move another $500 stack out from
your depleting bankroll. The hand on your
shoulder tightens perceptibly. Another card leaves
the dealer's fingers. Closer to the statistical
probabilities this time: A red king to go with the
first eight. Quickly, your finger taps the second
eight. It is hit with a black seven. Again, not what
you expected. You make a quick decision, calling
for another card. This time you get a five, for a
total of 20 on that hand. Moving quickly to your
final eight, you motion for one more card. This
time the expected probabilities come through: a
queen.... of hearts.

If this is your fantasy of a weekend in Las
Vegas, then maybe BLACKJACK MASTER
can help make that fantasy come true. It gives the
blackjack devotee a way of testing new playing
strategies and betting systems without risking the
proverbial farm. The program consists of three
parts: The GAME; the SIMULATOR; and the
TUTOR.
The GAME is similar to other blackjack
programs. It plays blackjack with the player,
offering all of the options available in a standard
casino game, including doubling, splitting cards,
insurance, and that little known possibility —
surrendering. Bets can be made in any amount
from $2.00 to $500.00, so money management
strategies can also be analyzed.
I have two immediate objections to the game
program. First, the game always starts you with
an unrealistic (for me, anyway) bankroll of
$100,000. I would quickly alter the program logic to
either provide a less intimidating amount or allow
the player to choose his own bankroll. I'm not
comfortable risking $100,000, and, at a maximum
bet of only $500, it just takes too long to feel that
you're either winning big or really blowing the wad
The second objection is more serious. The
graphics of the game are dull and uninspired.
Even with the somewhat limited capabilities of
the TRS-80, a graphic representation of playing
cards is possible. To limit the depiction of a
playing card to a small number crammed into a
box detracts from the visual impact of the game.
Additionally, the screen text format requires the
player's eyes to jump between several points on
the screen; increasing the likelihood of player
fatigue and mistake. Possibly the 16K memory
limit prevented the use of graphic playing cards
due to program size. But, even staying within

these limits, I believe that a better screen layout is
possible which would improve the visual appeal of
the game.
One technical hitch was discovered. After
running through a few hands in the GAME
program, I was pulled up short by an "out of string
space" error. I corrected the problem by increasing
the cleared space from 800 to 2,000 in line 20 of the
program. This worked in my 48K machine but
may not satisfy other models. I suggest you play
around with this if it occurs in your version.
The TUTOR portion of the program is probably
the most useful of the three segments for the
average player. It continuously deals cards to you
and to the dealer and asks for your play on each
hand: hit, stand, double, or split. It then immediately analyzes the correctness of your play based
on the playing strategy imbedded in its program
logic (more on that later). If you are wrong, it
displays the proper play for the hand. At the end of
any number of hands selected by the player, the
TUTOR provides a total statistical analysis of
your play; presenting percentages of correct and
incorrect calls when hitting, standing, doubling
and splitting. Thus, the player learns which of his
decisions are weakest and can concentrate attention on improving those segments of his play.
The only real objection I find in this part of the
program, is that the player decision is analyzed on
only the first two cards dealt in each hand.
Obviously, if I'm dealt a 4 and a 3, I'll call for
another card, no matter what the dealer is showing.
But, what if the third card dealt to me then is a 9,
giving me a total of 16. Should I hit or stand?
That's a far more important (and realistic) decision,
but the TUTOR doesn't contain the logic to help
with that one.
One other minor objection is the use of the
numeral one to represent aces in both the GAME
and the TUTOR portions of the program. It sometimes caused me to input wrong decisions due
simply to confusion.
The final, and most unique, part of the program
is the SIMULATOR, which is designed to run
through any selected number of hands using the
playing and betting strategy chosen by the player.
It then displays a complete analysis of the
strategy; including the total number of hands won
and lost, the number of busts for both the dealer
and player, and the number of blackjacks, splits,
doubles and pushes. All in all, a rather impressive
performance. Unfortunately, the program can
analyze only about 50 hands a minute, while the
instructions indicate that about 5,000 hands should
be processed for a statistically valid result, so
be prepared for a long wait.

Two other improvements can be suggested for
the strategy simulation program. First, it analyzes
only zero-memory strategies. That is, strategies
that do' not make use of any memorization of
previously played cards. Experienced blackjack
players, who utilize different betting and playing
strategies based on what cards are remaining in
the deck, may find this too limiting. Another
limitation is imposed by its use of only one deck of
cards. Many casinos use a shoe containing three
or four decks at a time, and, in fact, the GAME
portion of the program uses four decks. This can
change the strategies somewhat from single deck
play.
Now for the major criticisms. Two problems
stand out as almost intolerable in this otherwise
acceptable program: the documentation and the
method of inputting the player's selected strategy
for analysis.
First, the documentation. The instruction booklet is an impressive 60 pages in length with a slick
cover and quality art work. Of interest to the
neophyte programmer is a complete flow chart, a
listing of program logic and a list of all variables
used in the program.
The weakness is found in the complexity of
preparing the tables necessary for inputting the
player's selected strategy. After carefully explaining how the game is played in terms suitable for
rank beginners, the instructions continue on into
statements like: "for every entry next to the ace on
the worksheet, put an X in the ace row on the
double down table-hard form under the two card
total slot". Now that's a mouthful, and enough to
confuse and discourage all but the most determined
blackjack players.
The second major difficulty is in the method of
inputting player strategy. After using the confusing tables described above to diagram a strategy,
it must be input into program logic by listing out
the program and then inserting data statements
containing strings of l's and 0's at the proper
points in the program structure. In addition, if a
player desires to save a particular strategy for
future use, it must be separated from the rest of the
program, saved to disk in ASCII format and then
re-entered into the main program through the use
of the merge command. Certainly not a job for the
typical non-programmer blackjack player.
If this explanation of the strategy input method
left you confused, then perhaps blackjack master
isn't for you. But if you're a reasonably capable
programmer and an avid blackjack player, then
this program may be your guidebook on the road
to riches.

Fiction:

ESCAPE FROM
WOLFENSTEIN
by Ed Curtis
There it is...Switzerland! Just fifty more yards to
the frontier and those dogs can howl all they want
after that. Those miserable dogs! I haven't had a
wink of sleep in the past four days because of those
DOGS!! Hold it... Get hold of your self! Don't let
those moon-cast shadows get the better of you. Of
you? Now I'm talking to myself. That last grenade
must have shook me up more than I thought. That
last grenade. It seems like a lifetime ago that I got
out of the Castle. How long ago was it? Lets
see...the Schweinfurt raid was on the seventeenth,
August seventeenth. Only last Tuesday. Just hit
the ball-bearing plant on the swing back from the
fighter factory, and the rest was home free. That is
until you lose your engines and half your
crew to fighters that were supposedly drawn south
with the other formation. And then, slowly drifting
down as you watch your B-17 hit the ground in a
ball of flame. I was sure that they were going to
shoot me until one of the officers recognized that I
was a bombardier. All that I remember after that
was one word which kept reoccurring in their
conversation--Wolfenstein.
Time seems to lose much of its meaning as the
preliminary interrogation took place. "Tell us
about the Norden bombsight and how it works!"
"Don't be a fool, captain, you know that you will
tell us everything before long." "Why make yourself suffer needlessly?" "Your fellow officers have
already given us the information we need; all we
ask of you is enough information to check what
they have given for minor errors which may have
occurred due to their conditions at the time." On
and on, over and over with what appeared to be
random interruptions. It got to the point that I
wasn't sure anymore about my ability to hold out,
when it happened.
That night, a British commando, little more
than a pile of rags after what he had gone through,
slowly pushed a pistol, that he had somehow
gotten, over in my direction. He knew that he was
through, he insisted, and told me of the plans for
an Operation Rheingold. I now had a duel
mission; to keep my information from the Germans, and getting the plans out. More importantly, I now had the means to do at least the first half!
I was being taken to the interrogation rooms

again when the second miracle happened. As we
passed another prisoner, who was being taken to
the holding cells, my guard's attention was off me
long enough for the pistol to do its work. The other
prisoner, hit by a stray bullet, at first seemed dead.
I don't know what made me check his body, but
turning him over brought a small gasp from the
otherwise lifeless corps. Coming slowly to
consciousness, he held on, somehow, long enough to
give me a possible escape route.
From that point my escape became one battle
after another, as I slowly worked my way down
the building. Off the bodies of the common soldiers
I scavenged bullets and grenades that cleared my
way room by room. The chests that I opened
helped even more as they provided me with a
uniform, food, and other very useful items. Protected by a bullet-proof vest and in German uniform, my only bane proved to be the equally
protected and unrelenting SS. I don't know how
many times I ran from one room to the safety of
another only to be pursued by those devils. Fanatical, they would walk right into a stream of
bullets, trusting their vests and Adolf Hitler to
protect them.
Throw a grenade and duck around the corner.
Before I got out of that death-trap, I had developed
that response to anything...throw and duck. That,
I'm sure, is why my head feels like something that
was borrowed from some poor relation. And, that
last one! If miracles come in threes, then that must
surely have been the third. I'm still certain that I
was closer to it, when it went off, than the SS
officer.
I don't remember much of what happened the
next day or two, but it seems that I just kept going
away from the dogs. It is even possible that the
Germans, by heading towards the border, kept me
from wandering aimlessly until they picked me
up. Even with the way that I feel, the thought of
the Germans making my escape possible brings a
grin.
Oh, well! I've rested enough, and the howling
grows nearer. Time to check my pockets and go
those last fifty yards. Lets see, wurst, schnaps,
pistol, grenades, map, and...oh yes...the plan.

ODE TO JOY, PADDLE AND PORT:
Some Components for Game Playing
Luther Shaw
TG Products of Richardson Texas
and The Keyboard Company of
Garden Grove California are probably the best known manufacturers
of game input devices for the Apple
II computer. Both companies sell
game paddles and joysticks. TG Products also sells a switchable game
port.
In the year that I have owned my
Apple II computer I have gone
through two sets of the low quality
black-cased paddles which, at that
time, came with the Apple II computer. The dials for the old paddles
were often short on the readings on
the upper end. But the worst component of the old paddles was the
fire button which was designed for
light weight electronic duty, not the
hot and heavy pounding that comes
from constantly saving the earth
from invading aliens and the like.
Happily TG Products and The
Keyboard Company have made
available game paddles that are far
superior to the old ones. The TG
paddles are encased in rectangular
plastic cases color matched to the
Apple. The fire button is large and of
much better quality than the old
black-cased buttons. The paddle dial
control has a substantial feel. If you
leave your ship/whatever exposed
to enemy fire it will be your own
fault not that of the TG paddle which
retails for $39.95 per pair.
TKC's paddles are shaped to fit
comfortably in your hands. The dial
is designed to allow the player to use
the paddle as a small dial device or a
large dial device. It reminds one of
the small steering wheels of the
street racers versus the large steering wheels the cruisers used to have
(does that date me?). The fire button
is built flush against the case which
makes it comfortable to use. It is
apparent that TKC has put some

thought into the human engineering
of their paddles which retail for

$29.95.
Like the TKC paddles, the TKC
joystick fits comfortably in your
hand. It is weighted which gives a
high quality feel. The stick itself
moves smoothly providing accurate
response. Rather than the two fire
buttons that you find on most joysticks, the TKC joystick has one fire
and one dual action. switch. The
dual action switch has a momentary
ON position which automatically
switches back OFF (for use as a
regular fire button) and a permanent ON position (for continual
firing). TKC added this dual switch
with the view that players (as well
as those using the device for nongaming applications) would like the
variety of the dual switch. It was
also hoped that some games would
be designed to make use of the
feature. However, after using the
dual switch I find that it doesn't add
much and is more difficult to use
than a second fire button. The Keyboard Company has been considering making the change back to a
stick with two fire buttons. They
want to know what the users think.
If you have used TKC's joystick you
might drop them a line letting them
know what you think of their dual
switch.
Like their paddles, The TG Products' joystick is encased in a durable
plastic case color coded to match the
Apple II. The device has an important feature lacking in the TKC
stick — self centering. Certain computer games such as CASTLE
WOLFENSTEIN and FLIGHT SIMULATOR play much better with a
self-centering joystick. But if you
prefer a non-self centering stick TG
Products provides simple instructions-

on disabling the self-centering
feature. The two fire buttons are just
like those on their paddles and will
stand up to a lot of punishment.
A third item marketed by TG Products is a must for any gamer who is
tired of having to get inside his
Apple II to manually switch from
the paddle plug to the stick plug. Not
only is manually switching a hassle,
it can also get expensive if you do
what I have done — break a pin in
making the switch.
SELCT-APORsetouidyrAplIan
provides switch selectable sockets
for various game devices (such as
paddles and joysticks).
SELCT-APORplugsdirectynoham
port and allows you to plug in up to
five devices which would normally
plug into the game port. Socket #1 is
a non-switchable socket which directly parallels the game socket. It is
utilized for sensitive devices for
which diode isolation would interfere. Socket #2 is switch selectable
and modifies the device plugged into
it to operate as paddle 2 and paddle
3. This is useful in applications
requiring dual joysticks or four game
paddles. Sockets #3 through #5 are
switch selectable ports which may
be connected or disconnected to the
Apple II via a switch. At $59.95
SELECT-A-PORT is not inexpensive,
but is a worthwhile purchase for the
serious gaming hobbyist.
After having played games with
both sets of paddles this writer finds
both to be of high quality but prefers
the TKC paddles due to physical
design and the cost. The choice of
which is the better joystick buy is
more a question of taste. While the
TKC stick is of costs less ($49.95 as
opposed to the TG stick at $59.95), it
lacks the self-centering feature. If
self-centering is important to you
then your choice is obvious.

From left to right: TKC joystick, TKC paddles, TG Select-a Port, TG paddles, TG joystick.

THE CURRENT STATE
OF COMPUTER GAME
DOCUMENTATION
Computer game players often give short shrift
to game documentation. And why not? Too often
it's a barrier the gamer has to overcome, every bit
as difficult as the cleverest monster or the most
ingenious trap. Instead of being perceived as an
essential part of the game, the manual is seen as
something between the gameplayer and the game,
a necessary nuisance.
I know many computer garners who glance at
the documentation just enough to discover the
basic keyboard commands, then throw it into the
wastecan. I know gamers who copy their friends'
game diskettes, but don't even bother to borrow or
copy the manual. They know there will be com
mands that aren't in the documentation anyway.
They know there will be situations, objects, special
rules and conditions which the manufacturer
hasn't even bothered to include in the manual, so
usually they're content to just discover for themselves what the rules and limitations are. It has
become a game within a game — What was left out
of the manual and where was it wrong?
I'm not a programmer; I'm a fiction writer,
writing computer manuals on the side. I do therefore have a bias — I want gameplayers to read
manuals. But I don't read most of the manuals
currently on the market as I have a rather low
tolerance for boredom. Putting aside the issues of
incompleteness and technical inaccuracies game
manuals are usually lacking on the most basic
level of writing — they fail to hold our interest.
Consider the example set by adventure game
manuals. These are the worst offenders simply
because they need to be longer and more detailed.
Most of us can wade through the page or two the
average arcade-type game requires. Adventure

By Steve Rasnic Tern
game manuals, on the otherhand, will typically
begin with a lengthy description of its cast of
characters. The thief, the fighter, the priest, the
mage, etc. When have you ever been surprised by
these character descriptions? When has there
been a characteristic which stood out, which was
unusual enough to mark that character as anything other than two-dimensional? Read a character description in one manual and you've read
them all.
Next come the all-important Attributes. Strength,
I.Q., Speed, Luck, and Constitution make up a
typical list. Of course, these are merely words
attached to the numbers in the program which
enable the computer to simulate the variety of
human types in the real world. The computer
plays with these numbers to figure the outcome of
battles, theft attempts, etc. But the gameplayer
must think of these attributes as real human
characteristics, strengths and shortcomings which
make his characters individuals, before he can
really enjoy playing the game. Far too often the
documentation treats these attributes as if they
were just numbers, providing only the most
cursory examination of what these attributes
mean. Often the definitions are fuzzy, overlap
with each other, or at worst are just plain nonsensical. There would seem to be no compelling
reason why a character might be stronger in one
attribute than in another. Each should mean
something different within the context of each
character's life: added strength, for instance, will
mean something different to the fighter than it
does to the thief. And the case studies of the
characters in the manual should ideally provide a

context which will make such differences apparent.
A fighter might use added strength in swinging a
mace; a thief might use it to scale a wall to reach a
crown. But perhaps the fighter would not have the
motivation to use his added strength in this
manner, and would be unable to scale the wall. Of
course, in some cases these differences will not be
accounted for in the game system itself, but they
can make a big difference in a player's feeling for
the characters and the situation they are in. The
game simulation will seem a bit more real.
But a manual which attempts to work out the
questions of character and attributes more thoroughly and evocatively may provide an added
bonus. Using the above example, the manual's
fuller exploration of character might demonstrate
to the designer that he should change the Strength
formula in the program so that the fighter cannot
use added strength to scale a wall. More complete
documentation may suggest improvements to the
way abstract numbers are handled, adding complexity and realism to the game.
Of course, most of these criticisms apply to the
"simulation" part of the game. Gameplayers who
couldn't care less about characters and the fantasized scenario, who are quite comfortable playing
at a more abstract level in which these attributes
and characters truly are numbers, will have no
problem with second-rate game manuals. The
manuals will be totally irrelevant to them beyond
a few basic keyboard instructions.
As a science fiction and fantasy writer, the
thing I'm most struck by when I read computer
game manuals is the number of lost opportunities.
Few manufacturers seem to have realized that
manuals can be more than basic, skeletal instructions. They can be part of the fantasy world itself:
a magic book, a historical treatise, perhaps a
handbook for the sorceror's apprentice. A gateway
to another world.
In my desk 1 have a handful of computer game
manuals. Several of their makers seem to have
discovered some of the potential for the game
manual as an actual fantasy object.
A relatively straightforward treatment is the
Starship Mission Simulator Operator's Handbook (Harry M. Sweeney, 1979), a manual for a
number of the Trek-type games. It's a long manual,
with much discussion of quasi-technical matters,
game system material which might normally
detract from the role-playing aspects of the game.
But Sweeney treats this material as if this were an
actual Federation manual for the Starship Mission
Simulator. The reader becomes a cadet or highly
trained and skilled Federation officer seeking to
improve his or her skills. The cadet or officer will
be rated; the simulator gives each mission a

performance rating. The role-playing fantasy
begins as soon as the gamer opens the manual.
The documentation becomes a true fantasy object.
Similarly, Level-10's Rings Of Saturn manual
takes the guise of briefing papers for a pilot
employed by a corporation exploiting the mineral
wealth of the Saturn system. The pilot has been
ferrying tourists to view the splendor of Saturn's
rings when a distress call comes in — a research
ship has been disabled and is slowly drifting into
the 'A' series of rings. After a short narrative
placing the gameplayer into this physical and
social setting, the rest of the manual briefs him on
the capabilities of his craft and what dangers he
might expect. The keyboard is treated in the
manual as if it were an actual command center.
These two manuals represent a type of manual
we're beginning to see more of from computer
game manufacturers. The imaginative transformation of the manual is of the most elementary
kind, but it can be quite effective in placing the
gameplayer directly into the fantasy setting.
Strategic Simulations' manual for Computer
Ambush does something effective with the problem of character sketches. Near the end of the
manual the gameplayer will find two "soldier
dossiers," one for the U.S. Army and one for the
Wehrmacht. These dossiers contain profiles of
soldiers in the squad, including facial sketches.
The profiles are well-written, and most importantly give the gameplayer enough of the soldier's
background (history, lifestyle, hobbies, etc.) that
their otherwise abstract attributes (Intelligence,
Strength, Dexterity, etc.) take on specific meaning.
These dossiers make the characters in Computer
Ambush among the most real figures in computer
gaming.
The rest of the Computer Ambush documentation, although very thorough, underscores the
problems involved in writing a manual for a very
complex game. As in many boardgame manuals,
the long lists of rules, combat formulas, and
special conditions make for very dull reading. And
this is perhaps one reason wargame rules and
procedures often require many playing hours to
understand even at an elementary level. The
solution is not easy to come by, but I would suggest
that a collection of fake documents containing the
rules in disguised form — such as "The Conduct Of
War" by Baron Reich, "A Hand-to-Hand Combat
Training Manual," or "A Handbook Of Codes Fro
The French Campaign" — might prove to be part
of the solution. Using the fake document format
not only thrusts the gameplayer immediately into
role-playing, but also produces a manual which is
much more entertaining, and easier, to read.

Producing such a manual is not easy — when
poorly executed such fake documents would tend
to confuse more than clarify — but when well
thought-out the results should be quite impressive.
One of the more impressive series of computer
adventure manuals is Dunjonquest by Automated
Simulations. These manuals include a basic
introduction to role-playing for those unfamiliar
with the phenomenon, a brief fictional narrative,
descriptions of the monsters, and descriptions of
the rooms and levels within the dungeons.
Although simplistic in comparison to the highly
descriptive Dungeons & Dragons manuals, these
manuals encourage the gameplayer to visualize
the fantasy setting to an extent not found previously in computer gaming. Where graphic
limitations prevent the programmer from illustrating the scene, these short descriptions prod the
gameplayer's imagination into making up the
difference. The Dunjonquest manuals provide a
happy medium between the highly descriptive
and involved D & D manuals — which would be
far too cumbersome for the average computer
game — and simple, skeletal manuals which do
not engage the player's imagination at all.
When I was asked to write some of the manuals
for the Level-10 series of adventure games these
questions were very much on my mind. The first
two of these games, Dragon Fire (by Rodney
Nelsen) and Kaves Of Karkhan, involve the
same cast of characters. My goal for these two
manuals was to produce "fantasy packages,"
which would encourage the gameplayer's roleplaying abilities and use of imagination to a high
degree.
The introduction of the Dragon Fire manual
delves into the psychology of role-playing, encouraging the beginning player to enter the persona
of one of the DF characters. This is followed by a
full-length short story which brings the characters
together and explores major aspects of this fantasy
world. I felt that the brief narratives in other
manuals, as rarely as they appear, have a number
of limitations. There really isn't enough room to
provide the specific detail, the gradation in mood,
the "color" required to make a fantasy world come
to life. The short story form can also show a lot
more about character than the usually brief
character descriptions. Motivations can be explored (an aspect lacking in many computer
games). And of course in a short story you can
build suspense, and involve the reader in the
setting in ways not possible in a narrative fragment. What better way to enter a role-playing
fantasy universe?
Both Dragon Fire and Kaves include character profiles and detailed character drawings.

These profiles are meant to make the figures come
alive, relating anecdotes concerning their lives
before this particular adventure.
Female warriors are not unheard of in
these regions, but their homelands, their
purposes, sometimes even their names,
have remained secret. Three-finger John,
the tavern owner, is convinced they hail
from wandering "daughter bands" of
amazons who kill their husbands. "They
eat raw meat and drink the blood from
dying animals," he tells his barmaid
with a wink.
Wizards are said to love disguises...Many
has been the time he's dressed the part of
the elm, the weeping maiden, the grasscovered hillock, or the deer in flight.
You can't find an elf, no matter how hard
you try. They will always find you. Elves
are highly secretive creatures, vanishing
here and reappearing there; they enjoy
travel more than most anything.
I also tried to bring some life to the usual
stopping places of the adventurer on an important
mission: the ubiquitous weapons shop, armorers
and tavern. I was tired of shops with no names, no
proprietors, and worst of all no visual picture which
readily came to mind while the player was visiting
there. At Winsome Willy's Weapons Shop: "Willy
will go to any lengths to replenish his diverse
stock, including raiding the bloody battlefields,
ambushing unwary warriors, and has even stooped
to grave robbing upon occasion. Please watch
your head; hand axes, maces and battle axes are
hung just above eye level." At Fliver's & Sons,
Armorers: "There are no 'sons': Fliver just likes
the way it looks on the sign... Try not to stumble
over the customers piled up outside the entrance."
Level-10's Alkemstone provided a different
kind of challenge. This was essentially a puzzle
game, the clues leading you to a real stone (a glass
sphere) buried somewhere in the world, with a
prize of $7,500 to the finder (unclaimed as of this
writing). The task was to create a mythic history
for the stone. So I tackled this project as I would
any fiction assignment for The Twilight Zone
Magazine or Weird Tales, attempting to create a
mythic tale spanning centuries, involving "real"
characters in conflict with such primeval forces as
"The Spectral Serpent."
A vast creature of stardust and
moonshine...its disturbing and bizarre
dreams are ultimately responsible for
most of the races of people who live
today. The sun lived within a small

Continued on page 39

Congratulations to Richard Fowell and his
robot Norden+ — Winners of CGW's Robotwar Tournament!

NORDEN+, ROBOTKILLER
by Richard Fowell.
ROBOTWAR is MUSE's game for the Apple
computer, in which players write control programs
for robot gladiators. At the UCLA Computer Club,
fifteen members have been playing ROBOTWAR
since the summer of 1981. As of January 1982,
NORDEN+ is one of our top two robots . He is my
eighth robot, and the fifth in my current series.
NORDEN+ was designed for multi-robot battles,
where avoiding damage is more important than
inflicting it. His intent is to let the others kill each
other, then kill the weakened survivor. To avoid
damage, he moves at top speed in both X and Y
directions. This is fast enough that, even if a robot
has him dead in his sights, NORDEN+ is usually
gone by the time the shell gets there. Even robots
with tracking algorithms, such as its arch-rival
SCALE, have difficulty connecting. To date, firing
blindly seems to hit him as often as anything.
NORDEN+ fights as well as he runs. His ability
to hit targets while moving at full speed earned
him the name of the famous World War II "Norden"
bombsight. He scans to his right, and when he
sees a target, he computes the angle to which he
must swivel the gun so that the shell will hit, based
on how far he will have moved between sighting
and firing , and on the range to the target. He uses
his knowledge of instruction execution time and a
simple arctangent approximation. His offense if
his weak point, but even in one-on-one combat,
NORDEN+ will beat any of the robots about nine
times out of ten.
Another problem with movement is collisions.
To avoid robots, NORDEN+ doesn't start moving
until damaged, giving corner and edge robots time
to leave the middle. Once moving, he stays away
from edges to avoid such robots. After turning, he
looks along his new path for robots, and turns if
blocked. While waiting initially, he first checks
the direction he intends to move, then does a
simple rotary scan. If he spots a robot, he goes into
a firing routine that includes a simple tracking

algorithm. To avoid walls, NORDEN+ uses the
information from his scan along his movement
path and dead reckoning.
NORDEN+ has lots of room for improvement.
Rather than detailing his specific implementation, I think it is more fruitful to mention some of
the tools employed. Two primary design considerations are general strategy and the specifics of the
robot simulator.
In strategy, it is important to concentrate on
things that count. A robot that ignores damage
while locked on to a robot in multiple combat is
silly — the others will chew him up while he's
distracted. In one-on-one, the reverse is probably
the case. Spending a lot of trouble on improving
NORDEN+ performance in his stationary state,
where he spends little time, is not as rewarding as
improving his performance while moving, etc. All
too often, designers spend a lot of space on
features that are rarely exercised.
To implement things, it is frequently important
to know precisely how a program will act. We have
done considerable experimentation with test robots
on the testbench and in the arena to learn these
details. Here are some. The program seems to go to
each robot in order, execute one "tic" of code, move
the robot, resolve collisions, if any, then go to the
next. A "tic" of code is one expensive instruction (a
GOTO, GOSUB, or a reference, direct or indirect,
to the "real" world, i.e. referencing AIM, SHOT, X,
Y, etc.) or ten successive cheap (other) instructions
referred to are the compiled or assembled instructions, which, by the way, make a perfectly valid
source code. NORDEN+ takes full advantage of
this by putting as many as nine cheap instructions before each expensive one, since such a
group of instructions takes only one tic. Incidentally, the X distance moved by a robot in a tic is
SPEEDX/50, and similarly for Y. For such
things as dead reckoning and tracking algorithms
this information is crucial. It also helps to know
that the gun barrel cools in 9 tics.

There are also some typical useful code sequences.
If the gun barrel angle is stored in variable A, and
the scan increment in B, the sequence
A + B TO AIM TO A TO RADAR

0 - RADAR 0 TO SHOT

is useful. Note the use of A to store the value of
AIM, which is expensive to refer to, and that the
test of RADAR leaves precisely the right value to
be fed to SHOT in the accumulator.
If anyone has a robot that beats NORDEN+, the
sample robots, and all other robots they have seen
in one-on-one combat consistently (we typically
use twenty-game matches as a standard) I would
be interested in hearing from them. I may be
contacted care of this magazine. If not, I hope that
this article helps someone produce such a robot.

X > 128 -256 TO U
/ V TO H< 0 90 + 0 TO 0
85 TO N
95 TO 0
11 TO INDEX
29 / 2 TO J
1014 * 4 TO E
SCAN
O + T + B TO A TO AIM
58 TO B T + 13 TO T
IF DAMAGE # D GOTO START
•A TO RADAR
3 - RADAR TO R < 0 GOTO SCAN
TO SHOT
SIMPLE
2 TO F
850 / R TO C
INAMIN
A - C - C TO A

MORE
DAMAGE # D GOTO START
A + C TO A TO AIM TO RADAR
1 + F TO F > 10 GOTO SCAN
3 - RADAR TO P < 0 GOTO MORE
F < 0 GOTO INAMIN
R TO SHOT
GOTO SIMPLE
START
-500 TO F
U TO SPEEDX
✓ TO SPEEDY
O TO RADAR
RADAR > 0 GOTO MAINE
TURN
IF H > 0 - U TO SPEEDX
IF H < 0 - V TO V
✓ TO SPEEDY
INDEX + 1 TO INDEX
O - H TO H

;ROBOT "NORDEN+"
;BY RICHARD A. FOWELL
;WINNER OF COMPUTER
;GAMING WORLD'S
;ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT

ADROIT MOD
1 TO SPEEDY
256 TO U TO V
715 TO 0
100 TO D
81 TO
Y
128 -256 TO V
-1 135 TO 0
90 TO L
99 TO M

90 + 0 TO 0 TO RADAR
IF H < 0
U TO U
IF INDEX > 15 11 TO INDEX
3 - RADAR TO F > 12 621 + 621
/ F + 0 TO AIM
> 12 F TO SHOT
> -137 GOTO TURN
MAINP
-600 TO B
TRACK TO C
U TO SPEEDX
F > -145 TURN TO C
-500 TO F TO T TO D
O + DATA TO I
MAINO
T + 29 TO T > -77 GOTO TURN
D > DAMAGE GOTO TURN
T - 29 > B I TO A
A TO RADAR
T > - 99 GOTO TURN < -450 766 TO Z
3 - RADAR TO F
< 3 + T > -296 GOTO TURN
< 3 GOTO C
T < B GOTO C
Z / F + A TO AIM
IF A = I E / F + A TO A
F TO SHOT
J + T TO T > - 84 GOTO TURN + 50 TO B
IF C < TRACK GOTO C
TRACK
O TO RADAR
O - RADAR > 0 GOTO TURN
TO T
MAINE) TO C
621 + 621 TO Z
DAMAGE TO D
GOTO MAINO

A New Column .. .

most of the comuter games out on the market). The
first problem is taking care of itself, but what
about the second one?
This column, hopefully, will help to take care of
the second problem. Its purpose is to provide a
forum for demonstrating useful AI techniques for
computer games, with the emphasis on "useful".
To do this, Computer Gaming World is going to
need the help of those of you who are actually
using such techniques in your games right now. If
you are interested, you are invited to write me, c/o
CGW, to get information on the format we want to
follow in this column. If you don't feel that you can
write the column yourself due to time or other
constraints, you can submit your ideas and we'll
write the column to present them. The goal is for
the techniques to be understandable and applicable.
When necessary and feasible, program outlines
and short sections of code will be used.

THE SILICON
CEREBRUM
by Bruce Webster
AN INTRODUCTION
Artificial intelligence, games, and computers
have been linked together for, well, as long as
computers have been around...longer, in fact, if
you count the "chess automatons" (usually worked
by a hidden person) of a few centuries ago. In 1950,
only a few years after the advent of the digital
computer, Claude Shannon published a paper in
Scientific American describing an "automatic
chess player". Since then, computer game playing
has been a significant area of research in Artificial
Intelligence (AI). Recently, much of that research
has found commercial application in specialized
units that play chess, backgammon, and reversi.
It has been slower, however, in being applied to
games for personal computers. There are at least
two reasons, among others, for this. First, up until
a year or so ago, most personal computers systems
did not lend themselves to sophisticated software
development. Second, there have not been that
many articles on applying AI techniques to computer games (outside of alpha-beta/minimax
techniques, which are not easily applicable to

Some of you may be wondering just what areas
of artificial intelligence are applicable to gaming.
The answer is; almost all of them. to give you an
idea of some of the areas we're interested in and
how they might apply to your programs, here's a
partial list of topics with some ideas as to how they
are used in games:
Making decisions. This is probably the "heart"
of computer game playing: choosing the best move
or action. It usually involves two separate problems:
generating a set of legal moves, and deciding
which one is best. The classic technique here is
generating a game tree of alternating moves (so as
to look several moves ahead) and using some sort
of evaluation function and alpha-beta/minimax
techniques to minimize how long you have to
search to find the best path. Unfortunately, alphabeta/minimax techniques don't work well in "real
time" games or in games where a given side can
move several or even dozens of pieces each game
turn (e.g., your typical wargame). When you have
lots of units to move, how do you decide where to
move them all?
Defining and seeking goals. Typically, each
player in a game has some goal or set of goals to
accomplish. When there is a single goal (e.g.,
putting your opponent's king in checkmate), this
isn't a problem. But what about when you have
several goals to accomplish? How does the program
decide which goal to pursue right now? In some
games, only a few goals out of a given set need to
be reached. How do you decide which goals are
most feasible in a given situation? The program
may also need to be able to break down a goal into
a set of sub-goals, each of which is easily defined
and accomplished. Finally, there are situations
when a given goal is no longer worth the cost of

achieving it. How does the program recognize
that, and how does it pick a new goal?
Representing the "world". A computer game
is played within its own little "universe", which
must somehow be represented inside the computer.
Modelling a chess board and pieces is not a
difficult task. Modelling a typical wargame map
and all the attendant counters is another matter
entirely. Adventure and all its many progeny
have generated a lot of commercial work in knowledge representation; what are some of the cleaner
and more powerful techniques in use now?
Talking with the player. This problem is
twofold. First, the computer has to somehow convey
the necessary information concerning the internal
universe to the player. Second, it must understand
his commands. Much of this area doesn't directly
impinge on AI, but the Adventure-like games,
with their command parsing, do. How do you let
the player express commands in a powerful,
straightforward manner?
Learning. For most of us, the more we play a
game, the better we get at it. This is not true of
virtually all of the computer games on the market
today (which may explain why so many of them
become boring after a while). For any of you
currently developing computer vs. player games,
this would be a marvelous selling point: a game
which gets better as you do. An added enhancement would be for the program to develop specific
techniques for specific individuals (which would
require the individual to enter his/her name before
each game).
Recognizing patterns. The program needs to
be able to interpret the game "universe" and
recognize certain situations or patterns. This can
range from something as "physical" as a certain
configuration of pieces on the game board to
something as abstract as certain game strategies.
To do this, the program needs to extract certain
features or characteristics from the appropriate
data source and somehow decide what they mean.
A computer playing OGRE might not have much
trouble recognizing (and adjusting to) the fourhowitzer defense, but can it pick out a pattern of
hit-and-run attacks by GEV's (Ground Effects
Vehicle) and react accordingly?
As stated at the beginning, AI, games, and
computers have somehow been always tied together, though usually just in research centers.
With the rapidly expanding personal computer
market, however, commercial applications abound.
Hopefully, this column will help you, the game
designers and developers to share your expertise
and generate better, more intelligent, computer
games.

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:

Tigers In The Snow

TYPE:

Wargame

SYSTEM:

Apple II & TRS-80

FORMAT:

Diskette "Apple";
Tape "TRS"

# PLAYERS: 1 or 2
AUTHOR:

Landrey, Kroegel, Walker

PRICE:

Apple ($39.95),
TRS-80 ($24.95)

PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations
465 Fairchild Dr. Suite 106
Mountain View CA 94043
(415) 964-1353

Few subjects in the history of board gaming
compete with such ferocity for attention from
traditional wargaming partisans as the German
counteroffensive in the Ardennes of December
1944-January 1945. Tigers In The Snow, a
recent release by Strategic Simulations, Inc., is
another of the many attempts to confront the
design problems inherent in attempting to simulate
that campaign. Tigers In The Snow is a grand
tactical first-time attempt by a software company
to cover the Battle of the Bulge in a computer game
format. With graphics and memory limitations
inherent in a 48K Applesoft ROM or Apple+
version, its one-map solution presents some unique
design innovations as well as pioneering pit falls.
The physical components are slick and professional. A thick 1" box (with splashy exterior
graphics) comes with 4-page "case-organized"
rules, color map display, and quick-start/order of
appearance card.

THE GAME SYSTEM
A traditionally accepted sequence of play is
presented: German movement; German attacks;
Allied movement; Allied attacks; reinforcement
appearance; victory status; and save game option.
Units are called off for movement and combat in a
once-through order, as it's not possible to move
one unit out of the line and another unit back in its
place (for the most part) on the same turn. During
the combat segment, enemy units are listed that
are adjacent to friendly units, and an option exists
to attack or not attack. If an attack decision is
made, four different levels of attack are offered:
major; medium; light; and recon. Units debilitated
by losses or combat state may shift down in
method of attack (simulating possible decisions
by local commanders). Combat resolution is done
by the program, with results ranging from attrition and no advance or retreat to outright defender
(or attacker) elimination, advance after combat
(attacker only), and an option for a second combat.
Between each phase a summary of general supply,
fuel, and artillery reserves is posted, along with a
victory point total for each side. The save game
option requires an initialized SSI disk.
One and two-player versions are offered at the
outset, with the computer capable of taking either
the Allied or German side in the one-player option.
Computer strategy, as the Allied player, is typically
one of straightening out the line, holding key
points ( victory conditions), and falling back.
Computer strategy as, the German player, is one
of pell-mell dashing for victory point locations;
ignoring problems of flanks and fuel. It's quite
possible, in the middle of the game, for individual
German units to become isolated far ahead of the
main advance, subject to ever-tightening fuel

resource shortages and the inevitable Allied 3 to 1
attacks by reinforcements. Unit losses are worth
victory points on a 1 to 1 basis, with no bonuses for
unit losses while isolated. Marche, Bastogne,
Rochefort, and northern, southern, western, and
eastern map edges are worth additional victory
points.
Units cannot stack, move through each other,
break down, or build up. Zones of control impede
movement (ridged Z.O.C.), preventing retreats,
and supply unless friendly units are in the enemy
zones of control otherwise blocking supply. Units
unable to retreat, when the combat results call for
such, suffer additional losses. Each unit has a
combat state, ranging from 0 to 7, which greatly
affects combat resolution. Combat state changes
if units move or just "stay put"; possibly showing
the effects of movement on communications and
unit cohesion. Combat results which allow an
advance of three hexes permits the attacker the
option of a second combat.
An average "computer as player" turn last 3-6
minutes, with player interaction necessary for
defensive strategy and artillery allocation. While
this 3-6 minute turn may seem long to some, it
actually goes by fairly quickly since the human
player is involved with each battle in terms of
setting his defense and deciding whether or not to
call for defensive artillery support.

THE GAME AS GAME
Options exist initially for players to choose
strength levels for each side, numbered from 1 to 9.
A historical mix should be 4 for the Allies and 5 for
the Germans. With a "computer as German
player" set-up, 7 or 8 for the Germans will allow for
greater thrills, as the helpless Allied player
watches the computer Germans blast through the
thin American lines and surge towards the edge of
the map to be hopefully repulsed by penny-packed
reinforcements near the Meuse. With a "computer
as Allied player" set-up, the Germans are still
going to have a rough time of it, so a compensatory
"play balance" rating of "6" for the Germans is
appropriate.
The inability of units to attack, break down, or
re-form into their parent units is as frustrating as
the inability to move through each other. A more
suitable approach would have been to allow units
to move through each other (regiments and
brigades only), with deleterious effects on movement capabilities and combat state as columns
become snarled on the few roads available. Combined regiments should be allowed to re-form into
divisions, again with the above effects. Other
debilities in this system include the inability of
theoretically mobile units (such as the hapless

14th Cavalry Regiment) to get out of the way if a
clear path of retreat is present before combat, and
the almost hypnotic predilection of German units
to advance far ahead of supporting elements in a
near-manic drive for the victory point hexes. An
evil tactic for the Allied player is to allow one lone
chewed-up German unit to "break out" and advance across the Meuse, to be later consumed by
counterattacks from the thus-triggered British.

THE GAME AS HISTORY
One obvious element that is missing from
Tigers In The Snow is the presentation of
road nets. Certainly on the scale presented (10/15
km./hex) adequate road presentation is difficult
at best, as several roads would course through
many of the hexes. But leaving out the road nets
causes the game to gloss over the problems that
were so important in the Bulge campaign.
Namely, that the extreme congestion of German
columns, traffic and unit control created a situation in which small elements of American infantry (remnants of combat units mixed with support
troops) were able to force powerful panzer and
panzergrenadier elements to stop and deploy. This
necessity of deployment clogged rear areas with
tangled elements of mixed-up men and material.
The result was that the German advance was
often restricted to small scale actions between
company and battalion sized formations.
The use of "combat states" is the answer given
by the designers to the problem of road movement,
deployment and attack. The higher a units combat
state, the better prepared it is to attack or defend.
Units go down in combat state as they move and
go up as they remain stationary. While not a bad
way to handle the problems of movement/deployment, this method still leaves untouched some
important facts concerning the Bulge campaign.
With roads not represented the importance of
critical road junctions is only hinted at. Victory
points are given for holding Marche and Bastogne
but the important road junction of St. Vith is
ignored.
CONCLUSIONS:
Despite the minor dissatisfaction over the road
nets, Tigers In The Snow is enjoyable as a
"situation in doubt" game, with the possibility of
German break-outs threatening to roll up the
American line. The tension of hoping your perfectly laid plans don't disintegrate in your face
can keep you riveted in your seat for hours.
Although the game is not as innovative as other
SSI games it is a design which deserves attention
as part of the improving integration of wargames
and computer software.

YOU TOO CAN BE

AN ACE!
Bob Proctor
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:

A2-FS1 Flight Simulator with
British Air Ace
Arcade flight simulator

TYPE:
Apple II or TRS-80 16K
SYSTEM:
Diskette or Tape
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS: 1
Bruce A. Artwick
AUTHOR:
Tape $25; Apple Disk $33.50
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Sublogic Company
201 West Springfield
Champaign, IL 61820
(217) 359-8482

Ground School For the Flight Simulator
The A2-FS1 Flight Simulator from Sublogic
has been available for about a year now. Although
there are other flight simulators, the Sublogic
program remains unique for the built-in dogfight
game. While raving about the simulation, reviewers have called the game "difficult", "challenging",
and "next to impossible."
Difficult, you say? Maybe, but certainly not
impossible. For those of you who have given up, or
are about to, I would like to pass on the approach I
used to score my first victories. I assume that
you're already a reasonably competent Simulator
pilot. By this, I mean that you can land safely but
not necessarily on a runway!
The first step is to take off and fly due west (270
deg.) about 100 feet above the ground. To save
time, I just ignore the runway; the plane is heading
270 to start with and you can take off and land
ANYWHERE in the Simulator's world — I think
it's a gigantic parking lot. The low elevation does
two things: 1) it keeps enemy aircraft above the
horizon where you can see them constantly and, 2)
it prevents those same aircraft from diving under
you and coming up on your tail.
The basic plan is to come in low and straight,
shooting all of the enemy planes down while they
are in front of you and before they can begin to
play tricks. The differences in the 5 enemy pilots
and planes will cause them to spread out as they
come after you. You just point your plane directly
at the nearest enemy and keep firing by pushing
the space bar until the little dot disappears. You
can get confirmation of your "kills" from the score

on the lower right corner of the instrument panel
— 1 point for each plane shot down.
Let's return to the cockpit of our Camel, still
heading 270 at about 500' (ground level is 411'). No
matter when you declare war (the "w" key), the
enemy will not take off until you cross into his
territory. The further you are from his airbase at
that time, the longer it will take the fastest fighter
to reach you and the more scattered the enemy will
be. This is what we want, nobody that I know of
can tangle with all 5 at once and survive. Our only
hope is to take them on one or two at a time.
As you cross into enemy territory, then, you
should be close to the north edge (the mountains).
Flying due west from the British airdrome will put
you far enough north for this strategy to work, but
you can go further north if you find yourself
needing more time. In fact, you can fly right
THROUGH the mountains and go several miles
further north!
At this point, I usually switch from the 3-D view
to the downward view. The latter acts the same as
radar but has greater range to the sides. You can
"see" the enemy coming from the south (left) and
turn to meet them sooner. As soon as the first one
shows up on the "radar", switch back to the 3-D
view as this is the only way you can see whether
your target is higher or lower than you.
After nailing the first two (they always stick
close together), you may have to bank left quickly
to get number 3 in front of you. CAUTION! Don't
bank too steeply! If you stand the plane on its
wingtip, it will start to sink like a rock. Remember
that you're only 90' or 100' up! I think I flew into
the ground more than I got shot down while I was
developing this approach. A notch or two more
throttle will help pull you around quickly. Keep
banging that space bar!
By the time you've downed the fourth fighter,
you will be very close to the enemy airbase.
Surprise! Fighter number 5 is back on the ground,
where you can't harm him even with your bomb!
He won't take off until you enter the square where
the enemy ammo dump is — your mission was to
bomb it, remember? This guy is faster than stink
and, if you head toward the target now, he will be
on you from behind faster than you can turn
around! Instead, circle back toward the northeast
and don't go for the dump until you get back up
near the mountains. As soon as number five comes
after you, turn and deal with him as you did with
the others. Once the skies are clear, you can bomb
the dump at your leisure. This gives you an
additional 3 points and you can now take your 8
point total back home to refuel, rearm, and try the
whole thing over again. Good hunting!

A REVIEW
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:

Bug Attack

TYPE:

Arcade

SYSTEM:

Apple II and Atari 400/800

FORMAT:

Diskette

# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:

James L. Nitchals

PRICE:

$29.95

PUBLISHER: Cavalier Computer
P.O. Box 2032
Del Mar, CA 92014
(714) 755-8143

Centipedes, the popular arcade game with the
multi-colored dancing spiders, the kamikaze fleas,
and the endless procession of centipedes, is my
current arcade obsession. So it was with a great
deal of anticipation that I booted up Bug Attack,
by Cavalier Computer.
The player begins Bug Attack with three beetles,
which can be moved laterally across the bottom of
the screen. Movement is accomplished by either
the A/S and or arrow keys, or a game paddle. The
beetles come equipped with stingers, which are
fired by either pressing the space bar or the paddle
button. At the lower left corner of the screen is
stacked the number of beetles remaining to the
player. At the top of the screen are the counters for
the amount of fuel remaining and the player's
score.
The graphics of all aspects of Bug Attack are an
impressive combination of imagery and color.
Like Centipedes the playing field is dotted with
randomly placed vegetation. The vegetation in
Bug Attack, however, varies throughout the
game; thus far, I've encountered cactus, clovers,
and bouquets. The insects also vary, with successive
waves of ants, millipedes, and medflies¬

by Dave Jones

bombarding the player. One of the most appealing
aspects of the game is the imaginative use of color.
Each level of play is represented by a different
color, with the vegetation and the insects changing
hue as the player advances.
The insects in Bug Attack are organized into
waves of ants, millipedes, and medflies. To the
tune of "When Johnny Comes Marching Home",
the attack begins with a random placement of
ants marching back and forth across the screen.
In wave two, a millipede snakes its way down the
screen, moving left to right and back again,
dropping a level at each end of the screen. The
millipede bears the closest resemblance to the
arcade's centipede, but unlike Centipedes, striking
a section of the millipede does not alter the path of
the rest of the millipede. Wave three consists of
medflies. The medflies begin in a column like the
millipede, but follow a semi-circular path around
the screen. As the column works across the screen,
individual medflies drop out of the column to
pursue their own erratic pattern. Only the ants are
affected by the vegetation on the screen, reversing
direction and dropping a level when encountering
the obstruction. The other insects simply move
through the vegetation.
Striking an insect with the beetle's stinger
transforms the bug into vegetation; firing three
stingers into the vegetation removes the vegetation
from the screen. Interception of an insect and
beetle results in the beetle's demise in an explosion
of color and sound. In addition, the bugs all come
loaded to the teeth (mandibles?) with an endless
supply of wicked looking daggers which they hurl
downward as they trek across the screen. Needless
to say, the daggers are also inimical to the wellbeing of the beetle. One frustrating aspect of the
game is that insects can drop daggers with impunity from atop or behind vegetation, but that
same vegetation blocks any stingers fired at the
insect. One quickly learns to clear firing lanes
through the vegetation to allow clear shots at the
bugs.

Continued on page 38

PINBALL
MANIA
by Stanley Greenlaw
played. To store the high scores on disk you must
snip out the write protect tab, unfortunately this
negates your warranty. Thus, Broderbund has left
us with an undesirable decision to make. I, for one,
like the all time scores and have altered the
diskette accordingly.

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:

David's Midnight Magic

TYPE:

Pinball Arcade Game

SYSTEM:

Apple II or Apple II Plus

FORMAT:

Diskette (DOS

3.2

48K

or 3.3)

# PLAYERS: 1 to 4
AUTHOR:

David Snider

PRICE:

$34.95

PUBLISHER: Broderbund Software
Vista Wood Way
San Rafael, CA 94901

2

(415) 456-6424

Until this week I thought that I had outgrown
the all-night game playing binge. So why did I
look at my watch and see that it was 2:30 AM and I
was still playing the game I had started earlier in
the evening? When I have friends over to play
computer games I, from time to time, remind the
more zealous players that they need not pound the
keyboard to bits in order to destroy whatever foe
they are facing. So why is it that I find myself
pounding the keyboard so hard that I've caused
the game to bomb several times? I used to think I
was a completely sane person. So why did I almost
throw my Apple out the window when I had 59
bonus points, a 3x multiplier and then tilted the
game? I can blame David Snider and Broderbund
Software for my irrational behavior. It's all due to
their new game DAVID'S MIDNIGHT MAGIC.
Players of RASTER BLASTER will instantly
recognize MAGIC. MAGIC has the same feel as
the earlier RASTER BLASTER however MAGIC
is a better game.
MAGIC is a traditional pinball game that can
be played on your Apple II computer. The graphics,
colors, and sounds all combine to produce a very
realistic pinball game. Up to 4 people can play at a
time (alternating turns) with top ten scores listed
after the game. One thing I like very much about
MAGIC is that, if you wish, the scores are dis-

The pinball field is divided into an upper and a
lower playing area. Each area has a pair of left
and right flippers. The flippers are controlled by
the game paddle buttons. Each button controls
two flippers (i.e. the left button controls the left
flipper on both levels). As with an arcade pinball
game bonus points are scored for hitting certain
rollovers, gates, etc.
Although I do not claim to be a pinball wizard I
have found certain strategies that lead to good
scoring possibilities. I found that if I divide the
game into an upper level game and a lower level
game I can create a high scoring situation.
Upper level play — 1) Try to keep the ball on
this level as long as possible by keeping the ball to
the left of the left flipper. 2) Develop a technique
for getting the ball to roll down the left side incline.
' As the ball reaches the left flipper try to hit the ball
into the "S" trap. This will score 10 bonus points
and will set up multiple ball play later. While
trying to get the ball into the "S" trap you will
most likely hit the five drop targets on the left,
thus scoring 5,000 and 5 more bonus points.
Lower level play — Once the ball gets down to
the lower level concentrate on two things: 1) kick
the ball through the loop at the upper end of this
level; 2) get the ball back up to the upper level. The
former will increase the multiplier (thus shooting
your score way up there if you have a lot of bonus
points), while the latter will again increase your
chances of getting bonus points.
Something new with MAGIC is the ability to
"jostle" the game to get extra bounce on your
shots. This feature, along with the related TILT
possibility adds a lot to the game. You "jostle" the
game by hitting the space bar during your shot.
Some practice here can really help your score.
However, too much "jostling" can cause a tilt
which will cause not only the loss of the ball in

Continued on page 38

MICRO - REVIEWS
CREATURE VENTURE
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:

Creature Venture

TYPE:

Text Adventure Game

SYSTEM:

Apple II (Applesoft, 48K)

FORMAT:

Diskette

# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
PRICE:

$24.95

PUBLISHER: Highlands Computer Services

Stashbuck mansion is the setting for CREAan adventure game that
utilizes Hi-Res graphics and some clever animation. Your goal is to rid Stashbuck mansion of the
creatures that are haunting it and to find the
treasure that your Uncle Stashbuck buried just
before his death.

TURE VENTURE,

Along the way you will come across objects to
help you in your quest, including a key, a jar of
water, a swarm of fireflies, and a bat in a cage.
Some of the monsters or creatures that you will
encounter are the boogeyman, the gooey oozlebub,
and Lucifer himself. Other hazards include a maze
and a cave-in.

CREATURE VENTURE

abounds with secret
passages. You must find the clues to the magic
words that open them. The program, also, gives
hints in the form of riddles. For instance, a note on
a bed reads, "Goldie slept here but Alice was
smarter". Lewis Carroll fans should not have
much trouble with that one.
The program is self-documenting. All the instruction needed to run are contained within the
program. Normally you communicate with the
program with two word commands but for the
directions and inventory a one letter command is
sufficient. Also, it is only necessary to enter the
first three letters of the verb and the first four
letters of the noun.

CREATURE VENTURE has a save game
feature which comes in handy because the program
tends to end rather abruptly. Another nice feature
is the summary of commands. Pressing return will
display the last ten commands. After you have
ridded Stashbuck mansion of the creatures and
found the treasure you are offered a chance to play
the master game and find yet more treasure.
I think CREATURE VENTURE is an excel-

lent game for beginning adventurers. Many adventure gaves leave the beginner stuck in one spot
and unable to continue. If you get stuck with
CREATURE VENTURE, you can always move
to another part of the mansion, and perhaps find a
clue to help you with your previous problem.
Just because CREATURE VENTURE is good
for beginners does not mean it can not be enjoyed
by experienced adventure players as well. It will
provide many hours of challenging entertainment
for even the seasoned expert. In conclusion I
would recommend CREATURE VENTURE for
either the novice or expert. I do not think you will
be disappointed.
Computer
CREATURE VENTURE, by Highlands
Services, runs on the Apple II (Applesoft,
48K. disk) - $ 24.95.
William Zurfluh

DON'T FORGET TO
MAIL IN THE
"READER'S
INPUT
DEVICE"
(p. 40)
ZOSSED IN SPACE
ZOSSED IN SPACE (Adventures International,
Box 3435, Longwood, Fla. 32750) $14.95, cassette;
16K TRS-80; sound, one player, playing time 10
min. to 45 min.; cannot be saved.
Zossed in Space is a machine language program
that challenges you to pilot your trading ship
through 100 sectors of space, overcome a variety of
problems, accumulate 100 trading units and
destroy 10 enemy ships. You have 3 ways of
fueling, 2 ways of accumulating trading units and
dozens of ways of getting killed in the attempt.
Your ship moves from the bottom of the screen to
the top for each sector. As it appears at the bottom
of the next sector, the scene changes. And should a
piece of anti-matter or a meteorite be sitting
there —BANG.
There are over a dozen different types of sectors,
from a maze of anti-matter, to a black hole, to a
vortex. Once you have been through them a few
times you will find a strategy which will usually
get you past. Some of them are so totally random
Continued on page 38

PINBALL: Continued from page 35
play but also any bonus points gained with that
particular ball (hence my irrational behavior mentioned above).
There also is, under certain circumstances, a
feature for saving a ball about to be lost down one
of the side columns. Unfortunately, to activate
this feature requires striking the z, x, c or v key for
the left side column or the m, / key for the right
column. It is very difficult to hit these keys while
your hands are tied up with the game paddles, and
fractions of a second are all important. I just try to
hit the appropriate row of keys with my palm
hoping that the inevitable "jostle" that will also
occur (you can't help hitting the space bar this
way) will not tilt the game.
In conclusion, I enjoyed DAVID'S MIDNIGHT
MAGIC immensely and recommend it to anyone
even remotely interested in pinball action games.

ZOSSED: Continued from page 36
that they defy analysis. Beating this will not be a
snap, no matter how much experience you have.
One other interesting thing about Zossed in
Space is the use of sound. It is not just an
embellishment as, in many cases, it is the only
warning you will get that a problem has cropped
up.
While this is an arcade style game, graphics are
it's weakest feature. Surprisingly, this ceased to
bother me after I had played a few games. The lack
of a save game routine annoyed me more, though
you can put the game on hold while answering the
phone or putting out dinner.
This is the kind of game you can introduce to a
visitor with only a couple of minutes instruction,
as well as play yourself on a continuing basis. If
you find yourself stuffing too many quarters into
arcade machines, this is a fairly good alternative.
John L.Vogel

BUG ATTACK: Continued from page 34

off the sound for the entire game just to avoid its
noxious effect.

Each 'garden' in Bug Attack is made up of a
wave of ants, a wave of millipedes, and a wave of
medflies. The player begins each garden with the
fuel counter set at 99. If he fails to clear all three
waves before the fuel runs out, his beetle will selfdestruct. Losing the beetle in the midst of a wave
causes the counter to be reset, a fresh pattern of
vegetation to be redrawn (filing in any firing lanes
the player may have succeeded in clearing), and
the wave to restart with a full complement of
insects. As the player progresses through the
game, the gardens become more difficult, with
more ants appearing on the screen (though apparently not more millipedes or medflies), more
vegetation congesting the screen, and the insects
dropping daggers with greater speed and frequency.
In between every two gardens, the action shifts
slightly. During one such intermission, some sort
of tableau is staged (it appears to be a dancing bug
being eaten by a flower); in another, the player
faces a millipede that carries no daggers, but
speeds up every time a stinger is fired; and in a
third, the player faces medflies flying in a
different formation.

Although the game can be played with the
keyboard, my experience is that the level of control
available using keys is inadequate to effectively
master or enjoy the game. Game paddles are
highly recommended. Also, the variety of colors in
the game make Bug Attack one of the most
beautiful games available for the Apple. Naturally
the game can be played on a B/W or green
monitor, but much of the game's appeal will be
lost.

In general, the sound effects accompanying the
game enhance play. Appropriate noises accompany the firing of stingers, the transformation of
bugs into vegetation, and the totaling of the score
at the end of each insect wave. My one complaint
about the game is the irksome screeching that
accompanies the display of the title screen which
occurs every time the player loses his last beetle. I
found the noise to be so offensive that I would turn

Centipedes aficionados and arcade purists, who
insist on an absolute replication of an arcade
game, will be disappointed with Bug Attack.
Beyond a common fascination with entomology
and an imaginative use of color, the two games are
very dissimilar. The game strategy and mechanics
of Bug Attack bear no resemblance to those of
Centipedes. But do not let this dissuade you from
taking a look at the game; Bug Attack is an
excellent game in its own right. Normally, I tire
quickly of arcade games, as the monotony of repeated play sets in. But the novel touches of Bug
Attack, such as the variety of vegetations and
patterns of color, and the intermissions which
break up the action between insect waves, served
to maintain my interest in the game hour after
hour. The author of the game is to be complemented on his packing such a successful combination of imaginative flair and technical expertise
into the confines of the Apple II.
Bug Attack, from Cavalier Computer, is available for the Apple II (48K) $29.95.

NAPOLEON: Continued from page 14
large battle on an unwilling foe, allowing for the
total destruction of the enemy force. Leadership
was especially crucial in the Napoleonic battles,
and playing Napoleon's campaigns shows that
Napoleon can be worth as much as 100,000 men in
combat.
11.3 Lines of communication were important for
both supply and morale reasons. Units cut off
from their supply lines would not be able to recover
from their actions as would a unit in supply.
Armies (especially Allied ones) were often very
concerned about maintaining their communications lines. In fact it was this fact which Napoleon
tried to take advantage of in the Waterloo campaign
(failing when Blucher went against all reason and
retreated his army from his communications and
towards Waterloo). Because of this, we have given
units on their uncut communications lines the
DOCUMENTATION: Continued from page 23
house beneath its tongue and the great
armies of the Dead Lord used its spine for
maneuvers.
The Alkemstone itself was formed in the hollow
between the Spectral Serpent's eyes, and nourished
there like a baby.
The goal at least, was to provide a context for the
game that followed and a fantasy anchor-point for
the players.
A good manual will not save a bad game, but it
will make a good game much better, more accessible, and more satisfying.
I believe that in the future computer game
manuals will contain fewer and fewer basic
operating instructions. We're fast discovering that
the software itself can provide smoother and

ability to recover from fatigue faster than otherwise possible. The French army put less emphasis
on maintaining communications with the rear
areas (since they were usually attacking and thus
constantly changing the rear area), and for this
reason we have allowed the French to ignore their
corn lines for the first 4 days of each campaign.
14.0 Communications lines were also developed
for the purpose of funneling the movement of
armies, causing each army to decide where it will
launch its offensive operations ahead of time.
Most armies found it necessary to advance along
major roads, with the details for supplying the
army prearranged. The corn line forces this for in
order to move quickly without fatiguing, an army
must advance along its corn line (using force
orders). Thus, although players may leave their
com line, it becomes difficult to maintain control
over the advance of their army if they do.
faster instruction when programmed with enough
thought. I believe the manual will ultimately b
part of a multi-media approach including software
book, playing map and other artifacts —
packaged fantasy world. Perhaps for a mystery:
computer game we would even include the clue.
for the player to examine physically. Reading the
manual would be like finding the guidebook to
lost or parallel world on your front sidewalk. You
would pick up this guidebook, read it, and suddenly:
find yourself transformed into a citizen of this.
other world, until recently afflicted with amnesia
The book would make you want to return there
The computer would provide a viewscreen
that world.
With more sophisticated software we will see
new medium of entertainment to rival the theater
TV, movies. The manuals for this new medium
will have to become part of the presentation; par
of the fantasy.

READER INPUT DEVICE
We want your opinion. Please clip or photocopy
this page, fill it out, and send it in. One of the best
ways of expressing what you like or dislike about
CGW and computer games is to send in this form.
Let us know what you think.
GAMES

Rate the following games which were treated in
the first two issues of CGW. Use a scale of 1
(terrible) to 9 (outstanding) for each of the
categories below;
PRESENTATION: Rate the graphics and sounds
against other games that run on the same machine; GAME DESIGN: Rate the game design
itself. Apart from the presentation is the game
well designed, playable, interesting? Are there
problems in the design which make the game less
than it should be?; DOCUMENTATION: Does
the documentation do what it is supposed to (i.e.
provide the player with the pertinent information
he needs to play the game well)? Is it well written.
Is it interesting to read?; LIFE: Does the game
wear well? Does one bore of the game easily or does
it still command interest after multiple plays?;
PRICE: Is the game worth what it sells for?

ARTICLES
Please rate the articles in this issue on a scale of 1
(terrible) to 9 (outstanding). If the article doesn't
interest you enter 0

Enter 0 in the first box for a game which you have
not played.

What computer system do you own?
What would you like to read about in CGW?

Would you be interested in a poster series reproducing the various covers of CGW?
Comments:

