VOL. 3 NO. 3

MAY -JUN 1983

FEATURES
CLOSE ASSAULT

6
Bob Proctor

Review and Analysis

ADVENTURE GAME CONTEST
Fill

7

in the Crossword Puzzle

COMPUTER AMBUSH

10
David Long

Review and Analysis

PINBALL CONSTRUCTION SET

12
John Besnard

A Toy for AH Ages

WHEN SUPERPOWERS COLLIDE
Part 1 Germany 1985

14
Maj Mike Chamberlain

GALACTIC ATTACK!
Sir-tech's Space Combat Game

TELE-GAMING
A New Column

THE NAME OF THE GAME

19
Dick Richards
20
Patricia Fitzgibbons
22

A New Column by Jon Freeman

TWO COMPUTER BASEBALL LEAGUES
Two leagues for SSI's Computer Baseball

CHESS 7.0
Odesta's Program Evaluated

23
Stanley Greenlaw
33
Floyd Mathews

Departments
Inside the Industry
Hobby and Industry News
Taking a peek
Silicon Cerebrum
Atari Arena
The Learning Game
Microcomputer Mathemagic
Route 80
Micro-Reviews
Reader Input Device

2
3
4
13
28
30
34
35
36
47

INSIDE THE INDUSTRY
by Dana Lombardy,
Associate Publisher Game Merchandising

This issue we're going to look at the
nearly thirty computer games that have
been on the best-sellers lists for months.
There was a time when a new game
program came out, sold out, and then
the next new program came along to
replace it and repeat the cycle. A game's
"life-span" at the store was measured in
weeks.
But this has been changing. Several
games have been continuing to sell well
for months, despite the hundreds (no
exaggeration) of games that have come
out since these games were first introduced. This interesting list was compiled
from "hot sellers" lists provided by
wholesalers.
Wholesalers are middlemen in the
computer game industry. They buy
software programs in volume from
publishers ("vendors"), and then sell
them in smaller amounts to individual
retail stores. Since there are literally
thousands of stores and departments
nationwide that sell software, wholesalers fulfill a real service to both
retailers and game publishers.
A software publisher likes working
through a wholesaler because they then
need to work with only a few dozen
accounts for shipping and billing, instead of hundreds or even thousands of
individual stores each requiring individual shipments and individual bills.
Retailers like working with wholesalers because they sell literally
hundreds of different companies'
products. Try counting the number of
different software publishers on the
shelves in your local store next time
you're there. (The January-February
issue of CGW listed 1982 releases from
more than 130 game publishers!)
A store is only run by a few people,
and even with the help of a computer
(no pun intended), it would be very
difficult to work with so many different
software publishers. Therefore, retailers
like working with just a few distributors
through whom they can get nearly all
the software programs they need — and

order them in the quantities they can
handle.
As you can see, wholesalers are important to the software industry. And
because of their unique position, they
have a perspective on what's happening
that can be more accurate than a poll of
stores or publishers.
For example, your local store may be
selling a lot of one particular game, but
other stores around the country may
not be doing so well with it. Also, a
publisher may think he's doing great

with one of his new games, when another
publisher may be selling twice as many
of his slowest-selling game! Because they
really are in the "middle" of things,
wholesalers can provide a much more
accurate picture of the overall software
market.
The following 27 games have been on
wholesalers' best-sellers lists for at least
five months. This, in itself, should tell
you something about the quality of the
games in terms of play value, replay
interest, word-of-mouth support, and
value for the money.
❑

HOBBY AND
INDUSTRY NEWS
Creative Software has moved into new offices at
230 E. Caribbean Dr., Sunnyvale, CA 94086. A large
independent publisher of software programs for
the VIC-20 and C-64, they will be entering the TI
99/4A and Timex 2000 markets by June of this year.
Originally produced for use on Apple computers,
EVOLUTION, by Sydney Development Corporation,
will soon be available in versions for the C-64 and
IBM-PC microcomputers. Sydney's second Ottawaproduced game will be "Quest for Tires," incorporation the characters from "B.C." and
"Wizard of Id."
COMPUTERWARE introduced six new arcade
games on cassette and disk for the Radio Shack
Color Computer and TDP System 100. They are
Grand Prix, Moon Hopper, Nerble Force, Block
Head, Shark Treasure and Megapede. EPYX has
expanded its list of games for the IBM-PC and the
VIC-20. Added for the IBM-PC are Star Warrior
($39.95), Jabbertalky ($ 29.95), and Crush,
Crumble, Chomp!($29.95). Added for the VIC - 20
are Invasion Orion($24.95), and Datestones of
Ryn($19.95).
EPYX has also expanded its line to include games
for the Commodore 64 personal computer. The
first game released for the C-64 will be Temple of
Apshai($39.95), to be followed by Upper Reaches of
Apshai($ 19.95), Curse of Ra ($19.95), Crush,
Crumble, Chomp! ($29.95), and Sword of
Fargoal($29.95).
Synapse Software has announced that it is
poised to launch 32 new game, educational, and
utility programs for the VIC-20, TI99/4A, C-64, IBMPC, Apple II, and Radio Shack Color Computer. The
slated new releases are to include Pharoah's Curse,
Fort Apocalypse, Necromancer, and Shamus: Case

II.
MUSE Software has released its popular Castle
Wolfenstein for the Atari 400/800. 32K ($29.95).
Edu-Ware Services, of Agoura Hills, California
and Sweet MicroSystems, of Providence, Rhode
Island announced a hardware/software joint
venture which will result in a biofeedback mouse for
Apple, Apple II, II+, and Ile. A second version will be
compatible with any computer accessible by RS
232.
A handrest control device collects pulse rate,
galvanic skin response, and skin temperature.
Converting analog to digital, it interfaces with
software and alters programs taking user excitement or anxiety into account. Higher pulse -faster
action. High anxiety - more friendly instructions.
Infocom, Inc. has announced the June 1 introduction of WITNESS, a whodunit rooted in the
classic mystery novels of the 1930s. WITNESS is a
follow-up to the successful DEADLINE, the murder
mystery released by Infocom last year.
On-Line Inc., a leading home computer software
publisher, is entering the educational software
market. The company has announced: the acquisition of a product line developed by Sunnyside Soft
of Fresno, California; a new emphasis on the
development of its own education programs; and
the appointment of Nancy Anderton as manager of
educational publishing.
The educational product line will start with a
focus on pre-school and elementary school skills,
geared to specific ages within the three to
eight year-old. The first four releases scheduled are:
Learning with Leeper, Bop -A - Bet, Dragon's Keep,
and Troll's Tale.

Counterpoint Software Inc. announced the next
product in its Early Games for Young Children
series, Early Games Music. Designed for children
ages 4 to 12, the program is available for the IBMPC, C-64, Apple 11+, and Apple Ile computers.
HomeComputer Software of Sunnyvale is offering
Family Bible Fun, a series of Bible games for the
Apple and Atari home computers. The games, on
diskettes, cover Biblical themes graded for primary,
junior and adult levels. Using animation and sound,
each contains learning activities ranging from word
puzzles and games to true-false, multiple choice
and matching quizzes. Subjects include David, Great
Men of the Bible, The Life of Christ, Book of Acts, Old
Testament Prophets, Patriarchs and general
Biblical lore.
Electronic Arts, a new computer game manufacturer, begins shipping product in May. Among
their first releases is ARCHON by Jon Freeman and
Ann Westfall. The game will be played on two levels.
The strategic level is somewhat like chess. You move
your fantasy units across the board to encounter
enemy fantasy units. When two units are in the
same "square" battle ensues. The screen is filled
with the terrain of the "square" and a hi-res tactical
battle takes place between the occupants. Another
game, also by Jon and Anne is MURDER ON THE
ZINDERNEUF which is scheduled for a June release.
MOTZ is a repeatable mystery game in which the
player takes the role of a detective on the German
dirigible which is returning from the 1936 Berlin
Olympics. There is a murder, and there are 15
suspects.
Dan Bunten's release for EA is M.U.L.E., a game of
planetary colonization and resource management.
The game is somewhat like Monopoly in that the
players buy and sell parcels of land. "Great graphics,
animation and sound" according to Joe Ybarra,
Producer at EA. The game is layered from a novice

to tournament level play. HARD HAT MAC by Mike
Abbott and Matt Alexander formerly with Cavalier
Computer. HHM is an arcade game that takes place
on a construction site. "A favorite around the office"
according to Ybarra. Two other releases are AXIS
ASSASSIN and WORMS?. Both games use geometric
figures. The former has certain similarities to the
coin-op game Tempest and the later is actually
based on an article on mathematically games which
appeared in Scientific American. The game make
uses instructions from the player to begin producing geometric figures. The program will continue to
create patterns based on the most recent instructions received.

In addition to these releases, EA will release the
Atari version of PINBALL CONSTRUCTION SET by
Bill Budge. Bill is a "signed artist" with EA and will
be doing other games for them. All initial EA
releases are for the Atari 400/800. Most will be on
the Apple and C-64 later.
SSI will release COMBAT LEADER in June. CL
(Atari 48K) is a game of tactical armored warfare in
the 20th century. The game is in real time against
the computer and from a bird's eye view. The real
time aspect, ease of play and realism makes this a
new generation game according to Joel Billings,
president of SSI. GEOPOLITIC 1990 is due out in
late June for the Apple. The statistics-based boxing
game, RINGSIDE SEAT will be out in July for the
Apple and C-64. It even has color commentary.
A WWI air game for the Atari (with Apple and
C-64 conversions) will be out in August. Gary
Grigsby's WAR IN RUSSIA will be out in 1984. This
one is even a bigger monster than Guadalcanal
Campaign. Expect a price higher than GCC's $59.95.
BROADSIDES, a detailed historical simulation of
fighting sail will be out later this year.

In addition to games mentioned elsewhere
in this issue. the following products have been
received by CGW. Some of these products will
receive more detailed attention in future
issues. Readers wishing to review any of these
games should contact CGW.
BEZ
4790 Irvine Blvd., Suite 108B
Irvine, CA 92714
DOUBLE TROUBLE: In DT you play two
arcade games at once. Your single joystick
controls the central character on both the
left and right sides of the screen. A good
move on the right might be disastrous on
the left. Top three scores are saved. There
are five different games are used on the split
screens. The games are recognizable as
typical arcade games (maze-chase, invaders,
etc.). The split-screen-single-control idea is
interesting and at only $15.00 one can easily
overlook the low cost packaging. Apple II.
Broderbund Software
1938 Fourth St.
San Rafael, CA 94901
A.E.: The Atari version of the Space Invader
type arcade game which originally came out
for the Apple. The graphics create the feel of
a three dimensional battle between your
mobile gun and the invading A.E.s (manta
ray like creatures). The A.E.s come in from
the horizon circling closer to you, diving
behind obstacles, seeking to destroy rather

than be destroyed. A nice twist to the
Invader type game. Apple and now Atari.
$34.95.
SKY BLAZER: Just like the Apple game of
the same name (which was originally
marketed under the name STAR BLAZER).
A "Scramble" like arcade game in which you
have five missions (see review of STAR
BLAZER in CGW 2.5) The missions include
destroying a ground radar station, tank,
ICBM, and the Bungeling headquarters. As
with all Broderbund products, the graphics
are well done. As will all conversions from
the Apple to the Atari, the sound is much
better. Atari. $31.95.

DataMost Inc.
8943 Fulbright Ave.
Chatsworth, CA 91311

THE MISSING RING: A fantasy adventure
game with 3-D graphics that gives a different
viewpoint than most adventure games.
Rather than a side view or bird's eye view,
TMR gives us a "bank camera view". That is,
the view as it would be seen from a vantage
point above the room on one wall (but not
on the ceiling). The perspective is impressive
and if for no other reason makes the game
interesting. Another unusual feature is that
the game allows for up to five separate
players, each in control of one or more
characters in the adventure. Apple II.
$29.95.

SPECTRE: A maze-chase game that gives
both an overhead and a 3-D eye level view of
the maze. The overhead view of the maze
gives you a complete view of a level for five
seconds after which the maze walls disappear. Your task is to close Space Ports on
each level to keep out enemy Questers, but
of course, many are already on the ship to
hinder your task. Apple II. $29.95.

WIZPLUS: a utility program for Sir-tech
Software's WIZARDRY. Wizplus allows you
to change, restore, add to, modify, recover,
edit or move character, equipment, spells or
treasures. In addition to the program
documentation, the handsomely done
manual also includes maps of Wizardry
/Proving Grounds and equipment lists for
both Proving Grounds and Knight of
Diamonds. Sir-tech Software, has taken a
strong stand against WIZPLUS and other
programs of the same nature. In each
Wizardry box a note concerning what they
call "cheat" programs is enclosed. In part it
says: "It took more than four years of careful
adjustment to properly balance Wizardry.
These products tend to interfere with this
subtle balance and may substantially reduce
your playing pleasure". Apple II. $39.95.

EPYX
1043 Kiel Court
Sunnyvale, CA 94086
NEW WORLD: A game of colonization. Each
of the three players (Spain, France,
England) seek to gain land and wealth in
the New World by conquest and colonization. Beginning in 1495 each turn represents
one year. Players raise armies, recruit
colonists, explore, etc. Hitting the return
key at the wrong points will bomb the game.
Since hitting the return key is almost a
reflect action for most Apple gamers, this
problem can be annoying. The documentation is not up to Epyx's old standards.
Graphics are good. The game itself is similar
to a board game from Avalon Hill called
CONQUISTADOR. Apple and TRS-80.
$39.95.
JUMPMAN: An arcade game in which you,
as the Jumpman, scale ladders, girders and
ropes as you attempt to defuse 30 bombs.
Obstacles include Alienator bullets, robots,
dragons, birdmen, flying saucers, crumbling
girders and vanishing escape routes. Atari
and C-64. $39.95.
Exeter Books
New York, New York
ILLUSTRATED COMPUTER DICTIONARY: Written in simple language and with
many helpful illustrations, ICD defines more
than 1000 words and phrases. $4.98.
Hayden Software
600 Suffolk St.
Lowell, MA 01853
BELLHOP: You are a bellhop delivering
luggage as quickly as possible by using the
various elevators to reach the upper floors.
Time is money as your tip constantly decreases until you complete the round by
delivering all the luggage. A Hotel Ghost will
hinder your efforts in the more difficult
higher rounds of the game. Apple. $34.95.

CHAMPIONSHIP GOLF: Both a bird's eye
view and a side view are presented of each
hole in this hi-res game. While the ball is in
the air it is seem moving from both
perspectives. The view from the side adds a
dimension to CG not found in other golf
games, that of seeing the ball's arc. The
frustrating thing is that the out of bounds
markers only read the horizontal position of
the ball, not the vertical. You cannot arch a
ball across an out of bounds area in order to
land inbounds on the other side of the
dogleg. The program immediately calls you
out of bounds when your ball breaks the
plane of the marker. When all players in the
round (up to 4) reach the green, the screen
displays the green and players then must
putt out. Direction of shot is determined by
keying in a compass heading. There are 18
skill levels. Apple. $24.95.

Infocom
55 Wheeler St.
Cambridge, MA 02138

SUSPENDED: Infocom continues to come
out with outstanding products.
SUSPENDED incorporates their top-notch
programming with a functional game board
and movable game pieces, all of high quality.
The game takes the player into the world of
cryogenic suspension. The player awakens
from frozen sleep to find his world in serious
trouble. While attempting to save the planet,
the player will be able to manipulate six
robots, each with a unique perception of the
game's environment. The game is designed
to have high replay value (something
uncommon in adventure type games).
Like Infocom's other adventures,
Suspended incorporates the Interlogic
programming system that allows whole
sentence commands as opposed to two
word commands. If you only buy one
adventure game this year, this should be it.
It is available for many systems and sells for
$39.95.

Micro Lab
2310 Skokie Valley Rd.
Highland Park, IL 60035
MINER 2049er: Like DONKEY KONG,
players must travel around split level
screens, using elevators slides and the like
to capture Apples, destroy mutants, etc.
There are 10 levels. Top five scores are
saved. Joystick is required. Apple.

Penguin Software
830 4th Ave.
Geneva, IL 60134
CRIME WAVE: You drive a police cruiser
and patrol the city streets looking for and
then trying to capture bank robbers. One
way streets (which you can't violate) hinder
your pursuit. If you drive up while the thieves
are still at the bank there is a brief moment
in which you may capture the bag man as he
runs from the bank. Apple. $19.95. The
penguins are not unusually dressed in this
one.

Continued on pg. 45

CLOSE ASSAULT:
Review & Analysis

Bob Proctor

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Close Assault
TYPE:
Strategy
SYSTEM: Apple II, Atari,
TRS-80
FORMAT: Diskette or cassette
# PLAYERS: 1 or 2
AUTHOR: National
Microcomputer
Associates
PRICE:
$35.00 disk, $30.00
tape
PUBLISHER: Avalon Hill
Baltimore, Md

CLOSE ASSAULT (CS) is a computer
game very much in the AH tradition —
what they now refer to as "a computerassisted game". This means you move
counters around on a mapboard, type
in your moves using a simple coordinate
system, and get information back from
the computer in the same format. There
are no on-screen graphics at all, which
is why the game can be made available
on so many different types of computers.
(CS) is a game of tactical infantry
combat in World War II. Tactical means
you make decisions about which building to hide in and which direction to fire
your machine gun, instead of wrestling

with larger issues like whether to attack
Moscow or Kiev, or how many divisions
should be committed to defend Egypt.
You are the top-ranked officer, giving
orders to one or more squads. You know
the status of every support weapon and
losses to the man. For example, squad
107 is healthy, but their heavy machine
gun isn't working. Squad 102 has lost 3
men, but their leader and flamethrower
are intact. Squad 110 has lost 6 men and
their leader and the rest are demoralized.
The game can be played by two players
but the obvious intent is that one person
plays solitaire against the computer. I
say obvious because a two-player game
(with the computer as referee) ideally
requires two sets of boards and counters
and only one is provided. The program
keeps track of the position of all units
but you only know about the enemy
units that can be "seen" by your units.
Therefore, both players could not keep
all of their forces set up on a single
board without giving away the locations
of hidden units.
In its role as ref, the computer can
catch all of the mistakes that are typically made in normal boardgames. It
makes sure that you don't move too far
in one turn. It checks Lines Of Sight
(LOS), so you can't shoot at somebody
through a building or a hill. It calculates
combat odds correctly and determines
the outcome quickly. It reminds you of
each phase of the turn so that you don't
accidentally skip one or get the order
mixed up. Of course, it's still possible to
goof; for example, you could type a legal
move into the computer but move the
counter to the wrong place on the map.
This could cause a lot of confusion if not
detected promptly.
This is a well-designed and challeng-

ing game. The map and counters are
very well done and were borrowed from
Avalon Hill's best-selling board game
SQUAD LEADER. German, Soviet and
American troops are all represented.
There are two different scenarios and
several combinations of nationalities
for each. If this isn't enough, you can
design your own. The computer will play
either side in any scenario, and it plays
well enough to teach you good infantry
tactics. It does better in some scenarios
than others and the rulebook gives some
advice in this area. It also gives some
examples of play, but you don't need to
read the book before you start playing.
Just sit down and begin — the program
is self-explanatory. You don't really have
to know the rules for moving or combat;
the computer will tell you what is legal.
Of course, you'll make a few tactical
blunders but that's part of learning!

IS THIS COMPUTER
SQUAD LEADER?
It is inevitable that CA will be compared to Avalon Hill's SQUAD LEADER
(SL) boardgame. The game was obviously derived from SL — the mapboard is board #3 from SL, the counters
look the same, the turn sequence is
identical. It is only fair to warn SL fans,
though, that if they buy CA hoping to
have a computer SL opponent they will
be disappointed.
At best, you could say that CA is a very
simple version of SL. If you're struck
dumb by SL's 140+ pages of rules, this
may be a blessing. Let's quickly spell out
the major differences for those who are
familiar with the SQUAD LEADER
system.

Continued on pg. 42

THE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD
ADVENTURE GAME CONTEST

Baseball tournaments? Space ship design contests?
Robotwar tournaments? Who cares about all that when there
are damsels to rescue, dragons to slay, and nations to be
saved?!!! Well, we don't want all of you adventure game players
to feel left out — so here it is! The COMPUTER GAMING
WORLD ADVENTURE GAME CONTEST. We have collected for
you 23 mind teasing, knowledge testing, budget busting
questions. Your budget would have to be busted if you owned
all 23 games.

you to solve the puzzle of the CGWAGC. Oh lusty adventurer,
solve the 23 riddles and you can win...for the publishers of this
fair journal will give unto the first correct entry from from
each of the fifty states and from each foreign land a free one
year subscription to COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. But count
the passage of time well, as entries will only be accepted
through the final day of July in the year of our Lord, Nineteen
Hundred and Eighty Three. Answers will appear in the Sept
issue of CGW. Godspeed.

We have ventured far and wide to find these questions in
Appleland, Atariland, and elsewhere. If you follow our trail,
you may know the answers! We throw down our gage. We dare

The crossword puzzle was created with CROSSWORD
MAGIC from L&S Computerware. CM runs on the Apple II and
retails for $49.95. L&S Computerware, P.O. Box 70738,
Sunnyvale, CA 94086.

COMPUTER AMBUSH:
Review & Analysis
David Long

Computer Ambush, SSI World War II
man-to-man combat game, is back! After
nearly two years of intensive effort, SSI
has finally completed their Second
Edition and the wait has been well
worth it.
One of the first games I bought for my
Apple was Computer Ambush (the First
Edition). Having been a long time fan of
Avalon Hill's Squad Leader (but not a
fan of repeated die rolling, and of
pretending not to see the enemy when I
was playing solitaire) I had visions of
instantaneous response and a fast
smooth flowing battle between my
brilliantly led troops and the evil Nazis
under the control of the devious
artificial intelligence. As anyone who
acquired that first edition knows, my
visions were rudely shattered the first
time I completed the orders phase and
entered the execution phase. It seemed
to me that the orders phase lasted a
millennium or two.

THE SOLDIERS
Four teams of standard soldiers are
presented for your fighting pleasure,
one of red blooded GI'S, and three teams
of Germans. Both the Americans and
the average German teams are available
for two player games, with one additional team of German rookies and one
of SS "supertroops" to allow you to
handicap against the computer.
Both the two player option teams
provided come fully described in a
variety of characteristics. These include
weight, strength, intelligence, dexterity,
power of observation, throwing and
firing ability, and hand-to-hand combat
effectiveness. These characteristics
range from a low of one to a high of ten,
and directly affect the effectiveness of
your fighters. For example, a firing
ability of seven means that your man
would have a 70% chance of hitting his
target with a fire weapon, before taking

THE WEAPONS
At the beginning of the game you have
the option of either allowing the computer to allocate weapons for you, or
doing it for yourself. If you choose to do
it yourself, you can then select between
a limited availability of weapons or an
unrestricted availability. In two player
games, I suggest that you make a
decision as to what weapons will be
available, and then select the unrestricted allocation option. If you pick
the limited allocation option, the
computer may very well give one side
three rifles and two autorifles, while
giving the other side two rifles and three
autorifles. This can really make a
difference in a concentrated fire fight.
Against the computer, the limited allocation option is fine, and almost
certainly more realistic.

Weapons available are machine guns,
autorifles, rifles, and grenades. In
addition, each soldier gets a knife, and
each squad is normally allotted one

garotte and one packet of plastic
explosives. Each of the fire weapons has
its own rate of fire and accuracy rating,
both of which are affected by the
personal characteristics of the man
carrying them.
In order to be used, a weapon must be
prepared (you can't have both your rifle
and a grenade prepared at the same
time) and, a fire weapon, loaded. Each
time a fire weapon is used, there is a
chance that it will run out of ammo and
have to be reloaded before refiring.

THE MAP
Computer Ambush is played on a 37
by 63 square map of a war ravaged
French village. Each space is three
meters square and one second equals
ten time points. The game is mathematically adjusted to eliminate the
artificial bonus that sometime is found
in moving diagonally; a factor which
adds to the realistic feel of the game.
Terrain types include doors, windows,
hedges, a statue, exterior and interior
walls, piles of rubble, and building
contents. Each different type of terrain
exerts a multiplier on both time and
energy expended. You may very well be
able, for for example, to run back
through a building, out the door, down
the street, around the corner and up the
alley to spot adjacent to where you
started in less time than it would have
taken to crawl out the window.

THE ORDERS
The great thing about the orders
phase game mechanics is that you can
try as many different things as you want
with your men and thus calculate which
of the numerous possible options is your
best one. You can always change your
orders without penalty, so long as you
have not (F)inished your turn. If you
give more orders than can be accomplished in the time span allotted (you
decide at the beginning of each turn
how many time points will be simulated
that turn) the orders will carry over to
the next turn. Then, at the beginning of
that turn, you may either add to the
existing orders, or (R)eplace them with
a new command. A minor word of
caution here. Should you decide to enter
(N)ew orders, you may not then change
your mind and so back and recapture

the left over order from the prior turn.
They are lost.

Player scenario seven is Free Form,
which means you can do anything you
want.

The orders format allows you maximum flexibility at the cost of a fair
degree of complexity. You can walk,

Two Scenarios which I and my playing
partners have come up with that maybe
of interest are Rescue and Spy Recovery.
In Rescue, one side has captured an
enemy, and is holding him for interrogation. The captured soldier is unarmed (except for a knife, which is
unavoidable) and is held in a room with
one armed guard. The rescue team,
often a team of commandos all equipped
with autorifles, must free the captured
soldier and get him back to a friendly
map edge alive. The defenders cannot
shoot the prisoner before the prisoner
attempts to escape (moves or attacks
his guard). In Spy Recovery, the spy
starts at the bottom of the map and the
recovery team at the top (or vice versa).
The defenders spread out anywhere in
the mid-section of the board and must
prevent the spy from successfully
reaching the opposite end of the board
from where he started. In this scenario
the defending team should have at least
50% greater forces than the recovery
team, while in Rescue, the rescue team
should have 50% greater forces than the
defenders.

run, crawl, run dodging, fall prone,
stand up, sneak, and/or wait (resting
at your option. You can fire single bursts
at specified squares, or direct area fire
at anything in your field of vision
(assuming that you do in fact see something!) As mentioned earlier, you can
get and drop things, look around, prepare and load your weapons, throw
grenades, and set off plastic explosives.
As SSI has devoted nearly five pages of
explanation to orders and movement, I
am not going to attempt to detail them
here. Suffice it to say than once
understood, they allow you to quickly
and exactly determine what you want
your soldiers to do and to explore
virtually every possibility prior to
committing to a particular course of
action.

THE SCENARIOS
Five solitaire and six two player
scenarios are built into the game. The
solitaire games include the NCO Training game (a simple introduction to the
game with a detailed first turn example
to acquaint you with the game mechanics), Ambush (where you lie in wait
for the unsuspecting Germans), Raid
(blow up the German HQ), Infiltration
(get from one point on the edge of the
board to another without meeting the
Grim Reaper), and Barn Defense (in
which you defend your position from
the enemy).
In each of these you have a choice of
opposing a German team of Volksgrenadiers (Rookies), Wehrmacht (The
average run of the mill German), or
Waffen SS (Experts). My favorite
solitaire game has been infiltration,
since you may choose one of eight
different starting points, and then
choose any of the remaining squares as
your objective, so long as it isn't adjacent
to your starting point.

For those of us who wish to fight our
own battles, or relive the escapades of
comic books or television heroes, SSI has
made provision for the creation of
soldiers. You can change both characteristics and names, and then save your
new squad for future use or go straight
into a battle from the creation phase.
This brings up the one and only bug that
seems to have found its way into this
version of Computer Ambush. After
creating and saving a new German team
(only usable in a two player game) the
weapons allocation phase crashes with
the message. "Error of unknown origin!"
This bug can be avoided by (1) allowing
the computer to allocate weapons for
you, or (2) going straight from the
soldier creation phase into the game.
The bug has been located, and in future
copies of the Second Edition will
probably be corrected.

In the two player mode, you can select

Ambush, Patrol (like Ambush only the
Germans lie in wait for the Yanks),
Strongpoint (the GI's defend the
factory), Church Defense (Germans
defend the Church), Seek and Destroy
(a meeting of two enemy patrols), or
Alley Fight (one side defends a specific
alleyway). Finally, as in nearly every SSI
game, you can have a free for all. Two

HINTS
The most important suggestion that I
have in this area is to take your time. It
is absolutely essential to provide cover
fire before rushing an enemy position.
There is a chance that when an enemy
soldier is fired on, he will duck. If he

Continued on pg. 44

PINBALL
CONSTRUCTION SET
John Besnard
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:

Pinball Construction
Set
TYPE:
Game Generator
SYSTEM: Apple II (48K)
Joystick required
FORMAT: Disk
# PLAYERS: 1 through 4
AUTHOR: Bill Budge
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER:BudgeCo Inc.
Piedmont, CA

When I first played Raster Blaster, I
vowed that I would buy all future
BudgeCo products sight unseen. I did so
with the Pinball Construction Set. My
faith was well rewarded! Bill Budge has
moved us into a new generation of
human-computer interfacing. This
"Software Toy", as Bill refers to the
product, allows a user to build a video
pinball game. And, better yet, to do so
without any programming. In fact, you
don't even have to type a single
character on the keyboard, unless you
wish to save the results.
A joystick controlled "hand" and a set
of icons are the tools in the Construction
Set toolbox. Move this pointing hand to
a Thumper Bumper, push either button
on the joystick to 'pick it up', and drag
the bumper from the toolbox onto the
playing field. Let the button go and the
bumper is left in place. If you don't like
the placement, push the button again
and move it to a new spot or put it back

in the toolbox. This completely interactive technique transcends language
and age barriers. My eight-year-old had
absolutely no difficulty in creating a set
of games of his own. The Pinball
Construction Set finally got him
interested in the Apple as a tool, rather
than as just a connector for our joystick.
The key to the ease of use of this product
lies in the pictorial representation of
objects or activities. "Icons," as these
pictorial representations are technically
called, are activated by pointing them
out with the hand. A hammer allows
polygons you move into place to be
`pounded' into shape, and a paintbrush
allows them to be colored in. (I still can't
believe that the balls bounce accurately
off these walls.) Made a mistake? Cut it
out with the scissors. You can finally
shape your ideal pinball table layout.
Like all of Bill Budge's programs, this
product is very complete. Most of the
traditional pinball elements can be included in a game:
Thumper Bumpers
Drop Targets
Knockers and Slingshots
Spinners
Ball Catcher
One Way Gates
Rollover Lights
Single Strike Targets
But it does not end there; there is also a
magnet that holds a ball for a split
second, then releases it, and a ball disintegrator, that not only catches balls but
eats them as well. Moving things around
the playing field is fun in and of itself,
but the really amazing part is that at
any time you can point to the 'play' icon
and instantly test your creation.
Users can create very sophisticated
games through the use of the logic icon.
Up to three elements on the playing field
can be tied to an AND gate. When all
inputs to this gate are 'true' (they have
been hit) the player can be awarded

bonus points or the bonus multiplier
can be increased. A sound can be
selected to signal this achievement as
well.
There's even more. A magnifying glass
icon and the pointbrush allow you to
customize about 75 percent of the
screen. How about a custom made
pinball gift for your favorite Apple
gamer? Russell Sipe got one along with
this article. Does your special friend live
on the moon where gravity is only oneeighth that of earth? No problem, just
set the gravity of the game to any value
you want.
Is there anything else you could
possible want? Yes, just a few things I
which were included. First, if you're a
pinball purist, you'll still be a little
disappointed in your ability to 'catch'
the ball with a flipper. This implementation is better than Raster Blaster,
but still doesn't 'feel' right. Second, there
is no real way to apply "Body English".
One of my favorite finishing touches
in Raster Blaster was the way the score
seemed to roll into place from digit to
digit. The Construction Set just displays
the scores like any other game. I guess
it's a small price to pay for being able to
make your own game so easily. Finally, I
would have liked to be able to link the
output of some of the AND gates to an
element on the playing field. That
element would be invisible during play
until all the inputs to the gate went true,
then it would show and come into play.
Using a technique like this, the ball
savers in the hard setting of Raster
Blaster could be duplicated.
All of that notwithstanding, there's
something almost magical about the
way this product works. You take everything it does for granted after just a few
minutes. Bill Budge obviously worked
very hard to make the outcome so easy
to use. It became obvious that picture

Continued on pg. 43

then set the location of each quark to
-50 and of each boson to +50 (see Figure
2). We then make a series of passes on
the map. During a pass, each location
receives a new value equal to its old
value, plus one for each adjacent
location whose old value is greater than

TERRAIN
The example above assumes that a
unit's influence propagates evenly
throughout the map. However, the game
may include different terrain types
which affect how units move and fire, so
we may want to take that into account.
Figure 4 shows the same map now
populated with four different types of
terrain:
CLR =

clear terrain; no

effect on influence
rough terrain; harder
to control
MNT = mountains; can only
be slightly controlled
and cannot influence
other hexes
WTR = water; cannot influence or be
influenced
RGH =

THE SILICON
CEREBRUM

0, minus one for each adjacent position
whose old value is less than 0. After 10
passes, the map in Figure 2 has become
the map in Figure 3. The sign of each
locations —"+" or "-" — indicates
whether it is controlled by the bosons or
the quarks, while the magnitude —
ranging in this case from 1 to 105 —
shows how strongly it is controlled.

by Bruce Webster

Having modified the algorithm to
reflect these differences, we now get the
influence map shown in Figure 5. As you
can see, the terrain makes quite a
difference. In Figure 3, the quarks
control over twice as many hexes as the
bosons (97 to 46). In Figure 5, the ratio
has dropped to less than 3 to 2 (69 to
49), and the shapes of the areas have
changed considerably. Indeed, what
used to be a powerful thrust by the
quarks between the two boson areas
has now become a two-way split with
the key point contended for by both
sides.

MAP WEIGHTING
(Part 2)
A year ago (issue 2.3), I wrote about
influence mapping. The column gave a
simple algorithm which, given a map
and units placed on it, would calculate
areas of influence. I then made two rash
promises. The first was that I would
follow up on the subject the following
month; the second, that listings would
be sent out to those who wrote and
asked for them. My life has been in high
gear ever since and those promises have
not been kept. My apologies to all and
sundry, especially those who wrote and
never heard back from me. This column
represents my first attempt to live up to
those promises.
The technique is, indeed, a simple one.
Figure 1 shows a hex grid with two types
of units on it. The circles shall be called
quarks and the squares, bosons. To
start our algorithm, we set the value of
every unoccupied location to zero. We

That's as far as the column got last
year. I then promised to consider such
problems as terrain, unit differentiation,
movement, ranged combat, and what to
do with all of this marvelous information. In this issue, we'll look at terrain
and unit strength and how they can be
taken into consideration.

Continued on pg. 45

WHEN SUPERPOWERS COLLIDE
CHAPTER ONE
The Battle for Central Germany

Major Mike Chamberlain

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
GERMANY 1985
TYPE:
Tactical Wargame
SYSTEM: Apple II with
Applesoft or Apple II
Plus - 48K
FORMAT: Diskette
# PLAYERS:1 or 2
AUTHOR: Roger Keating
PRICE:
$59.95
PUBLISHER:Strategic
Simulations Inc.
Mountain View, CA
"Mustang Three, Mustang Three, this is
Gunner One Six, Over!"
"Gunner One Six this is Mustang Three,
go ahead, over."
"This is One Six! We're in position
Bravo on Phase Line Apple!... Under
attack by Red Tank Regiment!!... Heavy

artillery! Request TAC Air Support;
coordinates niner five two eight!!
Reinforcement required ASAP!!... DO
YOU COPY MUSTANG?!!"

computer) and you have the makings of
an excellent wargame.

"Roger One Six. TAC on request. ETA
2nd Brigade eight hours. Hold current
position. Maintain radio contact...good
luck."

GERMANY 1985 is the first in a fourgame series by Roger Keating titled
"When Superpowers Collide." It uses the
basic game system which he developed
for SOUTHERN COMMAND (Note: for a
review of this game see CGW Vol. 2 No. 2,
Mar-Apr 82, pg. 6). Although GERMANY
1985 is obviously an enhancement of
the SOUTHERN COMMAND game

As you hunker down in front of your
computer preparing to go toe-to-toe
with the Soviet's finest, you begin a
scenario which some imagine could
occur one day in the Fulda Gap of
central Germany. You are in the lead
elements of a meeting engagement
between NATO and WARSAW Pact
Forces in Strategic Simulations' new
game, GERMANY 1985; and about the
only thing missing is the static on the
radio.
Having spent eight years in Germany
as an army officer, I was anxious for
the opportunity to see and play
GERMANY 1985. I haven't been disappointed. The game presents, in a
reasonable general manner, the
challenges (and frustrations) which
such a conflict would place on a ground
Commander. Allocation of air support,
planning air superiority, prioritizing fire
support targets, and allocating reinforcements are just some examples.
Add to this a fluid situation and a
powerful opponent (human or

OVERVIEW

system, it is also clearly its own game
with nice touches added, more options,
and a simpler playing system. The
biggest bonuses in Roger's current game
are the ability to play either side against
the computer and the provision of two
totally different scenarios. The factors
make GERMANY 1985 a real bargain at
SSI's regular major game price of $59.95.
The game comes in a standard SSI box
with one disk, a map card with one map
on each side (different terrain for the
two scenarios), a reinforcement
schedule/control key card, and the rule
book. Getting started is no problem as
the disk has a souped-up DOS and the
program loads quickly. You won't go
much further though, unless you've read
the rule book which can be something of
a chore — especially for the beginner.
The rule book is the only serious flaw I
found in the package. I discovered three
commands that I couldn't make work at

all (it could be me) and one key (H) that
wasn't mentioned, it draws in the hexes
for those who like that sort of thing. All
of these things, though, were really only
minor irritants and shouldn't stop you
from buying and enjoying the game.
Once you've made it through the rules
and know your way around the battlefield, you're ready for the fun.
THE GAME
GERMANY 1985 is played on a 39 X 28
hex grid with each hex representing one
mile. Since the tactical map on the
monitor contains a 13 X 9 blowup of the
terrain, you have to scroll around the
map ala' SOUTHERN COMMAND while
playing. By hitting the "P" key you can
view the entire 39 X 28 map in a less
detailed manner but with all exposed
units and key terrain clearly evident.
You need this screen to keep a feel for
the overall flow of the battle. If you focus
attention or forces in one area, you can
be sure that your opponent will take the
opportunity to go somewhere else.
The terrain in the game is generally
similar to the terrain I saw in Germany,
lots of wooded areas with rolling hills
and some rough. The rivers and roads
don't always fix exactly with the tactics
one would like to employ, but then they

rarely do in reality either. This is
particularly true in the "Invasion"
scenario where the invading forces
advance on both sides of a north-south
river (tough!). The graphics for the
terrain are colorful and easily identifiable. Don't worry if you have a B&W
monitor because there's no trouble
there. The unit graphics represent
battalions of different types (Tank =
Armor, APC = Mech Infantry, Helicopter
= AIRCAV, Howitzer/Truck/SPG =

Artillery).
The forces available are roughly
equivalent to three divisions for each
side. They are numbered for identification and to assist in maintaining
unit integrity (crucial on the Soviet side
because artillery can only answer fire
missions for their own division). The
mix and number of the units are
obviously dictated by gaming considerations and don't mirror actual US
or Soviet force structures, but they're
close enough.
The object in both scenarios of the
game is the "control" of town, village,
and airfield hexes. Control is established
by the last unit which passes through
the hex and is graphically indicated
with a "+" for NATO control and a "0" for
Soviet control. According to the

designer, the intention of the victory
condition of majority control was to
represent the necessity for lines of
communication and supply. I understand that aspect, but it is also true that
you can "win the battle and lose the war"
if all you end the game with is a couple of
hidden units in the rear gobbling up
objective hexes. Each gamer can decide
on his own concept of victory, of course,
but I suggest that "true" victory is to be
found in some combination of hexes
controlled, number and strength of
units remaining, and the ending tactical
situation.
The game end is, randomly, turn 20,
21, or 22 (representing about 3 1/2 days at
4 hours per turn) but can be continued
for up to 240 turns (40 days) at your
option.
At any time during a human players'
turn, the game can be saved by hitting
"CTRL B". This allows you to save the
game on a moments notice and is a real
improvement over the old "end of turn,
do you want to save game?" method.
Saving requires an SSI initialized disk.
The SOUTHERN COMMAND save game
disk will not work, but this is really
another enhancement due to the
easy-to-use catalog of saved games and better
speed.

PLAY
Upon booting the disk you'll be given a
wide list of options: 1 or 2 players; which
side the computer is to play; difficulty
level (1-3); hidden or exposed movement; reinforcements; and finally, the
scenario you wish to play. (The options
available give you 96 possible combinations against the computer!!)
After you make your selections, the
map appears and you are given the
additional option of randomizing
terrain. With this option all terrain
except towns, rivers, and swamps are
randomly dispersed. I don't recommend
you try it until you're fully comfortable
with playing the standard terrain.
Movement of units is similar to
SOUTHERN COMMAND and involves
entering the movement mode either
individually with the "M" key or automatically cycling through the units with
the "ESC" key. Movement is accomplished with the 1-6 keys and to assist
seeing what's ahead, you can center the
moving unit on the screen with the "0"
key at any time. The options available in
commanding your units include a list of
orders (the "0" key) and modes (the "C"
key). Both are expansions of the options
previously available.
The order commands allow you to
commence firing, call in air and artillery
fire, withdraw and reorganize, move
forward and attack or fire, move to
capture nearby villages, exit map, and
set a delayed attack or fire mission. The
latter is somewhat different from
SOUTHERN COMMAND in that you only
order the ambush, allowing the computer to decide when it's triggered. This
makes unnecessary the previous,
somewhat cumbersome, system of play.
The change mode option allows you
to direct units to enter different modes
of operation; normal, transportation,
reorganization, river, support, fire,
defense, and attack.
All of this might sound a bit complex
at first reading, but the game plays very
well using only a couple of selected
options. As you become more familiar
you'll grow into the rest.
Unit to unit combat in the game is
initiated by moving next to an enemy
unit, or by hitting "CTRL C" if already
located in an adjacent hex. The strength
of combatants is affected by the number
of enemy units in sight, distance from
unit headquarters, number and type of

supporting units, terrain, preparatory
artillery barrages, mode of operation
and, of course, unit's strength and
efficiency. (Aren't you glad you own a
computer?)
A major addition to combat in
GERMANY 1985 is the provision of more
realistic air support play. There are now
two factors which must be accommodated, tactical air support (TACAIR)
and air superiority. TACAIR is
scheduled one turn ahead of time by
entering the air mode (CTRL A) and
striking T for TACAIR. You then position
the cursor in the desired location and
lock in the target with a CTRL F. On
your next turn, you may call in the
strike if you have (1) air superiority or
air parity, and (2) friendly units within
three hexes of the hex previously
specified. At that point the computer
will attack the best enemy target within
three hexes. The air attack has the
effect of a strong .artillery strike and
can, in many cases, spell the difference
between victory and disaster on the
battlefield. All this great air support
planning is meaningless, however, if
your opponent has air superiority. In
that case your TACAIR doesn't show up
and you can find yourself in what is
known as a "tactical bind". Air
superiority is achieved by allocating
between one and nine sorties to be
effective two turns in advance. Since
there is a trade-off in allocating sorties
to superiority versus support, you can't
afford to be too generous in the
allocation either. All of this means that

you have to become a careful manager
of your very important air assets, a nice
representation of a very real problem
for the army ground commander.
The artillery support in the game is
fairly straight-forward. You can shoot
by calling in fire support in the order
phase or by activating a specific artillery
unit and then positioning the cursor on
the target and firing. The Soviet side
seems to have an advantage in artillery.
This is certainly true in the "real world"
— they're loaded with it as any student
of WWII will tell you. One recommendation for using the fire support
order is necessary. Since the orders do
not differentiate between artillery and
airsupport, activating the order will call
in everything within range. If you don't
want your artillery to go where your
airstrikes do, you must fire your artillery
manually before activating TACAIR.
Another new wrinkle for the game's
artillery is the provision for firing smoke.
This capability can be very important if
you have to withdraw or if you're
conducting a river crossing operation.
I feel somewhat obligated to mention
engineer play in the game since I am an
engineer officer. Although the game has
indications of mines, they are not
available in this scenario. Keating says
that he ran out of memory and at the
time couldn't pack it in. This is also the
reason that there is no nuclear play. The
lack of mines or the capability to destroy
bridges make the engineers either
bridging or fighting units. It also means
that you can't reinforce terrain with

demolitions. Clearly, provision of this
capability would require a reassessment
of the opposing force balances and I
won't second-guess Keating on that
point. In any case, real world infantry
and armor officers sometimes overlook
their engineers as well (soapbox
presentation over).

There is one other provision not made
in the game that I think would add to its
realism. Although you can move an
infantry, armor, or artillery unit and
subsequently fire (if you have movement
points remaining; the reverse is not
true. I think that the addition of a "fire
and withdraw" order would provide
tactical options not now available. As it
stands, you have a tough choice when
faced with mounting pressure to either
try to back out without inflicting damage
(really only delaying the battle), or stand
and fight.
One other improvement worth
mentioning is the speed of computer
movement. In SOUTHERN COMMAND,
computer forces moved so quickly they
were almost impossible to follow. In
GERMANY 1985, however, you can slow
down the speed of the movement by
striking the "right arrow" key until the
' speed is acceptable.
THE SCENARIOS AND TACTICS:
Advance to Contact — this is really a
meeting engagement between the forces.
The initial forces are pretty equal (about
2 brigades each) and start at opposite
sides of the map rushing to gain ground
in the middle.
The stronger US battalions are slightly
fewer in number and have a chore in
covering all the terrain and trying to
avoid strong Soviet artillery and initial
air strikes. The US player has to choose
his ground carefully and avoid early
decisive engagements. He has to hold
initially and wait for reinforcements
before moving to penetrate the Soviet
front. He shouldn't be so timid that he
can't recover from deep Soviet penetration, but at the same time he can't
afford to become overly aggressive at
the start.
The Soviet player should look for
holes in the US line and, while holding
down US units with moderate forces,
attempt to infiltrate and cause problems
in the US rear. He needs to protect and
make good use of his superiority in
artillery and if possible destroy the US
air cavalry squadron which is highly

mobile and therefore significant threat.
Actual Soviet tactics call for massing a
superior force and breaking through
the enemy front, then exploiting the
breakthrough. This is an excellent
approach in GERMANY 1985 but
shouldn't be attempted too early.
Invasion — this scenario begins with
the US player placing his forces (about
two brigades) anywhere on the map.
After placement, but before the US
player's movement, the Soviet player
positions two airborne drops on the
map. The "attack" by the Soviet begins
on turn three with the appearance of
ground forces attacking from the south.
There is a major north-south river
traversing the center of the map and the
attack comes up both sides.
The US player has a problem right at
the beginning — does he set defenses for
the imminent ground attack, or does he
try and neutralize the airborne forces in
his rear? There is no "good" answer. The
US player should react to the airborne
placement with two objectives in mind;
first, control of the two major bridges
across the river (this forces a Soviet
assault crossing with engineers), and
second, the elimination of the secondary
attack along the west bank of the river.
If the latter can be accomplished, the US
player can consolidate his forces and
move when appropriate to attack
eastward. Since later US reinforcements
appear in the northeast, he can effectively "squeeze" the Soviet and win.
The Soviet player should place his
airborne drops carefully. His artillery is
light and vulnerable and must be protected. Consideration should be given to
a drop to secure the southern bridge
(sound familiar?) and thus provide good
lateral movement. He must be selective
in his use of the western force and may
wish to consider a reinforcement
crossing with his engineer unit from the
east. Basically, he must react to the
initial US strategy.
Naturally, all of these tactics change
as you select different difficulty and
reinforcement options prior to play.
When the computer is playing, increasing the difficulty factor increases the
reorganization capabilities of its units.
It handles this very well, withdrawing
and reorganizing at opportune times.
The result is a more aggressive
opponent. Winning against the computer with the most difficult combination of options will take every bit of
savvy you have plus a bit of luck!

THE FUTURE
The remaining games in the
"Superpowers" series are: RDF 1985
(Rapid Deployment Force) a US reaction
to a Soviet invasion of Saudi Arabia;
BALTIC 1985, a Soviet invasion against
primarily anti-tank forces on the
northern European plain; and
NORWAY 1985, a Soviet invasion of
Norway across their common border,
and the NATO response.
The next release, RDF 1985, has just
hit the street and I will have a follow-up
review in an upcoming issue of CGW.
The good news is that these later games
will sell for $34.95 (you will need the
GERMANY 1985 rules - $5.00 if you have
to order separately). [Ed Note: SSI is
considering including a copy of the
GERMANY 1985 Master Rule Book in
future releases in the "Superpowers"
series.] SSI told me that the price
reflects the fact that the game system is
already developed and that there will
only be one scenario per game. It's a
good bargain and SSI deserves appreciation for their fair treatment of their
customers.
There's still more! Although not
officially announced, Roger Keating told
me, SSI confirmed, that they hope to
release a fifth disk. It will not be a game,
but instead will give owners of the
previous "Superpowers" games the
ability to enter those disks and modify
unit arrival schedules, force composition, and possibly terrain. The
program is still in the conceptual stage
but, if introduced, will be a landmark in
computer wargaming!

ERRATA
1. The following keystrokes do not
function:
CTRL P: Combat pause on/off
CTRL K: Global leave (cycle round all
units)
CTRL D: Divisional leave (cycle round
divisional units until all
moved) — This can be
accomplished by using the
"L" key when auto-move is
active.
CTRL M: Turn auto move on/off —
use the "ESC" key for this
function.
2. The "H" key (not mentioned) will
draw/remove a hexagonal overlay from
the tactical map.
❑

GALACTIC ATTACK!
Dick Richards

sSpaceCombtG h'
ringed Saturn, cloudy Venus, and
strangely shaped Ceres and all the others
individually portrayed in their proper
relationships to each other. Each new
game places the planets in differing
orbital positions, so that while Mercury
is always closest to the sun and Pluto
furthest away, each game is different.
One game could, for example, find Venus
and Mercury quite close together, while
in the next game they might be on
opposite sides of the sun. GA also allows
you to choose to view the display with a
magnification of from 1 (close up) to 9
(shows virtually all the planets).

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Galactic Attack
TYPE:
Arcade/Strategy
SYSTEM: Apple
FORMAT: Disk
# PLAYERS:1
AUTHOR: Robert J. Woodhead
PUBLISHER:Sir-tech Software
Ogdensburg, NY
Galactic Attack is a real time space
war simulation from Sir-tech Software,
the people who made Wizardry. You, as
commander of the USS BLAISE
PASCAL, must free our solar system
from the invading Kzinti. Only the Earth
and Luna remain free, all other planets
and the asteroid Ceres are garrisoned
by the aliens. To succeed in your mission,
you must travel to each planet, decimate
the enemy forces by strafing, and then
beam down Human armies to complete
the reconquest of the planet. As this is a
real time game, it demands quick
thinking — indecision can be fatal —
because the computer controlled Kzinti
never hesitates.
The graphics display gives you an
excellent view of our solar system, with

To allow you to learn without instant
self-destruction, you can vary a number
of the game parameters. The attacking
Kzinti fleets can be composed of from
one to nine enemy ships (three is a
challenging beginning number). You can
also set the number of hit points required to destroy a Kzinti ship (from 50
to 300) and the number of hit points
inflicted by a torpedo explosion. Since
your ship can take 100 hit points before
becoming a mini-nova, this allows you to
handicap either side, while the torpedo
inflicted damage is the same for both
the BLAISE PASCAL and the Kzinti.
One advantage that you have is that
your ship has shields, something the
Kzinto have never developed (probably
due to their low regard for life). As long
as your shields are up, your ship takes
no damage points at all.
After you destroy the entire Kzinti
fleet which has engaged you, you'll have
time to concentrate on the planets.
Orbit the Kzinti infected planet of your
choice, strafe off the vermin, then beam
down enough Human armies to wipe
out the remaining aliens (strafing won't
affect the last three Kzinti), and the
planet is yours!

Each human army beamed down will
wipe out one alien army and destroy
itself in the process. Hence, if there are
four Kzinti and you beam down six
Human armies, you will take over the
planet and have a garrison of two
Human armies.
Sounds easy, doesn't it? The problems,
however, are numerous. First of all, you
start out with the capacity to transport
only one Human army at a time. This
transport capacity increases as you
destroy additional Kzinti (up to
maximum of ten), but the more armies
you transport, the poorer your ship
performs. In fact, when carrying the full
complement of ten armies, the BLAISE
PASCAL maneuvers like a beached
whale and probably couldn't survive an
attack by a Kzinti captain's gig!
Another problem encountered, is that
in order to strafe an enemy planet, you
must first drop your shields. This means
that, while you are strafing, the planetary defenses will be blasting you. I'd
suggest you break off your attack when
your damages reach 50% to 60% or you'll
soon be referred to in the past tense.
Cruise to a safe distance to repair your
damage and then head back into the
fray. A word of warning here. When
strafing, the keyboard registers a strafe
order for each press of the "S" key, so if
you madly hit the key ten times, you will
be committed to ten strafing runs. You'll
find this very frustrating when, after six
or seven runs, you realize you're about
to explode!
There is a random time period between the destruction of the last Kzinti
fleet and the arrival of the next. One
thing you'll want to avoid, therefore, is

Continued on pg. 42

A New Column...

Well, of course, someday is today! No
matter where you live, if you have a
computer or terminal, a modem, and a
private telephone line, you can explore
the exciting world of gaming via telecommunications ("tele-gaming"). Do you
prefer to match wits against a computer
or against another human being? Either
way, you'll find hundreds of online opportunities to challenge your skills,
share your knowledge, and have just
plain fun!
If you don't already have a modem for
your home computer, you'll need to
purchase one at a computer store.
Check the various computer magazines
for information on popular brands and
price ranges, as well as for reviews of
terminal software to accompany your
particular hardware configuration.

TELE-GAMING

Patricia Fitzgibbons

Someday, you'll be able to use your
computer to...
Wage a real time space battle
against nine other starship commanders; Play chess tournaments
with opponents who post their
moves while you're asleep or at
work; Receive, within minutes,
that desperately needed hint for
solving a maddening adventure
game; Participate in a fantasy
role-playing quest with a druid
from Oklahoma, a fighter from
Louisiana, and an elf from
California; and, Join a gaming
special interest group of over a
thousand members from every
part of the United States.

Okay, you say, I've got my computer
all set up with a modem and software.
Now what do I do? Here comes the hard
part: choosing the online service with
which to connect, and which games to
play. You have many options, and your
choices will depend upon your gameplaying preferences as well as your
budget. If you decide to investigate the
games offered by one of the major telecommunications services (such as
CompuServe or the Source) you will
need to become a subscriber and pay an
hourly fee for your online time.
CompuServe, for example, offers a
subscription that you can buy at most
computer stores. The basic kit contains
a password, a terminal emulation program, and five free hours of online usage
for $39.95. However, you can purchase
the subscription package alone (without
the software) from Radio Shack for
$19.95, including one free hour of usage.
CompuServe's hourly rates for 300 baud
service are: $22.50 from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m., and $5.00 from 6:00 p.m. to 5:00
a.m. (and all day on weekends and
holidays). Over forty online games are
available, including the exciting new
"Dungeons of Kesmai," nine Scott Adams
Adventures, and "MegaWars," a game
that offers the capability for ten people
to play simultaneously. You can also
join CompuServe's Gaming Special
Interest Group (GameSig) where
members take part in ongoing fantasy
role-playing games, game authors trade
ideas in the conference area, and users
upload their public domain game
programs to a database.

Perhaps one of the most amazing
phenomena in online gaming is the
explosion of information exchanged
between computer game players. Messages such as the following are posted
daily on GameSig:
#:7604 Sec. 1 - Adventure Games
Sb: #WIZARD AND THE PRINCESS
27-Mar-83 16:27:19
Fm: Chuck Wright 73105,1161
To: Scorpia 74045,221
Help! I'm in the castle and I can't
get to the frog. I've been able
to go everywhere except the locked
room in the maze. Is there an exit
somewhere or is there a way to get
to the frog??? I would appreciate
your help!
Chuck Wright
#7607 Sec. 1 - Adventure Games
Sb: #7604-#WIZARD AND THE
PRINCESS
27-Mar-83 16:53:51
Fm: Scorpia 74045,221
To: Chuck Wright 73105,1161
Hi Chuck! Well, there isn't a key for
that particular lock, but check
your inventory for an item you've
had since the beginning of the
game, but haven't used yet. That
should give you some ideas! And
when you do get past that door,
keep in mind that it helps to go
upstairs twice!
Best,
Scorpia
Obviously, the ability to receive almost
instantaneous help in solving a frustrating puzzle is one of the most valuable
assets of this gaming special interest
group.
Continued on pg. 44

COMING NEXT ISSUE
A Hints & Clues Column
on Adventure Games

We need your questions. You can
send them to :
Computer Gaming World
Adventure Games Column
P.O. Box 4566
Anaheim, CA 92803-4566
"The Commodore Key"
C-64 and Vic-20 users will have
their own column beginning in
July. Manufacturers are encouraged to send review copies
of their C-64 and Vic-20
products.

A New Column...

It was, in a word, plagiarism.
If someone painted a nearly perfect
likeness of the Mona Lisa, we wouldn't
call it "a new version of the classic 'La
Gioconda' paintings;" we'd say it was a
fake or forgery.
When enterprising crooks print "funny
money," we don't say the result is a
"clone" or an "imitation" of what we
laughingly call real money; we call it

counterfeit.
When Linda Ronstadt records "a new
version" of a song like "Desperado," she
doesn't pretend it was merely "inspired
by" the Eagles. She is giving the song her
own special treatment, but Don Henley
and Glenn Frey still get credit — and
royalties — for writing it.

THE NAME OF
THE GAME

Jon Freeman
Five years as a professional game
designer is enough time to develop a
long "hit list" of things (and people) that
disturb, distress, and annoy me about
the art, craft, hobby, and business of
computer gaming. These — the subjects
of this column — will often be tough
topics — tough sometimes because they
require heavy thinking, but tough, also,
because they may make someone (even
you) uncomfortable or unhappy.
Rest assured that it's all in the cause
of truth, justice and Margot Kidder...

At Applefest I overheard someone
complain about pirated copies of "their"
game, and the royalties they were
thereby losing.
What made this comment so ironic
was that it was just another copy of
Pac-Man for the Apple. It was not
"inspired" by, "derived" from, nor even
an "imitation" of PAC-MAN. It was a
blatant rip-off.

So why make a fuss?

Because it matters. It affects what
games get done and who gets rewarded.
It makes a difference to you — whoever
you are — in the long run and it affects
people like me right now. Today and
every day.
In his review in the January/February
issue of CGW, Allen Doum described
TAX DODGE, a game Anne Westfall
and I created, as "a kind of PAC-MAN
variant." In a limited sense, that's true.
(Or, as Sally Field said in Absence of
Malice, "It's not true, but it's accurate.")
TAX DODGE is loosely, a maze game,
and as such it's closer to PAC-MAN than
it is to, say ASTEROIDS or ZORK.

If I wrote a spy novel about a hero
named James Band, who liked his
martinis "shaken, not stirred" and
fought a villain named "Silverhand"
whose Oriental bodyguard was called
"Oddjab,"would a critic refer to it as "the
latest in the secret agent 007 genre?" Or
would I be visited by a nasty lawyer — if
not the police?

The problem is that what is intended
as a helpful bit of orientation (since
Allen goes on to detail many of the
differences between TAX DODGE and
PAC-MAN) may mislead the casual
reader, who, jumping to a false but
predictable conclusion, reads no
further: In the average gamer's
experience, the only thing vaguely
similar to PAC-MAN is a counterfeit
PAC-MAN. Ergo (he thinks), TAX
DODGE is just the Same Old Thing, and
its theme is as bogus as the other rip-offs.

THE AWFUL TRUTH

THE BOTTOM LINE

As Abe Lincoln is reported to have
said, "Calling a tail a leg doesn't make it
one." There's no such thing as "
Geat-ohldsfginm"(pru)
movies. "Maze games" are a genre;
PAC—MAN rip offs are not (though
they are an industry, almost).

This is not just unfortunate; it is
unacceptable. I do not want to be found
in the company of con men and rip-off
artists, even by accident. More importantly, perhaps, this confusion reinforces in the mind of the average gamer
the notion that no alternative is possible.
Original ideas (some think) occur
miraculously in certain arcade games,
and the only thing home computer
programmers can do is copy them.

Contrary to a recent article in this
magazine by Anthony Melendez, "mazechase games" have not been "overused."
(Abused, yes; overused, no.) Just offhand, I can think of only three games for
home computers that might fall in the
category of "maze-chase games:" TAX
DODGE, SERPENTINE, and
PAC-MAN. None of the three is very
similar to either of the others, and only
PAC-MAN has been "overused" — in the
form of dozens of shoddy fakes.

I am not an apologist for Atari. I don't
work there; I don't own stock in Warner
Communications; and I probably have
more gripes about them than you do.
(That's another story, however.) I don't
even like PAC-MAN very much, and
(speaking of "shoddy") the 2600 (VCS)
version was simply a disgrace.

There is a four-letter word for that
notion, but it is unjust as well as vulgar:
manure is necessary and, it its way,
useful. The idea that rip-offs are
inescapable is useless, offensive, and
Sorry but these are not "nice little
games." They're nasty little pieces of
trash, and belong in the garbage with
their illegitimate brethren.

Jon Freeman is Creative Director of Free
Fall Associates, a development team
whose newest games, ARCHON and
MURDER ON THE ZINDERNEUF, are
available from Electronic Arts.

TWO COMPUTER
BASEBALL
LEAGUES
Stanley Greenlaw

kites are flying, and thousands of computer gamers are
hunched over their computers setting the daily line-up for the
big game. Watch them, riveted to the monitor, as the speaker
spits out a low pitched "beep" and the flashing ball rockets
down into the left field corner driving in all the runners.
Of the several computer baseball games on the market only
two are truly "stat" games; SSI's COMPUTER BASEBALL (CB),
and Avalon Hill's MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL (MLB). The
former, by Charles Merrow and Jack Avery, is the more
popular (according to our R.I.D. ratings) and allows you to
make up your own teams. The latter, by Richard Bamberg,
allows you to design your own teams, however the process is
more difficult that with CB. To design your own teams with
MLB you must first have the board game version of MLB which
contains the information on rating players and then you must
use a text editor to create the teams.
Don't confuse Avalon Hill's MLB with another computerized
baseball game they have, BASEBALL STRATEGY (we won't
use an acronym on this one). This game is a "you against the
computer" game based on their board game of the same name.
In BASEBALL STRATEGY, you and the computer manipulate
identical rosters to set up the best lineup for your strategy
(long ball, running game, etc...). Actual play involves the
defense picking one of seven pitches and the offense picking
one of twelve swing types ( go with pitch, punch, long ball,
etc...). Results are found by cross indexing the two choices on a
matrix. The nice feature of the board game version of
BASEBALL STRATEGY is the ability to have head-to-head
games with human opponents, each having the same tools
with which to work. Unfortunately, the computerized version
is strictly a solo game.
The idea behind a "stat" baseball game is that each individual
player has a separate data string or "card" which rates him in
the offensive and defensive categories associated with baseball. For example, Babe Ruth's "card" would call for a lot of
home runs but also a lot of strikeouts. The ideal result being
that if you played a team through a particular season,
individual players would end up with stats very similar to their
real life performance for the year in question.
In addition to using the standard teams that come with the
game , CB is supported by yearly update disks with the past
season's teams. The disks cost $15.00 and are available directly
from SSI. There are presently two season data disks: 1980 &
1981. The 1981 disk has a nice feature not found in the original
game or 1980 disk: A season statistics compiler. Any gamer

who has tried to run a baseball league, board or computer,
knows the tedium of compiling statistics. With the 1981 data
disk, you simply save the results of the game to a statistics disk
and, with the touch of a few keys, you can get a printout of your
team's performance to date. The new 1982 disk should also be
out in June or July according to Joel Billings of SSI. And, CB
will soon be available for the Commodore-64, the IBM-PC and
later the Atari.

CB Enterprises of Ft. Lee, Virginia sells five CB data disks on
which you can get every pennant winner, division winner,
close contender, and notoriously bad team from 1900 through
1979. The disks cost $15.00 individually or $60.00 for the set of
five. You can even order a customized disk with just the teams
you wish on it.

LEAGUES
The most interesting way to play a "stat" baseball game is to
set up a season replay or a league. Seasonal replays are just
what they sound like. Using Sporting News' BASEBALL GUIDE
for the year in question to find each team's schedule as well as
the results of each game, it is possible from one source to get
the information needed for the season. You can simply replay
the same schedule while resting the pitchers according to the
general rule that a pitcher needs one less day of rest than the
number of innings he pitched (with four days rest being the
maximum required).
Leagues on the other hand can be created according your
own tastes. The two leagues which I ran this past year were an
ALL STAR LEAGUE and a WINTER LEAGUE comprised of last
year's four division winners (St. Louis, Milwaukee, Atlanta,
California) plus the two teams that were eliminated at the
very end of the season (Baltimore and Los Angeles).

1981 ALL STAR LEAGUE
The ALL STAR LEAGUE was based on 1981 players and
was comprised of four teams, each representing one of the
divisions of major league baseball. Selections for team members were based on information gleaned from BILL JAMES'
BASEBALL ABSTRACT 1982 ( Ballantine Books; $5.95) (the
1983 version is now available for $6.95, and is a must for any
serious baseball fan) and influenced somewhat by the actual
All Star selections for 1981.
It was a 36 game league in which the computer coached
both sides (a nice "spectator" feature available in CB) thus
eliminating any bias on the part of the league commissioner.

Continued on pg. 26

I

THE RESULTS
The American League Western All Stars were the league
champions finishing with a record of 22-14. After six games
the AL Westers were 3-3 and trailed the NL Easters by a game.
But, the ALW then proceeded to sweep three from the NLE and
went into first place to stay for the rest of the season. From
game nine on, the ALW never had less than a two game lead.

1982 WINTER LEAGUE
The 1982 Winter League matched the four division winners
and the two near winners in a six team, thirty game league.
Like the All Star League, the Winter League was dominated by
one team. The 1982 Milwaukee Brewers were the runaway
league champs.
The Atlanta Braves had their usual quick start, winning
their first six games. But, they then went to Milwaukee where
they dropped two of three to the Brewers. The Brewers went
on to win six straight and after 18 games had a one game lead
on the field. At that point, they put the competition away by
winning nine straight games and clinching the league
championship. The last three games were strictly an exercise
in determining the second place team.
There were many interesting games in the league, but none
more interesting or odd than the final game of the season
between the California Angels and the Los Angeles Dodgers.
The Angels had just one last chance to avoid the onus of having
the league cellar all to themselves. A win by the Halos would
bring their Southern California neighbor down in the cellar
with them. But, to add insult to injury, not only did Fernando

Valenzuela defeat them, he threw a NO-HITTER! What made
this game even more unusual, and at the same time very
frustrating, was that it rained out after seven innings!
The MVP competition was not even close as Don Money won
the Triple Crown as well as leading the league in triples! His real
statistics for 1982 (.284, 16HR, 55RBI) indicates that the
random number generator in the computer liked Don a lot. I
went back more than once to check the figures we entered for
Don at the start of the season looking for data entry errors
that would cause such a performance, but none were found.

FIRE CASEY
One disadvantage of letting the computer (Casey) play is
that he will sometimes make some really off-beat decisions. He
will, for example, leave pitchers in too long. The Dodger's
Valenzuela had his final ERA ruined by one disastrous outing
in which the Braves nailed him for 10 runs on 15 hits (he was
never removed from the game). At other times the computer
will take pitchers out seemingly too early. Phil Niekro of the
Braves had a shutout going through eight innings and had not
allowed a baserunner for three innings when the computer
pulled him. Gene Garber got the last three outs for the shutout.
Letting Casey do all the coaching may reduce bias and make
things go faster, however some teams require more coaching
than Casey is prepared to give. For example, in 1982 Gene
Mauch brought the California Angels to the playoffs using
what he called "Little Ball" (i.e. a lot of bunting, sacrificing,
hitting behind the runner, etc.). While this method got the
Angels to the playoffs; with a weak coach (which is all you can
consider Casey) the Angels were buried in last place.

1981 ALL-STAR LEAGUE 1982 WINTER LEAGUE

Team
AL Westers
NL Easters
AL Easters
NL Westers

Won Lost Pct.
22
18
17
15

14
18
19
21

.611
.500
.472
.417

Team Staff
GB Batting ERA
-4
5
7

.275
.267
.263
.263

T. Paciorek
T. Paciorek
Triples
R. Henderson
Home Runs E. Murray
RBI's
B. Grich
Steals
T. Raines
R. Henderson

(ALW)
(ALW)
(ALW)

.374
21
4

(ALE)
(ALW)
(NLE)
(ALW)

13
35

Pitching

(ALE) (5-3)
(ALW) (4-3)
(NLW) (2-5)

(36+ inn.)
Strikeouts

B. Blyleven
L. Gura
N. Ryan
S. Carlton

Brewers
Orioles
Braves
Cardinals
Dodgers
Angels

Won Lost Pct.
22
16
15
15
12
10

8
14
15
15
18
20

.733
.533
.500
.500
.400
.333

Team Staff
GB Batting ERA
-6
7
7
10
12

.295
.300
.286

3.46
5.06
5.39
4.70
4.85
5.19

.283
.265
.261

League Leaders

League Leaders
Average
Doubles

3.66
3.66
3.77
3.86

Team

(NLE)

13
13
2.31
2.84
2.88

Average
Doubles
Triples
Home Runs
RBI's
Steals
Pitching
(36+ inn.)

D. Money
K. Landreaux
D. Money
D. Money
D. Money
L. Smith

(Milw)
(LA)
(Milw)
(Milw)
(Milw)
(StL)

Strikeouts

D. Sutton
M. Caldwell
T. John
F. Valenzuela

(Milw) (3-0)
(Milw) (7-0)
(Cal)
(1-3)
(LA)

Triples

R. Henderson

(ALW)

.408
12
5
13
41
12
2.33
2.61
2.81
35

45
4

SOME HELP FOR THE COMPUTER
BASEBALL MANAGER

up because of the data entry involved. In addition to the disks
mentioned above, Computer Gaming World has available a

The biggest problem with running a league/replay is the
keying in of the data. It gets to be very tedious. Many readers
who read about our "GREATEST BASEBALL TEAM OF ALL
TIME" tournament wanted to replay the tournament but gave

data disk that contains all of the teams from the All Star
League, Winter League, and the Greatest Baseball Team of All
Time Tournament. In addition, reprints of the "Greatest
Baseball Team of All Time" articles are available from CGW.

BASIC INFORMATION

THE ATARI
ARENA

NAME:
Wayout
TYPE:
Arcade/Maze
SYSTEM: Atari & Apple
# PLAYERS:1
PUBLISHER: Sirius Software
Sacramento, CA

There are eight different types of
fighters, and the game may begin with
the player facing one, two or three of any
one type by selecting one of the first 24
chases. There are ten more chases above
that, but the dangers there are undocumented, and can only be reached
by beating chase 24. (I would like to tell
you what's up there, but editorial policy
is not, alas, the reason that I cannot.
Astro Chase is a tough game at even the
lower levels.)

THE STATE OF THE ART
To describe anything as being "state of
the art" is tricky. The three games
reviewed this time, however, each define
what can be done technically with the
Atari computers. All three of these
games qualify as "arcade-type" action
games. There are, of course, state of the
art wargames and adventure games,
but action games presently offer the
most advanced graphics and animation.
Two of these games, Astro Chase and
Survivor, have similar scenarios: a lone
space-ship trying to finish a difficult
mission while being hounded by enemy
fighters.

Allen Doum
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Survivor
TYPE:
Arcade
SYSTEM: Atari 400/800, soon
for the CBM64, VIC20, and TI 99/4A
# Players: 1-4
AUTHOR: Richard Carr
PRICE:
$34.95
PUBLISHER: Synapse Software
Richmond, CA

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Astro Chase
TYPE:
Arcade
SYSTEM: Atari 400/800
#Players:
AUTHOR: Fernando Herrera
PRICE:
$29.95
PUBLISHER: First Star Software
New York, NY

In Astro Chase, the mission is to save
the earth. The Megards, humiliated in
past conflicts, have returned and
surrounded the earth (and an amazingly
crowded local area of space) in an
impenetrable force field. Into this area
they have launched 16 Mega mines that
home in on the earth. If any mine
reaches the earth, the earth explodes
and the game is over. The player flies a
saucer shaped ship around a fully
scrolling area about ten times the size of
the screen. By constantly patrolling
around the earth, the player could easily
destroy all of the mines as they
approached. The enemy fighters provide
the perhaps, fatal distraction.
Each time the player destroys all 16
mines, he is rewarded with two free lives
and another wave of mines approach
Earth, guarded by; tougher fighters.
(Waves are called Chases in this game.)
Chase one is guarded by one Ramatron,
a slow moving fighter that must ram the
player's ship to destroy it. By chase 24,
there are three Firelon Jets, fast, missile
firing enemies that can fly through the
earth and other obstacles.

The player flies his ship at a constant
speed by using a joystick. If the action
button is pressed, the ship continues on
its present course, while the joystick
aims and fires the ship's missiles. This
control scheme is called Single Thrust
Propulsion and First Star seems to
believe that it is unique enough to be
placed under separate Trade-mark.
Displayed at the bottom of the screen
are the chase number, score, high score
for session, energy remaining, ships
remaining, and mines remaining.

What qualifies Astro Chase as "state
of the art" is the graphics presentation.
The full scrolling playfield is not only
drawn beautifully, but changes with
each chase. The explosion of the earth is
so good, that seeing it almost makes up
for losing. There are even cartoon
intermissions. When the game is loaded,

PLEASE
TAKE TIME
TO FILL OUT
READER INPUT
DEVICE

and again after every fourth chase,
there is a short interlude of an astronaut
landing and reboarding his ship to an
increasingly spectacular reception.

Almost as good as the graphics is the
documentation, which clearly and
completely explains all the features of
the game (except what is beyond chase
24, of course).
The mission in Survivor is to eliminate
four large Xenogryph space forts. Each
fort is surrounded by a barrier which
must be blasted through, and each
bristles with gun emplacements. When
all of the guns have been destroyed, or
when the player runs out of lives, the
game ends.

The three types of enemy ships that
pursue the player do not fire, but each
has a different plan of attack. The
fighters can pass through the barriers
and forts, but are destroyed by the guns
or the asteroids that roam in the "open"
space between the forts. Needless to say,
all of these destroy the player's ship.
What really sets this game apart is the
control scheme. The player's ship is
controlled by joystick and fires directly
forward and backward, as in the arcade
game Bostonian. That is, it does this in
the one player version. When two
players are involved, one controls the
ship, the other the guns, which still fire
in opposite directions...Unless, that is,
there are three players. A third player
gains independent control of what has
been, up to now, the "rear gun". And the
fourth player? (That's right, four
players.) With each additional player
the ship becomes more versatile. This is,
however, offset somewhat by the
problem of coordinating the action.
Even so, our first time at the four player
version (with two rookie gunners) we
were able to destroy all four forts at the
lowest difficulty level.

There are seven difficulty levels, with
the enemy fighters appearing more
often at the higher levels. In addition to
the above variations, the ship's guns
may be placed on automatic fire and
there are two different ways that the
ship's movement can be controlled—
one with momentum.
Displayed at the bottom of the screen
are the players score, level of play, lives
left, and smart bombs left. (The smart
bombs will destroy all three enemy
fighters at once.) The main display is
fully scrolling, and uses a very good
redefined character set for all but the
ships.
The ships in both games use player/
missile graphics, and that is not the only
similarity. Both keep high score for that
session, but in both it is not really the
score that counts, it is the success of the
mission. Both also show a flat universe
from a point of view "above" it. While
there have been games that show the
action from the player's point of view
(Star Raiders, of course), they have
always been limited either in what they
showed, or in the animation of the
scene. Until now.

Now there is Wayout, a maze game
with several exceptional features. The
most striking is the animated perspective graphics. The screen displays the
maze from the player's viewpoint, not
simply jumping to the next space, but
moving and turning at all angles as the
player moves and turns. The floor is
brown, the sky white fading to blue "in
the distance", the walls a different shade
of blue with black outlines. All except
one wall that flashes red and black. That
one in the way out; the goal. (in the
Apple version of the game only the
outline of the walls is displayed.)

The perspective view takes up only a
small part of the screen. Above it is the

name of the maze, the score, and the
compass displays that show what direction the player is facing. At the bottom
of the screen a map is drawn. Each time
the player "sees" a new wall, it is added
to the map which includes a small white
dot on it showing the player's position.

Solving the maze is not all that
straightforward, however, some passageways are blocked with a strong wind
that will blow the player helplessly
through the maze. Sometimes the wind
can be overcome, but often not. At large
in every maze is the Cleptangle, a
spinning column of light that chases the
player and will steal first his compass,
then the map-drawer. To retrieve these,
the player must chase the Cleptangle
into a corner or dead-end. The thief
then disappears, but only for a while.
You are given the choice of keyboard,
paddle or joystick control and there are
26 different mazes in Wayout. Both a
low score (of time spent moving) for
each maze and a game in progress may
be stored to disk.
The mazes are not simple. INTRO, the
first maze, is not much more complex
than a Pac-Man maze, but most of the
mazes have literally hundreds of
passageways. Fortunately, the player
may mark up to nine reference points in
each maze and return to any of them
with a single keystroke.
Wayout has the best "attract mode"
I've ever seen. The program actually
solves the INTRO maze, while demonstrating all game features except the
reference points.

What do you think about the following
game? The players are members of a
tank crew with the sections of the screen
showing each player's control panel and
the commander's window showing a
detailed view of the terrain. The objective is just behind that stand of trees,
when suddenly an enemy tank, a Tiger,
appears on the right.
Sound good? Well, as far as I know,
that game isn't available yet. But all of
it's features are, in the games just
described. After all, these games can't
stay "state of the art" forever. Watch this
space for future developments. (P.S.
And let me know as soon as that tank
game shows up, will you?).

the
learning
game
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Rocky's Boots
TYPE:
Logic Game
SYSTEM: Apple II+ or Apple II
with Applesoft
FORMAT: Diskette (DOS 3.3)
BACKUP: $12 by mail
# PLAYERS: 1
PRICE:
$75.00
PUBLISHER: The Learning
Company
4370 Alpine Road
Portola Valley,
CA 94025

by Bob Proctor

It seems you can no longer assume that everyone knows who
and what the Beatles were. For those of you who don't know or
remember, then, let me just state that they were a singing
group and they wrote a song about a boy named Rocky
Raccoon who got into a pack of trouble over a girl and got mad,
shot and religion, in that order. This has nothing to do with
him. Instead, I'd like you to meet a raccoon named Rocky who
leads a much more wholesome life; in fact, he's the sort of
playmate any child should know.
ROCKY'S BOOTS is a program from The Learning Company.
To an adult, it is obviously educational; when I saw it I was
excited by the outstanding use of graphics and by the wellstructured progression from one concept to the next. In
children's eyes however, it is first and foremost a game and one
that is very fun to play. They seem to regard the instruction as
"learning the rules of the game", something you do for any
game, and since that part is highly interactive it's fun too.

What does Rocky teach? The best answer is "logic", more
specifically the logical concepts of ON and OFF (or true and
false) and the logical operations AND, OR and NOT. It does this
by having you build electrical circuits, not out of real components like batteries and transistors, but out of logical
components: AND gates, inverters, and such with wire to
string them together. Another important component is Rocky's
electric boot, which gives a powerful kick whenever it is turned
on. The ultimate goal is to construct a device that boots certain
kinds of targets but not others.

Believe me, the telling is much more complex than the
concept. If it sounds complicated, I can give you no better
advice than to try ROCKY'S BOOTS yourself. The game will
entertain people from the ages of six or seven right on up to
the oldest person you know. Even engineers who know this
stuff are fascinated by the manner in which it is presented.
They are also challenged, as the problems given at the end run
the gamut from very simple to very tricky.
A word of advice here. One of the big advantages of
computer-assisted learning is that it is non-threatening. Once
you are comfortable using the computer, you stop worrying
about making mistakes. All the pressure of knowing people are
judging you based on how quickly you pick things up disappears. At least, that's the case if they're not all standing around
the computer watching you every move. so be sensitive; even
the best programs can be made uninteresting by people
laughing at your mistakes. It may even be more likely with a
program like ROCKY'S BOOTS, which will draw lots of people,
all of whom want a turn as soon as possible.

A RUNTHROUGH THE GAME
You control ROCKY'S BOOTS by moving a cursor through a
series of rooms. Each room contains instructions to read and
doorways and arrows show you the way to the next room.
Most rooms have something to do as well; the photos show a
room where you practice fine controls by putting a key in a
keyhole to open closet with a skeleton.
As you can see from the menu, there are six parts to
ROCKY'S BOOTS. Part one just teaches you how to move the
cursor and manipulate objects. In parts two and three, you
learn basic concepts and circuitry. Each component is introduced and explained in turn, starting with the simplest. At
each step, you can manipulate and test to make sure you
understand.
We finally reach the game in part four; Rocky gives us some
puzzles to solve using what we've learned thus far. For
instance, you might be expected to build a machine that will
kick all triangles. This is done by hooking the boot up directly
to the triangle sensor. When a triangle enters the target
rectangle, an orange pulse of electricity shoots from sensor to

boot and the triangle gets kicked. A more complex puzzle is to
boot and target that is either a diamond or a circle. The
solution to this (shown in the photo) uses an OR gate to turn
the boot on when either one OR the other (or both) of the
sensors detects something.
Part five teaches some more components for our logic
circuits: flipflops, delays and clocks, The format is similar to
parts 2 and 3. Part six, ROCKY'S CHALLENGES, is similar to
part four, but includes all of the newly-learned components. It
also has many more puzzles, from simple ones all the way up to
some real mind-bogglers. There is even a room wherein you
can design a puzzle to stump your friends.

CONCLUSION
This is an outstanding game. The only bad thing I can say
about ROCKY'S BOOTS is the high price tag. It may be a fair
price, but it will (unfortunately) keep it out of many homes. If
you like the concept but want something for younger children,
The Learning Company uses the same format to teach set
theory in GERTRUDE'S PUZZLES and GERTRUDE'S SECRETS.

CHESS 7.0:
Review & Analysis
Floyd Mathews

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Odesta Chess 7.0
TYPE:
Chess Program
SYSTEM: Many
FORMAT: Disk
AUTHOR: Larry Atkin
PUBLISHER:
PRICE:
Odesta
$69.95
Evanston, IL

Odesta's Chess 7.0 (C7) is easily one of
the best chess programs now available
for microcomputers. This new program
is designed by Larry Atkin, a co-author
of the Northwestern University Chess
4.7mainframe program, which was the world
computer chess champion from 1977 to
1980. It is ideal for both chess novices
and experts.
C7 has 17 skill levels, 27 special
features, is written in machine language
with disk storage access, and is much
stronger than other microcomputer
chess programs. Satisfied customers
also report that it is superior to
"dedicated" commercial chess computers, including the famous Chess
Challenger 9 and Sargon II, formerly
viewed as the strongest home computer
program, is defeated five games out of
six at tournament speed.
For comparison, the United States
Chess Federation rating for the Atari
Chess program is only about 1250 at
tournament speed. Sargon II rates
about 1400. C7 is unofficially rated at
1813 at tournament speed, and is of
course very much stronger at the slower
depth limited levels.
The program has an "opening library"
of over 7,000 moves. Over centuries of
analysis, the best possible opening move
sequences have been discovered, and
many of them are stored on disk. If you
play a "book" opening, C7 will
immediately reply with one of the best
book responses.
Also recorded on the disk are 40 of

the most famous games and problems in
chess history, including several games
played by world class mainframe class
computers, such as Belle, the current
world computer chess champion.
C7 has nine time limited skill levels at
which it averages from one second to
sixteen minutes per move, depending
on the complexity of the position. It also
has eight depth limited skill levels at
which it considers all positions which
could possibly arise up to a certain
number of moves into the future.
The time limited levels are best for
quick fun or tournament play. The depth
limited levels are best for postal chess,
thorough analysis of difficult problems,
and for stiff competition against expert
human players.
In chess, each move by a side is called
a "ply". At its lowest depth limited skill
level, C7 examines all possibilities about
three ply into the future, and averages
about 20 seconds per move. At the
highest skill level (the so-called
"perpetual" mode) it searches an awesome 23 ply ahead, but may take
literally forever to do so. This is truly
impressive, as current world class
mainframe chess computers only search
about seven ply ahead at tournament
speed in complex positions.
The manual is very well done and
extremely informative. Beyond this,
demo command gives demonstrations
and brief descriptions of most of the
special features. And, C7's 26 other
optional special features will be helpful
to both novice and expert chess players
as the program is very user friendly.
The following are some of the most
important of the special feature
commands:
1) The value feature gives the program's
evaluation of which side is winning in
any position. It considers who has lost
more men, as well as positional strength.
A pawn lead is worth one point, a knight
is worth three, and so forth. The relative
strength of a position is usually worth

only a fraction of a point, except in a
hopelessly lost position.
2) The look feature gives C7's a prediction of the best future moves for both
sides which were discovered in its
analysis. Each progressive move
represents one less ply of search by the
program, therefore the first predicted
move is much better than the later
moves. C7 continues to "think" while the
player is considering his next move, so
that if you take a long time to move, or if
you move as predicted, it may respond
more quickly.
3) The visible command allows you to
view the moves which C7 is "thinking"
about on its turn.
4) The change command allows you to
set up any position, and is a fast way to
set up special chess problems for C7 to
consider.
5) The auto feature instructs the
computer to play both sides against
itself. This feature is very educational
for novices, very entertaining for
spectators, and is also safe and effective
therapy for incurable kibitzers!
A game was played by telephone over
a period of weeks as a test of C7's higher
levels (E and F) against a very strong
player, Spencer R. Mathews, who has a
U.S.C.F. rating of 1965 and has studied
chess avidly for 30 years. (Spencer is a
former South Carolina State Champion,
and defeated Bobby Fischer in a
simultaneous exhibition in March,
1963). S.R.M. had previously played
several other chess programs, including
Atari Chess and Chess Challenger, and
had easily defeated them at their highest
skill levels. The game was played under
postal chess conditions and S.R.M.,
playing black, averaged about 30
minutes a move, although neither side
was under any time limit.
The game appeared to be even or
slightly in Black's favor until the 28th
move. Faced with being down by at least
one point, and convinced that C7 would

Continued on pg. 42

Greetings once again! Now that I have
finally made my big move (note my new
address below), I can settle down for
some more mathematical games. As
always, I am interested in your questions, improvements, superior programs, and so on — especially answers
to questions asked in the column. I
particularly am interested in getting
your programs to solve the McDONALD'S
PERMUTED CHANGE PROBLEM from
the last issue of COMPUTER GAMING
WORLD. The best ones will be
acknowledged and published, probably
in the next issue. (In general, due to
time lag in getting articles to the editor,
then to the printer, etc., responses take
some time to get into print. Bear with us,
folks!). So, send all your comments,
questions and answers to:
Dr. Michael W. Ecker
COMPUTER GAMING WORLD
129 Carol Drive
Clarks Summit, Pa. 18411

Please remember that I will answer
any personal questions if you provide a
self-addressed stamped envelope. With
this business out of the way then, let's
look at this issue's new recreations.

A NUMBER GUESSING GAME
WITH YOUR COMPUTER

Program one, a no-frills program in
Microsoft BASIC, will enable you to play
a simple guessing game with your computer. The computer will randomly (or
psuedo-randomly) pick an integer from 1
to 1000 and prompt you to guess it. You
will then be told whether your guess is
correct, too low, or too high. The program
loops back to the prompt for a guess
until the correct answer is obtained. As
always, this program was written for a
TRS-80 (I have a Model 3), but is very
easily adapted to Apples and Ataris
(the two computers owned by most of

our readers) as well as any others.
Specifically, CLS clears the screen, so
change that line to HOME or whatever
command clears the screen for your
machine.
10 CLS
20 RANDOM : X=RND (1000)
30 PRINT "I'VE PICKED A NUMBER
FROM 1 TO 1000."
40 PRINT "WHAT'S YOUR GUESS";
INPUT G
45 J=J+1
50 IF G=X THEN PRINT "HOORAY!
YOU GOT IT (IN";J;"GUESSES)."
:END
60 IF G X THEN PRINT "TOO HIGH.
TRY AGAIN."; PRINT: GOTO 40
70 IF G X THEN PRINT "TOO LOW.
TRY AGAIN."; PRINT: GOTO 40
Can you think of a mathematical
strategy for guessing correctly within a
specific small number of moves? How
many moves are enough to get the
answer every time?

give it the same feedback that the
program here gives you. Specifically, it
should ask whether its guess is too high
or too low, and not just right or wrong.
Again, I will publish the best one(s)
several issues later. You should strive, if
possible, to make the program so that
the computer can guess the number in
as few moves as possible, so think about
how to do this!
FIXES AND IMPROVEMENTS
In Micromagic column #1 (Vol. 2, #6),
the program for THE REMARKABLE
NUMBER 153 produces unwarranted
decimals sometimes due to the use of
the exponentiation operator. To
eliminate this minor (but annoying)
shortcoming, change line 110 as printed
to read:
110 A(I)=VAL(MID$(N$,I,1)):A(I)
=A(I) *A(I) *A(I)
which has the desired effect by simply
using iterated (or repeated) multiplication (which is what exponentiation
is anyway).
THE BASE TWO CARD TRICK

I have been told that certain calculators by Texas Instruments (I think
the TI 58 or 59, if memory serves me) are
equipped to play this game with either
the machine or the player doing the
guessing. The computer uses an
algorithm for getting the answer in as
few moves as can be expected without
mind-reading.

(There is, of course, one way to get the
answer the first time every time: when
you run the program and the computer
prompts you for the number, hit the
break or escape key, "PRINT X", and
then type "CONT" to continue - - but that
is not very sporting!)
Once you figure out a way of handling
this, I challenge you to the problem of
writing a program which will allow YOU
to pick the number and have your
computer guess it. Your program should

This trick is totally in the spirit of the
guessing game program above. Briefly,
you pick a number from 1 to 63 (in fact,
you may even choose from 0 to 63). The
program will ask you whether your
number appears on the screen. You type
either Y or N (yes or no) and hit ENTER
or RETURN each time. After doing this
for six screens, the computer will tell
you what your number is! I won't give
the explanation (at least not until next
issue anyway), so just enjoy it for now!
Until next issue...
1
CLEAR 5000
5
DIM A(6,32)
20 CLS
30 PRINT "PLEASE THINK OF A
WHOLE NUMBER FROM 1 TO 63"
40 PRINT: FRO Z=1 TO 1000:NEXT Z:
REM TIME STALLER
45 PRINT:PRINT:PRINT

Continued on pg. 43

THE ROAD TO
TRS-80 GAMING

DICK McGRATH

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Telengard
TYPE:
Adventure
SYSTEM: Many
FORMAT: Disk and Tape
# of Players:!

PRICE:

DISK:$28.00
TAPE: $23.00
PUBLISHER: Avalon Hill Game Co.
Baltimore, MD
The ominous grey ruins of an ancient
castle loom out of the mist as we
approach the town of Telengard, far
from the familiar scenery of ROUTE 80.
Today we're exploring a newly discovered locale: THE DUNGEONS OF
TELENGARD!
Telengard is an adventure game from
the Avalon Hill Company. As with many
fantasy role-playing games, Telengard
appears to have borrowed heavily from
the original Dungeons and Dragons
(D&D) game. In fact, my first reaction
was to search the credit lines, looking
for some acknowledgement to Gary
Gygax and his pals at T.S.R., producers
of D & D.
As in D & D, you start by creating your
own personal dungeon adventurer.
Somewhere deep in its electronic
recesses, your computer patiently rolls
three six-sided dice, producing random
values for the time-honored D & D
character attributes of strength,

intelligence, wisdom, constitution,
dexterity and charisma. Using these
values, it churns out an endless string of
adventure characters; one of which you
must select as your hero. This can be a
long process. Faithfully adhering to the
odds of statistical probability, the
computer produces an abundance of
slightly-flawed lance and shield carriers.
The computer has infinite patience and
sees no reason to depart from its
mathematical randomness. You, how-

ever, sit with a finger poised over the
enter key, waiting for just the right
combination of high-value attributes to
come along. Usually, the "right" combination never does show up, so you
eventually settle for a less-than-ideal
candidate...Perhaps a ruffian with a
strength of 15, constitution of 12 and a
charisma of 5 and you name him "Igor".
Or, more likely, "Svigor" as the program
has an unusual character naming
convention: if you want to be able to
resurrect a character from oblivion, the
first two letters of his name must be SV.
This produces some unpronounceable
names, and also lets everyone know
whether you have been bravely risking
final, irrevocable death while raising a
character to 27th level or whether you
have simply been resurrecting him after
each unsuccessful foray. One possibility
overlooked by the authors is the option
of creating your own character by
selecting desirable values yourself, or
inputting attribute values of a character
already created for some other game
system, such as a favorite D & D
character.
Those of you who play D & D are
familiar with the character classes of
fighter, mage, cleric and thief. Each
class requires special capabilities in one
or more of the six basic attributes
(strength, wisdom, dexterity, etc.) In
Telengard, regardless of his abilities,
your character is a hybrid of fighter and
magic user with no opportunity to
choose his own destiny.

The character comes equipped with
an economy grade sword, armor and
shield and the ability to cast one magical
spell. He doesn't have a farthing in cash
and no way to upgrade his equipment or
buy anything additional. The ability to
make purchases from a general store
would have added an extra and very
desirable dimension to the game. This
would be particularly interesting later
in the game as your hero accumulates

treasure from his adventures. As the
program is written, he has nothing to do
with his wealth except to deposit bags
of gold in the Inn safe which is done for
him automatically. Igor doesn't even get
to decide how much cash to take with
him on each succeeding adventure.
Some other fantasy adventure programs
handle this better. The DUNJONQUEST
series by AUTOMATED SIMULATIONS
provides an inn-keeper who haggles
over the price of five types of weapons,
five kinds of armor and two sizes of
shields. The Maces and Magic series
from ADVENTURE INTERNATIONAL
provides an amazing array of 80 weapon
choices and 26 types of armor!
As you begin your descent into the
dungeon, you might look around and
discover that you're all alone! This is a
solo adventure, and you don't have the
company of fellow-travelers to provide
comfort and security. The dungeon itself
is composed of 50 levels of rooms and
corridors, with each level containing
progressively more dangerous monsters
and traps. The Dungeon is displayed as
simple overhead views of the walls and
doorways, and you are shown only what
your character would actually be able to
see from his current position. Anything
around a corner or behind a door is left
blank. This can create some confusion
in mapping, because what appears to be
an opening from one perspective may
show up as a blank wall after you have
moved. You should definitely prepare a
map of your travels as you will need to
know the locations of all the dungeon
features in order to find your way in and
out and to avoid traps. The features
include a variety of puzzles, traps and
teleportation devices. The effects of
each feature may change between
encounters, so that you can never be
quite certain of what is going to happen
at any particular feature, even if you
have visited it previously.
As you travel through the passages
you will encounter 20 different types of

Continued on pg. 43

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Twerps
TYPE:
Arcade
SYSTEM: Atari, Apple
FORMAT: Disk
# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR: Dan Thompson
PUBLISHER: Sirius Software,
Sacramento, CA
TWERPS, an arcade game from Sirius,
has eight levels of difficulty. After
selecting your play level you see a reenactment of the infamous day when a
Twerp explorer ship, with nine Twerp
crew, met with a mysterious accident
and crashed on an asteroid. Fortunately,
all nine crew Twerps survived and took
refuge in individual caverns on the
asteroid.

re-rescue any unlucky Twerp so plucked.
In addition to the Glingas, you will
sometimes see a Gleepnok walk across
the screen. The Gleepnok will track your
string of Twerps and, will immediately
eat any he catches. Of course, once a
Twerp has been digested it can not be
rescued. You cannot destroy Glingas or
Gleepnoks, but you can hide from them
by quickly jumping into the nearest
unoccupied crater. When you have
rescued all nine Twerps, or as many as
possible, you simply return to the space
vehicle and blast off. Once in space you
must again blast your way through
Orbiters to reach the mother ship and
safety.
Dan Thompson has programmed
many extras into this game including
very good graphics and well placed
sound routines. Fuel is a function of
time and each rescue mission must be
completed within the allotted fuel (time)
limit. Points are deducted for each
Twerp not rescued. The game at level
one is very easy to play. My nine year old
mastered it in about 20 minutes. At level
three it gets hard and by level eight it
presents a real challenge for even skilled
arcade game players. This game will
provide a pleasant diversion for children
and adults alike.
Mark Bausman

Your mission, as Captain Twerp, is to
travel from the mother ship to the
surface of the asteroid, rescue stranded
Twerps, and return them to the mother
ship.
In order to travel from the mother
ship to the surface of the asteroid, you
must blast your way through Orbiters. If
you get past the Orbiters, keep your
finger on the fire button because now
you must guide your rescue vehicle,
"Lunar Lander" style, to the asteroid
landing pad. Once landed, you move the
figure of Captain Twerp to the various
caverns and rescue the Twerps. Each
rescued Twerp will fall in line behind
you and follow as you rescue the rest of
the crew. As you bravely move about
with your chorus line of Twerps, a
birdlike figure will appear on the screen.
This figure is called a Glingas and it
loves to pluck Twerps from the line and
carry them to empty caverns. You must

distinguished himself with the release of
AZTEC. Aztec combines real-time animation with fast arcade action and the
puzzles of a good fantasy role-playing
game. The object of the game is to
recover a golden idol from the recesses
of an ancient Aztec temple. As you
search for the idol, you will have the
dubious honor of battling the various
denizen of this temple—including tigers,
dinosaurs, spiders, alligators and others.
In addition, an assortment of deadly
traps must also be overcome, in the true
spirit of "Raiders of The Lost Ark". If you
are lucky, you may find a machete, a
gun or even some dynamite hidden
amongst the debris which litters the
temple. But remember, even if you
should find the idol, you must still
escape to claim your reward.
The temple consists of eight levels,
each containing eight separate rooms
and each room, in turn, containing three
floors which are simultaneously visible.
The game is reminiscent of Muse
Software's Castle Wolfenstein, except
for the fact that the Aztec maze is
shown from a cut-away view, whereas
Castle Wolfenstein is shown from an
overhead view. You need not fear getting
bored with the same old maze, as the
temple configuration is chosen randomly from 32 possible combinations.
There are eight levels of play available to
the player to insure that the game will
remain a challenge.
The hero's movements are controlled
by the keyboard; a joystick would be
inadequate. You can make him walk,

run, jump, kneel, stop, turn around,
climb, place dynamite or fight with
either a machete or a revolver.

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
AZTEC
Adventure Arcade
TYPE:
SYSTEM: Apple
FORMAT: Disk
# PLAYERS:1
PUBLISHER: Datamost
Chatsworth, CA
Paul Stephenson, author of the
popular "Swashbuckler", has once again

The graphics are among the best that
are now available on the market. Each
creature moves with such fluid animation that they seem at times to be
alive. What results from these excellent
graphics is non-stop action which will
make many games appear obsolete by
comparison. After playing Aztec a few
times, you can easily become addicted.
Aztec has, however, a few minor flaws.
The graphics routines will upon occasion leave 'garbage' on the screen. In

addition, the documentation provided
with the game is adequate but far from
clearly written. I had to play several
times before I realized that you must
kneel twice before placing dynamite.
These minor faults seldom effect play,
but you should not, for example, run
into the next room just after lighting a
stick of dynamite.
When Aztec's few faults are balanced
against some of the best action graphics
and general designs now available, the
latter definitely win hands down.
Tom Jones

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Sherwood Forest
TYPE:
Adventure
SYSTEM: Apple II (48K)
FORMAT: Disk
# PLAYERS:1
AUTHORS: Day Holle &
Dale Johnson
PUBLISHER: Phoenix Software,
Inc. Lake Zurich, Il.
"#'*%&," he said as he unsuccessfully
tried to get out of the 'Little Twisty
Passages' in the Colossal Cave. Well,
don't try typing that into this adventure.
The people at Phoenix Software don't
take kindly to people who swear. They
do, however, take good care of logical
two word commands. 'Sherwood Forest'
is similar, in many respects, to most of
the picture oriented adventure games
on the market today. The top portion of
the screen displays a room (the generic
term for your current location), while
the bottom four lines are text and give a
verbal description. What sets this game
apart is in how well it performs the
required transition from 'room' to 'room.'
The speed of picture creation is almost
frightening, but even more amazing is
the quality of the picture once it arrives.
There is ABSOLUTELY no bleeding of
one color into the next. Each scene is
exceptionally well drawn, and some of
them are even partially animated. The
animation consists mostly of blinking or
shifting eyes, a scene with smoke rising
is very nicely presented.
The puzzles, for the most part, are
simple, straightforward and logical —
prompting Phoenix Software to classify
this a Class 3 Adventure. If you really
like sinking your teeth into an adventure
game, this one will be like a couple of
sticks of chewing gum. A master
adventurer should be able to solve the

entire adventure in an afternoon. There
are less than 50 separate scenes and
only about 25 puzzles to be solved. The
first few puzzles are exceptionally easy,
making this a very fine beginner's
introduction to adventure gaming. But,
there are still a few challenges that
might tempt you to enter an expletive or
two. Finally, there is even a separate
screen to reward successful completion
of the adventure. I don't know about
you. But after spending a couple of
weeks solving a horde of puzzles, it's a
real let down to just see, 'GAME
FINISHED, DO YOU WISH TO PLAY
AGAIN?' at the bottom of the screen!
Should a puzzle get the best of you,
Phoenix has prepared a map and hint
sheet that they will send in a self
addressed stamped envelope. It took
only a few days for them to respond to
my request. The hint sheet is even coded
to prevent accidentally reading a clue
you did not want.
Up to ten versions of the game can be
saved on a separate disk. Those of you
with two drives will appreciate the fact
that the save disk can be placed in drive
two, meaning you never have to swap
disks during play.
Phoenix has put everything in place
to allow them to create a really great
adventure game. Sherwood Forest isn't
bad, it's just too short. Look for great
things to come when they produce a
'Class 1 adventure.' Then let the foul
invectives Fly!
John Besnard

BASIC INFORMATION

NAME : COMPUTER FACTS
IN FIVE
TYPE :
Quiz Game
SYSTEM : Atari, Apple II,
IBM PC
FORMAT : Disk
# PLAYERS:1 to 4
AUTHOR : Paul F. Granchelli
PUBLISHER: Avalon Hill Game Co.
Baltimore, MD

COMPUTER FACTS IN FIVE (CFIF) is
the computer version of Facts in Five,
Avalon Hill's-popular game of knowledge
and quick thinking. With rules very
similar to its board/card game counter
part, CFIF is faster moving, more
demanding, and vastly more versatile.
The basic concept and function of the
game is quite simple. CFIF is played in
rounds, during which one to four players
work against the clock to give five
answers to each of five classes and
possibly sub-categories of subject matter ranging from popular subjects to
highly academic ones. The answers
must, however, begin with the letters to
be found following the five subjects. For
example, if the subject class were
CITIES, and the sub-category FOREIGN,
wit h t he letter L as the first of five letters
following, then a correct answer to this
part would be LONDON, as London is a
Foreign City beginning with an L.
Selection of the subject categories
may be made by either the computer or
the player(s). If done by the computer,
the program will randomly select five
classes and possibly sub-categories from
the over 1000 choices available to it.
Selection by player, on the other hand,
offers many more options, and potential
strategies to be used. The computer will
display a group of classes or classes and
categories from which one must be
chosen. The players alternate in the
selection of subject until all five subjects
for the round have been chosen. The
strategy, of course, comes in choosing a
subject at which either you excel, or at
which your opponents are poor. More
than half the battle may be won or lost
during this part of the pre-round setup.
The strength of CFIF lies in its extreme versatility. During the initialization process you may essentially tailor
the game to your requirements. At this
time the following options are given:
setting the time limit per player per
round (normally 5 min.); specifying the
number of rounds per game (1-999); the
number of games per match; the alphabet to be used (you may, for example,
remove some difficult letters); set letter
options (each subject with five unique
letters or all five subjects using the same
five unique letters); and the option of
using an eighty column printer. Added
to these options, there are three different game modes, each with five
variations.
When the desire comes upon you for a
change from arcade games, or from

fighting against some historic army or
mythological beast, CFIF should definitely be considered. Played solitaire or
as a party game (where its abilities
shine best), this game, with the vast
number of options combinations available, will continue to be enjoyable for
years to come.
Ed Curtis

BASIC INFORMATION

NAME :
The Alien
TYPE :
Strategy
SYSTEM : Apple II
FORMAT : Disk
# PLAYERS :1
PRICE :
$28.00
PUBLISHER :Avalon Hill
Baltimore, Md.
The fangs of the metamorphosed alien
still dripped with the blood of Commander Clark as Chief Dimitrov dropped the cage into the stern airlock.
Quickly, Dimitrov leaped from the compartment like a frightened child. "Jettison it!" he shouted, "What are you
waiting for, man?" The corpse-white
mask of fear on the engineer's face gave
way to the purple visage of rage, as the
passionate slay heard the reply. "Regulations strictly forbid the killing of alien
life forms that can be handled by alternate means," responded the science
officer.
"Sometimes, I think you're more a
computer than a human," accused the
chief. Just then, the sound of metal
being torn apart was heard behind them
and Dimitrov never saw the scowl cross
the android science officer's face at this
uncomfortably accurate insult.
Sound familiar? Yes, Avalon Hill has
recreated a nightmare similar to the
one experienced in the SF/horror film,
right down to the android crew member.
The game, however, offers a more complex challenge, since it involves more
than one kind of alien life (some benign),
more personnel to deal with the problem
and more than one of the hostile aliens
(possibly 5 or 6) with which to cope.

Each game turn consists of an interrupt phase (summary of basic game
status); a non-crew movement phase
(strategic movement by the computer);
two action phases (tactical movement
within a room, passage, or vent for both
player and computer); and a movement
phase (strategic movement by the
player). The movement phase is accompanied by a map of the ship to aid in
plotting the crew members' movement
(+) and tracking the aliens' movement
(-) over the ship's thirty rooms, passages
and vents. The map is accompanied by
two bookkeeping displays to aid in
keeping track of action points expended
and the location/status of crew and
equipment.
The player's force consists of three
character types: 1) officers, 2) scientists,
and 3) engineers (each of which has
particular value). The officers are in
charge of the armory and are the only
ones who can engage the self-destruct
mechanism. The scientists have the best
chance of breaking the protection code
on the computer's classified data file
concerning alien life. If one of the
scientists is the android, however, you
will have the frustration of seeing "DATA
PROTECTED" displayed on the screen
ad nauseam. They are also the only ones
who can lock aliens or animals in laboratory cages or who can take inventory.
The engineers are important because
they are the only ones who can construct makeshift electric prods and
flamethrowers.
The game can be as unsettling as the
plot for the movie. Just as the account
which begins this article suggests, you
can think things are under control and
then have disaster strike. The first time I
played the game, I had the alien encaged, anesthetized and flanked by two
armed crew members. The alien broke
out of the cage and escaped without so
much as a chance for defensive fire. It is
frustrating to have prepared for just
such a contingency and have the advantage taken away from you. In some
locations you can soften this blow by
placing an armed party in the room or
passageway adjacent to the compartment with the encaged and/or anesthetized alien. This is not always practical,
since some locations offer several escape
routes (such as the bridge or any passageway). Although this feature of the
game could be defended as being like a
"reaction phase" (similar to some rules
for miniatures), it demands the use of
strategies which do not actually make
much sense.

A minor difficulty is encountered in
the action phase displays. These are
only text displays and sometimes have a
tendency to give confusing information.
If a character is located in a room with
more than one object, it is often difficult
to interpret what the character is
actually carrying and what is simply
present in the room. The matter is
always cleared up during the crew movement phase, however, and rarely offers
a problem in the flow of the game.
"The Alien" is an interesting strategy
game which will take many hours of
gaming to master. Variables in number
and locations of aliens, rate of metamorphosis, and identity (or existence)
of the android crew member offer the
possibility of an above-average shelf life.
Johnny Wilson

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Nautilus
TYPE:
Arcade
SYSTEM: Atari 400/800 32K
FORMAT: Cassette or Disk
# of Players: 1 or 2
AUTHOR: Mike Potter
PRICE:
$34.95
PUBLISHER: Synapse Software
Richmond, CA
Nautilus is a fast action game of sub
and destroyer warfare. As captain of
the Nautilus you are given the job of
destroying enemy cities block by block
and capturing the proto-pods that lie
inside them. Proto-pods give the
Nautilus energy that is vital to the
engines, defense and life support
systems. Above, the destroyer Colossus
moves between shore lines carrying
repair crews that rebuild the cities you
destroyed. The Nautilus commander
must alternate between destroying
cities, picking up proto-pods, and
keeping the Colossus from reaching the
west shore. The colossus depth charges
and Barracuda missiles that lock on to
your position and relentlessly pursue
you. Between the two shores there is a
vast underwater cave system in which
you must journey through on your way
to destroy the cities. Beware though,
intelligent Limpet Lurkers materialize
in the depths to hunt you out, and
electronic locks are activated at the
entrances of caves to slow you down.
The game uses one or two players,
allowing either the computer or a
human opponent to operate the
Colossus. Each game has a one to nine

minute time limit. Though you have
unlimited "lives", it takes five seconds
for both the Colossus and Nautilus to be
repaired. The Nautilus has an unlimited
number of Thunderbolt torpedoes to
deploy, which takes no extra energy to
fire. Colossus will drop depth charges
and one barracuda missile at a time.
Quick reflexes are a must, though, as
the Colossus moves between the dock
on the east shore to the deployment
area on the west at roughly twice the
speed of the Nautilus. Colossus gains
points for each city-block repaired, and
Nautilus for each destroyed. To aid the
Nautilus, there is a support helicopter
which is constantly bent on damaging
Colossus. If Colossus is damaged, the
ship is automatically returned to base,
then repaired and deployed.

The game has nine challenging skill
levels and a handicap option which
governs the amount of points the
Colossus receives, between 10 and 80,
for each city block repair. To the
beginner, this game is enjoyably frustrating, as even nicking a cave wall will
send you crashing to the bottom. With a
little persistence, though, you'll soon
find that you can handle even the
tightest squeeze.

The graphics are the highlight of the
game, with a beautifully scrolling split
screen showing the progress of both the
Nautilus and Colossus. The underwater
world is an excellent concept, creating
an exciting adventure in which to
explore and play, something that typical
single screen arcade games lack. The
Nautilus and Colossus are well portrayed on the screen and the sound
effects are quite good.
Documentation comes in the form of
a small but thorough seven page booklet.
It gives a player everything he needs to
get going, except strategy notes. There is
also a small bug in the program which
sometimes places an unmovable and
undestroyable barracuda missile on the
ocean surface. Since the Nautilus needs
only to go around it, this does not affect
the playing of the game to any great
extent. Otherwise, Nautilus is very well
designed and written.
Truly, Synapse has produced another
top rate game with outstanding graphics
and intense action.
Grant Butenhoff

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
NECROMANCER
TYPE:
Arcade
SYSTEM: Atari 400/800
FORMAT: 32K Disk/Cassette
16k Cartridge
Player:
One
PRICE:
$34.95
PUBLISHER: Synapse Software
Richmond, CA
It's the age of darkness and evil wizard
Tetragorn rules supreme. He has many
allies — halting spirits and legions of
arachnids and the Earth is in his grip
of terror. Only you, a lone Druid, have
the power to defeat him. Aided by the
powers of Mother Nature, you can grow
trees and create your own army to
defeat the wizard's forces.
There are three Acts in the game. Act
One is where you grow trees which are
needed to proceed to Act Two. You start
out with ten seeds. As you plant them,
they begin to grow from a bud, to a
young tree, and finally into a full grown
tree. This happens in a matter of
seconds. Ogres like to eat seeds and
young trees, but can't hurt full grown
trees. Using your 'Wisp" to defend the
trees is easy since the Wisp loves to eat
Ogres. The enemy of fully grown trees is
the Spider. It poisons adult trees. The
poisoned trees call for help and you
have a limited time to save them by
hitting them with your Wisp. The more
trees you grow, the faster the Ogres
come out, and the faster the spider
poisons a tree. The poison works faster
as well, with uncured trees turning into
useless stumps. After losing all your
strength on this level, you are transported to Act Two, the Vaults, with the
number of adult trees left alive.
In Act Two, the trees are used to plant
over the bins in the vaults. In these bins
are Spider eggs. Any eggs not destroyed
will become spiders that you have to
face in Act Three. Your Wisp turns the
trees into walking trees. You can walk
tree over a bin and plant it. It will
automatically grow roots downward
into the bin eventually falling through
and smashing the egg. When, during this
act, an egg is ready to hatch, it will flash
— so watch for them. Hands of Fate will
also drop down every few seconds, and
anything that walks under them, such
as a tree or a Druid, will be picked up.
Each level of the vaults has two levels of
bins, four stairs going up and four stairs
going down. To get downstairs, a ladder
must be lowered. To lower a ladder, you

must walk the Druid across a question
mark (?) left by the hands of fate. Be
quick, as the Hands will return to pick
up what they left. There are five levels of
vaults, and each level is harder than the
previous one. The more difficult the
level, the faster Hands drop down and
the eggs hatch. Also, any spiders
hatched in the vaults will not only eat
the trees that you have brought with
you, but will shoot poison at your Druid
while so doing.

After going through all five levels of
vaults, you reach Act Three, the Wizards
Domain. The Wizard can only appear
on graves with headstones so, to defeat
him you must destroy the headstones
on thirteen graves. Here also, you now
face the spiders and eggs that escaped
destruction in the vaults of Act Two.
Each spider you destroy, in this Act,
however is only temporarily gone as it
can be reincarnated by the Wizard.
When you destroy the wizard, he
vanishes in blue flame creating a new
spider and new grave (with a headstone
to be knocked down). Destroying the
wizard gives you strength, which you
need because the spiders drain strength
by touching you or being hit by your
Wisp. There are five levels in Act Three,
each faster than the previous one. When
you defeat the wizard on level five, the
screen explodes in a shower of colors
and the Wizard is defeated forever. The
graphics in the game are superb using
every color available On the Atari. The
details are as good as the colors
showing the leaves of trees that sway in
the wind. It's a fast paced game with
plenty of action to keep even the best
arcader busy with joystick controls. This
is definitely one of the best games in the
Synapse line for the Atari. Even the best
arcader will have a difficult time
defeating the wizard and reaching level
five of Act Three.
Hosea Battles Jr.

STAR MAZE WINNERS
In the Nov-Dec issue of
COMPUTER GAMING WORLD (2.6)
we sponsored a contest based on
Sir-tech's space arcade game, Star
Maze. Roe Adams of Hyde Park, MA
won the first prize. Barry
Schlossberg of Louisville, KY was
the second place winner.
Congratulations to both.

until turned away from the wind. Each
ship has three destructible sails. Speed
is reduced with each sail lost in combat.
In addition to sails, guns can be lost to
enemy fire. One of the more interesting
encounters is between a ship with little
mobility (one or more sails gone) but
good fire power against a ship with a full
set of sails but with most of her guns
shot away.

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Old Ironsides
SYSTEM: Apple II
FORMAT: Disk
# PLAYERS: 2
AUTHORS: Jack Rice
Richard Hefter
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: XEROX EDUCATION
PUBL.
MIDDLETOWN, CT

OLD IRONSIDES (01) is an excellent
example of a game that combines
graphic/arcade features with strategic
planning. Grognards from the WOODEN
SHIPS AND IRON school of fighting sail
games may at first find OI "too simplistic". There is no selecting of ammo
type (chain for sails, grapeshot for antipersonnel, ball for hull damage), there is
no boarding, there is no this or that.
However, the simple nature of this game
makes what is basically a strategic game
very easy to play even for someone
totally unfamiliar with fighting sail.

OI pits two players (no solo version
unfortunately) against one another on
the high seas. Each identical ship has
six guns per side and begins with six
rounds of powder per side. Powder is
replenished at a rate somewhat slower
than the maximum fire rate. This means
that you must conserve your powder
when getting ready to enter a melee. On
the other hand, a useful strategy is to try
to force your opponent to engage in a
series of broadsides from his undersupplied side. Hopefully you will still
have a keg or two of powder left when he
runs out.

The wind always blows from the
bottom of the screen toward stationary

Players can sail their ships off the
edge of the screen and enter the fog.
While in the fog they can fire back onto
the screen but cannot themselves be hit.
This feature makes for some interesting
"ambush" tactics. Try to work to the
outside of your opponent and lead him
toward the edge. If you are to the
outside, you can duck into the fog and
engage him with impunity. On the other
hand, when you see an opponent working toward the edge and you cannot
stop him, high-tail it to the other side of
the screen to force him to return to the
battle area.

While the fog can be interesting, it can
also be deadly. When you exit the board
a beeping begins and rises in frequency,
ceasing only when you return to the
battle area. When the beeping reaches
its upper limit, your ship is lost in the
fog, considered sunk, and a victory given
to your opponent. It is especially dangerous to sail off into the fog with one or
more sails down as you may not be able
to get back in some situations before
you are lost. One of the most frustrating
yet humorous encounters I have had
was a long battle with a friend in which
we fought tooth and nail and were each
down to one sail and a couple of guns
each. I at last crossed the 'T' and put
the final salvo into him which gave him
100% damage. When a ship reaches
100% damage it explodes and sinks.
However the process salvo into his ship I
jumped up and cheered (it really HAD
been a tense battle) but my opponent
only smirked. While congratulating
myself my ship had continued on into
the fog. Before I realized what
happened, his ship sank and mine was
lost and sank as well, producing a draw.
Argh!

A more detailed fighting sail game (by
Wayne Garris) will be released by SSI
later this year. However, it will not
"replace" the present game, for OI has
an appeal all of its own.
❑

The Blade of
Blackpoole
Fantasy/
TYPE:
Graphic Adventure
SYSTEM: Apple II
# PLAYERS: One
AUTHOR: Tim Wilson
PUBLISHER: Sirius Software, Inc.
NAME:

The Blade of Blackpoole (BB) is an
illustrated fantasy game similar in
format to 'The Wizard and the Princess".
The object of BB is to recover the magical
sword Myraglym and return it to the
altar from whence it was stolen. Rumors
speak of a secret chamber near Blackpoole in which sword is said to lie.

When the game begins you are
deposited in a forest with only a money
belt and some gold coins in your
possession. As you get the lay of the land
and attempt to fulfill your quest, you
will probably come across a tavern. Here
you can purchase some items that could
be useful. However, you are only allowed
to carry five objects in your possession
at one time; so it is wise to pick and
choose among the objects that are made
available to you. In some cases you
should drop an item as soon as it is used
to allow room for another item that you
might not need until late in the game.
Some of my repeated starts resulted
from the fact that I traveled past certain
points in the game where you could not
return through only to find that I had
left behind a needed object. So, pick
your inventory carefully.

The ability to play and finish this
game involves solving many puzzles
before the successful conclusion. The
author did not intend for this game to
be solved in one evening.

As in other games of this genre,
mapping is another must. Accurate
knowledge of where you have been and
where you currently are cannot be over
emphasized.

When you first start the game, you
make a "player's disk" by copying the
back side of the original disk. From that
point on you just use the original disk to
boot and then play with the copy. As you
can realize this saves an awful lot of
wear and tear on the disk that you

Continued on pg. 44

CHESS (Cont.)
continue its error-free play, Black
resigned.
In other tests against two 1900+ rated
players, C7 consistently played a strong
positional game, not merely setting
tactical ambushes. It handles its pawns
well, and strives to push passed pawns
to the eighth rank. It is particularly
strong in the end game and in its opening library, but is somewhat weaker in
complex middle game positions. In one
memorable game at a low level against a
1911 rated player, C7 sacrificed a knight
for two pawns plus a surprisingly lethal
kingside attack. The player eventually
won, but just barely.
Odesta's Chess 7.0 probably has the
most powerful chess solitaire play
capability now available for home
computers. You will find it extremely
entertaining even if chess is not your
favorite game. I hope that more
designers will try to reach this level of
solitaire capability in other types of
computer games.

CLOSE ASSAULT (Cont.)

GALACTIC ATTACK (Cont.)

Probably the most important difference is in the Defensive Fire phase. In
CA, you can only shoot at an enemy
squad in its CURRENT position; no
dragging it back to where it ran across
the open for a more effective shot. This
makes defense a lot harder and you'll
find the most challenging scenarios are
those where you play defense against
the computer. You can also shoot at
only one squad at full firepower. If two
or more enemy squads occupy the same
hex, you can opt to fire at all of them,
but firepower is diluted among them.
CA also treats LOS differently — an
obstacle is assumed to fill the entire hex
even though its symbol on the map may
be much smaller. CA has no counters for
leaders and support weapons; these are
assigned to squads at the beginning of
the game. You can't transfer support
weapons between squads, even if the
squad gets blown away, nor can a leader
rally any squad but his own. CA has no
stacking limits, no fire groups, no
artillery, no vehicles, and no entrenchments. The only support weapons
represented are machine guns (light,
medium, and heavy), flamethrowers,
demo charges and smoke.
On the other hand, it does keep track
of unit strengths much more precisely.
Each squad starts at a strength of 10
men, but may suffer losses as men are
killed or wounded. The combat routines
have been modified somewhat to take
advantage of the greater detail. Another
improvement, in my opinion, is that you
are definitely in the role of leader. When
a squad becomes demoralized and
refuses to follow orders, the computer
controls its behavior until it rallies. If
you get yourself killed then you don't get
to give any more orders. The computer
takes over control of your remaining
troops and plays out the game. Your
subordinate may win or lose, depending
on how good a position you've left him
in, but all you can do is watch.
As usual, Avalon Hill has provided the
source code, so if you'd like to make your
own modifications to the game, you can.
CLOSE ASSAULT is written in machine
language rather than BASIC, however,
so be advised. Now that I've played
LEGIONNAIRE, I can't say that CLOSE
ASSAULT is Avalon Hill's best computer
wargame, but it IS their best for the
Apple and TRS-80. I recommend it
strongly to anyone who is looking for a
first computer wargame.

❑

being a short distance away from a
Kzinti planet in repair mode (ship
damaged, shields down) when a new
Kzinti fleet appears in orbit around that
very planet. You'll then have to do some
fancy flying to avoid disaster. It is this
danger which makes the Short Game
(solar system extends only to Mars)
more difficult than either the Intermediate Game (solar system extends to
Jupiter) or the Normal Game (all the
planets and Ceres). The newly arriving
Kzinti comes in randomly at one of the
alien controlled planets or at the edge of
the solar system. The fewer planets
there are, the greater the chance that
the enemy will arrive at your current
location while you're in repair mode.
GA requires fast thinking, a fair
amount of keyboard dexterity, and a
good knowledge of the directional commands. For some unknown reason, Sirtech has reversed the traditional 0 to
360 degree CLOCKWISE layout, and has
all commands entered on a COUNTERCLOCKWISE 360 degree layout. To fire a
phaser, you must type "P", then the
numerical direction in which you wish
to fire. The same procedure gives directional course commands, and fires
torpedoes. Although Sir-tech gives you
`short cut' orders of movement and torp
fire thru the use of the keys surrounding
the "S" key, you have to use the numerical commands to fire phasers.
As with any game, the actions required may be simplified to three basic
actions. The steps in winning are 1)
strafe, 2) transport and beam down, 3)
move to next planet and engage the
Kzinti Fleets there. (A process which
can, in the long game, become rather
repetitive.) If you have a garrison of
three or more, they'll multiply and you
can completely forget about that planet.
Starfleet Command has requested
that this transmission be terminated, so
I'll leave you with these final words of
advice. Launch your torps in clusters three or more in rapid succession - so
the Kzinti don't have time to recover
between hits, and use your phasers at
close range for the coup de grace. To do
this, you MUST know your phaser angles!
Lastly, don't forget that the "+" key will
give your shields a boost when they're
sagging.
Good hunting, and when you win a
complete game against nine Kzinti at a
time, write in and let us know.

❑

of wounds. Learning to use each spell

PINBALL (Cont.)
images lead to quicker and easier understanding than written words. The
instruction manual for the Pinball
Construction Set is a scant nine pages
long. Contrast this with the 38 pages
BRODERBUND used to describe The
Arcade Machine (see our review in the
last issue of Computer Gaming World).
That book, although very complete, was
actually one of the drawbacks to the
product. It was necessary to refer to it
often to determine what the codes on
each screen stood for. The Pinball
Construction Set manual is actually
overkill. Once you get the feel for
pointing and moving, you never need
the book again.
The Pinball Construction Set is worth
buying even if you don't like pinball. It
represents a landmark leap into the
future of computer processing. Almost
any interactive process can benefit from
the use of pictures to represent actions.
Look for icons to appear and be called
`state of the art' in future products. Yet
the idea has been around for three
thousand years. Bill Budge brought back
hieroglyphics - maybe the ancient
Egyptians were on the right track, after
all.

❑

ROUTE 80 (Cont.)
monsters, each randomly appearing at
any point in the dungeon. The instruction booklet depicts and describes each
monster and you would be very wise to
become familiar with these denizens of
the dungeon depths. When you encounter a monster, you have three
choices of action: fight, cast a spell,
attempt to evade. Knowing which monsters can be dispelled by a magical
incantation and which ones should be
avoided altogether can very well mean
the difference between life and death.
All of the action takes place in real-time,
so any delay in making your decision
can find you decapitated or burned to a
crisp before you even lift your sword! A
fire-breathing dragon is nothing to fool
around with!

One of the best features of Telengard
is the character's use of magical spells. A
total of 36 spells are available to him;
each one different and distinct in its
effect. Some are combat spells, such as

magic missiles, fireballs,
lightning bolts and the ability to turn
away the undead. Other spells provide
higher levels of abilities, such as

levitation, detection of traps and curing

properly is an exciting part of the
Telengard adventure. To further complicate your tenuous life, the instruction
booklet cleverly provides the names, but
does not describe the effects of the
higher level spells. You have to learn
through trial and error! Imagine hacking
your way through 12 hours of mortal
combat with skeletons, vampires, orc
and demons, just to be incinerated by
your own improperly invoked wall of
fire spell!

MATH MAGIC (Cont.)
50 PRINT "PRESS (ENTER) WHEN
YOU ARE READY TO CONTINUE"
60 PRINT:INPUT X$
70 CLS
80 FOR J=1 TO 6
90 FOR K=1 TO 32
100 READ A(J,K)
110 PRINT A(J,K),
120 NEXT K
125 PRINT:PRINT:PRINT
130 INPUT "DOES YOUR NUMBER

As you accomplish various feats of
daring and dexterity, you are occasionally rewarded with treasures such as

magical swords and shields, rings of
protection, magic potions, and other
useful accouterments. It is wise to
accumulate a number of these lifeinsuring devices before attempting to
probe the deeper depths of the
Telengard dungeon. They'll be needed!

The more I played Telengard, the
more I appreciated its possibilities. At
first, it seems to be a simple cut and
slash type of adventure. But, you
gradually realize that a substantial
amount of careful planning and cautious
exploration is necessary for a successful
assault on the dungeon's treasures.
You'll lose many a good fighter before
learning all of its secrets and, if you're
really brave, try it without using the
"SV" in your character's name!
Telengard has one of the most
necessary qualities of a good game: The
ability to grab your interest and bring
you back again for another try. There
are features missing which I would have
liked to have seen included in Telengard,
but it is still an excellent addition to the
dungeon adventure collection of computer games.

Fortunately, because it's written in
basic language, some of the missing
features may be implemented easily. In
the next issue I'll be providing a few
lines of code which will allow you to
print out a permanent record of your
character's attributes and current
status. If any of you devise some changes
to the original program, I'd be happy to
print them in future columns. Just send
them to me with a statement that they
can be used for publication.
Until next time, Happy Gaming! I'll be
looking for you again on route 80!

APPEAR ON SCREEN (Y or N)";N$
140 IF N$="Y" THEN S=S+2 [(J-1):REM
"[" IS EXPONENTIATION
150 IF N$ < >"N" AND N$ <> "Y"
THEN 130
153 N$=""
155 CLS
160 NEXT J
170 CLS
173 FOR Z=1 TO 300:NEXT Z
175 PRINT "OKAY, CONCENTRATE
VERY HARD NOW..."
180 PRINT "I AM READING YOUR
MIND..."
183 FOR Z=1 TO 700:NEXT
185 PRINT:PRINT
186 FOR K=1 TO 2
188 PRINT " ": STRING$ (57, "=")
189 PRINT
190 NEXT K
193 FOR Z=1 TO 300:NEXT Z
194 PRINT " AHA! YOU PICKED THE
NUMBER";:PRINT S: FOR Z=1 TO
1200:NEXT Z
200 DATA 1,3,5,7,9,11,13,15,17,19,
21,23,25,27,29,31,33,35,37
210 DATA 39,41,43,45,47,49,51,53,55,
57,59,61,63
230 DATA 2,3,6,7,10,11,14,15,18,19,
22,23,26,27,30,31,34,35,38
240 DATA 39,42,43,46,47,50,51,54,55,
58,59,62,63
260 DATA 4,5,6,7,12,13,14,15,20,21,22,
23,28,29,30,31,36,37,38
270 DATA 39,44,45,46,47,52,53,54,55,
60,61,62,63
290 DATA 8,9,10,11,12,13,14,15,24,25,
26,27,28,29,30,31,40,41
300 DATA 42,43,44,45,46,47,56,57,58,
59,60,61,62,63
320 DATA 16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,
25,26,27,28,29,30,31,48,49
330 DATA 50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,
59,60,61,62,63
350 DATA 32,33,34,35,36,37,38,39,40,
41,42,43,45,46,47,48,49
360 DATA 50,51,52,53,54,55,56,57,58,
59,60,61,62,63

TELE-GAMING (Cont.)
On the Source, another timesharing
service, subscribers pay $100 to sign up,
plus a monthly minimum charge of $10.
The hourly rates for 300 baud service
are $20.75 from 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
$7.75 evenings, weekends, and holidays,
and $5.75 from midnight to 7:00 a.m.
The Source has over seventy online
games from which the gaming enthusiast may choose. You can pit yourself
against the puzzles in "Blackdragon" or
blast Klingon ships in "Trek." And, for
the gamblers at heart, there are computer versions of "Poker," "Craps," and
"Blackjack." Many of the popular
play-by-mail games (such as Diplomacy and
those from Flying Buffalo) are in progress on the Source as well. "Post
Games," a bulletin board where users
can leave their hint requests, is a
heavily-used feature.
These two companies are the largest
providers of national online gaming services. Throughout the United States,
however, there are hundreds of private
electronic bulletin board systems (BBSs)
in operation. Many of these BBSs offer
an additional means through which
garners can talk, play, and exchange
information. For the cost of a local or
long distance telephone call, you can
connect with a gaming bulletin board
system and join in the fun. Hint
messages, game reviews, and longrunning mail games — particularly
fantasy role-playing games — are the
typical fare on these systems.
This column will he devoted to bringing you news about the present realities
and future possibilities of tele-gaming
— the who, what, where, when, and how
much. With future issues of CGW, we'll
be taking closer looks at every facet of
online gaming. In the meantime, your
comments, suggestions, and questions
are welcome. I would especially appreciate hearing from readers who are
confirmed tele-gamers as well as from
those who are running their own gaming
BBSs. You may write to me at the
following address:
Patricia Fitzgibbons
195 Claremont Avenue, Suite 115
Long Beach, Ca. 90803
72145,42 (CompuServe)
ST0262 (Source)
I will be happy to reply personally to
your letters if you enclose a stamped,
self-addressed envelope. Until then,
remember, as the great Sherlock once
said: "The game's aphone!"

AMBUSH (Cont.)
does, then he will not fire his weapon for
4 to 30 timepoints. If he is fired on again
while ducking he again may duck. This
really adds to the realism of the effects
of cover fire. This addition was made too
late in development to reduce the
ducking soldier's chance of being hit by
future fire so you can still kill him while
he's ducking.

Soldiers can only be given a limited
number of orders per turn so, if you are
concentrating fire on a specific spot,
you may find it advantageous to use the
FS command for the first part of the
turn, and then switch to the FA
command.

Another point worth remembering is
that a soldier who throws a grenade
through a window or door and is not
sneaking, may very easily blow himself
up. If sneaking, however, he will be
assumed to have flattened himself
against the wall beside the door or
under the window and will be unharmed. Grenades, by the way, are very
effective and the computer controlled
enemy knows it. They love to toss
grenades as soon as they know exactly
where you are — so it is rather
dangerous to stay in one spot firing for
very long. In one game, I had my
machine gunner and two autoriflemenn
in excellent positions firing at the
approaching enemy with fairly good
success. It was a bit disconcerting when
all three of them were killed by grenades
in the same turn! Hit and run, move and
shoot, are the best tactics.
In designing your own forces, it is a
nice touch to not know what your two
player scenario opponent is like. Since
there are seven really pertinent characteristics ( strength, intelligence,
dexterity, observation power, throwing,
firing and hand-to-hand combat ability)
you can pick an average number, say
six, multiply by seven, and then distribute the resulting point total in any
way you want.
CONCLUSIONS
Computer Ambush (Second Edition)
has been well worth the wait! It's fast,
smooth flowing, and surprisingly realistic. This game could set the standard
for tactical simulations for a long time
to come. At least, until the Third Edition
comes out.

BLACKPOOLE (Cont.)
bought. It is also important, as it allows
new adventurers to save the game
frequently. It can be very frustrating if
you succumb to one of the many traps
along the way and have to start over
from the beginning.

An improvement over previous games
of this type is that you do not have to
limit yourself to two word commands.
The only rule you have to remember is
that a verb always precedes the noun or
object of the sentence. For instance you
can say "move the rock with a lever". I
thought this was great, but after awhile
I found myself out of habit reverting
back to the old verb-noun syndrome, i.e.
move rock, get staff, etc... You can talk
with the inhabitants and there is even a
HINT or HELP command. I used these
commands a lot even though they were
usually too vague to be very helpful.

One unique feature is that when you
lose (get killed) or win, you are scored
by the computer on how well you did. A
perfect score is 500 and your score is
displayed as a ratio of this 500. The less
moves it takes you to complete the quest
the higher the score. This adds much to
the game's potential life span.

There is one aspect of these types of
games that has prevented me from
really enjoying them. More often than
not, I get stuck on a problem that does
not involve a riddle, deducing a clue, or
wondering whether to go north or south.
I find myself getting stuck on how to tell
the computer exactly what I think
should be stated to get something done
or advance me closer to the end of the
game. I spend more time on the trial and
error of how to say a command as
opposed to enjoying the other aspects of
the game. I know I am in the minority, as
these games are so popular, but I do
wish that, for the benefit of people like
myself, a complete list of the games'
vocabulary would be included in the
directions even if it were put in the form
of some code. Then I could spend more
of my time enjoying the game itself.

BB runs on the Apple and the Atari

SILICON (Cont.)
UNIT DIFFERENTIATION

the terrain is probably a help to the
quarks, since it acts as a buffer between
the two groups.

Our original example assumed that
all units exerted equal influence. What if
they don't? Wargames commonly involve
units with different combat strengths,
so we may need to take that into
account. For example, Figure 6 shows
the quarks and bosons again, but this
time, the bosons have a strength
advantage of over two-to-one. How shall
we take the different strengths into
account?
Sierra On-Line
Sierra On-Line Building
Coarsegold, CA 93614

CONCLUSIONS
One of the advantages of this technique is its ability to be modified to
reflect the importance of different
factors. We'll continue to look at this
next time (honest!) dealing (hopefully)
with such problems as unit movement,
ranged combat, and just what to do
with all of this information.
❑
The method I came up with involves a
slight modification to the new weight
calculation. Before, we just added in the
sign (+1, 0, -1) of each adjacent hex. I
changed that to a signed magnitude: +1
for values up to 39 and an additional +1
for every 20 points thereafter. Figure 7
shows the result if we again ignore
terrain. The quarks still have the
advantage in numbers (85 to 58), but it
is now the bosons who have cut the
quarks' area into two pieces. Indeed, the
bunched-up formation of the bosons is
all that keeps them from controlling
most of the board.

THE DARK CRYSTAL: TDC is High-Res
Adventure designed by Roberta Williams
(Time Zone) and based on the epic fantasy
film conceived by Jim Henson (The
Muppets). The game follows the movie's plot
with enough differences to make it a
challenge. As Jen, last of the Gelfling, you
must find a shard of the Great Crystal and
restore it before the Great Conjunction. The
documentation is excellent and a four color
poster is included with each game. Apple.
$39.95.

Copies of "Map Weighting" part 1 from
the May-June 1982 issue are available
directly from CGW for $1.00.

PEEK (Cont.)
THUNDERBOMBS: When supported by
The Mockingboard (a popular sound board
for the Apple II), TB has a few speech
features and better than normal sound. TB
is an arcade game in which the player is
caught in the middle of a crossfire of alien
ships. You must fire and dodge to score
points. Apple. $19.95. The penguins wear
space suits.
Sir-tech Software Inc.
6 Main St.
Ogdensburg, NY 13669
POLICE ARTIST: In Police Artist the game
player is an eye witness to a crime and must
remember the culprit's face so as to be able
to pick it out of a police lineup or reconstruct it from a catalog of face parts. The
program creates more than 1,000,000
different faces, each with a unique name.
Apple.

Figure 8 shows what happens if we
consider terrain 'as well. The two sides
are nearly equal in the number of hexes
controlled (57 to 52) with the quarks
still in the lead. More importantly, the
average magnitude of the hexes controlled by the bosons is over three times
that of the quarks' hexes. Despite this,

Programmers Software
2110 N. 2nd St.
Cabot, AR 72023
IFR FLIGHT SIMULATOR: A flight
simulator for the Apple that requires
knowledge of IFR flying or at least willingness to learn. Using an ADF, a compass, and
two OMNI indicators the program has 13
problems that can be flown (such as flying
into LAX (LA International) using real life
fixes. Apple. $50.00.

RID #7
There were 215 R.I.D.s turned in by
press time for this issue. The breakdown
of users was: Apple (63%); Atari (31%);
Others (6%). The mean score for RID #7
was 6.12. Starting with this issue, we are
no longer adjusting mean scores as we
have in the past. New games will be
listed with the score obtained from that
R.I.D.. Repeat listings will have their
scores averaged in with previous R.I.D.
scores for the same game. The new
games and updated games are listed
with bold type in the table on page 48.

GAME RATINGS
The following table includes all games
evaluated by our readers since May
1982. For a game to be included in this
listing it must first have been offered for
rating in our regular RID rating system.
Games offered for evaluation are those
covered in the magazine and/or have a
good sales record during the time of
evaluation. Once offered for evaluation,
the game must have been evaluated by a
sufficient number of readers to be
included in the results. Any game not
evaluated by at least 10% of the respondents was not included in the results.

Games were rated on a scale of 1
(terrible) to 9 (outstanding). Respondents were asked to consider such
things as PRESENTATION (graphics,
sound, packaging, documentation);
GAME DESIGN (design, playability,
interesting?), Life (does the game wear
well?).

R.I.D. #8 (Use card provided)
On this page a number of games and
articles are listed for evaluation. Please
take time to evaluate these games and
articles. Use the guidelines above for
game evaluation. Leave blank any game
which you have not played enough to
have formed an opinion.

R.I.D. was prepared with the help of SPEED STAT by SoftCorp International, Westerville, OH 800-543-1350

See page 47 for details on the Reader Input Device

