1

0

8

3900 Games Later
CGW's Retrospective on 11 Years of Computer Gaming
by Russell Sipe

34

Hail, Kyrandia!
Robin Matthews Greets Westwood Studio's Legend of Kyrandia

38 A "Hole" New Way to Look at Golf
Part I in a Series on Course Design for Jack Nicklaus Signature Edition
by Mark Willett

42 SSI's The Summoning
Chuck Miller Conjures a Sneak Preview of the First in a New Series

49 The Dick-Van-Dyke\Peter Oliphant Show
Johnny L. Wilson Interviews The Child Star/Adult Designer

54

What's Revolutionary about Crisis in the Kremlin?
Spectrum HoloByte's Game of International Politics Reviewed
by Political Columnist, Chuck Moss

58

The Dark Half of Charles Ardai
The Critic Confesses New Capstone Release Offers Dark Side

On the Cover
With sound-blasted trumpet flourishes and luxuriantly
decorated halls, the Golden Emperor invites you to
sample the richness of CGW's 100th issue. This
special Collector's Edition features a
computer-generated cover by illustrator Mark J.
Ferrari. Conceived by editor Johnny Wilson, the
rendering portrays Golden Emperor (publisher) Russell
Sipe, vizier Wilson at left, proud chef Ken Brown, and
elven cake-bearers Alan Emrich, "Ranger" Chris
Lombardi, Dawn Thompson and Mike Weksler.
Ferrari did two weeks worth of work in only four days
for the image—twice as long as any previous computer
image he had created. "When you turn people green
and raise their eyebrows half a foot, it's a challenge to
maintain their likeness," he observed. The piece is
Ferrari's first computer
artwork intended specifically
for print. He painted over
electronic scans of the faces.
Long gradients and intense
anti-aliasing helped minimize
pixelation in the approximately
640x480 pixel image. The
work was created in Deluxe
Paint II Enhanced by
Electronic Arts. Mark's palette
is a 386/33, his brush a mere
mouse.

I

61

It's Only A "Digital World"
Designer Bill Fisher Attends Seybold Seminars' CD Conference

64 Virgin's Magnetic Scrolls Collection
Hi-Tech Text Games with a Classical Flair
by Charles Ardai

68

Flapper Era Fad — Oriental Classic
Electronic Arts' Hong Kong Mahjong
by Scorpia (Honest!)

72

Clubhouse Chatter on Links 386 Pro
Access' New Premium Version of the Award-Winning Game'
by Thomas Liam MacDonald

76 Confessions of a Computer Composer
Ken Allen Speaks Out on Music in Computer Games

80 How Virtual Is Virtual Reality?
An Update on the New Technology
by Craig Engler

84

Studying the Classic
Spectrum HoloByte's Tetris Classic
by Michael S. Lasky

88 Open With a Spassky
Tim Carter Rates Grandmaster Chess

99

Evan Brooks Goes Into Orbit
Science Fiction and Future Based Strategy Games Rated

110 The Best Games of the Commercial Year
Computer Gaming World's Game of the Year Awards

118 Journal of Computer Game Design Abstracts
"Plagiarism" Designed to Whet Reader Appetites

124 Carte Blanche in Casablanca
ReadySoft's Guy Spy Comes Out of the Cold
by David M. Wilson

136 Freeway Fantasies and Racetrack Romps
A Sneak Preview of EA's Car & Driver
by Ken Brown

146 Three Dispatches on the Hundred Years War
A Treacherous Trio Sneak Previews GEnie's Multi-Player Game
by Ken St. Andre, David M. Wilson and Johnny L. Wilson

154 Daring Diplomatic Deeds
Diplomacy and other PBEM Games on Compuserve
by Ken Hill

158 Breaking the "Geneva Convention"
A Report on the 1992 GenCon/Origins Gaming Convention
by Alan Emrich and Johnny L. Wilson

162 Napoleon Needs A Brain
Computer Assistant/Umpire Programs for Boardgames
by Robert Nielsen

170 Designer Notes: Carriers At War
The Al in SSG's World War II Naval Game
by Gregor Whiley and Roger Keating

52 Rumor Bag
94 Scorpion's View—
Dungeon Master
96 Advertiser Index
114 Scorpion's Tale—
Legend of Kyrandia
122 Humor Rag
128 Edutainment—
Educational Cartridges?
132 CGW Stock Watch—
Electronic Arts

140 Letters from Paradise
144 Computer Wargaming
World Editorial
176 Inside the Industry
178 Taking A Peek
188 Conversions Received
190 CGW Poll: Top 100 Games
192 PC Research Hits
List/Playing Lately?
193 CGW Hall of Fame

3900 GAMES LATER
by Russell Sipe
Sometime in early summer of 1981
the first review copy of a computer
game arrived on Computer Gaming
Worlds doorstep.
Unfortunately, we did not keep an accurate log of arrivals
back then. We wish we could remember which was the first
game to arrive at CGW. Perhaps it was Muse Software's
Robotwar. This game was popular enough with the CGW
staff that in our early years we sponsored a series of annual
Robotwar tournaments. Robotwar has spawned a couple of
offspring in last couple of years. Origin Systems Omega and
Maxis Software's Robosport are spiritual descendants or the
original. Or perhaps Castle Wolfenstein, another Muse
Software product, was the first to arrive. This year, eleven
years later, Castle Wolfenstein has been updated to 1992
standards and has been re-released. As they say "what goes
around comes around."
What "comes around" this month, some 3900 review copies

later, is the 100th issue of Computer Gaming World. The
staff of CGW takes great pride in this accomplishment. Most
magazines are part of a larger stable of titles within their
publishing company. CGW is somewhat different. For
eleven years the staff of Golden Empire Publications put all
their efforts and affection into one magazine, CGW. It is with
particular pride that our staff celebrates this milestone.
It is also with great pride that at the same time we
celebrate the 100th issue of Computer Gaming World, we
celebrate the addition of a sister publication. Shipping
almost simultaneously with this issue of CGW is the first
issue of our new publication Kids & Computers: A Magazine
for Parents.
Recently CGW introduced "Once Upon a Time", a column
on the history of computer gaming. In the tradition of
"Once" but with a broader view, this twelve page article
looks back at the history of computer gaming as seen
through the pages of 100 issues of the world's oldest
computer gaming magazine: Computer Gaming World.

Number One
The most significant release of the
year was the first installment of the
now classic Wizardry series. Andrew
Greenberg and Robert Woodhead
put two and a half man-years into
The Proving Grounds of the Mad
Overlord which was the number one
rated game in the CGW Poll for a
span of 18 months.

The Major Players in 1981
Adventure International
Scott Adams made a name for himself in the late
70's and early 80's not only for producing the
commercial version of Adventure, but also for
heading one of the most prolific computer game
companies of the time (specializing in the classic
text adventure format).
Automated Simulations (Epyx)
In 1978 Jim Connelley bought a Commodore PET
to do bookkeeping chores for a D&D campaign he
was running. Jim decided that a good way to write
off the purchase would be to design a computer
game and sell it. He invited one of his D&D players,
Jon Freeman, to write the game with him. They
completed the game and had to think up a
company name. Jim came up with 'Automated
Simulations'. Their first copy of Starfleet Orion sold in
December 1978 thus giving Jim his write-off. In 1982
the company would change it's name to Epyx.
The Avalon Hill Game ompany
Long the leader in the board gaming hobby,
Avalon Hill formed their Microcomputer Games
Division in 1979 when they released four titles: B-1
Nuclear Bomber; North Atlantic Convoy Raider;
Nukewar; and Planet Miners. By Fall of 1981 their list
had grown to a dozen releases with Tanktics being
the best.
Broderbund
Attorney Doug Carlston used a TRS-80 to design
Galactic Saga. He and his brother Gary formed
Broderbund and, like many companies at that time,
packaged their products in ziplock bags. Today
their educational and entertainment products are
known world wide. The Carmen Sandiego series has
consumer recognition well beyond the world of
computer gaming.
Hayden Computer Software
Between their Hayden line and their Programme
International line, Hayden Software produced many
titles in late 70's and early 80's, the most notable
being Sargon I, II, and III.

Computers on the Move
These days we are
watching the seemingly
slow move from floppy to
CD based computing. In
1981 diskettes were in the
final stages of
overthrowing cassettes as
the consumer's medium of
choice for data storage.

Apple games dominated the years 1981-1983. Atari
was the number two machine. lt was a time of decline
for TRS-80 games and growth for two new machines,
the IBM and C-64. Most of the games in the Other
category are a fairly balanced mixed of the two (the
Radio Shack ColorComputer & Vic-20 made up most
of the rest).

Muse Software
Muse Software's Robotwar and Castle Wolfenstein are two
standouts of the time that still influence computer gaming in our
day.
On-Line Systems
Ken and Roberta Williams developed their first computer game,
Mystery House, at their kitchen table using an Apple II computer
and graphics tablet. They formed On-Line Systems, to be renamed
Sierra On-Line and have made it one of, if not the premier
computer game companies.
Sirius Software
Sirius was a big name in arcade style games. A commitment to
developing cartridges for 20th Century Fox Games provided Sirius'
undoing when the arcade crash of 1983 hit.
Strategic Simulations
Much like CGW, SSI was started by a gamer who saw an
opportunity to turn his hobby into a business. After Avalon Hill and
Automated Simulations expressed no interest in his designs, Joel
Billings (who still runs 'miniatures' campaigns in his office after hours)
started SSI to produce computer wargames. Computer Bismarck,
which was originally designed on a Northstar Horizon was released
for the Apple II in February 1980. The rest is history (or fantasy,
depending upon your viewpoint).

According to a summer
1982 CGW survey of 150
game manufacturers, Zork I:
the Great Underground
Empire Part I was the top
selling computer game
(having sold 32,000 copies
by June 30 of that year),
Zork III was released later in
the year bring to a
conclusion the Zork trilogy.
Infocom went on to
produce another 32 games
including this year's Leather
Goddesses of Phobos 2.

Access Software
In 1982 Bruce Carver bought a C-64 from a Salt Lake
City computer retailer. He wanted to learn how to
program sprite graphics. Since the C-64 manual didn't
deal with multi-colored sprites Bruce wrote a sprite
program for his own use. It was so good he started
selling it as Spritemaster. He made tape copies one at
a time until his retailer, Steve Witzel (now Marketing
Director at Access), built a device that allowed them
to make six tapes at a time, They thought they were in
fat city. Several months later they landed a $6000
order for Spritemaster programs. They spent a lot of
time copying. "Now we need a computer game" said
Steve. Bruce went to work on Neutral Zone (a typical
arcade game of the period). Ten years later they
continue to push the state of the art and are best
known for developing Real Sound and the Links line of
golf games.

1982 CGW Poll Top Five
1.

Wizardry I (Sir-Tech)

2.

Computer Baseball (SSI)

3.

Olympic Decathlon (Microsoft)

Electronic Arts

4.

Guadalcanal Campaign (SSI)

Trip Hawkins graduated with high honors from
Harvard with a specialization in "Strategy and Applied
Game Theory" and in 1975 had the stated goal of
starting a game software company before 1985. After
receiving a MBA at Stanford, he joined Apple
Computer early in its growth and left the company in
Spring of 1982 after serving as Director of Marketing
for Apple's LISA computer. One of a number of sharp
thinkers who walked away from Apple as millionaires
Trip laid the groundwork for EA. After visiting
Computer Gaming World's offices to discuss the state
of the computer game industry Trip took a three
month tour of Europe. On his return he formed
Electronic Arts and signed up some of the most
talented designers of the day.

5.

Choplifter! (Broderbund)

Lucasfilm Games
In 1982 Atari provided a one million dollar grant to
Lucasfilm to produce games for the Atari home
computer. Lucasfilm had wanted to use the group to
develop experimental technology for when film and
computer technology came together (in reality,
Industrial Light and Magic ended up filling this need)
and produce educational games that would capture
the imagination of the young like the Star Wars films
had. It took over two years for the first two

products (Rescue on Fractalus and Ballblazer) to be
readied for market. When the games were
completed, however, Sam Tramiel bought Atari.
Tramiel was not interested in publishing the games. I
took another year for the games to see the light of
day under the Epyx label.

MicroProse
In summer 1982 Bill Stealey was a employed as a
strategic planner. During a break in a company
meeting in Las Vegas "Wild Bill" was challenging all
corners to beat his score on a coin-op game called
Red Baron (no relation to the Red Baron game from
Dynamix). A programmer at the same firm named
Sid Meier waxed Bill's tail on the game. Meier
explained to a chagrined Stealey that it was all a
matter of observing the rudimentary A.I. of the
enemy pilots then "ambushing" them. Sid boasted
that he could design a better game in a week on his
home computer. Bill told him that if Sid could do it,
he (Bill) would sell it. The result (two months later)
was Hellcat Ace. They formed Microprose and
embarked on a course that would bring them fame
and fortune,

THE "Image" Ad
1983 CGW Poll
Top Five
1. Wizardry I (Sir-Tech)
2. Combat Leader (SSI)
3. M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts)
4. Archon (Electronic Arts)
5. Wizardry II

Knight of Diamonds

Of
Games
And
Machines
Although the Apple II computer would
continue to dominate floppy based computer
gaming for another two years, 1983 signaled
the beginning of it's decline. The Atari 400/800
became the machine of choice of several
companies during the period 1983-1984 and
the C-64 which was released in 1982 started
coming on strong in '83.
Lurking in the background
but slowing building up
momentum was the IBM,

An
Industry
First

The world's first computer game convention
was co-sponsored by CGW. It was held in
Southern California on Labor Day weekend 1983.
SSI sponsored a Computer Game Pentathlon
(play 5 SSI games for a combined score).
Speakers came from SSI, Avalon Hill Game
Company, Softline (a computer gaming
magazine from the early 1980's), Electronic Arts,
and Computer Gaming World.
Today, computer gaming mini-cons within
larger board/adventure game conventions are
common place.

Electronic Arts released their first products in May 1983.
As part of that launch EA produced the above "image"
ad which ran in numerous publications including CGW.
The ad, printed as a 14"x19" detachable poster remains to
this day THE best example of "image" advertising in the
computer entertainment industry. The poster features the
'software artists" behind EA's initial releases: Mike Abbot
and Matt Alexander (two guys on left side) designed
Hard Hat Mac; Dan Bunten (second from left top row) did
M.U.L.E.; John Field (bottom row second from left) did Axis
Assassin; Jon Freeman (third from left, top row) and Anne
Westfall (second from right, top row) did Archon; Bill
Budge (top row, far right) was the author of Pinball
Construction Set; David Maynard (arms folded) wrote
Worms?
The ad copy starts with this statement:
"Software artists? It is a name these people are
uncomfortable with. 'I'm not so sure there are any
software artists yet', says Bill Budge. 'Maybe we've got to
earn that title-.
Did EA's designers go on to earn the august accolade
'artist" in terms more real than advertising copy? It
depends. Certainly Electronic Arts dominated the mid
and late 1980's with their "New Hollywood" studio design
concept. Some of the most talented people in the history
of computer entertainment applied their talents to EA
products. These days, however, EA is better known as a
leading distributor of other people's designs and products
than as a community of software artists. Today, EA and
other companies that "see farther" are busily forming the
strategic alliances that will prepare them to engage the
"New Hollywood" in a more literal sense where film,
television and computer game "artists" may form a new
interactive entertainment.

1984 CGW Poll
Top Five
1. 7 Cities of Gold (EA)
2. M.U.L.E. (EA)
3. Wizardry I (Sir-Tech)

SURVEY
SAID

4.

Ultima Ill (Origin)

5. Fighter Command (SSI)
According to a 1984 survey the following percentage of CGW readers
played games of that category at least five times per month. The totals
are greater than 100% because a large number of readers played more
than one category of games at least five times a month.

Adventure
Wargame
Arcade
Abstract
Sports/Other

64%
73%
53%
12%
39%

CRASH GO THE CARTS

Dan's Duo

1984 was Dan Bunten's year. One of the original 'software artists"
from the EA "We See Farther' ad, Dan produced two outstanding
hits for Electronic Arts in 1983-1984. MULE and Seven Cities of
Gold were top rated games all year long among CGW readers, In
an industry where last year's hit is this year's old technology,
M.U.L.E. and Seven Cities holds up well against the current crop of
designs. Good game design is not made obsolete by new
technology.
Fortunately for those of you that weren't hanging around the
hallowed halls of computer gaming back in the early eighties,
rumor has it that M.U.L.E. is being updated. Keep your eyes
peeled. If the update is faithful M.U.L.E. should again appear in
the Computer Gaming World Top 100 (and probably near the
top).

In 1983 the video game industry hit the skids and by
1984 had gone over the cliff. A series of poor
management decisions at Atari (Atari VCS and 5200
System) combined with competition from Mattel
(Intellivision) and Coleco (Colecovision) put Atari in a
precarious position. At Christmas 1982 Atari had ten
million dollars worth of unsold merchandise sitting in a
warehouse in Taiwan, not to mention the pieces to
make five million E.T. carts, On December 8 Warner's
stock lost 33% of it's value. It didn't recover. Other cart
companies were affected as well. By 1984 the video
game industry would be a shadow of it's former self.
Into this chaos stepped Commodore with their hot
new little home computer, the C-64. The C-64 would
become the fastest growing computer in gaming in
during the years 1983-1985.
Meanwhile, of the 18 computer and/or video game
magazines serving the computer game and video
game hobby in 1983 all but Computer Gaming World
disappeared over the next couple of years.

1985 CGW Poll
Top Five
1.

Kampfgruppe (SSI)

2.

Wizardry I (Sir-Tech)

3.

Mech Brigade (SSI)

4.

Ultima III (Origin)

5.

M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts)

The installed base of C-64s rose
dramatically in 1983-1984. A lot of those
video gamers that abandoned the
cartridge market latched onto affordable
C-64s. The publishers responded vigorously
with translations and original designs for the
C-64. In two years the C-64 tripled it's share
of the market (measured by numbers of
titles).
The Apple and Atari 400/800 were still
major players, but on the wane. The IBM-PC
was building steam. The Amiga was too
new to have a significant impact on 1985
releases.

Hardware was the big story in 1985. The IBM-PC turned the corner (in spite of
droping the PCjr) and became a development platform for several publishers.
In an April 1985 article, 'IBM Goes To War", CGW declared a commitment to
IBM-PC coverage stating that 'the era of IBM computer gaming has arrived."
The other big hardware development was Commodore's introduction of the
Amiga computer. Greatly anticipated, the Amiga delivered graphics and
sound capabilities unseen and unheard of to that point. It was cutting edge all
around.
Electronic Arts embraced the Amiga whole-heartedly. EA President Trip
Hawkins declared that 'the Amiga will revolutionize the home computer
industry... we think the Amiga with it's incomparable power, sound and
graphics will give Electronic Arts and the entire industry a very bright future."
As great as the Amiga computer was and is, EA's vision was thrown out of
focus by the less than cutting edge marketing and distribution the Amiga has
received over the years.

Kampfgruppe was the
top rated game by CGW
readers in 1985. SSI's
simulation of tactical
combat on the Eastern
Front during World War
Two was a landmark
design.
Computer wargaming
was still a strong category
in 1985. However that
was to change in time.

Chess
is
Number
One
Actually, Chessmaster
2000 was #1 for only one
month (December
1986). However, it stayed
in the Top 10 until it's
retirement to the CGW
Hall of Fame (as a
charter inductee).
Chessmaster 2000 is the
only chess game to ever
make it to the top spot.

1986 CGW Poll
Top Five
1. Chessmaster 2000 (EA)
2.

Ultima IV (Origin)

FULL
MYLAR
JACKET

Bard's Tale I (EA)

The Vietnam
War ended in 1975,
The
national
trauma that
4. Kampfgruppe (SSI)
followed in the U.S. dictated
that, for years, Vietnam would
5. Silent Service (Microprose)
not be the subject of
"entertainment". It was not until the
early 80's that Hollywood could
turn to the subject in movies like
The Deer Hunter and Apocalypse
Now. Even these were not traditional
works of entertainment. They were
filled with the pain that was part
of the trauma we were going through.
Avalon Hill produced a game called VC
in 1982 that made no one's list of favorite
computer games. It was not until 1986-1988
that we were past the pain far enough to
enjoy movies like Platoon, Full Metal Jacket,
and Good Morning Vietnam. During that same
period Conflict in Vietnam from Microprose
and NAM from SSI appeared. Of the two, Conflict
in Vietnam was the better game. NAM was too much
like a WWII game set in the jungles and cities of
The years 1984-1986 saw a number of writers, both famous
Vietnam. In our coverage of Conflict in Vietnam

3.

and lithe known, get involved with "electronic novels". In a
few cases the writers became inimately involved in the
development of the product, in others it was more a matter
of using the author's name and prior work and forcing it into
a computer.
A few of the more successful projects (from a critical
perspective) were Doug Adam's The Hitchhiker's Guide to
the Galaxy from Infocom, Michael Crichton's Amazon from
Spinnaker, and Thomas Disch's Amnesia from Electronic Arts.
Synapse Software produced three electronic novels in
which the reader/player reads the first chapters of the story
In a hardbound book then goes to the computer for the
balance of the game.
As a category electronic books have not been very
successful.

a panel of gamer/vetrans including two
brigadier generals and the editor of a major military
encyclopedia gave their opinions on the game. Although the
panel liked the game overall, one of their criticisms was the
unrealistic victory conditions which were based on taking and
holding objectives. Here is part of the discussion from CGW #26:
"The most serious dispute (by the panel) was over victory
conditions. How does one actually win the war in Vietnam? With
the American emphasis on body count, the NVA also looked to
American casualties as an indicator. While the panel preferred
body count as a measure, Microprose's staff felt that "body
count" was simply unmarketable and ghoulish. Unmarketable,
yes; but then again, Vietnam was never intended
to be a marketing man's dream."

1987 CGW Poll
Top Five
1. Gettysburg: Turning Point (SSI)
2.

Ultima IV (Origin)

3.

Pirates (Microprose)

4. Starflight (EA)
TIE

Wizardry I (Sir-Tech)

5. Might & Magic (New World)

"Horizontal releases" were de rigeur in 1987. Most
game titles from major publishers were released for
Apple, C-64, and IBM. The Amiga and Atari 400/800
were often included in the release list as well. It was a
year of maximum number of "machines supported".
In prior years one machine would dominate the
percentage of releases (first Apple then the C-64).
After 1987 IBM would dominate.

SSI TSR Do AD&D™
1987 was a watershed year for
Strategic Simulations Inc. They rolled
the dice and came up a winner
when they signed an agreement to
produce official AD&D computers
games in co-operation with TSR
Hobbies.
The first title, Pool of Radiance,
kicked off what has become one of
the most successful product lines in
the history of the hobby.
Computer wargamers felt that SSI
had abandoned them since the
number of wargame releases
dropped after the deal was made.
From SSI's viewpoint, however, the
success of the AD&D line meant
that they could continue to develop
wargames even though they are
not as profitable as adventure
games.

The Year of
Adventuring Dangerously
Although Gettysburg: The Turning Point was
the top rated game at the end of 1987, it
had only edged out Ultima IV by 1 / 100th of a
point. The real story is that five of the top six
games were adventure/role-playing games
according to CGW readers (December
1987). 1987 and 1988 were dominated by
adventure and role-playing games.
Classic series such as Ultima, Wizardry,
Might and Magic, AD&D, along with
individual standouts like Pirates and Starflight
(Starflight ll came out in 1989) shaped the
character of computer gaming in 1987
and 1988.

1988 CGW Poll
Top Five
1.

Wasteland (Interplay)

2.

Empire (Interstel)

3.

Dungeon Master (FTL)

4.

Pirates (MicroProse)

5.

Stealth Fighter (MicroProse)

Although its window of
influence was to last less than
18 months, EGA became the
dominant graphics format for
games in 1988. Sierra was
already shipping EGA products
and their lead was followed in
early 1988 by EGA compatible
releases from all of the major
players by year's end. Who
would have guessed that the
shift to VGA would follow as
fast as it actually did (see 1989).
In 1988 CGW interviewed a number of
well known science fiction writers (Isaac
Asimov, Doug Adams, Harlan Ellison, Alan
Dean Foster, Roger Zelazny, Harry Harrison,
Jerry Pournelle, and Steve Brust) to get their
views on the possible futures of computer
entertainment.
Although some of the wilder predictions
have not come to pass, several predictions
from our March, 1988 survey are coming
true. Alan Dean Foster spoke of artificial
realities at amusement parks; Harry Harrison
talked about wall-sized monitors and
multi-player D&D games (long before
AD&D was available on America On-Line)
with graphics; and Douglas Adams noted
that games would have to become
increasingly more 'multimedia" in order to
retain popularity.
Roger Zelazny pictured virtual reality
games which would combine
electroencephalography and
biofeedback into the design. Not yet, but.,.

The first Computer Game Developers Conference
was a gathering of 26 designers in April, 1988. The
conference was held at Chris Crawford's house and
proved that there was interest in holding a larger and
more lengthy conference, In September of 1988, the
Miltipitas Holiday Inn was the site of the second
Computer Game Developers Conference where
more than 100 designers, programmers, artists and
musicians gathered to discuss game philosophy,
design constraints and personal experiences. Today,
more than 500 members of the development
community attend the annual conference.

1988's Wasteland was a
favorite among CGW
readers. The way in which
Wasteland's NPCs related to
player characters, the
questions of dealing with
moral dilemmas, and the
treatment of skills set this
game apart. The
post-holocaust quest
blended science fiction and
modern man-to-man
combat into a classic mix of
tactics and problem- solving.

1989 CGW Poll
Top Five
1.

F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse)

2.

SimCity (Maxis)

3.

Populous (EA)

4.

Battlehawks '42 (Lucasfilm)

tie Red Storm Rising (MicroProse)
5.

Lords of Rising Sun (Cinemaware)

FIRST CD-ROM GAME

1989 could very well be known as the year of the sound
card. At the Summer Consumer Electronics Show, Sierra led
the way by announcing their commitment to the AdLib,
Roland and Creative Labs sound standards in all of their
products, as well as marketing the soundboards through
their direct mail catalogs. By year's end, six cards were
competing for the market share with more on the way.

Modem
Mode

Activision's The Manhole was the first
CD-ROM entertainment software to
ship. Children were able to "point and
click' their way through developer
Cyan's version of an Alice in
Wonderland gone even more wild. It
was followed almost immediately by
Cinemaware's Defender of the Crown
CD-ROM.

1989 marked the first
wave of modem-to-modem
games. Although Sierra's 3-0 Helicopter
Simulation had appeared in 1987, it wasn't
until 1989 that Electronic Arts brought
out a half-dozen modemable titles
and Spectrum HoloByte made its
commitment that has lasted from
TANK through today's Falcon 3.0.

Although some computer games were labeled as
being VGA compatible prior to mid-1989, most of
them provided EGA resolution through the VGA
board. By the end of 1989, however, most
companies were releasing their premium titles as
VGA (actually, many were MCGA (320x200)
resolution, in order to get beyond the 16 color
restriction of VGA's more precise (640x480)
resolution).
The pictures above show the EGA and VGA
versions of the same screen from Sierra's Mixed Up
Mother Goose.

1990 CGW Poll
Top Five

Another major goal in 1990 was the publication of
computer games for people who never played
computer games. The software publishers reasoned
that the only way to expand their market was to
introduce the hobby to new garners and they used a
variety of techniques to try to accomplish this. On the
heels of the unparalleled success of Tetris in reaching
non-garners, Spectrum HoloByte unveiled an
international series of puzzle games (Welltris from the
Soviet Union, Soko-Ban from Japan and Zig-Zag from
Britain); Taito announced Puzznic (a real-time sliding
tile puzzle game) and Arkanoid It: Revenge of DOH;
and Virgin Games released SPOT, a challenging
abstract strategy game with delightfully frivolous
animation.
Believing that the hobby needed more female
garners, Roberta Williams designed an "interactive
play" with a female protagonist and more
eavesdropping and observation than action (The
Colonel's Bequest). An introductory-level adventure
game, LucasArts' (nee Lucasfilm) Loom, used a
musical staff and "point and click" interface to induce
new players to give computer gaming a try. Sierra
even tried the multimedia, multi-player strategy route
with Jones in the Fast Lane,
The lesson that software publishers seemed to learn
from these efforts was that a product could not
succeed in the market if it did not appeal to
experienced garners first. If its appeal could be
transferred by experienced garners, later, that was
beneficial. There seemed to be no room for purely
novice games, however.

1.

Their Finest Hour (LucasFilm)

2.

Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse)

3.

Ultima VI (Origin)

4.

Harpoon (Three-Sixty)

5.

SimCity (Maxis)

Apparently, many CGW readers believed
that Larry Holland's second game of
WWII aerial combat was their own "finest
hour" because the game held record
high ratings throughout much of 1990.
Gamers enjoyed the ability to fly on both
sides of the conflict, as well as the
excellent bit-mapped graphics.

By 1990, the success of the video game
industry was significantly impacting
computer game design with regard to
interface. Since many designers and
publishers wanted to see their computer
games move onto the more lucrative
video game platforms, icon-driven "point
and click" interfaces began to proliferate.
Broderbund's Joan of Arc; Siege and The
Sword, Data East's Full Metal Planet and
Interstel's Dragon Force provided
icon-driven wargames, while Accolade's
Day of the Viper and Star Control offered
icon-driven action games. In the CRPG
world, earlier products (such as Origin's
Times of Lore and Interplay's Dragon
Wars) were emulated in Data East's
Chamber of the Sci-Mutant Priestess and
Drakkhen, Infocom's Circuit's Edge,
Interplay's Lord of the Rings, Mindcraft's
The Keys to Maramon, and Origin's Bad
Blood and Ultima VI. Ironically, very few of
these easy-to-be-imported designs ever
made the transition to the cartridge
game market.

1991 CGW Poll
Top Five
1.

Wing Commander (Origin)

2.

Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse)

3.

Red Baron (Dynamix)

4.

Warlords (SSG)

5.

Ultima VI (Origin)

The "Race" to Multimedia

EDITED FOR YOUR
VIEWING PLEASURE

I 990's Red Baron and Stunt Driver spawned
numerous 1991 products with user-defined
camera angles for instant replay. Unlike
Spectrum HoloByte's 1990 Stunt Driver,
however, where garners had to set the
cameras in advance of running the course,
most of 1991"s releases allowed the gamer to
select the angles of view during the replay.
Falcon 3.0 let garners view their mission from
a multitude of perspectives, changing on the
fly. Konami's Bill Elliott's NASCAR Challenge
and EA's Mario Andretti's Racing Challenge
(both developed by Distinctive Software)
offered multiple angles from which to review
races, The former even lets garners view
crashes from any other car in the race. Earl
Weaver Baseball ll and 4-D Boxing (both from
EA) allowed replays from several angles. The
latter even allowed players to edit their
fighter's appearance.

In 1991 Origin's Wing Commander
dominated the CGW Game Poll like no
other game before or since. It debuted
in the number one position in February
1991, In March it attained a 10.91
rating, the highest CGW Poll rating ever
It remained in the number one position
until January 1992 when it was
superseded by none other than it's
own offspring, Wing Commander II. The
two Wing Commanders remained first
and second until the original was
retired to the CGW Hall of Fame in April
1992.

In 1991, software publishers
began to use more digitized
images and film sequences in
computer games. This was a
combined result of delayed
introductions of platforms with
optical storage and the
research/development being
done in preparation for their
introduction. Some games used
incidental images, just to prove
that it was possible. Other games,
like Sierra's Rise of the Dragon, used
film sequences to reveal clues.
The actual multimedia platforms
themselves, however, continued to
slip. Commodore's CDTV, expected
by Christmas of 1990, was still
touted as 'Real soon now' in early
1991. CD-I, expected years earlier,
was still gearing up for its release
and Sega announced that its
CD-ROM was still, at least, a year
away. NEC hoped to ship its
CD-ROM for the TurboGrafx 16 by
the end of the year and the MPC
specifications had not been
adopted.

Although Dynamix used the technique of scanning
illustrations for 1990's Rise of the Dragon, 1991 became the
'Year of the Scan.' Sierra and Dynamix used the process of
scanning painted backgrounds to both speed up
development time and to offer a different look. LucasArts'
LeChuck's Revenge: Monkey Island II used a similar technique
(and the same hardware) to enhance the look of that popular
game. Several companies scanned photos as backgrounds
and segue screens, as well. Perhaps, the most interesting use of
the scanning technology, however, was the use
of colored backgrounds and
animated sketches in The Adventures of Willy Beamish, an animate(
cartoon that offered a unique(
look for graphic adventure:

Review

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
PROTECTION:
DESIGNER:
DISTRIBUTOR:

Fables & Fiends: The Legend of Kyrandia
IBM, Amiga
$59.99
Documentation Look-up
Michael Legg
Virgin Games
Irvine, CA

Review
into a far off rural area, there to raise and educate the boy in
preparation for his ascent to the throne.
In the meanwhile, all was not well in Kyrandia, magical
powers were not being replenished, and the Royal Mystics
were forced to utilize some of the
magic that was continuing to imprison the murderer Malcolm. As the
spell became weaker, Malcolm prepared to escape and make good his
terrible revenge on the Royal family,
the Mystics (in particular Kallak) and
the Natural World.

Part Two:
The Game Unfolds
Kyrandia starts with a well-presented introduction showing the escaped and rather ticked-off Malcolm
venting his revenge on a forest or two.
a poor little squirrel and the mystic
Kallak; a pretty nasty result for him,
being turned into stone hut still being
able to see! This graphic sequence
compares with the best, is not overlong and nicely sets the scene. An
impressive feature is the use of perspective where the player looks at one
scene, and the focus alters creating
three scenes within one; first the
player concentrates on the quill and
the writer's hand, then behind that the
writer's face itself, finally the window
set at the back of the scene. This creates depth and atmosphere and gives
Kyrandia a cracking start.
After the introduction one enters a
gaming world which is best described
as a cross between Loom, King's
Quest V and Secret of Monkey Island
2. The graphics are genuine 256 color
VGA/MCGA (the only standards supported ) and are beautifully drawn.
There are stated to be over 100 locations, these being 'self-contained' i.e.
there is no real scrolling. One moves
from one location to another in KQ V
fashion.
The atmosphere and mysticism is
similar to Loom, as is the ease of use.
The interface is of the no-typing variety and doesn't even include icons.
All actions are instigated with the cursor, using either the
keyboard or mouse (highly recommended). The cursor is
moved over an object/person and the action is activated by a
single click. If it is an object this will be picked up, and can
either be moved into or out of inventory, or manipulated. If
you click on a person, conversation is automatic.

The interface does not contain default verbs such as in
Monkey Island 2, so choices are limited, and the game is
necessarily somewhat linear. Legend of Kyrandia is divided
into four chapters, each chapter having a series of quests or
problems, these becoming progressively more difficult in
each chapter. The system is intelligent, with NPCs realizing if one has
a required object or not, (and, in the
latter case, prompting one to find it).
Flags are set as the character completes tasks, triggering other events,
and allowing him to progress in the
game. Casual gamers will also appreciate the fact that the save game facility is simple, and allows multiple
saves.
All the main soundboards are supported, with a classy full length sound
track, incidental noises and sound effects. The music alters as the hero
enters certain locations, again adding
to general atmosphere. The locations
themselves are well varied, with forests, cottages, caverns and (surprise,
surprise!) an underground maze. This
is a variation of KQ V's desert, using
`fire-berries' as temporary light
sources ( and then being eaten by
suspiciously 'grue-like' creatures if
the light goes out) rather than dying
from thirst. Luckily, this maze is nowhere near as tiresome as that in KQ
V, but why do software authors feel
they have to include a maze to make
it a proper game?
Comparing Kyrandia with the
above 'classic' graphic adventures, it
has the magical nature of Loom, hut
with progressively more difficult
puzzles and the use of gem stones as
opposed to musical notes. The graphics are as good as KQ V and Monkey
Island 2, possibly better than the latter as they are not so cluttered. The
sense of humor is similar to the
tongue-in-cheek approach of Monkey
Island 2, and adds up to an enjoyable
jaunt. The storyline is hardly original,
and the interface/game system do not
really break any new ground, but the
presentation of the game, the general
quality and the feel, make this a
promising debut and a welcome addition to the world of
graphic adventures. The game is also relatively short, so if
you fancy a not-too strenuous stroll in a magical kingdom,
you won't go far wrong visiting Kyrandia!

Sneak Preview

Jack Nicklaus Signature Edition:

The "Hole Shebang"
Examining The Course
First in a Series on Course Design
by Mark Alan Willett

G

olf is the only sport whose playing fields are virtually
infinite in variety and relatively undefined. Yes, I know
the outfield fence varies in baseball, and there are rink-size
variants in professional hockey, but for sheer distinction and impact
on play, nothing approaches the fields of
golf.
As a result, a critical aspect of the sport
is "hole analysis" or,
as it is often called,
"course management." It is no mean
compliment that today's computer golf
games/sims are detailed and realistic
enough to provide
both the video display and requisite
tools to make course
management a possibi Iity while playing
the games. Though
this article will look
specifically at the
tools available in Jack
Nicklaus Golf Signature Edition (JNSE), the principles of course
management may well be applied to almost any
of the computer golf software packages on the
market.
Analyzing a hole for its play values shouldn't
just result in lower scores, it also offers the
opportunity to develop a greater appreciation
for the game and it is the best place for the mind
of the golfer to see into the mind of the course
designer. If one is standing on the tee at the first
hole, for example, looking out over the fairway, which club should be used? Where should
one try to hit the ball? Why? Where's the best place to start figuring
this all out?
While the first temptation may be to take into account the wind
and the condition of the course (whether it is being played on wet,
normal, or dry surfaces), in fact, those are elements which simply
modify play on the hole. They don' t provide any insight into the hole
itself.
So the first thing is to look at the hole, carefully and without
consideration of the elements. JNSE is unique among computer golf
games because it contains both a play module and a design module.
Also, while some took have been provided to assist analysis from

the play module, the best evaluation of a hole can be conducted from
within the design module itself.
In the design module, one can assess the lay of the land without
interference from trees or other objects. One can also quickly view
the hole from any point and look in any direction. Think of a
tour through the design module as being comparable to "walking the course." For best play, the time you spend walking the
course can be very rewarding to your final score.
Let's go to the EDIT WINDOW for the first hole and select
OPTIONS. From that OPTIONS window, choose HIGH
CONTRAST. By doing so, the distinctions between tees,
fairway, rough, heavy rough/out-of-bounds, and greens will
be clearer when you return to the EDIT WINDOW. Furthermore, changes in elevation are more clearly displayed.
The following are a few important things to look for while
taking a tour of the hole:
Most par fours
and fives will begin based on a,
roughly, standard
250-yard drive.
Look for the landing area of the
drive at about that
distance from the
tee. The TAPE
MEASURE tool,
available from
most design module screens, is
quite handy in
measuring specific distances between any two
selected points.
Is the landing
area flat? Does
one side slope?
Are there bunkers, trees, or water which threaten it? If the standard
landing area is greatly affected by any one of these features, a shorter
or longer tee shot may be best. Further, remember that the course
designer may be using the apparently easy first shot as a tease to
make the next shot tougher.

On the Fairway
Course management is the art of seeing how the first shot affects
the second and how that then affects the third, and so on. Courses
are often designed with risk-reward factors where the difficulty of
one shot sets up an easier next shot. So, it is a good idea to look back
at that landing area and see if the easy tee-shot to flat fairway may

Sneak Preview
actually make the second shot tougher or not. It is also useful to
consider whether a more risky tee shot might lead to an easier
approach.
The ability to narrowly skirt a dangerous stretch of water, a bunker
complex, or an out-of-bounds area may actually lead to the shot
which will result in a birdie or even eagle. This is a simple example
of how risk-reward factors may be applied on the course. Often, the
more risky shot either reduces the yardage of the next one or makes
access to the green easier.
Avid computer golfers should
make liberal use of the VIEW
HOLE capability, available
from virtually every design
module menu, particularly to
see if hills or mounds, trees or
other objects, block the view of
their shots. It is also vital to use
this feature in order to make note
of where the hole plays uphill,
downhill and flat.
Of course, once the best potential first shot has been selected, the rest is easy. Using
that as a starting point, one
should use the same tools to
evaluate the second and, on par
fives, third shots. When done,
the best path from tee to green
should be abundantly clear.

On The Green
When evaluating an approach to the green, it is vital to make
certain of two considerations: the length and width of the green and
its elevations. Not only will the VIEW HOLE function assist one in

this regard, but "zooming" in while in the BUILD HILLS menu will
provide a cell-by-cell display of every minor and major change.
What should one look for on greens? First, it's usually easier to
play to the length of the green. When selecting a landing area before
making the approach, it is profitable to find the one that allows one
to play lengthwise home. Second, it is useful to note if any adjacent
hunkers are being used to simply "contain" the ball (and keep it in
play), or if the green actually slopes toward the bunker. If so, it's
important to draw or fade away
from those bunkers when coming into the green.

Golf Course
Appreciation 101
By this time, there should be
some appreciation that each hole
is a puzzle to be solved by the
individual golfer. Let's go back
to the tee and evaluate other variables. From the play module, it
is possible to access an overhead
view of the hole at any time. The
AUTO CADDY feature is cornparable to the TAPE MEASURE
in the design module. The same
with VIEW HOLE, though in the
play module, all uses of the
VIEW HOLE function point one
toward the pin.
There are now three more variables: wind, course conditions
and pin positions. The wind and course conditions are visible from
the OPTIONS menu, COURSE CONDITIONS, and these have their
greatest impact on club and shot selection: Will the course conditions cause a gain or a loss in yardage? Will they force the shot to

Sneak Preview
the right or left? Note how these conditions could change the
best-laid-plans for getting to the cup.

short at 163 yards. When necessary, it is easier for most to hit a club
longer than to hit a club shorter.

Also. it is significant to note how the current pin position may
change the approach by forcing the shot to come in over water, sand,
or around trees. In the play module, one can access the GREEN
OVERHEAD view to help one
see the pin positions, elevations
and area around the green. So,
be prepared, using the previously selected best route as a
starting point, to completely replan the entire line of attack.
Naturally, this should be easier
when one can use all that was
learned about the hole in the
process of designing the original.

Remember that hitting into the "red-zone" exaggerates hooks and
slices, but so does the wind. Learn to play into a wind with a draw
or fade when control and precision are most important. Also, it is
profitable to learn to play with
the wind when its time to pick up
extra yardage.

Here are some other
rules-ofthmb, era
always exceptions:
Play to the outside of doglegs.
The inside is usually filled with
water, sand, or trees. Even for
those willing to flirt with the
hazards, trees have this ugly tendency to block the next shot.
Remember, the goal is to find
the best angle to get to the green.
Most course designers use flat
terrain to help point the way. Look carefully, though, there may be
a hazard lurking where one least expects it.
Try to pick a lie such that the next shot uses a full stroke. It is easier
to hit a full I 73-yard five-iron, for example, than to have to hit one

Learn to sort sand traps into
three kinds: I) Those that are
used to help point the way to the
best shot (in this fashion, they are
simply signposts); 2) those that
are used to punish bad shots (not
as many as one would first
think); and 3) those that really
are helpful because they are used
to keep the ball in play (called
containment bunkers, they may
be used near water hazards. outof-bounds, and behind the
green). Containment hunkers
may act as a safety net and actually encourage golfers to take
that more dangerous shot!

Happy Bird
Hunting
The computer golfer who learns the lessons of course management
is all the more likely to find himself/herself on the way to computer
golf fame and fortune than those who choose to ignore the hints
which the course itself provides. Next installment. we'll provide
concrete tips on building one's own masterpiece.

Sneak Preview

by Chuck Miller
Sneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. They
are feature articles based on
"works in progress" that
CGW's editors have deemed
worthy of early coverage.
These articles are not intended to provide the final
word on a product, since we
expect to publish appropriate review coverage when
the game is completely finished.
"Inside, the Council
awaited. They were 12,
seated about a circular table,
resting on a dais above the
floor. In one corner of the room hung a great, crystal sphere.
Rowena recognized it at once as the Orb of Knowing. Without
ceremony, she took her measure of the Council, judging each
of them who sat before her without waiting to be judged.
Robes of regal blue, hoods lined in gold and threaded with
silver filament, noble faces looking out; none of it fooled
Rowena or gave her cause for awe. What she saw were
defeated men. After all, not a single Lord among them would
have accepted her as leader before this present war, this
disastrous conflict of theirs with Shadow Weaver."

The Serving
(of the Summons)
Little has done well since the appearance of Shadow
Weaver. Kingdoms have toppled like dominoes under the
powerful arm of his evil horde. In fact, events dictate the need
to call forth a new champion in a final effort to defeat the
malodorous presence responsible for this vast devastation.
Thus, a champion is summoned. With the aid of Rowena
and the Council, this warrior is readied, then transported to
Shadow Weaver's labyrinth to puzzle and battle his or her way
to the Citadel and, in the end, to defeat the wicked denizen of
the dark.
Under most circumstances, I would not look forward to
receiving a summons. Appearing in court is just not my idea
of a fun day. However, in the case of SSI's soon-to-be-released single-character fantasy role-playing game, The Summoning, this adventurer is more than willing to interrupt his
normal schedule to appear in t he "court" described above and

invest countless hours traversing the Shadow Weaver's
immense labyrinth.

The Designing
(of the Quest)
The Summoning hails from
the lineage of DarkSpire and
Dusk of the Gods, with its
greatest similarity in design
to the latter. However, don't
let the more modest nature of
these previous offerings color
your expectations. SSI's new
fantasy role-playing adventure for MS-DOS gamers, developed by Event Horizon,
significantly improves upon
and refines those earlier efforts.
As indicated, The Summoning exhibits its closest heritage
with Dusk of the Gods, reviewed in the September 1992 issue
of CGW. Its chief two weaknesses, as presented in that review,
"lack of emotion" and "uninspired graphics," have both been
admirably addressed. Though not always providing an
edge-of-the-seat experience emotionally, The Summoning does
draw the player into the story and provides sufficient action
and exploration to keep his or her gaze fixed to the monitor
for hours on end. Graphics, presented in 256-color VGA
Hi-Res mode, have received state-of-the-art attention and are
quite attractive.

The Conjuring
(of Combat and Conundrum)
The Summoning follows the basic slay-the-evil-wizard scenario where the player spends the majority of his or her time
solving the puzzles necessary to reach the final encounter with
evil incarnate, while at the same time developing abilities to
a sufficient level to succeed in that predestined meeting.
Though the story has been told endless times before, this need
not detract from the playing experience; and in The Summoning, it indeed does not. Few role-playing games have so
involved this adventurer in recent days. Not since Dungeon
Muster first appeared has a game of this genre so captivated
my attention, enough so as to make it difficult to pause
sufficiently to pen this preview.
Most time spent in the labyrinth will be devoted to either
combat or puzzle-solving, with an anticipated 100 hours of

Sneak Preview
adventuring or more provided. The puzzles are, for the most
part, object-oriented — finding the right key for the right lock
and manipulating trigger plates to open and close pits in the
correct order. Keys are quite basic, as they are normally used
in close proximity to where they are acquired. The trigger
plate variety of puzzles, though, is a little more perplexing.
Fortunately, combat is not stressed to the same degree as
that of other SSI offerings, particularly Gold Box games (let
ecstatic shouts of joy ring forth!). The combat present is both
challenging and manageable, though some of the more difficult battles do require the retreat-save-and-heal-thyself approach. However, the emphasis is definitely focused more on
character development and exploration than on combat.

created by combining hand symbols in the correct sequences.
Covering the lower third of the playing field is the Character
Screen which can be raised or lowered as much as needed,
providing access to the player's inventory. Also available
from this screen is an auto-mapping feature, similar to that in
Ultima Underworld. However, The Summoning goes one step
further by allowing one to print the maps — a long overdue
and appreciated feature.

The Foreshadowing
(of Needed Improvements)
There are, of course, some areas which need improvement.
Copy protection remains an obtrusive
match-the-symbols-on-page-such-and-such event that precedes play. Most designers
still need to incorporate more unobtrusive protection schemes
into their products.
Music and sound effects are ably handled. However, while
sound effects accompany game play throughout, music is
reserved for special occasions only and is noticeably absent
from most of the gaming experience. Not all players crave the
constant drone of "dungeon music," yet its presence would be
welcomed, along with the option to turn it off if so desired.
The only other "chink" worth mentioning is the lack of a
quick-save function. At present, the player must go through
several requesters in order to save his position. Adding the
ability to "quick-save" the current game would be especially
handy.

The Prognosticating
(Regarding the Published Version)
Several sub-quests are provided within the confines of the
overall adventure. While not all need to be completed to defeat
the Shadow Weaver, they do provide items to make the job
easier (especially weapons — consumables which wear out
and break). Some of these sub-quests, nevertheless, must be
completed as they provide items essential to a successful
conclusion.

Still in its final beta stage at the time of this writing, The
Summoning has proved to be a substantial and stable product,
though certainly in need of several finishing touches. Even so.
it is a polished and much improved offering from Event
Horizon, one that will make a fine new addition to SSI's
stable of thoroughbred developers.

Character interaction is also important to success in the
labyrinth. Many NPCs hold information and items of extreme
importance. Thus, questioning each of them is vital. While it
is recommended that players keep track of the information
given, it is no longer necessary to take written notes. Conversations with NPCs can be conveniently printed out if so
desired.

The Positioning
(of Characters and Scenery)
The Summoning is presented from a 3D isometric perspective, allowing the player to control the activities of his onscreen counterpart from a godlike vantage point. As the
character moves about the labyrinth, the screen scrolls to
reveal his immediate surroundings and immediate opponents.
Rooms and passages concealed behind closed doors and gates
remain unseen until the obstructing object is opened.
Partial-screen cinematic sequences, interspersed throughout the game, lend a feel of motion and realism. For example,
when using a ladder to climb from one level to another, a small
window opens on the screen and depicts the player's hands
ascending or descending the ladder one rung at a time.
The Magic Screen, when activated, covers the top twot hirds of the gaming window and effectively pauses the game.
Spells, which play an important role in The Summoning, are

The Summoning effectively combines elements of traditional RPGs and animated adventures into a very playable and
enjoyable package, creating one of the best single-character
dungeon adventures to appear in a very long time, and providing a refreshing and consuming experience. Seldom have
I been as caught up in a new adventure as I have been with
this one. Hopefully, many other garners will find themselves
presented with the same summons as this thankful adventurer.

From Pictures to Pixels:
Old Hollywood to New Hollywood
t is, perhaps, appropriate that Peter Oliphant's last released title,
LexiCross, has recently been converted to the Macintosh. On the old
Daniel Boone television series, Peter
played the part of a young Scottish boy
from the Macintosh clan. Currently,
Oliphant is working on a top-secret
project for Interplay Productions that
is expected to be their primary product
announcement at the Winter Consumer
Electronics Show (January, 1993).
CGW has always been interested in
the journey from the old Hollywood of
film and television to the New Hollywood, and Peter's story is an interesting way to explore the differences and
similarities between the two entertainment industries. Industry insiders are
always accusing the entertainment
software industry of being an "incestuous" industry where: everyone knows
everyone else; "who" one knows is
often more important than "what" one
knows; and players from one company
almost inevitably show up at another
company in the same industry.

I

Life in the
"Old" Hollywood
The old Hollywood must have been
similar. Peter Oliphant got into show
business because his stepfather, Darrold Westbrook, was an actor and occasionally worked in atmosphere (i.e.
as an extra). He came from an entire
family that was interested in show business and, eventually, the family formed

a local "live" program
called Air Patrol (aired on
Channel 5 — KTLA, a station under Gene Autry's
Golden West Broadcasting
rubric). Peter's uncle was a
clown, his stepfather
played a regular role and,
one day, as a guest, Peter
took over the entire show
by talking and doing ad lib
business. Peter's precociousness (he was apparently able to both read and
write long before being of
kindergarten age) and cute
sense of humor was so delightful that the family kept
him on as a regular and, in
Oliphant's words "Once
you've got a credit, it's
much easier to get an open
door for the next job."
So, for a while, Peter entered the daisy-chained world of series
pilots and guest appearances. His pilot,
Be It Ever So Humble, showed Peter
on-screen as an adult trapped in a
child's body, but used a dubbed voiceover of an adult male to dramatize the
difference between a kid's perspective
and an adult's perspective. The pilot
didn't sell (apparently being too far
ahead of the rash of summer films using the same schtick a few years ago),
but it gave him a chance to make an
appearance on The Donna Reed Show.
In the episode entitled, "Mary's Little
Lambs," he played a little kid who tore
up the dolls and the puppets behind the
stage. In addition to The Donna Reed
Show, he also turned up as a "poster
child" on Doctor Kildare where Richard Chamberlain looked at his foot.
One of his most exciting credits was
in the film Mr. Hobbs Takes A Vacation
with Jimmy Stewart. The shooting
schedule for the film went past Christmas and, on the last shooting day prior
to Christmas, Stewart handed out gifts
to the cast and crew. As he finished
handing out his presents, Stewart suddenly caught a glance of Peter sitting
patiently on the floor of the sound

stage. He realized he had forgotten the
"kid," so he went back into his dressing
room and brought out a generic gift.
Humorously, the gift turned out to be a
bottle of Scotch. Peter wishes he still
had the bottle, but figures his parents
were pleased with Stewart's "thoughtfulness."
Peter also appeared in five episodes
of The Dick Van Dyke Show. Interestingly enough, only four of the five were
aired during the series' Emmy-winning
run. The episode which didn't air was
written and directed from the perspective of two goldfish in a howl as they
observed the goings-on in the Petrie
household. After the episode was
filmed, the producers decided that they
would lose audience share if they
broadcast it. They considered the episode too weird and experimental for the
public's taste. Whether in the old Hollywood or the new, it appears that
weird and experimental, as well as innovative and unique, are concepts that
are often avoided.
Such were the environs of this game
designer's life until he reached the
eighth grade. Then, except for a one-

shot appearance, he didn't work in Hollywood again through high school and
college.

Birth of a Computer
Game Designer

As a sophomore in high school, he
started computing when he was taking
upper division math courses. Through
the math department, he started using
computer mainframes and entering
programs via punchcards. Though he
actually attended Los Angeles' Fairfax
High School, he was allowed to take
computer courses after school at Hamilton High (where they had an IBM
1130). As a junior, he wrote a Roulette
program and, when his own school got
a terminal, became the computer monitor for his high school.
When Don Daglow, President of Beyond Software (and producer of both
the original Earl Weaver Baseball for
Electronic Arts and Tony LaRussa Ultimate Baseball for SSI) and. later, Eddie Dombrower (designer/programmer
of Earl Weaver Baseball and Earl
Weaver Baseball II) were going to Pomona College (one of the Claremont
Colleges), Oliphant was going to
Harvey Mudd (another of the Claremont Colleges). All three computer
science students were later to end up
working on Mattel's Intellivision team
and all are still involved in the computer game industry, today.
During that time, Peter wrote a contract bridge program on the mainframe
to determine the percentages of winning hands and also studied game theory. After college, he went to graduate
school at Purdue for one year (where he
did not study computers, but did some
tutoring in computer science). He decided that graduate school in mathematics was not for him and moved back
into the Claremont community (silver
umbilical cord syndrome). Seeking
work, he went back to the college guidance counselor and told the counselor
that he'd like to program games for a

living. The year was 1976. The world
was not ready for computer game programmers and the counselor told him
to come back when he was serious.
Finally, Oliphant landed a job at
Sperry-Univac in 1977. There, he
learned to program in assembly language and wrote software that was used
on military computers. One program
was used with coast guard rescue missions and adapted for Anti-Submarine
Warfare (ASW).
Later, Peter got a job with a defense
contractor that was a spin-off from
TRW. There, he was supposed to maintain software written in bit splices (next
level below assembly programming).
Unfortunately, the original code was
not commented and maintaining another person's uncommented code
proved to be a horrendous experience.
He was all set to bail out of the company with the "program from hell" and
had managed to use his high security
clearance to get a job interview with the
CIA.
Just at that time, however, his original dream came true. He ended up at
Mattel, working on Intellivision.
When the division split off a hand-held
games department, they had plans to
release a game based on the coin-op hit,
Gravity, as well as a juggling game.
They wanted to develop prototypes for
six more games from which to choose
an additional title to add to the two they
had already selected. Developing the
prototypes was Oliphant's first experience with 6502 programming and they
chose one of his prototypes called
Docking. Docking was one of the first
games to use geometrical wire-frame
graphics and required gamers to successfully maneuver their space ship
into a space station's docking bay. He
also worked on World Championship
Football, Speed Freak and StandAlone Football, while at Mattel.
Mattel decided to go into personal
computer software and Peter became
the head of one of seven development
teams. The division went from twenty
people to 140. The section was supposed to be experimental and Peter,
enamored with the possibilities of
Atari's new machine, started working
on an Atari game. Unfortunately, Mattel didn't want to sell software for any
hardware that they weren't selling
themselves. Peter stopped working on
the game at work, but ended up working on the program at night and decided
to sell it independently, Eventually, he
sold Wall War to Sierra for a $16,000
advance. Then, when he decided to go
independent and was getting ready to

leave, Mattel changed their minds and
decided to release Wall War as Force
Field (its title when Peter did the original design in-house). By the end of his
going away party, Peter was informed
of impending litigation concerning the
title. One year later, Mattel's computer
division crashed.

Life in the
New Hollywood
By that time, however, Peter was living in Oakhurst, California and working for Sierra. Early on, Peter worked
on both conversions and his own projects. He programmed the conversions
of Troll's Tale and Dragon's Keep, as
well as his first legitimate hit, Mr. Cool.
Mr. Cool was only a small hit by either
today's standards or those of the era. It
was a little game, heavily influenced by
the reigning coin-op hit, Q-bert, but it
was an excellent performer for both
Oliphant and Sierra, nonetheless.
Encouraged by his, admittedly minor, success, Peter signed a contract to
co-design Mickey's Space Adventure.
Before he knew it, however, he had a
400 page design document placed on

his desk and, by his recollection, approximately 25 pages with minor or
major changes from Roberta every day.
He worked 20 hours per day (from 1
PM until 8AM or so), seven days per
week for seven weeks straight in order
to get both the Amiga and Apple versions of the game completed. Unfortunately for Oliphant, the contract
contained royalty ceilings (i.e. if the
game did too well, they wouldn't pay
anymore). Since Mickey's Space Adventure was a very successful product
and Peter felt cheated, he left in a contract dispute that was, eventually, to
cause him personal disaster.
Right after he left Sierra, Peter
worked for Davidson Associates on
their Homeworker package (Peter did

the calculator section of the program).
Then, he moved on to Paramus where
they were building LANs with Apple
IIs. Paramus planned to port their software over to the IBM, but abandoned
their project when the industry as a
whole tightened its purse strings in
1985. As the highest paid person on the
programming team, Peter was the first
to go when things started going bad. He
also felt discriminated against because
he was the only employee who was not
part of the religious clique at the company.
His next job, however, was to bridge
the gap between his earlier career and
his current one. Peter says that one of
the main reasons he got the job at Cinemaware was because of his show business background. His first
responsibility was to work as a producer on a conversion of their Sinbad
product from the Amiga to the ST.
Cinemaware was using a Hungarian
programming team to do the work and
Oliphant was frustrated with the way
they worked and having to direct all the
work through long-time software
agent, Stephen Friedman. Peter decided to cut out the middle man and
become a programmer on the IBM conversion of Rocket Ranger, instead. It
was the first code that worked automatically whether one had CGA, TGA or
EGA without having to have separate
versions.
As Cinemaware itself began to falter,
largely because it was banking on the
world of CD-I and CD-ROM to put
them in the forefront of entertainment
software companies, Andy Caldwell
(Sport-Time's SuperStar Ice Hockey
for Mindscape), Steve Quinn, Peter
Oliphant and John Reego formed a
company initially called Atomic. later

AfterShock Software. Peter was the
first to leave AfterShock after a dispute with John over Peter's projects.
John never wanted to do any of Peter's
designs and Peter kept getting stuck

with contract work on other people's
designs, including an Activision project called Sabet. Activision's style
during this era was to start 25 projects
and throw 14 of them away. Unfortunately, Peter's project ended up in the
latter category and that was the last
straw for his relationship with AfterShock.

Now, nobody would hire Peter for

anything. He played tennis with Rob
Landeros of Virgin and Rob suggested
that they work together on an X-Rated
version of Wheel of Fortune. Peter,
probably very much aware of contracts
and licensing from his days in the old
Hollywood, told Rob that it was impossible to sell a Wheel of Fortune game,
even an X-rated version without getting sued by the production company.
However, he suggested that if it were
turned into a crossword puzzle game, it
would be fair game. Activision turned
down LexiCross, but Miles Computing purchased it before it went out of
business.
After Miles' demise, Accolade and
Virgin Games both turned the game
down because game shows need a "license" in order to sell. Peter finally
went to Interplay Productions
and showed the game to Brian
Fargo. Brian was not immediately optimistic for the same reason many other publishers had
been skeptical. After playing the
game for a day, Brian called Peter on Sunday morning, said that
he and his wife couldn't stop
playing the game and the final
deal for LexiCross was solidified.
Peter is currently working on
the project known only as
Brian's Dungeon (Not the final
name). What little we have seen
of the game leads us to believe that
neither Peter's experiences in the
old Hollywood nor those in the new
have been wasted on this showcase
product for 1993.

Rumor Bag

I'm a Sinner
I'm a Grinner
I'm a Slam Dancer
and a Tale Spinner
by Jerk Malfeasance

M

ilwaukee is a disgustingly
clean town. You can't hardly
find a biker or a gang banger
anywhere. At least, that's what I figured when I left the Mecca and stepped
onto the street. Then, this preacher guy
in a beat-up panel truck, with blood-red
slogans painted onto every dirty white
smear of surface, starts circling the
block with his speaker blaring out the
glorious news that we were whoremongers and sinners. This gave me
some hope. I figured it meant that some
of my kind of people were around. He
started shouting something about the
world burning in flames, though, and
my mind started wandering.
I had just been told that the brilliant
World War II strategy game from Australian Design Group, World In Flames,
was being converted into a computer
game with modem and network capability for up to four players. Players will
choose the U.S., German, Japanese or
U.K. side and the difficulty level for the
game will be set by letting the player(s)
determine the level of control they wish
to have over their units. Assuming the
deal works out, a new software publisher
called WhiteWeb Software will be publishing the game as part of an extensive
roll-out of new products within the next
year.
I didn't even feel like running out and
overturning the old preacher's truck anymore. Just thinking about all the new
software under development pumped me
up so that I wanted to go slam dancing.
Wonder if they had some abandoned old
warehouse around here where it was happening? I started off in the direction of the
Safe House. The burgers weren't much,
but the spy motif with its false doors and
secret passages usually elicited a few secrets from software folks. Everybody
wants to be a spy.
My contact recognized me immediately. Guess it was the sunglasses. He told
me that he and Marc Miller, creator of
Traveller, had just seen a demo of Kes-

mai's Multi-Player Traveller. Running
under Windows, the upcoming GEnie
game will have the complete data on the
entire Imperium from the GDW sourcebooks. The way cool part is that players
will be able to download the data onto
their hard-disks only as their characters
(each GEnie account will be able to support up to four player characters) either
personally explore new planets or as they
purchase the information from other
player characters.
I asked him if he'd ever heard of Operation: Phoenix, another WhiteWeb
game. When he hadn't, I told him it was
due to be a CD-ROM space conquest
game where players would get recorded
radio-style messages to update them on
planetary situations and digitized film
footage of planetary battles. It even has
an AI routine that "learns" as it plays
against human players and a capacity for
modem and network play for up to four
opponents. I thought my contact might
enjoy the planetary exploration and having to put down guerrilla uprisings on
conquered planets.
I grabbed my souvenir glass and
jammed it into the pocket of my leather
jacket. Slapping my contact across the
shoulder, I told him I was off to find
whatever Milwaukee's idea of a happening place might be. "Oh," he snickered,
"you must mean the cyber-tribal-disco
place, Club Marilyn." I asked my contact
how he knew about the place and he said
it was where some of the SSI gang were
going to be hanging out.
Well, I didn't know if the club was
going be any good, but I knew the potential for rumors was going to be. Maybe I
could get Kathleen Watson to go on record and tell me if SSI was really going
to publish an updated version of Archon.
That is, if she could hear me over the
funky out-of-synch backbeat arrangements of upbeat tunes they were playing
in this dump. They were raining vegetable oil smoke from the ceiling and zapping strobe lights through it so that the
whole place looked like some grotto
where mysterious tribal rituals might be
performed. The voodoo woofers made
the dance floor vibrate like a 2.6 quake
and the dancers looked like the new animated monsters that are supposed to be
coming to life in next year's Archon
2000.

During a pause in the cyber-tribal-disco
writhing that passed for dancing, she
leaned close to me and whispered those
magical words that always turn me from
punk to gentleman, "There's something I
need to tell you." I jerked the length of
chain that clasps my reporter's notebook
to my steel-studded belt and got ready to
write. She asked me if I had seen SkyRealms of Jorune in the dealer room.
"Sure," I replied, "It's not a computer
game, but I knocked one off the table and
bought it as damaged goods, anyway."
"Well," she smiled, "what would you
say if I told you it was going to be a
computer game next year?" I told her that
I knew of several companies who
couldn't possibly be publishing it if it was
going to ship next year and grinned cruelly so that she could take in my artificially sharpened canines. Instead of
appreciating my slam on the competition
or reacting to the desirability of my dangerous dude vamp, she had the audacity
to ask me if there were any new wargame
companies on the horizon.
I told her that this new WhiteWeb
Software group looked like they were
going to hit the simulation market pretty
heavily with their line of simulations.
One is going to be a tank sim called
Rolling Thunder. Besides being multiplayer via modem or network, it will feature animated sequences to keep the
player informed of the war's progress.
Then, the music started up again and,
since we couldn't hear each other anyway, I began to move in the stiff cyborg
shuffle I call dancing. You can always tell
a PR professional, though. She didn't
laugh.

Review
Crisis of Verisimilitude
Crisis is an admirable effort, well-produced and lavishly underpinned. Ultimately, however, it must be judged on two
levels. One is its quality as a game, the other
its accuracy as a simulation of the Soviet
situation in the late 1980s. Let's deal with
the second item first.
Computer political simulations are a
fairly rare breed and most of them have
tended to reflect extreme bias on the part of
their designers. The most successful political games are Chris Crawford's pacifist
treatise Balance of Power and the wildly
leftist Hidden Agenda. In the former, nuclear war erupted if the U.S. so much as sent
five million dollars to Panama; in the latter,
the game program forced the player to become a Sandinista to survive.
Crisis has a similar bias —one that drives
the player toward establishing a free market, and both political and social liberation.
This reviewer is an unreconstructed Reaganite and heartily approves of all these
moves. However, the USSR did not have to
implement these reforms. As Deng's China
and Castro's Cuba have shown, authoritarian reaction is a valid option. Unfortu-

by Chuck Moss
"Hall measures can kill when on
the brink of precipices,
chafing in terror at the bit,
We strain and sweat and foam
because we cannot,
jump just halfway across."
Yevegny Yevetushenko
"Half Measures."

n Spectrum HoloByte's political
simulation Crisis in the Kremlin, the
player gets the opportunity to assume
leadership of the Evil Empire at its most
critical juncture: 1985. Chernenko is dead,
the USSR is rotting, Stalin's system is
cracking. We know what Gorbachev did,
and to his eternal credit, he killed the Bolshevik state — even if inadvertently. The
death of Soviet power is a dream come true
for a weary world, but today's outcome —
an economically prostrate, fissioned Eurasia — is not the best of all possible worlds.
A unitary, free, reformed, free-trade federation within the USSR's vast boundaries
would be a marked improvement. The
question is, will players win where Gorby
lost or will they find themselves overthrown one night like poor Nikita
Khruschev?
Crisis in the Kremlin lets everyone have
a go at reworking history. A graphically
gorgeous game, the mechanics of Crisis
were accurately noted in Johnny Wilson's
Sneak Preview (CGW #95). Without retreading that ground, here's a short briefing. The player begins as either a hard-liner,
a Gorbachev "moderate," or a Boris Yeltsin-style reformer, with appropriate policies in place. He faces a command screen
with a map and menus, and occasionally —
a cup of tea.
One runs the USSR by manipulating two
variables: policies and budget. Policies

I

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRIG:
PROTECTION:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Crisis in the Kremlin
IBM
$6995
None
Lary Barbu,
Spectrum HoloByte
Alameda, CA

cover matters such as civil rights, economic
freedom, military aggressiveness and media freedom, all measured on a scale from
one to 10 (where one is equivalent to Stalin
and 10 his 180 degree opposite). The game
runs in "real time," by months, with certain
known events occurring at the proper times
(Chernobyl, for example, blows in April of
1986).
The budget power is the meat of the
game. Although budgets officially take effect in October of the year, one can tinker
throughout the game — and should. Budgets can be handled at various levels of involvement, but the player should always
use the "detail" option. This power is one's
major lever for change. Reallocation of resources is the key to reform, along with the
decisions made at certain historic junctures
(e.g. should one adopt Glasnost or send its
adherents to Siberia, etc.).
Of course, one is not total master of the
top. Political strength ebbs and flows, and
the hardliners always seem to have enough
power to stymie reform. Too many steps
taken at once and the screen will fill with
video footage of coup tanks rumbling
through Moscow. So long, comrade. Sometimes, the player can face down the opposing faction, but changes need to be done
incrementally. That's why monthly salamislices of budget and policy moves need to
he spaced out throughout the year. With
luck and skill, players could survive to the
end of 1991. The Soviet Union might, too!

nately, the game's designers do not allow
us to — as Editor Wilson put it succinctly,
"hit the snooze bar of history." This distorts
the game's veracity from the outset.
Secondly, the central game mechanism is
authoritarian. A player micromanages the
economy to a total degree — which was the
USSR's problem in the first place! There is
no way the player can "de-control" segments of the economy, or de-bureaucratize.
This further distorts the actual process.
Thirdly, events occur often without regard
to performance in the economic model. Despite this reviewer's consistent funding of
agriculture at the maximum level and distribution of land to the people, "food riots"
occurred; mainly, it seemed, because food
riots always occurred at that particular
chronological point.
Finally, there is no political interaction.
This is perhaps an unfair criticism, as this
reviewer strives to critique the game released, not the game the reviewer wishes

Review
were released. However, Gorbachev
needed to rely on people to carry out his
reforms, and the failure of those underlings
(and in the case of the coup plotters, their

actual betrayal) was a sizable element in the
drama. Hidden Agenda makes effective use
of subordinates. As the USSR, like most
tyrannies, was actually a feudal welter of
interests beneath the facade, Crisis' inability to more than crudely simulate this central aspect of the situation hurts the model.
As a re-creation of the late Soviet Union,
Crisis has a surface plausibility. All the
proper elements are present; the dates correspond with actual events, the special
events (Chernobyl, Matthais Rust, Perestroika) generally occur at the proper
times. However, Gorby's progress went
through several stages. First came "uskoreneii" or acceleration in 1985-1986,
which was actually marked by more centralization, as well as the catastrophic antialcohol campaign. Acceleration's failure
led to expansion of "glasnost" which began

a device to purge corrupt Brezhnevites.
Discarding uskoreneii for a mid-course correction led, in 1987, to restructuring, or
"perestroika." Finally, the mishmash of
"half-measures" led to the 1989-91 period
of spiraling collapse.
Throughout this time, Gorby backed and
filled, hemmed and hawed, pushed forward
and retreated, put forward plans and retracted them. He compromised all over the
place, thus dissipating his own influence
and throwing the nation into chaos. Crisis,
by contrast, presents the reform period as a
linear progress; slowed perhaps, but steady,
rather than the chaotic mishmash it was.
An acid test of a simulation is whether,
by doing what the historic principals did,
one can obtain the same general result. This
reviewer has been unable to survive past
1988 following the Gorby line. In every one
of more than fifteen games, Mikhail Sergeevich's strategy has led to premature
hard-line overthrow. Thus, as a simulation,
Crisis falls short.

Better Than An AntiAlcohol Campaign!
Now to the game aspect: it's fun. It's
challenging. One can try a variety of different strategies. I've played it for two months
and I'm not sick of it. Although technically
without degrees of difficulty, the "Yeltsin"
scenario is markedly easier, as the necessary policy changes have already been
made—all the heavy lifting done. If played
prudently, "Yeltsin" can have the budget

balanced and the people fed in two years,
as well as keep most of the union together
(minus the East Bloc and the Baltics) by the
game's cut off date: New Years' 1992.
Gorby's scenario is tough, but this reviewer found the most challenging job was
to rule as a hard-line "Brezhnev," following
the Deng Zhao Peng formula of economic
liberalization and political control. To sum
up, Crisis in the Kremlin is a quality product that marries a challenging economic/political game to the drama of the
late Soviet Union. Despite an annoying tendency to hang up on my Samsung laptop,
the production values are superb, the graphics are stunning and the accompanying
background material interesting. This worthy stab at a limited genre is to be commended.

Review

Capstone's The Dark Half
TITLE
:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
GRAPHICS:
SOUND:
PROTECTION:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

of the problems with computer games in the
horror genre has always been that it is hard
to drum up much sympathy for characters
who are visually only one step up the evolutionary ladder from the Mario brothers.)
In the game's occasional close-ups, the
drawings are crude and the color-selection
is poor. Most of the game's scenes are done
in medium and long shots and while the
game does deliver on its promise of "cinematic animations" with fluid scrolling and
some nice effects, the look of the game will
not knock anyone's shoes off, much less
their socks.

The Dark Half
IBM
$59.95
VGA, EGA, Tandy 16
All Major Sound Cards
None
Kelcey Simpson
Capstone
Miami, FL

by Charles Ardai

T

he Dark Half is one of Stephen

King's most violent novels and one
of his best. It is also, along with
Misery, one of his most personal, telling the
story of a successful genre writer who is
haunted by a pseudonym come to life — a
story that carries King's own experiences
with his sometime-pseudonym Richard
Bachman (under which name he wrote
Thinner, The Running Man, and two other
novels) over the line into horror.
Respectable Thad Beaumont, who lives
in Maine and makes money hand over fist
from a series of ultra-violent novels written
under the pseudonym "George Stark" goes
public when a nosy fan threatens to reveal
that he and shockmeister Stark are one and
the same. Beaumont reveals his secret identity and ceremonially "buries" Stark, only
to find, within days, that the phony grave
has been dug up and that his own fingerprints are all over a string of sadistic murders carried out by his psychotic
doppelganger. Stark is the "dark half' of the
hook's title, representing the dark side of
the writer, Beaumont, incarnated as an inhuman killing machine.
As should be evident, this novel is not
made of the stuff that goes into good computer games — it contains no "delightful"
horror, only dark, soul-searing, grief-inflected horror. (By contrast, such King novels as Needful Things, Christine, or It would
he perfectly suitable for computer game
development.) Turning The Dark Half into
a computer game shows a degree of sensitivity and savvy unseen since Data East
decided that Platoon would be a good license under which to release one of its
jungle shoot-em-ups. Granted, much of the
reason the Dark Half game was created was
as a tie-in to the soon-to-be-released Dark
Half movie, meaning that some of the

game's flaws may owe their genesis to the
designers' faithful adaptation of a rotten
screenplay rather than to their butchering of
a good novel. Whatever their source, the
game is full of flaws at every level, from
coding to plotting to artistry.

Dark Roots
The game, though released by Capstone,
was developed by Symtus, whose only previous credit was the negligible but entertaining action game, Cybergenic Ranger.
Designing one Sega Genesis-style twitch
game was clearly inadequate preparation
for the much more challenging task of crafting a sophisticated LucasArts-style
graphic adventure. It is a bad sign when a
game touts "innovative" game features that
other publishers have been featuring for
ages. "Unique interface with
point-adclkes,"hboxpraimfnstce,
referring to an interface which is graphically unique (commands appear as keys on
a typewriter keyboard, text appears on a
sheet of paper coming out of the typewriter)
but which in all substantial ways is no different from the interface of the classic Lucasfilm gem, Maniac Mansion. "Graphic
inventory display of over 35 items," the box
exults, "Spine-tingling VGA images."
For the record, there is no image in the
game that will leave anyone's spine tingling, unless the sight of body-shaped pixel
masses on top of jagged red "pools" has that
effect on the most sensitive of players. (One

The typewriter interface is a clever conceit, but its appeal fades quickly when one
realizes that one has to wait for a blank sheet
of "paper" to scroll up every time one wants
to enter a command. Equally annoying is
the need to wait until a command has been
completely executed not only before entering the next command, but before even
being allowed to move the cursor to where
one wants it in order to select the next
command.
Worst of all, there are no shortcuts built
into the command structure. One cannot
type 'L' instead of clicking on the "Look"
key, and there is no way to repeat a command without going back to the typewriter
keyboard. This means that when one wants
to perform an action repeatedly (such as
looking at all the headstones in the cemetery or taking all the implements in the tool
shed) it is a matter of dragging the cursor
back and forth, over and over again, from
the command key at the base of the screen
to the objects with which one wants to
interact. Mouse users will merely be annoyed; joystick and keyboard users might
as well not bother.
Needless to say, there is no such thing as
a "Take All" command. This is particularly
frustrating because the game is crammed
full of items which look interesting but
which turn out to be useless. (As irritating
as it is to have to go back and forth to collect
a screenful of supplies, it is even worse to
go back and forth only to be told "I don't
need that" nine times out of ten.) Also,
many of the items on any given screen are
visible but do not register when one passes
the cursor over them — and even this is
inconsistent. The bowl in Thad's living
room is there when one "Look"s at it but not
when one tries to "Pick [It] Up."

Review
The game is full of things it doesn't need
to pick up and things it doesn't want to do.
Try to open the barbershop drawers and the
game says, "I don't think the barber would
like that." Try to open Thad's window at
home and the game says, "Better not, looks
like rain." (The day is perfectly sunny.) Go
to the payphone even after Thad has found

one or talk to the other is the height of
cruelty, an act of sadism of which George
Stark could be proud.
When the player encounters characters
with whom the computer does let him talk,
the design is bungled as badly as it is in the
rest of the game. The typewriter interface

Thad Beaumonts on-screen, one seated, the
other standing. Is this an early visit from
George Stark? No, it's a bug — the extra
Thad vanishes after one move.

Half Is Not Better
Than None

some change and the computer says, "I
don't have anyone to call." (This despite the
fact that, if one uses the phone at Thad's
home, Thad immediately calls a fellow professor.) From beginning to end, the game
will only let players do what it wants them
to do.

Betrayals and Bugs
The paper-thin veneer of interactivity
with which this game is coated will leave
most players ripping out great clumps of
hair. It is a cardinal rule of adventure game
design not to put a drawer in a room if one
doesn't want players to open it; if something appears in a scene, one has to be
prepared for players to interact with it. Over
and over, The Dark Half breaks this rule
and, in so doing, breaks faith with its audience.
There are more egregious examples as
well, where this kind of design misstep
actually affects the plot. In one scene, the
player wants to remove a murder weapon (a
bloody artificial leg) from the open bed of
a truck, since doing so would help keep the
police off Thad's trail. Unfortunately, even
though the computer tells the player "You
see Homer's artificial leg" in response to
the command "Search truck bed," the leg
does not show up in the graphic, making the
command "Pick Up Leg" impossible to execute.
Later, one manages to open a locked
china cabinet and is told that "There is a
pistol inside." Alas, the pistol is not visible;
much as one wants it, one cannot take it. (At
this point in the game, I would have killed
for the freedom simply to type in the command "Get pistol.") Telling the player that
he has found an object or met a character
and then, not giving him a way to get the

disappears, to be replaced by numbered dialogue choices. Why the choices are numbered is a mystery, since one is not
permitted to select them by typing in the
numbers. (Once again, everything has to be
point-and-clicked.) The dialogue is badly
written, mispunctuated and ungrammatical: "Digger is a old man," says respected
novelist Thad at one point. In some dialogue sequences, care must be taken to say
the right things, but in most, one will do fine
simply by running down the list of options
in the order in which they are presented.
Of course, this process is complicated by
the fact that the computer usually kicks the
player out of dialogue mode after each interchange, requiring the player to click on
"Talk To" and the character (who may be
all the way across the screen from the "Talk
To" key) before asking each question.
In addition to the poor design (more remains to be said, but space is limited), the
game has more bugs in it than John Gotti's
dinner table. Consider: after Thad
leaves the tavern for the first time,
the graphic portion of the screen
goes black. Is this because it suddenly got dark? Is Thad having a
blackout? No, it's a bug — walking
to the edge of the screen restores the
graphics.
Another example: after taking all
the objects out of the truck, try saving the game and then, restoring. A II
the objects will reappear in the truck
even though they are already in
Thad's inventory. Does this mean
one can take them twice? No, but
either way it's still a bug.
Finally, try this: when a certain
waitress tells Thad to take a seat, sit down
and then call up the save/restore menu. Select "continue." Note that there are now two

It is probably not worth harping too much
on the numerous changes in the novel's
storyline. Whether in the old Hollywood or
the "new" Hollywood, meddling with a
work occurs no matter how good the original or how weak the suggested changes.
Here, changes have been made with all the
delicacy one would expect from teenage
vandals finger-painting on the Mona Lisa.
Absent-minded prof Rawlie DeLesseps is
turned into Reggie DeLesseps and made
female. Victim #1, Homer Gamache, is
beaten to death with his artificial leg rather
than his artificial arm, even though the
switch of prosthetics requires contortions
in the storyline and leaps of logic. Law
student Fred Clawson even becomes
"drifter Fred Clawson" before the game is
through.
Even more distressing than changes like
these is the general dumbing-down of the
story. For instance, the book's grueling
toe-to-toe interrogation between Thad and the
police, where Thad has to work like crazy
to establish his innocence, is reduced in the
game to a scene that goes something like
this:
COP: We have your fingerprint in the dead
man's truck.
THAD: I was framed.
COP: Well, okay.
In brief, everything that made The Dark
Half an exceptional novel is missing from
the game, as is anything that might have
made the game an exceptional game in its
own right. The Dark Half is not only a bad
game, it is easily one of the worst games I
have played in the last ten years, on top of
which it is an insult to a fine work by one
of our most underappreciated authors. To
the extent that people will associate this
game with the name "Stephen King," he
will go on being unappreciated, and this is

perhaps the greatest pity of all.

by William C. Fisher
During the summer, Seybold Seminars
held the Digital World conference in Beverly Hills, California. There were several
new products and players introduced at
the show. The following is a list of what
we considered most enlightening.

Radius VideoVision
One of the most exciting developments
at Digital World was the board introduced by Radius. Originally conceived
by Apple, the rights were sold to Radius.
The unit supports video in and out, including S-VHS format, through an external breakout box. This product joins the
SuperMac VideoSpigot, one of the bestselling hardware products of the past
year, in providing immensely powerful
video on home computers.
What's new about this board? The ability to output to videotape using 24-bit
convolution. What that means is flickerfree video. Normally, output from a computer with a high-resolution display like
that of the Macintosh flickers badly on
videotape. Thin horizontal lines create
havoc on TV. Convolution smoothes the
lines so they don't flicker or jump around
on the tape. It can be switched on or off
at the flick of a switch, which makes for
a very convincing demo. The result of
this support for convolution is that anyone with a Macintosh and this board will
be able to produce crystal-clear videotapes without the usual expensive video
hardware.
This board will list for "less than
$2,500." While that's not cheap, it's a lot
less than the current studio alternatives.
And don't forget that it's also a 24-bit
video board. And, as did the Spigot on
initial release, it will come with plenty of
bundled software: DiVA VideoShop and
MacroMedia Action!, advertised by Radius as an "$1,100 software value."
The net effect: VideoVision makes
"desktop video" even easier than before.
Every self-respecting game developer or
multimedia producer needs at least one
board of this type, even if just to play
around. Not every game needs video, of

course. But video power this great is a
tool that can be used to create better software, in ways that may not be obvious
today. Most important, the VideoVision
is one more indication that personal computers will continue to expand their capabilities in ways which were almost
unthinkable a few years ago. The pace of
change provides huge opportunities for
the kinds of visionaries who have made
this such a great industry. Expect a lot
more to come.

Compact DiscInteractive (CD-I)
Digital World was held in the very
shadow of Philips Interactive Media of
America, the company that created CD-I.
When it comes to CD-I, there are two
kinds of people: True Believers and
Skeptics. The True Believers are unfailingly optimistic about the future of CD-I
and are very vocal about their belief that
it will be the next major force in home
entertainment.
The True Believers say:
There is a lot of money to be made in
CD-I.
Large numbers of products are now being
developed for CD-I, especially in
Europe.
The CD-I unit is technically superior to
computer-based platforms for "multimedia" applications.

More than 100 companies are developing
compatible units. The market will really
explode when Nintendo and Sega release
their low-cost versions.
Philips understands that CD-I will require years before it becomes profitable,
and they are willing to wait.
The Skeptics say:
The current installed base is probably
between 5,000 and 10,000 units in the
U.S. now. It is unlikely to exceed 50,000
units by the end of the year. If there is
money to be made, it's in finding someone with deep pockets to fund the
development of products for CD-I
(like Philips). A single CD-I development station costs tens of
thousands of dollars — enough to
buy an office full of
top-fhelinIBMPCcmpatbesor
Macintoshes. And the tools are
rather primitive compared to those
available on those other platforms.
There are large numbers of people
developing for CD-I. Yet, there
are also many current software
publishers who are holding back
until they can justify the investment. Of those who are developing products, one person boasted
to me about producing a disc for CD-I in
eight weeks (with six people) using the
latest authoring tools. What kind of disc?
A library of digitized artwork. Whoopee.
Wing Commander it is not.
The CD-I unit has some definite advantages of IBM PC and Macintosh "multimedia" units, such as multiple video
planes and a variety of very nice sound
and display mode options. Most of all, it
has consistency. The specifications are
set in stone. The Macintosh market, led
by Apple, has done fairly well in standardizing, one of Apple's specialties. The
PC market, as usual, is a fistfight of socalled standards promoted by competing
hardware and software vested interests,
most of which have received lukewarm
interest. On the other hand, Apple is reportedly releasing new consumer machines this fall to compete with CD-I.
Macintoshes, and most new IBM-compatible PCs, have their own advantages

patible PCs, have their own advantages
in this field: much higher video resolution, greater software versatility, and
greater computing power, to name a few.

as a firm Skeptic: I don't see any compelling reason why I, as a consumer, would
want to purchase a CD-I unit today and I
don't see why I, as a software developer,
would want to invest my company's
money in developing a consumer CD-I
title. There is absolutely no money to be
made in it now. However, I do see a
potentially huge market for CD-I in the
industrial training and education fields
and for use in kiosks. As a delivery platform, it has excellent price/performance
characteristics. If there's money in CD-I
this year, that's where it will be found.

CD-ROM for Business
and Education
Nintendo or Sega may just be the saviors
of the CD-I format. Of course, this may
also trivialize it, since the machine might
be tarnished with a "kiddie game machine" image that runs counter to the
"happy educated interactive family" image Philips is trying to promote. But it
will certainly sell a large number of CDROM units into homes, which is critical
to the success of the platform. The current
unit is too expensive for the average consumer, especially in a protracted down
market.
What was actually showing at Digital
World in the CD-I arena? Development
systems and developer enthusiasm. I
didn't see any actual products on display.
So far, I still maintain my original status

The CD-ROM business is serious business. Although CD-ROM technology is
still moving slowly into the mainstream
PC market, it has long been a force in
certain large vertical markets. There are
literally thousands of CD-ROM discs on
the market today.
The overall message is that producing
a CD-ROM today is not a big deal at all.
There are now a number of authoring
systems for the IBM PC and Macintosh.
There are companies that specialize in the
pre-mastering and mastering of discs, and
a number which will sell desktop systems
for pressing "one-off' CDs for about
$15,000. It has been done many times
before. And the cost of hard drives and
backup mechanisms capable of handling

gigabytes of data is dropping rapidly. Finally, disc production costs are leveling
off at very reasonable prices.
Of course, CD-ROM has its limitations. But double-speed drives are becoming available, and even higher speeds
and higher densities reportedly are in the
works. It has a long way to go before its
technological franchise has expired.
The biggest question about CD-ROM,
which has yet to be answered, is that of
standards. Apple is likely to release new
CD-ROM machines for consumers,
along with their own standards. IBM PCcompatible hardware and software vendors are fighting over standards for their
marketplace. So far, none has lit a fire
with consumers and, without a reasonable installed base, entertainment producers will hold back from large
investments in CD-ROM. CD-ROM is
here, but it is not clear when we will start
to see large amounts of entertainment
software using it.

DVI, JPEG and MPEG
Huh? For those without their pocket
acronym dictionaries handy, JPEG
stands for Joint Photographic Experts
Group. MPEG is Motion Picture Experts
Group. These are both industry-wide
committees attempting to create international standards. DVI is Digital Video
Interactive, which is being promoted by
Intel.

This year, we are finally beginning to
see glimpses of the future of compressed
video. What passes for video in the typical software product of today is jerky,
chunky and slow. These new fancy acronyms are names you will hear more and
more in the coming years as the quality
of digital video, played back from ordinary CD-ROMs or disk drives, improves.
These new techniques provide massive
levels of data compression, throwing out
parts of the video image that are (one
hopes) not important. They are known as
"lossy" compression techniques because
some detail is lost in compression.
DVI is Intel's system for digital video
compression. It has been around for several years, but the cost of DVI hardware
and the clunky nature of the compression
process (you send your data to Intel and
pay them by the minute) has limited its
appeal. IBM demonstrated some very
nice DVI across a network at Comdex last
year on its UltiMedia PS/2 machine. DVI
boards are available for both IBM PC and
Macintosh users. The best thing about
DVI is that it is available today, although
DVI boards still cost as much as the rest
of the machine. So far, it looks like
MPEG will outshine it.
JPEG is now being used in some applications for digital video. Unfortunately,
it's really intended only for still-image
compression. LSI Logic showed a chip

set at Digital World that compresses ratios as high as 50:1 or 60:1. Unfortunately, at that level, the image starts to
deteriorate noticeably. A level of more
like 150:1 or 200:1 is necessary for playback of video from standard CD-ROM.
JPEG is not the answer for digital video.
MPEG is a still-emerging standard for
digital video compression. It is computationally complex, and only this year have
the first commercially available MPEG
chips been produced. Demonstrated at
the show was a sample of a music video
compressed using a newly available chip
set from C-Cube Microsystems (which
has teamed with JVC).
It's worth the wait. The demo was
amazing: scrolling of the entire screen,
fast cuts between scenes, and none of the
stairstep-like "thresholding" distortion so
common on other compression schemes.
I pressed C-Cube for details, and they
assured me that the demo really was running at only 150 kilobits per second
CD-ROM data rate.
MPEG chips are still quite expensive,
and the standard is not yet officially approved by any international standards organization. Plus, several more MPEG
enhanced standards are in the proposal
stages. This has delayed availability of
parts. But the first hardware is here now,
and we can expect some very exciting

developments from it in the next few
years.

What Wasn't There
Unfortunately, there were no CD-ROM
entertainment products. It's still an
emerging field, and it's hard to make a lot
of money. This is especially true of the
MPC platform, for which there are virtually no CD-ROM titles.
Commodore (CDTV or Amiga):
there's not much coming from Commodore these days about CDTV. And the
Amiga, a technological breakthrough, is
rapidly passing from view in the high-end
world of digital media (Amigas were not
at all prominent at Digital World).

Conclusions
Digital World proves that digital media
are real and already serious business to
many companies, much further along
than fields such as virtual reality. It's not
yet down to the consumer level, however.
And we still haven't seen the VisiCalc or
PageMaker type of breakthrough product
for digital media. Naturally, we all hope
that these magical new capabilities will
lead to even better games in the next few
years. As far as I can tell, we have every
reason to be optimistic. Stay tuned!

Review

Three Runs, Two Hits, One Error
Virgin Software's Magnetic
Scrolls Collection
by Charles Ardai,

T he

trouble with multi-game value packs is that too
often they are nothing of the sort. Nothing is of less
value than three, or five, or 20 obsolete games one doesn't
want to play. Three bad games for the price of a good one is
not a good deal. Yet, one always holds out hope. It is possible
to imagine a good anthology of games — think of The Lost
Treasures of Infocom or picture a megadisk containing all the
installments in Sierra's Space Quest series. If most anthologies are bad, it is because they are born solely of a publisher's
desire to breathe new life into his moribund backlist, which is
usually moribund for a reason; if anthologies are sometimes,
though rarely, good, it is because there are some games out
there that deserve to be resurrected.
The latest games to be dusted off, polished and served up
fresh in this way are three of Magnetic Scrolls' ersatz text
adventures: the well-known Guild of Thieves, the unjustly
forgotten Corruption, and the bizarre Fish! Each comes from
England complete with charming British spelling and vocabulary (one mustn't call a "torch" a flashlight, or a "checque" a
check), and each has a nice, wry sense of humor (excuse me,
humour) lacking in most American games. Alas, though, all
is not well. This collection, like so many others, shows the
signs of a job done too quickly. Among these signs are
insufficient documentation, a muddled installation procedure
and a title that couldn't possibly be any duller. Sadder still is
the thrown-together, grab-bag manner in which the peripheral
materials that came packed with the original games are presented. Where the original Corruption came with a poker
chip, and the original Guild of Thieves with a lengthy, witty
Guild "newsletter," the Collection comes with neither; what

it does contain, somewhat arbitrarily, is a fish chart from
Fish!, a map from Guild of Thieves, and a calendar page and
audio cassette from Corruption, all thrown in the box willynilly with not so much as a label on each to indicate its
provenance or significance.
In all fairness,
though, these are
TITLE:
Magnetic Scrolls CoIlection
small complaints,
IBM
SYSTEM:
and none makes a
EGA/VGA
GRAPHICS:
PRICE:
$59.95
difference once the
PROTECTION:
Documentation Based
Collection is up and
Magnetic Scrolls
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:
Virgin Games
running. The new
Irvine, CA
games are as good
as they ever were,
aided greatly by the
fluid Magnetic Scrolls interface, which allows players to
arrange the game screen in any way they want. Each game
text, graphics, inventory, self-drawing map, hints,
function
has its own window, which the player can create,
compass
destroy, resize or move at will. This gives the player total
control over the games, which can be played as pure text
adventures, as graphic adventures with all the modern conveniences or as anything in between. There are a few quirks,
such as one's inability to call up a map window and a hint
window simultaneously, but none are debilitating. The biggest problem with the interface is that the computer screen is
not large enough to hold all the windows at once, so that a
certain amount of reshuffling is always necessary. This is not
a big deal.
There is no sound in these games, except for a short soundtrack included on the Corruption cassette, and though there is
some excellent animation in the graphic windows, there isn't
much. The graphics are wonderful but spotty (i.e. they don't
always change when one moves from location to location)
and, in any event, they are incidental to the gameplay. What
matters is the text, the puzzles, the stories and the worlds in
which the stories take place.
In the Collection, therefore, Magnetic Scrolls takes adventure gaming back to its roots, and it works. I was surprised at
how quickly I fell under the spell of these three odd stories.
At some point, early on, I stopped being a Detached Reviewer
and became a Secret Agent Fish, a Would-Be Thief, and a
Framed Yuppie.

Go Fish
It is difficult to say which of the three games is the best; this
is a matter of personal preference, after all. If, on the other
hand, one is trying to pick out the strangest game, Fish! wins
hands down. In Fish! one plays a "daring interdimensional
espionage operative" currently inhabiting the body of a goldfish for a little R&R. Shore leave (so to speak) is suddenly
interrupted with a message from HQ: the terrorist group the
Seven Deadly Fins is on the loose again. Three space warps

appear in the fishbowl, permitting one access to a recording
studio, some hippie-filled ruins, a forest with an exploding
bird in it and lots of other peculiar places.
It is a little tough to get oriented in this game, because things
are just a shade too crazy. Unpredictable is good; incomprehensible is not. Some of Fish! is seriously incomprehensible.
However, when it makes sense (as well as when it doesn't,
but is at its silliest), the game can be fun.
Puzzles are of the "how to placate a screaming record
producer who wants his coffee" school rather than the "how
to slay a dragon" school, and if nothing else, this makes the
game original. Fish! also offers the most clever gags of the
three games, such as a bit with a crystal tuna (used to tune a
crystal, of course) and a scene where the player finds a
computer that is running Fish! itself.

Stop, Thief!
Guild of Thieves is both the best known and the most
conventional of the three games. (I don't care to speculate on
whether there is a connection.) Taking place in a moderately
Zork-like environment, the game also has a moderately Zorklike plot: the player, eager to
be accepted into the infamous Guild of Thieves, is
given the test of denuding a
certain patch of the
Kerovnian countryside of all
its valuables. In all, the player
has to collect 14 treasures,
stowing them in convenient
"nightsafes" for safekeeping.
Gameplay is, of necessity,
episodic. The map is larger in
this game than in either of the
other two, as well as being
more unified
no space
warps here — but each scene
has very little to do with each
other scene. Each location offers a different puzzle, and
one's role is simply to go
from location to location, solving each puzzle and picking
things up, as adventurers have done since Crystal Cave.
The puzzles are pretty good, requiring a certain amount of
ingenuity (especially to get past some wicked deathtraps) and
a little interaction with other characters. None are particularly
memorable, though. The game is good, but lacks the spark of
innovation that would elevate it above the level of dozens of
similar games.

The Seven Deadly Sins
The third game, Corruption, is the one clear winner in the
package. It tells a story that takes place in modern London and
which could have been lifted out of today's headlines. The
player is Derek Rogers, a yuppie lucky enough to have been
named partner in a growing trading firm. Derek has his own
office, a dutiful secretary, a spot in the basement carpark and
a beautiful wife. Unfortunately, he also has a partner who is
up to no good — up to all sorts of no good, in fact, and eager
to pin it all on Derek.
The had news starts when Derek finds a bag of cocaine in
the bathroom. Then, there is the matter of the queer affidavit
he finds, exonerating David of any charges of insider trading
before any such charges have even been raised. This followed
by the spectre of an illegal casino operating in the middle of
London, as are alleged episodes of adultery, book-cooking,

drug dealing, and medical malpractice, all of them threatening
to collapse on poor Derek's head.
To get out of all the frame-ups, Derek has to fight fire with
fire. Before too long, players will find themselves stealing
documents, eavesdropping on phone conversations, breaking
into safes, beating up policemen, breaking out of jail, wearing
a wire to expose corruption, turning in their "friends" and
(gasp!) crossing the street against the light.
All of these activities and their results are described with a
sharp satiric edge. Corruption is a pit bull of a game, sinking
its teeth into the player's psyche and not letting go for a
second. Think: what other game has ever said, when the player
looks in a mirror, "You see an ugly face"? Where else has a
game character said, in response to the command "kiss her",
"Get off me or I'll report you for sexual harassment?" Corruption simply doesn't pull any of its punches.
The main drawback with Corruption is that it is very short.
(It is hard to imagine the game sustaining its level of intensity
at greater length, though.) Staunch moralists might also take
exception to a game that requires players to behave in seven
immoral ways before breakfast, especially in light of the fact
that, while the original Corruption package carried a
warning that it was for adults
only, the game is included
here, warningless, with two
games which would be just
fine for kids.
I would submit, though,
that a game this powerful deserves the widest possible
audience, and if that means
that a few kids will be exposed to semi-adult material,
so be it. There is nothing vicious or pornographic in the
game, just a lot of dark truths
about the ways of the world.
Corruption may be the most
cynical game ever made, but
it is not, I believe, a corrupting influence in itself.

Three And One
Perhaps the biggest problem with the Collection is that the
three games it contains have no reason to be on the same store
shelf, much less in the same box, except for the trivial fact that
they share a game engine. (It's akin to putting "Citizen Kane,"
"Fritz the Cat," and "Superman III" on one videocassette
because they are all movies.) One game is a straight fantasy,
one is an absurdist farce, and one is a hyper-realist drama.
They sit in the box uncomfortable with each other; thematically, they practically repel each other as do the opposite poles
of a magnet.
People who love old-fashioned adventures will probably
enjoy all three. People who value unusual, exceptional games
will love Corruption. The irony is that people will probably
pick up the Collection because of Guild of Thieves, but will
be glad they did because of Corruption. Fish! is the odd man
out, neither popular nor good; it is the one of the three which
will be left (you'll pardon the expression) to flounder. Yet,
two out of three is not a bad showing. As anthologies go, The
Magnetic Scrolls Collection may not be a home-run slugger,
but it is a consistent line-drive hitter.

Review

Hong Kong
Mahjong Pro
by Scorpia

TITLE:
Hong Kong Mahjong Pro
IBM
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
$49.95
PROTECTION: Documentation Look-Up p
DESIGNER:
Julian Robert Fitch
PUBLISHER:
Electronic Arts
San Mateo CA

M

ost people have heard of Mahjong (Chinese for "sparrow"), but have never played
it. The game was very popular for a time
during the 20s, but then died out for various reasons,
not least of which was the growing complexity that
resulted as players made up their own "house rules"
for the game.
Today, the closest many have come to Mahjong are
games such as Shanghai, which use a Mahjong tile
set, but are really nothing like the original. Now,
Electronic Arts brings us Hong Kong Mahjong Pro,
and it's the real thing.
As the title suggests, HKMJ Pro uses the rules and
tile set that are generally accepted by Mahjong players in Hong Kong. Those who already know the game
may thus find it a little different from what they are
used to, but still should have little trouble adapting
to the rules.
Despite its exotic flavor, the basics of Mahjong can
be learned in a few minutes or so. The game uses 144
tiles, comprised of three suits (bamboo, circles, and
characters) numbered 1 to 9, four winds (north,
south, east, west), three dragons (red, green, white),
and four flowers (which correspond to the four
winds). There are four of each tile, except the flowers, of which there are only two apiece (one red set
and one blue set).
One of each wind is put face down on the table and
each player picks a tile. Whoever gets the East Wind
will start the hand. All the tiles are now mixed face
down and stacked around the edge of the playing
board to form the wall. Three dice are thrown by the
East player to determine the starting point along the
wall from where tiles will be drawn. Each player
draws 13 tiles for his or her starting hand.
Players then choose and discard tiles to build sequences, such as 1-2-3 of the same suit (called
Chow); three of a kind, for instance three red dragons
(called Pong); or four of a kind (called Kong). A
winning hand generally consists of four such sets of
tiles, plus a pair of any kind. Tiles taken from the wall
can be kept in hand, but a discard picked up from the
board must be melded immediately into a chow,
pong, or kong and placed face up on the table.
Play proceeds around the table counterclockwise
until either someone wins the hand or all tiles have
been drawn from the wall with no winner, which is
called a dead hand. After any winnings have been

paid, the tiles are mixed, built into a new wall, and
the next hand begins.
That's pretty much what Mahjong is all about, and
HKMJ Pro recreates it all quite nicely. One begins
by choosing three opponents from a pool of twelve.
These computer players are, in fact, based on real,
live Mahjong players, whose digitized portraits and
voices are used in the game.
The choice of opponents is very important, since
that determines the difficulty of the game (some are
better at Mahjong than others) as well as the minimum number of points needed to win. Novice players are advised by the manual to start off with the
default trio of Christopher, Wing Yin, and Miko, and
that's good advice. Until one has some experience
and is able to keep track of points correctly, one
doesn't want to be in there with sharks like Uncle
Chen and Wong Ho Ming.
Next comes the choosing of the winds (the player
gets first pick), followed by the appearance of the
Options menu. This menu allows one to turn the
sounds, voices, and music on or off, as well as set the
game speed (how long a discarded tile can sit on the
board for someone to pick up), review the scoring
rules, put "extra markings" (English numerals and
words) on some of the tiles for easier recognition,
and see what one's running total of winnings or
losses are to that point.
Then, the game proper begins. Each player re-

Review
ceives 500 chips with a default value of $1 (this can be
changed to either 10 cents or 10 dollars), East Wind rolls the
dice, starting hands are dealt to all players, and the game
begins.
The initial hand of tiles drawn rom the wall is automatically
sorted by the program, like
tiles together and in numerical order where necessary.
Tiles drawn from the wall
later on that one decides to
keep will likewise be inserted
in the proper place in one's
hand.
Everything is handled
smoothly through a mouse interface, using both the left and
right buttons. The left button
is used to click on tiles for
both discarding and picking
up. The right button is used to
skip the "waiting period"
when a tile is discarded and
one knows they won't be taking it.
If voices are on, one hears
the opponents say "chow" "pong" "kong" or (most dreaded)
"I win!" at the appropriate times. If the hand ends with a win,
there will be short digitized animations showing the "thrill of
victory" for the winner, and another showing the "agony of
defeat" for whoever tossed the winning tile (such a person
pays double chips to the winner). Since there aren't. of course,
any portraits or voices for the human player, all that happens
when the player wins is that a special tune is played (each
player has his or her own signature tune that signifies victory).
At this time, the winner's hand is displayed, along with a
scoring menu showing how the hand's points (if any) were
totalled. From here one can go
on to the next round, return to
the main menu to choose new
opponents, or quit entirely by
exiting to DOS.
For those who have never
played Mahjong before and
want some initial experience,
HKMJ Pro includes a separate
tutorial program. It plays exactly like the regular game, except the Mahjong Sparrow
(which sits in the right-hand
corner of the screen) gives one
a lot of help, and one's opponents are always Christopher,
Miko, and Wing Yin.
In the tutorial, Sparrow will
always advise the player when
someone makes a discard he can use. Play halts while a box
displays a text message saying what the tile can be used for.
Sparrow can also advise the player on discards; clicking on
his symbol causes him to hover briefly over the tile he wants
the player to throw out. In between hands, little pop quizzes
show up, asking questions on the rules and scoring of Mahjong, to see how well you're picking up the game. Wrong
answers carry no penalty, and if you're wrong, the correct
answer is shown. Sparrow can also play the entire hand for
the player (this is demo mode), which is interesting to watch,

but not as helpful as simply using him as an advisor. The best
way for one to learn is to do it oneself, with a little assist from
a feathered friend.
Graphically, the game is well-done. All the tiles are clearly
and sharply delineated, the screen layout is good, and the
digitized pictures are very
nice, including the garden
and Hong Kong harbor scene
that alternate on the playing
board. This is one of the few
games on the market that
supports 640x480 256-color
SVGA mode, provided one
uses an expanded memory
manager such as EMM or
QEMM and have at least 2
meg RAM. One should definitely choose SVGA if one
has it on his or her system.
This excellent product
does, however, lack a couple
of features that should have
been included. One is the
ability to explicitly set the
minimum points for a winning hand. In Mahjong, one can have a winning hand of no
particular value (worth 0 points), also known as a "chicken
hand." For more demanding play, a hand worth at least 1 or 2
points can be required. Unfortunately, the only way to get that
in HKMJ Pro is through the opponents one chooses for a
game. There is no way that one, personally, can say "We will
play for a I (or 2) point hand."
The other omission is a way for players, especially novice
players, to keep track of how much their hand is currently
worth. There is no facility in the program for this; players have
to tote up the point value themselves, and it is all too easy for
a beginner to make an error
or two as to how much a
hand is worth. An option to
have a "point counter" active would be welcome.
Outside of that, there is
nothing to fault in Hong
Kong Mahjong Pro. The
program itself ran
flawlessly, first time, every
time. No bugs or oddities
were evident over many
sessions played (a rarity in
these days of problem-ridden releases).
The computer opponents,
to the best of my judgment,
played up or down to their
skill descriptions as given
when they were chosen.
One can therefore tailor a game to be as "easy" or "difficult"
as one prefers, always keeping in mind that luck does play a
part in Mahjong. Still, even a poor opening hand can be turned
into a winner with the right play.
If one has ever wanted to learn Mahjong, or one already is
a Mahjong player with no local opponents, this game is well
worth looking into. While nothing can beat sitting down with
three live opponents, Hong Kong Mahjong Pro is the next best
thing to it.

All Systems Green

from Access
T. Liam McDonald is the co-author of
Sun Tzu's Ancient Art of Golf (Contemporary Books, November) and the forthcoming Myths to Golf By.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:

Announcer (sotto voce): It's a lovely
day out here on the back nine at Harbour
Town. The wind is blowing out of the east
at five miles an hour as the crowd's
favorite, Arnie, steps up to the tee. He takes a moment to check
the overhead view of the fairway and meditates briefly upon
his approach strategy to this long and arduous fifth hole. His
caddie suggests a number two driver, but Arnie decides to
play it short and easy with a one wood in order to get by the
tricky water hazard left of the dogleg. It's a daring move, but
will it pay off? After his ritual two practice swings, he addresses the ball, sets his feet and swings. The shot draws into
the wind, cruising a respectable 232 yards before rolling to a
wonderful lie 90 yards short of the
green. Let's look at that shot again
from the reverse.
The hushed voice of the announcer
is one of the few staples of professional golf which is not included in
Links 386 Pro. Other than that, almost everything a desktop duffer
could possibly want is included in
this lavish, multifaceted game. The
fans of Links spoke and Access listened. Links 386 Pro is the result.
Right from the opening screens, it's
easy to see what all the hoopla is

about: textured, Super-VGA graphics
create a stunning backdrop for game
play. Like a constantly refreshed, constantly shifting snapshot of a course,
the graphics recreate the finest level
of detail yet seen in any simulation.
Shading, shadows, clouds, ripples on
the water: everything's here. The limits of the medium have been stretched as far as they go, and
it is only these limits that prevent even more detail, such as
the trees and water being gently blown by the breeze. In time
(maybe for Links CD-ROM?), we shall surely see this as well.
(Maybe they can even fix that bug where a golf player stands
on water when shooting near a water hazard).

Links 386 Pro
IBM w/ 386SX/16 Mhz
2 MB RAM, 12 MB on Hard Drive,
mouse, SVGA
PRICE:
$69.95
PROTECTION:
None
DESIGNER/PUBLISHER: Access Software
Salt Lake City, Utah

Ambient sound and random sound effects—croaking frogs,
crickets, whispered comments by the golfers—round out the
creation of a day at the links. Contrary to what the manual—
otherwise a monument of clarity and
accuracy—says, there are some female voices available. Be warned,
however: most shots by female golfers prompt male comments. Access's
debatable logic is that the female golfers are accompanied by men.

Fairway (Game Play)
Okay, so it's a pretty game that's
nice to look at and features effective
use of sound. Yes, it is impressive for
the level of detail, but how does it
play? No matter how attractive a game

is, the final word is in features and playability
Rest assured that the final word in golf—for now,
at least—is Links 386 Pro, and it is quite likely that
the only thing to ever beat this game will be yet
another version of Links. The golfing engine is a
dream come true, with an unprecedented level of
control over swing, positioning, club facing, and

included in the control bar with a description of the surrounding terrain (sand, rough, etc.).
Further major upgrades exist in the
form of replays and recorded players. Shots
can be replayed from
straight ahead or a reverse angle, and particularly good shots
can be saved with a
save shot option. Of
course, if one is not
satisfied with saving a
single shot, Links 386
Pro lets the player record an entire round
and save it to disk.

such nuances as
drawing, fading,
and even the position of the golfer's
feet.
A click of a button
zooms the pin position directly to the
golfer, and aiming is
a snap with the aiming pole. Depending
on the strength and
direction of the
wind, the golfer can
draw (a "controlled"
hook left) or fade (a
controlled slice right), hit straight and control direction by
use of the "club facing" feature in the Setup box or, alternatively, be daring and use the power bar to determine in-flight
ball direction. Two user-defined swing definitions can be
added to the control bar for easy access, complimenting the
draw, straight, fade, chip and putt options already available.
Another major overhaul of the Links engine is the addition
of multiple user-defined windows. The screen can be configured as a single window showing the main screen, divided
in half horizontally or vertically or, even split into fours. One
can display the teeing box and the approach to the green, club
distance chart, score card, top view, or terrain profile in an:
position the player desires. One can hit the ball from the to
and watch it soar toward the green, while keeping the over
head view handy in order to plan the approach or the club
distance chart to be able to choose just the right club for the
job. It is possible to put up four windows or just one. It'
player's choice in this game.
It should be noted that the overhead view, score card am
profile are all available from buttons on the control bar.
Access has also added the nice touch of giving the average
distances of each club when displaying the "club selection
panel. A tiny close-up showing the lie of the ball is also

One can even copy it to floppy and send it to a friend, since
pregame options allow "live" players to play against recorded
ones or for one to just sit back and watch multiple recorded
players compete against each other. While this may lack the
immediacy of modem play, which is not supported, it sure
won't eat up more than half an hour of
phone time and allows multiple players to compete in tournaments at any
time. More than a dozen pre-recorded
games are included in the package,
courtesy of the design team. One problem with this option, however, is that
someone using the amateur tees can
compete against someone using the
professional tees, creating a rather lopsided game. Then again, that's what
handicaps are for.

Hazards (Problems)
Not everyone is in love with Links 386 Pro. First, anyone
with less than a 386SX with 2 MB of RAM and, at least, 13
megabytes free on the hard drive shouldn't even think about
purchasing this game. Naturally, more RAM and faster computers speed up redraw time. Yet, I saw no appreciable
difference between playing with 4 MB of RAM and 8 MB on
my 386/40. Redraw time in full-screen, full-detail mode was
still about ten seconds. Fortunately for those with slower 386s,
various options can be turned off to speed play, but few people
purchase a Links game in order to turn off detail.

Review
Second, there has been a lot of grumbling on CompuServe
about the ridiculously low scores of which most players are
capable in Links 386 Pro. 18 hole totals under 60 are very
common. Access has responded with a "you must have prac-

game have made high scores easier to achieve, or it may be
that Access has not programmed a marked enough difference
between the beginner, amateur, and pro levels.
New courses are being planned (including some hush-hush
deals being made for English and Scottish courses), and old
courses are being slowly upgraded to SVGA. For those who
already own the VGA versions, they can be converted for use
with the Links 386 Pro, though of course they won't look as
good as the SVGA courses. The game comes with the Harbour Town course, Barton Creek is available at $24.95, and
Mauna Kea, Hawaii and Banff Springs, Canada are in the
works. Unlike the Jack Nicklaus series, Links has no course
designer nor does it intend to develop one. Instead, they plan
to concentrate their efforts on releasing a new course every
two months. They are also considering a CD-ROM version,
possibly for 1993.

Green (Conclusion)

ticed to get such a low score" attitude, much to the displeasure
of the low-scoring course hounds. It is possible that this
unprecedented level of control over so many aspects of the

With the deluge of golfing games out there now, it's difficult to decide just which is best. If one has the hardware and
if designing custom courses is not important, Links 386 Pro
is truly the computer golfing experience. Indeed, the only
really important aspect of the golfing experience that's missing from the game is the 19th hole. Maybe as an add-on disk?

Game Design

No Longer
a sound of
silence
by Ken Allen
has been composing
KfenorAllen
over twenty years. His
game related contributions
are included in titles released from Sierra On-Line, Dynamix, Accolade,
Ballistic and Tsunami Media. Ken is

a non-smoker (unless he's on fire),
claims that it's not red-meat but the
bluish-green-meat-with-fuzzy-stuffgrowing-on-it that's dangerous to eat,
and makes fun of anyone who thinks
that political commentator Mark
Russell is a gifted musician.

Yesterday
Remember Pong? A coin-op Pong game
could be found in the lobby of a nearby
airport, and I would find any excuse to trip
out there in order to challenge the upright-coffin-sized-box-with-a-TV-screen-and-a
-little-knob to a game that would inevitably
result in "GAME OVER." I plugged many
a quarter into its happy little slot in order to
play surreal table-top tennis whose primitive graphics were accompanied by the
bleeps and bloops of equally primitive
sound effects.
The world of video-gaming has evolved

quantum leaps since Pong and this progress
has taken graphics and sound right along
with it. When the Commodore 64 hit the
market nearly a decade ago, it was practically assured of becoming the dominant
game computer of choice, but not because
it was easy to program (ask any programmer) or because it had superior graphics

(about equal to Atari 800, TI-99/4a and
Coleco Adam). Yes, it did have more memory, but the C-64 also had a built in synthesizer circuit, called SID. SID was similar in
some ways to the Adlib sound card found
in many gamer's PCs. Game creators could
now use more authentic instruments and
better sound effects in their game soundtracks for the C-64 than ever before.

This Morning
The interim that has transpired since then
has provided computer game players with
a wide palette of sound support. Today,
however, computer game companies are at
the jumping-off-place to the next plateau in
interactive entertainment. CD-ROM is
quickly gaining acceptance on the coattails of its adoptive parent — Windows
Multimedia. This "new plateau" of interactive entertainment is on a level of such
sophistication, that professional video and
audio studios are being utilized to meet the
lofty expectations of game designers, their
bosses and the consumers they serve.
Gone are the days of programmers-who-can-do-art-or-music-so-let's-make-a-ga
me (thank the Divine One). Don't get me
wrong — some of my best friends are programmers (really!). Computer game companies that have a well informed vision of
our industry's future recognize that, in order to stay competitive, they must employ
professional artists, animators, story editors, screenwriters, video and sound technicians, and composers. I'm one of these
composers involved in supplying music
and sound effects for some of your favorite
games. I have the dubious honor of making
funny noises for a living, but I think most
will agree that, as a computer game composer, I also have the most enjoyable profession in the industry.

So,What Is Involved In
Putting Music Into
Games?
Glad you asked.
Writing music for computer games is
similar to writing for theater, television or

film. But, theatrical forms of entertainment
require the musical tasks to be predefined
in a linear fashion. Soundtrack requirements for computer games, on the other
hand, must conform to the interactive decision-branching nature of a computer game
and this can foster poor musical continuity
unless the composer pays very close attention to the game design. It really helps if the
composer is, not only computer literate, but
computer-game literate as well.
Each computer game genre requires music to be implemented in a unique way;
arcade action requires music to repeat without getting monotonous, and music for a
cinematic scene in an adventure game has
to be specific enough to complement the
scene (for example: building tension) while
being generic enough not to frustrate the
gamer in the event he/she doesn't solve
certain puzzles in a specific order or within
a certain time frame. Because of the nature
of computer games, a composer must exercise creative restraint, more so than composing for other forms. Listen to
Beethoven's 5th Symphony in C Minor,
first movement. As the musical themes develop and interact, it feels like a roller
coaster ride, but (and this is important) the
music is on track to a musically predictable
ending at a musically predictable time.
Movies unfold before an audience in the
same way; timing is everything. A composer for computer games, however, does
not always have that luxury.

Game Designers Must
Have Clear Vision
I remember writing the music for the
climactic battle sequence in Sierra's Kings
Quest V. The scene depicted King Graham
in a battle of magical might against the evil
wizard. The art director choreographed the
entire scene and described the elements of
the battle in very cinematic terms. He
wanted the heart to palpitate as the game
player raced to solve the puzzle for the
scene. I created little musical building
blocks for each scene element and, like a
jigsaw puzzle, everything came together
(art, animation, story, choreography, sound

Game Design
and music) to form the exciting battle finale.
Each game designer has their own way of
describing the music requirements for their
game. If the designer communicates well,
their vision for the game becomes contagious. On the other hand, I've also worked
on projects where I've composed the score
based on a list of songs I received over the
phone or fax machine without being privy
to the game's story elements — and later,
after having had a chance to see the game
in its shipping-version, I thought "Wow,
had I known more I'd have done things a
little differently!" It is most common that I
work from a design document that has storyboard sketches, room and puzzle descriptions, and character sketches (and
sometimes even a video tape of completed
animation), but I always try to meet with
the designer to can catch his or her vision
of the game. What's important is that every
detail of the game, as well as the overall
ambience of the game, be communicated to
the composer.

Avoid The Rut - Know
Your Forms
As a composer, 1 cannot afford to get
caught in a rut. I remember hearing a "rut"
described as a grave with the ends kicked
out. Currently I'm working on five computer games, one of which is Starflight III
(Tsunami Media and Electronic Arts). In
Starflight III you can visit various space
stations and, on each station you can visit
the bar. The game design calls for a different lounge act fir each respective starbase's lounge. The game animators created
three very different musical acts — a band
of spider-like aliens playing music on giant
web-like instruments, another band of cowboy tribbles playing more conventional instruments, and, finally, a solo keyboardist
act with a four-armed performer who looks
like a 70's throwback. The spider band
plays a light-hearted sinister piece played
on plucked instruments. The tribbles band
(called the Lune Rangers) plays a bluegrass
banjo tune, and the four-armed 70's guy
will play a disco-baroque-h
ip-technofuksrte.Gafun!Bhlso
here, boys and girls, is that a composer must
be a student of all musical forms or may
starve wishing he had been. (Composers
must obey another rule; if you want to write
good music, you must write music every
day.)

MIDI, And Other Forms
Of Wildlife
Modern composing is often done using a
MIDI sequencer, which is a software program that is to music what a word processor
is to document preparation. I would estimate that 80% to 90% of popular music
recording is done with MIDI instruments
connected to a computer running MIDI sequencing software. Occasionally, I '11 resort
to using music paper, hut, if I don't need it,
I won't use it. The industry standard MIDI
sequencer for PC compatibles (the one that

I use) is called Sequencer Gold (Voyetra
Technologies). Most PC sound cards on

the market today are shipped with a pareddown version of the Voyetra sequencing
program called Sequencer Jr. at no extra
charge, putting song production in the
hands of thousands of computer users.
When the song is saved to disk from a
MIDI sequencer program, only the performance information, not the audio sound,
is stored. It is the sequencer song files that
are shipped with a computer game; the song
file will be played by the game engine on

whatever supported sound card is installed
in the PC.
The current batch of sound cards available to the PC game player and the present
state of PC hardware does place certain
limits on what a computer game composer
can do for a game. More often than not,
hardware is my chief opponent. Then, when
the hardware limitations have been addressed, having music play on the various
sound platforms elevates the challenge further. The current convention requires that I
compose for four music platforms on the
PC: 1) single-voice speaker, 2) Tandy-IBM
PS/1 3-voice, 3) Adlib/Sound Blaster 2-operator FM, 4) 4-operator FM (Sound Blaster Pro/Pro Audio Spectrum), Roland
MT-32, and General MIDI. The MT-32, 4
operator FM and General MIDI share the
same music performance data, but each do
have their respective set of eccentricities
which require consideration.
Programming customized sounds for
these musical devices requires an additional set of skills; synthesis programming.
The Roland MT-32, for example, has 127
instruments in its ROM sound bank and a
complete percussion section. Even with all
(Continued on Page 86)

Define Your Terms
MIDI
Musical Instrument Digital Interface. It is a communication standard for the electronic
music realm, like RS-232 is for telecommunications. MIDI allows you to play the keys of
a Yamaha Clavinova to hear the internal sounds of a Roland MT-32, record and edit the
performance on software from Passport Designs via a MIDI interface card manufactured
by Sound Quest. Boy, talk about cooperation!
A MIDI sequencing program requires that a MIDI interface be installed in the computer
and that it be connected to a MIDI keyboard (or other MIDI controller). In the same way
that a word processor keeps track of keystrokes to store the document contents and format
information, a MIDI sequencer keeps track of the keypresses (or performance in formation)
from MIDI keyboard.
No audio recording takes place, just the note-on/note-off information exchange, along with
some other commands, like volume settings, stereo position, damper peddle, bender wheel,
etc. When the MIDI sequencing program is instructed to replay the performance, the
performance is played back identically (for all practical purposes) to what was recorded.
One of the biggest benefits to using a sequencer is the ability to edit in fine detail what
was played.
MIDI is also being used to control reverb effects modules, automated mixing consoles
and even stage lighting.

General MIDI
General MIDI is the new arrival in the computer game playing arena that deserves some
serious consideration. General MIDI is just an additional set of pre-agreed minimum
standards that sound devices adhere to. For example, in the General MIDI sound bank,
instrument #1 will always be Acoustic Grand Piano and instrument #1 15 will always be
Steel Drums. General MIDI is the music portion of the MPC standard, that describes the
hardware minimum requirements for the current MS-Windows multimedia industry
standard. That way if you buy the Binford 2000 Hyper-Mega-Ultra-Orchestra Multimedia
Philharmonic sound card from the Big Sound Wave company for $1999.99, and your
neighbor buys the Humble Little FordPintoOfSoundCards sound card from Bargain-noiz
R Us company for only $79, and both are MPC certified, then both of you are assured of
hearing the soundtrack as composed for General MIDI.
Supporting the General MIDI family is practically transparent to the composer and the
end user; it is the sound manufacturer who does all the hard work. What also makes General
MIDI/MPC a nice entry is that the standard also requires at least one digital audio circuit,
for sound effects or speech, be available.

Industry News

AFFORDABLE VR BY 1994
by Craig E. Engler

W

hen W Industries introduced its Virtuality system
to the public, it took cyberspace out of the NASA labs and put it
into the arcades. For the first time anyone with a few dollars could go out and
try Virtual Reality and, at least in the
beginning, a lot of people did. While
the novelty of that particular system
seems to have worn off, it's shown that
VR represents an entirely new gaming
medium rather than just a new game.
Like the console or computer industry before it, VR promises big payoffs
to the companies who can come out
with a successful home system. Already there are, at least, half a dozen
companies with plans in the works and,
in many cases, they're willing to bypass the arcade market altogether. The
feeling in VR circles is that a home
system will have to cost less than $500,
come with at least one game and have
an immersive hardware system with
graphics equal to that of current video
game consoles. While Virtuality accomplishes most of those technical
feats with a price tag of $60,000, comparable units at one hundredth the cost
are only a year or two away.
The idea behind VR is to create a
three-dimensional environment that a
player can interact in. While the environment itself is generated by computers, it's accessed by a pair of
stereoscopic goggles and a data glove
or joystick. The goggles allow wearers
to look into the 3-D environment as if
they were actually there, and the data
glove gives them a virtual tool so they
can interact with it. It's literally a first
person perspective that puts gamers inside their games.
While it may sound complex, the first
piece of VR hardware actually hit the
consumer market several years ago.
That was the Mattel Power Glove for
the Nintendo Entertainment System.
The Power Glove is really a simple and
cheap version of a standard VR data
glove. By wearing it a gamer could
control a virtual reproduction of his or
her hand that appeared inside a gaming
environment. In Super Glove Ball,
players used their virtual hand to play
a video version of handball, but with
the right software they could have used

it for just about anything, from attacking virtual monsters with a sword to
turning the pages of a virtual instruction manual.
Chris Gentile at Abrams/Gentile
Entertainment helped design the
Power Glove, and he said his company
is working on a home VR unit, though
he wouldn't release any details. Gentile
said the only thing preventing the introduction of VR systems into the consumer market is a cheap pair of goggles
with good resolution.

While many in the industry are shooting for something with VGA capabilities, Gentile said displays of fantastic
quality are currently being developed.
"The amazing part is the new display
technology that will be able to handle
TV resolution and greater." If Gentile
is correct, VR goggles might become
the backbone of a system rather than its
weakest component. Since they're also
one of the most expensive pieces of
equipment, Gentile said consumers
wouldn't have to spend money on
costly upgrades, and that could be an
important marketing consideration.
"The computing power and chip form
will probably not be able to match the
display. I think that's what you have to
do."
Another company which has been in
on VR almost from the beginning is the
Sense8 Corporation. Co-founder Eric
Gullichsen thinks an affordable pair of

goggles is just around the corner,
though they might not be developed for
VR at first. "I would expect that the first
video glasses will come as a result of a
portable, video multimedia player,"
Gullichsen said. "The idea is, imagine
a Sony Walkman or Sony Discman.
Neat and simple. The parts are almost
to the point that mass scale manufacture would make sense." The rest of the
technology necessary for a home VR
unit already exists, he added. "In terms
of the rest of the components, cheap
software, cheap graphics processors,
that's there already."
Visions of Reality, a company
working
with
Sense8 to develop a
game system, already has a prototype VR arcade unit
which it expects to
release in March of
1993.
President
Dan Rice said that
while his company
has no immediate
plans to bring out a
home VR system,
there is one in the
works. Rice said
several companies
are working on home systems and
something like an immersive NES
might be available in the next year or
two. "In a full virtual world, 3-D, interactive, everything, I think in December
or January of '94 or '95. It'll do what a
workstation will do right now. You'll
be inside the world, flying airplanes or
playing interactive games where you
can have four to five players in one
game." He said the cost of those units
would range between $500 and $1,000,
though the price would drop rapidly.
Another group that isn't talking about
what it's developing is Sphere, Inc.
That company includes Spectrum
HoloByte which is already working
with W Industries to produce software
for the Virtuality units. A. J. Redmer,
the executive director for research and
development at Sphere, said they were
working on something relating to VR
and the home market, but non-disclo-

Industry News
sure prevented him from saying more.
"I can't publicly state the stuff we're
doing for home. There's a few systems
we'll probably be supplying software
for." He did add several companies to
the growing list of those entering the
VR field, including Walt Disney, General Cinema and MCA. Redmer said a
lot of people were working on a variety
of VR applications, including home
units. "There's some really good stuff
coming. Things are only going to get
better and cheaper." Redmer also
said that there are plans to upgrade the LCD goggles and new
software is already in the works,
but consumers might not see a
change for some time.

Virtuality appears healthy, it provides
all the necessary hallmarks of a fully
immersive system at what, to many, is
a cheap price. The main complaint
about that system has so far been its
lack of resolution and software support.
However, there's been some indication that graphics are not the biggest
consideration in creating a VR system.
While Virtuality has admittedly crude
graphics, it does give a sense to players

LEEP, a company that manufactures VR optics, said the number of pixels in a system like
Virtuality is not a limitation.
LEEP has created an anamorphic pair of goggles that provides higher resolution with
smaller pixels. Greg Rivera, who
handles marketing for LEEP,
said it's been able to produce
cheaper goggles with better resolution than other companies in
the VR field without drastically
increasing the pixel count. He
said his company is working on
a game system that's almost
ready to be introduced. "It's only
a system for the gaming market.
We're very close. Maybe even
within the next six months. It's
just a new way of looking at VR
gaming." As usual, Rivera could
not release specifics about what
LEEP was working on and he did
not say whether it was for the
home or arcade market. "We
can't talk specifically about
games we're doing now."

Silence and non-disclosure
agreements seem to pervade the
VR industry right now and, with
sales projected in the billions of
dollars, companies are being understandably quiet. John Barlow
writes about the VR field and
he's familiar with many of its
key players. He said that while a
lot of companies aren't talking,
they are working behind the
scenes to produce an affordable
home VR unit. "On the basis of
the rumors that I hear and what I
gathered by various methods of
triangulation, I think you're going to see a pretty low resolution
system available for general public use at an affordable price in
the next year and a half. I think
they're going to be like Power
Glove class in terms of the resolution and in terms of the sense
of reality that's being conveyed.
I think it's going to be real rugged. We're talking under $500,
but not much."
Barlow handily summed up
what people actually know about
what's being developed in the
VR field. "Them that know
aren't saying, and them that
don't know, don't know." So far,
there's only one yardstick to measure
any VR game against, and that's Virtuality. When W Industries brought out
its units in, first in the United Kingdom,
.then the United States, it caught the VR
industry unaware. Although the cost of

would keep costs down. Even today's
arcade and console systems lacking superb graphics do well in the market. If
you take something like the video
games that are out there, in terms of the
actual number of polygons that are hitting the screen at any given moment,
it's not that many. You're not talking
about that many polygons per second.
You're not talking about a very fast
frame rate. It's more a matter of trying
to optimize perception.

that they're in another reality when
they're playing the game. "That's a
pretty darn successful thing without being a big bit spitter," Barlow said.
"Something like a 3D NES would do an
adequate job for VR gamers, and right
now a lot of companies would rather
produce a low resolution system, if it

Since VR seems like it will be
a major step in the evolution of
both gaming and entertainment,
companies are trying to approach the market cautiously,
but quickly. Since it's a new medium altogether, VR games are
being designed that will try to
take advantage of all the technology's aspects even though
they're not fully understood yet. VR
should not be a case where the first in
the market wins the market. Rather, the
chance to provide a standardization for
the industry would create an environment where quality is more important
in the long run than timing. CGW

/

Review

Blockheads Are Back In Style With

Tetris Classic
by Michael S. [risky

T

he story of Tetris Classic is ex-

actly the opposite of Coca-Cola
Classic. You remember the
brilliant Coke marketing strategy.
They changed the formula and the entire country turned up its nose at it.
With much high fructose corn syrup on
their face, the Coke people said, "all
right, we will bring back the original
Coca-Cola" and they called it CocaCola Classic. The New Coke all but
faded away.
Well Tetris, the first Russian computer game brought to the U.S. as part
of detante by Spectrum HoloByte, has
been a raging success from day one.
And now with more than 400,000 copies sold, four imaginative sequels, tens
of thousands of pirated copies and a
vast parade of me-too-ware, Tetris returns, ever the winner as a "Classic."
It's like an old friend with a beauty
make-over. As much as you liked and
were comfortable with the old version,
you have to admit the new one really is
better. And Tetris Classic is just that:
much improved, and still a joy to play.
And still a habit hard to break.
Tetris has remained a continuous
bestseller since its first release in 1988.
A testament to this success is Spectrum
HoloByte's almost religious production of an annual spin-off game. First,
in 1989, came Welltris, the fiendishly
difficult 3-D version of Tetris. Following on its heels was Faces, which could
have been called egg-on-our-Faces for
all the expected sales that didn't happen. Up next was the 1991 WordTris, a
clever crossword-like version where
single letters instead of block clusters
had to be assembled into words.
WordTris made a nice splash and sold

TITLE:
Tetris Classic
PLAYERS:
1 - 2 (on Novell network/null connect)
SYSTEM:
IBM
PROTECTION: Documentation Look-up
PRICE:
$49.95
DESIGNERS: Rebecca Ang & Heather Mace
PUBLISHER:
Spectrum HoloByte
Alamed,C

handsomely. Then, later in 1991, came
SuperTetris which combined the best
of Tetris and added a dazzling array of
bells and whistles, music, VGA graphics and, in addition to the block clusters
falling from the sky, a treasure trove of
surprises arising from a bottom pit.
What all these sequels did, especially
SuperTetris, was to reveal just how
simple, and in computer terms, how
primitive a game Tetris is. Designed for
computers that ran at a fraction of the
speed of today's sleek PCs and Macs,
and with only clunky graphic capabilities, Tetris seemed like Fred Flintstone,
fun to have around but still prehistoric.
Clearly the time was right for an updated, spruced up version of Tetris.
And so it was done. The first version
has been removed from the shelves,
although for diehards with equipment
that does not support EGA or better
graphics, there are still plenty of copies
in retail inventory. For the rest of us, the
new Tetris Classic is like the compact
disc version of a favorite record
in
with the digital, out with the scratchy
analog.
Still richly redolent of its Russian
heritage, Tetris Classic is now highpowered with 256-color VGA graphic
tableaus, Russian folk melodies at the
start of each round, and expanded play
action to allow for pairs of gamers to

play competitively, cooperatively, or
head-to-head via a null modem connection or network setup.
One of the major complaints about
the original game was that the actual
playing field was a cramped inset
screen in the middle of an entire screen
occupied by busy background graphics. The playing field is now expanded
and in the "comrade" two-player mode
it is further enlarged from ten blocks
wide to 16.
It may have been a while since some
gamers have played Tetris (although
that's hard to imagine) so here's a recap
of how Tetris works: blocks fall from
the top into the playing pit 20 squares
deep and ten wide. The object is to
arrange the block in a single completed
horizontal line. When completed, the
line disappears and points are earned.
The problem with making the lines is

Review
that the blocks come in four different
geometric formations (L-shaped,
straight line, cubed, S-shaped.) and arranging them to fall neatly into place
takes practice and a gift for spatial
logic.
Tetris Classic has improved on the
actual game mechanics so that mastery
is more easily attained, while making
scoring more difficult. You can use a
joystick, mouse or the keyboard cursor
keys to maneuver the falling shapes.
Keyboard keys seem to offer the precision necessary for accurate block

that was it — all control was lost. Now
the drop can be manipulated; once you
release the spacebar the shapes return
to their normal velocity and can
then be manipulated further.
Much of Tetris Classic can be
user customized. The delightful
background graphics become
transparent in the playing pit area
but they can be removed for
those that like a totally black
playing field. A timer has been
mercifully added for those Tetris
addicts who need to have their
playing time restricted.
In the competitive levels
of the game, a "Send
Rocks" option will send
extra random pieces to the bottom of the opponents field each
time you complete two lines.
And we thought the Cold War
was over. The competitive
rounds in Tetris Classic are a
nasty bit of business.

movement. The spacebar releases the
falling cluster quickly. Previously,
once a gamer launched a quick drop,

after installing the game. After that,
password protection is removed. Tetris
Classic supports all major sound

The logistics of play are
cleaner with the addition of a
drop down menu bar, accessible
with a touch of the Escape key.
The copy protection scheme is now
user friendly: the player is sent to the
documentation only on the first play

boards, although it will only work with
Sound Blaster cards that are at their
default hardware settings. The Ad Lib
board setting can be substituted.
The enhancements to Tetris are all
basically cosmetic. The game remains
the same: it is addictive because it is
intuitively simple. Even though the improvements mean gamers now have 26
pages of documentation to read, it is
still simple. Deceptively simple. And
bound to be around as long as computer
games are played.

Game Design
Continued from page 78
these instruments, sometimes I need one
that is not in the internal bank. Another of
the games I'm currently working on is
called Ringworld (Tsunami Media). The
game is based on a popular award-winning
series of science fiction paperbacks by the
same name authored by Larry Niven. Ringworld, as described in the novels, is a constructed world that resembles the shape of
a Christmas ribbon connected at both ends
to form a circle, whose actual size has a
radius measuring 95 million miles and contains the area equivalent to a million earthsized planets. That's one big piece of real
estate!
The fact that the Ringworld is a constructed (synthetic) "planet" is important in
the way I envisioned the soundtrack. I
needed instruments that were synthetic
sounding; I wanted a Wendy Carlos or Iso
Tomita sound and the MT-32 has very few
of these instruments. So, in addition to
composing , I created customized instruments, instruments that have never been
heard on the MT-32 before, using synth
editing-software (MIDI Quest - Sound
Quest Inc). This software allows me to
create customized instruments and sound
effects (like explosions, turbo powered tricycles, and hydraulically cushioned bungie
cords, as well). Of course, 2-operator and
4-operator FM sound cards will have their
respective set of customized sounds (using
similar editing software) for the game
soundtrack, too! My intent is to provide a

fresh sounding score on existing equipment.

Virtual Reality For
The Ears
The digitized sound effects and speech
that you may hear from a Sound Blaster
card are created using a digital recording of
a software/hardware setup. To record the
sound, I use a regular sampling keyboard.
After the sound has been sampled, the digital information that makes up the sound is
transferred to my PC via MIDI and sample
editing software (Sample Vision - Turtle
Beach Systems). From Sample Vision, I
fine tune the sample and save it to disk; the
end result: real recorded sounds in a computer game! For extensive amounts of digitized sound; for example: narration for
CD-ROM, I use direct-to-hard-disk digital
recording techniques. Sound Stage (also
from Turtle Beach Systems) is a software/hardware package with stereo digital
sound editing software, a PC card and an
interface box that connects to the "digital
out" of a DAT recorder. The DAT recorder
is also connected to a mixing board with a
microphone. With this setup, I can record
CD-quality sound (for speech, music and
sound-effects). I haven't even mentioned
some of the fancy stuff, yet, like 3-D sound.

Tomorrow Afternoon
That brings us full circle to something I
mentioned earlier; CD-ROM. The major

complaint of game manufacturers is storage media restrictions. Look at how many
disks will be shipped with this year's releases. Blue Force, from Tsunami Media
is projected to ship on 12 high density
(1.44M) floppies; other games on even
more because of digitized speech support.
The material cost for a CD-ROM is between $1 and $2.50 per CD, whereas the
cost for twelve 1.44M disks is between
$2.50 and $5 (your mileage may vary).
Storage space on the CD-ROM is a phenomenal 660 Megabytes! That's enough
room to support super VGA graphics, fully
digitized speech, sound effects and a complete stereo soundtrack using one of the
MPC certified sound cards. The potential
for a complete interactive multimedia experience is at hand, and those of us who
compose for this "multi" media are salivating at the prospects (and capabilities) of the
CD-ROM/MPC marriage. When you play
one of these games you will hear real orchestration and actual sound effects; a totally authentic soundtrack. And soon, the
phrase "interactive cinema" will truly describe the gaming experience.
If you would like a cassette tape of music
by the author, send a check (or money
order) drawn on US funds for $7 per tape
to cover the costs of shipping, materials
and donuts for the UPS guy; made payable
to Ken Allen, PO Box 1318, Oarkhurst,
CA 93644. Orders will be sent the same day
payment is received. Ken will also entertain
all offers to compose for film or television

Review

randMaster Chess is Capstone Software's first foray
into the field of computer
chess games. Given the nature of the
market in electronic chess simulations,
any new product will face stiff competition from well-established games currently in their fourth or fifth generation.
While GrandMaster Chess does provide the
basic functions necessary to a chess
game, it falls short of the current competition in terms of over-all options.
GrandMaster Chess uses pull-down
menus to provide easy access to all of
the available options. Using a mouse,
the game flows smoothly and easily.
Most of the options that are standard
features on other recent chess programs are available on GrandMaster Chess. Variable piece styles, 2-D
and 3-D perspectives, the ability to
upload and download games, etc.

thinks, giving it the option to think
while you do, and by determining
whether it will always pick the best
possible move. A limited amount of
personality can be added through the
setting of three possible playing styles
(passive, active or balanced).
This process is complicated somewhat by the lack of centralization with
regard to Al options. Several of these
options are located in different menus
and there is no central organization to
the characteristics of the computer opponent. In part, this is compensated for
by the documentation. The manual is
concise, easy to read and, with a few
notable exceptions, reasonably comprehensive.

In addition, the computer has a limited ability to learn from its mistakes. It
does this by saving any situation where
the score changes against it. It will then
GrandMaster Chess also supports a
recognize this situation as a losing one
number of sound options, including
before it happens and take steps to
speech. Even using a PC speaker the
avoid
it, if it occurs in another game. With the
TITLE:
GrandMaster Chess
program will occasionally make a comment.
exception of the tutorial function, however,
SYSTEM:
IBM 286, 386, 486
("Bad move!" was the one I heard most
PLAYERS:
1-2
the manual does not adequately address the
PRICE
$59.95
frequently.) Copy protection takes the form
nature of the computer intelligence. I would
PROTECTION:
Documentation Look-up
of a code sheet from which players are reDESIGNER:
John Stanbach
have appreciated a more lengthy explanation
PUBLISHER:
Capstone Software
quired to enter an appropriate character beof the computer's method of analysis. A side
Miami, FL
fore gaining access to the game itself.
window can be called up to show how the
The game's packaging states that it recomputer is thinking and what moves it is
quires 640K to run and I can testify that it uses most of it.
considering. However, even on my 386-16, the information
While I did not experience difficulties with a 386 using DOS
in this window moved too fast to be of much use. Furthermore,
5.0 and extended memory, I was unable to run the title page
the description of the information presented in the analysis
on a 286 with DOS 4.1. Other users have reported being
window is somewhat lacking. Sequences of moves are anaunable to even install the program on a 286, although I did not
lyzed and rated numerically on the basis of pieces lost and
find this a problem myself.
taken. Given the subtleties of chess strategy, this seems a bit
shallow.
The strength of the computer opponent is handled through
a variety of options. There are five levels of difficulty ranging
from novice to expert. Within each level it is possible to
improve or weaken the computer by adjusting the time it

The problem is that all that is displayed is the tactical
element of the game. Strategy and how it is being pursued is
neglected. This is a difficult issue, since it is much easier to

Review
provide an understanding of tactics than strategy, and invariably computer opponents are stronger tactically than they are
strategically. However, the lack of strategic analysis weakens
several of the features available. For instance, it is possible to
ask the computer for advice at any point in a game. From a
tactical viewpoint, this advice is not bad and can be useful for
getting out of a tough spot once in a while. Yet, the computer
does not provide the player with an understanding of why it
thinks a particular move is good. Often it will run counter to
the overall strategy that one has been developing over a
sequence of moves. This can
be disturbing when the advice is based solely on a
short-term tactical evaluation
of the current position.
While weak analysis is a
drawback, a more serious
problem is that certain features simply do not exist.
GrandMaster Chess advertises a teaching mode, however neither the manual nor
the pull down menus provide
any hints as to where this feature resides. There is a similar problem with the library
of opening moves. While this
library exists, it is neither extensive nor particularly user
friendly. There is no systematic overview of openings (or variants), or any useful way of
learning particular openings or the relationship between openings and strategy. If one cares to enter openings into the

library, the computer can analyze them, but once again this
analysis is based on tactical rather than strategic factors.
There is a class of chess players out there whose strategic
skill allows them to defeat the tactical strength of a computer
opponent at any level of difficulty. This author is definitely
not one of these people. For the rest of us (normal?) players,
a good chess program must be able to provide at least some
tools through which it is possible to develop one's skills and
improve one's playing ability.

GrandMaster Chess is
quite simply lacking in this
area. It has all the "bells and
whistles" that one might expect from a state of the art
product, as well as the ability
to play a reasonable game of
chess with the minimum of
fuss and difficulty. However,
in comparison with the leaders in the field, Chessmaster
3100 and Sargon V, some
other (unnamed) products
currently on the market,
GrandMaster Chess comes
up short. Those who do not
care about real and useful
opening moves libraries or
teaching and analysis modes
will find GrandMaster Chess
enjoyable and, most likely, challenging. Those who do desire
a more comprehensive package of options will want to shop
elsewhere. cGw

Manchester, England-based company
Ocean, is an original arcade/strategy game taking
some inspiration from the
excellent Lemmings products from Psygnosis. The
gameplay is based on the
massive layouts of dominoes, where the player
"pushes over" one and sets
off a chain reaction demolishing acres of dominoes in intricate
shapes.
Pushover is not as complicated as
Lemmings, but follows a similar design
philosophy. The scene is set with a
character called Colin Curly who loses
a packet of savory snacks which end up
disappearing down an ant hill, whereupon his old buddy GI Ant appears. GI
is, of course, a soldier ant, possessed of
super human strength, and small
enough to enter the anthill. He volunteers to recover the snacks.
All is not as it seems, however, as this
is no ordinary anthill. Rather, it is the
entrance to the amazing world of Domino Domain. This is a mini world comprised of nine different continents, each
with a multitude of different levels. To
get from one level to the next one must
open up a door; achieved by knocking
over every tile, with the trigger tile
being last. Sounds easy, but as the tiles
are split over several levels and special
tiles (including tumbler tiles, ascender

bridger tiles, delay, splitters, vanishers, exploders and stoppers), one
can wind up in a terrible tactical tangle.
As screens are completed, the player is
awarded tokens which can be used to
negate the time limit or to return to an
uncompleted level. EGA, VGA and
MCGA graphics are supported, the
VGA screens being particularly crisp.
The game controls are very positive,
especially with the supported joystick,
and the sound support is well up to
scratch. This has all the makings of a
winner; the strategy element is very
high, and Pushover is anything but its
title. Be warned it is very, very addictive!
Latest news from the stylish French
company Delphine is the forthcoming
release of Flashback, hot on the heels
of their graphic adventures Operation
Stealth, Cruise for a Corpse and the
interesting, Another World [Ed: Out of
This World in the U.S.]. This release
uses the famous cinema techniques of
flashbacks to present its story and re-

volves around Conrad B.
Hunt, a research scientist
who discovers that certain individuals have a molecular
density much higher than
anyone else. These people are
in fact, aliens, and they hold
most of the top jobs in the
world. Conrad's investigations were noticed by the
ET's who kidnapped him,
erased his memory, and
locked him up in a top security prison from which there is no escape.
Conrad escapes (!), steals a hoverbike and flies off into the — ah, this
seems to be the planet Titan. Then,
Conrad starts to have occasional flashbacks which unravel the storyline. The
graphics are very impressive and the
animation is superb. The main character is able to walk, run, jump, climb,
roll, duck, inch forward (a la Prince of
Persia), pick up objects and throw
them. The graphic system is, in fact, a
development of that found in Another
World, and now uses 24 animation
frames per second to produce some
very smooth and realistic movement.
Throw in the elements of role playing
and adventure and this may avoid some
of the criticisms of Delphine products
of being a touch too Gallic! Currently
being converted from the French version, this should be released late in the
year.

The most successful role playing series in Germany is Das Schwarze
Auge— it apparently outsells D&D and
AD&D by approximately four to one.
Attic Software of Germany
has recently announced that
they will be releasing the first
English language version under the title, Blade of Destiny,
with the series to be known as
Realms of Arcadia and available on IBM and Amiga. The
computer versions will
closely follow their pen and
paper ancestors, making for a
very detailed game system.
Character development is a
huge area with over 100 skills,
and also 'negative' attributes
like greed, superstition and
phobias. Add in over 200
spells and it is apparent that
this is no lightweight. UK and
French distribution will be
handled through the UK distributor
U.S. Gold. U.S. distribution yet to be
announced.
Turcan Research Systems, has released two add-on disks for their well
received surface fleet battle simulator
Dreadnoughts. The first is Ironclads
and covers a period prior to the original
product, in the Sino-Japanese War of
1894, and the Russo-Japanese War of
1904/5. The first war is represented by

the Battle of Yalu, 17th September
1894. The second conflict is covered by
the Battle of The Yellow Sea, 10th
August 1904, the Battle of Ulsan, 14th

August 1904, and the Battle of
Tsushima, 27th May 1905. The ships
and combat are markedly different
from the World War I period. At Yalu,
for example, the biggest Japanese guns
could fire only once every five minutes! A neglected period of naval history is admirably covered by this
idiosyncratic gaming system. The addon disk captures the era well, and is a
much more leisurely affair than the
chaos of Jutland.

The second scenario disk is probably
the most interesting of all. Bismarck
covers major 'surface only' naval
clashes during World War Two. The
first is the Battle of the River
Plate and the sinking of the
Graf Spee. There are also
three scenarios involving the
pursuit of the pride of the
Kriegsmarine, the K MS Bismarck, including the clash
with HMS Hood and Prince
of Wales, and her final battle. The packed disk also includes the Battle of the Java
Sea that involves the ABDA
force in the Far East, including the USS Houston, and
finally, the Battle of North
Cape: The Sinking of the
Scarnhorst.
Each of these scenarios
can be played from either
side, and also with lots of
`what ifs' so you may be able to get the
Bismarck back to port, or sink all the
allied cruisers off the River Plate. Superb graphics, and enormous research
make these two 'mission' disks a welcome addition to Dreadnoughts. The
game is essential for old sea-dogs, and
if the interface was just souped up a
touch, Dreadnoughts might appeal to a
much wider audience. CGW

Scorpion's View

Dungeon Master
Scorpia Takes a Look
At a (too) Long Awaited
Conversion

as told by Scorpia.

Scorpio is an experienced and respected
adventure game expert. CGW is pleased
to provide this forum for her distinctive
and alien controversial perspective.

lmost

six years ago, Dungeon
Master arrived on the CRPG
scene, appearing first on the
Atari platform. It was hailed almost
immediately as innovative and stateof-the-art. Its very name became descriptive of a particular style of dungeon.
Eventually, the game made
its way to the Amiga, the Apple IIGS, and now at last, to
the IBM.

A

stone blocks, which can become monotonous after a while. Even so, the
various monsters are well-detailed and
well-conceived, acceptable at even today's high standards.

Anyone who has played Eye
of the Beholder (either or

both) will find much here that
is familiar. This is especially
true of the combat style,
which relies most of the time
on the "slip'n'slide" method
of hitting an opponent, then
moving quickly away to the
left or right (or, occasionally,
backwards).

The big question is: did
FTL take too long to bring it
to the IBM market? Can a
game hailed as innovative
almost six years ago still
hold i ts own against state-ofthe-art productions such as
Eve of the Beholder and Ultima Underworld? Or is
Dungeon Master now a mere
curiosity, a groundbreaker
whose time has long passed?
Visually, many games
have surpassed Dungeon Master, and
given the rapid advances in technology, this isn't surprising. For all that,
the graphics are surprisingly good, all
things considered. True, each dungeon
level is composed of the same gray

There is, of course, a bare bones plot
to provide the motivation for trekking
through this hostile environment, but
essentially it's a hack'n'slash epic
sprinkled throughout with a number of
devious puzzles to keep you
mentally alert and give you
something else to do besides
bash monsters.

Beyond pretty pictures is the game
itself. Dungeon Master never made any
pretensions to being other than what it
is: a dungeon crawl through fourteen
levels of increasing nastiness, with an
equally-nasty endgame (we will get to
that in due time).

Fighting tends to be slower
than in EOB, however, since
each time you click on a
weapon, a small menu comes
up from which you must
choose the character's attack mode:
chop, swing, thrust, melee, berserk,
parry, etc. This is true even for weapons
such as slings or bows, which have only
one attack possibility, namely "shoot."

Scorpion's View
The screen layout is also somewhat
awkward. Character portraits are lined
up along the top left of the screen, in
the order you chose your party in the
Hall of Champions. The top right cor-

ner has a 2 x 2 diagram showing their
actual positions, and lower down is a
row of symbols, displaying what each
member has in his fighting hand. It is
these symbols you click on during
combat to fight or use a magic item.
The problem is that neither the symbols nor the portraits change position if
you make changes in the party order.
Only the 2 x 2 diagram reflects the
actual arrangement of characters. This
can be confusing, particularly at the
start. You can also waste spells by not
remembering where everyone is, as
many offensive spells go off on the
same side as the caster. A fireball or
lightning bolt might zip harmlessly
down the passage into a wall instead of
into a monster if you aren't careful.
One aspect of combat did not make
the transition to EOB: door-bashing a
critter. This tactic involves luring a
monster into a doorway, then pushing
the button to shut the door. Depending
on how smart/fast the critter is, it will
take one or more hits from the door
before retreating. It is a handy "extra
fighter" in many situations.
Magic is handled in a style somewhat
similar to the system used in Ultima
Underworld. Spells are prepared beforehand for each character capable of
magic, using an array of symbols for
each spell. Thus, the party can have up
to four "ready" spells that can be cast
immediately when needed, instead of
fumbling through magic books.
However, once a spell is cast, another
set of symbols must be put together
before that character can cast another
spell (either the same one or a different
one). Since combat is real-time, this

generally means each character can
only get off one spell per fight, as there
is usually no way to put symbols together while maneuvering around giant
scorpions or bloodthirsty rats. Thus,
spellcasting is
of generally minor use in combat, although
several powerful spells going
off one after the
other can be effective.
Advanceme
nt in any class is
solely "by doing", a radical
departure from
the "gather
enough experience points to
go up a level"
system used by
almost
all
CRPGs, and much more sensible. Wizards and priests gain levels only by
casting spells. Fighters, naturally, get
better the more they fight and ninjas
improve by using missile weapons.
A nice feature here is that, whatever
a character started as, he or she can
become multi-classed by practicing
other skills. Someone who is "only" a
fighter, for instance, can try casting
some low-level mage spells, and eventually begin gaining levels as a wizard
(or priest, by trying priest spells).

visible), dancing around pits, and so on.
Anyone who has played EOB will find
these quite familiar, and will have an
advantage over someone who hasn't
played it before.
That doesn't necessarily mean the
puzzles are easy to solve. Some, such
as the clockwise/counterclockwise
rooms on level I1, can be rather devious. So it pays to explore thoroughly
and experiment carefully.
Which brings us to saving the game.
This can be done at any time, even in
the midst of combat (not recommended). Unfortunately, there is only
one save position allowed. This can
mean trouble if you happen to save the
game with your party in a bad spot, or
if you happen to have a crash of some
sort and lose the save file. Wise players
will therefore exit the game now and
then to back up the save and have something to go back to in case of difficulties.
Even more unfortunately, there is no
way to reload the save from inside the
game, except when everyone dies. To
restore a position otherwise, it is necessary to exit and reboot the game. This
is very poor, and there is really no
excuse for not having an in-game reload.
There is nothing much in the way of
music, except for a little tune that plays
at the doors of the dungeon at boot-up.
However, there are plenty of sounds.
Party members grunt in pain when hit,

Food and
water are very
important, and
unlike EOB and
UW, there is no
food creation
spell. You must
depend on finding
edibles
scattered
around the dungeon or eating
the remains of
some of your
opponents,
such as the rats,
purple worms,
and screamers.
This also means
you have to
clutter your inventory and weigh your
characters down with extra food, since
it is scarce on several dungeon levels.

and scream collectively when falling
through pits or when everyone dies.
Buttons click when pushed, doors open
with a clank, etc.

Puzzles tend to fall into one of several
types: finding the hidden button,
weighing down plates, throwing things
into teleporters to weigh down plates,
avoiding teleporter fields (visible or in-

Naturally, the critters make noises,
too. Each one has a sound it makes
during attack, and they can often be
heard walking/slithering/scuttling
around before they actually show up in

Scorpion's View
the vicinity, if you take time to listen.
What is perhaps the most astonishing
achievement of Dungeon Master is its
size. The entire game fits on a single,
uncompressed, 5.25 high-density
floppy. In these days of megabyte monsters, it is amazing (and refreshing) to
find one that takes up less than 2 MB
of space...and that for a game which
(aside from not having SVGA graphics) gives you almost everything you
can get from EOB, with more dungeon
levels besides.
However, there is a dark lining to
every silver cloud, and the dark lining
here is the endgame. Some people
thought that spiking the Beholder or
dealing with Dran Draggore was tough;
those critters were a piece of cake compared to Lord Chaos and his demon
buddies.
No endgame has ever given me so
much trouble or frustration. As many
know by this time, the showdown with
Lord C is not so much a "Foozle fight"
but a "Foozle trap," where he must be
enclosed in fluxcages and rendered
harmless rather than killed (it's not
possible to kill him anyway).
Chaos by himself is more than
enough for any party, but the six or
eight demons that come with him make
the situation almost impossible. When
I tried ignoring the demons and concentrating on Lord C, the party was
quickly surrounded and destroyed.
When I tried killing the demons first,
Chaos always popped in behind the
party and blew them away in short order, no matter how fancy the footwork.
In the end, I got him more by luck
than anything else. The bones of Alex,

Nabi and Elijah were scattered across
the dungeon floor, leaving only Duke
Zed (my hero!) to do the job. After a
considerable amount of time waltzing
around with Lord C, I realized that only
one demon was actually in this part of
the room.
Where the others were, or why they
didn't show up, is a mystery, as they
usually came stumping along soon after Chaos made his appearance. Whatever the reason, it gave me the
opportunity to finally finish the game.
I blew away the single demon, then
developed fluxcage mania.
They went up everywhere, whether
Lord C was around or not. Almost half
the southern end of the room was covered with them. They were so thick, I
could barely see more than a step or two
in front of me. Regardless, the tactic
worked, and Chaos was finally contained...but again, only because no
other demons were around.
I've gone on about this endgame because up to this point I was rather enjoying the game as a whole. Dungeon
Master, for all that it creaks a bit, is still
eminently worth playing, even years
later. However, because the endgame
is so difficult (needlessly so), I can't
give it a blanket recommendation.
Anyone who hates real-time combat, or
had severe problems with the final
fights in EOB 1 or II, may well give up
in aggravated disgust when faced with
Lord Chaos and company.
On the other hand, those who enjoy
this style (and frustration, heh), are
likely to find that the game that started
it all still has something to offer the
seasoned adventurer.

I

Strategy & Wargames:

The Future (2000-••••)

A Paiktography of Past and Future Sci-Fi Games
by M. Evan Brooks

T

his paiktography will cover the

"futuristic" strategy and wargames released for the computer
markets. The subject matter proved to
be the most difficult to define because
so many science fiction simulations are
role-playing games or arcade "
shoot-em-ups." Where a strategy game begins and a "shoot-em-up" or
role-playing game ends is an unceasing
problem of definition. I have tried to
cover those simulations that emphasize
the former aspects and do not rely on
quick reflexes or intensive role-playing. Another problem is that futuristic
simulations seem to "blend" into one
another; after all, what is the basic difference in a game based on destroying
Krellans or Kzinti or whatevers?
But aside from definitions, I have
merged certain other simulations
which would clearly belong to other
periods — some fantasy simulations
are covered (e.g. DragonStrike) simply
because their topics do not easily lend
themselves to another period.
Futuristic simulations must create
their own environments. While a historical product has an underlying reality which assists in creating the
"mood", the futuristic product must do
so by itself without external reference.
This often presents a problem — an
attractive game today can grow obsolete faster than a historical simulation
simply because it does not have the
intrinsic linchpin of reality. Of course,
this also allows the designer a great
deal of latitude; how he handles his
created world will determine how longlived a product he develops.
The computer market is quickchanging and unforgiving, and the
state-of-the-art changes rapidly. Futuristic simulations seem to be among the
most short-lived of all games; simultaneously, they are also those that are
often used for graphic innovations. It
should be noted that the ratings are an
individual preference, and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the publisher or editor of this magazine. Also,
please note the platform availability; a
five-star game on an Atari 800 that is
several years old is not of the same
sophistication as a new product designed for a PC 486-33. However, it has
been given its rating for what it did, to
a lesser extent, what it still does, and

LEGEND:
LINE 1: TITLE

perhaps for the place it holds in this
reviewer's heart and memory. Of
course, the designers look askance at
these ratings, and often deluge the
magazine with voluminous complaints. But again, these are intrinsically subjective, and a discriminating
reader should be able to temper the
ratings with this writer's normal reviews in order to ascertain the inherent
biases. What is also noteworthy is that
few computer games have a shelf life
longer than three years, yet board
games remain classics ten years or
more after their release (e.g. Napoleon's Last Battles, A House Divided,
Up Front).
Prices are difficult to determine for
older games, since they are so heavily
discounted, assuming they can be
found at all. Thus, be aware that the
prices are only a rough guideline. Also,
since this guide is for reference, one
should be aware that prices shift downward rapidly.

LINE 2: (Machine Format
[(A)tari/(C)ommodore/(Ap)ple
II/(T)RS-80/II(GS)
/(Am)iga/(ST)/(M)acintosh
/(I)BM]/(P)ET; Issue of CGW in
which that game was mentioned
(hold print refers to major article)].
[Company/Designer/Date of Publication/Price (O/P: Out of Print)/Rating
= Good use as a magnet holder
(0
= Avoid
= Marginal
**
*** = Average to Good
**** = Very Good
***** = Highly Recommended
N-R = Not Rated)!
LINE 3: Difficulty [(Beg)inner
/(Int)ermediate/(Adv )anced]/Level
[(Tac)tical/(Op)erational
/(Str)ategic]* / # of Players
(M: modem option)
No table of unit sizes has been presented because the scope of futuristic
simulations ranges from man-to-man
to galactic empires. Generally, a tactical simulation will range from a manto-man to ship-to-ship; operational
simulations cover squadrons to fleets;
strategic simulations cover entire planets to complete universes.
xxx = Data not available.
THE ALIEN
(Ap; #3.3) Avalon Hill; H. van Halteren; 1983; O/P; N-R
Int/Tac/1
A computer version of the now-classic movie with Sigourney Weaver
(though not to be confused with the
movie-licensed arcade-style game
from Activision), this product offered
a number of scenarios and options in an
attempt to "ethnically cleanse" your
space vessel.

II any readers have additions/corrections/modifications, please send them
to me in care of this magazine or via
modem on GEnie (address: M.E.
Brooks). Special thanks to Craig K.
Andrews for his extensive corrections
to earlier paiktographies.

ANDROMEDA CONQUEST
(C/Ap/I; #2.6) Avalon Hill; David Peterson; 1982; 0/P; **
Int/Str/ 1-4
This strategic game of economic
management and planetary conquest
was simpler than SSG's Reach for the
Stars (which came later) and slightly
tougher than Avalon Hill's Galaxy.

ARMADA 2525
(I; #87) Interstel; R.T. Smith; 1991;
$49.95; ***+
Adv/St/ 1-6

parts and the genre better fits a firstperson perspective as in MechWarrior
or Multi-Player BattleTech.
CONFLICT 2500
(A/Ap) Avalon Hill; xxx; 1982; 0/P;
N-R
Beg/Tac/ 1

Space colonization, research & development, production and galactic
battles — it's all here in an ambitious
package. Multi-layered and detailed.
ARMOUR-GEDDON
(Am/ST/I; #85,87) Psygnosis; Paul
Hunter and Ed Scio; 1991; $49.99; **
I nt/Tac/1-2
A simulation of aircraft, tanks and
hovercraft attempting to destroy the
"mad scientists" who will otherwise
destroy the planet. In addition to combat elements, one must determine research and production priorities. With
a heavier emphasis on tactical battles
rather than cerebral considerations, it
can be fun, but resembles a Chinese
take-out restaurant, i.e. a half-hour
later, you are hungry for something
with some substance.

A tactical simulation of space conflict in the 26th century.

BERSERKER RAIDS
(A/Ap/C/I; #5.3) Berserker Works;
Lloyd Johnson; 1983; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Tac/ 1-2
A strategy game based on the Fred
Saberhagen science fiction novels.
BREACH
(Am/ST/M/I; #41,45) Omnitrend; Tom
Carbone & Bill Leslie; 1988; 0/P; **
Int/Tac/ 1
Tactical man-to-man combat with
space marines.

AUTODUEL
(Ap/C/M/Am/I; #26,28,29) Origin;
Chuck Bueche; 1985; 0/P; **
Int/Tac/1-2

BREACH 2
(Am/ST/I; 65,68,70) Mindcraft; Tom
Carbone; 1991; $49.95;****
Int/Tac/1

A computer rendition of Steve Jackson's classic board game, this simulation panders to the harried commuter in
us all. Arm your vehicle and destroy the
opposition! Graphics and game play
now appear very dated.

A newer revision, and one which fits
into Rules of Engagement as a tactical
subset thereof. Easy to learn and fun to
play, it is reminiscent of SSI's Six Gun
Shoot-Out, but moved from the Old
West to Outer Space. A
design-your-own scenario option and on-line availability of scenarios makes this a
continuing "fresh" product.

BATTLE ISLE
(Am/I; #89) UbiSoft; Blue Byte; 1991;
$49.95; ***+
Int/Op/1-2
A true wargame, with a hex-based
map in a futuristic conflict. Detailed
air, ground and sea units compel one to
adopt a comprehensive combinedarms strategy for victory. Enjoyable for
the persistent gamer looking for new
worlds to conquer.
BATTLETECH: THE CRESCENT
HAWK'S REVENGE
(I; #76,79) Infocom; Barry Green and
Tony Van; 1990; $49.95;***
Int/Tac/1
Set in the BattleTech universe, this is
has strong role-playing elements, but
still retains a tactical flavor of mechwarrior combat.
BATTLE TREK
(A; #2.5) Voyager; Chris Frazier;
1982; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Tac/1
Ship-to-ship space combat, from the
early days of computer gaming.

BREACH 3
(I) Impressions; xxx; 1993(?); $69.95;
N-R
Int/Tac/1

CONQUERING WORLDS
(Ap; #4.2) Datamost; Walt
Hochbrueckner; 1984; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Str/1-3
A simple destroy the enemy civilization campaign. It was not original when
released and time has done nothing to
make it more attractive.
COSMIC BALANCE I-II
(A/Ap; #2.6,3.1,3.5,5.1) Strategic
Simulations,
Inc.;
Paul
Murray;1982/1983; 0/P; ***
Int/Tac-Op-Str/ 1-2
Two early SSI releases, the original
Cosmic Balance offered an individual
ship-to-ship battle in space (with design-your-own-ship capabilities),
while Cosmic Balance II covers more
of the planetary and galactic overviews
(together with aspects of economics,
colonization and exploration on a
macro-scale). Both were excellent
products in their day; note the operative
words — "in their day."
CYBER EMPIRES
(Am/I) Strategic Simulations, Inc.;
Dennis Dyack, Rick Gouts; 1992;
$49.95; N-R
Int/Tac/1

The latest rendition of Breach is expected to have a campaign builder, as
well as a scenario designer.

Players build teams of mechanoid
fighters in the far future and resolve
arena-style battles via action sequences
in this adaptation of the popular European boardgame, Steel Empires.

CARRIER COMMAND
(C/ST/M/I; #52) MicroPlay; Clare
Edgely; 1988; $39.95; **
Int/Op/1

CYTRON MASTERS
(A/Ap; #2.5,2.6) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Dan Bunten; 1982; 0/P; **
Int/Tac/ 1-2

Carrier warfare in the 22nd century,
to include air and sea options plus production and manufacturing of armaments. Although it combines arcade
and strategy elements, it just never
seemed to stand out from the crowd.

Combined arms tactics utilized in
real-time combat in a futuristic milieu.
Players control robot warriors which
strive for control of foreign planets.

COMBOTS
(C; #74) Avalon Hill; John Huff;
1990; $19.95; **
Int/Tac/1
Rohotfox without elan. Players design their own robots and scenarios, but
the whole is less than the sum of its

DEBUT
(Am/ST; #76) Pandora; xxx; xxx; xxx;
N-R
Adv/Str/ 1
A European hybrid: SimEarth meets
Balance of the Planet.
DELTA SQUADRON
(Ap; #3.5) Nexa; Gilman Louie;

Int/Tac1 1983; 0/P; N-R

Well-balanced and fun to play, but it
seems to lack a "joie de vivre."

A tactical simulation in which the
player must duplicate the Star Wars'
destruction of the Death Star. The
names and premise have been changed
to avoid copyright infringement, but
there is an obvious resemblance. There
are nine "different" scenarios (in terms
of strength), but the objective is the
same in every case
DRAGONRIDERS OF PERN
(A; #4.3,4.4) Epyx; xxx; 1983; 0/P; **
Int/Tac-Op/1-4
A strategy game based on Anne
McCaffrey's classic space fantasy novels, this product combines tactical elements (thread fighting) and operational
aspects (negotiations with other
Weyrs). It offers some interesting features, but it is dated and primitive.
DRAGONSTRIKE
(C/Am/I; #71,77) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Westwood Associates;
1990; $39.95/49.95; ****
Int/Tac/1
Although this product is set in an
AD&D world, it appears to be an Anne
McCaffrey clone of the Dragonriders
of Pern genre. Jousting atop a dragon
with different weapons systems (fireballs, gas, etc.) often resembles a
World War I fighter duel. Sadly, this
product did not receive the attention or
play that it deserved.
ELITE
(C/Ap/Am/ST/I; #25) Firebird; Ian
Bell and David Braben; 1986; 0/P; **
I nt/Tac/1
Interstellar trade and combat with two
thousand planets in eight galaxies, Elite
used wire frame graphics to depict space
flight. Its popularity was largely a result
of being one of the first space games with
a "large" universe to explore.

tactics and professionals think logistics; the problem is that, considering
the clunky interface, the logistics just
are not that much fun.
FEDERATION
(Am/ST; #70) Cinemaware; Paul
Blythe; 1990; 0/P; N-R
Int/Tac/1
A space ship flight simulator with
good graphics and decent gameplay
that simply doesn't stand out from the
crowd.
FEDERATION II
(GEnie; #97) GEnie; Alan Lenton/Ken Farnen; $6 per hour; ***+
Beg/Tac/Unlimited; M
Economic/role-playing in the far future, Federation II requires players to
determine the economic viability of
trade runs, bounty hunting, tactical
ship-to-ship battles and commodity arbitrage while building up the wealth,
power and influence of one's character.
FIRETEAM 2200
(I; #81,82,99) SimSystems and RAW
Entertainment; Dave Nielsen; $49.95;
1991; ***
Adv/Tac/1-2; M
Tactical ground combat in the 23rd
century; a detailed and complex wargame, but one which could have benefitted from mouse implementation and
a scenario builder.

GALACTIC ADVENTURES
(A/Ap; #3.4) Strategic Simulations,
Inc.; Tom Reamy; 1983; 0/P; ***
I Int/Tac/ 1 -2
Basically, a role-playing shell that
expanded the horizons of Galactic
Gladiators, the tactical sci-fi combat
game described below, Galactic Adventures uses a first person perspective
where one's character applies to one of
four guilds for the necessary expertise
to explore the galaxy.
GALACTIC ATTACK
(Ap,I; #3.3) Sir-Tech; Robert J.
Woodhead; 1983; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Op/ 1
An early real-time space battle game
reminiscent of Trek games like Star
Fleet I, but requiring one to think
ahead because of the time restriction.
Allows custom parameters to adjust
difficulty rating. Compared to today's
graphics and game play, it offers little.
GALACTIC FRONTIERS
(M; #99) SoftStream Int.; Russel
Lowke; 1991; $59.95; **
Beg/Str/1-4
A strategic space conquest game of
the Reach For The Stars ilk, Galactic
Frontiers offers a venue in which two
to four human players can compete for
control of the galaxy. Offers an easy
interface and a simple economic
model.
GALACTIC GLADIATORS
(A/Ap; #2.5,4.4,4.6) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Tom Reamy; 1982; 0/P;
**A_
Int/Tac/1-2
A space combat simulation between
different species types, it was one of the
first "space operas" to offer a scenario
designer. Very dated.

ELITE PLUS
(I; #86) MicroPlay; Chris Sawyer;
1991; $49.95; **+
Int/Tac/1

FIRST EXPEDITION
(I; #53) Interstel; Steven Englestad;
1988; $49.95; *
Int/Tac/ 1

GALAXY
(A/Ap/I) Avalon Hill; Tom Cleaver;
19; 0/P; **+
Beg/Str/1-20

An update of the original, with better
graphics and sound (although they are
still not up to state-of-the-art). More
detailed and complex, it is also more
tedious than the original.

A slow-moving simulation of planetary exploration with elements of navigation, management and role-playing
which doesn't decide which facet to
emphasize and succeeds at none.

E.O.S.
(C/Ap; #40) Electronic Arts; Karl
Buiter; 1987; 0/P; **+
Int/Tac/1-4

FULL METAL PLANET
(Am/I; #80) DataEast; Hitech Productions; 1991; $49.95; ***+
Int/Op/1-4

Players attempt to conquer the galaxy
with the victory going to the empire
with the most planets at the end of
either a preset or random number of
turns. A simpler predecessor of Reach
For The Stars.

An interesting failure, Earth Orbit
Station is a game of logistical space
station building. Yes, amateurs think

A tradititional hex-based military
simulation (with economic underpinning) occurring on a mining planet.

GLOBAL CONQUEST
(I; #93,97,99) MicroPlay; Dan Bunten; 1992; $59.95; ****+
Adv/Op/1-4; M
The futuristic element is limited to
combat operations on another planet,

MOONBASE: The Lunar Colony
Simulator
(I; #80,83) Wesson International;
Robert Green; 1991; $49.95; ****
Adv/St/I

but this product's main strength is modem play coupled with detailed military operations. Recommended.
GLOBAL EFFECT
(Am/I; #99) EA/Millenium; Toby
Simpson; 1992; $49.95; **
Int/Str/1-2; M
Economic/ecological warfare in the
near future, the modemability is questionable as is the playability. The game
is detailed but the documentation and
interface make it very tedious.
HYPERSPEED
(I; #92) MicroProse; Sandy Peterson
and Andy Hollis; 1991; $59.95;*+
Adv/Tac/ 1
An expanded Lightspeed; its strategic
aspects are often overshadowed by
role-playing elements. Emphasizes
trade and diplomacy more than combat.
INFILTRATOR I-II
(C/Ap/I; #44) Mindscape; Chris Gay;
1987; 0/P; *+
Int/Tac/1
A futuristic helicopter simulation,
with emphasis on arcade aspects.
Tongue-in-cheek documentation
grows dated quickly, as does the program itself.
IMPERIUM
(Am/ST/I; #71,75,80) Electronic Arts;
Matthew Stibbs and Nick Wilson;
1990; $49.95; ****
Adv/St/ 1
A very detailed simulation with military, economic and diplomatic aspects.
Sadly, its graphics were mediocre and
it seemed to quickly disappear from the
market. Yet its rich texture and gameplay deserve a second look.
IMPERIUM GALACTUM
(A/C/Ap; #5.3) Strategic Simulations,
Inc.; Paul Murray; 1984; 0/P; **
Adv/St/1-4
A successor to Cosmic Balance II,
this detailed strategic simulation of
space empires simply lacked sufficient
"chrome" to make it enduring.
INVASION ORION
(A/Ap/PET; #2.5) Epyx; Jon Freeman;
1979; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Tac/ I
Originally released on cassette tape
for the Commodore PET in 1979, this
duel in space was a sequel to Starfleet
Orion and allowed players to design
their own fleets and fight against a
computer enemy (rather than simply
another player, as in the first game).

Probably the most detailed and realistic space "construction" set ever produced. Not for the "joystick" crowd,
but recommended for the user willing
to engage his brain.

JUST ANOTHER WAR IN SPACE
(ST; #82) Azeroth; Robert Parkins;
1991; $49.95; N-R
Int/Tac/ 1
A tactical level space combat game
whose title describes it all.
LIGHTSPEED
(I; #74,76,82) MicroProse; Sandy Peterson and Andy Hollis; $54.95;
1991;*+
Adv/Tac/ 1
A cut-down version of Hyperspeed,
its utility and game play have been
more than superseded by its successor.
MANTIS: XF-5700 EXPERIMENTAL FIGHTER
(I/CD) MicroPlay; Glen Dill, Mark
Seremet, Paul Conklin; 1992; $69.95;
N-R
Int/Tac/ 1
Ship-to-ship space combat simulator;
available by the time you read this.
MECHWARRIOR
(1; #65,66) Activision; Dynamix/Kesmai; 1989; $59.95/$6.00 per hr.; ****
Int/Tac/1-unlimited (on-line)
Now available as a stand-alone game
in Activision's new BattleTech trilogy
package and on GEnie as Multi-Player
BattleTech, this robotic combat simulator is like candy — fun and exuberant, although it may rot your teeth.
MERCENARIES
(I) Mindcraft; xxx; 1992(?); $59.95(?);
N-R
Int/Tac/1

M.U.L.E.
(A/C/Ap/1; #3.4,4.1) Electronic Arts;
Ozark; 1983; 0/P; *****
Int/Tac/1-4
An all-time computer classic, this
was one of the only games ever devised
that was playable and entertaining for
four humans. Economics made fun! A
semi-space game of real estate, market
economics (auction) and production, it
still holds up well after all these years
and, by itself, provides justification for
holding onto the 8-bit Atari.
OGRE
(A/C/Ap/Am/ST/M/I; #36) Origin;
Steve Jackson and Steve Meuse; 1987;
0/P; ***
Int/Tac/1-2
Based on the MetaGaming
boardgame, this is a faithful rendition
of futuristic tank warfare. However, its
inability to design or modify the Ogre
tank and its graphics in today's market
condemn this product to "shelf-dust."
OMEGA
(C/Ap/ST/M/I; #64,65) Origin; Stuart
Marks; 1989; $49.95; **
Adv/Tac/ 1
Programmers love this "simulation."
Design-your-own tank and program it
in quasi-computerese to survive the
combat environment. If "Androids
Dream of Electric Sheep" and you personally "Dream of Assembly and C,"
you'll love it. Otherwise, it's all geek
to me.

MODEM WARS
(C/1; #56) Electronic Arts; Dan Bunten; 1988; 0/P; ***
Int/Tac/2; M

OVERLORD
(C/Am/ST/I; #82,83) Virgin; David
Perry and Nick Bruty; 1991; $49.95; *+
Adv/St/ 1
A game of strategic conquest with
well-done graphics and a rich and
broad texture. However, the program
does not adjust well to computer clock
speeds, and on a faster machine (16
MHz up), the computer opponent is
simply too quick. Great concept ruined
by technical oversight.

A quasi-football contest as if played
by the military "for keeps." Strong modem capabilities could not save it from
a rapid shelf life.

PLANETMASTER
(Ap; 4.3) Magnetic Harvest; xxx;
1984; 0/P; ***
Int/Op/1

Similar to Breach, very similar to
Breach, suspiciously similar to
Breach. Need one say more?

An early game of planetary ecology
in which the player must choose to save
six endangered species. A unique
simulation, but one which has grown
old ungracefully.

In the tradition of Reach for the Stars,
an obscure Macintosh-oriented company developed a game where space
was literally the next frontier. Replete
with horse opera cliches, this is an entertaining "beer and pretzels" version
of the more serious economic/military
space conquest school. Now, New
World Computing is making it both
accessible and networkable for the MSDOS world.

REACH FOR THE STARS
(C/Ap/II/M/I; #3.6,5.4,51,55,81) SSG;
Roger Keating & Ian Trout; 1983;
$45.00; *****
Adv/Str/1-4
Arguably the best science fiction
game ever released. Galactic conquest
through detailed exploration, economic and production modules coupled with planetary invasions and
space battles make for a product still
worth playing.
RENEGADE LEGION INTERCEPTOR
(I; #79) Strategic Simulations, Inc.;
Todd Mitchell Porter; 1990; $59.95;
***
Int/Tac/1-2

gated to slow disintegration on one's
shelf of "lost games."
RULES OF ENGAGEMENT
(Am/I; #84) Mindcraft; Maurice
Molyneaux; 1991; $59.95; ****
Adv/Op-St/1

STAR CLASH II
(I) Baen Publishing; Stephen Walton;
1983; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Op /1-2
A strategic conquest game where
players elect to attack various star systems and follow-through with the surface invasion.

Strategic starship combat in the
Breach world. The interface is detailed
and takes time to learn, although it is
logical; the gameplay is extensive.
Recommended, although many users
initially criticized this game for its lack
of a scenario builder.

STAR COMMAND
(I; #47) Strategic Simulations, Inc.;
Winston Douglas Wood; 1988; 0/P;
**+
Int/Tac/1

RULES OF ENGAGEMENT 2
Impressions;
(I)
xxx;
1993(?);
$69.95(?); N-R
Adv/Op-St/ 1

Science fiction role-playing, with
heavy emphasis on the role-playing aspects, but does feature some tactical
space combat.

ROADWAR EUROPA
(A/C/I) Strategic Simulations, Inc.;
Int/Tac/1
Jeffrey A. Johnson; 1987; 0/P; **+

An updated version, only this time
with a campaign builder included. This
should be an interesting product and
well worth a serious look.

STAR CONTROL
(I; #76,77) Accolade; Paul Reiche;
1990; xxx; ***+
Int/Tac/ 1

Gang warfare in a post-Holocaust
"cyberpunk" environment. Quite entertaining when originally released, but its
graphics have rendered it obsolescent.

SEUIS
(Ap; #2.6,3.1) Strategic Simulations,
Inc.; John Lyon; 1982; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Tac/ 1-2

ROADWAR 2000
(A/C/Ap/I; #32,49) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Jeffrey A. Johnson; 1986;
0/P; **+
Int/Tac/1

An acronym for "
Shot-EmUpInace,"idlvrsxtywhaeil
promises. Strategy and arcade elements, but of "collector" interest only.

Strategy takes a back seat to arcade
action in this graphically intense
ship-to-ship combat simulation. Despite (or
maybe because of) its lack of depth, it
remains an enjoyable challenge.

Ship-to-ship combat in space; sequential turns coupled with simultaneous execution make this product
reminiscent of early space simulations,
but it provides an enjoyable interlude.

An early "cyberpunk" simulation,
this was a hit when initially released. It
is quite dated today, although it can be
fun as a semi-"no brainer"
ROBOSPORT
(M/I) Maxis; Ed Killam; 1991; $59.95;
N-R
Int/Land/Tac/1-4; M
"Demetrius and the Gladiators" get
mechanized in an urban environment;
available under Windows (playable
over LANs, too!).
ROBOTWAR
(Ap; #1.1,2.2,2.4,2.5) Muse; Silas
Warner; 1981; 0/P; N-R
Adv/Tac/ 1
An early game, similar to Omega;
touted when released, it is now rele-

SECOND CONFLICT
(I; #88) jSoft; xxx; 1991; $49.99; ***+
Int/Str/1-10
A new approach to Reach for the
Stars-style space conquest, Second
Conflict runs under Windows and features a scenario editor to modify victory conditions, change the galaxy and
adapt computer opponents.
SPACE M*A *X
(I; #35) Final Frontier; T.L. Keller;
1987; 0/P; ***+
Adv/Tac/1
A very detailed space station construction simulator. It suffers from two
flaws: it is very educational and intellectually stimulating. Hey, I still like it!
SPACEWARD HO!
(I) New World; xxx; 1992; ?; N-R
Beg/Str/ 1-20

STAR CONTROL II
(I) Accolade; Paul Reiche; 1992(?);
xxx; N-R
Int/Tac/ 1
The sequel to Star Control, this one
combines the action combat sequences
of the original with the exploration and
storytelling of Star Flight I & II to
create what initially appears to be a
playable hybrid.
STAR FLEET I
(I; #5.4,5.5,30,33,37) Interstel; Trevor
Sorenson; 1985; 0/P; *****
Int/Tac/ I
Move from cadet to admiral in a superb rendition of the "main-frame" Star
Trek. All the bells and whistles one
could wish for; this reviewer still plays
it today, even though the graphics are
primitive.
STAR FLEET II
(1; #60,65) Interstel; Trevor Sorenson

and Mark Baldwin; 1989; $59.95; *
Int/Tac/1

UTOPIA
(I; #98) Konami; xxx; 1992; ?; ***+
I Int/Str/1

The stereotypical sequel—i.e. awful.
The product was sufficiently underdeveloped as to destroy the parent company. Released with major lock-up
bugs and inability to access certain elements of the program, Interstel promised to make it good. They sent out
revised disks, and never did get it to run
correctly. A game with all the aspects
of "Built by Committee."
STARFLEET ORION
(P) Automated Simulations; Jon Freeman and Jim Connelley; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Tac/2
The tactical space combat game published on a cassette tape in 1978, which
launched Automated Simulations
(Epyx).
STARSHIP COMMANDER
(Ap: #2.5) Voyager; Gilman Louie;
1982; 0/P; N-R
Int/Tac/ I
A starship simulator with individual
crew rankings and a more detailed
playing environment.
STAR KING
(I; #85) Spaceware; Walker Vanning;
1991; $39.95; N-R
Int/Tac/1-7; M
Battleship in space, only with more
problems and less play value.
STELLAR CONQUEST
(#86) Delphi; Andy Green; 1991; xxx;
N-R
Int/St/1-Multi; M
An on-line space conquest simulation.

Almost a Moonbase/PowerMonger
hybrid, Utopia will allow players to
create cities on several different planetary types and to face three or four
different alien opponents in trying to
defend those cities.
WAR OF THE WORLDS
(At) Task Force; Joseph Delinski;
1984; 0/P; *+
Int/Op/1

TRAILBLAZER
(Ap) Zeta Systems; xxx; 1982; 0/P;
N-R
Int/Econ/1-4

H.G. Wells' Martian invader novel
brought to the computer. Do yourself a
favor and curl Lip with the book instead.

The authorized computer version of
Metagaming' s Trailblazer board
game. A multi-player game of economic speculation in space.

WARP FACTOR
(Ap) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; xxx;
1983; 0/P; N-R
Int/Tac/ 1

TRUST & BETRAYAL
(M; #47) Mindscape; Chris Crawford;
1988; 0/P; N-R
Int/Tac/ 1

Cosmic Balance for Apple machines.

A Chris Crawford design which emphasized interpersonal relationships
and verbal discourse between aliens.
Innovative concepts marred by slow
and obtuse game play.
UFO
(I; #66) subLogic; Bruce Artwick &
Hugo Feugen; 1989; 0/P; **
Int/Tac/1
Tired of Flight Simulator? Then try
UFO — same mechanics, but a very
different sort of aircraft. Personally,
this reviewer found flying around looking for fuel to have the same appeal as
a gas queue during the Oil Embargo of
the 70s.

STELLAR CRUSADE
(Am/ST/1: #48,50) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Norman C. Koger, Jr.; 1988;
0/P; **
Adv/Str/1-2

UNIVERSE
(A; #4.3) Omnitrend; Thomas R. Carbone; 1984; 0/P; ***
Adv/Tac/ I

Mr. Koger's first professional design
effort was severely marred by a manual
which deleted eleven pages of necessary information and made the game an
effort to play. Even with the documentation, "Space Ayhatollah," a game of
religious jihad on an intergalactic
scale, was simply not fun.

A detailed simulation of space exploration and trading. Multi-faceted and
very deep, its playability suffered from
documentation which was hard to interpret as well as an unforgiving game
system. Build your own ship to specifications, but a wrong move can waste
hours of previous play. Still one of the
early classics.

STRATEGIC CONQUEST PLUS
(M; #35) PBI; Peter Merrill; 1987; 0/P;
N-R
Int/St/1

UNIVERSE 2
(I; #29) Omnitrend; William Leslie
III; 1985;0/P; **+
Adv/Tac/ I

A Risk-like game of conquest with
elements of Empire.

The sequel becomes a role-playing
model.

WHEN TWO WORLDS WAR
(I) Impressions; xxx; 1993(?); ?; N-R
Int/Str/1
Aside from the tongue-twisting title,
this is scheduled to be a detailed strategic simulation of planetary conquest
with emphasis on economics, R&D
and production.
WING COMMANDER
(I; #77,84) Origin; Chris Roberts;
$29.95; 1990; *****
Int/Tac/1
This program set new standards in
graphics and gameplay. Graphically
intense and luxurious, it places the
player in the role of a space combat
pilot in an intergalactic war. Although
the plot follows a "branching tree," the
richness of the entire package makes
this a "must-have."
WING COMMANDER II
(I) Origin; Chris Roberts; 1992;
$79.95; *****
Adv/Tac/ 1
Origin followed up its classic with a
sequel worthy of the name. The graphics are even better, but the main improvement has been the richness of the
plot and gameplay. These products
show off what current machines can do.
WORLDS AT WAR
(1; #70) RAW; John Almberg; 1990;
$39.95; N-R
Adv/Str/ 1-2
A newer and competing version of
Reach For The Stars, but ultimately
less successful than its ancestor.

Awards

CGW Salutes
The Games of
the Year
A

lthough

November may seem like a strange time to be
handing out the Game of the Year awards, the bizarre
timing accomplishes two major purposes. First, by
nominating games which have reached the market from one
Summer Consumer Electronics Show to another, these awards
focus on the entertainment software industry's sales year. If the
awards were presented on the basis of a calendar year, most
Christmas titles would be so new
we could not have any reader ratings to factor into our editorial
choices for the Game of the Year
awards. By waiting to announce
the nominations at Summer CES
and to award the winners during
the Fall, the readers have some
impact ( hut arc not the ultimate
factor) on our decisions.
Second, publishing these
awards during this time frame
provides a counterpoint to our upcoming Christmas Buying Guide
in the December issue. The Game
of the Year awards provide our
critical perspective on games
which have been on the market
for a while, while the buying guide provides the most up-do-date information we
can provide on upcoming Christmas releases that we think will be important.
This year's awards may also be somewhat controversial. Some of the winners
do not fit neatly into any particular category. The basic definitions which we try
to use for the categories (except for the
obvious category of Sports) can be found
in the CGW Glossary in this issue's editorial. However, this year's nominees
seemed to allude our artificial taxonomy
more than in any previous year. So, cue
the fanfares, release the balloons, uncork
the champagne and trot out the celebrity presenters. It's time for
the awards!
Action Game of the Year:
In general, action games are considered to be variants of the
running, jumping, shooting, die-a-lot games from the worlds of
coin-ops and video games. This year's best four titles add additional elements to the recipe. Gods, from Konami (by the Bitmap
Brothers), offers fast and furious arcade-style action with the
prolific number of "boss monsters" one would expect out of,
primarily, a cartridge game publisher, but also provides enough
exploration and puzzle-solving to raise it above the typical action
crowd. Wing Commander II from Origin (Chris Roberts, designer) built upon the sure-fire success of its predecessor, Wing
Commander (the CGW Overall Game of the Year in 1991).
Adding a speech module and greatly expanding the story elements from those in the earlier game, Wing Commander II:
Vengeance of the Kilrathi is an excellent product and points
toward a successful future for all the products in the Commander

series. Spectrum HoloByte's Super Tetris (Gilman Louie, Alexey Pajitnov, Vladmir Pokhilko, Joel Powers and Les Watts)
went back to the basics that made the original Tetris a major
success. The addition of new elements of strategy with bombs
and treasures made an already great game, even greater. Technically, Psygnosis' Lemmings (DMA Design) should have been
eligible for last year's awards, but a
technical glitch caused CGW to be
late in getting a review copy. With
the phenomenal success of both
Lemmings and its sister program, Oh,
No! More Lemmings!, we simply had
to nominate it for this year's award.
And the winner, according to the
several thousand tiny envelopes on
the podium, is Lemmings, the actionstrategy game that requires quickthinking, fast reflexes and overall
strategy to keep those cute little creatures alive on the computer screen.
In action, whimsey, challenge and
fun, Lemmings wins the prize.
Adventure Game
of the Year:
This is an interesting category due to the number of
quality titles released each
year. This year, Sierra's The
Legend of Robin Hood: Conquests of the Long Bow

(Christy Marx) garnered a
nomination because its attention to historical detail
(including the music) and
number of puzzles made it
the best graphic adventure
since Sierra moved to the full
"point and click" interface.
Access' Martian Memorandum deserves a nomination because of its extensive use of
multimedia effects in a floppy disk-based product. LucasArts
garnered two nominations. Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis
(Hal Barwood and Noah Falstein) rates a nomination because of
the excellent story, beautiful interweaving of art and music, and
its daring attempt to provide three playable game tracks.
LeChuck's Revenge: Monkey Island 2 (Ron Gilbert) rates high
marks for both its challenging puzzles and wonderful sense of
humor, along with a stunning visual presentation based on new
scanning technology.
The envelope, stuck together with some type of green, viscuous
substance, please. The winner of CGW's Adventure Game of the
Year is LeChuck's Revenge: Monkey Island 2.
Role-Playing Game of the Year:
In the category CRPG, three sequels and two original games
were nominated. Strategic Simulations, Inc.'s Eye of the Be-

Awards
holder 2 (Westwood Associates) deserves commendation for
following in the strong graphic and solid play-balance tradition
of the original. New World's Might and Magic III (Jon Van
Canegham) earns consideration for its new graphic look, use of
sound and challenging play. Origin's Ultima VII (Lord British)
pushed the technological envelope with its new AI routines for
party movement and NPC combat, as well as its object-oriented
approach to the game map. Of the two original titles, New
World's Planet's Edge (Eric Hyman and Jon Van Caneghem)
reveals new creativity in the types of worlds to be explored and
puzzles to be solved, while Origin's Ultima Underworld: The
Stygian Abyss (Paul Neurath and Blue Sky Software) broke new
ground with its 3-D perspective
and solid role-playing system.
The winner, according to my
simulated 3-D, polygon-filled envelope, is Ultima Underworld, the
game that's safer than being in a
real dungeon, but doesn't seem like
it.
Simulation of the Year:
This year's period of eligibility really raised the ante on simulations.
Virgin's Shuttle (Vektor Graphics) and Three-Sixty Pacific's
Megafortress both offer extremely
detailed simulations of unique aircraft. Neither are "load and shoot"style simulations, but require the
player to stretch and learn something about the world they are
modeling. Gunship 2000 from MicroProse brings the realism of small unit
tactics and updated graphics to a game
design which was already a Hall of
Fame member. LucasArts' Secret
Weapons of the Luftwaffe (Larry Holland) could have been nominated in the
wargame category as easily as the simulation category, since the strategic game
is so challenging. In addition, SWOTL
offers the most detailed flight models of
any of the LucasArts (nee Lucasfilm)
air combat series.
The most daring technological leap,
however, was probably that taken by
Spectrum HoloByte when they released Falcon 3.0. Though
some readers have suggested that we give Falcon 3.0 the award
for being "The Buggiest Game Ever," we have to recognize that
the number of bugs is correlative to the improvements attempted
in flight model, computer opponent routines, terrain resolution
and detail. The company is continuing to improve the product
and fix the glitches. In spite of the problems, the flight plans
sealed in the envelope reveal that the winner is: Falcon 3.0.
Sports Game of the Year:
Sports games come in such varied packages that we have four
widely diverse nominees, from the almost pure action of Accolade's Mike Ditka Ultimate Football (Gene Smith) and Electronic Arts' 4-D Boxing (Distinctive Software, Inc.) through the
hybrid Tony LaRussa Ultimate Baseball (Beyond Software, published by SSI) and on to the ful l statistics of a coaching simulation
like NFL Pro Football (Micro Sports, Inc., distributed by Interplay).
The cleat-marked envelope indicates that Tony LaRussa Ultimate Baseball is the winner. Its balanced blend of action and
statistics, along with constant improvements from the design
team, make it the winner in this year's league of contenders.

Strategy Game of the Year:
Strategy games are relatively easy to define (see the editorial),
but they are not always easy to distinguish from a popular subset
of strategy games, wargames. Some publishers have found that
they prefer to position their combat games as strategy games to
remove some of the stigma from the wargames category. Hence,
Sid Meier was reluctant to call Sid Meier's Civilization (MicroProse) a wargame and we are able to justify calling it a strategy
game because it offers city construction, diplomacy and economics in addition to warfare. Bruce Williams Zaccagnino's and
Thurston Searfoss had something of the same feeling with The
Lost Admiral, fearing that emphasis on the ship-to-ship combat
would cause gamers to overlook the basic strategic challenge.
Either game could have been placed in the wargames category
as easily as this one.
More traditionally within the
strategy game genre arc QQP's
Solitaire's Journey (Andrew Visscher and Bruce Williams Zaccagnino), which provides the
greatest number of solitaire variants in the context of two extremely
clever campaign games; Interplay's Omar Sharif on Bridge
(Chris Emsen), which presents an
all-around solid package for the
novice to intermediate bridge
player with enough interface refinements to make a complex game
simpler; and Electronic Arts'
Populous 2 (Bullfrog), which
creates new challenges for the
aficionado of 1990's Strategy
Game of the Year.
And the winner, if we can get
this wet envelope open is The
Lost Admiral, a strategy game
where the artificial opponent
gets stronger every time the
gamer returns to it.
Wargame of the Year:
A subset of strategy games,
wargames emphasize conflict
from a command perspective.
This year's nominee's range
from Gary Grigsby's Western
Front and Carrier Strike (both
published by SSI and both enhancements of earlier designs
by the prolific wargame designer) through Mark Baldwin's (and
Bruce Williams Zaccagnino's) The Perfect General (a beautifully play-balanced tactical game of WWII-style land combat
from QQP) and on to Dan Bunten's Global Conquest (a strategic
level planetary conquest game for 1-4 players, set in the far
future) from the MicroPlay label of MicroProse. In addition,
Three-Sixty Pacific has a bonafide contender in its first V is for
Victory release, Utah Beach.
The envelope is arriving by long-range artillery and the winner
is, The Perfect General.
The CGW Overall Game of the Year:
All of which leads us to the most prestigious award. It should
come as no surprise to anyone that CGW's Overall Game of the
Year is, the papyrus please, Sid Meier's Civilization. Sid Meier's
Civilization offers a fresh new style of game which combines
construction, diplomacy, economics and conflict into a fascinatingly addictive entertainment. The designer who has the most
titles in CGW's Hall of Fame has done it again.

Game Hints

Scorpion's Tale

A

h, there you are. Come in,

come in. My, you look a trifle
peaked today. Must be all that
heavy-duty adventuring you've been
indulging in lately. Take a seat by the
fire (chilly, these autumn evenings)
while Fred whips up a little something
for you. What you need is a vacation, a
trip to someplace calm and not so trying on the nerves. There's a gem of an
island I know about that would be perfec t ...
Legend of Kyrandia is Westwood
Studios' first pure adventure game.
Taking a breather from the usual
hack'n'slash associated with their Eye
Of The Beholder series, they have produced what might almost be called a
quiet fairy tale.
There are no dank dungeon passages
teeming with evil critters and there is
no party of heroes cutting a swath of
death and destruction as they ramble
down the tunnels toward their appointment with Foozle. Just Brandon, the
not-too-bright hero of the piece, bumbling his way to the big encounter with
Malcolm the demented jester (something along the lines of an early Joker
model).
Unfortunately, this rather lighthearted air is somewhat marred by
Westwood allowing a four-letter word
into the game. Its appearance is all the
more astonishing since Kyrandia is
certainly not an "adult" product by any
stretch of the imagination. Outside of
this one incident, the game is really
quite innocuous.
So why Westwood chose to shoot
themselves in the foot this way is a
mystery. In any event, parents of
younger children are advised that Bran-

don's demise at
the lava river
(should that
happen) is not a
sight for young
eyes to see.
That
said,
let's move on to the game itself. Brandon comes from the "young heir spirited away for his safety" tradition, and
has no idea for some time that he's
actually the rightful ruler of Kyrandia.
Considering some of his actions later
on, perhaps this is just as well.
Anyhow, Brandon returns to his cozy
treehouse one morning to find his
grandfather turned into a stone statue.
Right there, you know it isn't going to
be a good day. There's nothing that can
be done for the old boy, so just clean
the place out and get a move on (look
everywhere; you never know what you
might find).
After the big scene where the tree
tells Brandon that (of course) he and
only he can take on Malcolm and undo
all the nastiness the crazy jester is perpetrating, it's time to explore the environs. No auto-mapping here, so you'll
have to dig out the graph paper, but it's
all very straightforward stuff and you
should have no trouble. Naturally,
Brandon snarfs up anything he can get
his hot little hands on as he snoops
around.
Somewhere in all this Brandon will
come across Merith and his marble.
Have no fear, Brandon's gonna catch
up to him eventually, so if Merith
scoots out of sight, don't worry about
it. Better right now to find the chapel
and have a little chat with Brynn.

She mentions a mysterious amulet
and sends our hero out to pick a lavender flower. If you did all your mapping
before this, you may already have it, or
if not, you certainly know where to find
it. Whichever, Brynn gets her flower,
performs a little magic act on it (because a little magic is all that she and
most other people have these days,
courtesy of Malcolm), and hands Brandon a silver rose.
How touching! However, that rose
has a purpose, and it ought to be pretty
obvious what to do with it (especially
considering where you found the other
one, not to mention Merith and his marble, but I did anyway). So now, all
Brandon has to do is get across the
broken bridge. This is also not a problem, if Brandon has looked everywhere
and grabbed everything (note: Herman
does need a little time, so do this early).
First thing across the bridge that
Brandon comes to is the home of Darm
and his pal, Brandywine the dragon.
Darm is either extremely absentminded or senile; since the results are
about the same either way, it doesn't
much matter which.
Anyway, Darm needs something to
write with, and sends Brandon out for
a quill (this game could easily have
been subtitled "The Errands of Brandon"). This is your opportunity to do
some more mapping (I knew you'd be
thrilled).

Game Hints
By the way, since Brandon can only
hold so many items at once (like, ten),
it may be necessary to drop some stuff
now and then. Find a convenient location, and cache a few things there; they
won't disappear.

As Brandon wanders around the
landscape, he's likely to come across a
hole in the ground. Pretty deep hole. I
bet something goes into it. Maybe even
more than one something, or two somethings. Whatever, Brandon should
have the quill soon after. Then of
course he rushes back to Darm, who
writes up the magic scroll. Hang on to
that scroll, 'cause it's useful in more
than one place.
Now it's time for the Great Gem Collection (don't forget to re-visit the
stream). The jewels appear randomly
all over the place, so Brandon will just
have to go looking for them. There
wasn't any rhyme or reason I could
come up with for the solution; trial and
error is what works here. Save the
game, and keep trying gems until you
find the ones that work (the ones that
don't vanish in a spurt of fire).
During his wanderings, Brandon
probably came across an ominouslooking cave entrance. Trying to go
inside triggers a cameo appearance by
Malcolm himself. You'll likely be appalled at the way Brandon smartmouths the jester, especially as
Malcolm is juggling knives at the time
(well, I did warn you that Brandon
wasn't too swift).
However, you just have to sit there
and hope for the best, since the conversation is all automatic. Then, Malcolm
retreats into the cave and thoughtfully
freezes the entrance. Luckily, Brandon
has done all the right things up to now
(well, hasn't he?), and can shatter the
ice with no trouble — ending the scene
on a high note.
Now comes the fun part; getting
through the dark passages beyond.
Hate to tell ya, but some of Fred's

relatives are lurking around in there. If
Brandon sashays into a dark room
without light...well, let's not think
about it.
Actually, we' ll have to think about it.
Dying around here is inevitable. The
fireberry branches only last for
three rooms, so you'll just have
to guess which way to go next (to
reach the next bush) and sooner
or later (probably sooner) you're
going to guess wrong. Save a lot
as you map out the caves.
Remember that Brandon
should grab everything he comes
across, and look around (even
better, click around) carefully
when he gets to the outdoor room
( with the braziers on either side
of the door). Now, even with the
fireberries, there will be some
rooms Brandon can't get to because they are too far from a bush.
Leave those for now and worry about
finishing up the Pantheon of Moonlight. Hint: what you need isn't in the
caverns. Don't you wish I'd tell you?
Well, you just got your hints. Hope
Brandon found the gold coin.
Oh, getting back out (after that door
shuts when Brandon goes inside). Yes,
that could be a problem, but not if Brandon collected five items. It has to be
five. You'll find out why when you use
'em (like I said, our boy has rocks for
brains).
Anyway, once the Pantheon is fixed
up, Brandon can make it to the infamous lava river. A hot place, but if
Brandon doesn't lose his cool, getting
over is a snap. That was a lot of
trouble for a measly key, but it's
an important one, so don't lose
it. And now Brandon can scoot
across the chasm and finally get
out of here before he comes
down with claustrophobia.
Of course, the first thing that
happens after he leaves is that he
gets conked on the head by a
falling branch. That's not so bad,
really, since Zanthia finds him
and drags him into her hut. She's
the one who finally tells Brandon about his true identity, and
then sends him out to get some
magic water.
The fountain is only a few steps away
(do NOT pet the frog; or save the game
first!), but Malcolm makes another
guest appearance and walks off with
part of the fountain. Now Brandon has
to play hide'n' seek to find it, but that
isn't too hard (the magic scroll helps,
and this is the last time it's needed), and

besides, it gives you the chance to map
this area out.
So, after Brandon gets the flask filled
(feeling thirsty today?), naturally, Zanthia sends him out after something else
— this time blueberries. However,
when our boy gets back...no Zanthia.
Yup, Malcolm's up to his tricks again,
and it will be a while before you see her
again.
This means Brandon has to make the
potions himself. How wonderful. (Of
course, you've always wanted to dabble in Alchemy, right? Here's your
chance!) First, though, he should check
out the woods on the other side of the
trap door (more mapping), and as
usual, grab everything he can.
Now, about those potions: think primary colors. Think about two of the
same. Look over your inventory for
ideas. Then save and start experimenting. You'll want one potion of each of
two colors, and two potions of the third
color. What to do with them should be
obvious, if you've mapped around.
So, about that chalice floating in the
air that Brandon saw earlier during his
peregrinations: bet you already fooled
around there and tried to get it, and had
the little faun come by to grab it away
from you. Tch! Brandon must be getting slow in his old age (grin).
Anyway, our hero should be able to
get into the little treehouse now. Then
it's only a matter of finding out what to
trade for the chalice. It' 11 be right outside when Brandon leaves.
Speaking of leaving, it's just about

time to pay a visit to Malcolm (you've
been waiting for this moment, right?
hehe). Okay, find the launching point
and get going (you did experiment with
the potions to see their effects, of
course?). Take a souvenir before you
depart.
On the other side, the first thing Brandon finds is the grave of his parents.
Looks a bit neglected. Pity. We (or at

Game Hints
least Brandon) must do something
about this. A little token of filial respect
will suffice.
How about that! Momma Brandon
makes a special guest appearance.
Good old mom! And just in time, too.
Brandon will need her gift to get past
the gate (and those dragons on top of it).
So, Brandon's in the castle at last, and
naturally Malcolm is there to greet him.
Luckily the batty jester is in a good
mood, so Brandon can snoop around.
There's a lot of junk lying about, much
of it useless. The kitchen and library are
the only important rooms on the ground
floor.
Before Brandon goes traipsing
through any secret passages in the library, he should check out the books.
Hmmm, did you. hear a click? Bet that
means something. But, I'm not gonna
spell out the answer; Brandon will have
to do that on his own.
Luckily for Brandon, the secret passages are not full of Fred's pals, but it
does help to see in there. When Brandon gets to the right spot (which will be
obvious), a certain spell will help (this
is another of those trial and error jobs,
and one more is coming up).
Speaking of up, let's visit the next
floor. Hey, it's our old buddy Herman

(the guy who fixed the bridge, way
back when). Only he doesn't look too
good. In fact, he looks downright unhealthy and that saw is very sharp; I
don't recommend trying to just waltz
by it without some precautions.
When Brandon does get into the
room, he'll find a statue of someone
he's met before (now you know where
all those people disappeared to!).
What's important here are the bells.
Yep, this is the trial-and-error puzzle I
said was coming along. Brandon only
has to hit four of them, in order. Think
wrap-around here.
Okay, it's time to see what's behind
those doors at the back of the Great
Hall. Hmmm, the Royal Foyer, with a
locked door and three pillows. Now
what do you suppose could go on those
pillows? Oh yeah, I forgot, this is trial
and error, too, but nothing bad happens
if you make a mistake.
However, save the game here, be-

cause once the vault door opens, there's
no opportunity to save afterwards! All
right, now Brandon can fiddle around
to get the door open. Naturally, Malcolm pops in, but Brandon pops him a
good one on the jaw and strolls into the
Kyragem room (not smart, our hero,
but he has a good right!).

This is where it gets tricky. Malcolm
will recover soon and he won't be in a
good mood. Brandon has only a short
time to prepare himself or he'll end up
as the newest addition to Kyrandia's
first rock group. Reflect carefully on
what needs to be done (and it is best
done quickly). Whew! Malcolm does
himself in, the gem is repaired, everyone is restored, peace, light, and joy are
returned to the world, etc., etc., etc. (At
least until the next time you go adventuring).
And that's about it for now. In the
meantime, if you need help with an
adventure game, you can reach me in
the following ways:
On Delphi: stop by the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu).
On GEnie: visit the Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia to reach the
Games RT).
By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live
in the US):
Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station,
New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!

Industry News

Abstracts from the Journal
of Computer Game Design
CGW regularly prints abstracts from
The Journal of Computer Game Design
in order to stimulate thought concerning the philosophies behind and development of computer games. The last
article was in CGW #95. This article
covers JCGD Issue 5.6.

Making the PC
Speaker Speak
by Hal Martin

A

lthough

various high level languages allow programmers to
use functions such as sound()

and nosound() (used in C to enable the
program to play a single melodic line
of music on the IBM's internal
speaker), it is difficult to figure out how
to program speech and more complex
sounds on the internal speaker. Martin
offered some instructions on accomplishing the task.
He noted that the internal speaker can
only be turned off and on. There is no
amplifier feature to increase/decrease
sound gradually. When the higher level
languages use their particular function
to play a single melodic line, they are
directing the off and on switching of the

speaker through the ouput of Timer 2
in the PC's 8253 timer chip.
To create speech, however, Martin
observed that one must implement a
pulse width demodulation scheme. The
figure on this page shows a sine wave
as it appears both pulse modulated and
demodulated. Martin's approach allows the printed listing to support
either a SoundBlaster compatible
board or, of course, the internal
speaker.
The function in the listing can be
called from Microsoft C++ using the
prototype:
extern "C" void far VoiceTrk(char far
*Start, int Length);
where Start is a far pointer to the beginning of the array of samples and Length
is the number of samples.
Martin went on to explain how the
function sets up two loops and admits
that this is a crude implementation.
However, the full article should provide some idea of where programmers
can begin in working with the internal
speaker.

Programming
"M.C. Kids"
by Gregg Iz-Tavares and Dan Chang
(M. C. Kids)
Chang and Iz-Tavares shared some of
their discoveries in dealing with the
limited features of the 8-bit Nintendo
Entertainment System. Their Nintendo
game, M.C.Kids, is a platform game
where the Hamburglar from the MacDonald's commercials has stolen
Ronald MacDonald's magic bag and
the player (as either Mick or Mack) has
to retrieve the bag before dire consequences set in. The game offers over 40
playable levels and uses 28 different
creatures, 16 different objects and 27
varieties of platform.
The article had very useful information on setting up tilesets for platform
games. The designers observed that
each tile type has seven attribute bytes
to define it. Of those, the first four

Industry News
define which characters to put in the
screen memory for each corner of the
tile; the fifth byte defines which colorset the tile uses; the sixth specifies
the type of tile it is (e.g. 0 = Sky, 1 =
Solid, etc.); and the seventh records
any transformation characteristic (e.g.
will ice turn to water when stepped
on?).
In addition, each tile has five collision routines ( a later article is expected
to explain these more fully), two contour tables and various flags like
AT_BEHIND (which enables an object's sprites to be displayed behind the
tile) and AT_ABOVE (which allows
for tiles with height (like hill tiles) to be
placed atop a given tile).
Each tileset may contain up to 64
characters and, at most, 64 tiles. Further, tilesets can use no more than four
colorsets, since the NES can only display four character palettes. Finally,
each level in the game may consist of
up to four different tilesets. Here is an
example:
In this example, the tile at position 0,0
in the map is retrieved. It is tile 4.
Looking into the tables, one finds the
four characters that make up tile 4 and
places them in their proper positions to
create a 1 Up block (in M.C.Kids, this
creates an extra life for the player).

Note that the tile uses colorset 1 and is
of type X (= extra life).
The article also explained how to animate shapes by using sprites and noted
that the "hot spot" for most videogame
shapes is usually the bottom center
pixel.

Chris Crawford closed out the issue
with an article based on his speech at
the Computer Game Developers Conference. Here are the five basic lessons
which Chris believes he learned from
designing, producing and developing
Patton Strikes Back.
Lesson 1: Start with a clear mission

Lessons from "Patton
Strikes Back"
by Chris Crawford (Balance of
Power, Patton Strikes Back)

statement.
Crawford states that he knew exactly
what he wanted to do with the design
from the very beginning. This simplified the difficult choices in the design
trade-off process so that Chris didn't
have to decide which feature/option
was better. Instead, he merely had to
decide which design decision met the
mission statement.
Lesson 2: From Miss Goody TwoShoes to Hairy Hacker

There is always a tension between
clear, commented and well-structured
code and those quick and dirty hacks
that help a programmer/designer finish
the game. Chris suggests that when one
is working in the long-term (and especially when one might need that same
routine again some day), one should
strive for clean, structured, commented
code. During crunch time, there is always the chance to cut corners and get
the product out the door.
Lesson 3: Don't be seduced by the
cleverness of your own ideas.

If a great idea makes it almost impossible to get a marketable conversion out
the door, don't sell yourself short by
forcing Macintosh design decisions
into an IBM world.
Lesson 4: Bake the cake first, then
add the icing.

Publishers like glitz. Designers like
games. Crawford suggests that designers create the game with the features
they want in it and let the software
publisher's producers and marketing
experts determine what kind of "icing"
to put on the "cake."
Lesson 5: There ain't no rest of us.

Crawford attempted to circumvent
the wargame aficionados with Patton
Strikes Back and reach the "rest of us."
It didn't sell. He implies that fighting
the aficionados is like fighting stock
market momentum. Without the support of the hardcore, one cannot make
money on a game.

Humor

by Allen Greenberg

riting about a computer game
program is comparable to performing delicate brain surgery
while tap dancing — it demands skill,
knowledge and a willingness to be entertaining. I don't imagine that it's easy for an
outsider to fully understand the fondness
we have for this hobby, yet that has never
stopped me from attempting to explain to
someone who is both foolish and polite
enough to ask me just what it is that I do in
my spare time.
Years ago, I worked alongside a friend
named Miguel who had come over to the
United States from Ecuador. "Do you have
one of those?" Miguel once asked, pointing
to a copy of Byte, through which I had been
browsing during lunch.
"No," I answered, taking the question far
too technically. "I have an Amiga, Miguel.
An Amiga."
Miguel's expression became very serious
as he considered the literal translation of
my statement. "Yo comprendo. Don't
worry, I will be muy discreet." Later, I
invested in a IBM clone — just to be safe.
My two children, Amy and Charles, have
been an unending source of pride and delight for me. Yet, there remains what I
might have once called a "generation gap"
when it comes to "daddy's favorite hobby."
"I don't want to do my homework," complains Amy, age 9. "Why can't I do what
daddy's doing?"
I am fully entrenched in my latest assignment, and barely manage to call on my
reserve of fatherly wisdom without breaking my concentration. "Because, sweetheart...**FIRE!**...we all have a job to
do. Daddy has to finish
this...**YES !**... game so he can write
about it for his magazine. Your job is to
finish your... **UGH !**... math problems
and study for your spelling test. **ALL
RIGHT!** Do you understand, love?"
Amy is a very expressive girl, but she
does as she is told. "Talk about your mixed
up values..." I hear her mutter as she retreats
to her room. "I'm writing another letter to
Dan Quayle."
It becomes clear to me that my enthusiasm for the subject matter of my writing
will never be shared by someone unacquainted with computers. Many "mom &
pop" computer hobby stores, where a collection of interested listeners may have
once been found, have now ceased to operate due to an overly competitive marketplace or the devastating effects of software
piracy. Yet, many malls and shopping centers may boast of having a software store,
and it is to one of these which I turn. Per-

W

haps, I speculate, the manager would set up
a small chair and table for me, with the
words "this reviewer" tastefully displayed.
Rather than disturb the staff, I quickly
approach one child whose curious eyes
have become fixed on a copy of Computer
Gaming World. At his request, I happily
sign a copy of the magazine which I am then
forced to purchase. As it turns out, the tyke
really didn't want a magazine "some guy
just wrote all over." He also admits to not
actually having any money with him and
was certainly not supposed to have talked
to a stranger in the first place.
My first attempt to earn the trust of a
feflow grown-up produces different results.
To one attractive woman looking for a recommendation I quickly hand a copy of
Civilization. "Can you balance your checkbook with this? I'm looking for a program
to balance my checkbook." Only slightly
disappointed, I replace Civilization with a
copy of my favorite home-accounting
package.
"Is this any good?" she demands. "Who
uses it?"
"I use it."
"Is that all? Don't you know anyone else
who uses it?"
"The entire United States House of Representatives," I assert, wondering if she will
accept the good-natured humor of my reply. Sadly, she does not.
My next conversation is with an experienced computer game player, in whom 1 am
sure I will discover an intellect as keen as
my own. "Have you ever gotten to first base
with Princess Rosella?" he blurts. "Do you
know Lord British? Tell me about Lord
British!"
"Well, Lord British...sure I know Lord
British. Lord — only his best friends get to
call him 'Lord' — he's very...young."
"How young?"
"He's so young...did you know that Ultima II had to be delayed because of a bad
case of diaper rash?" I earn my first laugh
of the day, but the conversation continues.
"What about Scorpia? Tell me about
him."
"Her," I correct. "Scorpia is a woman."
"Did you ever meet him?"
"Her," I patiently insist. "No, I've never
met Scorpia. No one has ever met Scorpia."
"Then what makes you think that he's a
her, when no one has ever met him?"
"Her. Because she...says so."

"Investigative reporting," muses my fellow hobbyist, "Nothing like it in the world."
My attention is abruptly caught by an
argument which suddenly erupts nearby. A
young adolescent is petitioning his parents
to buy him the package containing Ultimas
IV, V and VI, recently released by Origin.
The remarks being made by the parents
clearly indicate that they are imagining this
program to be some very unsophisticated
arcade game, and not at all the worthy
material for which their child is whining. I
cannot help but offer my advice.
"I understand your concerns," I tell them.
"I' m a parent myself. This game isn't at all
like what you're imagining! Sure, there's
some fighting, but only in the name of
virtue. What is far more important is that
your offspring will have the chance to examine a society's values, as well as how
they consider one type of virtue in relation
to another; Compassion over Valor, Honor
over Sacrifice, Justice over..."
"It's Sacrifice over Honor!"
I whirl around to see that two small figures have returned for me, their mouths
busily attacking mounds of ice-cream. "He
always gets that one wrong!" exclaims my
daughter, in between mouthfuls.
"It's not like he doesn't have the hint
book!" responds her five-year-old brother.
"HINT BOOK'?" comes the sudden gasp
from the parents behind me. At once, the
already quiet store becomes completely
mute. An elderly woman scowls at me and
turns away. Employees, one by one, return
to their assigned tasks without comment. A
dog growls at me. The disheartened adolescent, realizing that he will have to state his
case to his parents some other day, drifts off
into the shadows of the Nintendo department.
I turn to my children and for just a moment they pause in their feasting. This is no
longer that good-natured game player they
face — this is DADDY whose anger they
have invoked.
Quickly, small hands are raised to me,
palms forward, as tiny fingers strain to
separate. "Live Long And Prosper daddy."
I sigh. They know all the right buttons.
At home, I wonder if I have truly emerged
from the flames of consumer hell in order
to become a better reviewer. Perhaps I
should at least phone CGW and explain to
them that I've been suffering from a rare
software virus for the last few weeks.
Naaaah!
Within a week, a package is delivered to
my home from Anaheim, California. In the
package is some new software release for
review, along with a one-word message
written in Johnny Wilson's familiar scrawl,
"Enjoy." Reflecting on my experience, I
begin to grin a bit, (or "(g)" as we are fond
of saying on the bulletin boards) despite the
risk of damage to my thawing facial musculature. Of course I'll "Enjoy!" Why else
would I be doing this?

Review

Never Dies (He just reboots.)
by David M. Wilson
TITLE:

Guy Spy and The Crystals of
Armageddon
SYSTEMS:
MS-DOS, Amiga, C64/128,
Mac, Atari
PRICE:
$49.95
VERSION REVIEWED: Amiga
PROTECTION:
Non-Repro Code Sheet
PUBLISHER: Readysoft Inc.
Richmond Hill
Ontario, Canada

So it is Guy Spy who is elected to
locate the infamous Baron Von Max, a
villainous lout who has already ordered
the termination of the super agent's
life. As the story begins, Von Max is
already in the process of assembling a
Doomsday Tower, a weapon that
makes nuclear weapons seem like pea
shooters, and the Baron's men are in
the process of gathering energizing
crystals which will provide the necessary energy to make the tower fully
operational.
That is the basic plot of ReadySoft
Incorporated's Guy Spy and the Crystals of Armageddon. The player, as
Guy Spy, must overcome a multitude
of obstacles between himself and the
maniacal Baron Von Max in order to
save the world from certain destruction. The story is less than carefully
crafted cliffhanger material. Fortunately, the game program neither
stands nor falls based on the pulp style
plot.

W

hen General Atterman suggests using his top agent on
a crucial mission, Admiral
Pierce thinks it's a joke. A great percentage of President Truman's military
advisors and their aides agree with the
cynical Admiral. After all, it must be
somewhat difficult to take an agent
named "Guy Spy" too seriously. President Truman disregards the humor surrounding the agent's name. His desire
is to see the most effective operative
assigned to the mission.

Smooth-scrolling animation (remember that this game is from the creators of Dragon's Lair) gives the player
the feeling of participating as the lead
part in a Saturday Morning cartoon.
The graphics are beautiful, if in some
scenes a bit gory. The soundtrack is
worth an honorable mention, even if it
is a bit too short so it becomes annoying
through its repetition.
There are 13 exciting game scenes
and Guy has a different goal with each
scene change. So, Guy Spy discovers
himself in more than just a
shot-emuparcdg,hfinsmela

shoot-em-up that is sprinkled with a
variety of animated scenarios.

Subway To Espionage
Warning: This section of the review
offers a blow-by-blow summary of the
action sequences. Readers who wish to
maintain elements of surprise when
playing the game may wish to skip to
the "I vs. Spy" section.
The first scene is an ambush inside a
subway station. Guy is ambushed on
the platform by Von Max's henchmen.
It is basically a shoot and dodge scene.
The trains rushing through the station
make this task more difficult as they
block Guy's shots. The trains also have
a saving grace, as they also provide
cover for our operative.
Scene two was my personal favorite.
Guy jumps in a mountain gondola car
and is ambushed again. Guy must leap
out from behind cover to shoot his attackers and then leap back behind
cover to avoid being shot. To make
matters more difficult, his enemies also
have sticks of dynamite which they will
light and attempt to throw. The player's
point of view in this scene is excellent
and easily allows for the suspension of
disbelief.
I hate to even mention the awful
scene in Olga's cabin. Olga is that fat
woman people are always waiting to
hear sing. Guy finds himself cornered
in her cabin and, since Guy will not
bring himself to strike a woman and
Olga doesn't mind slapping our hero
around like a rag doll, Guy might be

Review
better off signing up for Chivalry
Anonymous rather than going through
the concatenations required to get
through this sequence. Guy works hard
just to be able to maneuver around
Olga, until he can reach the safety of
the cabin door. Once this is accomplished this super agent runs off like a
puppy with his tail between his legs.
Even on the simplest level, this task
seemed next to impossible. Olga can
move rather quickly for such a large
woman.
Leaving the cabin, Guy grabs a pair
of skis and begins to ski down the side
of the mountain. The ski run he has
chosen is not exactly a "bunny slope."
Further, his movements are hampered
by the Baron's henchmen riding in the
ski lift overhead. These henchman, it
seems, are having a blast (pun
intended) by tossing sticks of
dynamite directly in Guy's
path.
Guy leaves the snowy cold
and moves to Egypt where he
pursues Von Max into a pyramid. The pyramid is a complex maze which will require
one of two things for the
player to complete: either a
gift for cartography or an outpouring of blessings from
Lady Luck. The maze is full
of traps such as pits and slamming doors. A giant spider
and (good thing the player is
Guy Spy and not some other
heroic explorer of ruins™) a
vicious snake are the secondary "villains" to be evaded in this sequence.
In one chamber of the maze, though,
Guy confronts the primary villain, an
evil being named Ramah-kul. Ramah
waves his arms and sends flashing energy bolts in Guy's general direction.
Fortunately, for the forces of truth, justice and victory in the Cold War, Guy
is able to snatch up a nearby sword and
throw it at Ramah. The Sword visibly
damages Ramah, so Guy continues repeating this action while dodging
Ramah's energy bolts until the evil being is destroyed.
In another chamber of the maze, the
super agent encounters a behemoth
mummy. Using a sword, Guy cuts the
mummy to ribbons (or is that bandages?). Then, just as he is prepared to
exit the maze, Guy is once again called
upon to demonstrate his expertise (or
lack thereof) with a sword. He is rushed
by a group of scimitar-wielding bedouins and, bad news for our courageous

cold warrior, the noise of the battle
draws more and more of them.
If Guy should be skilled enough to
defeat the swordsmen, the next leg of
his journey takes him to Kenya. He
meets his contact, a real babe (real cold
warriors are sexist and proud of it)!
After she gives him the message, she
exits with a flirtatious wink. Unfortunately, before Guy can follow her and
succomb to her feminine wiles (real
cold warriors are...well...I guess
there's no need restating the obvious),
she is abducted and Guy is left to duke
it out with a tough goon. This fistfight,
for true action gamers everywhere, is
cleverly designed and very enjoyable.
Guy's message leads him to Peru. As
he makes his way over a log that has

fallen across a gorge, he is ambushed
by Peruvian Indians in the employ of
Von Max. Guy takes up a stick and uses
it as a quarter-staff to battle these natives in a scene that is reminiscent of
Robin Hood's meeting with Little
John.
The problems with the Indians are not
over yet. Guy travels across a clearing
in the jungle while avoiding thrown
spears and pits filled with sharpened
stakes. Guy makes a bow and arrow
that he can use to defend himself, but
many will find it so difficult to use that
it is much simpler just to run and avoid
the spears and pits (in the tradition of
another well-known adventurer™ ).
Eventually, Guy locates the Doomsday Tower inside an ancient Incan temple. Of course, it is not unguarded. In
addition to dealing with the guards, the
agent must also avoid the tower's automated laser cannon. He leaps and rolls
across the screen in order to dodge the
laser. He picks off the guards one by
one.

Finally, he is inside the tower and at
last confronts the infamous Von Max.
The evil baron holds a knife poised at
the throat of Guy's Kenyan contact.
Naturally, like most pulp heroes, Guy
does a really stupid thing. He tosses
aside his weapon. Von Max sneers and
closes on Guy, intent on cutting him to
pieces with the knife. This scene can be
quite grisly should guy not find a way
of winning the final battle with Von
Max.

I vs. Spy (Critical Notes)
Despite the pleasure I derived from
the game, 1 must note a few minor
details. The manual was full of several
minor spelling errors. The pulp-like
fiction therein was long and drawn out.
Indeed, it was overall unnecessary to get the player into
the fiction of the game and
the game would have been
much more enjoyable if the
set-up plot would have unfolded more on the screen
and less in the manual. Despite these minor flaws,
however, the manual was
fairly well-organized and did
a viable job of explaining the
various goals and controls
for each individual scene in
an easy-to-follow format.
Although the game boasts
three levels, I rather doubt
that many players would
play on the two harder levels.
I tried, although I failed miserably. ReadySoft's customer support
told me that they had a difficult time
playing the two higher levels. Nevertheless, I found the game quite satisfying on the simplest level.
Many will complain about the save
game option, however. It only allows
for saving one game per disk. If a
player decided to save on each level,
therefore, it would require 13 different
disks. For an arcade game, where "save
games" are rare rather than standard,
this seems acceptable. Players should
be forewarned, however.
In short, this game does a great job of
providing thrills for the average arcade
player. The animation is eye-catching
and the battles offer a sufficient amount
of variety. Guy Spy is not the sort of
game I would take down from the shelf
again and again, but should guests arrive, I would have a great package to
demonstrate the wonders of computer
animation, sound, and arcade fun in an
easy-to-learn game.

Edutainment

Why Edutainment Doesn't Make It In A
Videogame World
by Sara Reeder

A

ll

I want is a reasonable explanation. And I know I'm not the
only one. As I write this, conscientious parents across our great land are
watching in quiet desperation as their
kids spend yet another golden summer
afternoon inside, glued to the Nintendo
deck.
It's been like that for about seven years
now. From where we sit, reports of the
video game market's imminent demise
appear to be highly exaggerated. Here
we've got the best-selling piece of hardware in computer history — and the one
most closely identified with children.
We've heard six years' worth of concerned talk about the possible negative
effects of video games. (The only thing
that generates more bad press than video
games is the TV set itself.) And
as a counterpoint, we keep
reading articles by people like
me extolling the promise and
wonder of the new generation
of kids' software, and the immense potential of computers
as a learning medium. It
doesn't add up. According to
the basic theories of market dynamics, these factors should
naturally bring about a large,
sudden explosion of great
video game software that kids
enjoy, and parents can live
with. In the more responsive
disk-based market, these products would have started appearing within a year of the first
wave of bad press. (Remember
the Surgeon General's 1987 report on the life-threatening
dangers
"Nintendo
of
Thumb?") But it didn't happen then. In
fact, it's just barely started to happen
now. And it makes me wonder...am I just
paranoid, or is this an insidious Japanese
plot to create a generation of dazed,
twitchy Americans with great eye-hand
coordination? My curiosity about this led
me to over a dozen discussions with developers, publishers, parents, and other
interested parties. While the video game
industry has never been held up as the
paragon among free markets, it became
increasingly clear that if you were designing a system specifically to discourage
innovation of any kind, you could hardly
do better than the one that puts
videogames in your kids' hands. It seems
that every stage in the development, distribution, and retailing of game carts favors those who don't deviate from the
tried-and-true formula of fighting, driv-

ing, and shooting games. Let's take a look
around, starting at the top.

The Developers
Imagine that you're a computer game
developer in 1985. It's morning in America, Steve Jobs is about to get booted out
of Apple, and, with EGA color on the
horizon, computer technology is improving at warp speed. A popular Japanese
coin-op arcade company comes out with
an antediluvian 8-bit throwback of a cartridge machine for the home. It reminds
you eerily of the old Atari deck, now
being used as a bookend in your kid
brother's room. The games are flat and
cartoon-like. You can't save data. The
company holds developers to about a

on producing carts for their machines. If
someone wants to produce a cart, they
have to give the giants a lot of money to
make it for them. This means they see less
profit on each cartridge and have to put
their bets on being able to sell a higher
volume. Unfortunately, educationallyoriented titles don't generate that kind of
volume, and, to make it worse, they usually sell for less than regular games. Besides, putting the "edutainment" stamp on
any entertainment product is the kiss of
death. It's a dollars-and-cents decision, in
which breaking from the standard formula just doesn't pay. It's a lot different
with your disk-based product line. Over
the years, you've watched that market
mature, moving through arcade games to
deep, sophisticated fantasy role-playing
games and complex simulations of all kinds. On the cart
side, everything's still focused
on arcade games, and there
aren't any real pressures to
change that. (Until recently.
More about that later.)

The
Manufacturers

hundred different design restrictions designed to squelch any possible creative
impulse. The company proceeds to sell
millions of units and make billions of
dollars, all the while selling variants of
the same fighting, shooting and driving
games to the same mesmerized group of
7-to-14-year-old boys. Occasionally,
someone will try something different: a
sports game, or a kids' game. If there's a
good license involved, like Sesame Street
or Barbie, they may do OK, although the
company will only give them tentative,
halfhearted support.

The Publishers
As a major computer game publisher,
you maintain an uneasy relationship with
Nintendo and Sega, mainly because the
two videogame giants hold the monopoly

There are only two that matter: Nintendo and Sega. As the
undisputed leader of the cartridge market, Nintendo has
been very careful to maintain
an iron grip on everything that
goes through its channel.
Every game shipped under a
Nintendo license is evaluated
according to the company's
40-point scoring system and
subjected to an intensive technical review. High-scoring products get
the full benefit of Nintendo's formidable
marketing resources. A lower score
means a smaller commitment. Once Nintendo of America approves the product,
the entire evaluation is repeated again in
Japan. Given the company's eagerness to
put the burden of risk on others, they're
content to leave the exploring to the
above-mentioned pioneers. This caution
extends to new game topics, new technologies and new audiences. The few
forays into young children's software
have relied on blockbuster licenses and,
even the Sesame Street and Barbie games
were not noted for their innovation. Furthermore, Nintendo is notoriously inflexible when it comes to negotiating
manufacturing prices for its carts: as one
publisher put it, "They don't show any

Edutainment
favoritism
everybody has to pay
through the nose equally."
Sega is slightly better. To compete with
Nintendo, they've had to be more innovative and more attractive to adults, girls
and young kids — those on the fringes of
Nintendo's core market. But they still
maintain a tight grip on product quality
and content, and extract such high prices
for cart manufacture that the fledgling
edutainment industry is effectively shut
out.

The Retailers
As a retailer, you live and die by turnover. Over on aisle 3, where the "real"
computer games are, you might keep the
same game in stock for, oh, a year or so.
At the national level, your chain might
sell upwards of 40,000 copies, if it turns
into a hit.
On aisle 4, a high-quality kids' learning
product usually sells slowly but steadily
over a couple of years before you replace
it with something else. But on aisles 1 and
2, where the videogames are, the stuff just
flies off the shelves. Nationally,
an average game cart might sell
half a million units in three
months flat, then give up its
shelf slot to a successor that
will perform equally well. It's a
jungle out there—one in which
Reader Rabbit is going to get
chewed to pieces by Sonic the
Hedgehog. If you had your
way, you'd convert the whole
store to videogames.

gic skills. With the number of machines
out there, it would create a remarkable
change in the whole next generation of
American kids."
A spokeswoman for another large publisher with hopes of enriching the range
of kids' offerings on Nintendo said emphatically, "We are absolutely, positively
in the position of educating parents about
the potential of the cart machines." Both
felt that tremendous opportunities have
been missed because of the fatal perception of video games as toys, and that
teachers and parents need to take the lead
in making the machines an integrated part
of the learning experience, both at home
and at school.

The Kids
The bottom line on videogames is that
kids love 'em. The interfaces (designed
for the pre- and semi-literate) are incredibly easy to use. The content and pace
matches the interest and physical drive of
young boys. They're full of emotion and
catharsis. And kids buy'em. When a par-

The Parents
Ever since Atari created the
cart market over a decade ago,
video game machines have
been perceived by Responsible
Adults (i.e. parents, grandparents and teachers) strictly as a
kids' toy, with no worthwhile
content, no educational value, and (beyond the occasional lament over undone
homework and wasted Saturdays) no
need to take them seriously. Besides, the
hardware is an order of magnitude
cheaper than true computers. Almost any
family can afford one; even families with
a tricked-out PC in the study bought
them, hoping the thing would keep the
kids out of Dad's spreadsheets and
Mom's online accounts. Because cart
decks have been considered kids' toys
from the very start, it didn't really occur
to parents that there could be anything
educational about them.
Until very recently, there haven't been
many factions in the industry inclined to
change that perception, which is making
it really rough for the few companies
who'd like to try. "Nintendo is so incredibly absorbing," sighed a marketer at a
major publishing company. "Forget
about straight education. It would be
great if we could just put that focus to
work on developing memory and strate-

ent and kid go into a software store to buy
a kids' computer game, it's usually the
parent who holds the money and guides
the selection. When a parent and kid go
to buy a videogame, the kid usually tells
the parent exactly what he wants. Or the
kid comes in alone, with a pocket full of
allowance and birthday money.
Peer pressure is the biggest single factor in explaining the last seven years of
Nintendomania. I know quite a few game
developers (including cartridge game developers) whose kids have tens of thousands of dollars of state-of-the-art
computer equipment at hand, along with
easy access to the best kids' software on
the market. Given this embarrassment of
riches, many of these parents flatly refuse
to allow a videogame deck into the house
and their kids still come home pleading
for one because the neighbor kids on both
sides, three-quarters of the Cub Scout
troop, and everyone in the entire third
grade at school has them. No matter how
fast your 486 is, you still can't play Super

Mario XVII on it. The kids who don't
have access to videogames are as culturally isolated as the kids in our own generation whose parents refused to buy a
TV.

The Future
All is not lost in the gloom, however.
Some small but strong glimmers of hope
are beginning to shine through.
Market Saturation — The core of the
video game market, those 7-to-14 yearold boys, has been completely saturated,
causing a deepening slump in the industry. Faced with a flattening market, developers, publishers and manufacturers
have a greater incentive to reach outside
that core to adults, girls, and younger
kids. Electronic Arts' EA Sports Network games were one early bid for an
older audience. In cahoots with Broderbund, they're following up this year with
two Carmen Sandiego games on the Sega
Genesis and already have a SNES version.
The Age of the 16-Bit Videogame
One publisher recently
pointed out at an industry
gathering that, disk-based
computer games are the computer equivalent of art films.
Although they appeal to a
much smaller audience than
mass-market movies and they
won't ever make billions,
they're the crucial testing
ground on which almost all
the artistic and technological
breakthroughs are made;
breakthroughs that will have a
profound influence on the
next generation of mass market offerings. Unlike their
predecessors, the 16-bit SNES
and Genesis decks can handle
more complex games with
higher production values, enabling them to take better advantage of the advances made in the
"real" computer world. With SimCity,
Chessmaster, and a growing list of other
popular disk games appearing on SNES
and Genesis (and real disk drives purportedly on the horizon for these machines)
there's good reason to hope that the quality of video game offerings is about to
take a major leap.
The Boomer Factor — The force that's
driving the edutainment boom is also putting new pressure on the videogame industry. It's all those 30- and 40 something
parents who are demanding high-quality
experiences that they can share with their
kids. The evolutionary shift that carried
disk-based garners from 32K arcade
games to complex RPGs, sports games,
and simulations is beginning to cause
similar tremors in the videogame channel. While it might seem like deja vu
(didn't we just go through this ten years
ago?), it may mean that we will finally
get videogames that teach kids to do more
than twitch.

I

Electronic Arts: The Quest for the Ultimate Value

n the June issue, we reported on the two-for-one stock
split for holders of record (March 16, 1992) of Electronic Arts stock (NASDAQ:ERTS). On March 27th,
a person who owned 100 shares of ERTS (selling at a price
ca. $45) ended up owning 200 shares at approximately half
the original value per share. The hypothetical shareholder still
had the same dollar value worth of EA stock, but it represented
twice as many shares. So, theoretically, every dollar per share
which the "new" stock increased would mean $2.00, in terms
of the original investment.
The chart provided in the June issue was already "adjusted"
for the split and did not visually depict the split. This chart
shows a gap in mid-March which reflects the split activity.
Notice that, after the split, the stock drifted slightly downward
with the rest of the over the counter market, but moved up
solidly in July with continued solid earnings and announcement that the company had signed a multi-year global
licensing agreement with Sega. The new contract firmed EA's
very profitable relationship with Sega and guaranteed that EA
would produce software for the Sega CD-ROM drive for the
Genesis. This stock movement can be shown in the first wave
upward on the inset.
An equally impressive upward spike in share value occurs

during the most recent weeks depicted on the chart. EA's purchase of Origin Systems of Austin, TX firmed up the company's
need for a solid CRPG line (with Ultima VII and Ultima Underworld both selling impressively) and provided solid polygon-fill
technology (from the Commander series) to be used with new
platforms in the future.
Apparently, the market was impressed with the addition of a
$32 million dollar per year subsidiary. Note that the stock
jumped upward on the Thursday in which the actual announcement of the acquisition was made and continued upward
for two more days before consolidating with the rest of the
market and moving upward again. Now, the approximately
$4,500 ( I 00 shares at $45 per share) owned by our hypothetical
shareholder had increased to circa $6,600 (200 shares at $33 per
share), an appreciation of $2,100 total. If ERTS shares had not
split, the stock would have had to have appreciated to ca. $66
per share to get an equivalent return on investment. Therefore,
this issue's CGW Stock Watch charts present the value of a split
for a successful company that is continuing to seek further
growth. This is why investors often get excited about a stock split
from a growing company.

7

OF MAGAZINES AND MOTORWAYS

by Ken Brown
Sneak Previews are not designed to be review. They are feature articles
based on "works in progress" that CGW's editors have deemed worthy of
early coverage. These articles are not intended to provide the final work on
a product, since we expect to publish appropriate review coverage when the
game is finished.

F

ew events in man's evolution have wrought greater

impact than the opposable thumb, the automobile,
powered flight, microprocessors and Post-It notes.
How gratifying, then, that the
new Car & Driver "Ultimate
Fantasy Driving Game" incorporates three out of five,
given the advent of a joystick
to wrap one's thumb around
and drop the hammer on your
(presumably) warmed-over
microchip.
The very same chip, it
should be noted, that regulates fuel injection, now put
to good use driving sports
cars whose hallowed windows we'd never be privy to
smudge, let alone roll down
to roar down Monterey Raceway. This fact not having
been lost on the folks at Car
& Driver, has enabled Electronic Arts to create a new
"ultimate driving experience."
EA, whose oil-free garage has also engineered the benchmark racing simulation Indianapolis 500: The Simulation and
the more recent Mario Andretti's Racing Challenge, has
rolled out a smooth-running machine with the new Car &
Driver. The game offers the decided thrill of jumping into,
say, a Porsche 959, putting it on the pavement at, oh, Northern
California's Route I, jamming down the joystick and cavorting with three other 959s in a race along one of the country's
most spectacular coasts.
Never in the history of driving sims has there been such a
stable of sports cars to dimple one's digits: Corvette ZR1.
Eagle Talon TSi, Lamborghini Countach, '66 Shelby Cobra,

'57 Ferrari Testarossa, Lotus Esprit Turbo, Ferrari F-40,
Toyota MR2, Mercedes C11 IMSA ("1,000 Horses in a Small
Sweaty Box," says the sub-title) and the aforementioned
Porsche. That's enough
machina exotica to keep a
team of mechanics busy for
weeks, bankrupt all the members of one's family combined and power Rhode
Island.
Selecting one's dream machine is no more difficult than
opening the pages of Car &
Driver Magazine. Behind the
game's opening screen lies an
authentic-looking C&D table
of contents. Pick a car from
the index of feature cars,
choose a track, and it's time
to grab some gears.

Making Tracks
The tracks truly range from the ridiculous to the sublime,
with the exalted ones including the Monterey Raceway, California Route 1, New York Highway 97 and a very challenging
EA Speedway which, we'd guess, exists only on disk. The
mid-range courses include an oval speedway, a twisty Arkansas Route 7, and a parking lot cum Autocross Course. The
bottom end of the scale includes the Mahomet Dragstrip, the
Dobbs Raceway (allegedly founded by the J.R. "Bob" Dobbs
Subgenius Foundation), and the San Dimas Mall parking lot
(sans Waterloop, of course).
Every start is from a standing stop with a field of three
computer-controlled cars identical to the player's (unless one
opts to sideline them). In the "easy" mode, the AI cars seemed
like weekend warriors, frisky for a good race but not terribly

Sneak Preview
skilled. In fact, it doesn't seem to take
long before a member of the esteemed
competition is seen bouncing crosscountry atop the handsome polyfilled hillside.
The latter, of course, is exactly what
novice drivers do before getting with
the zen of the program's controls.
Rocketing down the straightaway on
the California coast, only to plunge
into the sea at a curve, isn't so refreshing after a couple dips. Our sneak
preview copy offered a "Return to
Road" command (Q), which proved
very useful in getting a feel for the
wheel.

Becoming a Big Wheel
In fact, an actual wheel was used to
test C&D, the Mouse Wheel (from
Colorado Spectrum, creators of the
Mouse Yoke) saddled to a mouse and
bolted to the desk top. The wheel
looked the part, but couldn't act the
role nearly as well as a CH Flight
Stick. The wheel exaggerates steering
input, making it very difficult to control acceleration. EA recommends using a joystick, which provides much
more controlled input than the mouse
or the arrow keys. Fortunately, this is
not the infamous DSI joystick routine
to be found in Mario Andretti's Racing Challenge or Bill Elliott's NASCAR Challenge. Ned Lerner has
managed to return control to the joystick user, rather than forcing one to
depend on the keyboard.
Driving feel in the game has a lot to
do with the chariot one chooses. Obviously accelerating in an Eagle Talon
TSi will not be as exhilerating as punching a Lamborghini.
Cornering improves dramatically with the Porsche and Italian
vehicles, as one would expect. One gets a sense of roll in some
of the vehicles when cornering, as well as a definite "bounce"
when cresting raised sections on the Monterey Raceway and
California coast.
Interestingly, cornering characteristics lean only towards
understeer, regardless of vehicle. Attempting doughnuts in
the San Dimas parking lot in the ZR1 yields only ploughed
front ends, not smashed doors or side panels. Okay, that won't
adversely affect the driving experience, but what might is the
disappointing lack of speed one should feel when vaulting up
the pavement at 100 mph or more. Judging by the slow pace
of road-side objects going by, you'd think that 70 mph readout
should be more like 30 mph. This adds to the sense that the
driver isn't going very fast, until he or she enters a corner.
Inertia then arrives with a vengeance.

Magazine Interface
Deep into the red on the "neato meter," however, is the unique interface
which offers an "article" plus layouts
and specifications for all the cars and
courses. One may easily peruse the
vehicles in the on-screen pages rather
than flipping through a manual. Real
C&D wheelmen make real C&Dtype urbane comments on real
sCtylepa&g.WDhn-drivsle
behind the wheel and chooses "dashboard visible" mode, he or she has a
realistic rendering of that vehicle's
interior (when was the last time you
sat in an F-40?). And the race review
mode (with several camera angles to
view from) shows the driver's run
from start to finish, no matter how
long the race took.
C&D gets high marks for its beautiful graphics, delicious choice of
cars, whimsical and varied tracks,
and engrossing simulation. Its level
of sophistication may not match Indianapolis 500, but neither does it require winning a number of races or
mastering delicate hand controls to
enjoy. A comparable, though dated
simulation, Test Drive III (1990),
looks like a child's 8-bit game after
driving C&D. TD3, after all, offers
only three different cars.

Checkered Flag
Finally, no driving game, no matter
how recent, can compare to the thrill
of driving the "corkscrew" at Monterey Raceway: cresting a small hill,
turning left to face what looks to be
a sheer drop-off, only to veer right
again and plunge down the hi II for another sharp left. The view
from the driver's seat is so low-profile one must use the road
markers to see the course. The best source of information for
the driver is the course map in the upper right hand corner.
The C&D writers will admonish the driver to gather "all the
information possible" in order to be more fluid and competitive, and they are certainly right.
Perhaps by paying more attention I wouldn't have plowed
head-on into a big rig on the Arkansas state route in a Lotus
Esprit Turbo. Being able to do such driving gymnastics,
crashing a Lotus and climbing into a Ferrari, is one of the
understated delights of this game.
So, since my request for a review copy of an Eagle Talon
has been met with steel-belted silence from Chrysler and I
lack the few hundred grand to pony up for a wedge of Modena
metal, I ll take Car & Driver any day.

Letters
Reynold Wong
Pacific Grove, CA
You are right, sir! The major difference between the early
SSI releases (1982 and 1983 respectively) and the current
Interlocking Game System is that the former linked two
spaceship combat systems while the latter moves between a
spaceship combat system (tactical space combat) and a manto-man combat system (boarding sequences).

Rational Harpoon Correction
Napoleon in the RAW
With regards to your review of Napoleon I, in the September
'92 issue of CGW, please note that the bug found by the
reviewer had already been discovered and was corrected
shortly after sending out the review copy. It was our mistake
not to have informed you earlier that this had occurred. We
also found a problem with printing out variables for use in a
miniatures boardgame,. This was corrected at the same time.
With the long lead times required for you to review games
in a timely manner, we can sometimes have a later version
available before your review is published. It is something we
will bear in mind for the future. Can I also say that the
philosophy of RAW Entertainment is that the crime is not
in releasing a title with a bug (as long as it is not catastrophic!),
but rather not admitting to it/fixing it when you find out it
exists. We produce titles that require sophisticated Al routines
to produce "human like" opponents and therefore, can expect
to have bugs of some sort in most of our titles. (Even though
we go to enormous lengths to try to weed them out.) However,
we will never ignore them! In this instance, we believe we
have lived up to our philosophy.
In closing, can I say that your magazine approaches your
reader in the same way we like to approach our customers.
That is, you treat them as adults and stimulate debate and
argument, where others just pander to the common denominator. Your review of Napoleon I was a testimony to the
above, and I accept it as an accurate rendition of the product
(sans bug!) and indeed, the philosophy behind it. That is, an
entertaining, lighterweight wargame designed for the beginner/intermediate wargamer who doesn't necessarily want to
play detailed wargames like Action Stations! every evening!
(Although some do!)
John J. Ingram
President, RAW Entertainment, Inc.
We continue to applaud RA W's efforts to expand the scope
of game subjects and to include such nice touches as the
miniatures set-up/resolution feature in Napoleon 1.

Balancing The Cosmos
In reference to your article in the "Industry News" concerning Omnitrend Software and the "Interlocking Game System"
printed in your August issue (#97), I would like to bring to
your attention that in 1982, SSI came out with what might be
the first interlocking games — Cosmic Balance and Cosmic
Balance II. Cosmic Balance handled the tactical combat and
ship designs, while the latter handled the strategic combat/world conquering. Both games were designed to be played
as stand-alones or could be linked together to form a very
involving and complex gaming system. In very early issues,
Computer Gaming World held ship designing contests, thus
enabling readers to pit their custom-designed ships against
others for fame and fortune (like subscriptions to your magazine). I am very fond of these early SSI releases and would
like to see them receiving their just mention.

In response to the article about Harpoon Battle Set 3 in CGW
#94, I would like to note that the unrealistic emphasis (in all
Harpoon products and not just Battle Set 3) upon air platforms
which can carry long range missiles is a fundamental problem.
Tim Carter, missed an excellent opportunity to communicate
the "Why?" behind this problem to Three-Sixty.
The aforementioned problem relates to the air intercept AI.
First, the computer does not scramble enough planes to deal
with the threats which it faces. If large numbers of missiles/bombers are approaching an air base and the current
patrols cannot eliminate them, the choice is to scramble
additional aircraft or allow the base and the grounded aircraft
to be destroyed. Unfortunately, the computer always seems to
choose the latter. Second, the computer likes to launch its
missiles in large numbers at extreme range. All that is required
of the player is to direct the targeted air-group away from the
missiles and increase speed to afterburner and they will outrun
the effective radius of the missiles, making the computer's
now missile-less interceptors useless. Third, the computer
seems to be confused as to what it should do with its interceptors after they have launched their missiles. The planes often
simply loiter weaponless, waiting for a missile to remove
them as a future threat.
To conclude, I just want to say that this letter is not meant
as a condemnation of the Harpoon system. It is just that
aircraft are a large part of any modern military simulation and,
until the computer's management of air resources is improved, Harpoon is functioning well below its potential as a
simulation of modern combat, naval or otherwise. I simply
hope that the people at Three-Sixty will take note of these
problems and resolve them in the same manner that Sid Meier
has changed Civilization as problems with his program were
brought to his attention.
Stephen Corbett
Aichi, Japan
Your letter is useful and well-reasoned. We hope that it will
have the desired results, even though we understand the
difficulty of programming the routines for computer opponents. Meanwhile, Harpoon players can rejoice in the fact that
the GEnie network will offer a multi-player on-line Harpoon
product in the near future.

The Most Frequently Asked Question
I'm a lawyer and a programmer, so I'm pretty good at
understanding rules. But I've never quite understood how
your top games poll works. A while back, you published a
statistical analysis of the poll, but it didn't explain the nuts
and bolts of how it works. How do you select the games that
appear on each month's reader survey cards? How do you
weight the total scores depending on the frequency of response? Why do some games appear for months on the chart,
even though they are not in the reader survey forms? In other
words, what precisely does it mean that on a given month a
particular game is 43rd on the chart? I'll bet many readers
would appreciate a few paragraphs on this.
Also, I'm an editor of a highly regarded legal newsletter.

Letters
We regularly report on seminars, meetings and publications
in our field, including activities of our competitors (we figure
we're so good we really don't have any competition — which
I, having looked at many other computer game magazines,
think is also true of CGW). I've long wondered why CGW,
the premier publication in its field, does not do the same, at
least not regularly. If I knew about them, I'd buy many more
publications on computer game design, etc. You often report
on your experiences at conferences and seminars — but you
never announce these meetings beforehand. Computer games
are my main hobby, and I'd like to be alerted to new publications and upcoming meetings. If you can't do this, please
advise me how to get this information.
Finally, just for the record, I think your fancy new table of
contents format is hideous. It's hard to read, and just plain
ugly. Sorry. I use CGW as a constant reference tool, believe
it or not, and the old table of contents style is much easier to
use. To make up for this, you might consider publishing a
mini-index on the final quarter page that would list alphabetically all games mentioned in feature articles and letters (not
including all the Taking a Peek blurbs and "paiktographies").
Thanks for your attention. Keep up the good work.
Bruce Hake
Silver Spring, MD
The CGW Poll was inaugurated early in our history so that
the readers could rate the games instead of the reviewers/editors. The averages are cumulative, built off a database that is
updated each rating period. The cumulative database is why
there can be titles that stay on the Top 100 chart for months,
even if they have not been rated during recent CGW Polls. As
for how the games appear on each month's reader survey
cards, we try to rate about 40 games per issue. Ten of these
games are identical to the top ten in the Top 100 chart for two
issues prior (this is because one issue of CGW is at the printer
while the readers' cards from the previous issue are still
coming in the mail). The rest of the games rated are a
combination of new games which we believe have actually hit
the shelves and games that are tied with other games farther
down the Top 100 chart.
When readers rate the games, each letter grade is converted
to a number. The article which you read before was an
analysis of the new system using letter grades converted into
numerical values as opposed to numerical values factored
such that it was perfectly obvious to the readers what the
numerical scale actually was. The statistical psychologist
believed that not specifying the numerical values kept the
ratings from skewing to the middle. As the years have progressed since that change, you will have noticed a slight
rating inflation throughout the Top 100. Readers seem to look
at the current chart and elect to give more A pluses than they
used to give to games.
We have an in-house program that collates the raw data,
determines if the number of responses are significant (the only
specific weighting for frequency of response), creates a cumulative numerical rating, updates our database and prints
out the Top 100 of statistically significant ratings. Whenever
games attain Hall of Fame status, they are removed from the
cumulative database. So, on a given month, a game that is
43rd on the chart means that it is 43rd among all the statistically significant ratings in the database that, with the exception of Hall of Fame games, has been accumulating since we
changed the ratings system to a grade scale, approximately
four years ago. If a game is listed on the CGW Poll card and
does not appear on the Top 100, it means that we either
received insufficient responses to integrate it into our data or
it rated below #100 on the cumulative scale. We hope this

clarifies your question. We do not claim that our system is
without occasional contamination, but we do believe it is the
best numerical indicator of computer game ratings available.
As for the seminars, we should let you know that the Computer Game Developers Conference is scheduled for April
17-20, 1993. It will be held in Santa Clara, California and
prospective attendees need to write to: Computer Game
Developers Conference, 5339 Prospect Road #289, San
Jose, CA 95129-5020 for more information. Most of the other
conferences which we attend are not open to the general
public. One glaring exception, of course, was the Summer
Consumer Electronics Show which was advertised in our
pages. The backgrounds on the table of contents pages were
an attempt to spice up the look of the magazine. We emphatically deny that we are engaged in a conspiracy with an
ophthalmic group in an attempt to force all our readers to buy
glasses. Microfiche readers, maybe, but not glasses.

Wooden Ships and 9-Pin Adapters
Is any publisher planning a simulation based upon wooden
ships? A computer game simulating the battles of Admiral
Nelson or the naval wars of 1812 would prove to be an
interesting topic.
D.F.
Oceanside, NY
On the IBM, there is only the Ancient Art of War at Sea from
Broderbund, an action-oriented game covering the era. Apple
II owners could remove the dust from their boxes of High Seas,
an out-of-print strategy game from now-defunct Garde'
games, while Atari 8-bit owners could do the same with
Broadsides, an out-of-print strategy game from SSI. C-64
owners might want to bring their units out of mothballs in
order to play Wooden Ships & Iron Men from Avalon I till. It
is an adaptation of the boardgame classic which, in turn, is
similar to Gygax and Arneson's original Don't Give Up The
Ship miniatures rules for Napoleonic sailing games. We are
hopeful that Simulations Canada's Man of War (working
title) will offer an exciting challenge for fighting sail aficionados with IBM compatibles.

Why Not The Rumor "Bag Lady?"
Bring back the rumor guy, you know, the one under the bag.
Sam J. Pennington
Guthrie, OK
Don't look now, Sam, but heeeee's back!

Ryans' Toasts
Great magazine! Keep up the early previews.
Ryan Reinike
Ocean Springs, MS
As a new subscriber, I am impressed by your high-quality
magazine. I use it as a guide when shopping for new games.
I would like to let you know that I agree 100% with Johnny
L. Wilson on his latest editorials on violence in computer
games. Keep up the good work!
Ryan Akiyama
Tacoma, WA
Well, you didn't think I was going to hesitate printing those
did you? Anytime anyone agrees 100% with me, I'm going to
expose him for the psycho he is (big grin).

Editorial

COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD
" I Came, I Played, I Conquered"

Broadsides & Gripeshot

Computer Wargaming
World
Editorial: The Future
of Modem Gaming
A Sneak Look at GEnie's

144

Modern Gaming
Telecommunity

The Hundred Years War

146

by Alan Emrich

PBEM Diplomacy
On-Line
A Field Report From The 1992
GenCon/Origins
Computer Assisted
Boardgames
Designer's Notes:
SSG Speaks On
Carriers At War A.I.

154
158

that there are tens of thousands of modems
that have been appearing in homes and
believe that connectivity will become progressively more important as this market
penetration (marketing slang for the number of potential customers) continues.
The good news that has us smiling relates
to the number of releases on the horizon.
Modem gamers are bound to be excited
over such possibilities as Empire Deluxe
from New World Computing, a six-player
version of the original Empire, which will
include full modem, network (Netbios) and
play-by-email features. For players who
have long been playing this game through
a jury-rigged system of file transfers, a
brighter day is ahead.
Novell network gamers will be particularly pleased to know that New World also
plans to publish Spaceward, Ho!. Originally designed by Delta Tao for the Macintosh, will be coming out for both MS-DOS
and Windows and promises to be a modem/network/e-mail gamer's delight.
Spaceward, Ho! is easy-to-learn,

162

170

t is well known that the editorial
stance of Computer Gaming
World is highly "pro connectivity." We embrace computer modems,
networks and modem/play-by-email
gaming at every opportunity. What
we're excited to see is that this is a trend
which is growing in our computer gaming community. As the "installed user
base" (a little marketing lingo, there) of
modem garners increases, more opponents become available. Through the
networks, players have been meeting
each other and setting up computer
gaming challenges against each other
— making friends and having a lot of
fun in the process.
As I observed during a recent panel discussion on computer games, "I have friends
I've never seen." One of our writers expressed something of the same sentiment
when he told me he was having a tremendously difficult time in communicating to
his wife that he was talking/typing to other
people when he played a multi-player online game. We expect this phenomenon to
continue to expand as computing penetrates the home market more fully.
Some software publishers have refused to
incorporate modem features into their current lines of releases because their demographics (the numbers they've collected
from the registration cards on old products)
do not indicate that more than a couple of
thousand gamers per product were influenced toward their purchase by the connectability of their games. Yet, we contend

I

fast-oplyndeirck.Awonted,
Pax Imperia has just delivered an alpha
version to our office and presented us with
a game of amazing depth and a very intuitive interface. Pax Imperia manages up to
16 players over a network and/or through
modems (in real time). Alternately, players
can "hot seat it" in front of a single computer.
Computer pilots will not be forgotten,
either. Players who have been enjoying the
likes of Red Baron on The Sierra Network, Kesmai's Air Warrior in SVGA
graphics on the GEnie network, or the
point-to-point combat simulations (like
MicroProse' Knights of the Sky, Electronic Arts' F- /6 Combat Pilot and Spectrum HoloByte's Falcon 3.0) will be glad
to hear that the third incarnation of MicroProse's F-/5 Strike Eagle III will feature
modem play ( though not the connectivity
to Falcon 3.0 that several members of both
design teams had allegedly hoped for).
Spectrum HoloByte plans to be back in the

modem ether with A-10 Warthog by this
time next year. A-10 Warthog is being designed to fit into their "Electronic Battlefield System" of connective games.
"Kings" of strategy gaming will enjoy
Mindcraft's Siege (expected to have a modem play feature in an upcoming enhancement) and the first "expansion" disk for
Interplay's Castles 2 (also expected to
support modem play). In addition. QQP's
next strategy game, Conquered Kingdoms
is a turn-based strategy game in the best
QQP tradition that will support both modem and specific play-by-email features.
After their recent foray into modem gaming with Theatre of War, Three-Sixty Pacific is planning to follow up along that line,
so don't hang up that modem yet! The
second chapter in their V For Victory series,
Velikiye Luki (due out before Christmas)
will feature modem play for its turn-based
system. Next year's projects, which include
Victory At Sea (the Jim Dunnigan design
implemented by Dave Menconi) and Harpoon II, both tentatively slated to include
modem play.
The many enthusiastic fans of the popular
"out of nowhere" strategic WWII computer
wargame High Command read in the designer's notes about a pending 2.0 version
which promises to feature modem play and
is scheduled for 1993. For those who can't
wait, Columbia Games, the boardgame
publisher, has released their Computer
EastFront, a Windows version of their
popular board game. Although it has no AI,
the game was specifically built abound
play-by-modem and play-by-email features. While it is anyone's guess how such
a game will fare in the marketplace, we
salute the attempt to translate an excellent
board wargame to a broader base of computer gamers.
Thus, with all the promises from various
publishers, it is time for modem strategy
gamers to get a separate phone book and
start listing their gaming buddies there.

Sneak Preview

Three Viewpoints on the
On-Line Multi-Player Wargame
by Ken St. Andre, David Wilson, and Johnny Wilson

T

he so-called Hun-

dred Years War
lasted, of course,
longer than one hundred
years. A wag might conclude that the sum of its
years was greater than that
of its title. The same might
be said for GEnie's Hundred Years War, a multiplayer game of diplomacy,
economics and warfare by
Jim Dunnigan, Dan Masterson and Al Nofi. A beta
test version of HYW is
available for anyone to join
on GEnie's page 945 for
$6.00 per hour. In order to
give CGW readers a taste
of our impressions of this
fascinating cyburb, we
have elected to publish the
thoughts of three gamers: a
boardgame designer with
some computer game credits; an editor
who has been writing about computer
games for more than a decade; and a
gamer who is new to multi-player online games.

resource management
game, a tactical combat
game for marauding armies, a role-playing game
with numeric character attributes and skills that affect how well one's
alter-ego can accomplish
his/her goals, and a writing game where one attempts to dazzle both
friend and foe with witty
contributions to the on-going chronicle of the war.

The Designer
(Ken St. Andre)

while the great lords — the Kings of
England and France — seek to embroil
him/her in the greater power struggle
between France and England that
lasted from 1337 until 1453. How well
the player succeeds depends on tactical
and logistical brilliance, but also on
diplomacy, luck, and stubborn adherence to one's goals.

James Dunnigan's Hundred Years
War was originally designed as a play-

As an on-line computer game, Hundred Years War (HYW) is the most

by-mail game for SPI — a humongous
sort of wargame to keep huge numbers
of players busy for years as they strove
to enrich their families and defend their
nation. Each player takes the part of a
European noble (mostly French or
English, but with some Italians, Spanish, and Germans, etc.), and then, tries
to increase his/her power and wealth

ambitious game design I've ever seen.

HYW combines several genres of combat game into one overwhelming experience. (And when they finally get the
graphic front end in place some time in
1993, it should be truly overwhelming.) First, it is an enormous historical
simulation, but it is also a multi-player
diplomacy tournament, a long-range

It has been my pleasure
and privilege to participate in both the alpha and
beta testing of HYW. Over
the last several months,
I've seen the game/simulation grow in complexity
and rectitude. I've enjoyed
playing HYW. It can be totally absorbing if one has
any feel for the High Middle Ages and
either role-playing or war-gaming. (I
was excommunicated twice and tried to
transplant the Islamic faith to Holland
during the alpha test!)
Having said all that, I want to add that
as a sometime game designer myself
(Tunnels and Trolls, Stormbringer and
Wasteland) and a game player, I'm not
entirely happy with the way Hundred
Years War is developing. From a design perspective, I would almost have
to call the current game too ambitious.
In simulating the High Middle Ages,
Dunnigan and company have gone too
far and made the whole game/simulation too complex. Each day of real-time
(outside the game) represents 90 days
of game time. During each game turn

Sneak Preview
one can: (1) manage one's properties,
(2) conduct family business such as
getting married, or trying to get the
wife (or self) pregnant, (3) give orders
to NPCs that will send them on journeys or make them into kidnappers,
assassins, bailiffs, etc, (3) travel by
land or sea, (4) recruit armies in any of
three different ways, (5) visit courts
where one can hire or attempt to seduce
NPCs, (6) conduct battles, either army
to army or army to castle, (7) enter into
a simple hunting simulation, (8) try to
get wealthy in one of four different
gambling games, (9) communicate
with other players through a message
function online, or (10) visit the interactive court where one can talk, drink,
brawl, or duel with the other gameplayers in what passes for real-time. Further, even though I've listed ten things
to do, I've left some of the lesser things
out and haven't even mentioned the
non-gaming time when one would be
trying to participate in the neverending
flow of messages posted on the game's
bulletin board. Moving from menu to
menu as rapidly as GEnie will let me,
it usually takes me at least two hours
and sometimes, as long as four to finish
one 90 day turn to my own satisfaction.
How many people can afford between
$12 and $24 a day to play a game that
may last for over 400 turns? Of course,
one doesn't have to play every day, and
one can't — vacations, illness, computer problems, a thousand things
might keep one off-line sometimes, but
missing a day can sometimes be disastrous. (My character Guillaume de
Granson was kidnapped from the Scottish Court and tortured to death, because bad weather in Phoenix kept me
from being online one night.)
HYW can be a lot of fun, but because
there are so many things one must do
— many of which, such as recruiting
NPCs or managing fiefs which are pure
drudgework, there is also a boredom
factor involved in playing and the boring stuff is costing the gamer as much
as the interesting stuff. I really believe
that if Dunnigan doesn't simplify the
game, it will turn into the Hundred
Years Bore.
My other concerns are myriad. First,
there is an overabundance of mostly
meaningless numbers that appear in the
description of every fief and character.
What does "Fields 4.68, Industry 0.00,
Weather 0.98" really tell you when
looking at the description of a fief?
How can one measure weather on a
0.00 to 1.00 scale anyway? Second, it
often seems that Dunnigan assumes a
double standard that probably arises
from confusion as to whether he's de-

signing a simulation or a game. (Yes,
there is a difference — a simulation
merely models a process while a game
imposes artificial rules and goals upon
one or more processes.) When players
complain about something that doesn't
seem fair, Dunnigan's tendency has
been not to fix the inequity, but to explain why he put it into the game. The
answer he likes best is "Because that's
the way it was in the 14th century."
Such reasoning is fine for enhancing
the reality of the simulation, but pretty
lame for a gamer who finds artificial
constraints hampering his style of play
and chance of succeeding. At other
times, Dunnigan ignores the most unrealistic results because his gaming
system (largely built on random number generators) gives or requires them.
A good example is money. Although
every country in Europe had its own
distinct currency by 1337, the only
monetary unit in the game is the kiloducat (1000 ducats). That's an easy way
to handle the problem of money in a
game, but wildly unrealistic for the
simulation. An old (1960) Webster's
dictionary that I have defines a ducat as
a small gold coin worth between $0.83
and $2.32. Modern dictionaries refuse
to give a cash equivalent for the coin.
Today's value would be at least five
times as high, so figure roughly between $4 and $12 per ducat in 1992
U.S. money which makes a kiloducat
worth $4000 to $12,000 dollars. To
hire one soldier for 90 days costs 1
kiloducat or $8000 if we average it, any
soldier whether mounted knight or
lowly footslogger. Can you believe that
any lord of medieval France paid his
foot soldiers the equivalent of $32,000
a year? In the game, even poor nobles
have thousands of kiloducats to throw
around, so we never even stop to think
about how much money Dunnigan has

us spending in order to fight our wars
or pay our taxes.

My lives during
the Hundred Years War

Unfortunately, as in real life, rebellions of this type can occur at the worst
possible times. The worst possible time
being, by definition, those periods
when a player is seeking to do something important, such as battling invaders from an enemy nation. Since the
game itself is realistic enough that a
great deal of playing time is spent waiting for one's enemies to actually make
a move, it can be particularly frustrating to be forced to put down a rebellion
just as the first wave of invaders begins
its attack. Such is the penalty for bad
management. Bet you wonder how I
know that.

by Ken St. Andre
(a.k.a. Robert de Granson)
In days of old when knights were bold,
And 'puters weren't invented,
They fought and died with manly pride—
They sinned and then repented.

A hundred years of hopes and fears,
Of sword and spear and meinies,
Of siege and slaughter, prince and rotter,
Yours in the realm of GEnie.
James Dunnigan seeks fun again
With massive simulation.
Have you the force to stay the course
That shaped the Gallic nation?

I could give many more examples of
such double-sided thinking, but the fact
is that as a simulation, HYW is too
simple and as a game, it is too complicated.

The Player
(David M. Wilson)
There are multitudes of fascinating
elements that draw the player to HYW.
For me, there was the strain of trying to
build a kingdom of my own, while trying to defend my homeland against the
onslaughts and land piracy of the much
despised enemy. There was the thrill of
raising an army and attacking a fellow
noble's fief (followed, of course, by
experiencing the agony of watching the
same noble, more powerful than myself, crush me beneath her unmerciful
bootheel). There was the pleasure of
striving for diplomatic resolutions to
problems, as well as negotiating for
reparations when another Lord had
wronged me. I also discovered the sadness of losing a child at birth, a gamestyle microcosm of seeing one's hope
for immortality disappear.
HYW allows a noble to begin with a
number of fiefs, the responsibility for
which can be immense. These fiefs
make up the main source of revenue for
the noble. Managing a fief consists of
setting the payroll for officials and garrison, extending fortifications, increasing the infrastructure and deciding how
much to tax the peasants. Should a noble fail to pay proper attention to such
matters, he may find himself muttering
the cliched Mel Brooks line "The Peasants are revolting!" ("You said it, they
stink!") The noble could very well be
forced to raise an army, rush to the
rebellious fief and crush the rebellion.

As noted earlier, each real-time day
is equal to 90 game days and each
activity costs a certain amount of game

Sneak Preview
days. For example, attempting to conceive an heir takes 10 game days.
Sometimes, one wishes there was a medieval fertility specialist around to
proffer the right herb or advice. Naturally, the importance of having an heir
becomes obvious when one realizes
that a player's noble can die at any
time. More than one noble has discovered how prevalent disease was in medieval France and how suddenly it can
take one's life. The far-sighted player
who took the time to ensure himself/herself of an heir can assume the
role of that heir and continue in the
game.
HYW may also have to take some
responsibility if I am forced to join
Gambler's Anonymous, for I find myself constantly taking risks to prove my
system. I can remember being up 5000
kd (kiloducats) one evening by gambling on the Sport of Kings (horse racing). It wasn't long until I was 5000 kd
behind and had to force myself to quit.
It is amazing what a person can learn
about himself in front of a computer
terminal.
In addition, the role-playing elements
of this game are quite fascinating. The
Private Roundtables set up for nobles
of their own respective court (on the
game's bulletin board) literally bristles

with discussions of on-going events
within the game. Players find themselves negotiating, informing, discussing, arguing and generally communicating from the viewpoint of their character. Even when involved in a quarrel
the player is expected to remain in
character and respond only as his/her
character would respond.
The online message system further
facilitates the role-playing aspects of
the game. Even in the midst of making
his/her moves, a player is able to send
and receive messages (one line at a
time). In this manner, alliances may be
created/cemented, resources may be
consolidated between players, military
operations may be coordinated, enemies may be chided/insulted, or players can simply greet one another. The
aspect of today's computer role-playing games that is lacking the most is
player interaction with other characters. HYW delivers a satisfying roleplay ing game to those who are seeking
RPG fulfillment.
This role-playing portion of the game
became personally distasteful for a
time during my initial gameplay experiences. The person playing the French
king did not take his royal duties seriously (much like the historical Valois
King). This created a real problem for

those of us who were waiting for a
decision from the king. I waited for two
weeks for a response and was quite
irritated that when he did respond, he
e-mailed the wrong player. I was counseled by many to relax, as this was
realistic role-playing because it fit the
historical facts and setting. I made sure
that there was no doubt in any player's
mind that I was extremely upset about
the turn of events (too sure!). I even
threatened to assassinate the king.
This leads us to another important
issue, not often addressed. Players
must carefully word messages and responses to other players. It is easily
forgotten that the printed word has no
tone of voice or facial expression to
assist in proper communication. People
often will discover that they lack the
inhibitions that keep them polite in a
face-to-face conversation when they
are communicating across a modem
connection. Let's just say that unrestrained communication will not benefit the player in HYW, since much of the
game relies on diplomacy.
As for the entertaining surprises that
occur with human opponents, I must
confess that even the best laid plans of
mice and men can go astray. I had the
amusing situation of taunting the king
of England into leaving a keep without

Sneak Preview
an army. I had no kidnappers or assassins who spoke the proper language to
kidnap him while his guard was down.
So, he challenged me to give him a
minimal force so he could defeat me
handily in pitched battle. I transferred
50 men to his control and faced him
with more than 300. Imagine my surprise when he not only won the battle,
but killed my main noble character. As
stated previously, it is imperative that a
noble have heirs.
I have found myself totally immersed
in the game. While I had been asked to
play for 20-30 minutes per day, at most,
for the purpose of this article, I found
myself dawdling online for hours, often
not moving or accomplishing anything,
but merely discussing strategy and tactics with others. After I played for 30
hours in the first week, my wife
stormed into my office and demanded
to know what I was doing that took so
much time. I told her that I was talking
to others within the game. She wondered aloud how I could spend so much
time talking to imaginary people in my
computer when I had a wife and two
kids in the same house with me. I
laughed as I tried to explain that people
all over the country were on-line and
playing right that very moment, and
these people were real. I had the pleasure of meeting some of those people at
GenCon and I can assure you that they
are real enough. To sum up my experience in the game, the people were the
element that made the game fulfilling
and interesting for me. What can I say,
I'm a people person!

The Critic (Johnny L.
Wilson)
As the dean of analytical history (the
best description I can provide of Jim
Dunnigan's prolific contribution and
importance to the hobby which continues to enthrall me, i.e. wargaming in all
its permutations), Dunnigan well
knows the difficulties involved in
translating history to a living experience and stimulating challenge. At
CGW, we use the term "grognard" to
describe those of us who are willing to
dig into and assimilate a wide variety
of information on a subject in order to
get the most out of a wargame. I believe
that Dunnigan designed Hundred
Years War with the "grognard" in
mind. The time period is not that which
would engage the mainstream of
gamers (indeed, even many wargamers
of my acquaintance think anything before World War II is totally uninteresting) and it is based on a series of
conflicts which were largely misman-

aged in the first place. Yet, out of the
midst of that historical chaos, comes a
game.
HYW is a game because it has no
certain outcome. It is analytical history
because it pits a roughly historical
amalgam of economic, diplomatic, religious and military forces against each
other in a simulated time period of conflict.
My criticism of HYW as a game is
that it has some problems in play balance. One reason that Kesmai, the
leading developer of on-line games,
has always resisted having human referees and game masters in their games
is that humans are unreliable. One reason Dunnigan wanted the French king
to be picked at random is because, historically, the Valois line was so indecisive. He thought the potentially
ineffective French leader would add to
the realism. As analytical history, he is
right. As a game, particularly a game
where players are paying by the hour,
where everyone wants a reasonable (if
not equivalent) chance of winning, this
is a poor design decision. I believe the
French should select their king among,
at least, experienced players prior to the
beginning of actual game play. At the
very least, I think any king that is inactive for over a week of real-time should

experience an untimely death and the
throne be passed to another player.
Another weakness as a game may be
found in the way stature is handled.
Stature appears to be a significant factor in the success algorithms. Yet, I
couldn't really figure out how stature
could be raised. Even when my character was making numerous diplomatic
alliances, increasing his number of
fiefs and defeating the enemies of
France on the field of battle (well, admittedly they were only garrisons of
the fiefs I was pillaging, but there were
victories nonetheless), my character remained at a stature of 1.0.
Finally, though I cannot agree with
Ken St. Andre on the matter of monetary abstraction (if he thinks the game
is complicated now, just imagine how
it would be with crude auctions at border marketplaces for foreign exchange
and having to deal with all sorts of
traveling moneychangers), I am concerned about the lack of utility in the
numerical characteristics for each character. Some characters have numerical
values for useful characteristics; others
have numerical values that never come
into play. One of my daughters, for
example, is a glutton, but we've never
had to find a medieval equivalent of
Weight Watchers for her. There is no

Sneak Preview
weight measurement in the game. Another daughter is extremely disliked by
the clergy (guess she takes after her old
man), but it didn't stop the Pope from
blessing her marriage.

Dunnigan's answer is that it rounds
out the characters, particularly the nonplayer characters, by letting one see at
a glance what they are like. To some

extent, I agree. If all the characteristics
don't matter, however, there ought to
be some way for every character to
have, at least, one or two characteristics
that do matter. It's a matter of playability and perception.

All of these criticisms aside, gamers
are to be reminded that Hundred Years
War is a work in progress. It is still
evolving all the time (we're currently

working out a glitch in the parliamentary system and tournaments are just
about to go live). It is a different game
than when we started and the best news
is that, even when it is complete, it will
be a different game every time it's
played. That's the way human opponents are.
Hundred Years War has seduced this
critic into historical research, many extra hours of correspondence and plenty
of map study. I've spent dozens of
hours talking over the events of the
games with other people, both those
involved in the game and those who are
not. I've adjusted my personal goals in
connection with changes in the influence stream among the players and
done my share of helping other players
who had experienced bad breaks. I've
rethought the historical situation and
replayed possibilities in my mind. I've
learned the lessons of history in subjective new ways that reinforce what little
I know objectively about the period. In
short, the dean of analytical history is
holding class. Matriculation is as easy
as logging onto GEnie. Finishing the
course can be as rewarding or unrewarding as the "students" want it to be.

Review

When E-mail Became A
Diplomatic Pouch
Historical Reflections
and Future
Invitations
on PBEM
by Ken Hill

B

ack in the early 1960s, some old
college friends who had moved
to different parts of the country
decided to try playing one of their favorite board games, Diplomacy, using
the mail. Because the game required
intense negotiations between players
and did not rely on random factors like
die rolls to determine results, it was
highly suited for being played via written messages. One of the players volunteered to organize and run the game
and the Play-by-Mail gaming hobby
was born.
In 1982, Russell Sipe decided that the
fledgling commercial computer networks had the potential to run Diplomacy games using the new "electronic
mail" technology more efficiently and
quickly than the PBM system. Sipe
started a handful of games on both
CompuServe's Garners Forum and on
the now-defunct Source and created
his Diplomacy "zine," The Armchair
Diplomat (TAD). The Play-by-Electronic-Mail gaming era had begun.
Today, a dedicated band of gamers
play a wide variety of traditional board
games via electronic mail in CompuServe's PBMGAMES Forum. By
far the most popular of these games is
Diplomacy. Published in the U.S. by
Avalon Hill, it is still the board game
that is most widely played by mail. The
game attempts to recreate the situation

in Europe before the start of World
War I.
It requires seven players, each of
which represents one of the "Great
Powers" (Austria, England, France,
Germany, Italy, Russia or Turkey). To
win the game, a single player must
control 18 of 34 "supply centers." In
most cases, the player must negotiate
and make agreements with other players in order to succeed. Each player. of
course, has his or her own agenda and
deals must be made with shrewd tact or
— diplomacy!
In combat, nothing is left to chance.
If two units attack a single unit, the
single unit is defeated and must retreat
to another space on the board (if possible). Every other turn, the players must
adjust their forces to match the number
of units they control to the number of
supply centers they hold. If a player
holds more supply centers than units,
he or she may build new units. However, if the player controls fewer supply
centers than units, he or she must remove units from the board until the
numbers are equal. It is a classic game
which has been played for more than 30
years.
In the PBMGAMES Forum Diplomacy section, players can send private
messages to each other or send out
general messages (usually called
"Press") related to the games. Each

game has a volunteer GM who oversees the action and adjudicates the turn
results. Orders are submitted to the GM
on a regular schedule, usually every
two weeks. The GM then forwards the
results for each to the editor of TAD so
that game results can be published.
Every Tuesday, TAD is available in the
Forum's data library for the players to
read or download.
Usually, there are a dozen or more
Diplomacy games active at any time in
PBMGAMES. The average game takes
around six to nine months to complete.
A player in an on-line Diplomacy
game can spend roughly an hour a
week conducting written negotiations,
preparing orders and reading the game
reports. Players are encouraged to play
in more than one game if they like, and
many participate in several games at
once.
Players can also try out several Diplomacy variants. These games are run
in the sister publication to TAD, The
Eccentric Diplomat (TED). Among the
most popular variant games are Gunboat (where the identity of the individual players are unknown to each other
and the players must rely on their tactical skill) and Woolworth Diplomacy
(which is played on a slightly different
map of Europe with each player playing two positions in each game). Many
other variant games are run regularly in

Review
TED. One can even try a position in one
of the frequent "Round Robin Gunboat" tournaments where seven players
get together to play in seven Gunboat
games simultaneously. Each player
plays a different power in each game.

game section. Among some of the
games that have been run in the last few
months are: Monopoly, Acquire, Dune,

Traditional war gamers can find opponents in the War Games section.
Many different games have been
adapted for play in PBMGAMES Forum, including Third Reich and Titan.
Anyone tired of playing solitaire is almost certain to find opponents, here.

For the armchair railroad engineers,
PBMGAMES Forum offers the Rail
Games section. The weekly ELECTRIC TRAINS publication features
games of 1830, Railway Rivals and
other popular rail games.

The cost of playing in a PBEM board
game on CompuServe is surprisingly
affordable. With the advent of automated communications packages
which give the user the ability to do all
the time-consuming work of composing messages off-line, the average
player can play in a number of games
for around $20 a month. Of course, the
cost may vary depending on the number of times one signs on and the number of messages written.

1830 is Avalon Hill's classic game
of track building and finance in the Age
of Steam. Railway Rivals is a British
game which has been very popular in
PBM circles. Last available in the U.S.
through an edition published by Games
Workshop, players must build efficient
track on a map of a particular geographical region. The map for each
game is different and, with dozens to
choose from, the variety is endless.
There are current RR maps for most
states of the U.S., all of Europe and
Asia, even Tolkien's Middle Earth!
The game usually features three to
eight players per game and most games
finish in three months or less. Rules and
maps can be ordered on-line.
Other types of board games can be
played in PBMGAMES general board

many others. If the game can be
adapted to playing by electronic mail,
chances are that opponents can be
found in this section of the forum.

Junta, Wooden Ships and Iron Men,
Civilization (the Avalon Hill board
game), Advanced Civilization and

So, for those gamers who fondly remember the days of playing board
games with real human opponents,
CompuServe's PBMGAMES Forum
can become a home away from home.
For information on how to join CornpuServe, call 1-800-848-8990.

Conference Report

A Convention Report from
GenCon/Origins 1992
by Alan Emrich and Johnny L Wilson
"What does GenCon stand for, anyway?"
asked a first-time attendee at what is, perhaps, the oldest continuing game convention running in the United States. When we
answered that it stood for "Geneva Convention," the attendee laughed at our outrageous pun. GenCon does, however, stand
for "Geneva Convention." Since TSR, Inc.
(once known as Tactical Studies Rules,
but now known as the publishers of Dungeons & Dragons) is located in Lake Geneva, WI and both owns and hosts the
convention (which is held every August in
Milwaukee, WI), the convention is affectionately named for its original locale.
Now, however, it has evolved into a supershow for role-playing gamers and, because
of its rich association with both two large
active user groups (one for the Atari ST and
one for the Commodore Amiga), one of the
most well-attended shows for computer
gamers. This year, GenCon was combined
with Origins, the national strategy game
convention and the mix was special, indeed.
Origins is sponsored by GAMA (the
Game Manufacturers' Association) and
travels around the country each year. (Last
year found it in Baltimore, next year it will
be in Dallas and in 1994 in San Jose).
Origins began as a wargame convention

established under the auspices of both The
Avalon Hill Game Company and SPI in
the 1970s, but evolved into a showcase for
the entire hobby. It has not, historically,
been a strong show for computer gaming,
but GAMA officials were impressed by the
computer room showing at this convention
(though many were confused as to the lack
of participation from the MS-DOS world)
and are making plans to have a significant
computer presence at their next two conventions.

Regardless of the past and future, however, this year's convention was a combined supershow and this was reflected in
both gamer and exhibitor attendance. The
exhibitor room itself tells the story. From
our vantage point at the CGW booth (where
many readers stopped by and said "Hello"),
it was easy to see that this was a well-attended show. While the official figures are
still to be released from TSR, Inc., our
estimate of 15,000 gamers and 150 exhibits
is probably not too far off.
Oddly, the number of costumed individuals (everything from guys dressed as barbarians to women in chainmail bikinis)
seemed to be down from recent GenCons.
Perhaps the larger-than-expected turnout of
wargamers put them off, because it certainly wasn't a result of the perfect weather
outside.

and Chaos over a bedspread-sized terrain
map. Chris Lombardi proved to be the
CGW champion at this game, while regular
reviewer David Wilson defeated his elder

brother editor and QQP President Bruce
Williams Zaccagnino upset on-line editor
Alan Emrich in a see-saw battle where momentum shifted more times than in an NFL
football game.

Charles S. Roberts
Awards

Each morning as the exhibitor room
opened, we saw scores of gamers run past
our booth en route to the FASA booth.
There, they mobbed each other to pick up a
copy of Shadowrun, 2nd Edition. White
Wolf's Werewolf The Apocalypse seemed
ubiquitous, as well. AD&D fans turned up
the heat with TSR's release of their Al
Qadim boxed set. This is sort of AD&D
goes Arab and seemed to be quite a draw at
TSR's huge, four-story "castle" booth display. Other items of note for the people and
paper game industry included: new GURPS
modules from Steve Jackson Games (as
well as miniatures rules for OGRE) and the
re-release of Jorune.(expected to be a 1993
CRPG from SSI).
For CGW's staff, the boardgame that
captured our attention was Milton
Bradley's Battle Masters, a Games Workshop design where players move large,
plastic miniatures of the armies of Good

Normally, the Charles S. Roberts awards
are formally presented at the show. This
year, a logistics error forced the cancellation of the awards ceremony. Some of the
winners included:
Best Pre-WW2 Board Game: Alexandros
from XTR
Best WW2 Board Game: EastFront from
Columbia Games
Best Post-WW2 Board Game: a tie between Hornet Leader from GMT and
Inchon from XTR
Best Pre-20th Century Computer Game:
Sid Meier's Civilization from MicroProse
Best 20th Century Era Computer Game:
Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe from Lucasfilm
Best Wargame Graphics: Hornet Leader
from GMT and
Von Clausewitz (Hall of Fame) Award:
Mark Herman.

It's CGW Live!
When CGW first offered a seminar at
GenCon, it offered a panel of award-winning designers and garnered an attendance
of about 20 diehard gamers. It was held

Conference Report
directly across the hall from the auction and
lasted one hour. This year, CGW's editor
and on-line editor offered a seminar on
"Everything You've Ever Wanted to Know
About Computer Games" and more than
twice as many gamers not only attended,
but were still asking questions after the
scheduled 2 hours were over.
Four years ago, there were only a couple
of places for gamers to meet other gamers
on-line and there wasn't much interest at
the gaming conventions. This year's GenCon proved to be different. It featured
booths and attendees from GEnie (showing
the new SVGA Air Warrior and MultiPlayer BattleTech; the new Multi-Player
Games Network (displaying their on-line
role-playing game Drakkar and Empire
Builder and Operation Market-Garden
strategy games); Summit Games Network
(demonstrating their multi-tasking capable
system for meeting gamers of all kinds);
and National VideoText (talking up their
new network with the classic Island of Kesmai as its flagship game).
Also, four years ago, there were only
about four computer game publishers present at GenCon. This year, there were
seven. Many just showed CES demos, but
some had brand new product to sell and
others had new products to talk about. Origin was selling games, but spent more time
fielding questions about the much delayed
Strike Commander than anything else. MicroProse was not allowed to sell any
Darklands games because the "street date"
was the Monday after the show and retailers

might be upset if the games were sold early.
So, they showed CES-style videos and
touted their upcoming Ancient Art of War
in the Skies (originally a Broderbund
product). SSI seemed to have no trouble
getting gamers excited about Shattered
Lands, the first of their "new engine"
CRPGs in the Dark Sun universe.

Electronic Arts elected not to sell games
at the convention, but demonstrated both
"pencils" and colored screens of their upcoming Space Hulk game (based on the
Games Workshop boardgame), Car &
Driver, Black Crypt (originally discovered
at a previous GenCon) and Lost Files of
Sherlock Holmes. Other projects displayed
at the EA booth included: Bard's Tale IV,
Utrabots, Seal Team and Dangerous Journeys: Necropolis (the first in a projected
series of computer games based on the new
E. Gary Gygax design from GDW).
Meanwhile, QQP was selling plenty of
copies of The Perfect General, The Lost
Admiral and Solitaire's Journey, while
talking up their next release, Conquered
Kingdoms (medieval combat with modem
play and lots of playability).

SSG, perhaps the leading computer game
company in terms of AI, arrived at GenCon
with more than a pocket full of demos. They
had the long-awaited Carriers At War
(IBM) for sale and stated that the Macintosh version was already working (in color)
and would be out as soon as they finished
the black and white version. They also
promised an improved version of Warlords, tentatively entitled Warlords II, early
next year.

Finally, The Avalon Hill Game Company, one of the original sponsors/exhibitors of Origins, was not only selling
Computer Third Reich for Amiga and Atari
ST, but they were selling a new version of
Computer Diplomacy for those machines.
[Note: The IBM version in the new boxes
is still the original version.]

Two Roads Diverge
All in all, the GenCon/Origins event
seemed a stirring success in 1992. The
question is, "Which convention should we
attend next year?" Both? CGW

Op inion

H

ow many wargamers does it take to

simulate history? The answers
range from many to none. For example, one type of wargame is nothing
more than large scale maneuvers of up to
thousands of troops and their officers. Instead of bullets and bombs inflicting casualties, umpires make the decisions as to
who is eliminated in combat. The 19th century witnessed the development of the "kriegspiel" variety of wargame, which has
eliminated the need for soldiers. Instead,
the general staffs issue orders to imaginary
troops. Then, umpires make the decisions
as to how the troops carry out the orders and
their effectiveness in combat.
Boardgames have done away with umpires, probably because it is easier for a
Prussian general to order his staff to spend
their Saturday night doing the paperwork
for a wargame than it is for today's gamer
to find someone stupid enough ... er ...
willing to perform the drudgery of umpiring a game. More recently, computer games
have replaced a player's opponent with an
artificial intelligence (AI) routine. In fact,
several computer games have the option of
the computer playing both sides, completely eliminating any human presence.
Eliminating the human element from
simulations is not without its disadvantages. As has been discussed in CGW by
Alan Emrich and others, even a very good
AI program does not play the same as the
player. The question was raised: what about
Al to improve play between two people?
The idea of Al routines to improve the play
between people reminds one of the umpires
in the kriegspiel type simulations. These

umpires were invaluable in handling details
behind the scenes and helping simulate the
fog of war, i.e., revealing to the participants
only what they would be able to know if
they were in the real situation.
A couple of years ago, motivated by the
idea of having the computer perform some
of the tasks of a human umpire, I wrote such

an AI program. SPI's (Simulation Publication, Inc.) game, Napoleon at Waterloo
(NAW), served as a starting point. NAW is
similar to other boardgames in that printed
counters represent military units. The combat strength of a unit is represented by a
number. Combat is resolved by comparing
the ratio of the attacker's strength to the
defender's strength. The higher the ratio,
the more likely the attack is to succeed.
Playing the game, one finds oneself constantly concerned with the odds (ratio of
attacker to defender strength). For example, two attacking units with strengths of 5
and 4 confront a defender with a strength of
5. This yields 9-5, or 1-1 odds (rules stating
that fractions are lost). However, if a unit
with an attacking strength of 6 is used instead of the 5, the attack is 10 (6+4) to 5, or
2-1 odds, more favorable to the attacker
than the 1-1 odds previously mentioned.
Consequently, players find themselves
making decisions that Napoleon or Wellington probably never made.
Imagine Napoleon saying, "Send regiment X into the attack rather than regiment
Y in the attack against the Hougomont so
the odds will be doubled." In reality, Napoleon would have probably known that on
the average regiment X was slightly more
effective militarily than regiment Y, but for
us to believe that he could have been able
to mathematically calculate the precise increase in strength is an absurdity. Besides,
regiment X might be having a bad day and
regiment Y a good day, in which case that
day regiment Y could outperform regiment X.
Continued on Page 166

Continued from page 162

To simulate these vagaries of combat
strength, my Al umpire randomly (and secretly) adjusts the combat strength up or
down I point, or sometimes makes no
change to the printed strength. Thus, the
unit that has 6 printed on it may be a 5, 6,
or 7. Similarly, the unit with 5 printed on it
may be a 4, 5, or 6. This means that if the 6
is a adjusted to a 5 (having a bad day) and
the 5 is adjusted to a 6, the 5 is actually
stronger than the 6. The net effect is to have
the players stop counting numbers and simply send their troops into battle knowing
their approximate strengths (and fervently
hoping their troops are not having a bad
day!).
Another feature of the NAW boardgame
is the concept that armies become demoralized after losing a certain number of their
forces. Realistically speaking, armies do
not fight to the last man, but rather, break
after reaching a certain loss. In NAW, an
army is demoralized after losing 40
strength points. Consequently, if the Allied
player sees that the French army has lost 39
points, he will make maneuvers and attacks
that he would not otherwise make if he can
be assured that his attacks will result in the
French going over the limit and becoming
demoralized.
Imagine Wellington ordering, "Move
everybody forward. After our attacks the
enemy will be demoralized and unable to
mount a credible counter-attack." Instead,

Wellington would have only a general idea
when the French might break. Therefore,
my AI umpire was programmed to keep
track of the total eliminated "hidden"
strength points. When 40 points were
reached, a player would be informed that
his army was demoralized. Because the
umpire keeps track of hidden points, players have to do more guessing than counting
as to when the enemy will break. For example, suppose the French had lost 7 units with
a total printed strength of 32. The actual
(hidden) value could be as little as 25 or as
much as 39. Most probably, the total is near
32, but not 32. The result is that the a player
can have only an approximate idea when an
army is close to being demoralized.
The Al umpire was assigned other tasks.
For any combat, it totals the forces involved, calculates odds, does the computer
equivalent of rolling a die, looks up the
result and informs the players. The players
are told only the result, not the odds or any
information that would allow them to deduce actual combat strengths. Housekeeping tasks such as saving games and listing
eliminated units are also taken care of by
the program.
While the program has several advantages there are some disadvantages. One is
that to play the game, you need a table set
up next to your computer. Another is that
the program was somewhat long to write:
over 1000 lines. The program was written
in a version of Prolog called PDC Prolog, a

relatively high-level language. In a lowerlevel language such as C, the program
would have been significantly longer.
Additionally, even though I have personalized the Al umpire in this article, in the
program the AI umpire does all its work
behind the scenes. For the average user, the
program is simply doing its job rather than
being an AI program. I am reminded of
some of the routines in SSI' s Second Front
game. For example, the computer resolves
battles between the Germans and the Soviets, keeping track of individual guns, tanks
and airplanes. Is this an example of the
computer simply doing its job or being
"artificially intelligent?" One pundit has
defined artificial intelligence as being the
computers ability to do the things people
can do but computers cannot do.
Finally, my program was intended for
face-to-face play. It would have been useful
for the program to handle electronic playby-mail, doing such things as helping to
create the files needed to send another
player via modem. Some of the files sent
could allow the other player to print maps
showing unit positions before and after
moving.
In any case, the Al routine creates a simulation where the decisions of the players
more accurately reflect the decisions of Napoleon and Wellington. Also, the Al umpire does not mind working on Saturday
nights.

I

I

I

I

I

F

Designer Notes

by Roger Keating and Gregor Whiley

V

ery early on in the design process of CAW, we at
Strategic Studies Group had to make crucial decisions about the form of the Artificial Intelligence
system that the game would use. Most strategy games are still
played against a computer opponent, but these computer
opponents are usually not strong. Their play is often stereotyped, and becomes predictable after a few games. Even
worse are games where, through rigidities or deficiencies in
design, a human player can
completely avoid the spirit of
the rules, and develop techniques for an easy and guaranteed victory.
While our own games are
recognized for their strong
AI systems, we were very
aware of the limitations inherent in our current AI designs. If we wanted to
achieve significantly greater
results, it followed that what
we really needed was a completely new method of programming Al systems.
Before explaining the design process, the fundamental behavior of computer AI
should be explained. Imagine the AI system as sitting below a hex grid. Any time it likes,
it can select what it wants to look for and then look up through
the grid. What it 'sees' is a field of numbers. It can select some
of these numbers, and store them or manipulate them according to some rules. The computer never 'sees' a complete
setup, nor can it recognize patterns like front lines, or concepts
like flanks. The best it can do is collect its numbers, and
process them in accordance with its rules. Hopefully this will
produce decisions which make it appear as though the computer 'knows' what it is doing, and that it has 'recognized' the
front line or other strategic concepts.
The first part of the design process is to decide which
numbers the computer will use. Even more important is how
these numbers are stored, and the relationships allowed between them. Mistakes at this stage of the game design can
cause massive problems later on in the design process. The

database will inevitably be amended several times, but if the
fundamentals are not correct, then the game will be limited.
To use one of our games as an example, the AI in Warlords
is limited in a few instances by the structure of the database.
Some computer games still seem to be developed to a beta test
stage before Al is even considered. This approach must lead
to fundamentally weak intelligence.
The second stage of the design process is to develop the
mechanical utilities that the
game will use. In Carriers At
War, these are the movement
combantdsye.SGh
developed a generalized
movement system, which can
derive an optimum path between any two points on a
map. Appropriate conditions
are simply fed to the system.
Planes have no movement restrictions, ships aren't allowed on land, or to move
across shoal hexsides, and so
on. The AI designer will rely
heavily on the fact that on being told to go somewhere,
units will make the best decisions.
To continue to valiantly criticize our own games, the computer's complete lack of interest in naval movement in Warlords came about because the terrain database was not
structured correctly. This meant that the movement routines
in Warlords could not be optimized. With our new routines,
these problems are completely solved.
It is important that the routines should not know whether
they are moving a computer or human controlled unit. Some
games force human controlled players to move hex by hex.
Not only does this mean unnecessary work for the player, it
means that the computer's moves will probably be weak, or
that the game designer will be forced to relax the rules for
computer movement and allow it to 'cheat'.
The third and most important step is the actual method by
which the AI decisions are generated. In CAW, this process is
a unique system which we have called WarRoom.

Designer Notes
The fundamental principle of WarRoom is to take the AI
design away from the programmer, and make it available to
everyone. WarRoom is a system for generating plans and
responses for computer controlled forces. The capabilities of
the system are limited only by the Al designer's imagination.
For example, in the original 8
bit version of CAW, the Japanese transport group scheduled
to invade Port Moresby always
left Rabaul at the same time,
and followed the same course.
With WarRoom, all that has
changed. The transports can
now be delayed for a few days,
or given a different course, or
even sent off to invade Brisbane! They can select between
courses of action at any time
during the game. The Japanese
carriers can be instructed to
sweep ahead of the transports,
or escort them closely or to
make a sudden lunge for likely
areas of US carrier operation.
Plans for the transports and the carriers can be coordinated so
their combined options remain sensible.
As well as controlling the movement of computer forces,
the Al designer also controls their response to the enemy.
Groups can be told which type of enemy to attack, and from
what range. No-go areas, (for instance those too close to
enemy land based air) can be specified. One can even specify
how resolutely forces will attack, and under what conditions
to withdraw.

WarRoom instructions consist of a series of cards. Each card
has some conditions governing its selection, and a list of
actions, which will be carried out if the card is chosen. Cards
can be linked in series, or branch to completely different
timecourses of action. The conditions are things like position or
movement, CAP and search orders,
. Th. actions include
and the responses to enemy
sightings.
By using the card system, the
Al designer can control both
the actions and responses of his
forces and change those as
often as he likes. Since the
cards can have chances attached to them, a random element is easily introduced, but
one which chooses between
sensible alternatives. Special
setup cards can even change
the location and composition of
any force in the game. A human
player could be facing an enemy with an extra, hidden carrier , or he could be given
different forces at the start.
The AI designer is now in the position of an admiral. He can
set plans for all of his groups, and set the doctrine for their
responses to the enemy. Those plans can be specifically
created to fool a human player. For instance carrier groups
can be set to patrol some innocuous point during daylight
hours, then make high speed runs at night to appear somewhere totally different.

■

Designer Notes
can be set to patrol some innocuous point during daylight
hours, then make high speed runs at night to appear somewhere totally different.
As well as making computer players much more competent,
the WarRoom system also
removes the crippling burden of predictability from the
computer player. Human
players can no longer rely on
the what the computer did
last time as a guide to what it
will do next time. And even
if a player eventually gets familiar with a scenario's permutations, all it will take is
the addition of a different
WarRoom file to his system
to remove that reassurance.
Even the computer's Order
of Battle could be altered.
WarRoom is really a fourth
generation computer language, applied specifically to
the task of describing AI
processes in strategy games. SSG has created the system, and
we can expand and build on the language as required. Anyone
who purchases the CAW Creation Kit will be able to change
the WarRoom plans included with CA W, or create new plans
from scratch. We hope that users will get involved in the AI
process, creating their own plans and surprising their friends
with their fiendish strategies. The creation kit will be available
about two to three months after the CA W game release.

The WarRoom system is applicable to many games besides
CAW. In a game like Warlords, it could be used to give
computer players a choice of strategies. The game could keep
a record of which strategies worked and which did not, using
this information to build up a
'personality' as well improving its chance of success.
A WarRoom system could
also be used to run third party
players. In a Warlords context, this could mean sudden
incursions by Vikings, Huns
or other raiders. These would
be outside the control of
either the human or computer
players. They would have
their own objectives and
strategies described by a
WarRoom system, and would
be able to respond
intelgyoacksint
them. Just the qualities one is
looking for in extra opponents.
We can see no limits to the ways and means of applying a
system such as WarRoom. When one plays against the computer in CAW, one is actually playing against SSG's own
plans, and hence against SSG. We will be developing more
plans for the WarRoom system, and we can assure players that
we have only just begun to fight.

Industry News

Electronic Arts And Origin Pool Resources In
"Ultimate" Acquisition

E

lectronic Arts (NASDAQ:

ERTS) has agreed to acquire
Texas-based Origin Systems,

Inc. in a 1.3 million share stock exchange worth approximately $35 million. As published on Prodigy after the
market close of September 4, 1992, in
a story based on the recurring rumor
concerning the deal, the operations in
Austin, TX will continue to function as
an independent (though wholly-owned
subsidiary) unit. Origin President
Robert Garriott will continue to act as
Origin's president and will become an
Electronic Arts vice-president, while
Richard Garriott (Lord British) will
continue as Creative Director at Origin
and become an executive producer for
Electronic Arts. In addition, the worldfamous designer has relinquished his
personal copyright on the Ultima trademark as part of the deal.
Both organizations win in this pooling
of interests. In order for the current entertainment software industry to be able to
take advantage of future technologies and
avoid being swallowed by larger players
in the overall entertainment and computer industries, existing publishers will
need to be making new alliances. This
deal provides new marketing muscle and
opportunities for Origin's talents.

Also, though the original article on the
rumored acquisition mentioned alleged
cash flow problems and employee losses,
Origin asserted that they had not lost a
significant number of employees, were
expecting the best fiscal quarter in their
history (assuming all scheduled products
shipped) and had considered an independent IPO (Initial Public Offering) of
their own prior to electing to join Electonic Arts' forward looking expansion
into new technologies. Origin's General
Manager, Fred Schmidt, stated that one
reason for the desire to change the corporate structure was to be able to allow more
significant employee participation in the
ownership of the company. He alluded to
a stock distribution to certain Origin employees as a result of the current deal.
What is truly unusual about this partnership is the fact that Electronic Arts and
Origin had a parting of the ways in 1987.
Furious that an Electronic Arts title,
Deathlord, appeared to use Utima's tile
set of terrain and appeared to be Ultima
with a thin veneer of pseudo-Oriental
flavor, Lord British insisted that he would
leave EA's affiliated label program if the
company published the alleged clone.
EA's then CEO/President, Trip Hawkins,
was just as adamant that the tail (i.e. a one
product company) would not wag the dog
(i.e. Electronic Arts Distribution).

Lord British not only lived up to his
threat, but allegedly reaped a cathartic
revenge on Hawkins by naming a pirate
leader (found in more than one Ultima),
Pirt Snikwah (try that one backwards).
Some people think that the sphere, tetrahedron and cube which the Guardian asks
the avatar to assemble in Ultima VII bears
an interesting resemblance to the three
basic shapes in EA's logo. One has to
wonder if EA's executives are going to
be as good-natured about (what is now
going to be) self-deprecating spoofs in
Origin's existing product line as Lucasfilm was about the ™ jokes in Monkey
Island.
So, why does a company which grosses
over $200 million per year purchase a $13
million per year company? In this case,
Electronic Arts is recruiting, acquiring
and aligning with partners that can help
them exploit future opportunities in new
technology. Hardware manufacturers,
venture capitalists and entertainment
conglomerates are all part of a murky
near future where EA, particularly
through the SMSG tri-venture with Time
Warner and Kleiner, Perkins, Caulfield,
appears to have an edge. To exploit the
future platform(s), the company will need
recognizable, marketable products and
solid technology. Origin provides both.

I

4

Taking A Peek
Broderbund
Novato, CA
WHERE IN THE USA IS CARMEN
SANDIEGO DELUXE: With the millions of kids after this woman you'd
think someone would finally find her.
But, she's at it again. This time, however, the infamous Queen of Edutainment is all dolled up for her appearance
on the state-of-the-art MS-DOS machines. Enhancements to the original
USA hit include gorgeous new digitized VGA background graphics, a new
Dataminder/Videophone interface
(like that in Where in the World?), a
complete series of regional maps (as
opposed to the one U.S. map in the
original), and 3000 new clues for kids
to track down in their latest edition of
Fodor's U.S.A. IBM ($79.95). Circle
Reader Service #1.
Buena Vista Software
Burbank, CA
HEAVEN & EARTH: Though this
game's fiction directs one towards a
convergence of mind on the "ground of
wakefulness and sanity" underneath
our inattentive Western lifestyles, the
package is actually a composite of
three wildly divergent diversions. The
first game is not really a game at all, but
a toy of sorts. While tapped into one's
nascent sense of rhythm and harmony,
one must direct a swinging pendulum
over a series of gravitational vortices.
While an interesting concept, those
without the patience of a monk will
probably race recklessly toward the
next diversion; a complicated solitaire
rummy of sorts where the player
(turned Buddhist acolyte) must compose tricks based on seasons, elements,
and landscapes, with special celestial
phenomena to completely confound
matters (though they do have cute animations and sound effects for each).
The card game is more interesting than
standard-deck solitaire and can be just
as addicting. The third game is the one
least in the Tao of the package concept.
Labeled "Illusions," this is a set of abstract geometrical puzzles similar to
those in Cliff Johnson's The Fool 's Errand or 3 in Three. Though challenging, the stark, logical nature of the
puzzle fits into the package concept
like a cubist nude in a Chinese landscape painting. IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #2.
Capstone
Miami, FL
LOTTO GOLD: To the skeptic, lottery
number analysis seems to be the mod-

ern equivalent of alchemy — attempting to turn the mad, mystical scribblings of one's pencil lead into gold. To
those more hopeful (naive?) this latest
version (2.1) of the 'ultimate lottery
analysis program' may offer the tools
one needs to shave tens of thousands of
points off of one's several
milon-teds.Ocaplyverfn
sounding mathematical analysis techniques to one's favorite lottery results
to yield The Winning Sequence. In addition to straight-forward historical
analysis, averaging techniques, and
number frequency analysis, one can
take his/her biorhythmic biodata
(based solely on one's birthdate) and
manipulate it using a Fibonacci
isAordnatfmlyheICg!BM.
Circle Reader Service #3.
Centron Software
7718 La Mirada Drive
Boca Raton, FL 33433
CASINO MASTER: This seems a reasonably nice package of non-glitzy
gambling games. Its games of chance
include: craps, blackjack, video poker,
roulette and baccarat, with win/loss
data kept and varying levels of odds
information provided for each. The
craps game allows one to select stake
and chip values and provides a decent
introduction to the house advantage
odds for all bets. Blackjack is blackjack, but this program has a card counting function and a counting tutor in the
documentation. The video poker program is none too thrilling, but neither
is it in reality. The roulette system is
nothing to scream about (the docs boast
of an animated wheel. Wheel) but,
once again, the docs provide useful information on betting strategies. Finally, the package includes a baccarat
system which is a pretty hard program
to find. If one is a baccarat player, this
program itself might be worth the price
of the entire package. All in all, this is
a great introduction to the basics of
betting strategy. IBM ($79.00).
Circle Reader Service #4.
PUZZLE MASTER: What's a 14 letter
word for a crossword puzzle constructor, that starts with a "C?" Give up?
Cruciverbalist, of course, and that's
what one can become with this
pack-age. Included are 200 daily and 50 Sunday crosswords from the New York
Times, as well as a puzzle creation utility. While solving the given puzzles
one can check their current answers
without revealing the other answers
(cheat!), and get correct letters (cheat!)
or full words (cheat!). For puzzle pur-

Taking A Peek
ists one can avoid the temptation to
fudge (cheat!) and, if one is as skeptical
about paperless crosswords as one is
about the `paperless office,' then the
puzzles can be printed out and solved
the old-fashioned way. IBM, Mac
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #5.
Davidson & Associates, Inc.
PO BOX 2961
Torrance, CA 90509
KID WORKS 2: Here's one for the
aspiring writer/publisher in the home.
This is basically a multimedia publishing tool for youngsters, that enable
them to create fully illustrated stories
that can be played back with voice nar
ration. Children first write their story
using words or pictographic icons, then
they illustrate the story with a complete
paint toolbox, and finally, they reap the
fruits of their labor as the program tell,
the story back to them. How did iie
ever get by with crayons and paper'
Mac ($59.95).
Circle Reader Service #6.
Domark
San Mateo, CA
TENGEN'S ARCADE HITS: Toobin'.
APB, Klax. Hard Drivin' II and Escape
From The Planet of the Robot Monsters; five action games from the middle ages of coin-op video gaming have
found their way to the PC. Toobin', or
"my spring break at the Colorado
River," involves piloting one radical
vacationer down a river while snatching goodies and fending of fraternity
boys by throwing river junk at them (no
cerebral cortex required). In APB, one
of the older games in the package, one
plays a police officer on a rough beat
One must ticket litter-bugs and other
heinous offenders while maintaining
blood sugar with a continual donut sup
ply, keep up the quotas and avoid de
merits. Klax is a weird abstract
action-puzzle where one must gather
squares from a conveyor belt and order
them into like stacks. Hard Drivin' II
is the most interesting game in the
pack, though it is a rather crude conversion of the excellent coin-op racing
game. One speeds a roadster around a
stunt track with loops, jumps and other
strange road phenomena. It includes a
track construction set, allowing one to
create their own commuter nightmares.
Finally, Escape is a Berserker descendant for two simultaneously playing
joystick-jockeys. Battle nasty reptile
thingies side-by-side! IBM ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #7.

Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA
JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL II:
"Pow! Zap! Boom! See that block?!"
Football's most charismatic color-man
and champion of the down linemen, has
graced yet another game box cover
with his exuberant grin. An enhancement to the solid original, this package
adds new features, like a one-on-one
match-up analyzer, and a "Madden
speaks" feature wherein the man with
the electronic chalkboard offers his
strategic advice on the game. The
graphics have been revamped to include VGA support, but this is not exactly a good thing. Players view the
field from a 3-D isometric, end-zone to
end-zone view and the field scrolls and
pans impressively with the action, but
the players themselves have become
more cartoonish and difficult to follow.
Still. Madden II offers a rich play selection and creation facility, and one can
play in both an action and a strategic
mode. It does not offer real team or
player names but, rather, "fictional
teams inspired by" certain classic ball
clubs and players. IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #8.
Empire Simulation
do ReadySoft Inc.
Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada
INTERNATIONAL SPORTS CHALLENGE: If one's Olympic zeal hasn't
waned in the months since the Barcelona games, it might be worthwhile
to check-out this package of six unusual international events. one to four
players can participate in the following: diving, from three platform heights
with 40 different dives; shooting, with
pistols, rifles and shot-guns; show
jumping; a first-person horse riding
event; cycling, also a first person simulation with rough, poly-filled graphics;
swimming, the standard eye-hand
rhythm and endurance test; and finally,
the marathon, the standard joystick
waggling blister-buster with some
strategy elements (selecting refreshment schedules, random weather effects and choosing runners based upon
their pre-event training schedule).
Amiga, IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service #9.
Flying Turtle Software
PO BOX 1218
Port Townsend, WA 98368
CYBART — THE CYBERNATED
ARTIST: This non-interactive piece of
shareware generates framed pieces of
abstract, mostly geometrical, art

Taking A Peek
through an "artificial creativity algorithm" which is allowed (programmed)
to be creative (random) within certain
defined bounds. Like a fireworks show,
the program generates both duds and
awesome sights. It occasionally generates such surprisingly impressive
pieces that one may be forced to ask
pointed questions about the nature or
aesthetic expression— indeed, it could
prompt a shallow discussion of the
meaning of art between pseudo-intellectual editorial stuffed-shirts. Otherwise, it's kinda neat. IBM (Shareware
Registration - $15).
Circle Reader Service #10.
The Learning Company
6493 Kaiser Drive
Fremont, CA 94555
TIME RIDERS IN AMERICAN HISTORY: News Flash! Dr. Dread, the
media entrepreneur and owner of the
Dread News Network (DNN) has captured a communications satellite and is
using its transmission power to send
phony headl i nes to the news networks.
(Hmm...is that Ted Dread?) The
player's job in this edutainment product is to use the historical resource databanks at the Time Rider's
head-quarters to look up the correct
historical headline facts and repair the
damage done by Dread. The game covers American history from 1492 to
1905, and requires no supplementary
books (like Carmen Sandiego's Fodor
Guides and World Almanacs). Next to
Carmen Sandiego, this appears to be
one of the best edutainment titles in its
age range (10 & up) and subject matter
(history/geography). IBM ($59.95).
Circle Reader Service #11.
Lifestyle Software Group
63 Orange Street
St. Augustine, FL 32084
MICRO BRIDGE COMPANION:
This extensive bridge package contains
three programs: the Bridge Baron IV,
supposedly one of the stronger bidding
programs on the market; Bridge World
Challenges, a collection of interesting
situations from The Bridge World
magazine; and, a Personal Play Library
which lets one database, review and
replay past hands from one's play history. Bridge Baron was designed h\
Tom Throop, who has been programming strong bridge algorithms for
many years. IBM, Mac ($59.95).
Circle Reader Service #12.
GOLF COMPANION: Just in case one
gets bored with one's golf simulation
and actually goes out and hits live balls

on real grass with living, breathing
companions, this package may help its
user along the way. Compatible with
hand held organizers like the Casio
B.O.S.S., Atari Portfolio and Sharp
Wizard, among others, this program
offers a swing analyst feature, handicapper and a golf travel guide. By analyzing the golfer's response to a series
of questions about the flight path of
one's ball, the program will determine
the potential problems with one's
swing and offer advice and schematics
to help correct the problem. The handicapping feature simply keeps track of
one's game, stroke by stroke, and calculates one's handicap. Finally, the
golf travel guide is a database of course
information for greens around the
globe. IBM (Windows), Mac ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #13.
Masque Publishing
PO BOX 5223
Englewood, CO 80155
800-765-4223
VIDEO POKER FOR WINDOWS:
Well, there's one editor on the CGW
staff excited about this product. Every
time we're in Vegas (for the Winter
CES show), he seems to drop too much
of his editorial paycheck in those infernal video poker machines. This program promises to make him a better
player by offering extensive strategic
advice and statistical analysis. One can
play any style of game (Jacks or Better,
Deuces Wild, Two Pair) for fun or for
education in the Windows environment. The program offers constant advice on hands, has practice drills for
pre-vacation warm-up, and will simulate an unlimited number of hands to
test the long term outcome of one's
particular strategy. No more trips to the
change booth for this editor! Get me a
(change) bucket! IBM with Windows
($54.95). Circle Reader Service #14.
Merit Software
Dallas, TX
TOM LANDRY STRATEGY FOOTBALL: One look at Merit's address
tells the whole story about this endorsement deal. Options in this strategic pigskin package include a VCR-like
replay device, a 'scenario editor' with
which one can set up specific game
situations for study, and of course, the
"Ask Landry" option whereby the
player can get tips from The Man. The
game has no play creation option per
se, rather one creates plays on the fly,
starting from a play base. For example,
the player might choose a "standard

Taking A Peek
pass" base, then click on the medium
pass button, click on the 'motion' button to set the flank moving, then the
play action button to fake a full-back
hand-off, and, finally, click on the pass
pattern button to chose a down n' out
for the primary receiver— and one has
a play. As one might guess, it can get a
little tedious building plays from the
ground up every time. The field action
is lively, though it is very difficult to
tell just exactly what is going on, and
the players feel a bit oversized for the
field dimensions. It can get awfully
crowded (i.e. it's not uncommon to find
four defenders guarding a receiver on a
deep corner pattern). Beyond the Christian Cowboy, Merit got no further NFL
licenses for this product, so neither
team names nor actual player names
are used. Supports modem connect for
long-distance Tele-Bowls. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #15.
MicroProse
Hunt Valley, MD
DARKLANDS: MicroProse's much
anticipated RPG set in medieval Germany has been met by its public with
much to-do. Some of the hoopla can be
attributed to the hoard of bugs in the
initial release (which has since been
replaced by two updates), but the substantive debate surrounds the openended approach to game development,
wherein the story is not a linear one
leading to an ultimate conflict, but
rather, the player is allowed the freedom to choose how the story should
progress, which heroic tasks to take up,
and when the game should end. Thus,
the game becomes more of a 'simulation' and less of a story. Beyond this,
Darklands has a wonderful character
generation system, beautiful splashscreen graphics, a quasi-real-time 3-D,
isometric combat system, a relatively
simple armor/weapon system, an involved alchemical system, a unique approach to 'magic' involving the
worship of saints, and a rather repetitive menu system when interacting in
cities, hamlets, and monasteries. IBM
($69.95). Circle Reader Service #16.
Microsoft
Bellingham, WA
MICROSOFT GOLF: The computer
industry giant makes its first major entertainment release since Flight Simulator in another "mass-appeal" genre.
Developed for Microsoft by Access,
this is actually Links for the Windows
environment. While not as graphically
stunning as Access' latest Links 386

Pro, it's still graphically superior to
most competitors in the market. Now
players can play all of the Links Championship Courses (completely compatible) in a customized windows
environment while running other appl
cations. Of course, the only practical
use for the multitasking function is to
sneak a few holes in your cubicle during work hours (no more need for a
"Boss" key as the Windows magic key
sequence (Alt-Esc) will instantly take
one back to their application). It's been
reported that productivity in Redmond,
Washington has dipped precipitously
since the company-wide beta-test. Productivity managers! Don't let this happen to you! IBM ($64.95).
Circle Reader Service #17.
Psygnosis
Brookline, MA
CARL LEWIS CHALLENGE: If three
channels of continuous Olympic coverage weren't enough for your ravening
track and field appetite, then get interactive with this collection of events in
the thumb blistering tradition of athletic action gaming. There is a small
strategy element to the game as one
must design a five week training regimen for his/her athletes prior to the
competition to maximize an athlete's
agility, speed, power and stamina, as
well as make the strategic assignments
of athletes to events from one's stable
of Olympic hopefuls. Beyond this, Carl
Lewis is pure action-gaming requiring
world class levels of eye-hand athleticism. IBM. Circle Reader Service #18.
R.A.W. Entertainment, Inc.
3027 Marina Bay Drive, Suite 110
League City, TX 77573-2772
SPOILS OF WAR: RAW Entertainment, the international talent scout for
independently developed strategy
games, has discovered a solid product
in this game of conquest from the German Design Group. As previewed in
issue #99, this is a sometimes dauntingly complex mix of exploration, colonial administration, and strategic or
tactical warfare for one to four human
or computer opponents. A map generation feature ensures that aspiring conquistadors always have "New Worlds"
to oppress. Amiga, IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #19.
Sierra On-Line
Coarsegold, CA
GOBLIIINS: No, the copyeditor isn't
on vacation; the title of this bizarre
French import has three 'eyes' in it; one
for each of the zany little gobliiins the

Taking A Peek
player controls while trying to figure
out the goofy puzzles in this 3-D Sierrastyle world. Each of the three goblins
has a gift; Hooter casts a general magic
spell with varying effect; Bobo is a
pugilist and a rope walker; and Dwayne
is the only one with any manual dexterity, it seems, as he is the only one of the
triplets who can pick-up and use an
item. Players must figure out how to
use these skills, and in what order, to
bypass the obstacles that lie in the path
to their goal (which, by the way, is to
save their king from the voodoo tortures of some nasty gobliiin hater). This
game is heavy on the cute factor as
there are dozens of silly animations
(including a wacky intro sequence) to
accompany nearly every move the
gobliiins make. Even when idle, these
guys will play with yo-yos and yawn
and wink and what not, and when the
player fouls up, well, he'll catch nonverbal hell from this unforgiving
bunch. A game hasn't tipped the
cutesie scale this far since Lemmings.
IBM. Circle Reader Service #20.
Softdisk Publishing
606 Common St.
Shreveport, LA 71101
KEEN DREAMS: King Boobus Tuber, the evil potatoe (we have to be
careful, the Grand Old Party might legislate a spelling change) monarch, has
captured innocent children and subjected them to the tortures of deranged
vegetables (the end result of genetically engineered foods, no doubt), in
this link between the two previously
published Keen trilogies. Developed
for Softdisk by Id Software (the de- ,
ranged bunch responsible for Wolfenstein 3-D) this is yet another action
romp through Keen's disturbed world.
Will Keen succumb to the (spelling?)
vices of the potatoe fiends? Will his
sweet disposition be spoiled by Sour
Grapes? Will he, like all strong leaders
of the free world, have the strength to
'just say noe' to the Broccolashes?
Register this shareware and see. Warn
ing: may induce vegetative states. IBM
($14.95). Circle Reader Service #21.
Three-Sixty, Inc.
Campbell, CA
THEATRE OF WAR: As previewed i ii
CGW#97, this is an abstract, real-time,
somewhat chesslike sort of strategy
game, that defies all attempts at a succinct description. As difficult as it may
be to describe its mechanics, the graphics are even more so: geometric figures
transform into animated creatures that 6

fight out the action on a 3-D polygonish
board seen from a side-long perspective with command icons floating in
virtual space. Even if abstract strategy
is not one's mug of Sanka, this is one
to see at the software store. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #22.
Virgin Games, Inc.
Irvine, CA
FLOOR 13: Murder, intrigue, scandal—according to this paranoiac computer game, these are the necessary
element of a strong democratic government. Players take the role of the head
of a secret agency behind the British
government, responding to events that
threaten the standing of the government in relation to 'them' the opposing political party. Players assign
agents to trail, tap, slander, abduct, interrogate and murder political dissidents. It's a do-or-die task for the
player, as incompetence will lead to a
short flight out of the 13th floor window of one's office. IBM ($19.99).
Circle Reader Service #23.
HEIMDALL: The mythos of the Icelandic Eddas has sure made a resurgence in computer role-playing lately.
Here, once again, the gods of Odin's
Hall have found themselves duped by
the evil Loke and are forced to choose
a human to save their deified derrieres.
The player chooses six human heroes
out of the 30 provided and leads them
through this rather large R-Ping space
of mythical inspiration. The view is the
popular 3-D isometric view, and the
combat system is somewhat like that of
Elvira. The generation of Heimdall's
(the hero) initial traits is based upon
three action sequences wherein one
must chop off a barmaid's blonde ponytails with throwing axes, catch a
greased pig, and rob a ship of its gold
while fighting off hoards of pissed-off
sailors. Amiga, IBM ($39.99).
Circle Reader Service #24.
REALMS: This European strategy
game is a potpourri of recognizable
elements from several recent releases.
There's the requisite, vogue and hackneyed Populous perspective and interface, the city-by-city strategic elements
of SSG's Warlords, and the real-time,
tactical battle system of Microprose's
Sword of the Samurai. While the interface is a bit cumbersome, the game
appears to have some depth, and may
prove a challenge to the casual strategist. Amiga, Atari, IBM($39.99).
Circle Reader Service #25.

CONVERSIONS
AMIGA:
Nova 9 (Dynamix)

IBM CD-ROM:
Kings Quest V (Sierra)

IBM:
Birds of Prey (Electronic Arts)
Tristan Pinball
(Amtex Software Corporation)

MACINTOSH (Color only):
Space Quest I (Sierra)

MACINTOSH (B/W & Color):
Command HQ (MicroPlay)
Pools of Darkness (SSI)
Where in America's
Past is Carmen Sandiego?
(Broderbund)

Bestseller List

Editorial

by Johnny L. Wilson

State of the Magazine: Over the years,
we've adapted or developed quite a few
terms, phrases, and acronyms to describe
the world of computer gaming. Sometimes,
we are queried as to what we mean by these
terms, particularly when they are adapted
from foreign languages or used with different nuances than the standard dictionary
definition (or even differently than other
magazines covering the same subject).
Here then, as we reach the 100th issue
milestone, is our first attempt at the Computer Gaming World glossary.
Abstract: A brief summary of an article
from another publication which is designed
to suggest the salient points of said article
and encourage interested readers to obtain
a copy and read the full article.
Action Game: Computer games that emphasize hand-eye coordination and reflexes.
Adventure Game: Computer games that
allow one to take an alter ego through a
storyline or series of events.
Al: Ostensibly meaning "artificial intelligence," it is actually used as a quick and
dirty term for the computer opponent routines.
Busy-Bath Software: Computer games
where there is far more exploration than
meaningful interaction. Often applied to
children's games.
CES: The acronym for the Consumer
Electronics Show, a major electronics industry exposition held in the Winter and
Summer of each year and providing a venue
for software publishers to unveil their upcoming computer games.
Cheese Screen: A term inspired by behavioral psychology to refer to the positive
reinforcement, in terms of fanfare, that
gamers (particularly adventure gamers and
CRPGers) receive upon successfully completing the game.
Control Freak: The type of gamer, particularly found among wargamers, who
wants to control every aspect of every individual unit or person, regardless of scale,
era or realism.
CRPG: Computer role-playing games are
a subset of adventure games which are
based on character development (usually
involving, numerical values for attributes).
Cyburb: 1) the multi-player on-line gaming environment or telecommunity which

enables gamers to socialize and interact so
successfully in a simulated "reality" that it
sometimes feels more real than one's own
physical neighborhood; 2) a place where
gamers make friends they've never seen.
Designer Notes: Articles from a member
of the design team which express something about how a computer game came to
be or is coming to be. These articles are
intended to share something about the philosophy behind or the inner workings of a
game and are not supposed to be virtual
press releases from the marketing department of a software publisher.
Fred: Scorpia's grue friend, an original
cast member from Zork and the bartender
at the tavern of the mind (The Scorpion's
Tale) where she gives hints on adventure
games and CRPGs.
Grognard: A noun derived from the
French verb, grogner. The verb means "to
complain" and referred to the veteran
French soldier who always grumbled as
they plodded toward battle, but were always dependable in a crunch. Grognards
tend to complain about everything in their
games, but they always seem to be buying
and playing new ones. Hence, we mean
those who are determined to play whether
a product is attractive, well-designed or
interesting, simply because of their personal interests.
Hack and Slash: A type of CRPG with an
emphasis on repetitive combat, almost to
the exclusion of story, character interaction, discovery or management.
Midrash: Taken from the interpretive tradition of Hebrew Scripture, we use the
word to refer to the body of literature surrounding a game or period.
NPC: Non-player character (those managed by the computer) in CRPGs.
On-Line Games: Multi-player games
where players participate simultaneously
or by E-mail (see PBEM) over a local bulletin board system, Local Area Network
(LAN), or commercial network (such as
America On-Line, CompuServe, Delphi,
GEnie, Multi-Player Game Network, National Video Tex, or Prodigy).
Paiktography: Taken from the Greek
words for play and writing, this synthetic
CGWism means "listing of games." We
thought it sounded better than the ludicrous
"gameography" we might have had to use
otherwise.

PBM: Originally part of the boardgaming
hobby, Play-By-Mail referred to games
where players entered their moves and orders by mail and received their results in the
same way: In the computer game hobby,
PBM games would be those where players
exchanged disks through the mail.
PBEM: Play-By-Electronic-Mail refers
to direct connect, bulletin board systems
and network games where players enter
their moves on their computers and transmit their moves and orders by electronic
messaging.
Phased: Computer games in which players (human and/or computers) alternate in
activities over the course of a turn.
Real-Time: As opposed to a turn-based or
phased computer game, a real-time game
requires the player to perform an action or
actions where the game-time is passing at
the same rate as time outside the game.
Review: An article which examines the
finished computer game and evaluates its
merit on the basis of the reviewer's experiences. CGW reviewers are expected to finish adventure/CRPG games and to win at
strategy/simulation games.
Simulation: Computer games based on
first-person perspectives of real-world environments (i.e. even science-fiction or
fantasy-based simulations must operate according to real-world models).
Sneak Preview: An article based on a
work-in-progress. CGW does not print
sneak previews on games with which the
writer has not had some hands-on experience. Although the designs sometimes
change after the sneak previews are printed,
the articles are based upon our perceptions
of the products and are not written by persons involved with the game's design.
Strategy Game: Computer games that
emphasize strategic planning and problemsolving.
Turn-Based: Computer games in which
each turn represents a period of time which
is not equivalent to time outside the game.
Virtual Reality: A full 3D experience
where the player is totally immersed in a
computer generated world as opposed to
interacting with pseudo-3D images on a flat
screen.
Wargame: Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a command perspective.

