"Covering Interactive & Multimedla Entertainment COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The #1 Computer Game Magazine March 1994 Number 116 1002 100 Games Rated The Latest From Vegas A Report From CES DOOM PLUS Star Trek Judgment Rites Gabriel Knight CyberRace And More! $3.95 USA $4.95 Canadian 03 Kingmaker The Making Of A Monarch 129074 12158 "


"Laurar of Destiny Wolfenstein 3D Graphic Adventure lllll 1_11 III III. MHEEN FLOOR 8 SCORE UVES 4400 3 HEALTH AMMOT 36% 23 FLOOR 5 SCORE 2900 LIVES 3 HEALTH AMMO 172 83 FLOOR 9 SCORE LIVES 2800 3 HEALTH AMMO 807 93 Virtual Reality! Spear of Destiny brings virtual reality to the PC, hurling you into an intense battle between good and evil in which only you can save the world! A breathtaking musical soundtrack sets the mood, while amazing first person\" visual perspective and spectacular digital stereo sound effects give an experience like no other game you've ever played! Features! spectacular VGA virtual reality system breathtaking musical soundtrack for Adlib, Sound Blaster digitized stereo sound effects for Sound Blaster, Sound Source over 20 complete floors to cover 4 levels of play difficulty special extra challenges for advanced game players saves multiple games in process What the Reviewers Saya the player is there' like no game I've ever played...\" the sound and the visual action, is frighteningly realistic...\" I can't remember a game making such effective use of perspective and sound and thereby evoking such intense physiological responses from its players.\" Game by id Software. Published by FormGen Corporation, Box 279, North Andover, MA, USA, 01845-0279(800)263-2390 (416)857-4141 Fax: (416)857-4531 Circle Reader Service #55 "


"The Heavy Metal Eye Opener! NOW FOR THE PEZ TM THE ACADE GAME : BLAST THE ENDOSKELETONS! 12 Alam THE ARCADE GAMET NOW FOR THE PC! AKlaim ESCAPE T-1000'S entertainment, in c. HELICOPTER ATTACK! Distributed by UltraTech To order see your local retailer, or call 1-800-447-6543 (MC/VISA AMEX). T2-The Arcade Game is available for IBM/Tandy & 100% compatible PCs. MIDWAY , Sean TERMINATOR. 12, ENDOSKELETON and Depiction of ENDOSKELETON ore trademarks of Carolco Pictures Inc. (U.S. and Canado); Carolco International N.V. (All Other Countries) and used under authorization. Sublicensed by Midway Manufacturing Company from Acclaim Entertainment, Inc.  1991 Midway Manufacturing Company. Distributed under license from Acclaim Entertainment, Inc. by UltraTech. Circle Reader Service #62 "


"FEATURES COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 18 32 48 Kingmaker pg. 150 54 . 8 Hits And Misses At The Winter Consumer Electronics Show Sierra's Gabriel Knight A Knight In Shining Horror by Charles Ardai DOOM, DOOM, DOOM, DOOOOOM! id Software's Symphony Of Violence by Bryan Walker These Are The Voyages... Interplay's Star Trek: Judgment Rites Seeks Out New Life by Allen Greenberg Book 'em, Daryl! Daryl Gates And Sierra Hit The Streets In Police Quest: Open Season by Dennis Owens A Photon Finish CyberDreams And Syd Mead Team Up In CyberRace Games In Dolby Sound A Pop Star Tunes His Talent To Computer Games Archon Lives! SSI Resurrects A Classic by Terry Lee Coleman An Heir In Your Favor QQP's Strategy Game, Heir To The Throne C.H.A.O.S. Under Control Creative Multimedia Takes Sci-Fi To The Macs Technicolor Yawn Disney's Coaster Throws Gamers For A Loop T2 vs. Darth Vader Two Chess Games With Licenses To Kill Revolution Redux The Yanks Are At It Again In Syndicate: American Revolt by Jeff James Merit's Kronolog: The Nazi Paradox Eco-Nazis Goosestepping In Garbage by Charles Ardai Flight Of The Crystalline Cow Casady & Greene's Crystal Crazy Milks Macs For All Their Worth Terminate Or Be Terminated Man vs. Machine In Bethesda's Terminator: Rampage Tips For The Genetically Challenged Fighting & Fornicating Strategies For UnNatural Selection by H.E. Dille Aces Over The Amiga Fighter Duel Pro From Jaeger Software Kids & Computers Software That's Kid Tested, Parent Approved 8 8 Star Trek Pg. 42 8 8 102 119 HET DOOM Pg. 38 106 110 114 118 But what about that lies on the other side? People believe if you can control the galaxy. can control the black hole. you 128 CyberRace Pg. 48 "


"Prepare for Kombat on your PC! Experience all the action of the arcade sensation! KOMBAT FREE Mortal Kombat Tattoos in every box. AKlaim entertainment, in c. Distributed by UltraTech To order see your local retailer, or call 1-800-447-6543 (MC/VISA/AMEX). Mortal Kombat is available for the Amiga and IBM/Tandy & 100% compatible PCs. MIDWAY. Mortal Kombe Mortal Kombat  1992 licensed from Midway Manufacturing Company. All rights reserved. Distributed under license from Acclaim Entertainment, Inc. by UltraTech (212) 941-1224. Circle Reader Service #61 "


"142 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Bridge Over Troubled Bidders Readysoft's Positronic Bridge 150 156 COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD Sneak Preview: Computer Kingmaker Avalon Hill Gives You Your Day In Court by Johnny L. Wilson New Weapons In The Arsenal Arsenal Publishing Prepares Its Landing On Wargaming Beaches by M. Evan Brooks Impressions' Finest Hour? WW2 Air Force Commander Comes In Under The Radar by Bob Proctor 160 pg. 160 Publisher Russell Sipe Associate Publisher Jonathan Lane Editor-in-Chief Johnny Wilson Editor Chris Lombardi On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Technical Editor Mike Weksler Assistant Editors Chuck Miller Terry Coleman Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Production Assistant Christine Kloss M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Advertising Manager Lee J. Uniacke Advertising Sales Coordinator Kathy Garcia Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks 163 The General And The Joystick Empire's Campaign // Blends Action And Strategic Command by M. Evan Brooks Able Was Ere I Saw Elba Napoleon Returns In Scenario Disks For Battles of Napoleon by Terry Lee Coleman 168 I Shou structure of group GEBOT99 USA I po 0 ON -0-0-ALL --001 2-0040 Campaign Il pg. 163 Contents are copyrighted by Ziff-Davis Publishing Co. 1994. Subscription Rate: The subscription rate is $27.94 for a one year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $11.00 for postage. Airmail subscriptions are $78.00 per year. Canadian GST registration number is R123669673. Payment must be in U.S. dollars made by check or money order drawn upon a U.S. bank. Visa, MasterCard, AMEX accepted. Subscription Services: For subscription service questions, address changes or ordering information, call toll free (800) 827-4450 within the U.S. and Canada. All other countries call (303) 447-9330 or fax to (303) 443-5080 (international subscribers only) or write to Computer Gaming World: P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167. Back Issues: For back issues (subject to availability). $6.00 per issue (58.00 outside the U.S.), send check, money order or credit card information to Back Issues Dept., Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., P.O. Box 53131, Boulder, CO 80322-3131. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe (76703.622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B GEnie: CGW Internet: 76703.622@compuserve.com Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 For advertising information only, call: Lee J. Uniacke (714) 283-3000 x41 Printed in the U.S.A. DEPARTMENTS 10 Editorial (Do Gamers Grow Up?) 138 Best Of The Rest (Shareware) 14 READ.ME (The News That Fit) 148 CWW Editorial (CES From The 68 Company Report (Villa Crespo) Trenches) 70 Scorpia's View (Companions of 174 Taking A Peek Xanth) 181 Hall of Fame 86 The Scorpion's Tale (Sam & Max) 182 Top 100 Games 98 Over There (From Europe With 184 What's Hot? Love) 185 Patch File 122 Letters To The Editor 186 The Rumor Bag (Celticus 131 Advertisers' Index Leprechaunus) "


"\"if you want to go all out for games, the Falcon is the best bet for your money.\" -Computer Gaming World MACH V THE FASTEST GAMING MACHINE JUST GOT FASTER! NOW WITH EVEN HIGHER FRAMERATES 45+ VGA FRAMES PER SECOND!! & FASTER HARD DRIVE TRANSFERSOVER 4 MEGABYTES PER SECOND!! THE FALCON MACH V: THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE 'If you need the fastest computer performance for your gaming, personal, or business software, you need to fly a Falcon! The MACH V Is Complete For Only $2,495 To Order Call: 1-800-258-6778 VISA & MasterCard Accepted Financing Available On Approved Credit. Standard features: Intel 486 DX/2-66 Processor, P24T Pentium Upgradable 100% Compatible with All IBMT PC Software Falcon VESA Local Bus Motherboard, 256K Cache, AMI BIOS VESA Local Bus Graphics Board with 1 Megabyte 16.8 Million Colors! Falcon VESA Local Bus Hard Drive Controller Card 4 Megabytes of RAM expandable to 32 1.2 & 1.44 Floppy Drives 250 Megabyte 12 ms Hard Drive with 128K Cache MPCTM Level 2 Compliant 250 ms Double-Speed CD-ROM Drive NEW! SoundBlaster PROTM with Multimedia Encyclopedia on CD-ROM NEW Shielded Multimedia Speakers CH Products FlightStick PROTM 4 Button Joystick with Viewing Control CH Products Automatic Speed Sensitive Dual Gameport Mini-Tower Case with 250 Watt Power Supply Two Cooling Fans with Temperature Sensing 14\" NonInterlaced Super VGA Monitor, .28dp, Edge-to-Edge Display NEWI 101 Key Keyboard with Dustcover MS-DOS 6TM 3 Button Mouse with Mousepad One Year Parts & Labor Warranty One Year On-Site Service Policy NEW! Upgrades for Memory. Hard Drives, Monitors and many other components are available each MACH V is custom tailored to fit your game! FALCON NORTHWEST COMPUTER SYSTEMS 263 South Bayshore Dr. Coos Bay, OR 97420 Trademarks are the property of their respective owners "


"CLEARLY, SOMETHNG HAS STARTLED MR. Cow, And It Ain't A PAIR OF COLD HANDS. You GOT A VILLAGE. FARMS. Huts. KnightS. PEOPLE TO BOSS AROUND. AND A COW. LFE iS GOOD. BUT THE YOU GET THESE VISITORS. THEY'RE FAT. THEY DROOL, BURP, AND SMELL LIKE A 11 OUTHOUSE. THEY COME I HORDES, EATING YOUR 3D TEXTURE MAPPED HUTS, TREES, WOMEN, CHILDREN, AND WORST OF ALL, YOUR COW. YOU TRY TO TRASH THEM WITH YOUR SWORD, BUT IT AIN'T EASY, AND THEIR GUTS GET ALL OVER YOU. LFE STARTS TO SUCK. YOU'VE MET \"THE HORDE\", MY FRIEND. An ORIGINAL GAME WITH CD-QUALITY LIVE ACTION VIDEO, DIGITIZED MUSIC AND DISGUSTING EATING SOUNDS. AND A CAST OF ACTORS WHO CAN ACTUALLY ACT: LIKE KIRK CAMERON AND MICHAEL GREGORY. You BUILD WALLS, MOATS, AND DEATH PITS. AND YOU HIRE AI ARCHER TO HELP FEND THE OFF. AGAIN THE 3 DO HORDE ATTACKS. YOU SAVE THE COW, BUT THEY EAT YOUR HUT, YOUR "


"THE HORDE 1994 Crystal Dynamics Inc. All rights reserved. IBM PC game screen shown Crystal Dynamics and The Horde are trademarks of Crystal Dynamics. 3DO, the 3DO logos and interactive Multiplayer are trademarks of The 3DO Company. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines Corp CORII CROP, AID THAT GIRL NEXT DOOR YOU HAD YOUR EYE on. Now LIFE REALLY SUCKS. AND IT AIN'T ABOUT IBM PC PC-CD & 3DO TO GET ANY EASIER. THE EVL HORDLINGS GROW BIGGER, FASTER, EVEN SMARTER. (AND YOU HAVEN'T EVEN MET THE EVIL CHAICELLOR YET.) DEAR READER, WE PRAY YOU'RE THE SORT WHO LEARIS QUICKLY. 'CAUSE THIS STUFF'S CRYSTAL DYNAMICS\" HAPPENING on 32 bits. Enjoy, MY FRIEND. AMD GOOD LUCK. Circle Reader Service #44 "


"EDDDDDA Do Gamers Grow Up? by Johnny L. Wilson The title is more than a rhetorical quessis is not provable. We could claim that as the proverbial wisdom of Solomon to decide betion with disparaging overtones; it is images used in flight simulators became more tween what is gratuitous and exploitative and a serious question that reflects upon and more realistic, the target audience grew what is insightful and productive. Indeed, the potential for the expansion and survival older. Of course, we would be overlooking Solomon himself appears to have had trouble of interactive entertainment. Many compathe fact that time was passing as those of us applying divine wisdom to his sexual life. We nies in the hardware, software and magazine who play computer games grew older in genare facing the difficulty of divining between fields are building their future on the assumpcral and technology made possible the leaps the sexploitive and merely provocative, and tion that the gaming world is maturing. The in graphics and performance. are working on a reasonable policy to sift decisions made by these companies will have We could then try to shore up the hypothethrough ads and reviews in such a way that significant impact upon the number of titles sis with the realization that multimedia that we can serve all of our readers without panavailable on given platforms, the subject matmuddy term for the electronic dissemination dering to the oversensitive. Our sister Ziffter of these titles, and even the way in which of sound and pictures together-had barely Davis publications are undergoing something these titles will be distributed. begun to scratch the surface in its distribution of the same rethinking of their policies. NeiHardware manufacturers are making reof photo-realistic pictures and digitized video ther our readers nor our advertisers will alsearch and development expenditures based until the pornographic CD marker began to the pornographic CD market began to ways agree with our reasoning or decisions, on the assumption that maturing gamers will take off. Suddenly, individuals who had albut we are definitely aware of the issues and demand greater performance. There is at least ways written off computer entertainment working toward solutions that work for our one historical example to support this. When products as \"just for kids» are beginning to magazine. Sega offered a 16-bit game cartridge that pay attention as the products present images outperformed the existing 8-bit machines, that are more and more realistic.\" Third, it means that there will be greater the company began to overtake and has overlap between the computers without keyWhat does this mean to the gamer? First, it boards and the hot rod computer rigs chosen quickly overtaken Nintendo in the video means that a horde of people who never game market. At the same time, the average thought about playing computer games ma by the majority of our readers. There will be age of the video game customer began to edge es may flight simulations where the interface caredecide to give them a try. Many are not slightly upward. fully follows rules discovered in the cartridge \"gamers» and do not have the same preconworld in an attempt to bring the high-end Sega customers regularly point out how ceptions of play that those of us who \"piocartridge gamers (and sometimes the better superior their machines are to Nintendo, and neered\" the genre possess. More has to be games) into the personal computer world, as how much more realistic their graphics are spelled out to these customers, and they are well as flight simulations where the high-end compared to even Super Nintendo graphics. less willing to put up with rough puzzles and characteristics are streamlined down to the Obviously, for those of us who are concerned archaic gaming conventions. They are more consoles in a logical fashion. In this way, the about the impact of realistic violence and interested in the chrome of presentation and bloodshed with no accountability for the less in the \"guts» of the game. worlds of video game and computer enterplayer's actions, the increased performance of Second, it means that the subject matter for tainment will come even closer together. the machines is a two-edged sword. Nonethegames will be broadened to cover the limits This convergence, however, will not be an less, it is a reality that Mortal Kombat players of human interaction, just as it has in art, all-consuming merger between video games, who own the Sega Genesis machine laugh at comics, literature, film, radio and television. computer entertainment and cable TV. InNintendo's color palette solution (changing As the subject matter of games touches upon stead, we will see a proliferation of imitation, the blood from red to white and calling it spit the areas where art imitates life and presents cross-promotion, technology-linking and or sweat) for the SNES version. The issue is such subjects with increasing realism, we can demographic crossover. In the long run, we one of perceived maturity, even if the grounds expect the self-imposed moral policement of think this means a larger universe of gamers for the perception is somewhat specious. this world-on both extremes of the political and more variety in games and game styles. Let me set forth a hypothesis based on this spectrum—to protest that software publishIn the short run, it may mean a string of big limited anecdotal evidence. Younger gamers ers are trying to corrupt our children. An «Mc, too!» failures that do not meet the needs Suspend their disbeliefara lower informative ratings system will ameliorate of hard-core gamers. In spite of the concerns, graphic, sound and performance level than some of these concerns, but not all. we at CGW are bullish on computer enterolder gamers. The corollary to this hypothesis Indeed, this broadening of subject mattertainment and feel that we are poised on the would follow: the closer the presentation of also means that magazines which care about brink of a revolution. Whether it takes a few graphics, sound and movement are to reality, the sensibilities of their readership will have years or a decade to create the \"new order,\" the more the game should appeal to older tougher and tougher calls about what ads to we'll be here to cover the maturation of the gamers. Like most generalities, this hypotherun and in what fashion. It will require the computer game market. CGW Page 10 Computer Gaming World "


"BUY THE BEST OF 193* And get the best of '91 &'92 FREE *As Chosen by Computer Gaming World & PC Games OVER W:ZapdrY... TRILOGY 4.6 MILLION SOLD WIZARDRY V, VI & VII Winner of over 15 International Awards WIZARDRY, the game that pioneered first-person perspective & defined computer role-playing for more than a decade. Now, the award-winning WIZARDRY V, VI & VII are available in 1 complete package, at 1 incredible price. Three best selling games, with over 500 hours of engaging,replayable adventure, come to you with a savings of 25% off individual suggested retail prices. -rady CRUSADERS of the DARK SAVANT 90HTS CRUSADERS OF THE DARK SAVANT REDEFINING ROLE-PLAYING FOR AN ENTIRE INDUSTRY '1993 ROLE-PLAYING GAME OF THE YEAR COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 1992 Fantasy Role-Playing Game of the Year PC Games 1992 Role-Playing Game of the Year Strategy Plus Magazine HILAKO LEONE Pin TARANG CLOCR613 GODT Wygry. edgars GUM NA 2013 TELE BANE OF THE COSMIC FORGE PAVING THE WAY FOR THE SYSTEMS OF THE FUTURE 1991 Best Game of the Year Strategy Plus Magazine 1991 Best Role-Playing Game of the Year Strategy Plus Magazine Top Role-Playing Game, April 1991 Computer Gaming World FORGE 1991 WIZARDRY. RELSEN Mad Herbieron appears THE LEGACY OF HEART OF THE MAELSTROM BREAKING AWAY FROM THE WIZARDRY SYSTEM OF THE PAST haquezim SIR-TECH Ogdensburg Business Center, P.O. Box 245 Ogdensburg, NY 13669 (315) 393-6633 THE WIZARDRY TRILOGY FAX# (315) 393-1525 Scenarios I, II & III The original classics that set the trend in Available at a software retailer near you, or call: fantasy role-playing are now available at a new low price! Circle Reader Service #112 (800) 447-1230 "


"\"The best simulator I've ever seen!\" Rick Zalud, Computer Game Review \"Makes the term 'virtual redundant Dave Moskowitz, Video Games and Computer Entertainment TEAR INTO A NEW REALITY! ARTERIETYRUNNELSE \"Sets a totally new standard for helicopter simulations!\" Arnie Katz, Electronic Games \"Redefines the state-of-the-art in computer simulation graphics!\" Computer Gaming World from Novalogic, the creators af WOLFPACKIM COMANCHEM N YMUM OVERKILLEM IS the promise of subulation action come true! You comme the ultimate in 21st Century Attack Helicopters the Boeing Sikorsky BAH-66 Comanche, not just over but in and around ultra-realistic 3-D terrain. Can it be true? Absolutely! Thanks to Novalogic's radical new simulation environment VOXEL SPACET, which produces graphics 500 times more detailed than any of those tired old polygon graphic games. You'll dive from mountain peaks, dart through winding canyons, and roar through pulse-pounding combat in stunning cloud-filled skies. So get ready for awesome graphics, unprecedented speed, and sweat-dripping, teeth-clenching, white-knuckle excitement unlike anything you've ever experienced on a personal computer. Tear out to your nearest software dealer and tear into a new reality! Tom Spotitest, richest terrain graphics ever  in a retire simulator First simulator with real-time controls of RAH-66 Comanche Unsurpassed speed and maneuverability Real-time fly-bys through actual terrain data One-minute learning curve Superb musical score and sound LOGIC ACTUAL SCREENSHOTS CHAT 23 IS TESETTEFLARE 30 TARE 20 For the IBM PC380 SX or greater 386486.32 biode game with megabytes fingereddfessed pool Wallace Comanche. Maximum Overkill VOXEL SPACE Novalgala anu The Wovalogie logo are trademarks of Novalania, inca 19570 Ventura Blvd. Ste 200 Tarzana, CA 91355 1992 by Novalogic, Inc. All Rights hasarved Circle Reader Service #94 "


"TM WOLFPACK Now on CD-ROM! Since its release, WolfPackTM has set a new standard for submarine simulations. Winner of Tilt Magazine's Tilt D'Or award for best simulation, it has consistently topped the best seller charts, earning raves from the reviewing community: \"Wolfpack can only be classified as a genre buster, one of those rare games that sets a new standard for other releases in the same field to live or die by Video Games & Computer Entertainment \"The graphics for Wolfpack are stunning Wargamer Now Wolfpack is available on PC CD-ROM. The same compelling game play of the floppy version allows you to command either a WW2 submarine wolf pack or the surface fleet Historically accurate, your weapons and instruments are precisely keyed to the war year that you choose to play, Afull construction set is included to allow you to re-create actual battles. From NovalogicTM the creators of Comanche Maximum OverkillTM and Ultrabots Wolfpack CD-ROM also includes: 58 new missions, 70 total. Over 5 minutes of breathtaking animation sequences. Pick up a copy at your local software store and find out what underwater warfare is all about. NOVA LOGIC Actual screen images Circle Reader Service #95 "


"READ.ME Intel Bans DOOM! in a company-wide memo issued in December, Intel banned id THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE GAMING WORLD Software's DOOM from their nerworks. The memo was issued after several Intel subnets were rendered inoperNTN Networks With New World able during lunch hour, as employees raced to get in a game of multiplayer Interactive TV Leader Purchases Might, Magic & More DOOM Death Match. Intel's decree is one of several banishments to come from large computer companies in the The announced acquisition of New World Computing by NTN wake of DOOM's long-awaited release. Communications, Inc. (AMEX: NTN) invokes the spellbinding possibility Aside from issues of lost worker proI of an on-line multiplayer Might & Magic game over multiple communicaductivity, DOOM creates other probtions networks. NTN is a leading company in multiplayer interactive entertainlems that have nerwork administrators ment with its NTN Trivia, available on Genie and INN, as well as in hotels and pulling out their hair. As explained in lounges throughout the country, and QB1, the interactive television game of footthe Intel memo, Doom causes network ball coaching strategy. problems because of the way it transNew World Computing is a natural NTN acquired full interest in New partner with NTN, considering that World for a stock swap of one million two of its recent products, Spaceward of their common shares (value circa Ho! and Empire Deluxe, both allow for $10/share), continuing a trend where multiplayer contests via networks. The public companies involved in other crown jewel in New World's tiara is, of media have acquired software publishcourse, Might & Magic. The series as a ers. In the last year, Sony purchased whole has sold more than one million Psygnosis; Viacom acquired ICOM copies. Simulations, transforming them into In spite of the potential synergy Viacom New Media; the Tribune Co. cited by NTN President Pat Down's purchased Compton's New Media; and and the obvious promise of such prod Time Warner Interactive expanded by ucts in the future. New World purchasing Software Sorcery. President Jon Van Caneghem says that Neither NTN nor New World has Neither NTN nor New World has mits the game information across a nethe doesn't know whether the cooperacommented on the precise projects in work. Doom sends a high level broadtive efforts between the two business which the two units will act in concert, cast packet that forces every computer units will happen in six months or six but one New World insider suggested on a network to transfer the packet into years. \"It will happen, though. Just that their Vegas Games line might be the main memory and analyze it before it is don't let anybody think we're planning place to start because of its broad condiscarded. Most network traffic is hanto program Might & Magic for bars and sumer interest. dled such that packets that are not hotels.\" needed by a machine are discarded by the network card before they interrupt Blockbuster Ties The Knot With Virgin the processor. With broadcast packets, the \"net\" result is that each computer in a continuing trend among large content to put on the information on the network must process the companies buying or investing superhighway,» according to a January DOOM data—even if it is not running in entertainment concerns, 18 article in the L.A. Times. Knief the game. If several Doom games are Blockbuster Video has purchased later denied this quote, but Times running at once, low end 386 workstanearly 20% in Virgin Interactive reporter Dean Takahashi stood by it, tions can bog down and network Entertainment in exchange for $30 saying, \"I can assure you he said that. servers can creep to a halt. million worth of Blockbuster stock. He even offered that Blockbuster According to Jay Wilbur, CEO of id The nation's largest video store chain, might use some of irs 20,000 hours of Software, the 1.2 version of DOOM Blockbuster is interested in merging (Aaron] Spelling and Republic will eliminate the use of broadcast with content providers before being Pictures programming for use as video packets and enable the game to comderailed by the digital highway,\" in Virgin games.\" municate machine to machine on a where video and games may be availThis is the second recent invest network, eliminating the technical able on demand. ment announcement involving Virgin problem. Version 1.2, which will A spokesman for the Fort (formerly known as Virgin Games), include a promised modem play feaLauderdale-based Blockbuster, Wally which sold a 16.2% stake to toy titan ture, should be available as you read Knief, said, «We want to have some Hasbro Inc. last year for $25 million. this. reporter Dean this quote, mes ockinge for $30 Page 14 Computer Gaming World "


"Rocket Science Orbits New Concepts ather Hollywood special effects did the background pictured with this and it sounds like it will be just that. wizards like Michael Backes article and game designer Brian Whatever titles Rocket Science elects (Jurassic Park, Rising Sun), Ron Moriarty designed the interactive seg. to launch in the near future it is cle Cobb (Alien The Last Starfighter. ments. It is expected to be released on that this company isn't going to be satConan the Barbarian). Richard Cohen Sega-CD in the fall of this year and on isfied with game design as usual. As the ninatar II Total Recall Star Trek MS-DOS based platforms in early '95. accompanying chart (which shows the VI) and Mark Sullivan (RoboCop 2, Comic aficionados will love Cadillacs momentum from both the traditional Hook, Death Becomes Her). Then, comand Dinosaurs. Based on the popular interactive and passive entertainment bine their expertise with that of veteran comic book series, this game is retroindustries) indicates, much of the game designers like Brian Moriarty '50s technology meets prehistoric monaction over the next five years will take (Wishbringer, Trinity, Loom) and David sters. The big challenge for this game Fox (Rescue on Fractalus, Zak was structuring the look of the game to McKracken and the Alien Mindbenders, use the two-dimensional vernacular of comic book art, while allowing the world to function with 3-D attributes. It looks like Frank Cirocco created the art, a former Marvel comic artist whose work shows the influence of Wally Wood, Al Williamson and Frank Frazetta. Again, the game will be released on Sega-CD in the fall of this year and should be on personal computers by Spring -95. Loadstar The most unique game in the bunch Cadillacs and Dinosaurs is called Dark Ride. Currently planned place in the central area between CDfor the Sega-CD, this space roller coastROM and interactive cable. Rocket and Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade), er experience sports a bizarre design Science has placed their emphasis in that seems to mix Rube Goldberg and just that arena. In addition, the compaas well as the technological expertise of M.C. Escher. Not only are the levels ny's technical wizards have developed a the former QuickTime team from expected to be wildly constructed, but technology called Game Science that Apple Computer, Bruce Leak, Sean they will also occasionally load upsideimproves the way data is delivered from Callahan, Peter Hoddie and Mark down or in a different place than the the CD-ROM to the processor. The Krueger. Stir in veteran executives from gamer expects. The emphasis, unlike team is expecting to overcome many SuperMac Technologies, former Vice President of Marketing Steve Blank and most action and physical logic games, is latency and data rate problems by the former Director time of their initial releases. of on playing rather than finishing. The Software company calls the game «fun-physics\" Technology Peter Barrett. The resulting mix is expected to be Rocket Science's recipe for success. The Convergence of the Game and Entertainment Industries The mix is definitely expected to be Production good news for gamers. As ViceCosts President Peter Barrett explained to G e industry. Movies CGW, «My first love is games. My sec$50 M Interactive Play ond is film. In this company, our goal is to bring them both together.\" He went $10 M on to say that Rocket Science would Cable place an emphasis on imagery, environment, character, and story, but that the Interactive games would all have a kinetic factor. Cable $3 M Cable-set If such is the goal, the first three Boxes CD-ROM announced products certainly fit the bill. Loadstar is a project based on a sciPC's & $1 M ence fiction film that never reached Cartridges Game Consoles Entertainment Industry $250,000 fruition. It is a machinery-intensive Game Passive Viewing SFX fest with detailed Ron Cobb Floppies Consoles PC's $100,000 designs of vehicles known as Jump Trucks, high speed rail vehicles Production Values / Realism that literally launch via a \"jump.\" Veteran matte painter Mark Sullivan 3 Game indisi Entertainment Industry  Rocket Science Games, Inc. March 1994 Page 15 "


"CGW To Present Games Of The Year At Digital World Will Feature First Acting Awards For Multimedia SEAL do Gal Vomputer Gaming World magaOn-Line Game of the Year: zine, the world's oldest computEmpire Builder (MPGNet) Jer gaming publication, will preMulti-Player Battle Tech (GEnie) sent its annual Game of the Year awards Shadow of Yserbius: Fates of Twinion at this year's Digital World conference. (INN) Digital World, the high-tech confer3-D Golf (INN) ence on convergence technologies, is VGA Planets (Many BBS Hosts) scheduled for June 6-8, 1994, at the Role-Playing Game Los Angeles Convention Center. The of the Year: Computer Gaming World Games of the Year award ceremony, expected to Betrayal at Krondor (Dynamix) showcase the inaugural presentation of Bloodnet (Micro Prose) acting awards for the computer game Darkside of Xeen (New World) medium. Categories and nominees for Dark Sun (SSI) the acting awards will be announced in Lands of Lore (Westwood/Virgin) a later READ.ME column, but the nominees for Games of the Year were announced at the Winter Consumer Electronics Show. Action Game of the Year: Doom (id Software) Prince of Persia II (Broderbund) Privateer (Origin) Rebel Assauli (LucasArts) Shadowcaster (Origin) Adventure Game of the Year: Day of the Tentacle (LucasArts) Gabriel Knight: Sins of the Fathers (Sierra) Myst (Broderbund) Police Quest 4: Open Season (Sierra) Return to Zork (Acrivision) Star Trek: Judgment Rites (Interplay) Simulation of the Year: Aces Over Europe (Dynamix) Flight Simulator Tool Kit (Domark) IndyCar Racing (Papyrus/Virgin) SEAL Team (Electronic Arts) Tornado (Spectrum-Holo Byte) Sports Game of the Year: APBA Baseball for Windows 3.1 (Miller Associates) Cactus League Pro Basketball (Cactus League) Coaches Challenge Football (MicroProse) Front Page Sports Football Pro (Dynamix) NHLPA Hockey (Electronic Arts) Strategy Game of the Year: Chessmaster 4000 (Software Toolworks) Kasparov's Gambit (Electronic Arts) Master of Orion (MicroProse) Merchant Prince (QQP) Sid and Als Incredible Toons (Dynamix) SimCity 2000 (Maxis) Wargame of the Year: Clash of Steel (SSI) V For Victory: Gold, Juno, Sword (Three-Sixty) High Command (Three-Sixty) Walls of Rome (Mindcraft) Warlords II (SSG) Special Award for Innovation: Aide de Camp (HPS Simulations) Ziff-Davis Announces \"Interchange\" For Digital Highway Games And More To Attract On-Line Tourists iff Desktop Interactive has from an on-line database full of text to with a target of 200,000 users by the announced a new on-line inforan on-line multimedia magazine with end of 1995. Michael Kolowich, the mation service. With the workmultiple connections to new informa executive in charge of Ziff Desktop ing title of Interchange, the service is tion and activities. Interactive, assures readers of the print expected to offer on-line companion Computer Gaming World will be a magazines that the new network will magazines, electronic mail, special part of this new venture, since games not detract from the strength of the interest/discussion groups, news access will be a significant component of the current publications. He positioned and on-line games. The network is nascent network. 30,000 users will the network and existing publications expected to be significantly more visukick off ZDI's 1994 test of Interchange as companion media that will compleas companion me ally-oriented, and the format shift is ment each other. CGW Page 16 Computer Gaming World "


"In 1944, This Was The Only Heavy Metal Touring Europe. American M4 Shermans. Tigers of the Third Reich. These were the tanks that rocked Europe from D-Day to the fall of Berlin in World War II. The same armored juggernauts that you'll command in the explosive new game Across the Rhine from MicroProse. Jump into history's most famous tanks and experience the fierce combat and tough decisions that gripped World War II tank commanders. Take command of U.S. or German forces. Control single tanks or entire Companies. And blast your way through enemy units across the war-torn landscape of Europe. Across the Rhine from MicroProse. And you thought heavy metal started in the 70's. Circle Reader Service #84 MICROPROSE 1993 MicroProse ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. "


"The FX Of Computer Coming Attractions in Computer Games from the Winter Consumer Electronics Show INTER reasure Island may have been the perfect place for the CGW staff to stay during the Winter Consumer Electronics Show. We marveled at the replicas of \"Age of Fighting Sail» vessels maneuvering in a man-made lagoon with masts snapping, boarding actions and one ship sinking. Yet, we couldn't get over the feeling we'd seen this before. The gas jet sending flame into the sky seemed remarkably like the volcano at the Mirage next door and the fireworks attending the exploding armory seemed like a Disneyland stage production. We were impressed with the ingenuity of the stage designer, but not drawn into the suspended disbelief that would have made us feel like we had stepped back in time. Photo by Ken Brown "


"MEDIA VISION Jarom IIIIII IITTIIN Left to right: System Shock (Origin), Noctropolis (EA), Media Vision booth, Pacific Strike (Origin) Entertainment In a lot of ways, that is what we felt in person perspective adventure in a fully-renwill feature some footage from the film, as examining the new computer games at dered world. On the console side, well as the Evolver video game from WCES. Here are the brightest and best of Electronic Arts' Shock Wave interweaves Trimark Interactive. The latter, positioned the upcoming spring releases, placed upon both 3-D action and digitized film footage. by the company as The Terminator meets a pedestal and forced to dance for the buywant to talk abour digitized film? Child's Play, was developed along with the ers and the press, and we kept seeing the Electronic Arts is artfully inserting digitized ng digitized filming. samc techniques and the same products. film footage into the film noir, graphic Want to talk about texture-mapping? Want to talk about Doom? We saw several novel look of its Noctropolis. The backIt's here in a lot of places. Remember M-1 products that attempted a Doom perspecground art is stunning and the conceit for Tank Platoon? Imagine if MicroProse was tive, including Capstone's Corridor 7, imposing video atop painted backgrounds to release that system with texture-mapped Merit's Isle of the Damned, Electronic Arts' Electronic Arts is ve is very strong (the hero dreams he has World War II era tanks and scenarios. Escape from Monster Manor (300), Ataris entered the world of his favorite comic That's the idea with Across The Rhine, a Alien vs. Predator (Jaguar), and Origin's book character). Access will use veteranW WII tank platoon simulation that is sure System Shock. Hollywood talent and film footage in the to excite historical gamers. MicroProse also Want to talk about three-dimensional next Tex Murphy game, Under A Killing uses texture-mapping and Gouraud shading graphics? 3D Studio, Softimage and other 3Moon. Margot Kidder, Brian Keith and in 1942: The Pacific Air War. 1942 allows D graphics programs are being used for Russell Means star in this interactive movie. players to fly ten historical Japanese planes everything from the realistic ships and Crystal Dynamics will use Kirk Cameron and, in spite of the sophisticated graphics, modules in Sierra's Outpost, a science ficas one of their dominant on-screen actors provides for head-to-head modem play. tion strategy game based on hard science, to in the digitized video of The Horde; Origin is building on their Strike Roberta Williams' massive Phantasmagoria, Mediavision has chosen relatively new talCommander technology with Pacific Strike, a detailed three-dimensional environmentent in their interactive movies Critical Path a World War II version of Strike for her horrific adventure game. Such techand Quantum Gate, and Tsunami will put Commander, and Wings of Glory: 1917niques are used for modeling ships and a few lucky gamers into a revised Blue 1918. The latter allows would-be pilots to environments in Mission Studios' Force. look around the cockpit like Strike Battlecruiser 3000 AD (an Interplay affiliIn addition, many companies are using Commander did, but there is much more ate), an amazingly complex space strategy digitized footage in a multimedia format as reason to look around in the WWI planes game where sophisticated Al meets both a tutorial. One of the best implementations of Wings of Glory than there was in the the simulation fan and the tactician, and in a in of this is Interolay's Castles 2 CD-RO) of this is Interplay's Castles 2 CD-ROM. long-range tactical combat of Strike building the weird world for Merit's The game's producer culled film footage Commander. Finally, Dynamix is not sitthe Children of the Corn from hundreds of hours of BBC documenting idly by as its competition improves. being taries about castles. Then, he placed the Aces of the Deep, the World War II U-boat filmed on location-style horror game. In intriguing and relevant footage on the simulation, uses Gouraud shading to addition, Origin used 3-D modeling for game's CD as part of the introduction. The enhance the targer ships. the introduction to Ultima VIII: Pagan and CD also includes a full-blown tutorial game Want to talk about multi-player games? allows gamers to operate a 3-D synthetic that can be interrupted at any time. New World Computing's Zephyr, a futurisactor in their interactive, sci-fi movie, Bio Electronic Arts' ESPN series of sportstic tank game where players are sponsored Forge. Software Toolworks used 3-D games (3DO) will use digitized footage for by large manufacturing companies and Studio almost exclusively in modeling the tutorials, as well. Finally, some actionblast their way to the top, looks like a wellrich, fantasy world of characters for Dragon games like Sony's The Lawnmower Man balanced and fascinating race combat game Tales: Rage of the Dark Alliance. It is a first(released in Europe by The Sales Curve) for network play. On a different level, SSI's March 1994 Page 19 "


"Yserbius By the magation Network TEC Dark Legions offers both modem and network play for action-oriented strategy gamers who like duking it out in fantasy worlds. Tek Warp (Technological Trends) Sadly, there was very little new technology on display in the computer gaming arena. One piece of good news was the unveiling of a virtual reality system for the home from Advanced Gravis. Their new headtracking unit is expected to sell for around $700 retail, and a floating mouse peripheral for $100 more. Both peripherals should enhance the gaming experience for those who want to experience virtual new worlds. An Advanced Gravis spokesperson 7 FORTE sale as carly as the fall of this year. Another bit of good news was shown in private. A dedicated developer showed CGW a prototype for software-based, near SVGA graphics. The demonstration was exceptional, proving that an ordinary VGA card with as little as 256K in memory could display photo-realistic backgrounds and allow animated sprites to move atop of those backgrounds. In light of the recent CGW editorial on companies that have taken the computer gamer as early adopter for granted, it was nice to see a company develop an elegant software solution rather than expect their customers to upgrade to a higher hardware solution. Another hopeful trend may be seen in terms of software development. Gilman Louie, Chairman of Spectrum HoloByte, explained that one reason for closing the AGA group (the graphic adventure team) at MicroProse was because those tools did not allow future designers to hook simulations into the graphic adventures. Louie explained, \"I want everything we do from now on to have the hooks built-in for future expansion.\" Neil Johnston, director of Spectrum HoloByte's flight sim group, echoed his chairman. He told CGW that the fourth generation Falcon product would not arrive all at once. Rather, it would be built as modular advancements and enhancements. He did pique our interest by assuring us that the fourth generation Falcon product would add military vehicles which are not Left to right: aircraft to the Electronic Battlefield Series. Speed Racer and Racer X enjoy a lighter moment, Sierra also plans to develop games with CPU Bach (Microprose), hooks in mind. Designers and programYserbius (Imagination Network), mers have been assigned to make many Ultima VIII: Pagan (Origin) Sierra and Dynamix games \"Network Aware.» Eventually, this will mean a seamlast CES report, the 3DO program is one less communication between the standof the most unique uses of computing alone games and the Imagination Network power that we've ever seen. where gamers will be able to play together. Soon, it will mean that gamers will be able Role Over Beethoven (CRPGs) to swap hints, save files and possibly, objects from the worlds of Sicrra games. Probably one of the saddest sights over In addition, Maxis continues to work the last couple of years has been the rapid with Mallard on a utility where gamers will decline in computer role-playing games. be able to convert their SimCity Classic and This year is no exception. Even Ultima SimCity 2000 save files into scenery files for Microsoft Flight Simulator 5.0. The Maxis action/adventure than a CRPG. The vision of interconnected software goes furemphasis is on bigger on-screen characters with more realistic animation in a smaller game world (1/3 smaller than Ultima VII). This seems to be part of a design philosophy which says that computer gamers don't want to play the big games any longer. One game that defies the trend is Inherit The Earth from New World Computing. This is a CRPG where the player controls \"furries,\" those humanoid animals that are so popular among the more esoteric comic convention crowd. The fictional VR brings DOOM up close and personal. set-up is that this is a post-holocaust world where the animals ther, however, with Will Wright currently have mutated into humanoids. It looks like working on a project where each building it will offer plenty of interesting new possiwithin SimCity 2000 could be designed in bilities. detail and integrated into the overall strucAnother interesting CRPG is ture of the city. Ravenloft:Strahd's Possession from Strategic Finally, Al is improving in several areas. Simulations, Inc. and Dream Forge (forMindcraft's CyberGo moves beyond the merly Event Horizon Software). In additree-branched logic and into expert system tion to covering the world of vampires, the technology and threshold logic in order to designers have tried to create a universe of ser long-range strategic goals. In this way, it more interesting puzzles and ethical choices not only assesses the board, but plays with a than we have seen in recent days. The particular style. Mission Products' graphic look is of a higher resolution Eye of Battlecruiser 3000 AD uses neural network the Beholder. SSI is also continuing to suptechnology to handle NPCs (whether port their AD&D license by publishing Alopponents or crew members). Perhaps, the Qadim: The Genie's Curse. This is role-playmost impressive use of Al, however, is CPU ing in the world of the Arabian Nights. Bach, Sid Meier's music composition proCeltic Tales is a unique new approach gram from MicroProse. As described in the from Koei. The player is the leader of a Page 20 Computer Gaming World "


"TOTERPLAY'S 10 YEAR ANTHOLOGY CLASSIC COLLECTION TASS TIMES BUCURCULIS BLOG A TALES UNKNOWN Dragon Wars Bari's male BUDILLO attle STAR TREK Van Ringan 21HRIYE DAY 1983 INTERPLAY 1993 Ten years in the making, but available for a very limited time. The Classic Collection contains ten extraordinary DOS games from the ten most exciting and influential years in computer game development from Interplay. And they're all together on one CD-ROM. These are the games that not only won your respect, but the attention and accolades of computer game critics all over the world. The games that made history. The games no gamer should be without. Interplay Productions, Inc. 17922 Fitch Avenue Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 563-6678 Star Trek do 1993 Paramount Pictures. Star Trek is a resistered trademark and the U.S.S. Enterprise is a trademark of Paramount Pictures. All rights reserved. The Plor of the Lord of the Rings, characters of the Hobbits, and the other characters from The Lord of the Rings are George Allen & Unwin Pubishers Lid. 1966 1974 1979 1981: All other product and corporate names are trademarks and registered trademarks of their respective owners.  1993 Interplay Productions, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"0000 Brent Spiner stan, S d IRATI ie NNN IIIIIII small, nomadic tribe in the 1st century product is largely a horizontal scrolling Left to right: Ravenloft (SSI/DreamForge), B.C. The player must stake out territory, combat game, but features very impressive Brent Spiner at Spectrum HoloByte booth, build up armies and resources, and draw 3-D models of the robots which the player Al-Qadim (SSI/AD&D), from the magical artifacts and traditions of must defeat. Klingon scrutinizes The Next Generation game the Druids. Koei is particularly proud of Inferno, from Ocean, is an action/adventheir attempt to provide strong female charture that looks at first glance like a crude acters. hybrid berween Wine Commander and Star In the more traditional mode of action We are also looking forward to Empire's Control 2. There is a solar system with games, Hi-Tech Expressions is nearing CyberSpace (based on the pen and paper seven planets and three moons, constructed release on Mortal Kombat, a direct translagame from Iron Crown Enterprises) and as texture-mapped terrain and digitized tion of the cartridge game for PC owners Dream Web, a detective game set in a gritty, photos, to be explored, and over 700 miswho haven't shed enough blood with grimy future that almost makes the streets sions to challenge the gamer. Gamers can Doom. The new twist for the computer verof George Alec Effinger's Budayeen (When also pilot ships that use three different sion is that it will feature an artificial intelliGravity Fails) or Ridley Scott's Blade flight models as they listen to the twisted gence scheme that learns the gamer's Runner look tame. These aren't the only beat of the British rockers, Alien Sexfiends. favorite moves and counteracts them. Hidark future games to come in 1994. Virgin We were also impressed with the lip-synchTech Expressions is also releasing a converwill be importing Beneath A Steel Sky, a ing of the non-player characters wheneversion of 12: The Arcade Game for the perdark future CRPG that was discussed in an they spoke directly to the player's character. sonal computer. earlier \"Over There\" as Virtual Theatre. Mallard Software, the company that is Psygnosis' Microcosm, a futuristic rollernados will enjoy the almost synonymous with Microsoft Flight coaster ride through the human body graphic novel look of Beneath A Steel Sky. Simulator add-ons, is about to release a new which mixes digitized video and traditional One new player entered the CRPG action/adventure which can probably best graphics, has been mentioned in earlier artiarena when CyberDreams announced that be described as Outland (the Sean Connery cles. It is almost finished and will soon be they had signed E. Gary Gygax (co-creator movie, not the comic strip) meets found on interactive platforms everywhere. of the original Dungeons and Dragons pen 21st Century Entertainment and paper game) to design a CRPG called will reprise their Pinball Fantasies Hunters of Ralk. Of course, many of the game, originally released on the CRPGs expected during the last calendar Amiga, for MS-DOS. A CD veryear have yet to ship: Bethesda's Arena: The sion of the game is expected to Elder Scrolls, Interplay's Stonekeep, and ship in late Spring. It will feature Spectrum Holo Byte's Star Trek: The Next a multimedia history of pinball as Generation role-playing games. part of the package. MultiBall is an upcoming pinball title which Twitch And Flex (Action Games) will not only allow players to put multiple balls in play, but will Bethesda's long awaited Delta Vis a feature a construction set. Pinball cross between the coin-op Stun Runner and 2000 is aimed at the expert pinthe old Tunnels of Armageddon (with signifball player and will feature icantly better and faster graphics). In short, One of Inferno's (Ocean) nicer denizens. physics-based action. it is a mad race across cyberspace where the action is fast and the strategy is discovered Mallard's Quackers is a new series of Shadowcaster. G-Nome puts the gamer into by the seat of your pants. action games. The first release in the series, the DNA strand of a genetically engineered which is set to debut on the Macintosh, is New World's Zephyr is a multi-player cop who can alter his shape and outward Fast Action Pag: The First Challenge. Most race for survival in the world of the mega appearance at will. interesting of the four games included (Flak corporations. Some of the design is based As noted earlier, Atari's Alien vs. Attack, Bubble Trouble, Mole's Quest and on New World founder Jon van Predator, for the Atari Jaguar, has an interBot) was Mole's Quest. It offers a mixture of Cancghem's experiences in winning the esting approach to far future violence. Not spelunking and platform hopping that will West Coast Formula Ford championship. only can gamers play the space marine tryremind veteran gamers of Dig Dug with Just as Jon learned about corporate sponing to clear out the varmints, but the game berter graphics. sorships, so must computer gamers or else scrolls faster when the gamer is playing the watch their tanks get blown up because of Another strong Macintosh title is Alien trying to waste the space marine and AstroChase 3-D from Interplay. This zerotheir technological backwardness. features a special near-psychadelic perspecG shoot-out is a high-tech version of all Another far future action romp will be tive when the gamer is using the Predator's those carly shooters (like Asteroids) that Mirage's Rise of the Robots, to be distributed special vision. used to keep us hooked on the coin-op in the United States by Accolade. This Page 22 Computer Gaming World "


" IN CYBER STRIKE, ALL BEGINNERS WILL BE TREATED FAIRLY. GAMING WORLD WINNER ON-LINE GAME The #1 Computer Game Magazine COMPUTER OF THE YEAR. AND THEN DESTROYED. Beaten all the boxed games? Done the arcades to death? Try CyberStrike, the wild new multi-player game on Genie where you hop into a two-legged CyberPod and battle it out against other real live humans for control of a virtual reality city. The action's fast and furious. But even if you're new in town, you won't get blown to Kingdom Come. Well, not right away at least. In fact, CyberStrike is so easy to learn, you might actually live long enough to waste someone else first. And best of all, it only costs three bucks an hour. So strap yourself inside a pod and come out shooting. You've got nothing to lose. Except your life. GEnie multi-player games 100% ORGANIC OPPONENTS SIGN UP NOW: 1. Set your modem for half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free 1-800-638-8369. Upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U# = prompt, enter JOINGENIE then press RETURN 4. At the key code prompt enter AJC423 5. Have a major credit card or your checking account number ready. For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. OLEME \"Here's the fine print. Genie multi-player games and support services are $3.00 an hour in non prime time: 6 p.m. to 8 a.m. local time Mon.-Fri., all day Sat. and Sun, and selected holidays. There's also an $8.95 monthly subscription fee. Each month, you'll get credit for up to four hours of nonprime time usage. Any surcharges incurred apply to all hourly usage, including your first four hours. SIMUTRONICS Circle Reader Service #57 "


"machines. The three-dimensional graphics tions, with over 200 missions included. Left to right: are nicely portrayed and the interface is TEX will have synthesized voice even on the Great Naval Battles II (SSI), Looking for games that don't suck, floppy version. very intuitive. Wings Of Glory (Origin), MicroProse's Across The Rhine bears CDs are (virtually?) everywhere at CES Sim, Sim, Sim (Simulations) game play similarities to Mi Tank Platoon, Simulations provide one of the most but has much more impressive textureexciting genres in computer gamedom. Not mapped tanks and is designed around Atlantic during WWII. It features seven only do they offer the chance to pilot, drive WWII scenarios. Fleet Defender, also from different U-boat models, a multitude of or command expensive vehicles, but the MicroProse, is an F-14 simulation in the warships and merchant ships to serve as vicgenre as a whole tends to push the envelope company's tradition of fast-paced air comtims/opponents and eight different enemy of technology as each simulation tries to bat simulations. It has an impressive array aircraft. become more and more realistic. Processing of options allowing the player to customize power is taxed to the limit in order to prothe sim. NovaLogic was showing Armored Fist, the tank simulation using Comanche vide for detailed flight models, fast frame Two simulations feature the giant comMaximum Overkill's voxel graphic technolrates and texture-mapped graphics. The bar robots of Japanime fame. MechWarrior ogy. In scenarios involving Americanand current emphasis seems to be on providing II: The Clans is a well-conceived simulation the best graphics possible, given the tradeset in the BattleTech universe. Featuring Soviet-made tanks, the player can command his contingent from a offs in performance, and creating Command vehicle or fight within modem/network versions of the same hot individual tanks. experiences. One of the important news The Pacific theater of World War II is items in the simulation genre was the subject matter for several sims. Origin's the announcement from Looking Pacific Strike is a hybrid sim/story approach Glass Technologies (developers a la Wing Commander or Strike of Ultima Underworld and Commander. The original game features 37 BioForge for Origin) that they missions and a mission disk is expected to plan to release their first self-pubfollow. Micro Prose opts for the more tradilished product. Tentatively entitional simulation in 1942: The Pacific Air tled Flight, this flight sim is War. The game allows sim pilots to fly ten designed to be a photorealistic, historical planes and command either virtual playground employing a Japanese or U.S. forces. SSI's Great Naval Conquer the South Pacific with Battles II: Guadalcanal, 1942-43 is yet true flight model. Particularly 1942: The Pacific Air War (MicroProse). impressive in this mid-'94 release another sim set in the Pacific Theatre. As is the way the program accurately with the original GNB, gamers will be allowed to command naval vessels from texture-mapped robots, mode texture-mapped robots, modem and nerreflects the response of the aircraft to either side in both strategic campaigns and work play, and the rich ficrion behind the weather and turbulence on the wings and tactical battles. familiar cosmos. Activision's classy sim shell of the plane combined with the photakes readers into a far more chaotic unitorealistic representation of the entire game Wings of Glory from Origin uses the verse than the static balkanization of the world, including the flight instrumentation. Strike Commander engine with tons of original setting. Further, the emphasis is chrome to depict WWI air combat. Rather more on the player as mercenary (killer?) Join The Adventure than a straight sim like Red Baron, Glory than soldier in this top-notch sequel. (Adventure Games) includes the cinematic plot sequences we've come to expect from the folks in Texas, MetalTech from Dynamix will also fea1994 looks like it will feature a very along with a random mission generator. ture modem support. When you go into a strong line-up in adventure games. Ocean's TFX features five million kilobattle, you negotiate the terms for victory Topping the list for most of the CGW staff (fighting for weapons, funds) with the was Electronic Arts' Noctropolis. With meters of simulated action in such faraway other player. One unique feature is the freegraphics a la vintage Ridley Scott and a places as Somalia, India and Columbia. floating camera that follows each 'mech. In bizarre story that would please Orson Though playable in an arcade form, the addition to piloting your 'mech, you can Welles, this game promises to be something flight model for the advanced mode was pilot your camera and shoot your foe's rovof a graphic feast—a computer game noir. designed with the help of an aeronautics professor. The story unfolds through ing eye. Of course, one can round up the usual \"Flashpoine\" missions specific to each type A ces of the Deep is the lat Aces of the Deep is the latest Dynamix suspects in the graphic adventure genre. simulation. As noted in the last CES report, Sierra plans to release a new King's Quest, will fly stealth missions instead of intercepthe game is based on U-boat actions in the Space Quest and Gabriel Knight in the next Page 24 Computer Gaming World "


"ARE YOU READY TO EXPERIENCE THE ULTIMATE IN SQUAD-LEVEL SPACE COMBAT? The sequel to the immensely popular Breach 2, Breach 3 puts you in command as Squad Leader of the Federated Worlds. Do you have what it takes to command your marines in 1200ZW(X) dangerous missions against destructive enemy forces? All new features in Breach 3 include a unique combination of turn-based and real-time play; individual personalities for each marine; stunning 256-color VGA graphics; tree-structured campaigns containing up to 511 scenarios; support for all major sound cards; LUCIU OZU and modular terrain, objects and opponents, LOUW The fate of the Federated Worlds is in your hands...    PRANINE A ORIENTATION TILSTEIN som EINT TITUTI STALL1 LTTILIMIZ LET Choose from exciting missions or use the scenario builder to create your own! Watch marines carry out your orders according to their own unique personalities! Stop the graphically stunning combat at any time to change your orders! EKZOMNITREND Impressions The latest module in Omnitrend's Interlocking Game System, Breach 3 allows you to interconnect with Breach 2 and Impressions Rules of Engagement 2! INTERLOCKING GAMESYSTEM Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment 1993 Impressions Software Inc. Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234. Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #63 Screenshots may vary "


"HEIL CAB Left to right: year. LucasArts will not only launch their On the film scene, Paramount Eleventh Hour (Virgin), Sam & Max Hit The Road CD, but have Interactive plans to release Star Trek, Deep Bioforge (Origin), assigned their third co-designer to The Dig Space Nine: The Hunt. The adventure is Dragonsphere (MicroProse), (based on a Steven Spielberg \"Amazing based on the TV series and is expected to CGW Editors late for an appointment Stories» script). As noted earlier, Access will allow gamers to play the role of a release another Tex Murphy adventure this Federation officer, Klingon, Ferengi or Spring. And Tsunami is in production on Bajoran in this cinematic mystery title. original Gigeresque graphic adventure, and Protostar II and Ringworld II. Both Macintosh and MS-DOS versions are confirmed that the Harlan Ellison project 1 Interplay just released Star Trek: being developed for both floppy and CDHave No Mouth And I Must Scream is still Judgment Rites and will follow-up with Star ROM release. in the works. Fleet Academy. If this game is anywhere near as impressive as the cinematic opening, This Means War (Wargames) Star Fleet Academy is going to have plenty of new cadets. Also, the company's IIn addition to those wargames covered Motion joint venture with France's in this month's CWW editorial, we were Infogrames will sport Call of Cthulhu: happy to see several others in development. Shadow of the Comet, set in the familiar Westwood's Command and Conquer is Lovecraftian environs of the Chaosium one of those strategy/wargames that is hard people-and-paper game, and Alone in the to categorize. This follow-up to Dune II Dark 2, the 3-D adventure game that folmoves out of the sand and onto a variety of lows in the footsteps of the innovative origterrain types as part of this exciting realinal, but with more game play. time wargame. Legend continues to spice up its graphic Speaking of sequels, Koei hopes that the adventure product mix. This time, the third time is the charm for Romance of the company is using a familiar design talent in Three Kingdoms III: Dragon of Destiny, feaa not-so familiar way. Steve Meretzky, the turing six new leaders and the option to game author that no one can take seriously, play with up to eight would-be conquerors. is developing a daffy adventure/role-playing VGA graphics appear for the first time in a game called Superheroes of Hoboken. Koci game, and highlight the 3-D naval Dragonsphere is the last graphic advenattacks. As with all Koei games, the player ture from MicroProse. The design team has must not only be a great military leader, but has to deal with disease, disaster, unrest tried to develop a realistic conversational Not all of the salespeople at CES were human. at home and all of the usual details with system. Said system is constructed so that which the ancients had to cope. Also in the depending on your interaction, there are works is Genghis Khan II: Clan of the Gray several different endgames. The AGA Among smaller companies, Capstone Wolf, where gamers vicariously become the engine may well be sold to another compahas acquired the rights to Steven Spielberg's great mongol chieftain, or any of 11 other ny in the near future, however; so solid perupcoming Zorro film, but did not unveil formance on this title could well impact world leaders. Samurai, knights, light cavalplans for story or interface at the show. ry and even elephants provide a variety of future products from other quarters. Readysoft has pinned its hopes on games tactical options in a game with even more Bio Forge is the first in a line of interacoriginally published in France. Arctic Baron military emphasis than the original. tive movies from Origin. As noted earlier, is an adventure/strategy game set in a futurMallard and Red Sword Software have gamers control a synthetic actor in sophistiistic ice age where everyone travels by train, Warpoint in the wings, a space war simulacated 3-D environs. The cinematic feel is and coal is more valuable than gold. The tion ser in 2049. The concept is that aliens developed through the extensive use of player's goal is, of course, to thaw out the came to conquer Earth, but were surprised multiple camera angles. world by chilling the bad guys. Robinson's and destroyed by SDI. Thirty years later, Wrath of the Gods, from new Maxis affilRequiem is another French import from the aliens have returned with new weapons iate Luminaria, is a CD-only adventure Readysoft where the player takes on the and tactics. Designed by Tim Jacobs of game (available for Macintosh and character of a hotshot FBI agent sent on a Harpoon fame, the emphasis is on strategy Windows) set in the context of ancient suicide mission. This is a heavily puzzle-orirather than just weapons platforms, and Greek mythology. Fans of Rayented adventure game on IBM, Macintosh, features 3-D texture mapping with Harryhausen SFX films will feel right at Amiga and Atari ST. Gouraud shading, rendered in 32-bit home, but those who know the Greek CyberDreams emphasized their just SVGA. If successful, Mallard plans to myths best are likely to fare better than released CyberRace product at the show, but release add-on scenarios a la Harpoon. casual Sinbad fans. unveiled Darkseed II, the sequel to their Page 26 Computer Gaming World "


"Real Ordinary Reel Magic 256 VS. 32,768 COLORS Why settle for a mere 256 colors, offered by current PC games, when ReelMagic gives you theater-quality graphics with over 32,000? There's more to games than a mouth that sort of moves or tinny sound. Now there's a new way to play PC games that's just like sitting in a theater controlling the action with your joystick. It's ReelMagic, the new MPEG playback adapter. Available only from Sigma Designs. This incredible add-in board brings the next generation of CD-ROM games to your PC GRUNTS VS. CD QUALITY AUDIO Get 16-bit CD-quality sound that plays Sound Blaster and Windows compatible software. The 8-bit audio you're used to just doesn't compare. POUCE OUEST 4 L 5 FPS VS. 30 FPS Reel Magic compatible games run at 30 frames-per-second, TRUE full-motion, so you avoid jerky. blocky images. Reel Magie bigger than life. 1/4 VS. FULL SCREEN Now you Say adios to wimpy can get theater-quality video in a graphics. Herky-jerky full-screen image for a realistic, movie-like experience. ReelMagic movement. Bogus sound. El And phony scenarios. ReelMagic pumps up the reality meter so you can crank up the fantasy. We've also included Activision's Return to Zork so you can experience the excitement of full motion video now. It's not real unless it's ReelMagic. Call 1-800-845-8086 ext. 324 for a dealer demo near you. Or you can stick with real ordinary. Oh joy! Discover the new generation of RelMagic games from these manufacturers, and look for more exciting titles coming soon. Reel Magie Adapter ACTIVISION SIERRA COMITON'S New MEDIA PCComputing MVPT Vw Chris RTADYSOFTTE MS trilobyts lobyte ACCESS GAMES entertainment FINALIST wie aris moyen Only ReelMagic Makes It Real E DESMONS 1993 S aray, be they are partered trademark and Roll Garn USD , the A rmed names and products are trademarks or rund ums of the next Circle Reader Service #110 "


"LE Pach Select leze Tomter Selection LISTEN SON HII SERIOUS 8 Fus Software Sorcery was bewitching CES future, Earth's resources have been deplerLeft to right: attendees with Aegis: Guardian of the Fleet. ed, and the cosmos must be exploited. D-Day (Impressions), Aces Of The Deep (Dynamix), The game emphasizes both the tremendous Players oversee mining expeditions and milFront Page Sports Baseball (Dynamix), defense capacity of this technological maritary actions versus their competitors, in a 3DO was heavily into sports vel and its flagship task force capabilities as cross between M.U.L.E. and Starship well. According to the scenario, gamers may Troopers. deploy helicopters, carriers, cruise missiles, Inc. has recruited Don McFadden's or even land-based air. Moving up in diffiIt's A Winner Strategy First crew to create a new hockey culty level offers limited views of the program with league utilities and interface Battlecruiser 3000 AD (Mission enemy, and advanced Al which responds to drawn from the Tony LaRussa Baseball II Products) looks like one of the richest stratevery maneuver. The electronic counterexperience. SSI is keeping the latter under measures have a good feel to them, and the egy games we've seen in a while. Originally wraps until later this year, but Dynamix is designed for Threc-Sixty Pacific, this comrandom mission selections add a great deal attempting to garner an MLBPA license for bination space conquest strategy/flight simto the replayability to the CD-based prodits product. The game is expected to use a ulator/role-playing game was abandoned by uct. oy physics-based, as opposed to stat-based, its first publisher because the two model, but lest stat fans be disappointed, year project was turning into a will feature 530 statistical categories. four year project. Now, designer Naturally, it will feature the functionality Derek Smart has teamed up with of the football game, but the interface will veterans from Velocity Software feature windowing and pull-down menus fatura to produce a huge product to produce a huge product. That should ma that should make the game more friendly According to Smart, there will be than its predecessor. Gamer-defined camera 5 MB worth of data on the game views will play a major role in the product. universe to explore. Gamers can play for hours, just exploring. Unnecessary Roughness was being shown They never have to trigger the by Accolade, even though it had shipped game's plot if they don't want to just prior to the show (see this issue's do so. Casual gamers may be put \"Taking A Peek»). Also, Accolade publioff by the game's detail level, but cized, but did not demonstrate two other Jim Rose and Keith Zabalaoui show off Avalon Hill's personal computer titles: Barkley: Shut Up the good news is that nearly and Jam! (streetball-style basketball) and everything in the game (except upcoming computer game lineup. piloting the craft during the Brett Hull Hockey. One of the big surprises at the show was flight simulation portion of the game) is Meanwhile, game companies were a CD-ROM on SEGA from Extreme called menu-driven. falling all over themselves to put out new Third World War. Solitaire only, it lers the The strategic game is based upon a cosversions of best-selling sports games. John gamer serve as the ruler of a country vying mic \"domino theory\" where the Gamulans Madden Football was completely redone for for global domination. Every country has are taking over the galaxy planer by planet. the 3DO formar, and looked impressive specific enhanced capabilities: Japan is One of the best aspects of the game is its site enough to entice enough to entice even the most jaded of strong economically, Israel is tough militartreatment of AI. All communiques in the sports gamers. Sony's ownership of ESPN ily, Libya can crank out terrorists. Unlike e are parsed and filtered through the gives them plenty of hear on the mound, as most \"game machine\" products, the game ESPN Baseball for Sega gets ready to ship is serious in its treatments of chemical and neural-networked Al database. This means that the computer-controlled races learn as by May, with the PC version arriving shortnuclear warfare, which cause you political gamers interact with the universe. In addily thereafter. ESPN Football, however, isn't problems, bring embargoes against you, tion, Smart has applied his experiments in ors in sche scheduled to ship until the start of the NFL and can even plunge the world into a Al to the crew Al. The crew members season. With sound effects from Chris nuclear holocaust. Even in conventional warfare, any buildings you destroy have to Berman, this may be what Hardball III improve or devolve according to the gamer's performance as captain. wasn't, especially since it is being developed be rebuilt when you conquer other counas a CD-ROM only title. None of the tries. Shore bombardment, mobilization, 165 different weapons, riots, spy satellites, games we viewed were guaranteed modemThrowing A Curve? (Sports) capable, something of a surprise given the treaty negotiations, and even the stock mar Two of the most exciting sports games \"connectivity\" buzz at the show. ket must be balanced to achieve victory in are built upon interface and design technolNew golf products continue to appear, this richly detailed game. ogy that has already proven successful. including some interesting products on Would-be economic giants can build Dynamix has a baseball game cut from the unexpected formats. Panasonic's True Golf their empires on a galactic scale with same cloth as their Front Page Sports Classics: Pebble Beach Golf Links for 3DO Mechamander from Mindcraft. In the far Football Pro, and Strategic Simulations, features CD-sound and full-motion video. Page 28 Computer Gaming World "


"From Those Wonderful Folks Who Gave You Gridlock, Blackouts and Runaway Taxes, Comes Raw Sewage, Yellow Journalism and the Subway at 3 a.m. "


"ESTOY FEW merece.00 1T2E0FT 1200 stroke 110 yards G reecova COWNII LUDD IIIIII OUDT Left to right: Evidently, Panasonic is going toe-to-toe of the game has worked very hard on the Theme Park (EA) (tee-to-tee?) with Links 386 (Access), who routines for the artificial opponents. Detroit (Impressions), just released its own Pebble Beach add-on. Bullfrog's Theme Park, to be published True Golf, Pebble Beach (3DO/Panasonic), Virgin is entering the fairway fray, as well, by Electronic Arts, is a SimCity-style game Breach 3 (Impressions) with a new conversion of Links for the with vibrant colors and child-like animaSega. Also, a new company called rion. The object of the game is to build up Intellimedia is launching an entire line of an amusement park with the right balance wargames discussed earlier, the company is sports instructional programs, led by ESPN of attractions and vendors to increase attenexpanding its line of abstract strategy Golf: Lower Your Score With Tom Kite, dance and profits. Different tiles are placed games. For example, Bridge Olympiad is a where the format offered by 3DO allows as in a Maxis game, but the graphic look is simulated international competition that much more interaction than a mere VCRquite different could do for contract bridge what Solitaire's based system. What Theme Park is to the amusement Journey did for solitaire. In addition, Zig In addition to the console games, the park business, Impressions Detroit is to the Zag is a word puzzle game that plays someNewton has two products for sports fans. automobile manufacturing business. thing like the table lame, Fingertip For Golf from Fingertip Instead of placing tiles a la SimCity, gamers Finally, Origamo is a very attractive puzortability move about a graphic interface to schedule zle/maze game. Each room has a different to call up stroke information and course research and development, assign assembly motif which can be anything from ancient layout, as well as to tabulate wagers. The workers, plan marketing campaigns, and Egypt or China to Alice in Wonderland. It company also plans to have Stats, developed ped rake in the profits. The de rake in the profits. The design team has even has variety in the way gamers can with Stats Inc., ready for baseball fanatics been listening, since it is easy to get a report score themselves in puzzle-solving. to help develop their own play-by-play from any section of the game at any point And now for something completely difcommentary, by the opening of the Major in the game play. ferent, or maybe not. Puggsy is an interestLeague Baseball season. With regard to sequels, another ing Sega-CD game, a non-violent, Divide and Conquer Impressions game may disappoint the fans Lemmings-like title designed to appeal to a of its predecessors. Breach 3 uses real-time broad audience. With high quality anima(Strategy Games) combat. The good news is that the game tion and a CD-quality soundtrack, Puggsy Hybrid games and new innovations on supports a tree-based campaign and features offers very addictive game play over 50 levproven concepts pretty well summarizes a mission builder utility. Also, in keeping els of mind-twisting puzzles. this year's crop of strategy games. SSI's with Impressions' IGS (Interlocking Game Dark Legions is a fantasy strategy And There's More game that is really more like the Of course, the entertainment industry classic Stratego than a wargame. has another tradition, and it was perfectly Dark Legions offers an \"over the demonstrated in the show at Treasure shoulders\" view of the game Island. During one show, the ship sank and board for movement and spellthe captain went down with his ship. casting with a switch to a topUnfortunately, there was a technical glitch down view for arcade-style comthat caused the ship to stay submerged bat. Action zooms in and our longer than it normally did at the end of when in combat mode to track the show. The actor playing the captain had the player's character. Games can a snorkel with which to breathe, but stayed be configured to allow for play underwater a good five or six minutes extra. sessions as short as 20 minutes or He stayed in character the whole time, folas long as several hours. Modem lowing that age-old tenet of show business-and network play are supported, Dark Legions by SSI offers strategy with a fantasy twist. the show must go on. but only for two players. That's the good news about this year's Mindcraft's Dominion is a fantasy/stratstrat System), the game plugs into Rules of CES. The show is going on. The special Engagement II for boarding actions. New egy in a similar vein. The difference is that World Computing has also entered the effects are getting better, the subject matter Dominion takes more of a dynastic perspecsequel race with Heroes of Might & Magic. is expanding, and new publishers are tive than most strategy games. Each king Actually, the strategy game is basically must use his ministers to preside over his appearing all the time. That's what we love realm in both war and peacetime, and wd about the world of computer games--someKings bou King's Bounty II with much bigger character thing interesting is always going on. From short-term trade-offs can be costly in the sprites and nicer graphics. what we've seen, 1994 should be no exceplong run. We also know that the designer QQP has built most of its reputation on tion. Who knows? We might even end up strategy games. In addition to the with more substance than glitz. Cow Page 30 Computer Gaming World "


"TRIN co BC ale M Lai | i RCI ROI S3Trgo Now Entering SimCity 2000 Groundwork land for New City Beneath the polished facade realer. In it, you get multiple lies a seething cauldron of viewing angles. You get to angry taxpayers, broken water import your old SimCities. You mains and other chalget to terraform your More SimCity flavor-less salt. Take a byte out of crime. The desalinization plant pumps lenges that will take landscape. You get Build SimPrisons-along fresh water into pipes you lay in with Sim Hospitals, SimSchools the new underground level. you uptown, downtotal control of a suband other city SimServices. town, even underground. Now entering terranean web of water pipes and subSimCity 2000—the ultimate city simulator. Stop the presses! 2000 comes ways. And you get it all in gripping, complete with a daily paper that may have you wanting to eye-imploding 3-D. S SIM CITY 2000 This long-awaited repeal the first amendment. follow-up to our software landSo pack up those old programs and move to SimCity mark, SimCity\" makes simulat2000. Everything that started the SimCity revolued real estate, in a word, tion. In a vivid new evolution. SIM CITY 2000 The Ultimate City Simulator.   Available for IBM PC & compatibles and Macintosh. 1993 Sim-Business. All rights reserved. SimCity 2000 is a trademark of Sim-Business. Maxis and SimCity are registered trademarks of Sim.Business. For product or ordering information, contact your local retailer or call 1-800-33-MAXIS. Circle Reader Service #75 "


"REVIEW VOICES IN THE KNIGHT Sierra's Gabriel Knight On CD-ROM illustrations by Terese Nielsen by Charles Ardai V atching computer games mature is on the voice actors and their performances? a little like watching a time-lapse Because the strongest impression you come V photography film of a flower away with after playing Gabriel Knighton CD blooming or the giant balloons being inflated is that it is an exceptionally well-performed for the Macy's Thanksgiving Day parade. It game. Not a well-written game, though it is feels like only yesterday that games with that, too, nor a well-designed or -packaged spotty animation, minimal sound, no speech, game (though the package of the CD edition and brainless storylines were hubristically is certainly memorable), but a game that is calling themselves \"interactive movies,\" to awfully well-performed. The actors don't the amusement and derision of players everymerely throw their talents into the artistic where. No longer: today we have games like por; they take control of the game, comGabriel Knight: Sins of the Fathers. manding the player's attention and adding a Even in its floppy-disk incarnation, Gabriel whole new layer of texture and reality to the Knight contains audio and video that outgame's various ungodly goings-on. shines any cartoon on television and a story That the actors grab the spotlight may not that could scare the bejeebers out of Stephen be fair to Jane Jensen, who wrote the game, King (assuming that after all these years he's or to Robert Holmes, who composed its got any bejeebers left). Add the improvescore, or to any of the dozens of other artists ments the CD-ROM edition introduces and and behind-the-scenes toilers who brought German who holds the key to Gabriel's sinyou've got a sterling example of the new Gabriel Knight from conception to compleister past. generation of games, one of the rare titles that cion. But that's the name of the game: no one There are other actors featured, too, of less lives up to the promise of the overhyped tag remembers the screenwriter of Bride of renown but no less ability: Virginia Capers is \"multimedia.\" Frankenstein or the composer who worked on a piquant narratress, making each \"You can't The Shining. Everyone remembers the stars. Gabriel Knight stars--yes, stars-Tim do that\" delicious in her luxuCurry; he's gor the title role and, I suspect, rious N'wallins drawl; Leilani Gabriel Knight: Sins of the Fathers more air time here than in all of his movies Jones plays the exotic and danput together. It co-stars such pop-culture lugerous Malia Gedde to the hilt; TITLE: Gabriel Knight: Sins of the Fathers minaries as Michael Dorn (Worf on Star and Jim Cummings fleshes out 386 or better, AMB RAM, VGA Trek: The Next Generation) and Mark Hamill no fewer than seven characters graphics, CD-ROM drive, Windows 3.1, mouse, supports (Luke Skywalker from Star Wars) in bravura with his gravelly tones, most Acilib. Sound Blaster, PAS, MT-32. and General MIDI sound cards turns as an ominous voodoo expert and an memorably a no-nonsense desk excitable police officer, respectively. It even sergeant at Mark Hamill's pofinds room for a cameo by that smooth old lice station. (800) 326-6654 lizard, Efram Zimbalist, Jr., as a mystical Why focus so much attention PRICE: SYSTEMS: REQUIREMENTS: S69,95 IBM CD-ROM PROTECTION: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: None Jane Jensen Sierra On-line Coursegold, CA Page 32 Computer Gaming World "


"THE HOTTEST 3D ACTION SINCE WOLFENSTEIN AKE STONE ALIENS OF GOLD Terror has been unleashed! And now...the violence that plagues a distant research colony threatens the planet Earth. As British military agent Blake Stone you're thrust into deadly combat against the malevolence of a mad scientist and the insidious mutant army under his command. Dr. Goldstern, driven by his insanity and bent on the annihilation of mankind, won't rest until he rules the known universe. The forces of heroic good and villainous evil collide in this life-or-death struggle to control Earth's future. PARENTAL WARNING PC-13 GRAPHIC VIOLENCE m Sign up to fight as Agent Blake Stone. The fate of humanity is in your hands! Call Toll Free 1-800-GAME123 Not Recommended for Younger Viewers Due to Realistic Depictions of Violence. ngaging Adib music; Intense Sound Blaster sound effects FASHIND For the cost of shipping and handling, only $5.00, you'll receive Episode One, The Star Institute. Or download Episode One and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out the FREE Apogee file section. The BBS phone lines are: 3-D texture mapping virtual reality in 256 colors (508) 365-2359: 2400 BAUD Take on dozens of vicious opponents in combat (508) 368-7036: 9600-14.4K  (508) 368-4137: 14.4-16.8K Episodes two through six are sold separately and can be purchased by calling Apogee's toll-free number, shown above. CREATED BY PUBLISHED BY 2014 Battle through 60 levels of \"heart-pounding terror! JAM PRODUCTIONS SOFTWARE P. O. BOX 496389 GARLAND, TX 75049 Blake Stone: Aliens of Gold requires an IBM or 100% compatible computer with 640K RAM, a VGA graphics card, and a hard disk drive. Extended memory (XMS), expanded memory (EMS), Joystick, mouse, Adlib, Sound Blaster or compatible cards are optional. Trademarks belong to their respective owners. Circle Reader Service #30 A001CGW "


"are listed on the conversation menus change color once the player has exhausted all valuable information. Players who are inclined to pursue a conversation further just for the joy of making Tim Curry say what you tell him to could do so, while those who want to keep the adrenalin flowing could exit the scene and get on with the case. Perhaps Sierra will include this feature in Gabriel Knight 2, which they tell me they are already working on. For Volume One, players just have to grin and hear it. 100 Gabriel Knight is the first authentic all-star computer game, and as such can afford to showcase its performers as its primary feature. Is there a downside? Of course; there is always a downside. Here it's that there is a lot of dialogue contained in this game. Most interactions contain a dozen, some even two dozen, different question-and-answer exchanges, any of which the player can access more or less at will. The result is that you find yourself having much longer conversations with each character than are really necessary, just to hear all the different, well-performed lines of dialogue. Furthermore, you don't just click on cach topic once; you click on cach topic several times, since a single topic will often contain six or seven different bits of dialogue and you never know when the sixth thing a character says in response to Gabriel's \"What else do you know about voodoo?\" will contain a vital clue to the bloody ritual murders the game wants him to solve. So you keep clicking and clicking and listening and listening. And enjoying. So what's the problem? The problem is that suspense and horror are genres that depend on the relentless, unimpeded unfolding of a story. Comedy is different: the mood is not diffused when you spend twenty minutes bantering with the barflies in Freddy Pharkas. The mood in Gabriel Knight, alas, does occasionally dissipate as one plunges ever deeper into discourses on the Old Country with Gabriel's grandmother. The game always recovers rapidly with yet another murder or disappearance or ambush or nightmare, each guaranteed to quicken the player's pulse, but it has its share of valleys as well as peaks. One solution might have been to have the topics that 5. 3 Why Is This Knight Different From All Other Knights? Sierra entered into the creation of Gabriel Knight with the intention of reviving what has been at best a sporadically viral genre of computer games. There have been plenty of monsters in games, but there has been precious little horror and even less in the way of suspense. The incomparable Steve Meretzky pulled off the latter in the nail-biting climax of Planetfall, and Dave Lebling drummed up some of the former in The Lurking Horror (both titles from Infocom and both, notably, text adventures), but recently there haven't been many titles, let alone good ones, to speak of. Alone In The Dark, yes, but try to name another! Into this vacuum (some might call it a \"market niche\") comes Janc Jensen, hot off her triumph as coauthor of the best-selling though somewhat vapid King's Quest VI. Her sweet streak having been sated by the adventures of Prince Pubescent in the Land of Cute, Jensen now unleashes her sour, her acrid, her steamy, and her vicious streaks all at once. Any game that opens with a woman being burned Page 34 Computer Gaming World "


"Between The Devil And The Deep Blue Sea. CHALLENGE the enemy at the battles of Coral Sea, Midway, Eastern Solomons, Santa Cruz, and the Philippine Sea! COMMAND U.S. or Japanese forces! PILOT any of ten historically-accurate planes, each with its authentic cockpit and flight characteristics! THEY WERE DESPERATE, DARING AND DEADLY! The relentless gunfire of Japanese Zeros. GravityTHE PACIFIC AIR WAR twisting dive-bomb attacks. Dropping torpedo \"fish\" on unsuspecting carriers. There's no room for error when you're a naval aviator in 1942, The Pacific Air War, the ultimate simulation of air combat in the South Pacific. Taking on the same challenges that World War II fighter pilots faced, your tour of duty includes some of the most heroic battles ever fought. Battles that will have you chasing down Wildcats, Corsairs, and Zeros in death-defying dogfights. Performing high-speed dives upon heavily defended carriers. And pushing your skills to the limit as you master WW II air combat in an innovative virtual cockpit. SWEAT over the comprehensive strategy for all naval forces! EXPERIENCE the thrill of head-to-head dogfights with a friend via modem connection. MICROPROSE The outcome of the war in the Pacific turns upon your actions. Your task force is depending on you. And the skies are yours to control in 1942, The Pacific Air War.  1993 MicroProse. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. For IBM-PC/Compatibles. Circle Reader Service #85 "


"alive, blood spattering a necromantic talisman, and the main character dreaming of being hanged in a crashing lightning storm is as far from King's Quest's Green Isles as anyone could hope to ger. Gabriel, as the player knows from reading the rather too artsy but still gripping graphic novelette that comes with the game, is the spawn of a Cursed House. An ancestor hired to hunt down and capcure a witch in the long hot summer of 1693 found and bedded her instead—then betrayed her to the bloodthirsty mob. Gabriel's family has been plagued with troubled sleep, and worse, ever since. Jump to the present: Gabriel is a rare book dealer and low-end novelist in the French Quarter of New Orleans, unaware of the legacy he carries in his besmirched soul. The papers are full of stories about a modern voodoo cult and the half-dozen murders it has carried out. Under the pretense of researching his next book, Gabriel looks into the matter. What he finds not only puts him in mortal danger but forces him to take on the ancestral mandle of the shattenjager—witch-hunter-at great peril to his immortal (and newly cleansed) soul. Yes, it's all a bit much, in the way horror stories always are; rather too much to take seriously, in fact, and, sure enough, the horror evaporates once you turn the monitor off. What a spell it weaves, though, while it is on! Each scene is painted realistically, so that the game appears to be taking place in the real world, yet the setting is sufficiently peculiar all by itself that it raises the hackles on the back of your neck. The music is seductive and dark, dirto most of the voices, which seem to ble out of the pits of the actors abdomens. Dorn's Dr. John deserves to be singled out: he is wonderfully throaty, only lapsing once or twice into the harsher tones fans think of as \"Worf-speak.\" The murders are depicted with no shortage of gore, one of several factors that may make Gabriel Knight a prime candidate to receive one of the \"intended for adults» ratings the software industry is currently hot to impose on its more explicit material. (A grouchy chess player who keeps muttering \"sonofabitch» to himself would probably be another.) Yet what makes this game unquestionably a piece of «adult» software is in other Sierra games. The familiar command line is there in all its point-and-click glory, but the game's ploring and puzzles are much more complex than usual. The game also relies much more on conversation than is typical for a Sierra game, and specifically on noticing subtle clues in what people tell Gabriel. This is not to say that the game doesn't have its maze-of course it doesand its obligatory pseudo-action sequences, but the emphasis is very much on character interaction. One consequence is that the characters not so much the occasional raw language or come to life in a way that no previous Sierra image, but its tone and subject matter as a characters have. You don't know what King whole. Graham drinks with breakfast or what Roger Gabriel Knight throws the player convinc Wilco worries about when he turns out the ingly into the world of satanism and live sacrilights at night; with Gabriel, you know both, fice, of seedy and lecherous New Orleans and many other things beside. Gabriel has the (exemplified by Knight himself, who is never at makings of a first-rate series character, albeit a loss for a leer or a muttered innuendo), and of a troubled and disturbing one. It will be interesting to see if Sierra has the courage to remain true to the character, following him into whatever dens of depravity his fate leads. If they do, they may have on their hands a very adult work, indeed. Gabriel Knight contains audio and video that Good Knight outshines any cartoon One of many things that make Gabriel Knight remarkable is that on television and a story it infuses the most mundane adthat could scare the venture gaming tasks—scouring one's inventory, for instancebejeebers out of with vibrance and character. For Stephen King. this general level of fun, the actors deserve all the credit: they make bending the rules till they just about break. even lame cao lines palatable Ar various points, Gabriel impersonates a cop What takes the game past \"palatable» and and a priest, uses someone else's credit card even \"fun\" to \"wholly engrossing,\" on the to fly around the world, and (most questionother hand, is a combination of good acting, able of all) sics a street mime on an unsuspectgood plotting, and good scripting, plus art ing victim. It's all harmless enough for players old enough to know what's what, but a good and music effective enough to permit a real suspension of disbelief. Looking back on the example for the younger set it ain't. game after you've finished it, it's easy to see The younger set would probably also run that, with all its faux-mythic huggermugger into some trouble with the mechanics of the and hysterical visions of evil, Gabriel Knight game, which are only partially similar to those ose is really a preposterous bit of silliness—but then again, that's also true of Fred Astaire dancing on the ceiling, Arnold blowing up buildings, Harrison Ford fending off Thuggees with his bullwhip, and Anthony Hopkins slavering over his fava beans. Like these birs of cinematic history, but unlike most computer games even today, Gabriel Knight is top-notch, Hollywood-quality entertainment. If we are lucky, it might be the start of a trend. Cow Page 36 Computer Gaming World "


"Whether you're facing a horrible fire-breathing dragon, a heavily armed MiG 29, or that really nasty dogleg on the 18th hole, there is one place you can turn to for help. CompuServe. The very best place to go for any kind of them for test drives. Before you spend your hardcomputer and video-gaming support. earned money. Because on CompuServe you can get advice, So whether it's bcasts, bogeys, or birdies and opinions, and more than a few special secrets by you're tangling with, don't go out there alone. Get talking to the members in our Gaming Forum, people CompuServe on your side. who share your passions for everything from whacking Sign up now and receive a free introductory enemy fighters to getting an cagle on the 18th. And CompuServe membership with a $15 usage credit and a free month of basic services. Call 1 800 524-3388 are here for you to talk to, as well. and ask for Representative 534 for more information. As a CompuServe member, you can download O CompuServe demo versions of the best new games, too, and take some of the biggest game publishers and distributors The information service you won't outgrow. Circle Reader Service #41 "


"REVIEW Hell's Bells And Whistles I've ever encountered in a PC game. Fullyfunctional stairs, elevators, and moving platforms are common, with many structures containing two or more levels. The deadly crushing ceiling traps and toxic rivers are beautifully rendered, and are ready to snare a reckless Marine. Shadows, strobe lights, fantastic architecture, and the occasional view of surreal lunar and infernal landscapes combine to form a deliciously nightmarish experience. The macabre imagination of veteran game designer Sandy Petersen (who designed the Call of Cthulhu role-playing game for Chaosium) is very evident in DOOM's devilishly constructed levels and eerie theme, giving the lavish graphics a brooding, sinister flavor. The game's first-person view is topid Software's DOOM notch, incorporating a variety of subtle improvements over id's earlier titles. The by Bryan Walker weaving and bobbing viewpoint that results from running and jumping is a wonderful Tith Wolfenstein 3-D and Spear of DOOM is easy to install and configure, and touch that's almost too natural to notice! Destiny, id Software established it can be up and running in minutes. The Owners of a Sound Blaster or compatible V itself as king of the action-game screen size, graphics detail, sound, music, and sound card are going to love DOOM's superb hill. The outstanding graphics and first-percontrol options are easy to adjust, accommodigitized effects. The monsters growl, scream, son 3-D environment of these games so condating a variety of systems and playing prefroar, squeal and hiss, while the stoic Marine vincingly immersed players in their world erences. DOOM can be controlled with a winces in pain and gasps for breath. Anxthat some players were known to actually keyboard, mouse, or joystick, with the ability iously listening as the breathy snarling of duck and swerve in their scats, and to be to custom-configure cach controller to the approaching creatures grows louder is not just noticeably startled when thrilling, but downright spooky! The aggresjumped by a lurking Nazi sive weapon sounds are equally realistic, caguard. Since these overwhelmpable of rattling tooth fillings if piped ing successes, id Software has through amplified speakers. The background been working hard on their enmusic is a good touch, going from fast and core while eager gamers have frantic to chilling, skillfully capturing the ambeen whispering one word: biance of each scenario. DOOM. It's here, and it was worth the wair. Something Under The Bed DOOM casts the player as a Is Drooling courageous Space Marine inIt won't take long to encounter DOOMS vestigating trouble at a futuris221319 tic research eager monsters. As loathsome as the Nazis of base. GE This M EE 1/299 Wolfenstein 3-D were, DOOM's enemies are investigation quickly becomes a AMMO | HEALTH || ARMS positively despicable! From possessed ex-Madesperate fight for survival, as vicious creaplayer's taste. Difficulty levels can also be rines to drooling denizens of Hell itself, tures and dangerous traps threaten the player adjusted, helping novice Space Marines have gamers will find themselves being at every 3-D turn. DOOM's adventure unfun without getting their faces DOOM chewed, clawed, scorched and shot. The folds in three increasingly difficult episodes, quickly chewed off. \"Knee-Deep in the Dead,\" \"The Shores of Hell,\" and \"Inferno.\" Each episode features a Satan's Sensory DOOM different theme with several locales to exSYSTEM: Symphony plore, and each offers a remarkable variety of REQUIREMENTS: 386DX or better (486 recommended), 4MB RAM, VGA scenery, monsters, weapons, and special items DOOM's first-person 3-D graphics, 17MB hard disk to gather, all adding up to a wonderfully graphics are simply dazzling. space; supports Sound Blaster involved and engaging game. DOOM also The detailed textures of the represents a huge technical improvement walls, ceilings, and floors, the DESIGNERS: John Carmack, Sandy Petersen. John Romero, Dave Taylor over id's earlier titles, giving the gamers what superb shading effects, and the id Software, 1-800-ID-GAMES they asked for, and the industry a new benchfluid animation provide the mark. most believable environment AS GI 2010 TITLE: PRICE: $40,00 IBM and compatible sound cards None PROTECTION: PUBLISHER: Page 38 Computer Gaming World "


"2297 200 300 eight different types of \"normal\" monsters complete floor plan, secret are very dangerous, possessing unique attacks, doors, and hidden rooms. Variintelligence, durability and voices. The clevous mystical globes can give a erly-designed Spectres are particularly tough, health-point supercharge, grant sporting an invisibility effect very similar to partial invisibility, or even temthat of the otherworldly antagonist of Predaporary invulnerability. My pertor. To make matters worse, each episode has sonal favorire was the Berserker at least one fearsome super-beast that must be Pack, which provides tremendispatched to continue the adventure. dous hand-to-hand combat While the monsters are tough and plentiful, ability as well as a health-point they hate each other nearly as much as they boost. Astute players will also hate the player's heroic Marines. Using this find the toxic-waste barrels scatBUEL 67290 enmity to advantage, a savvy player can cause tered throughout the complex AMMO | HEALTH ARMS T ARMOR 1317 different species of angry creatures to inadvermake great bombs. When laced ished Thrustmaster joystick! That's how intently attack one another. When the sibling with a room-full of snarling beasties, shooting rivalry turns nasty, the player can dash away a barrel will cause the contents, and any tense multiplayer DOOM can get! There have and watch the fracas from a safe distance. nearby monsters, to detonate in a gratuitous been reports of major corporations and even With the huge end-level guardians often surdisplay of destruction. other computer-game companies (and comrounded by an escort of different monsters, puter game magazines -Ed) issuing memos specausing a family feud is often a winning strarHell, Hell, The Gang's All Here! cifically forbidding their employees from egy! playing DOOM on company time. Jay WilPerhaps the most exciting feature of With the bad guys enjoying numerical suDOOM is its multiplayer capability. Up to bur, CEO of id Software, summed it up best: periority, players will appreciate the handy \"If you haven't played multiplayer DOOM, handy four plavers can icin in vera four players can join in over an IPX-protocol selection of potent weapons. The pistol with tion of potent weapons. The pistol With network. Version 1.2 of DOOM also provides nerwer you haven't played DOOM!» which the player begins the game won't do modem play at speeds of 9600 baud or faster. much, but pump shotguns, rapid-firing Multiplayer games can be played cooperaMisfires multi-barrel machine guns, and powerful tively, or as cutthroat DeathMatches where rocket launchers can be found early in the anything that breathes is fair game. Cooperaanvrh With some companies releasing bug-filled game. Diligent players can also unearth tive sessions are a great deal of fun, and can games that are little more than boxed betagames th plasma rifles and the Ultimate Weapon, the easily become rollicking all-night affairs. copies, I'm pleased to say that I've encounBFG 9000. Those in dire straits can always Many gamers are going to have flashbacks of tered no technical problems with DOOM. resort to fisticuffs, but finding a chainsaw the movie Aliens, as they and their fellow This is pretty remarkable considering the lying around can add new meaning to the Space Marines face the lurking terrors of crude network environment and variety of m \"wet work. While I found the shotgun DOOM as a close-knit team. machines it was reviewed on. The only comto be the most useful for \"close encounters,\" many situations seem tailor-made for a parOn the other hand, the open-ended Deathplaint I ve heard more than once referred to ticular weapon. During the numerous fireMatches may be the most intense gaming difficulties running DOOM under OS/2. fights, veterans of id's earlier games will notice experience available today. The ever-present The only quibble I can muster regards the some nice new touches. Errant bullets realismonsters are bad enough, but add monsters are bad enough, but add some ho-hum endgame. The ultimate end-level tically ricocher off walls, while rounds hitting twisted human opponents looking to use monster was too easy to kill, and the following their mark tear chunks of flesh from the chain saws on each other and there's a seri\"arraboy\" sequence was something of a letunfortunate target. A particularly amusing ously antisocial situation in the making. Durdown. However, given DOOM's many feature is the ability to send a charging moning one particularly ugly DeathMatch, I strengths, these minor complaints carry very ster hurtling backwards with a close-range became so fixated with stalking a human oplittle weight. blast from the shotgun. It's also nor uncomponent that an unseen Spectre was able to mon to see creatures tumbling off ledges sneak up and jump my hapless Marine from Locked, Cocked, and when breathing their last, reminiscent of a behind. The resulting adrenaline surge, Ready to Rock Wild West shoot-out. Gamers who like their mixed with the tremendous suspense of the computer combat brutal and hunt, actually caused me to break my cherDOOM is a virtuoso performance. Stunbloody will find DOOM serves PICKS OP 2 SHOTTES ning graphics, pulse-pounding sound, intense up an all-you-can-shoot buffet. gameplay, and multiplayer mayhem combine DOOM also has many useful to form what is probably the best action game items scattered around to help to dare. Those squeamish about intense viothe player survive, evade, resist lence, dark undertones, and mangled joyand escape. Extra ammunition, sticks should probably look for more healing kits, various types of arpedestrian fare. However, hot-blooded playmor, and high-capacity backers looking to have the time of their gaming packs are valuable finds. Certain lives are simply going to love DOOM. computer chips augment the (The author can be reached for further comhandy automatic mapping ment on America On-Line at Walker34, or function, revealing that level's CompuServe at 73472,3113) CGW 2291 D HEALTH ARMS ABMORE March 1994 Page 39 "


"Just looking at My nagine what play Vou stumble upon I a battered old book and find yourself transported to the island of Myst. Now you have no other choice but to explore. As you do, it quickly becomes apparent that something has gone wrong. Terribly wrong. An ancient betrayal must be unveiled. Secret books concealed on the island of Myst lead the way to worlds born of a master storyteller's imagination. Yet one by one, they're being destroyed through the treachery of his sons. But which one? Broderbund CYAN Myst is a trademark of Cyan, Inc. All rights reserved. Macintosh and QuickTime are registered trademarks of Apple Computer, Inc. MPC is a registered trademark of the Multimedia PC Marketing Council  Copyright 1994. Brederbund Software, Inc. and Cyan, Inc. To order, see your local dealer or call S00/521-6263 and refer to code 354. "


"st is an adventure ang it must be like) Only you can untangle the web of lies and deceit that shrouds the 5 worlds of Myst. So stop imagining. And live the adventure that tens of thousands of Macintosh\" users have already experienced Available on Macintosh CD-ROM 5 complete worlds to explore  No inventory or time constraints Over 2,500 photorealistic images  Non-linear game play  Original soundtrack QuickTime\" video and animation NWARD BEST GAN The Surrealistic Adventure That Will Become Your World MPC version coming soon. "


"REVIEW Passing Judgment On A Pop Icon Kirk, Spock, And The Star Trek Gang Meet New Galactic Dangers In Judgment Rites by Allen Greenberg T or Star Trek fans, 1991 was a signifiment Rites, yet more adventures have been 25th Anniversary game. Even when players cant year. In the year which marked the rescued from the obscurity of non-existence. choose to play the combat portions in Judg1 25th anniversary of the show's preOnce again, boldly returning to where no ment Rites they will find these sequences to be miere on network television, the casts of two man had gone before, Interplay embraces the far less pivotal, and far less abundant, than generations stood side by side with their creaoriginal series with all its quirks, clichés and they were in 25th Anniversary. Ironically, tor, justifiably proud of the series' ongoing characteristics, endearing the game to those those in search of additional combat need success. It was a year of heartfelt farewells, as who have followed the Star Trek saga for over only violate the game's navigation chart in Star Trek lost its creator, and the original 25 years. order to be confronted by one of the galaxy's crew appeared in what was stated to be their Judgment Rites is presented in the same nastier species, apparently putting in overlast feature film. Talk of future Star Trek multi-episode format as the original 25th Antime as copy-protection police. The easier projects seemed ubiquitous, while doomsaydoomsayniversary game and expands upon m niversary game and expands upon many of its level of combat is similar to that found in 25th ing critics of The Next Generation carned a features. While the ship-to-ship arcade exerAnniversary. The more diffic spot on the galaxy's list of endangered species. cises remain, players are no longer quite hazardous for the casual space pilot. forced to participate in them At times, it seems that enemies are able to against their will. Further, those dance in effortless circles around the slow who do participate now have two moving Enterprise. However, even under the levels of difficulty from which to most difficult circumstances, it is still possible choose. The individual adventures to win out by constantly maneuvering so that are far more interesting, and sevno one shield is subjected to a steady battereral minor characters from the ing. It is necessary to blast an enemy with a show have been given significantly dozen or more solid, uninterrupted hits in larger roles in the game. In the order to send it running. During combat, background, a new alien race players are no longer restricted to a forward judges the crew's actions and waits point of view; there are now six views from for the right moment to introduce which to observe the action. Also on the themselves. bridge are the familiar damage display and For computer gamers who had not enjoyed a control functions,\"bad-guy» radar, and good ride in the captain's chair of the EnterCling On Combat wide-screen view option. Unfortunately, aft prise since the original Star Trek appeared on and lateral weaponry are still not available. uputers some 20 years ago, it It is somewhat easier to imagine Luke SkyPlayers still have access to ship's phasers and was the year that the classic Trek characters walker as a participant in the battle sequences photon torpedoes Phoron forbedoes are slow were finally given respectable representation rather than the command crew of the Enterto reload, require the weapons officer to lead fo relo in interactive entertainment. Interplay's Star prise. In combat, the large starship suddenly hly the target by a greater distance, and deliver a the targ Trek: 25th Anniversary game was a collection becomes as agile as a small fighter in a zeroof episodes belonging to a season-that-nevergravity dogfight. These sewas from the original series. The episodes quences may be quite challengStar Trek: Judgment Rites were presented in standard, graphic advening, but they may also seem ture format and were interspersed with outersomewhat out of place here, TITLE: Star Trek: Judgment Rites PRICE: $59.95 space combat simulation. even to those who are normally JUDEMENT RITES SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: 386-16MHz or better, 2MB In constrast, 1994 is overshadowed by eminclined towards arcade games. RAM, VGA graphics, 27MB bittered Star Trek actors-turned-writers, and Players who have been discourhard disk spacer supports AdLib. Sound Blaster the uncertain transition of Picard and Co. aged by their presence in the Pro Audio Spectrum and from the small screen to the big screen. In past should note that Interplay Roland sound boards PROTECTION: Documentation look up spite of this, computer gamers who enjoyed has since issued a patch proPUBLISHER: Interplay Productions Inc. Irvine, CA Interplay's version of the original series will gram which allows those se(714) 553-6678 be pleased to learn that with Star Trek: Judyquences to be bypassed in the IBM Page 42 Computer Gaming World "


"DANGER more powerful blast. Phasers are weaker but recharge more quickly and are easier to aim. A very welcome addition to Judgment Rites is the ability to use the ship's computer to lock either weapon on the enemy ship. While not always successful, this device does allow the player to imitate the cast member of his or her choice yelling, \"Phasers locked on target!\" Local each of the main characters reflects his trademark posture: Kirk is slightly tense, Spock coolly studies his surroundings, while Dr. McCoy is clearly annoyed at something. The Enterprise and the various other space ships, both in and out of battle, are rendered with a great deal of care. The results are dramatic and very impressive. There is also an abundance of sound effects taken from the original series, as is much of the program's wonderful musical score. From the moment the program boots up, Star Trek fans will feel right at home. The mechanics of the game are much like the original. Kirk has the option to observe, take, or manipulate an object. He may speak with anyone, or instruct one of his companions to act. The player may also directly call on the medical scanner or scientific tricorder, provided Spock or McCoy are available to use them. There are no disposable security guards To Explore Strange New Worlds Of course, it's not the weaponry that attracts legions of Star Trek fanatics to the 23rd century; it's the characters, their relationships \"Voids\" may be the most intriguing story of with each other, as well as with the unknown, the collection, and is the only one which takes that has made the series so popular. Judgment place on board the Enterprise. \"Museum Rites includes eight adventure episodes featurPiece\" is a hostage story that calls on Scotty's ing those characters, in which some unacceptability to tinker with outdated machinery as able situation in the galaxy must be put to much as it does Kirk's diplomacy. \"Though rights. As in the first game, the player is This be Madness...\" is probably the most responsible for making all of the decisions for difficult exercise to complete, and is spread Captain James T. Kirk. For the most part, it out like a candy dish filled with Star Trek is science officer Spock and chief medical goodies: Klingons, malfunctioning computofficer McCoy who stand ready to carry outers, insanity, compassion and violence. It also thosc decisions. However, Judgment Rites alleads into the final challenge, lows communications officer Uhura, naviga\"...Yet There is Method in it.\" This tor Chekov, and chief engineer Scott each to brings Kirk face to face with aliens have a turn at their Captain's side. In general, who have presumably been observthis collection of episodes is less uniform and ing his actions since the beginning predictable than in the first game, and reflects of the game. For the most part, it a greater degree of thought and creativity is not a conventional puzzle-type Each episode begins with a title and brief challenge and requires Kirk to encreative credits, as the Enterprise makes its gage in a fair amount of debate opening fly-by in the background. A message with the aliens as well as his followfrom Starfleet Command follows, informing ers, including a Klingon captain. Kirk of his next destination and the details of While the 25th Anniversary led his mission. \"Federation\" reunites Kirk with up to a final, nerve-taxing battle in the deranged villain thought destroyed in the space, Judgment Rites climaxes with final battle of the 25th Anniversary game. an intimidating convers an intimidating conversation with \"Sentinel\" is a familiar Star Trek plorline in the alien observers. This is perhaps more apwhich Kirk must pull the plug on a computer autor propriate to a Star Trek adventur propriate to a Star Trek adventure in that it that has enslaved a race of primitives. \"No calls on Kirk to debate the Human/Vulil Man's Land\" is a charming story that recalls can/Klingon condition in the fashion necesa \"proto-Q\" character, Trelanc. This episode sary before screen pyrotechnics made feels classically Star Trek, as Kirk discovers a impossibly bright explosions an obligatory llage whose occupants believe they are living cinematic climax. While this hefty dose of in Germany during Earth's first world war. philosophical exchange would probably have \"Light and Darkness\" is an interesting, ver pleased Gene Roddenberry, there will doubtbrief story that mixes good, cvil, biology, ind less remain a group of die-hard alien-killers yet another computer on the fritz. whose instincts will cry out at the injustice of a non-violent ending. in this game, and there are far fewer opportunities for Kirk to die. Nonetheless, such opportunities do occur, so it is still a good idea to save the game regularly. The game may be played using only the keyboard, although a joystick or mouse is strongly recommended. The program occupies 27 megabytes on hard disk, plus additional space during the installation process. Installing the program can take as long as two hours, but thankfully the installer need not be present during the majority of this process. Judgment Rites may easily slip by at warp speed in the hands of an experienced adventure game player, who may feel that the eight episodes are both too few and too brief. Others may still wish for combat sequences that are less awkward and allow for some degree of strategy. Despite their complaints, it would be a shame for Star Trek fanatics to miss out on Judgment Rites, there has yet to be a better opportunity to interactively experience the 23rd Century. Cow \"Most Intriguing, Captain» Visually, Judgment Rites has been nicely upgraded. There is a tremendous amount of detail in each scene, and nowhere more than on the bridge of the Enterprise. It is a pleasure, once again, to see how we imagined tabletop computers in the '60s. Away from the bridge, March 1994 Page 43 "


"REVIEW The Killing Game Police Quest 4 Explores The Brutal Realities Of Police Work Photo by Susan Zurawik which is covered in the abridged Los Angeles Police Department manual included with the game. It is in this pointing and clicking, however, that the game reveals its one weakness: the limits of its genre. That a player unsure of what to do next must move the mouse all over the screen and repeatedly, desperately, click and point is a noticeable flaw in a game designed to be so seamlessly authentic. Often, how much an astute detective/player notices may depend on the resolution of his monitor or the accuracy of his mouse. Especially in a game as linear as Open Season, the incredible power of the game is replaced by the frustrating reminder that graphic adventures, at times, are little more than glamorized text games. It wouldn't have been unreasonable, it would seem, in a game that comes on 12 high-density disks, to include a feature that would highlight the names of important items when the pointer passed over them. by Dennis Owens Open Season repeatedly bludgeons us with reality in much the same metaphorical way as Detective Hickman must have been tortured before his murder. For instance, at one point olice Quest 4: Open Season is not a pleasportrays Derecrive John Carney, lead investiCarney must discuss Hickman's death with ant game, but then, Sierra On-Line's gator of the death of Detective Bob Hickman, Katherine Hickman, the slain detective's series has always been ambitious. Its whose body is found mutilated, tortured, and wife. Although he tries to console her, he attempts to combine playability with the recannot mask the real reason he ality of detective work has always required the Police Quest IV has come: his job requires him PQ series to balance carefully the drudgery, to. When he questions her \"We checked the alley for possible boredom, cynicism, and horror of real homiassailants, but found no one. Everything about Hickman's drug abuse cide investigation with the elements that go is pretty much as it was when we and her husband's increasing into a successful game. Open Season does sucarrived, 0: inability to separate his work ceed in that balance. However, it does so at from his personal life, Carney so many levels, that to consider the game is doing the same thing Hickmerely in terms of its entertainment value man did; he's failing to step would be to miss its larger implications about away from the job long our society and its struggle against the drug cnough simply to be, to feel, machine and violent crime in general. and to treat another humanFirst, though, the fact that the game rein this case, the stunned, grievquires us to face those implications is an ing widow of a longtime indication of its strength as commentary. friend—with simple, unobSurely, when Tammy Dargan, the former trusive compassion. producer of \"America's Most Wanted,» the That the game includes the Powers That Be at Sierra On-Line, and Daryl semi-nude behind a convenience store in player in this intrusion, is, of F. Gates, the former Chief of Police in Los South Central Los Angeles. The player must course, an astounding, overwhelming accomAngeles, decided to create Open Season, they follow a watered-down version of police pro plishment. The player cares nothing about were not unaware of the game's potential implications. Their decision to make the cedure to solve the murder, game as realistic as possible was, in effect, a which includes the collecPolice Quest 4: Open Season decision to portray urban realities and all of tion of evidence, questiontheir raw, tragic contradictions without com ing of witnesses and collatment-and nothing is more political than the erals, filling out seemingly Police Quest 4: Open Season truth. Indeed, when the player's partner, Hal endless amounts of paperBottoms, complains bitterly that he's a diawork, tracking down leads REQUIREMENTS: 386-25MHz or better. 4MB RAM. VGA graphics, 22MB hard drive betic, on his third wife, who has seen things and contacts, schmoozing Windows 3.1: supports all major no man is supposed to,\" the ability of truth with fellow officers, dumpTammy Dargan, Daryl F. Gates to destroy people's lives is vivid, almost dising money into vending DARYL E GATES PUBLISHER: Coarsegold, CA arming, and terrifying. machines, and much pointThe fiction of the game is simple: the player ing and clicking-most of TOOS Crawl ineda tho Ond of B Bersal Kmer TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM $69.95 IBM space, mouse; supports sound cards DESIGNERS: Sierra On-Line POLICE QUEST (209) 683-4468 Page 44 Computer Gaming World "


"CREATE FO Police Quest IV L.AP.D, this woman; she is simply a part of a puzzle to to the same end through disclosure be solved in the erreting out of the killer. and debate. Carney's later inability to After forcing Katherine Hickman in tears explain to a storekeeper why the telefrom the room, Carney thinks nothing of vised scene appeared as it did involves casually grilling Valerie, their young daughmany of the conflicting values of conter, or of searching a part of the house which temporary society. Few realistic depicshe mentions; the player probably won't, tions of societal misperception could either. It's not until the second visit to the present that conflict as accurately as, house that the player realizes there might have say, the NPC in Ultima V does when been a more humane and ethical way to prohe asks, \"Do you know Lord Blackceed. thorne? No? Then how do you judge Many games over the years have encourhim?\" aged that lack of consideration for NPCs. The tendency to slaughter all and take all in roleplaying games has been so pervasive that the few games which punish such behavior could be counted on one hand. But to run across HOMICIDE such selfishness in a game like this seems incredibly damning—and heartrendingbecause it's true to life. We treat each other, the game implies, in our attempts merely to cope with the problems with which we are faced, like NPCs. In that irony lies but one of the many strengths of Open Season. Its accuracy forces the player to consider issues that lie far beyond the typical scope of most computer games. The disrinction berween behavior in game-play and behavior in real life, for inIndeed, the Ultima series depicts many of stance, calls to mind the ongoing debate over the struggles implicit in Open Season more effectively than does this one game. The Black the effect of televised violence on its viewers, or of pornography on the attitudes of its Gate, for instance, freed of the necessity to be purchasers toward women—and may inditrue to life, easily and directly examines the cate why so many more fantasy role-playing implications of class warfare on society. Open my games exist than do those reflecting real life situations. The reality in the game's presentation of a confronta 299 tion between Carney and a television journalist, each of whom would argue that he was merely trying to do his best to fulfill his duty to society, is complex and fairly drips with the frustration inherent in the relationship between the police-dedicated to preserving justice through action and investigation, and the journalists-dedicated Police Ouest 03 TOHN That it accomplishes its task is noteworthy. The game draws us in; it surrounds us with a reality that is horrifying because it is our own. From the opening scene, when we realize that our character icon is faceless, it attracts us. Scott McCloud, in his book Understanding Comics, muses that the compelling power of the cartoon face is in its ambiguity. \"The cartoon is a vacuum,\" he says, \"into which our identity and awareness are pulled, an empty shell that we inhabit which enables us to travel in another realm. We don't just observe the cartoon, we become it.\" In much the same way, the good derective attempts to enter the mind of the derec criminal. There are reasons for everything, he understands, and in realizing that, he deciphers clues, pieces together motives, and visualizes sequences in which criminal events occurred. In effect, he becomes the criminal. Chief Gates knows that. Tammy Dargan knows that. The VGA graphics are photo-realistic. If anything, that realism adds to the grimness and sense of pressure which an actual homicide investigation entails. The score, by Neal Grandstaff, is moody and evocative. The overall sense of Police Quest 4 is of a tight package designed for those willing not to step into the shoes of a flatfoot trying to track down a gangster, but, instead, of a real-life investigator trying to untangle the knots of circumstance which lead to violence and horror. The contemporary detective story is not about rain-soaked streets or dames so hardened that their beauty is less murable only when compared to their cold, cynical hearts, but about class warfare and poverty so extreme and relative that hope can only exist through the desperation of violence and crime. Open Season tells that story magnificently. Not for the immature. Cow * 1 3 Pallce Ouest Season can only do so indirectly-by forcing the curious player to wonder why gang warfare occurs as it does, why the police are perceived as they are, and what would cause the mother of a horribly murdered child to refuse to cooperate fully with those dedicated to bringing his murderer to justice. However, Ultima has addressed those societal questions over many years; Open Season attempts to do so in one game. March 1994 Page 45 "


"190928 To read Kasparov's mind, simply refer to the second board. Ready to raise your game to a suggests. vee3 higher level, are you? Meet Garry You can Kasparov, reigning king of the | also customize most aspects of your opponent's [BEFORE] chess game, giving you world. And your a virtually infinite new private tutor. KASPAROVS pool of challengers. To make sure While you play Kasparov's Gambit, you don't outgrow his digitized Image Gambit any time and voice (Russian soon, we power it accent and all) will with the very same appear on your engine that won the screen. He'll warn 1993 International you of imminent Computer Chess Championship. Not WORLD CHAMPIONSHIT CHESS danger. Question exactly what the tactics you use. And constantly challenge you to seek out fresher and deadlier lines of attack. you'd call a pushover. So pick it up. Play it. And who knows? There's even a second After spending a few weeks or so SODIO board, which allows learning the ropes from Kasparov, you you to visualize the may just find that you're finally strategies Kasparov | ready to take on, well, Kasparov. [ AFTER] As you improve, you can customize opponents to suit your game. hinuparuv's Gunk le a trademark ul Elvetranie Arte tess Houd Saitwnts All rigtita romerou "


"YOU DON'T WORLD CHAMPION OVERNIGHT IT TAKE YOU A COUPLE WEEKS. Circle Reader Service #51 Gambit's engine won the world title, so watch your step. ELECTRONIC ARTS "


"REVIEW Go, Go Syd's Racers Syd Mead And CyberDreams Team Up In CyberRace by Paul C. Schuytema T ar has always been an inefficient and messy means of settling a conflict, and to this day humans seem to prefer armed violence to deal with their differences. It should come as no surprise then, that in the far, far fictional future of Cyberdreams CyberRace, when our galaxy opened up its mysteries to reveal several races besides the Earth-bound Terrans, war was called upon to settle the disputes over territory and power-sharing. As the story goes, the Terrans had a particular hatred for the demonic race known as the Kaladasians, and this hatred was keenly reciprocared. For decades the wars and battles raged, leaving millions dead and the political map of the galaxy changing by the day. One particular battle was especially messy. A Terran battle cruiser had made a routine raid of a Kaladasian outpost. As the cruiser made its escape, a Kaladasian Dreadnought fell into pursuit and let loose two pulses from a newly developed graviton beam. One pulse destroyed the cruiser, while the other plunged star. The star went nova, destroying the entire system in a single stroke, and then collapsed back into itself as a black hole. Both the Kaladasians and the Terrans were appalled by the senseless destruction war had wrought, and they decided to create another venue for settling conflict. The Cyber Race was born. CyberRace is a futuristic race simulator inspired by the fertile imagination of Syd Mead, an artist/designer whose credits include city and vehicle design for Blade Runner, space ship design for Aliens and 2010, as well as concept-car design for Ford. CyberRace tells an evolving story, tracing the political maneuverings of the Kaladasians and the Terrans as they jockey for position to control the resources of the black hole, which has the very real possibility of being a gateway to riches and technology hitherto unknown. Our central character is Shaw, who is still reeling in the emotional turbulence of his father's death. His father was one of the greatcies. To make the race more competitive, the est cyber racers, and after defeating the sleds can be outfitted with any manner of Kaladasian champion, Mugyor, he was deoffensive or defensive weaponry, from lasers stroyed by Mugyor in an \"accidental\" burst to anti-grav mines to holographic projectors. from his laser cannons as the sleds returned Racing well carns extra credits that can be to the pirs. used to buy more advanced weaponry or In your role as Shaw, you are uninterested some extra goodies from the black market. in becoming a cyber racer, but Dobbs, a Race day begins with an all-too-bricf overview of the race by Nardo, your crew chief, and then an opportunity to update or outfit your sled with an assortment of goodies to improve your racing chances. Then it's off to the race. It was startling to find that there is no real start to the race. After 10 seconds of CD access, you are dropped immediately into the race But sihat about what lies on the in progress. The sudden cut withother side? People believe if you can control the black hole, you our any green light is very disoriencan control the galaxy. taring, and until you get used to it, the start can mean the difference technocratic yes-man for the Terran Empire, between winning and losing. So, has different plans for your future. By kidnapthe first order or business is to avoid the ping your beloved Alyssia, Dobbs has found at this pseudo-start, swerving clear of the an effective way to get you to drive for the other sleds to get out into the open. There Terrans. Failure to cooperate means that seems to be a bug in the game which pulls the Alyssia will die. Winning consistently, on the sled's control to the left when faced with a other hand, results in freedom and riches for screen full of opponents, but control returns both you and Alyssia. after a few seconds A Day At The Races Once underway, you can take a breath and marvel at the scenery. The graphics are specWhile the framework of the game supports tacular (though not quite up to Maximum an evolving story, the heart and soul of the Overkill's level), and the painted stellar backgame is the sled racing. Using voxel graphics, grounds are amazing. Rich colors give an similar technology to that cmployed in Nova Logic's CoCyber Race manche: Maximum Overkill, the rolling terrain of the race course is vividly modeled. CyberRace \"The races, at their most basic REQUIREMENTS: 386-20MHz, 4MB RAM, level, are several-lap affairs, foldrive; supports Adlib and lowing a course laid down over Sound Blaster sound cards the terrain by holographic beaPROTECTION: PUBLISHER: Cyberdreams cons. In your race for the finish Woodland Hills, CA line, you compete against 14 (818) 223-9990 other sleds from four other speTITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: $69.95 IBM VGA graphics, CD-ROM None Page 48 Computer Gaming World "


"GET REAL BLAS Upgrade up to a Sound Blaster\" 16, and you've got PC audio as real as it gets. Real CD-quality, 16-bit stereophonic sound. Real built-in upgradability. And best of all, real 100% Sound Blaster compatibility. All of which may just be why we're the 16-bit PC audio standard. And why those other manufacturers spend so much time comparing themselves to Sound Blaster. But like the man says, Get Real. Because there's only one card that's \"as good as a Sound Blaster 16 And that's a Sound Blaster 16. For information, call 1-800-998-5227 Sound Sound CREATIVE Sound BLASTER THE 16-BIT SOUND STANDARD. CREATIVE LABS, INC. U.S. Inquiries: Creative Labs, Inc. Tel: 1-2X-9985227 or 1-408-428-66) Interational Inquiries: Creative Technology Ltd., Singapore, Tel: 65-77341233, Fax: 05-775-0357. Sound Blaster, and the Sound Blaster and Creative logos are trademarks of Creative Technology Ltd. All other trademarks are the property of their respective holders. Copyright 1993 Creative Technology End All rights reserved Tahan Circle Reader Service #143 "


"PRETEN otherworldly feel to the race course, and the The sounds, or absence thereof, opposing sleds are rendered in good detail. are the weakest part of the racing. The cockpit for the Terran sled, although The sled moves along silently, graphically uninspired, is very functional without so much as an engine Three-quarters of the screen is filled with the whine to indicate changes in speed, forward view, and a small monitor below can and the background noise is filled be switched to display left, right, rear and with random, silence-filling statistics views. There is an effective radar booms from impossibly far away. screen, a weapons screen, and a damSometimes a missile or mine hit age/shield-strength indicator. clicits no sound at all. Flying the sled is basically a matter of steer But on the whole, the race poring left and right with the joystick (the keytion of CyberRace is a load of fun, board is supported, but I wouldn't and the ability to actually use all of recommend its use). Pushing forward on the your sled's resources makes the stick accelerates the sled, and pulling back race an interesting offensive battle. The only use the same care in writing the dialogue, slows it down, but brakes can be applied for problem might be a quickly diminishing level which is at times humorously immature and even more stopping power. The ship's altiof challenge: once you figure out the control at other times merely a list of the next race's tude is controlled automatically, so you don't systems and master a few driving tricks, the objectives ser in a confusing and unimportant have to worry about bottoming out or flying game becomes fairly easy. context. The visual images of the characters too high. With a Thrustmaster joystick and The Need For Mead all of the visual controls, the game plays with consist of a blend of digital photographs and rendered graphics, and they are quite palata single hand, and after several races to get Though the racing simulation is strong, the able the first few times you see them. Unforcomfortable with all the gizmos, nearly everyoverall package comes up short in some ways. tunately, each character has basically one pose thing is useful and easy to access. CyberRace has been extensively hyped as a Syd in one location and is animated by twitching When hit by fire from opponents, your sled Mead creation from the man who brought eyebrows and squirming lips. The storage is stopped in its tracks and spins for several you Blade Runner\"), but sadly, Cyber Race space on the CD-ROM should have allowed seconds, whether or not the shiclds absorbed does not have the holistic feel of a Mead plenty of space to create several different all of the damage. This was a good design design. The haunting CyberRace painting and views of each character, and perhaps even a feature, because it penalizes you in time for a the package design are vintage Mead, and it's mistake, allowing other sleds to zip past. Ofobvious that Mead did the basic sled designs, change in clothes or facial expression. but on the whole it seems as if he By not altering the cut scenes much (there were used more as a selling point are a few alternate scenes, such as the Black for the product. Cyberdreams Hole news correspondent, several stills of seems to have missed an excellent Alyssia, and the saboteurs), the between-race opportunity to create a truly storytelling interludes seem like old reruns unique ambiance for the game. For after only a few races, and there is really no instance, the cut-scene locations, reason to pay much attention. the sled hanger, and the sled's controls are visually very run-of-theProspective cyber-racers should also know mill (sometimes very poorly that the game does contain several bugs. Ocrve poked around and discovered casionally, the non-interactive scenes will rendered, as if added as an afterthat IDI, a driver from Drum, thought), and could have been lock up, forcing a reboot, or an old image will has you Marked for this race, much more spectacular with remain on screen when a new interface is Mead's help. From a gamer's peroverlaid. Other times, the lip and face animafensively, even a hit on an opponent with the spective, Mead's design worktion will freeze up, and the game will only most simple of weapons can give you an comes across as more hype than substance. progress when you repeatedly tap the enter envelope of opportunity to attempt a pass. Another weak point is the narrative frame key. At the very start of the game, there is an At the conclusion of the race, you are prework of the game. Cyberdreams has at informacion (or menu?) screen that flashes by sented with a screen of statistics showing the tempted to infuse the gameplay with a so rapidly there is no chance of reading it. finish order of the race, as well as the damage larger-than-life struggle by braiding a plot In all, CyberRace is a fun, visually stunning to your sled. While the background graphics around the races, complete with angry argu race simulator with a rather weakly conare attractive, there is no additional fanfare ments with Dobbs, brief meetings with Alysstructed and executed narrative framework. I for winning a race, and Dobbs is extremely sia, saboteurs, a visit to a black market fixer can't shake the nagging feeling that the game stingy with his praise (after two wins in a row, bar, and ongoing news reports following the was rushed out the door without adequate I was called a mediocre driver). While winprogress of the CyberRace and the exploration playtesting of the game or story. Some gamening allows Shaw to spend a few moments of the black hole. play tweaking, a rework of the script, and the with Alyssia, I would have liked the game to While admirable in intention, the narr While admirable in intention, the narrative addition of some sounds and art would have factor in the race's results and Shaw's peris generally poor in execution. Using the masmade the difference between CyberRace being formance more carefully into the evolving sive storage space of the CD-ROM, all of the a mediocre game that provides a few hours of plot. More penalties for losing and fanfare for characters' dialogue is spoken by well-chosen fun and being an excellent, cutting-edge winning would have been a nice touch. actors. Unfortunately, Cyberdreams did not game that is hard to walk away from. CGW Page 50 Computer Gaming World "


" TOTTENHAM COURT NIGHTSBRIDGE HYDE PARK MARBLE ARCH CITY HAMPSTEAD HEATH 2000 AND PARK  COVENT GARDEN Join super sleuth Jon Daring as he races through the streets of London in his fight against evil! Using the most sophisticated video animation, graphics and digital sound available, C.I.T.Y. 2000 brings you the ultimate challenge of intellect and skill in the CD-ROM PC adventure of a lifetime.  LONDON BRIDGE  TOWER HILL  BLACKFRIARS WATERLOO  KINGS ROAD 13 JEEP  ST. MARTIN IN THE FIELDS  TRAFALG 20 DB There BEDF tic CD-ROM PICCADILLY  KING'S CROSS WESTMINSTE  1993 Aditus Inc. C.I.T.Y. 2000 City In Trouble Year 2000 is proprietary to Aditus Inc. All enquiries to Aditus Inc. 5756 Royalmount Avenue, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H4P 1K5 Tel: 514-737-8547 Circle Reader Service #27 "


"DON'T LET THIS GUY OLIFTING A He's General Minh, a deranged, power-mad sicko running a maximum security Factory of Doom. She's a chopper pilot turned survivalist named Kat. And she's 9 trying to get the hell out. You're her only hope of making it. Guide Kat along the escape route—the Critical Pathin the newest multimedia CD-ROM game for Macs and Windows\" PCs. From your fully-equipped control center, you'll share Kat's viewpoint through a headsetmounted camera. FRESH DELICIOUS Media Vision, Inc., 47300 Bayside Parkway Fremont, CA 94538. (510) 70-8600 Fax (510) 70-9592. Pop porn "


"HER FACE WITHOUT FINGER! TICI Together, you and Kat will negotiate TIC scene after scene of killers, mutants, traps and highexplosive surprises. It's gritty. Intense. Realistic. You'll feel like you're starring in your own action movie. You'll experience full motion video, real actors and a storyline that hinges on your every move. CRITICAL Sign up for combat PATH duty at your local software dealer. Or call 1-800-684-6699 to order Critical Path. And while you're at it, ask about upgrading your computer with a multimedia kit. MEDIA VISION Now, that's multimedia! Media Vision, the Media Vision logo and Critical Path are trademarks of Media Vision, Inc. 1994 Media Vision, Inc. All other trademarks and registered trademarks are those of their respective owners. All rights reserved. PATE CRITICAL Circle Reader Service #76 DISCHADEUS "


"Good Heavens, Miss America! You're Virtual! Enter the virtual reality of Thomas Dolby, where the hills are actually alive with the sound of music, and you are their conductor. by Ellen Snell Adams magine a computer game where your acscene, I assign a melody or sound to each \"My computer game is truly adult; that is, it tions create the music. As you navigate a character, object or space. I constrain the key has a much wider appeal than to reenage labyrinth, the music writhes and twists and tempo, and the music is generated from arcade fanatics. I'm very keen to widen the with every turn you make, or when you're within the game. Then, each important acenvelope.\" scaling a peak, the melody reaches a crescendo tion of the player creates a modulation or as you struggle to the top of the mountain. As tempo.\" Don't Shoot The Piano Player you pursue your goal, the music Dolby said his interest in computers follows you, buoying you along, evolved, in part, from the fact that he cannot sweeping you toward the objecplay the keyboards very well. \"I adapted a tive. So, in the end, you come lighting computer to trigger synths and drum away from the game experience pads around 1979. Then I got a Fairlight, and with not only a sense of victory finally a Mac II around 1985. I'm not a very or fulfillment, but with a symproficient keyboard player, so the computer phonic score composed entirely became my musical instrument.\" by the interaction between you Dolby's inadequacies as a keyboard player and the computer. That's were lost on the pop world, which eagerly Thomas Dolby's virtual reality. embraced him as a musiMusician Thomas Dolby, cian. Long before releasworld-renowned for his pioing his own Grammyneering music videos and pop nominated albums, he hir \"She Blinded Me With Sciwas in demand, and ence,\" has taken up virtual realcould be heard tickling ity programming and objectthe electronic ivories on oriented music. He's working Thomas Dolby models appropriate head gear for both albums by musical artists with innovative game makers to virtual and authentic reality. Foreigner, Def Leppard, create artificial worlds that Joan Armitrading and sound as distinctive as they look. Employing these methods works Malcolm McClaren. Afon a variety of levels, Dolby said. \"It ter top-five hits of his is much more economical in terms own (\"She Blinded Me That Bleeping Pong of time, money and computer With Science,\" and \"Hy\"The bleeps and blips of the Pong era are memory. Second, it gives the player peractive\"), Dolby then gone forever,\" Dolby told CGW. Music is a instant gratification for his choices; segued into producing other artists like Joni cheap commodity in the overall cost of a it creates a sense of achievement and computer game title, yet it can do a great deal will match his mood. And finally, the music Mitchell, Prefab Sprout ence with the incred. that results is very cool. It often surprises me.\" and Ofra Haza and composing film scores ible advances of affordable sound cards, along \"My first computer game The Conversaand musical numbers for movies as diverse as with the greater audio capabilities of new rion, based upon the Francis Ford Copola Ken Russell's Gothicand the animated feature machines, there's no longer any excuse for film) is the first to be driven completely by Ferngully: The Last Rainforest. settling for substandard audio.\" audio. It allows the player access to the same When composing his music, Dolby works With Thomas Dolby designing your music, audio and music techniques I use, but with a on a Macintosh 840AV machine with 32MB you don't have to. Dolby explained his techgreatly simplified interface, from within the of RAM, a 230MB hard drive and a 21-inch context of an exciting and suspenseful game,\" niques for creating the lush aural accompaniRasterOps color monitor. He uses lots of ments to the game experience. «When he said. musical attachments: 8 Tracks Pro Tools, a scoring a film or an interactive experience, Dolby hopes his work will help broaden the Sample Cell Card and a Fairlight Series III instead of composing a theme or cue for each appeal of the traditional computer game. electronic organ with assorted keyboards and Page 54 Computer Gaming World "


"Connect A Joystick To Your Notebook With The Parallel Game Port. PARALLEL GAME PART Notebook computers are great — except when it comes to playing simulation and action games. That's because they don't come equipped with a game port. Introducing the Parallel Game Port\" from Genovation. The PGP software turns your notebook into a gamebook by converting the computer's printer port into a \"virtual game port\". A part of the PGP package is an adapter which lets you connect a joystick, yoke or rudder pedals to any portable or desktop DOS computer: A port doubler cable is also available from Genovation, allowing the connection of two devices to the same adapter. The Parallel Game Port is an indispensable accessory for today's serious gamer. Whether you fly combat, race a car, play football or wing along at 100 knots, the PGP's software features will enhance your play action. You can now take control of the game as the PGP allows you to program the joystick's keys and customize them for your specific needs. What's ri Parallel Game Port eliminates the computer speed dependencies of some game ports. And it's easy to install, so you can be up and running in minutes. The Parallel Game Port is now compatible and comes with interfaces to more than 60 games. Including, most likely, every one of your favorites. And every month we add many more games to this list. Because we write our own game interfaces, they become available as soon as new games come to market — and may be downloaded free of charge from our own BBS. Look for the Parallel Game Port in the software section of your nearest computer dealer. Or call us at Genovation (800) 822-4333 Compatible with more than 60 games! LLLLLLLLL TETT TETTO TOTITOLI TTTTT GENOVATION Circle Reader Service #59 Genovation, Inc. 17741 Mitchell North Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 833-3355 FAX (714) 833-0322 , Sales: (800) 822-4333 Copyright Genovation, Inc. All product names are trademarks of their respective companies. "


"ON PRE REISS BYRON BYRON PREISS MULTIMEDIA COMPANY is looking for NEW GAMES NEW TALENT NEW SOFTWARE We are the ten-year veteran software producers of Dragonworld, Fahrenheit 451 and the new Isaac Asimov's The Ultimate Robot and Gahan Wilson's The Ultimate Haunted House rack modules. \"None of the equipment is been fortunate enough to get a head start, but essential, though,\" he said. \"In a way, I was I'd like to entice other artists into the fray. happier when I just had one monophonic That's one of the main objectives of Headsynthesizer and a two-track tape deck.\" space (Dolby's Los Angeles-based audio servHe employs the computer at several stages: ice company], to become a magnet for for writing, sequencing the keyboards and willing, creative minds.» Of course, another adding in vocals and the tracks of guest muobjective is to lure \"mega companies with sicians. \"I edit and weak my vocals digitally more money and bandwidth) than sense.\" with the other musician's performances. Dolby is interested in developing projects Then I record everything to hard disk and that do not yet have a target audience: \"We cdit together the best bits.\" can dream-take ideas that do not yet have a client and develop them until they crystallize.\" Dolby has scored several projects for Sega/Digital Pictures and l-werks Turbotour ridesimulators. His work with Iwerks led to a bid on music for Virtual Adventures, a game developed in collaboration with flight simulator experts Evans and Sutherland. In the end, lwerks chose a passive, linear score to accompany the game. Interactive musical scoring was perhaps too sophisticated for the adventure, which plays out entirely underwater. After becoming interested in virtual reality, Dolby teamed up with VR pioneer Eric GulThe Human Touch lichsen to create a gogglesand glove-based program called The Virtual String Quartet. Last summer Dolby premiered his comThe project, sponsored by the Intel Digital puter composing techniques at Digital World Education and Arts (IDEA) program, was in Los Angeles--to standing ovations. His exhibited at the Guggenheim Museum in instrument of choice, the computer, seems October of '93. The first interactive virtual only natural as the tool on which to compose world to synchronize animated figures with for computer games. \"There's really no difthree-dimensional sound (the illusion that ference between composing for the computer various sounds are coming from different and composing conventionally. People often points in space), the program introduced assume that music made by guys in tuxedos Quartet participants to a rehearsal space with Stradivarius violins is warm and human, where a string quartet is playing Mozart's whilst music made with buttons and wires is Quartet No. 21 in D Major. Participants cold and clinical. Actually, the opposite is could bend down to better hear the violin, often true. Orchestras are often programmed cello or bass. The really adventurous could like bytes in a computer, yet a computer, in cven \"tickle» a musician, sending him into an the right hands, is a very soulful instrument.\" improvised jazz or bluegrass solo as a musical Dolby's experiments with computers could counterpoint to Mozart. herald the dawn of an entirely new musical Dolby said he sees almost limitless potential age. «I hope to emerge from this with a brand in computer technology. He admits that he is new musical instrument. It will run on a greatly impressed with the potential of macomputer (maybe or maybe not the Mac) and chines like the 3DO system, which is exciting it will not supplant the recording studio,\" he gamers with photorealistic graphics and said. «It will work within the confines of a three-dimensional sound. \"It really is impordesktop business computer but it will behave tant that these fire bugs get into the hands of more like a musical instrument-like a direct entertainers. If artistic content is dictated by technicians and venture capitalists, we will all link between the music that's in my imaginabe subjected to an excruciating period of tion and sound waves that an audience can interactive Jeopardy,\" Dolby said. «Some arthear and enjoy.\" ists are better-equipped to adapt to the reEllen Snell Adams is a freelance writer based quirements of a new art form than others: I've in Austin, Texas. CGW Are you a programmer, computer illustrator, game writer or game tester? Are you a small software company looking for help? Are you looking for full-time or free-lance work? We'd like to hear from you. Suite 2122 175 fifth Ave. New York, NY 10010 Department C. G. W. Circle Reader Service #35 Page 56 Computer Gaming World "


"RETAR TM . THE ULTIMATE GAME OF STRATEGIC CONQUEST, ORBITING TAOOP UNIT In a real-time Universe; every move could be your last. REMOTE VIENE ESTABLISH LINK ESTABLISH QOBIT You are the commander-in-chief on a quest to conquer and colonize a galaxy of alien worlds. But first you must overcome hostile climate conditions, ward off cunning enemies, weigh critical information, calculate the risks, and make tactical decisions ... all at the speed of . light. Because in this mind-bending, real-time universe, there's a fine line between galactic success and dismal failure. To order Star Reach\", call 1-800-969-GAME, or see your local retailer. SHENDUR 0000000000 20. UN UZUN 0000000000 Pelaaminen  CU . CURITY Interplay Productions, Inc. 17922 Fitch Avenue Irvine CA 92714 (714) 553-6678 Actual IBM screen shots PATROL HRÉA. Circle Reader Service #66  1993 Interplay Productions, Inc. and Techtonics. All rights reserved. Star Reich is a truckmark of Interplay Productions, Inc. "


"AEGIS CD MAN ENOUGH CD COMPUTER xpress via e If you want a shot at the ultimate dato, you'll have to oorn it, Jerri's the kind of woman every mon dreams about beautiful intelligent successful. If you're going to date Jerti you'll have to pass her fest. Date all five of her girlfriends, and if they all like you, you'll get a shot at your dream date. All forms and figures presented in exciting 256 colors. A first person interactive social simulation where expressions and demeanors change in response to your dialogue Since 1985 Guardian of the Fleet naval simulation, Pushes you to the limit of real time strategic and factical combat simulation. Puts the latest in military technology and the ultimate hightech worship of your fingertips Features historically occurate bohle sequences. Based on newly declassified military information and historical accounts of actual battles. Challenges you to use the arts of deception, intelligence and worare in this high tech high thrill military Simulation PUBLISHER: Time Warner IBM CD 800-228-7449 ET TOLL FREE ORDER LINE $53 PUBLISHER: Accolade IBM CD $44 KING'S TABLE AUDIO MAGICIAN PLUS 16 LAWNMOWER MAN CD STAR TREK: JUDGMENT RITES FREE GUCIAN A unique fantasy board game, set within the legend of Rognorothe Norse version of the Apocalypse Features twelve different opponents each with their own personalities and styles. The dramatic sforyline unfolds, with stunning gruphics, and brilliantly animated sequences the opponents are a formidable collection of gods from the legendary Valhalla Play against the computer or against a friend. Love yourself to this forway world of challenge, intrigue and logic The board is set and the gods are waiting Truly an impressive blend of 3D and blockbusting action. There are 10 different varieties of gameplay, from puzzles through \"Cinematic style platforms to fly through scenarios which are true to the feel and quality of the film. Jobe, a simpleton who spends his hours Cutting neighborhood lawns, is used as a guinea pig by Dr. Angelo, and attains super human powers with the help of a unique Virtual Reality system, Entered into a Virtual Reality world within the Earth's computer network, he seeks revenge against Dr. Angelo for the injustice carried out against him. PUBLISHER: Sony Imagesoft IBM CD, MAC CD THE LAWNMOWER MAN Includes Wolfenstein 3.D FREEI A 16-bit stereo sound card which is 100% Sound Blaster and Adlib compatible and features a built in joystick port. Includes an llwoice FM music synthesizer Yamaha OP-2). Record, compress, store and play back sound, voice and music at 16 bits per sample Programmable sample rate from 4.000 22.000KHZ. PCM ADCPM, ESPCM, compression. Microphone jack and amplifier. Bundled software included PUBLISHER: Calypso IBM The 5 year mission continues Encounter strange adversaties in situations that defy logic. True episodie formal beams eight original missions into your computer As Captain Kirk you and your entire crow. Spock, Dr. McCoy. Uhura, Sulu, Chekov and Scott, bring the original unique TV series' humor on board Digitized, original painted backgrounds and detailed, computer-tendered storship poll you into the missions. Original series' sound effects and music loke you back to the action PUBLISHER: Gamatek DOS $23 $66 $39 PUBUSHER: Interplay DOS $33 337 23 SOUND CARDS JOYSTICKS/GAMECARDS IBM DROM BM O ROM 185 222 Pro Audio Studio 16XL. Pro AudioSpectrum 16 Reelmagic Multimedia Playback Sound Blaster 16 Basic Sound Blaster 16 MCD 167 Sound Blaster 16 MCD ASP...... 196 Sound Blaster 16 SCS12 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI-2 ASP SoundMan 16...... 107 20th Century Video Almanac ...112 7th Guest 50 AD&D Eye Beholder Trilogy .................. 51 AD&D Dark Sun Shattered lands........... 49 AD&D Dungeon Hack. Adventures... Adventures of Willy Beamish... Air Warrior... Aladdin and His Lamp...... Alone in the Dark... Animals MPC VERSION Art Gallery Windows CD Arthur's Tes Complete House Compton's Encyclopedia Upg. Conspiracy Cookbook Heaven... Curse of Enchantia...... Cyber Race D&D Fantasy Empires..... Doemons Dark Seed Day of the Tentacle. Deathstar Arcade Battles Dictionary of living World..... Dinosaur Adventure... Dinosaurs Multimedia Ency...... DireciPhone... Dracula Unleashed N 's Lair pedia '94 Flight Stand...... Flight Stick Flight Stick Pro GForce Flight Yoke........... GameCard Autose... GomeCord Ill Automatic GameCard III MCA Automatic... Notebook Gamepott. Thrustmaster ACM Game Card Thrustmaster Flight Control Thrustmaster Formula TI Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals Thustrposer Weapon UPROM. Thunderstick...... Virtual Pilot ACS300 Speaker Pait/Subwoofer..........282 AR Partner 22 Speaker Sys Gray..... AR Partner 622 Speaker System Altec AC5100 Speakers Altec ACS200 Speakers....... Koss HD 1 Speckers Koss HD 4 Speakers Koss HD-6 MPC Speakers.... Labtec CS 1000 Speakers Labtec CS-150 Spookers.... lobtec CS-180 Shielded Speaker Labtec CS 550 Speakers.... Labtec CS 800 Speakers Labtec CS 900 Speakers Labtec SS-100 Stereo Speakers Labtec SS 700 Speakers FanCard Version M . 29 IPS 360 GPS Navigation System....... 505 Microsoft Bus Mouse 2.0 Microsoft PS/2 Serial Mouse 20. Practical PM14400FXMT EXT F/M. Pro Movie Studio....... Sony PIX 100 CD ROM XA Player Sportster 14.4 EXT Fax/Modem.............176 Sportster 14.4 INT.Fux/Modem... Sior is 5 Laser Printer ........... . Stor NX 1040 Rainbow 180CPS ....... Star Starjet SJ 48 Ink Jet...... . VGA TV Elite 270 SPEAKERS St. Patrick's HARDWARE Journeyman Project....... Just Grandma & Me......... Jutland... Key Home Designer WIN ... King James Elect. Bible..... King's Quest VI...... . King's Quest VI Upgrade Labyrinth of Time lands of Lore... laura Bow 1. legend of Kryandia leisure Suit Larry V... Lightning...... loom Lord of the Rings Lost Treasures Infocom... Lost in Time.... Lyric language French MPC. Lyric language Spanish MPC...... MPC Music Mozart MPC Wizard Diagnostic.......... MS Beethoven for WIN....... Macmillan Kids Dictionary... Mad Dog McCree... Man Enough Mantis Experimental... Map Expert Mayo Clinic Family Health 1.2 Mayo Clinic Total Heart Mega Race Microcosm Microsoft Golf Windows MPC...... Might & Magic World of Xoon..... Monopoly Deluxe....... Multimedia Dinosaurs WIN Multimedia Mozart WIN Multimedia Stravinsky WIN Musical Instruments National Lampoons Chess Naval Pack.. Newsweek Interactive #1 Newsweek Interactive #2 Oceans below... . Our Solar System Oxford English Reference. Penthouse Interactive Photo CD Access DOS....... Photo CD Access WIN Photo Edge Color WIN Pill Book Police Quest TV..... Publisher CD ROMIX Comics Free 31 ROMIX Comics Hardcose ROMIX Comics Prime #1 Rebel Assault Return of the Phantom.... Return to Zork SVGA Harrier....... Sam & Max Hit the Road Scrabble Deluxe Secret Weapons Luftwate... Secret of Monkey Island... SelectPhone Seven Days in August....... Shadow of the Comet. SimAnt Enhanced..... SimCity Enhanced..... Sound Sensations Space Quest IV... 880 690 34 IBM CD-ROM Backroad Battle Chere Berlitz) Berlitz Think Better Homes Healthy Cooking.... Bibles & Religion Blood Net Blue Force.... Budget Guide USA 1993 Campaign Capitol Hill Challenge CD Pack Chessmoster 3000 WIN.. . Cica Gomes Windows Shareware CD AD&D Eye Beholder Trilogy AD&D: Dark Sun Shattered lands... AD&D Dungeon Hock Adventures....... Adventures of Willy Beamish..... Air Warrior Aladdin and His lamp... Alone in the Dark Animals MPC VERSION Art Gallery Windows CD....... Arthur's Teacher Trouble B17 & Silent Servicell Backroad Racer... Battle Chess MPC & DOS Berlitz Japon Alive Berlitz Think & Talk French Better Homes Healthy Cooking Bibles & Religion Blood Net.. Blue Force Budget Guicie USA 1993................ Campaign Capitol Hill Challenge CD Pack............. Chessmaster 3000 WIN............... Cica Games Windows Shareware CD Cinemania Movie Guide '94 Clipart Goliath. Colee Breck CD Collection Comanche w/Mission 182 CD Compleat Beatles Complete Bookshop 453 475 497 546 DigitalEdge CD Mult, Kit... Discovery Int Dbl 16 bit Kit............. Fusion CD 16 Internal Fusion CD 16E External Fusion Double CD Internal kit... Memphis Multimedia Upgrade Kat Mitsumi Double Speed Int MultiSpin 3XE Ext. 195ms. MultiSpin 3X1 Int. 195ms. MultiSpin 3XP Portoble 195ms..... OmniCD Upgrade Kit.. PAS 16 ll Multimedia Kit Sound System W/Microphone 2.0... Sound System w/Sound Card 2.0... Texel DM3028 Int 240ms Texel DM5028 Ext 240ms... CD DRIVES & UPGRADE KITS Globol Explorer Goblin Gobliiins 2 Noval Bottles Pack Disk Records '93............ 2000 w/Scenario.......... Radio Cob.. Hi-Tech Aircraft....... Home Medicol Advisor Pro... Dinosaur Adventure... Dinosaurs Multimedia Ency DireciPhone Dracula Unleashed......... Dragon's Lair ... .......... Dune Eco Quest Search for Cetus..... Eleventh Hour............... Encarta Encyclopedia '94 European Racers F.15 Strike Eoglaill Family Doctor MPC WIN Flight ATP w/East & West CD Fractal Ecstasy FreePhone... Gateway II Global Explorer. Gob . Goblins 2 Great Naval Battles Pock... Guinness Disk Records '93..... Gunship 2000 w/Scenario...... HAM Radio Hell Cob... HiTech Aircraft... Home Medical Advisor Pro... Humons CD INCA INCA 2... Indiana Fate of Atlantis Iron Helix LFK Assassination... 37 .863 ..50 139 IBM CD-ROM IBM CD-ROM 366 46 164 34 CALL Ad lib Gold 1000 AudioMan Gravis Ultrasound Por Able Sound Plus Pro Audio 16 Basic Pro Audio Studio 16 ....... "


"SAM & MAX HIT THE ROAD JOHNNY ROCK SUPRA FAXMODEM 144LC EXTERNAL INDY CAR RACING HOT JOHNNY Grab your night stick, squeal like a Siren, and hit the roud with Sum & Mox, Freelance Police, as they attempt to crack their toughest case Sam, a canine shemus, and Max a hyperkingtic rabbity thing, are traveling across Americe, hot on the trail of olunawoy cornival bigfootA deranged animated adventute Endless hours of fun playing mini games like Wok A Rat and CarBomb Indulge in gratuitous antisocial behavior. Enjoy edgy animation and twisted humor Stop attacky tourist traps and intim idote bizarre Denizens. CD version $39 PUBLISHER: LucasArts DOS Experience the INDYCAR thrill of racing ogainst the world's best drivers in the world's fastest roce cars. Gives you 800 horsepower IndyCar driving Detail even includes the point schemes and E PAPYRUS decals of actual IndyCars and the skid marks through the groove at every turn Select wing angles, fire type and pressure suspension stiffness, camber, gearing and much more. Adjust turbo boost, brake bios and roll bar settings from the cockpit. Custom tune your engine in the dyno room! Who shot Johnny Rock? Interactive live motion picture action It's the Rollicking 30's and someone has killed popular singer Johnny Rock in this action packed gangster whodunit Navigate the back streets, goming halls, funeral porlors and the dirty sections of this city to get at the clues held by a number of shady characters and solve this murder mystery Bad guys with machine guns provide a high level of challenge External 14,400bps data and 14,400bps send/receive fox/modern. V.42bis dato compression for up to 57,600bps throughput SilentAnswer allows you to receive fax and voice calls on a single telephone line Caller ID when supported by the phone company, displays information about incoming calls Simple LED display lights track modem activity Package includes Wintex lite, FoxTalk COM and CompuServe information Manager software. Features a 5 year warranty PUBLISHER: Supro Corporation $ 159 IBM, MAC $34 PUBLISHER: Am. Laser Games S Call IBM  PUBLISHER: Virgin Games $37 DOS FANCARD II VIRTUS VR NFL PRO LEAGUE FOOTBALL CAMPAIGN II FOOTBA Imagine the world of virtual reality on your desktop computer Remodel your home, office or just create fantasy worlds! Walk around in your model immediately. Design yout space using hundreds of included Gallery pieces FREE Tutorial video included Simple drag and drop drawing, Comes with its own set of 3D worlds, swim through an underwater og odyssey, or live the drama of JFK's molorcode passing through the streets of Dalles. You control the action, like a flight Simulator or movie that you direct Designed to dissipale heat in today's personal computers packed with addin. Eliminates overheating programs, Lowers internal tempera tures by 65 degrees by circulating 27 cubic feet of it per minute over the hottest components Keeps your hard disk or hard disk card cool Equipped with 2 fans, and a large LED to show that the power is on, Features 12 volts and its indo ony B16, or 32-bit slot. Draws only a finy amount of power lyrat replacement warranty PRO LEAGUE Brace yourself for impact Strategy graphics and Pro League play so real 's licensed by the NFL the NFPA and chosen by USA TODAY TO Simulate Super Bowl play Full field detailed color animation with actual NFL logos, NFL players, teams, uniforms and statistics. Design plays from scratch, or choose from 198 offensive and dutensive plays. Coach your favorite fum using the Pro Draft, Pro Trader and Team Editor modules. Full rosters with injuries and substitu tions. True modem play with chat mode PUBLISHER: Micro Sports DOS 50 years of global conflict, now generation of war AMPAIGN simulations. Over 130 templates of the most significant military forces of SEE the last 50 years have been included to help you gain empire an insight into real conflicts such as Korea, Vietnam and Operation Desert Storm Fly helicopters in air to ground or ait to air attacks. Deploy the animated infantry duting fierce battlefield action in a new 3D environment Features oll the modern weapons systems: guided missiles, rockets, homing missiles, loser rangefinders, gun stabilizers and night sights PUBLISHER: Empire DOS PUBLISHER: T.S.Microtech IBM $39 PUBLISHER: Virtus WIN, MAC $62 $34 $34 EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 OVU\"220\"/47 329 FAX:508-443-5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 * ** 10*I * FAX:0011-508-443-5845 Xit, CompuServeID: 70007, 15345 Ba b #T ) 1. 3 Stett 90316 ZL. FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS CD-ROM IBM RECREATION NNNN ble of the Dead... Jock Nicklaus Signature Golf Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour ! Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 2 Jogged Alliance... Jeopardy Deluxe WIN Joopardy with Alex... Jeopardy with Alex Trebock WIN.. Jet Fighter 11 .25 40 Jet Pack... CALL 40 Space Shuttle MPC... Spellcasting Porty Pok..... Spirit of Excalibur Sporting News Pro Football Star Trek 25th Enhanced Street Allos 20 USA WIN Strike Commander/Tactical TechnoTools......... .. Tetris Gold. Tony torusse Baseball i Too Many Typefants! Totul Distortion..... . Typecose... U.S. Atlas 4.0 UFO Close Guide WIN... USA Today: The 90's Vol. 1 Ulimali Ultima Underworld I & II. Under a Killing Moon CD Vacation Planner Gold Where in World Deluxe WinCD Professional 1.1 Wines of the World Wing /Ultima UnderWid Wolf Pack Works 3.0... World Atlas 4.0 World Circuit Grand Prix A 10 Tank Killer Enhanced 1.5 A320 Airbus: US Edition AD&D: Dark Sun Hint Book AD&D Dark Sun Shattered lands.... AD&D Dungeon Hock AD&D: Eye of Beholder III AD&D, Eye of Beholder Trilogy...... APBA Baseball for Windows Aces of Pacific 1946 WWII Miss Aces of the Doop Aces of the Pacific . VGA Aces over Europe Aces over Europe. Mission 1. Aces over Europe Mission #2 Adven of Willy Beamish... Adventure Pack Air Combat Classics... All Wartor SVGA Alone in the Dark Ancient Art of War in Skies Arborea 2 Archon Una Arena All of the Kill Ashes of Empire... . B-17 Flying Fortress VGA Baseball Card Collector Windows Bottle Chess 4000 Super VGA Bottle Chess 4000 WIN Bottle Chess WIN Bottles of Destiny Beethoven ll Betrayal at Kondor Bicycle Bridge WIN..... Bicycle Poker WIN Blood Net. Blue & the Gray Blue Force: The Next of kin Bram Stoker's Dracula...... Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space....... CD San Francisco Scenery 36 CD Washington D.C. Scenery... Coor. Coesars Palace WIN.... Campaign Card Shop Plus... Carrier Strike... Corners of War II...... Castle of Dr. Brain VGA Castles II: Siege & Conquest.. Challenge of the 5 Realnis... Chessmaster 4 WIN .. Civilization ... Civilization Hint Book........ Civilization Moster Player Ed. Civilization WIN Clash of Steel WWII 1939-45..... Classic 5 WIN............ Coaster Cobra Mission......... Cognito WIN Cohort Comanche & Mission Disk 1 Comanche: Mission Disk Comonche: Mission Diskil Comanche: Maximum Overkill Combat Classics ll .... Command HQ Classic... .. Command Starship Companions of Xanth.......... Conquered Kingdoms......... Conquered Kingdoms Scenario....... Crosswords Deluxe WIN Cyber Race... Cyberspace. D&D: Fantasy Empires.... D&D: Stronghold... Duomonsgulo. Darklands Hint Book Darklands.... Day of the Tentacle Hint Book Day of the Tentacle: Maniac Delta V. Detroit Doom Dragon Knight ... DreamWeb.. Dune Dune Il... ....... Dungeon Master Ethion Arend WIN Eco Questit: Rainforest....... Eight Ball Deluxe..... El Fish Empire Deluxe.............. Empire Deluxe Scenario Empire Deluxe Strategy Guide Empire Deluxe WIN... Eternam Evasive Action Even More Incredible Machines F-15 Strike Eagle ll Classic ....... F.15 Strike Eagle Ill F 19 Stealth Fighter Classic... F/A Hornet Naval Fighter.... Falcon 30 Falcon FA 18 Hornet. Falcon Mig 29/Deadly Adversary Falcon Operation Fight Tiger FlashBack Fleet Defender. IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION Joe Montana Football Jump Jet.... Kaspatay's Gambit Kid Pix ..... King's Quest V.VGA King's Quest VI King's Quest VI Hint Book King's Ransom Kingdom of Germany Kings Table.... 12 ..CALL Kronolog 14 Flight Light....... Flight Sim: Las Vegas. Flight Sim: New York Scenery Flight Sim: Paris Scenery... Flight Sim San Francisco Flight Sim: Washington DC Flight Simulator 5.0... Flight Simulator Strategy Guide Flight Simulator Toolkit... Forgotten Castlo... Four Play Freddy Phorkos...... Freddy Pharkos Hint Book Front Page Sports: Football Pro.... Frontier Elite II....... Gabriel Knight Hint Book Gary Grigsby's War in Russio..... Gateway Geekwad Games of the Galaxy Gettysburg WIN......... Giga Games Sharewste CD Global Domination............ Goblins..... ........ . Goblin III Goblins It The Prince Buftoon Grand Slam Bridge II WIN... Grandest Fleet... Great Navel Barles Pack Great War. Hand of Fate. Kyrandi all............... Handball HardBall lil Big League Parks........... HordBall Diamond Collect....... HardBall Player Disk Harpoon Il. Head Coach Football WIN....... Heits to the Throne High Command... Hoyles Book of Game Classic Human's Like You've Never Seen Humon's: Insult to Injury.... INCA INCA 2 INCA Hint Book..... Incredible Machine Incredible Toons. Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis Indy Car Racing Innocent Until Caught 39 IBM RECREATION Kye Deluxe Lands of Lore Lands of Lore Hint Book Laura Bow II. VGA Leather Goddesses of Phobos Il Logocy Realm of Terror. Legend of Kyrandio Legend of Kyrandia Hint book Leisure Suit Lorry I VGA Leisure Suit Larry V. VGA Leisure Suit Larry V Hint Book losure Suit Lorry VI Leisure Suit Larry VI HBook Lemmings... Lemmings Links 36 Pra Links Banff Springs SVGA Links Belfrey Course SVGA links: Firestone Course SVGA Links: Innsbrook Course SVGA Links. Mauna Kea Course SVGA links: Pinehurst Country SVGA Lost Treasures of infocom Lost Treasures of Infocom Il Lost Vikings IBM RECREATION BM RECREATION IBM RECREATION Lucas Arts Classic Collection Lucky's Casino Adventure Circle Reader Service #42 "


"THRUSTMASTER WEAPONS MARK II GAME BLASTER COMPUTER Express User program mable throttle and weapons functions. Compatible with 5 pin keyboard connectors Program your joystick for any current or future game. Your gaming periph eral laystick and WCS) will be instantly compatible with current or future gomos, Features: LED lighting system indicates when certain functions are activated; Screwdown connector, Handle moves lore and aft for throttle control, Sturdy seven foot cables: Allows joystick programmability through joystick interface: Digital/Analog mode toggle switch User programmable functions: One year warranty Converts the VGA output from your PC to a video signal so you can play oll your favorite PC games on any TV set. Display online Services like Prodigy America Online, and CompuServe Includes $150 worth of FREE gomes: Prince of Persia, Jetfighter II, and Spectre Challengerl Supports 640x480 VGA resolution in 256 colors, Outputs NTSC video in RCA composite and S-VHS Super video standards. Includes A/C Power Supply, 6 foot RCA cable, 6 foot SVHS cable and a VGA Y cable Supports TV Auto Blanking, Toggling between VGA monitor and TV display PUBLISHER: ADS IBM Since 1985 800-228-7449 EN TOLL FREE ORDER LINE PUBLISHER: Thrustmaster IBM $90 $79 NO. 11 DOWNING STREET CD PEBBLE BEACH GOLF COURSE MOTORMOUSE RED CORVETTE GAMEMAKER 2.0 \"Those who oppreciato the humor of Monty Python will love this product. CD ROM WORLD The first episode of a continuing seties, a novel where you interact with the characters die and settings as you read the mystery story Join Ninja Nanny and Sherrloch Sheltie os they meet a host of eccentric friends and foes. Historical facts and notorious tidbits linked to the story are contained in the online DictioPedia NinjaNannica, a National Inquirer for knowledge, which features fine art and more than 90 videos Animations of wocky characters cre drown in detail and shown fulscreen PUBLISHER: Silicon Alley IBM  FOR USE WITH leach LINKS, LINKS 386 PRO, Of MICROSOFT GOLF Located on the Monterey Peninsula 1 in California. The CANOS only course of its COURSE stature open to EM public play. Along the shores of Cormel Boy, profes sional and recreational players alike have experienced first hand the wonders of this seaside layout, rich with tradition and natural beauty. Nine national championships have unfolded at Pebble Beach, Super VGA version features real sound with all major sound boards. Enjoy becoming a part of history! PUBLISHER: Access Software S22 DOS A serial mouse styled as an exact replica of a 1985 Chevrolet Corvette. A sporty alternative to your dull grey \"mouse\". A highquality three button mouse with buttons on the hood. Gives you the some quick access to on-screen functions. Simply plug it into your computer's serial part. Includes a special Windows driver that turns the cursor into an animated version of the cor, including sound support to rev the engine and sound the horn. FOR IBM PC AND COMPATIBLES ONLY GAMEMAKER Uses a grophical interface to let you create adventure and arcade style games in 256 color VGA graphics without programming. The games you create ore only limited by your imagination. Comes with a large selection of roady mode basic clements such as hero characters, monsters, weapons, landscapes and more. Create full screen scrolling scenes complete with background animation, Import graphic images into games, and include Sound Blaster compatible music and digitized sounds. Plus you'll enjoy the sample games included. seas Nine mble Beacon with part of $44 PUBLISHER: Motor Mouse ISM $35 PUBLISHER: Recreational Softwore Designs DOS $49 IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION Star Trek: Judgment Rites... ... Star Trek: The Next Generation. Star Wars Chess Stonekeep... Street Fighter Il Strike Commander Strike Commander Players Guide Strike Commander Speech Pack... Strike Commander loctical #1 Slike Squad RO. Rules of Engagement il... SSN 21: Sea Wolf SVGA Horrier... Sam & Max Hint Book... Sam & Max Hit the Road Sea Wali Seal Team... Secret of Monkey Island II. Seven Cities of Gold Comm.... Shadow Coster... Shadow Coster Hint Book Sid Meit's Trilogy ............. Silent Service Il Classic SimAnt WIN SimCity 2000 SimCity Classic................ SimCity Classic WIN......... SimEarth WIN Simform Simlife WIN.... Smokin' Guns.... Solitaire WIN Solitaire Spor in Revolution Toll Free Order Line 1-800-228-7449 Ext. 239 IBM RECREATION lure of the Tomptress.... .... Master of Orion........ . MechWarrior II............ Merchant Prince Metal & loce. Metal & loce Upgrade Disk NR18 Michael Jordan Flight Microleague Baseball/Football Microsoft Arcade WIN.... Microsoft Spoce Simulator Might & Magic Clouds of Xeen... Might & Magic Dark Side of Xeen.. Mike Ditka football....... Monopoly Deluxe More Incredible Machines...... More Vegos Games WIN Mortal Combat...... NFL '94....... NFL '94 WIN... NFL Cooches Football NHL Hockey '94..... Nono Tank... Operation Combat 2 Outpost Oxyd. Pacific Strike .... Pocific Strike Speech Disk Pacific Wor Patriot..... Perfect General Great Battles Perfect General Trilogy... Perfect General Wwil Scenario Pinball Drooms... Pirates Gold Police Quest lll...... Police Quest IV Pool Shark Populous Il Power Game Il.......... Powermonger... Prince of Persia ll Privalo Privateer Speech Pack Prophecy. Quarter Pole Quest for Glory Quest for Glory III....... Quest for Glory IV....... Quiz Show WIN Rags to Riches... Railroad Tycoon Classic... Railroad Tycoon Deluxe Rally: The Final Round..... Reach for the Skies....... Realms of Arkania Realms of Arkania Hint Book Red Boron..... Red Baron Mission Builder Red Crystal ... ... Red Storm Rising Classic Remind Me Return of the Phantom..... Return to Zork... Rex Nebular Rex Nebular Clue Book Rood & Track Grand Prix Road to the Final Four 2 Romance Three Kingdoms Ill Rome. Pathway to Power Royal Flush... Ultima Underworld Il Labyrinth ..........49 Ultima VII Part 2: Serpent Isle ... Ultima VII: Forge Virtue Add On... Ultima VII: The Black Gole......... Ultima Vill: Pagan Ultrabots... Unnatural Selection......... Unnecessary Roughness... V for Victory Market Garden V for Victory Utah Beach V for Victory Velikiye Luki Vegas Games WIN....... Veil of Darkness... Victory Pak............... Victory at Sea.... Vikings: Fields of Conquest... ww2 Battles of S. Pacific ... WWII Pack........... Walls of Rome...... Warlords .......... . Warriors of Legend Wheel of Fortune Deluxe WIN When Two Worlds Wor Wing Commander Academy Wing Commander Il w/Speech Wizardry Trilogy ..... ........ Wizardry. Crusader Dark Savant...... World Circuit Grand Prix World War Il Bottle 5 Pacific X Wing X-Wing Official Guido............... X-Wing: B-Wing Tour of Duty........ X-Wing: Imperial Pursuit ............. Yserbius.... AD&D: Eye of Beholder Trilogy.... Adventure Pack... Air Combat Classics Berenstain Bears Fun LunchPok...... Comanche & Mission Disk 1....... Great Naval Battles Pock HardBallid Diamond Collect... Jet Pock. Lucas Arts Classic Collection......... MechWarrior/BanleTech 1 & 11....... Micro Kitchen/Betty Bundle DOS 43 Micro Kitchen/Betty Bundle WIN Perlect General Trilogy... QEMM 386 Game Pack 2.0. Sierra Dynamics Bundle VGA Strike Commander/Tactical..... wwil Pack... Wing Commander ll w/Speech...... Wizardry Trilogy II.... See page in this months Kids & Computers section. Computer Express delivers all your edutainment needs! BUNDLEMANIA VALUES IBM RECREATION Strike CommUNCI ech Pack Shadow Caster Hint Book.... Sid Meir's Trilogy Silent Service II Classic SimAnt WIN SimCity 2000. SimCity Classic SimCity Classic WIN...... SimEarth WIN Simform Simlife WIN Smokin' Guns............. Solitaire WIN Solitaire's Journey WIN. Space Hulk Space Quest IV Space Quest V............... Space Quest V Hint Book... Spear of Destiny Spear of Destiny Hint Book.. Spectre PC Speche VR Speed Racer Challenge Racer X....... Spellcasting Party Pok............ Sport Works Star Trek: 25th Anniv. Hint Bk. Star Trek 25th Anniversary..... NA NA BM RECREATION for Victor for Victory Vs egas Games WIN .cil of Darkness...... . Strike Commander Strike Commander Players Guide ...... Strike Commander Speech Pack... Strike Commander Tactical #1 Strike Squad Subwor 2050.. Summoning... Syndicate Syndicate: American Revolution.. T2 The Arcade Game Task Force 1942....... Terminator 2029... Tesserce WIN... Test Drive I: The Passion Tetris Trio.. . The Dig The Games: Winter Challenge ..... Third Reich Tie Fighter Space Combat. Tony LoRussa Baseball Il Tony LaRussa lI. AL&NL Stadiums. Tony LoRusso il: Fantasy Draft Tornado Towe Ultima Underworld... Ultima Underworld ll Hint Book................12 IBM RECREATION 18M PRODUCTIVITY Access 1 1 WIN Access Comp. Upgrade 1.1 After Dark After Dark 2.0 WIN AutoMap 3.0 WIN AutoMap Europe WIN AutoMap Ski Resorts WIN AutoMap Upgrade 3.0 WIN.. Betty Crocker Cookbook WIN CA Clipper Comp. Upgrade 5.2 Calendar Creations Baseball Calendar Creations Dogs & Cats Calendar Creations Exotic Cars. Calendar Creations Impressions.. Calendar Creations Nature 37 ..40 "


"AXIS THE GAMECHEATER GABRIEL KNIGHT CD REELMAGIC UNNECESSARY ROUGHNESS ACCOUDECA Allows you to cheot almost all of the popular computer games Supported games Include: Prince of Persia, Lemmings Hellcats, PGA Tour Golf Spectro, SimCity Street Fighter II and many more Overrides predefined game functions and parameters to give you more of what you need for coch specific game. Add more time, money, ammo, shields, lives, or whatever else your favorite game requires. You could almost be immortall Mac version $33 Gabriel Knight is the last in a long line of Shadow Hunters, those lated to fight the dark forces of the super. natural Haunted by a centuries old curse, he's tormented by terra fying nightmares Now he must spend every waking moment scouting the side streets and back alleys of New Orleans for the key to his dark past. Features more conversation, clues, game options, and dark secrets to discover. Includes a bound and illustrated graphic novel. DOS/WIN version available for $36. PUBLISHER: Sierra   lets you seo, 30 frames per second in 32K brilliant colors at full screen for a real movie experience right on your PCI Olfors on board CD quality, 16 bit stereo digital sound, so you can upgrade your sound board and save on extra slot at the same time. Experience the full state-of-the-art effects of the next generation multimedia technology, including spectacular new computer gamos, Video CD feature films, and interactive video education and entertainment Features 32K colors for life-like gameplay Suit up and go head-to-head against real NFLPA pros in a ferocious battle of outra geous tackles impossible one handed catches, brutal head-bults, and flying helmets, in a graphically intense PC football game. Design your own plays, rosters and logos, Take the field as TV sportscaster Al Michools and call overy play, Filled with intense graphics, realistic animation and high impact gomeplay Import and export rooms from all 28 NFL cities. Features 1-2 player competition, or 2 player cooperative game play Supports all major sound boards, PUBLISHER: Accolade DOS PUBLISHER: Baseline Publishing DOS S37 $46 PUBLISHER: Sigma Designs IBM 53 $33 KEYBOARD COMMANDER TEMPLATES CARRIERS AT WAR II LANWORDS FOR WINDOWS BEAT THE HOUSE WINDOWS CARRIERS AT WAR 11 High quality, full color keyboard overlays for Flight Simulators will turn any AT101 keyboard into a 3D looking control panel Includes oll key commands in logical layout, and legend boxes for cockpit displays Available for MS FS 5.0, FALCON 3.0. MIG 29, STRIKE COMMANDER, ATP, XWING, COMANCHEF 151, ACES OF PACIFIC, JETFIGHTER, SECRET WEAPONS B 17 GUNSHIP, ACES OVER EUROPE, TORNADO and more! Ask about fokon 3.0's Keyboord & Utility bundles! Quantity Pricing 2 521 50,3 $30.00, ony 4 or more only $9.25 each! Publisher: Keyboard Commander Corp. $13 Fleet convier CARRIERS operation in AT WAR Southeast Asia 1936.1946. This sequel to the hugely successful CARRIERS AT WAR uses a much improved version of the original mechanics. Spans a decade that changed the world. Offers more tonsion, more excitement, fougher opponents and more dramatic Carrier boltles. The uncertainty of wor is vividly recreated. Eight scenarios included, some hypothetical, others contro versial. Explore all aspects of lactical and strategic combat between Japan and the United States and Great Britain. PUBLISHER: SSG DOS Fast paced, challenging, ontor fainment value that's fun for all agos. Suven word gome variations Ol create your own version Change the look of your games with a choice of colorful tile patterns. Oifers 20 different computer opponents with increasingly sophis ticated vocabulary and skill, ranging from beginner to expert levels, containing 160.000 words. Online help, \"best plays anagram finders, and word finders are also included. If you've got network support, you con receive and send messages to your opponents via a chat windows sereen PUBLISHER: Suber Software S WIN NOW AVAILABLE FOR WINDOWS Prepare yourself for a casino goming experience! Includes the 160 page study guide \"Beat the House Companion.\" Featuring slot machines, blackjack roulette, video poker and craps Beginners will learn the rules and terminology of casino play Seasoned gamblers are schooled in strategic counting fuchniques as well as profitable being strategies. One to four people can play against each other, or computer players will till the empty seats. Anyone can be a High Roller when they know how to \"Beat The Housel Publisher: Spirit of Discovery S 27 DOS, WIN $38 $23 IBM PRODUCTIVITY IBM FINANCE/TAX Managing Your Money 10 ............... Quicken 3.0 WIN ..................... Quieken 7.0...... Quicken Deluxe CD WIN..... TaxCut DOS & MYM SE Bundlo......... TaxCut Windows & MYM SE Bundle.... Taxcut Federal Final DOS '93 Toxcul Federal Final WIN '93 TurboTax Final 1040 DOS '93 TurboTax Final 1040 WIN 93 Turbolax Tax Business DOS... TurboTax Tox Plonner DOS... TurboTax Tax Planner WIN .40 OAAAA 800-228-7449 529 FAX:508-943-5645 A AEXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 E* * . -yB C FAX:0011-508-443-5845, Xit.CompuServeID: 70007, 15340 VIADUT  FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS 50 .50 119 .86 40 2222222 Colendar Creations Oceans........... Click & Drag WIN............. Coaster Screen Saver WIN Comic Keeper.... Corel Draw 4.0 WIN Dos View 386 2.6................. Disney Collection Screen Saver ....... DoodleMotion WIN Draft & Print... FoxPro 2.5 WIN..... . FoxPro Comp. Upgrade 2.5 WIN..... Gifs Galore Shareware CD..... Holy Bible King James Version...... Home Survival Toolkit Key CAD Complete Libris Brittannia Shareware CD... Lotus 123 Rel 4 Upg WIN.... Lotus 123 Release WIN MS DOS Upgrade 6.2........ MSDOS Upgrade for Dummies 6.2 Morph WIN............... 103 Norton Desktop 3.0 WIN..... 119 Norton Utilities 7.0........ . ...... Office Professional 4.0............ . . 576 Office Standard 4.0. 480 Office Standard Comp. Upg, 4.0. 284 Office Standard Vers. 4.0...... Organize Your Way WIN Paradox 4.5 WIN Photo CD Alasku Photo CD Animals Photo CD Auto Racing....... Photo CD Butterflies............ Photo CD Fireworks....... Photo CD Japan... Photo CD Porsche Racing.... Photo CD Sailbouts... Photo CD Underwater .. Photo CD WWII Aircraft Print Shop Deluxe .... Print Shop Deluxe WIN... Procomm Plus WIN.... . Publisher 2.0 WIN......... . Publisher Special Occasions WIN... 34 Q&A 4.0 WIN... QEMM 386 7.01............ Quattro Pro 5.0.... Quattro Pro 5.0 WIN... Rosemary West's House Fortune Scenes Impressionists Collect... Scenes Outer Spoce Collection.. Scenes Sierra Club Collection... Shoebox Image Monoger WIN Simtel DOS Shareware CD Space & Astronomy Shareware CD Stomp Keeper... Voice Assist............. Winfax Pro 3.0 WIN...... Windows 3.1 Windows NT 3.1 ............... Windows Upgrade 3.1...... Word 6.0 WIN... 315 Word 6.0 WIN Competitive ......... Word 6.0 WIN Version ... 93 Word for Word 6.0 WIN ..86 WordPerfect 6.0 WIN................ WordPerfect 6.0 WIN Version ...... Wordperfect 6.0 DOS 308 Wordperfect 6.0 DOS Version....... 108 XTree 2.0 WIN.............................65 MACINTOSH TITLES SEGA/SNES/3DO & 100 MACINTOSH TITLES 7th Guest CD... A Hard Days Night: Beatles CD ... American Civil War Ill..... Art Gailuty CD...... Battle of Britain 2... Belter Homes Health Cooking CD..... Bomber 2..... Business Planner CA Cricket Draw ill CA Cricket Graph ill....... CA Cricket Presents 2.1.. Caesar Caesars Palace Curriers At War........ Castles Il..... CheckFree MAC Chuck Yeagur Air Combat Civilization Cogito... Dark Seed... .. Deliverance.... Disney Collection Screen Sover Dracula Unleashed CD Eight Ball Deluxe Pinball... Falcon MC........ .. Flight Sim Japan Scenery... Flight Simulator Freddy Phorkos................ Hell Cab CD... Hoylos Classic... Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis Iron Helix CD. Jeopardy with Alex Trebuck JourneyMan Project CD Just Grandma & Me CD King's Quest VI....... legend of Kyrandio... Lunicus CD............. M4 Sherman Tank .... Moc Attack Mac Full O'Humans...... Mario Teaches Typing..... Morio is Missing. Micro Kitchen Companion '94 Monopoly.... Morph 2.0. Myst CD Mysi CD... Oceans Below CD.. ... Oxyd........... Pathway into Darkness....... Pax Impotiu... PhotoEdge Color CD......... Print Shop Deluxe... Print Shop Deluxe Business... Print Shop Deluxe Comics...... Print Shop Deluxe Sampler........ Pro Audio Studio 161C.......... ... 288 4.Way Ploy Adapter SEGA.... Quicken 4.0... Airborne Ranger SNES Railroad Tycoon Aladdin SEGA................ Ready, Set, Read... Bottle Chess 3DO........ Rex Nebular.......... Bubsy in Claws SEGA Royal Flush...... Bubsy in Claws SNES. Shoebox Image Manager.. Cliffhanger SEGA Sierra Award Winning Bundle Eternal Champions SEGA SimAnt F-15 Strike Eagle Il SEGA SimCity Classic John Madden NFL '94 SEGA Simtarih SimEorth John Modden NFL '94 SNES Simlile... Jurassic Park SEGA. Spectre...... . . lawnmower Man SNES.... Sportster 14.4 EXT-MAC&FAX Lemmings 3DO..... .. Star Trek 25th Anniversary...... Mad Dog McCree 3DO Star Trek Screen Saver ... ......... Micro Machines SEGA Stellar 7...... .. Mortal Kombat SEGA........... Street Allas USA CD Mutant League Football SEGA.. Strip Poker Professional NHL '94 SEGA Sword of Sodon. NHL '94 SNES Taxcut Federal Final '93... Oceans Below 3DO. Thunderstick ADB....... Pirates! Gold SEGA Tristan MAC LC/MAC II...... RoboCop vs. Terminator V for Victory III: Mkt. Garden Shining Force SEGA V for Victory Volikiye Luki ....... Space Shuttle 3DO Victory Pak... Street Fighter II SEGA Victory at Seo.... Street Fighter II SNES 63 Wheel of Fortune w/ Vunna White Super NBA Basketball SEGA 800 228-7449 Orders Only, 508 443-6125 all other business. Sales Dept. Hours Monday Friday BAM 8PM, Saturday 9AM MI 5PM. All other Business Monday Friday 9AM SPM, Most orders ship within 24 hours. Temporary shortages are normally filled within 10 days. Books, Memory chips, and some electronic components are not returnable. We ship only to verified billing addresses. International orders welcome Airborne Express Shipping charges $7 por order up to 6 lbs. $1 per tb. above 6 lbs UPS Ground Service charge 53 per order Actual freight charges apply for computers, hard disks, Bernoulli's, tape back-ups. printers, Multimedia kits, monitors, etc. Alaska, Hawaii, outside continental U.S., APO/FPO call for infor mation. Prices subject to change without notice. Some product not availablo outside the US. Ploase call for more informaton. Not responsible for errors or omissions, Mastercard, Vian. Discovor, prepaid orders, purchase orders, wire transfer, cash, and cashiers check accepted. Personal and Company checks allow 14 days to clear. No surcharge for credit card orders. Your credit card is not charged until the merchandise is shipped We check for stolen credit cards. All returns for credit, repair, or exchange must have a return authorizaton number. Returned orders or ordered wrong items are subject to a 15% rostocking Master tee. We ship latest versions of software available. Over nine years of service. Thousands of satisfied customers. Send your Fax today! All quotes answered immediately Product covered by manufacturer's warranty. Detective items replaced immediately. Educational government, and corporate purchase orders welcome. All item numbers represent 3.5 floppy, except where noted. BANO && IBM PRODUCTIVITY 316 28 122 290 ..108 Circle Reader Service #42 "


"REVIEW The Phoenix Rises From The Ashes Of 8-Bit Games A Strategy/Action Classic Emerges by Terry Lee Coleman V Then Archon appeared a decade strategic basis with their more experienced but was not quite the unbelievable figures I ago on the 8-bit computers of opponents. had hoped for. There is naturally no point in yore, it was a revelation. The subcomparing these figures with the old 8-bit ject matter involved the ultimate forces of Power Trip versions, given their steroid-like transformagood and evil deciding the fare of the cosmos As in the original Archon, the key to wintion. on an otherworldly playing field. Like chess, ning the game is controlling the various Obviously, where Archon Ultra differs most its spiritual grandfather, two opposing groups \"spaces of power,\" the key to control of the from chess is in execution of combat. Regardof characters faced off on a grid less of how entertaining Battlechess might be, of squares, strategically maneuyou always know that the piece that moves vering to capture pieces and into the square will always win, whether by control the board. Unlike chess, blowing up the opponent, cutting him in half the capture of a piece wasn't a with an axe, or any number of violent animatidy, bloodless affair; instead, tions. Pieces that clash in Archon Ultra still pieces went into battle on a move onto the square, but have a choice of separate battle board, and the challenging an opponent in either dark, neuensuing arcade sequence would tral, or light-colored squares. The scenery determine the victor. The game then changes to one of three combat environwas well-executed and wellloved, and now it is back from ments: lush and green for light, gray for neuthe 8-bit graveyard to try its luck tral, or dark for chaos. When on your own color square, your piece's \"hit points\" are against a new generation of games and gamers. universe. Five such power spaces can be found increased greatly, and your opponents are The reincarnated form of Archon is Archon on the board: one at the exact center, one on summarily reduced. Once a piece of one side Ultra. Like its predecessor, it's played on a cach extreme edge, and one underneath each or the other loses all of its hit points, the other nine-by-nine square board, rather than the 64 opposing \"mage,\" roughly equivalent to side wins, with its piece returning to occupy squares traditionally used for a chess game. kings in chess (but with a lot more firepower). the square on the main strategic board. The initial effect of this expanded play area is The rest of the board is divided into light, All three types of battle areas have detailed neutral and dark squares, emblematic of the that chess players cannot depend on typical terrain, with trees or molten lakes of lava chess openings from memory, due to the spheres of influence for each different spatial considerations of the board of the Dark and Light forces. Archon Ultra Long diagonals take on even more signifiMovement is fairly simple for cance due to the larger playing area, while anyone who has played any ARCHON TITLE: Archon Ultra computer chess control of the center is a much more tricky ULTRA game. PRICE: SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, 2MB RAM, 5MB proposition. Chess players will also not be Whether mouse or keyboardhard drive space, VGA graphics: able to analyze \"pawn\" structure so casily, to analyze \"pawn structure so easily. driven, the pieces are most Supports Adlib and Sound Blaster sound cards making for a more wide-open style of play. responsive, and the animaDESIGNERS: Ion Freeman, Paul Reiche and Withour centuries of published games to tions are good, although not Anne Westrall PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations, Inc. build on, both the player and the computer up to the quality of say, BatSunnyvale, CA SEL tleChess 4000. The artwork (408) 737-6850 opponent must be more creative, allowing non-chess players to compete on a more equal tends to be clean and unusual, $49.95 IBM Page 62 Computer Gaming World "


"The Elder Scrolls \"I've played role-playing games since they first appeared on mainframes a decade ago. The Elder Scrolls: Arena is quite simply the most captivating, well-designed, realistic world available on home computers.\" -Russ Ceccola, Associate Editor, \"The most impressive showing by any company...Bethesda's Fall line-up is one of the best going.\" 000 Computer Game Review Circle Rearter Service #12 Electronie Games UELFIESDA SUFLWORKS Dorota Besos Sorvorks, All rights reserved. Dlatesca Sultworks and the Bes t TRIO "


"which affect combar in a variety of ways, corns have the fastest rate of fire in the game offering cover, blocking line of sight, and and the ability to leap over chasms and lakes. even destroying enemy units outright. The Dragons fly and breathe an arc of deadly fire approaches to the various power points as far and wide. Banshees wail to demoralize sures that each player will have to fight on their enemies and are one of the most effecboth favorable and unfavorable terrain to tive pieces for the dark-side player. The Phoecontrol the board. Winning \"on the road» in nix rises in flames and immolates its enemies, Archon Ultra is not merely difficult; it is the but has to be adjacent to be effective, a bit of key to ultimate success. a liability. Unlike the Phoenix in the original The pieces are all drawn from typical fanArchon, however, our 1994 model has a sectasy fare and will be casily recognizable to the ondary weapon, a sort of magical homing novice. Goblins act essentially as pawns, but missile. In fact, the biggest difference in comwith big, nasty clubs. Instead of castles, wc bat between the old Archon and Archon Ultra, find rock-throwing Golems, capable of demay be that now all of the different pieces stroying enemies with one or two blows. Unihave two unique abilities instead of one. GPPRCE The delights of the system are both obvious and subtle. From a tactical standpoint, no two pieces are alike. Different firing rates, amounts of damage per hit, and a marked difference in movement capabilities make every engagement something special. Some players might be tempted to charge head-long into their opponent with their most powerful unit, but each creature has its limitations, including a «recharge» period during which they cannot fire their weapons. The powerful Phoenix may have to face the Fire Elemental, who far from being harmed by flames, revels in them! Even the most jaded of players will have to play a long time to exhaust all the possibilities in the tactical match-ups alone. From a pure strategy standpoint, conservarive players may hug their own color squares, and play defensively. Wild attackers may pressure at widely divergent areas of the board, and those with a counterattacking bent may choose their spots carefully. Regardless of the playing style chosen, the Archon Ultra bonus is that even the most potentially static games are kept lively through the arcade struggles. So real, you may have to notify air traffic control. You no longer have to imagine the experience. Because now you can live the dream. Introducing G-FORCE, the high-tech flight yoke that lets you pitch, roll, bank, soar and never lose control. Activate dual fire buttons, throttle control, and more! So flexible, it even transforms into a fixed-column steering wheel for driving simulations. Try G-FORCE. It's like a heavy dose of reality. Nice New Paint Job, But How Does It Move? Most chess-like algorithms use a form of \"tree search» for their AI routines. Without having asked the designers, it seems that Archon Ultra uses a similar approach, because the program plays a very tactically-minded game. The designers have thoughtfully kept the \"reflexes» of the program to a manageable level on normal settings, although the program may be enhanced for O.K. Corral-type shoot-outs. Strategically, the Al tends to find a weakness and pound on it, making it a formidable opponent, but Archon Ultra also impressed me by being able to play most patiently in the late middle and end game. New players may want to give the computer Suncom The Hardware Advantage for Entertainment Software TECHNOLOGIES 6400 W. Gross Point Rd., Niles. IL 60714 708/647-4040 FOR IBM AND COMPATIBLE PCs. Screen shot of WORLD CIRCUIT by MicroProse. Cinta Dander Carinn 4116 Computer Gaming World "


"ON TARGET OF THE COMVIPUTER GAMINGO COMPY . GAIVIP WOR MPUTER PACIFIC Sex Sports Games Section ING WORLD CEMI FATE ORI har Party SALE LINKS 380 ENTE XXX 664 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Uluda em 7INDIANAJO pastyle VORLD COMPUTER GAMING WORLD aic Arts The al Computer Gam Mopane Jitra Hot 100 ItraBots HIPLASHES CAMES herplay's Star Trek: 25th Anniversary dat Labyrinth of Worlds FATE of ATLANTIS F Freda rontier Pratiche Don't go unarmed to the software store. For more than 12 years, Computer Gaming World has provided game hunters with the best information in the field. CGW is the magazine for gamers who want more than quick overviews of the latest games. We're loaded with the most complete reviews, new strategies, and the best hints for the discerning hunter. Take aim now with Computer Gaming World and save almost $20 off the newsstand price. Only $28 per year (12 issues). Lock and load with your Visa or MasterCard and call 1-800-827-4450 "


"a handicap setting for the first couple of more recent strategy games such as Theatre of signers see fit to design more games in this games in order to actually learn the game. War, while retaining the charm of the old genre. A pleasant surprise is that Archon Ultra 8-bit version. actually gives some of the feel of being a Aside from the obvious strengths of the Al. Everything Old Is New Again fantasy game. When playing other fantasy the best thing about Archon Ultra is that it can The remaking of a classic involves risks, be played via modem. Chess oneven for game designers with the lofty repuline is nice, but many gamerstations of Freeman, Reiche and Westfall. Just prefer action games or simulasimulaas in film, where a colorized version of a great tors such as Red Baron. With black-and-white movie can detract from the Archon Ultra, gamers may try to director's original intent, so the \"colorizaoutwit a live opponent, while tion\" and the addition of features to a game can destroy the balance of the original. On simultaneously having the thrill the other hand, the remake of a game can do of blasting away at enemy pieces too little to make the new version worthwhile in real-time action. The tournato players of the original. Recent efforts such ment potential is obvious, and as Pirates Gold! and Seven Cities of Gold II, we can only hope that the dewhich simply upgraded sound and graphics and added little to enhance gameplay, are clear exstrategy games such as Conquered Kingdoms, amples of this problem. Fortunately, Freeman, Reiche, and I feel as if I'm playing a wargame with fantasy trappings, whereas the Unicorns, Banshees, Westfall have found a balance etc., of Archon Ultra don't feel at all like between these two extremes, as they have brought the graphics military units. Magical spells cast by the sorand sound of Archon up to curcerers of each side add to the mystical feel, as rent standards, and have made units are releported, storms are cast, the \"flow minor changes to game play of time\" gets reversed, and mayhem reigns without sacrificing the elements throughout. The classic good-versus-evil that made the original a classic. struggle gains a bit of freshness, as Archon Ultra seems less abstract than chess or even CGW Precision analog joystick with an unsurpassed 5-year limited warranty Compatible with all flight simulation software, including Microsoft Flight Simulator 5.0. Announcing O.T.C. Lightning fast trigger button Dual position thumb button Cursor centering adjustment Realistic throttle control When that enemy MIG is bearing down on you, HUNT and PECK are not the first two responses that come to mind. If you agree, consider the advanced Thunderstick with OTC-One Touch Command. Touch a button to look left. Release it and you're automatically looking forward into your heads-up display. A single touch could select a weapon, target, and fire all at once. Eight dualprogrammable buttons on the front panel let you replace multiple keystrokes with One Touch Commands. Comes with a selection of predefined command sets. A simple display lets you set up your own to suit your aircraft or mission parameters, For over 30 years, Kraft has delivered Speed, Power, and Control to earth-bound pilots. When it's time for reflex responsive flight, reach for the Thunderstick with One Touch Command. We wouldn't give you the power if we didn't think you could handle it. Convenient throttle defeat switch responsive flight, reach for K ETT YEAR EROTIK Kraft Systems, Inc. 450 W. California Ave Vista, CA 92083 Tel: (619) 724-7146 Fax: (619) 941-1770 "


"Give Your Joystick a Thrill. n the early 21st century, staged fighting has become a lucrative profession for female hardbodies, with dozens of legal arenas in the city. But for the leanest, meanest warriors, the real money comes from the illegal bouts held outside the city. It's the hottest day of the summer and you're baking inside a dilapidated warehouse. You and your opponent wear the latest in MECHA armor. The best fighting armor in the world. THE BATTLE OF THE ROBO BABES This won't be any picnic. With the intense heat and action, you'll both end up in less than full body dress. It's dream babes in heavy armor battling for prize money action packed, arcade style fun for your PC. But be warned — with its intense violence and voluptuous women, Metal & Lace: Battle Of The Robo Babes is for mature audiences only. And not for the faint hearted. Available now at your nearest dealer or call 1-800-258-MEGA. Or write Megatech, P.O. Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510. Visa, Mastercard, checks accepted. feSULTS BORD System requirements: 286-20 or foster machine (386 recommended) with 640K RAM, hard disk, joystick recommended. Operating Sys.: MS DOS 3.3 or above, Windows 3.1. Graphics compatible with VGA. Sound support. Sound Blaster, Sound Blaster Pro, Thunder Board, Pro Audio Spectrum, Adib Gold and Speed Master. This game is not for the faint-hearted. Contains violence and some material inappropriate for minors. NOT RECOMMENDED FOR PLAYERS UNDER 13. da free demo, call our 24hr. BBS at 310-539-7789. (8N1) MEGA TECH Circle Reader Service 178 All compunies and product naines mentioned are trademarks or registried trademarks of the respective owners. "


"TITTTTTTT Gamblers Synonymous Villa Crespo Moves Beyond The Felt COMPANY REPORT by Johnny L. Wilson T na page right out of Rod Serling's «The cause of distribution problems, the company Crespo still feels like something of the RodHitchhiker» teleplay, Dan Sejzer's life was nearly an immediate flop. Fortunately, ney Dangerfield of the entertainment softchanged in 1969 when he picked up a Egghead Software took 1,000 copies of ware world. They have branched out into fellow in need of a ride. This hitchhiker hired Amarillo Slim on speculation and saved the morphing programs, computer security proSejzer to program a mainframe using COday. On the basis of a very successful sellgrams, database programs and children's softBOL. Naturally, the mainframe offered those through in that software chain, Amarillo Slim ware, but they are still primarily identified as versions of Adventure, Trek, Hangman, Gowas sold into several others. that \"gambling\" company. moku and Tic-Tac-Toe that could be found Sejzer hopes their current group of develon any mainframe in those days. And like opments will finally expand his company's many programmers of that cra, Sejzer would image beyond the poker room. They have a spend his after-hours time improving upon physics-based sports simulation and a very those games and designing his own. fast graphics utility called MetaMorf in the Sejzer, the son of a professional gambler in works. They are also nearing completion on Argentina, had been a fairly successful blacka series of children's titles called the \"Cookie jack player, but had decided that making a Break Series.» Their most exciting new proliving at blackjack was too much work. Yet, ject is a series of titles in conjunction with he drew from his experience and wrote a GAMES magazine. Lou Kesten, Villa Creblackjack program for that mainframe in spo's Communications Manager, is a freelCLIST, a command language that was used ance writer for GAMES magazine. He and at that time. in-house artist Gabi Ladowski are two of the Since he had watched his father play poker designers contributing to the new series of from the time he was two or three years old, GAMES for the computer. The value-priced he also had a desire to program a poker game. Volume I will be Word Games. It will feature In 1976, he purchased his first personal comDan Sejzer in the World Series of Poker '91, Press Tournament. crosswords, cryptograms, double crostics and puter-a Commodore PET. After working word jumbles. Later volumes will feature with mainframes, he found himself frustrated By this point it was mid-1990, and Dan logic puzzles and optical illusions. by both the memory constrictions and the realized that his company could not survive Even with expansion plans underway, how1/0 problem (remember those cassette on the strength of Amarillo Slim alone. He ever, Sejzer hasn't forgotten that helping tapes?). In 1980, however, he purchased a had always thought that blackjack was a betsomeone out can change a life. The company TRS 80 Model II and began programming ter bet than poker, so he started working on contracts out its packaging and assembly the forerunner of Amarillo Slim's Real Poker, the program that was to become Edward O. work to a company that employs the physiElectro-Casino. Electro-Casino had poker, Thorp's Real Blackjack. cally and mentally challenged. The subconhorse racing and roulette. Unfortunately, by Both the blackjack and the poker programs tractor calls its employees, «handicapable.\" the time he finished the program to his satissold well, but Dan saw the need to expand his Villa Crespo sends boxes to the subcontractor faction (1982), the TRS 80 was almost dead vision. He hired Roger Pedersen, former proand the \"handicapables\" place disks, manuas a commercial platform, and the game only grammer/designer for CBS Software, Gameals, brochures, etc. into the boxes. sold about 10 copies. tek, Merit and Hi-Tech Expressions, as We know the Villa Crespo contract makes Though he still worked in the traditional Director of Development. Then, he discova difference to the «handicapables\" because computing industry, Sejzer didn't buy an ered a poker program that some people (inwe have seen how they react when Brenda IBM compatible until 1988. Of course, he cluding CGW's Alan Emrich) thought was Andrews, Villa Crespo's Operations Manimmediately began translating code from superior to Amarillo Slim. Rather than comager, enters the plant. Most of them know her Electro-Casino into the MS-DOS environpeting with John Comeau (Vegas Johnny's by name and many get very excited, because ment, and in 1989 he started to market AmarPoker), Dan brought him onto the team, and they know her presence means that the comillo Slim's Real Poker. With his brother Ed (a Amarillo Slim's Dealer's Choice was the result. pany is going to be shipping more product. successful manufacturer's rep in a high risk Today, the company is still known largely Indeed, the look on those \"handicapable» business) and an entrepreneurial friend as the \"gambling software company. folks' faces may be the only respect any softnamed Skip Wood (who was coming off of a Though the company has grown from the ware publisher would need. It's at least failed pizza enterprise), Sejzer formed Villa original trio of partners to more than a dozen enough to make us think of more than gamCrespo to market both a productivity prodemployees/contractors, and the product line bling whenever we think of Villa Crespo. uct called MemoPad and Amarillo Slim. Behas dozens of \"Coffee Break\" titles, Villa CGW Page 68 Computer Gaming World "


"At the Summer Consumer Electronics Show, an incredible new game beat all the rest... ab. SHOW Take off on the adventure everyone's talking about: Command Adventures: STARSHIP. You'll wage war in space and on planets of every AGAWY description. Outwit devious pirates and bloodthirsty aliens. And amass wealth, weapons and glory. All while revelling in bone-chilling sound effects, an incredible CD-quality soundtrack, and what PC Entertainment called the \"tremendous visual appeal of ray-traced graphics and beautiful cinematic sequences.\" No wonder Computer Game Review said STARSHIP 'must be seen to be believed!\" It's never the same game twice. And with over 50 worlds to conquer, isn't it time you got started? To order or for the name of your nearest dealer, call today! 1-800-238-4277 Merit Software FM 13707 Gamma Road . Dallas, Texas 75244  214-385-2353 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS. 3805X-331Cor 100% compatible 2MB RAM with 575 Free Low RAM. Hard Drive, VGA Graphics Adapter with 250K Video Memory. Microsoft or 100% Compatible Mouse \"I. Adlib. Adlih Gold. Suund Blaster, Sound Blaster Pro, ProAudio Spectrum lo, Roland MT-32, and Roland Sound Canvas 1993 Ment Software 1003 Future Visionary, Inc Future Vision Command Adventures Starship and Masters of the Imagination are registered indemarks of Future Visionary Inc ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Circle Reader Service #79 "


"corpion's So Viele It's All Pun And Games Scorpia Piers At Legend's Companions Of Xanth mm BE Look @ Voustand in the thidst of Coro-Pewter, the most EVS machine in all of Xanth. The Xanth books by Piers Anthony have Once Nada gets Dug and herself out of the by the absence of a type-in, parser interface. long been popular with readers of fanstarting room, the real play begins. From that Except for a few hot keys, there is no keyboard tasy and science fiction, so it comes as point on, Dug must solve the rest of the inpur: all actions are handled with the mouse. no surprise that someone finally got around problems himself, although there are occaAs the cursor travels over the screen, it lights to making a computer game based upon the sions when he can ask Nada for assistance. up objects of interest by displaying the name series. The pair explore the wild and wondrous of the item. So, for instance, when the cursor Legend Entertainment's Companions of realm of Xanth, meeting many strange beis on Dug's computer, the word \"computer\" Xanth is adapted from the book Demons ings, passing through the regions of Void, appears on the screen. To form a sentence, Don't Dream, which is included in the game Earth, Air, Fire, and Water, and running the mouse is clicked on the highlighted obpackage. Since the game follows the book to across an unending succession of bad punsject, then moved over to the list of verbs on a large extent, and a couple of puzzles have (most, of course, taken from the book, which the left-hand side, where it is clicked on a verb essentially the same solution in each, it's best has even more; sometimes, there can be too to complete the sentence. Thus, the comto play the game first and read the book much of a good thing). mand \"look at the computer\" is made by first afterwards. clicking on the computer and then Take Put on \"look at\" from the list of verbs. The story begins when two mundane (i.e., Look at non-magical) teenagers from Earth, Dug and Open This system works in reverse, ciose Kim, are drawn into the world of Xanth to too: you can click on a command Talk to compete in a contest for a mysterious Prize. first and an item second. So taking Neither knows what the Prize is, except that \"look at first, followed by clicking on the computer, gives the same it's supposed to be something very good. result: \"look at the computer.» The Under the surface, however, matters are verbs listed are few indeed: Put, much more serious than they appear. Two Take, Look, Look At, Open, demons, E(A/R)th and X(A/N)th, have set Close, Talk, and Wait. Occasionthe game up as part of a wager. The stake is ally, an additional verb or two will the existence of magic in Xanth itself. If MAP UNDO appear on the list when using a E(A/R)th's player, Kim, wins the prize, then A round three-quarters of the way through particular object. For example, if a all magic in Xanth will disappear forever. If the story, Dug catches up briefly with Kim, rock is the highlighted item, the verb «throw\" X(A/N)th's player, Dug, wins, then everyand they switch Companions; Nada goes off is temporarily added to the commands. thing will continue as before. Since the goal with Kim, and Dug ends up with Jenny and Room descriptions and results of actions are is to maintain the status quo, you take the role Sammy Cat. This doesn't make quite as much displayed in a small window under the main of Dug. sense in the game as it does in the book, so be graphic screen. Below that is the inventory Because Dug is unfamiliar with this world, sure to read the book afterwards to learn what window, where all of Dug's current posseshe receives the Compendium of Xanth and this business is all about. sions are depicred. These items can be acted gers to choose a Companion to help him The game ending is very different from the upon in the same way as anything on the before play begins (hence the title of the book, however, and it is not clear why Legend main screen, by highlighting them and game). While four Companions are pre-made such a change. It is especially odd as the sented to him for selection, the choice is game's resolution doesn't really settle the dechoosing a verb, or vice-versa. actually rigged: only Nada Naga can be chomon wager at all, leaving one giant loose end While the verb-object interface is simple, it sen. Picking any of the other three leads to and making the whole thing ultimately un is not used consistently in the game, which early disqualification. satisfying. TITLE: Companions of Xanth PRICE: $59.95 This fact gets the game off on the wrong A Departure From The Text foot: it is annoying, unnecessary and unfair. REQUIREMENTS: 286 or better. VGA or VESA graphics, 8MB hard drive space, mouse; As the game is designed for Nada to be the Companions marks a radical departure for supports Adlib, Roland and Companion, better to have presented her as Sound Blaster sound cards Legend from their previous offerings, in that None such right away, instead of pretending to it is their first true all-graphic product. Players DESIGNER: Michael Lindner Legend Entertainment allow the player choices which lead only to familiar with the Spellcasting series, Eric the Chantilly, VA several disruptive false-starts. Unready, and Homeworld, may be surprised (800) 656-8891 SYSTEM: IBM PROTECTION: PUBLISHER: Page 70 Computer Gaming World "


"TORTURED SCREAMS EAB PIERCING SHRIEKS. ANGUISHED CRIES. NOISES FROM THE SOUND CARD YOU JUST BOUGHT? NO. FROM YOUR be WALLET. Must a 16-bit state-of-the-art sound card cost an arm, a leg and several other appendages? Must you raid your children's college fund to get the CD-quality audio supplied by 32 Operator Wavetable Synthesis? Must you fork out a sum equal to the GNP of a small European nation for Sound Blaster compatibility and a MIDI interface? In a word, no. The new ARIA 16 offers all of this, plus easy installation and a Digital Signal Processor that allows you to upgrade to speech recognition, for the oddly level-headed price of $99. Or, for a bit more, there's the ARIA 16se, featuring a SCSI-2 interface, a mic/headset, and Interplay's Star Trek: 25th Anniversary: 3 Episode Edition with ARIA speech recognition. To learn more, call us at 1-800-477-3473. And give your Prometheus ears the sound they want. Without ticking off your wallet. CAD 01994 Prometheus Products Inc. All trademarks are property of their respective companies & A 1993 Paramount Pictures All Rights Reserved STAR TREK is a Registered trademark of Paramount Pictures. Prometheus Authorized User "


"DON'T WASTE YOUR SOUND CARD ON INFERIOR SPEAKERS. can cause some frustrations. Take the matter the demoness Metria. When Dug finds Nada, of Ma Anathe (an anagram of \"anathema\"). she's chained to a wall. Nearby is a type of You have to bring her a certain item. Up to moss that can eat through anything, includthat point, when you had an object people ing metal. Naturally, you think that the moss wanted, they would recognize it was in the is part of the solution to freeing Nada. inventory when you talked to them. Wrong! The moss is used for something Not Ma, though. However much you talk else. You simply talk to the manacles, and to her, she just tells you not to bother her they let her go. How are you supposed to unless you have the item. Also, the verb \"give\" know this? How did I know this? Simple. doesn't appear when the item is highlighted. There wasn't anything else left to try; I had and the regular \"Put\" doesn't do much if you gone through all other possible actions with try to \"put\" the item on her. The answer to no result, and that was the last thing available this dilemma is to first highlight the item, to do. then move the cursor onto Ma, at which A voice does whisper at you occasionally point \"give (item) to Ma Anathe\" appears on \"from the vicinity of Nada's arm,\" but that's the screen. where the moss is, so you don't really associate This sort of thing happens more than once the voice with the manacles, and why should in the game, and to make matters worse, no anyone think that manacles can talk? None mention is made in the manual of this special of it makes any sense. construction. The instructions merely describe the \"verb-object\" Take and \"object-verb\" combinations. Look at Nowhere does it tell you that you Open VITEITES Close ET can make commands in other ways, Talk to Look as noted above. TUTTI fully raised. The Powered Partner 622 Powered Partners are the perfect complement to your multimedia computer system. They are the only speakers to be named a 1992 Windows Winner by Windows magazine. They were also nominated for a Readers' Choice award by Multimedia Magazine. But the best reason to use Powered Partners is the sound. Listen to the experts: \"They (Powered Partner 622) set the standard for all the other speakers\" (David Ranada-\"Windows\" recommended) and \"If you want the best, look no further... the (Powered Partner) 570s are the WS MAC Rolls Royce of sound\" (Rich Heimlich). With such high praise, why buy anything else. SAZINE Powered Partner 622 Features  Sophisticated 3-piece system with separate powered sub-woofer  Fully shielded, even the sub-woofer  Perfect for all computer and video applications  Electronic crossover and 3 power amplifiers Piers Poor Puzzles Look at the castle The puzzle quality in CompanYou're standing before a large castle's drawbridge. It is ions is uneven at best, and in some cases, downright poor. Take the F IX 25 sequence with the evil Com-pewter, for example. It is described in MAP UNDO the Compendium as being exThe best sequence is at the beginning where tremely powerful and able to change reality Doo must help the village of Isrhmus rid irself in its vicinity. This made it sound as if taking ng of the dreaded censorship. While most of the on Com-pewter would be a difficult task. As puzzles in this segment aren't especially diffiit turns out, this entire sequence was a joke (and not a funny one, either). All you do is cult, at least the solutions can be reasoned our play a game of anagrams with Com-pewter, instead of stumbled over by trial and error. instead who describes something from the world of Despite following the book fairly closely, Xanth and provides an anagram of the item, Companions is a quick play. This is partly lacking one letter. You choose the missing because of the trivial puzzles, and partly beletter from a small pool of letter tiles. cause many areas don't have that many things This isn't a challenge, or even a puzzle; it's to do in the first place. The Com-Pewter just pointless activity. You merely open your section is an example of this, as is the Void, a Compendium of Xanth and read through one-location puzzle. It just seemed to me that until you find the answer, which naturally there should have been more substance to tells you what the missing letter is, and that's many of the segments. the one you choose. The second round is slightly tricky, as Com-Pewter cheats by not Overall then, Companions of Xanth is a disproviding one of the letters, but Dug has an appointment. Its poor puzzle structure makes inventory item to use as a substitute. it the weakest Legend game to date, and After going through this no-brainer, Dug is unlikely to please gamers looking for an adforced by Com-Pewter to resign (even though venture on the level of a Spellcasting X01 or he won), but Grundy Golem (a sort of emcee Eric The Unready. The relatively short playing for the game) puts Dug back in the game and time is also likely to leave many with an gives him the item needed to actually destroy unsatisfied feeling. Only true \"pun\"dits of the the machine. This is supposed to be a puzzle? Xanth series, or those looking for a lightNot much better if at all—is the rescue of weight adventure, will find this one worth Nada Naga after she's been spirited away by their time. CGW For a dealer near you, call 1-800-969-AR4U. In Canada, call Precor at 1-800-268-1172. RESOURCES Superior Sound Simplified 1993 Acoustic Research, a division of IJI Circle reader Service #26 Page 72 Computer Gaming World "


"me a Play the best for less legends OF FUTURE 1993 Winner Computer Gaming World Special Award for Artistic Achievement! AAPIM PAST\" \"...A remarkably rich playground for modem-owning role-players.' (Computer Gaming World, Aug. 1992) «... no other game... captures the true essence of roleplaying like this one.\" (Computer Game Review, Oct. 1992) Now you can play the award-winning multi-player online game Legends of Future Past for as little as $1.80 per hour! Ureate your character and visit Andor, a world created solely through artistic prose and colored by shared imagination. Meet the exciting, intrepid and interesting people who populate these everexpanding lands. Become part of the community of adventurers who have found reward, riches even romance in the fantastic land of the Shattered Realms. New Lower Rates: $12.95 refundable sign-up fee includes two (2) free hours. $9.95 a month includes five (5) hours online time. (Not applied until after 30-day trial membership) Additional hours charged at $1.80 hour total via direct dial and Internet, or $3.60 hour total fee via CNS local dial-ups. No surcharge for connecting at 14400 baud or during daytime hours. Also available on SprintNet call for prices. If you are on Internet: telnet to novalink.com, or write info@novalink.com.  No special software required.  Toll free number customer service and technical support.  All adult: You must be eighteen (18) or older to use NovaLink.  American Express, Visa, MasterCard, Discover and Diners Club. ...and you can try it free! Live Game Masters: You'll explore a living world where professional game designers introduce new adventures and lands to explore on a continuing basis. Delve into the politics of the City-State of Fayd, or take up a noble quest. Become a Champion of Justice or a Force for Darkness. Andor itself will change around you as you are drawn into the never ending plot of Legends of Future Past. Full Character Development: In Legends, you can assume the role of any character imaginable. Our skill-based system will enable you to develop the persona of your dreams. Be a powerful wizard, sly thief or valiant Knight or even a gentle weaver, a skilled weaponsmith or a miner. The possibilities for profession and character development are endless. Nova link MAKING THE WORLD A BIT SMALLER Advanced Interactive Fiction: Legends was designed as a monumental work of fantasy and artificial intelligence. Not only will you interact with people just like yourself — you will be in a realm that responds to your every action. There are no graphics, because only the power of the English language could capture the beauty of this world. Come try it for yourself. 800-274-2814 Voice 800-937-7644 Sign-up/Info info@novalink.com  telnet novalink.com 79 Boston Turnpike, Suite 409, Shrewsbury, MA 01545 Circle Reader Service #65 "


"uantum Quality Productions has built reputation in Computer galling for providing the strategist with solid products. From the Scas of The Last Admiral to the antasy battlegrounds of Conuuu has left the perfect opportunity for the barons to regain their for111cr prominence, In your role as one of thcsc power-hungry birons, you start with but a single province, wresting territory from your rivals until you rol the cntire continent. Before playing, you are given an enormous nunnber of cus mining otions-10 less than six screens of which has significant effect play. For example, the Royalist troops Controlling the neutral Ccs at the start of the guile are a disadvantage for production. At the start of each new mc, you must choose a homc province. This choice is crucial, since this province is where your new military forces will come into play. The loss of your home province diate defeat, O games for their high-replay value, nd, in general, their strong artificial opponents. to your cause. Other selections influence [cri:in cflects, production, Tog of war, weather and even interrates on saved in many of these restrictions appli only to human players, they can be used to strengthen the Computer nents, and thereby tune the level to your tlciunts provide the money needed to buy the services of mercenary soldiers and the other articles of war necessary for conquest. other Articles There is an upcr limit of how many cach province can support, which adjusted to handicap clic game, The sequence of play is divided into several phases. First, all income and production is calculated based upon your village produc tion, and any soldiers, supplies, weapons or fortifications purchased on the previous turn are placed in your home province. Then, supply allocation and random events will lowifthese options were chosen at the games scrup. Next comes the attack phase. You can move roops from your provinces to attack neighboring provinces as you see it. After combat, you have the chance to move troops within your kingdom to defend against atfrom the other barons. Finally, you can illages, recruit soldiers, and perform dministrative tasks during the investprovide us witli yet another take on the medieval strategy game. Combining cleSire, Doth Thou Recognize have produced a deceptivcly sirth pl girls whiclinonclicless provides lough variety to challenge even the most battle-hardcned of The mcmapischcratcd randomly at the beginning of cach gumc. It consists of square and rectangular provinces, with sor Squares acting as borders bcrwccn clh province consists entirely 0 typt, titlher swamp, deScity russland. Not only docs that randomness of the maps pro vide reply value, but the progam will obligingly generate random continents until you find one that suits The premise of Heirs to the Trow is that vast continent, Sct somewhere in Intasy world, has been unified by a strong leader. This great King conquered the orcs andlotlier hideous creatures that once terrori/cd the populac, by uniting the warring factors of barons under a single banner. Though freed of the menace, not all the barons were lippy Throne | turing mood. The hired an assassin to do away with the King and you choosc, l'or cxample ISHER lcadcrless, as the rightful cir was convilrusading in the Holy Lund with range on the defensc, "


"eam actor. y original scripts and blog Set vastly padded production builgels. JhatIBeverly Hills mansion, Malibu bcach house 10,000 acres in Montana or your own Greek island. Collect cliennost Overjriced art on carth. iiid you can'live without that 4th Studio jet. he biggest names in Ilollywood witing outside lavc marketing and distrilution r) VOO / Reade "


"This province Baron ortnid has been conquered! Victim's Survivors 19 The defendors have retreated FUMI Cry Havoc! Provinces that are isolated by enThe combat system in Heirs To The Throne emy territory from the rest of your is relatively simple. Each \"soldier\" icon repreholdings cannot receive troops in this manner. sents 100 mercenaries composed of either cavalry, infantry, pioneers or archers. Your The Crown Is starting unit mix can be fixed or variable The Economy depending on the initial game settings. Infantry are equally effective in all terrain, while The final part of the game turn is cavalry work best in open country and defend the investment phase. During this poorly. Archers are excellent on defense but crucial phase, you must decide are nearly worthless when attacking fortified where to allocate your hard-carned positions. Pioneers are the most effective income. You may recruit new units for attacking castles. Heavy weapons are troops, found new villages, buy also available in the form of catapults; these weapons and fortifications, buy supplies, or can be purchased during the investment simply save money. The game does pay interphase and will help with assaults on fortified est on any gold not spent during the previous positions, but they cannot be used in defenturns, but saving is a luxury that many players mit will not get the option to exercise. Fiscal management is one of the keys to playing the game successfully. Finding the balance between building new villages (which provide future tax revenue) and supporting your military efforts requires planning and foresight. Those players in search of strong computer opponents should look k no further than Heirs To The Throne. The computer players are very shrewd and aggressive. They sive situations. Fortifications may also be purwill sacrifice provinces of dubious value in will sacrifice provinces of dubious value chased during the investment phase. Forts order to defend valuable ones. They will also range in size from a tower, which adds 12% set traps to lure the unsuspecting player into to your overall combat strength in that provindefensible positions. And, when all else ince, to a citadel, which adds a whopping opping fails, they don't hesitate to dig in by building 75%! Strongly fortified positions are not easmassive fortifications filled with troops to ily taken, and it requires a huge advantage in dely capture. The computer barons will also troops to finally wrest a citadel from enemy conspire against you. If you pay too much hands. attention to one foe, another will creep up on To attack a province, you simply click on your flanks to take advantage of your nearthe adjacent province you wish to attack and sighted strategy. It took several games before indicate from which provinces the attacking I was able to consistently beat two computer troops will come. Next appears a screen, opponents, even under what the manual calls showing the troop strengths and appropriate «very easy\" conditions. I strongly suggest that adjustments from weapons and terrain. From you take on only one silicon-brained adverthis screen, you have two options. Clicking sary until you have a good feel for the game on the sword icon on the left side of the screen system. Playing against two computer barons will begin the attack, while clicking on the and a hostile Royalist party is a very demandbanner to the right will cause your units to ing challenge! retreat. It can take several attack rounds to finally defeat your enemies. Once combat has A Long And Profitable Reign been completed, you can shift your armies between provinces during the movement The interface of Heirs is so well designed phase, reminiscent of the \"free move\" in Risk. that novice gamers will be able to use it with One handy feature allows you to split your little difficulty. Pop-up menus guide you forces equally between all the provinces that throughout the game, numeric selections are have hostile borders automatically, saving chosen using point-and-click buttons, and you the time and trouble of allocating troops the entire game can be played using a mouse by hand. You may make adjustments to the (although keyboard equivalent commands troop dispositions once the computer is finris fin are provided in some cases). are provided ished, transferring units between any two The graphics and visuals are functional, but connected provinces within your kingdom. are not of the highest quality. Most screens are very cartoon-like, especially the screens that appear when you are prompted to higher levels of nobility. The map screen is very functional and provides smooth scrolling during the main phases of game play. A right click of the mouse at any time will reveal an extensive supply of maps and charts. My only complaint would be the quality of the writing (especially the spelling!) on both the menu screens and in the manual. Since English is a second language for the game's designers, this can be forgiven to a degree, but a good edit would certainly have made for a more professional product sional product. On the surface, Heirs is a very simple strategy game that breaks no new ground in the tactical area. Production and attack games for the computer can be traced back as far as Empire, but Heirs will remind many veteran gamers of the venerable Electronic Arts classic Lords of Conquest. What makes the product particularly attractive are the many user-controlled game parameters. By changing these selections, you can create a different game situation each time you play. Smallcontinent games can take under an hour to play, while a large continent can gobble up an entire evening. The returning heir\" selection can inject a player with extra motivation, as he must consolidate his gains before the Royalist leader comes back from the Crusades. Those who enjoy tinkering with unit composition can select the variable unit composition option, or simply leave the decision to the computer for a quick and dirty\" struggle. Heirs to the Throne is a simple and challenging strategy game. With its strong artificial intelligence and many flexible options for customization, it will please many types of strategy game fans. While it may not have the complexity needed to hold the attention of the veteran wargamer for a long period, it still provides a welcome diversion from the rigors of playing games like Pacific War. Heirs is a fine complement to QQP's growing library of excellent strategy games. Cow Page 76 Computer Gaming World "


" Guess what's coming for dinner... LLEN DNGGU All hell just broke loose in the heavens. Your mission: kick some mean, green Alien bult! Overcome 18 labyrinth levels of the most ferocious creatures ever to terrorize the cosmos. Then set the Intex Space Station for self-destruct and face the biggest challenge of all: get out quick or die! Alien Breed is not for those who are afraid of the dark.  18 levels of Alien encounters and deadly missions  Simultaneous 2 player option 256 color otaphics with ultra-smooth screen scrolling  Politill sunt educts and digitized speech. MICROLEAGUE TEAMIZ Developed by Team 17 Ltd. Published by MICROLEAGUE interactive software U.O.P., 201 Bellevue Building, Newark, DE 19702 1-800-334-6572 Circle Reader Service #82 P / 09 interactive software "


"REVIEW C.H.A.O.S. Out of Order The C.H.A.O.S. Continuum From Creative Multimedia by Christopher Breen LOW LOCK 11321333333 LOAD e wary of any product that trumpets sound, into the C.H.A.O.S. Conthe worthiness of its ingredients over tinuum logo. A voice emanating the quality of the whole. This rule from a grid implores us to respond. MODE applies to everything from a blind date We are informed that a colony on DOWN (\"She's got a great personality!\") to breakfast Saturn's moon, Titan, is being held LOAD cereals (\"Contains 85% more bulk fiber!!\"). captive by an orbiting computer Unfortunately, this also applies generally to known as C.H.A.O.S. A group of entertainment software and specifically to scientists who are trapped within a Creative Multimedia's C.H.A.O.S. Continparallel continuum are contacting uum. us across time from the year 2577 The back of C.H.A.O.S. Continuum's CDin the hope that through our home ROM jewelbox announces that it is \"...the computer, we can control a Time first CD-ROM adventure to incorporate Probe that will disable C.H.A.O.S. movie-quality animation and special effects and set Titan free. Help us, OB1, FIRE HYPER created on Silicon Graphics workstations.\" It you're our only hope.... also promises \"innovative new scripting techOnce a lovely animated sequence has seen guided through the game as a mere witness to niques\" and \"various random events» that the Time Probe land safely in New Eden, a the action rather than a participant. enhance playability. When we wary gamers self-contained biosphere on Titan, control is This perception is substantially strengthgiven over to the earthbound, 20thened by drowsy CD access times and the century game player, and the adinability to move around certain areas of the MODE venture begins. Players interact game. All too often, you hear the annoying with the game through the Time \"Motion restricted!\" message when an atDOW. Probe interface. A central viewtempt is made to explore an interesting mascreen acts as the eyes to the world chine or doorway. Given the time it takes to of C.H.A.O.S. Arrayed around turn the probe around and the frustration this screen is a series of buttons that inherent in the wait, the designers might have control such functions as navigabeen better off omitting these inaccessible tion, data storage, data retrieval, items. on-line help and weapon control. The probe includes radar for locatThe Parts ing the baddies and an update Okay, so perhaps The C.H.A.O.S. ContinHYPER screen that displays messages from uum is on the slow side and not the most the entrapped scientists. challenging adventure game around. Creative read of the 8-bit graphics that look like 24-bit These messages are the glue that Multimedia never claimed it was fast-aland of the \"stereo sound effects and original ties things together. Although a mission statethough \"Innovative new scripting techniques music score, we mighr become suspicious of ment is presented at the beginning of the enhance playability\" does suggest some hope this blind dare and wonder how much of the game, once the probe makes its initial landing of a perkier pace. The company does, howhype is bulk fiber. on Titan, there's little to indicate what you're supposed to do The C.H.A.O.S. Continuum The Whole next. Fortunately, after a careful TITLE: The C.H.A.O.S. Continuum step or two, up pops a message PRICE: $69.95 SYSTEM: Macintosh The C.H.A.O.S. Continuum is a science-ficfrom these chatry men of sciREQUIREMENTS: Macintosh Il or better. System 6,07 or later, 2.5MB RAM, tion game in the \"Oh my golly! We've built ence that provides a first set of 1 MB hard drive space, 13\" a computer much smarter than we are and instructions. This is only the beor larger monitor with 8-bit display, CD-ROM drive with now it wants to control us!\" style. The game ginning: you can expect to re150k/second transfer rate, opens with a panoramic view of the heavens. ceive numerous missives from 380ms or less access rate recommended Stars and galaxies whiz by, nebulae burst bethese folks throughout the PROTECTION: None fore us, eerie synth pads drone. Suddenly, an game. Regrettably, these helpDESIGNER: Andrew Davies PUBLISHER: Creative Multimedia eyeball appears. From the eye comes a rotatful hints are so numerous that Portland, OR (503) 241-4351 ing pyramid which transforms, with a hissing you feel as if you are being Page 78 Computer Gaming World "


"MODE DOWN LOAD LOCK 33731731 MISSION UPDATE Fater Colony through Reception and played on these buttons. The first time through, five buttons are engaged. If you make a mistake, the ante is upped to six buttons. Any mistake thereafter is punished by destruction of the probe and a trip back to the main screen where you're offered the opportunity to begin anew, resume a saved mission, access on-line help, or quit the game. Although this test is amusing once or twice, on the third and fourth go around it becomes tiresome. Other than the Intuitive Sound Cognition Test, you stumble upon a couple of mazes that are easily navigated with the help of pen and paper, and you are called upon to play an outer space version of «The Lady or the Tiger.» This is that old wheeze in which the player is asked to make a choice among a number of potentially dangerous options. The difference here is that the tiger is always behind the same door if you make the wrong choice, it's a simple matter to go back to a saved game and try the next option. HIE HYPER Kiosk and elevatort to city levels ins/de H. and retrieve a number of codes and maps. To gain entry to the various labs that contain these items, we must pass the Intuitive Sound Cognition Test. Sounds daunting, I know, but it's as simple as a session with the old Milton-Bradley toy, \"Simon.\" Here's how it works: ever, trumpet their use of the Silicon Graphics system for the generation of movie-quality animation and special effects. Are these sequences really so spectacular? In short: No more so than many others you may have seen. There are some impressive bits of animation and special effects, but to label them movie-quality is stretching things. True, they are quite good and compare favorably with the kind found in some other Macintosh games, like Iron Helix, bur there is no discernible difference between the quality of animation found in C.H.A.O.S. and that of other products on the marker that did not employ a Silicon Graphics machine. Likewise, the use of stereo sound is somewhat exaggerated in the packaging. The game does use stereo for some of its sound effects and narrative passages, but in a few cases it's employed ineffectively. For example, during an instructional message regarding the operation of the probe, the narrator's voice pingpongs between the left and right speakers. Although the view screen does show a revolving wire-screen model of the probe, there is nothing to indicate that the player's orientation, or the orientation of his sound source, has changed in any way. The stereo sound, in this case, simply comes off as a gimmick. The Content The entire story of The C.H.A.O.S. Continuum is not contained in the game. Rather, the enclosed manual carries a three page pre-history of the events leading up to the scientists' call for assistance. This material is well written and, unlike many science-fiction stories of this ilk, is not terribly far-fetched. Unfortunately, it's also the most interesting part of the plot. By the time the distress call goes out and you are invited to participate, all the really compelling action has already taken place: Titan has been colonized, C.H.A.O.S. has been built, C.H.A.O.S. has become unruly, the colonists have been subdued, and the scientists have shuffled off into their cozy continuum. What's left is an exercise in digging up a few clues, following instructions, and completing a couple of fairly simple tasks. These tasks, which are intended to pass for challenges, are in fact, not challenges at all. For example, our first task is to travel into New Eden's underground science lab MODE From Bad To Worse C.H.A.O.S. is also plagued by a number of small problems. One of LOCK the included maps is wrong (the player who stubbornly follows its directions will quickly be vaporized), the Macintosh interface uses some odd conventions (to save a game, you must first quit and then save), and the game is overly particular about the kind of extenFIRE HYPER sions, control panels, and hardware you use. The current reWhen the probe draws up to one of the lablease is incompatible with accelerator cards, doors-there are four that must be acAdobe's ATM and Type Reunion, and Apple's cessed a computerized voice that sounds Mars distinctly low-tech for the year 2577 demands a security clearance code. A panel Creative Multimedia is aware of these probsporting, 12 buttons then appears. Each or lems and is correcting the incompatibilities these buttons has the ability to light up and and errors for future updates. Sadly, fixing play a different pitch, and your iob. as in these few things won't significantly improve «Simon,\" is to parror the sequence displayed the game. Although the game is recommended for ages 10 and up, The C.H.A.O.S. Continuum simply doesn't cut the mustard as adult entertainment. The game is too slow MODE and too easily solved to hold a seasoned game player's attention for long. If I worked in the Creative Multimedia marketing department, I would seriously MATCH TONE CODE consider revamping the packaging and advertising to target The C.H.A.O.S. Continuum for a younger audience. The perfect marker for C.H.A.O.S. is young teenagers who have an interest in sci-fi and space adventures. The level of science is not too advanced, there is no violence against humans, and the level of HYPER intensity is cnough to engage a young mind. CGW FOX LOCK DALA TO ENTER LABORATORY. March 1994 Page 79 "


"DON'T BUY A SOUND BOARD UNTIL SOUNDMAN' WAVE: GENUINELY BETTER SOUND, FULLY LOADED. Maybe you've read how wave SoundMan Wave table syn thesis uses actual recordings of instruments to create synthesized sounds. And how fantastic it sounds versus regular FM synthesis. Well it's true. Gamers no longer have to put up with artificial, simulated sound; now you can rock and roll with the real FM SYNTHESIS OF SOUND BLASTER 16 thing for an affordable price, COMPLETE COMPATIBILITY GUARANTEE. GUARANTEED 100% SoundMan Wave's Yamaha OPL4 chip is completely compatible great wavetable sound out of hot ADUB/SOUND BLASTER COMPATIBLE with the Adlib/Sound Blaster standardno software emulation games like X-wing, 7th Guest, Doom and tricks like other wave boards. SoundMan Wave is backed by a Space Quest 5 that already take full advantage of our wave 100% money-back compatibility guarantee, and to back that up technology. Dozens more are expected to hit the market every we'll give $500 to the first person that comes across a game month. And if you're shopping for a new CD-ROM drive, you'll with which SoundMan Wave isn't fully Sound Blaster compatible. be glad to know that SoundMan's SCSI interface connector Right now, thanks to our unique MIDI interpreter, you can get allows it to work with a wide array of CD-ROM drives. "


"YOU'VE HEARD US TOOT OUR HORN. DON'T BELIEVE US? CALL NOW FOR OUR FREE SOUND ADVICE AUDIO CD AND GET A $10 REBATE. SOUNDIALOVICE Listen to expert advice about adding sound to PCs, and hear for yourself the incredible difference between Sound Man Wave and run-of-the-mill 16-bit boards. Call for our Sound Advice Audio CD before supplies run out, and we'll enclose a $10 rebate coupon: WAVE TABLE TECHNOLOGY OF SOUNDMAN WAVE 1-800-889-0051, OFFER #5E. HERE'S WHAT WE MEAN BY \"FULLY LOADED\" WAVE TABLE SYNTHESIS Yamaha OPL-4 stereo synthesis; 44 voices, both FM & wave lable synthesis 128 General MIDI instruments Advanced MIDI interpreter for General MIDI/MPU-401 interface INPUT/OUTPUT 5-channel stereo mixer Stereo amp outputting 4 watts per channel Line out connector for best signal/noise ratio Microphone & line-in inputs IBM-standard joystick por 100ITECH CD-QUALITY SOUND 16bit & 8-bit stereo recording and playback Sampling/playback rate from 4kHz to 44.1 kHz SOFTWARE MCS MUSICRACK\" RECORDING SESSION\" BESTSPEECH READOUT\" SOUNDMAN ANNOTATOR ICON HEAR 11\" The Senseware Company ADVANCED HARDWARE FEATURES Hardware compression including MA, ADPCM & CCIT A-law and u-law SCSI CD-ROM interface See PC Magazine, 12/21/93, pp 95. M/-properties of registered owners. Circle Reader Service #74 "


"REVIEW s Coaster eeee. The Un owns of Disney's corks in structurede, Mousy Libriz Babe, and Redniel, keeeeee tark Irakes tipsteps ration Srautulart rotate, flip, and manipulate works in structure, and they're a hard lot to please. The progress for views that are perspecSurf Dude, Mousy Librarian, Nintendo Kid, tively correct from all angles. The Little Old Lady, Blonde Babe, and Redneck height, pitch, banking, length and Cowboy make up this eclectic judging panel, even the color of each individual bonded together only in their lust for the track picce are fully adjustable, as is thrill of the rails. Each has a specific coaster the desired amount of gravitational fetish, and where a relatively came affair will pull. For those who have always felt garner weary expressions and sarcastic comthe CAD learning experience might ments, a hell-bent screamer will elicit extreme be, shall we say, imposing, Coaster physical reactions, verbal enthusiasm, and a represents a fine working primer on high score. When all The Evaluators have the subject. found their own sense of joy in a single strucUpon completion of the model, ture, your job is complete...until next time, actual testing will determine its quals when the compelling design phase draws you iry and \"rideability.\" Ifa roller coaster back for another go. car is unable to make it from start to From most viewpoints, Coaster is an innofinish due to shoddy workmanship, vative, refreshing little softwarc gem, and asit's literally back to the drawing sembling the pieces of new coaster «puzzles\" By Gordon Goble board. Perhaps the degree of track may well become an engaging and possibly banking is insufficient, or the peaks a obsessive undertaking. But establishing new little too tall—whatever the problevels of first person thrills is not the strong suit KNOTT'S BERRY FARM: O 1992 Knott's Berry Farm of the program. As Ted Shred, the Evaluating Surfer Dude might say, \"Building the monster machine is, ow do you turn an introduction to like, tubular, man...but, hey, rid3D CAD design into something ing it through a monitor screen is I that people would want to do in like, bogus.\" their spare time? Disney Software seems to have found an answer in Coaster, a simplistic Clearly, riding a digital Matterhorn is a far cry from the \"chuckCAD program that allows you to design and your-lunch» frights of the real crect your own roller coaster. As reward, you, thing, but Coaster is somewhat inthe budding engineer, will then have a chance EVE effective even to experience first-hand your dream amusein its attempt. Granted, a \"virtual» roller coaster ment park heart-stopper. lem, you will have to reassess and rebuild, or is indeed an ambitious idea, but Disney's newest venture has several things find a new line of work. while the \"clackety-clack\" of wheels against working in its favor, not the least of which are its price, its miniature size (at a mere 1.1 MB, After experiencing first-hand the horrors of rail helps audio make the grade, visual percepthe program fits quite comfortably on a comyour mind wrought into ironwork, a sort of tion is left wanting—a sort of throwback to game analysis will check a number of dethose EGA days of yesteryear. The Coaster mon household diskette), and its ability to run on just about any 386 machine. sign characteristics such as Ride Time, Average track is skeletal, scenery is Mickey Mouse (a Speed, Top Speed, Maximum Height, Maximountain range thrown onto the horizon), But certainly the most intriguing element mum Gs, and so on. In this \"Signature\" mode, and no, your car cannot be hurled wildly of Coaster is the actual construction of the a wire-frame perspective of the ride will sit in through the air and viciously to the ground railed machine. With a simple tap of a mouse the screen's upper left corner, while a polyFrom poonyos a n button, thrill-scckers will find themselves imgraph-style plotter runs at the bottom, graphiAlthough sensory expectations may not be mersed in an informative and accurate \"3D\" cally depicting all the forces at work either met, Coaster presents its own little magical CAD sampler. Here, various track pieces are enhancing or detracting from kingdom in other areas, and introduces at the ready, including left and right handed your masterpiece. If the coaster a new twist (and a few loops) to the curves, loops, barrel rolls and climbing builder feels the overall statistics Coaster gaming world. Cow straights. The mission for the architect is the to be strong enough, the true amalgamation of all the components into fun quotient will be ready for some form of a working unit that will thrill the most intense scrutiny. the pants off, without ripping the spines out Residing deep inside the VGA graphics, IMB hard of, coaster lovers. Coaster program are a group of In the design mode, a detailed grid dcfincs people known as The EvaluaDESIGNERS: Jim Simmons, Dan Duncali your working space, a pair of button bars offer tors. Their sole function is to Burbank, CA (800) 688-1520 various track pieces and movement keys, and critique the gentle nuances and you may zoom both in and back out again, barf factor of each particular D GRID TRACK SCLCCTOR 1 auny. TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: Coaster $24.95 IBM 386 or better, IMB RAM, drive space, mouse None PROTECTION: PUBLISHER: Disney Software Page 82 Computer Gaming World "


"Do it on the big screen...with gamePlayerTV full-motion video/audio capture, compression, and professional audio/video output to TV and video. S o, dont settle for small-time pleasure when you can achieve the ultimate in game-playing excitement with gamePlayerTV. For more information on this and our other products, contact your local dealer or call us at 1-800-882-8184 or 1-510-226-8960, or fax 1-510-226-8996. Play PC games on TV! The new AlTech game Player TV lets you do this. Instead of playing games on your PC monitor, you can maximize your game-playing excitement by playing them on a larger TV screen. Imagine sitting in front of your 20\" TV playing your favorite computer game and for the first time, seeing and hearing the power of 24-bit computer graphics. WOW! Sit down Sega; this is real power! GamePlayerTV is well-suited for game, business presentation, video recording, and all home and business audio applications. It includes high-quality digital audio record and playback capabilities for all your Windows Sound System, SoundBlaster and AdLib games and educational and business software. And, whether your TV accepts NTSC or PAL signals, gamePlayerTV provides 24-bit, 16.7 million color resolution and S-Video output for enhanced TV viewing and video tape recording. An easy and user-friendly on-line TV adjustment screen puts all the controls for TV output right at your fingertips. The sound editing software included with game Player TV makes recording and playback of digital sound fun and exciting. AlTech's enhanced Windows-installed software makes the set up of gamePlayerTV easy and effortless. AlTech can assist with your other desktop video and multimedia needs too. We offer a complete line of fully compatible DTV and multimedia products, including integrated WaveWatcherTV audioSHOW AlTech International 47971 Fremont Blvd., Fremont, CA 94538 AlTech Audio/Video Blender VideoSurge gamePlayerTV ProPC/TV Plus . vision for M u 1 t ; me d i a AlTech International. 1993. Audio/VideoBlender, VideoBlonder, VideoSurge, Wave Watcher TV, audioSHOW.gamoPlayerTV and ProPC/TV Plus are trademarks of AlTech International Star XWING Wars is a product of Lucas Arts. All other trademarks are the property of their respective holders. Specifications are subject to change without notice. Circle Reader Service #29 "


"SURROUNDED BY ANTI-AIRCRAFT. HUNTED BY SAMS, EVEN MACH 2 ISN'T FAST ENOUGH. IT'S A STORY CAPTAIN DEAN PENNINGTON DIDN'T THINK HE'D LIVE TO TELL. WOULD YOU? PRETO A TRUE STORY capabilities of the F-16 Fighting life. Like real pilots, you'll fly Kuwait, May 23, 1991. Captain Falcon. Nothing, aside from a true with a wingman, allowing you Dean \"D-Dawg» Pennington dives F-16, captures the \"hair-on-fire\" feelWith Falcon SPECTRUM to engage in to take out an Iraqi 85mm gun ing of flying America's most deadly 3.0, up to six aerial tactics players can emplacement below. \"Flares, break go mano a go mano a fighter like Falcon 3.0, Spectrum AO 1:1, like bracket mano. May the left!\" his wingman screams. He HoloByte's computer simulation. best man win. HOLOBYTE maneuvers. wrenches the stick just as a SAM Instead of enemies who fly in explodes 10 feet behind his F-16. OC NOSI circles, Falcon 3.0 adversaries fly Anti-aircraft batteries now open up according to true fighter doctrine all around, engulfing him. Too low to so they're no pushovers. And avoid the anti-aircraft, too slow to Kuwait looks like Kuwait since evade another SAM, he's faced with real geographic theaters are a hopeless choice and less than a faithfully mapped. quarter of a second to make it. NOT JUST A SIMULATION Lighting afterburners, he rockets to OF A WARPLANE safety before they can lock on again. Spectrum Motobyte A SIMULATION OF WAR THE STANDARD BY Falcon 3.0 lets you fight as part WHICH OTHER FIGHTERS A HIGHER LEVEL OF FLIGHT of an entire campaign. The misARE JUDGED Unlike some sims, which more sions you fly play a crucial role in Captain Pennington survived closely simulate the arcade expeyour side's success. But they're not on skill, nerve and the awesome rience than the flying one, Falcon hard-wired. Each result affects the 3.0 features a depth of play overall war effort-and determines that almost rivals real your next mission. Succeed FALCON For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week: (800) 695-GAME. For technical questions call (510) 522-1164 (M-F: 9AM-5PM Pacific Time). "


"01993 Spectrum Holo Byte, Inc. All rights reserved. All trademarks are the property of their respective owners. ara and go on to hit the enemy in his Go head-to-head over a modem or media guide to air-to-air combat own backyard. Fail and find the bad with up to six players over a netcalled Art of the Kill* to help you guys breathing down your neck. work. It's possible because each fly like an ace. It all starts with FALCON 3.0 Vs. MiG-29 Electronic Battlefield Series Falcon 3.0. title works with the others, from The simulation for people who OKOST MiG-29 vs FALCON MiG-29\" to the upcoming F/A-18 want to fly the not-so-friendly simulation. There's even a multiskies. Spectrum HoloByte LOLINA Electronic Battlefield Series simulations link up. So you don't just choose your mission, you choose your aircraft. Care to fly for the other side, comrade? THE ELECTRONIC BATTLEFIELD SERIES: THE ULTIMATE CYBER-BATTLEFIELD Choose from multiple aircraft, multiple theaters, even which side of the conflict to fight on. MiG-29 FALCON TIDA ART KILL ELECTRONIC BATTLEFIELD SERIES The fight of your life. Circle Reader Service #115 "


"Scorpion's Tale Scorpion's Tale is a warm and comfortable tayern of the win, complete with a cozy fire of vibrant images. Our revered storyteller conjures up illuminating hints about games, so if our gentle readers eschew hints, let them beware! Roadside Assistance For Sam & Max Scorpia Plays The Good Samaritan To Adventurers In Need done on the first visit. For now, it's enough to talk to the weirdo who bends wrenches with mental power. And you can mess around with the binoculars if you like, but that's really for later. TIES WEIR CREEA It's not enough to say that Sam and Max and it turns out to be a strange one: the prime Hit The Road is bent. It's warped and exhibit, a Bigfoot-on-ice, has vanished, and twisted enough to put a DNA strand to so has Trixie the Giraffe-Necked Girl. How shame. Imagine a pair of wacko critters roardid Bruno get our of the ice? Why did he take ing around the countryside calling themselves Trixie? Where are they now? And who were the Freelance Police. Almost makes you wish those two unpleasant types you ran into on for an aspirin and a flak jacket. Hey Fred! the way in? That's what you'll have Check the storage closet! to find our as you go along. Real As a general rule, it's Sam who performs detective work here. Hah! most of the actions in this game, but don't walk around the carnival and be forget about his partner. When something sure to talk to everyone. And you has you puzzled, when you're not sure what must play Wak-A-Rat. Yep, no way to do, when in doubt-use Max! Hey, it can't around this one, and you do have hurr. to win. Besides, haven't you always Okay, so our boys Sam (the dog) and Max dreamt of bonking a passel of sassy (the psychotic rabbit) have just been assigned rats? Look around the rest of that a hot new case. Before running off, though, tent, too. And don't forget to take be sure to check out the office thoroughly. a ride on the Cone of Tragedy! You don't wanna be without money, or anySo now there's the Tunnel of thing else you might need later (walk ALL Love to ger through. Kinda dark in here, huh? around the place). Maybe some extra light will help with all that After some fun stuff on the stairway, it's blackness. Ah, is that a fuse panel we see? Sure time to hit the street and find that bonded looks like one. Let's be vandalistic and blow city courier. Hmmm. He doesn't seem to be the fuses! You gotta be quick, though; this around. Then again, this being the game it is, one requires splir-second timing (you might maybe he doesn't look like you'd expect (and say it's almost like splitting hares). just what were you expecting, anyway?). It isn't long after this that you talk to Doug Now it's off to the the Moleman. He can tell you some interest carnival to learn ing things-like about the World's Largest what the problem is, Ball of Twine and the real story behind Bruno's escape—for a little bribe (where to get it ought to be pretty obvious). I know you're eager to rush off to the twine, but visit Trixie's trailer first so that you can get Gator Golf on the map (saves a little time). This twine episode is a little tricky, and you'll be coming back here more than once, so don't expect to get everything So what's next? How about that World of Fish, eh? (Remember not to leave emptyhanded!). Say, that big fake fish on the left sure looks interesting. I wonder if anything might be inside? Or, if not, maybe something might go in there instead. A couple of somethings, even. At least it solves one of the problems with the ball of wine. Now let's go see what this Gator Golf is all about. Wow, miniature golf with alligator hazards! Whatta concept! And speaking of hazards, there's Conroy Bumpus and his stooge again. In hardly any time at all, Sam is out cold, and poor Max is trapped in the Dunk-the-Beast. Before rescuing Max, have a little fun with the golf course (I just loved dunking Max a few times myself!). Then it's down to serious stuff, like getting over to him without being chomped by alligators. Maybe you can give them something else to chomp on (Conroy comes to mind, bur he's not available, so you'll have to fish around for an alternative), Page 86 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS PO BOX 234 ROCHESTER VT 05767 DEPT 10036 FREE GAME OFFER See Last Page for Details Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10036 Visa & MC Accepted Chucks Hell 4 Weeks Money Orders Treated us Cash COD Sa, Deinctivas replaced with same proau Mostetno shippad samo dny. Shipping times not guaranteed Proo & availability subject to change OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order Mall to Canada PR HLAK APO FPO S4 por order 4-Bday Worldwide shipping S6 per fem Handling $2 per shipment » PG \"OPERATION CRUSADER' is set in the expansive reaches of the Libyan & Egyptian deserts during WWII. Six historical scenarios will show you first hand what open field tactics and desert combat are really like. Experience the cursed Hellfire Pass, & see for yourself if you can earn the title of Desert Fox.' $34 'ORIGAMO' Advance through the maze by successfully completing each unique puzzle. You plan the placement of blocks and shapes on the puzzle as a conveyor belt moves along or your blocks will stack up and time will run out $39 'STAR WARS: REBEL ASSAULT Take control of a Star Wars vehicle in challenging piloting & combat scenarios. Hone flight & combat skills to defend Tatooine against Imperial attack, challenge the menacing walkers of planet of Hoth and combat the Empire in intense deep space battles. CD $48 METAL & LACE The gorgeous Robo Babes are expecting you and you'll get a welcome you won't soon forget Strapped in Robo armor & loaded with special weapons, the talking Robo Babes will have you gripping your joy stick & wiggling the gimbal all night long! Contains violent fighting scenes & sexy graphics. $32 'THE C.H.A.O.S. CONTINUUM' is a fully interactive movie experience containing spectacular animation, and special effects. Titan Colony is being held captive by a vast, orbiting computer. Only you can find a way to stop it. Features innovative image control & random events to improve playability. CD 542 THE BATTLE OF THE ROBO BABES Dog ASSISTANCE DRUH IBM HARDWARE IBM ADULT IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM BUNDLES IBM CD ROM Darksun CD Day of the Tentacle Dracula Unleashed Dragon's Lair 233837385 $32 $38 $32 $36 ADD Starter Kit $35 Air Combat Classics S42 Combat Classics S19 Eye of Beholder Collect $52 Eye of Beholdr Trilgy CD S52 Falcn 3.0 w/Tmastr FCS 999 Gateway Collectn 1 & 2 S32 Land Sea Air 2 S29 Lost Trea Infocm 2 or CDS29 Max Pac S16 Maxim Overkill w/Disk $45 Perfect General Trilogy S36 Space Quest Bndle 1-4 $42 Spellcasting Bundle CD S32 Task Frce 42/Red Storm S35 The Victory Pack $36 Ultima Trilogy 2 S48 Wing Comm 1 Dix or CD $48 Wizardry Trilogy Wizardry Trilogy 2 $34 $49 $39 $45 $32 Acoustic Research P42$159 Acoustic Resrch P570 $319 Acoustic Resrch P622 $239 AdLib Sound Card $34 Adv Gravis Ultrasound $129 CH Weapon Contrl Syst $44 Command Control Pad $16 Fighter Stick $79 Flight Stick Flight Stick Pro $57 Labtec CS-150 Speakrs $17 Labtec CS-550 Speakrs $24 Maxx Cobra Flightstick $54 Pilot Control Stand $19 Pro Audio 16 Basic $109 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 $149 Pro Audio Studio 16 $199 Reel Magic Video Upgd$399 Sony SRS7 Speakers $9 Sony SRS9 Speakers $14 Sound Blaster 16 ASP $214 Sound Blaster 16 Bas $119 Sound Blaster Deluxe $82 Snd Blastr Discv CD 16$399 Snd Blastr Discv CD 8 S359 Snd Bistr Edutn CD 16 $519 SBlastr CD ROM Drive $299 SBlastr Powrd Speakrs $24 Snd Blastr Pro Deluxe $124 Snd Blastr Voice Assist $54 Snd Galaxy BX2 wSpkrs $59 Snd Galaxy NX2 wSpkrs $79 Sound Galaxy NXPRO $109 SGlxy NXP 16 WSCSI $139 SGlxy NXPRO MM Kit $399 Sound Machine Thrustmaster FCS Pro $99 Tmaster Fight Cont Syst $59 Thrustmstr Game Card $27 Tmaster Rudd Cont Syst $99 Tmaster WCS Mark 2 S94 Video Blaster $349 Virtual Pilot $61 Voice Blaster S52 101 Sex Postions 2 CD 544 Adult Palate CD S22 Adult Reference CD S24 Ady of Brad Stallion CD $39 Bodycello CD $12 Busty Babes CD Centerfold Squares S21 Debby Does Dallas CD Deep Throat CD S36 Dreamgirl $32 Ecstacy CD $34 Femme Fatale $26 Femm Fatal Disk 1-6 ea $18 Femme Fatale WIN $29 Girlfriend Suzie $36 Girls of Risque CD $32 High Volume Nudes CD $26 Jigsaw Pinups S19 Kama Sutra CD $44 Legends of Porn 2 CD $29 Lovely Ladies II CD $39 Mystic of Onent CD S29 New Wave Hookrs 1 CD S32 Nightwatch Intractve CD S36 Nova Collection V. 1 CD $26 Paradise Club CD $46 Penthouse Jigsaw XXX $12 Phone Sex CD $15 Physical Therapy CD $19 Playboy Electrnc Datebk $42 Rimfre Pac Vid OEM CD $32 Secrets CD $34 Southern Beauties CD $26 Strip Poker 3 $19 Strip Poker Professional $34 Strip Pokr 3 Disk 1-6 ea $16 Strip Pkr Pro Dsk 1-6 ea S16 Super Smutware CD S19 The Devil Ms Jones CD S34 Tracy I Love You CD $32 Tropical Girls CD $26 Wicked Wicked Q-Time Mov CD $42 Womn Who Love Mn CD $26 Women of Venus CD $22 S34 Adv Willie Beamish EGA$19 Riftwar Legacy VGA $39 Alone in the Dark 2 $36 Ringworld $35 Amazon $19 Robocop 3 $32 Bloodnet $39 Sam & Max Hit Road $36 Blue Force: Next of Kin $42 Secret Monkey Island 2 $21 Cast Wolfstn Spr Destny S32 Shadow Caster $45 Companions of Xanth $34 Simon the Sorcerer $32 Daemonsgate Space Quest 1 VGA $16 Dark Seed Space Quest 5 VGA $36 Day of the Tentacle $35 Spellcasting 201 $36 Dragon Knight 3 Spellcasting 301 $34 Dragon's Sphere $42 Star Reach $36 Dreamweb $36 Star Trek 25th Annivers $32 Elf $24 Star Trek Judgmnt Rites $38 Epic $32 Starship $39 Eric the Unready $21 Terminatr 2029 Op Scrg $19 Flashback Terminator Rampage $42 Fred Phark Front Pharm$38 Terror of the Deep $36 Frontier Elite 2 $39 The Dig $42 Gabriel Knight S39 Under a Killing Moon $43 Gateway 2:Homeworld S32 Where in Space Deluxe $44 Hand of Fate Yserbius $28 Hired Guns $32 Inca 2 $42 Indy Jones 4 Fate Atlan $36 IBM ARCADE Innocent Until Caught $34 Jack the Ripper $39 Aliens Ate My Babysitter $19 King's Quest 6 VGA $45 Cogito Windows $34 King's Ransom $36 Dragon's Lair $22 Kronolog : Nazi Paradox $36 Dragon Lair 2 or 3 $34 Laura Bow 2 Eight Ball Deluxe $38 Legend of Kyrandia $32 Geekwad Gam Glxy CD $21 Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGA$24 Gobliiins 3 $29 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $42 Guy Spy S24 Lost Files Sherick Holm $26 Highway Patrol 2 S27 Merchant Prince Incred Mach 1 or 2 Out of this World S36 Incredible Toons $29 Police Quest 3 VGA S36 Metal & Lace $29 PoliceQuest 4 DOS/WIN $44 Prehistorik $29 Prince of Persia 2 $44 Silverball $29 Proleague Football '94 $39 Space Ace 2 $34 Return of the Phantom $34 Street Fighter 2 $34 Return to Zork S 42 Take-A-Break Pinbll WIN $28 Rex Nebulr Mastr Editn S32 Tristan Pinball $19 Circle Reader Service #38 IBM CD ROM Dune OEM Dungeon Hack Eric The Unready European Racers Eye of Beholder 3 OEM $24 F117 & F15 SE 2 OEM $28 F15 Strike Eagle 3 OEM $26 Fantasy Empires $45 Fascination Fatty Bear Birthday Surp$38 Gabriel Knight Gateway 2 $34 Gobliiins $30 Great Naval Battles Gunship 2000 OEM Guy Spy OEM $19 Harrier Assault SVGA $44 Hell Cab $52 Hypnotic Harp $34 Inca 2 CD $42 Indy Jones Fate Atlantis 542 Interplay's 10th Yr Anth $48 Iron Helix $56 Jet Pack $46 Jungle Book WIN $19 Jutland $48 King's Quest 5 OEM King's Quest 6 $45 King's Quest 6 OEM $29 King's Ransom $38 Labyrinth of Time Lands of Lore S44 Lwn Mowr Mn Scrn Savr $36 Legend Kyrandia OEM S24 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $46 Loom OEM $19 Lord of the Rings $45 Lost in Time $19 Mad Dog Mcree $34 CGW MAR 1 S54 7th Guest 2: 11th Hour 565 7th Guest OEM $35 Aegis: Guardian Fleet Alone in the Dark $48 Arctic Baron $29 B17 Flyng Fortrss OEM $26 Backroad Racers S43 Barny Bear Goes School$23 Battle Chess OEM $24 Bloodnet $45 Blue Force: Next of Kin $39 Buzz Aldrin Race Space $59 Campaign $35 Castles 2 $49 Chessmanc 5 Billion & 1 $35 Conan OEM $18 Curse of Enchantia S26 Cyber Race $44 Cyber Space S38 Daemonsgate S32 $19 S27 S48 "


"Hey, what's this? It's a sno-globe from the miss the floor show. Especially not that, since Mystery Vortex! (You didn't see that? You you finally catch up to Trixie and Bruno, sort didn't look close enough!). If Sam and Max of. There's just this little alarm system you weren't twisted enough before, they're sure have to do something about first (doing gonna be after a visit to this bizarre place! something about Conroy will be a little furRiding the mini-vortex is fun, but it's really ther in the future). important later on. What you have to do here So you gotta do something about Leeis find Shuv-Oohl. Look at all those doors. Harvey. After Gator Golf, it's obvious that Maybe he's in back of one of them? Could be, sheer physical violence isn't the answer (a but just try getting through 'em. Not so easy, great disappointment to Max, no doubt). is it? However, Lee-H isn't too bright. A little Meanwhile, all this getting taller and geradroid diversion should be enough for that. ting smaller stuff makes you feel like Alice in Facing the dragon can be a little tough. Wonderland, huh? Well, you reflect on that Maybe frustrating, 'cause he seems to have for a little while. And when you get to the only one vulnerable spot (believe me, I tried secret of the Vortex (there's threeof'em; don't 'em all!). Need a hint? Just look at the title of miss the far right!), be sure to check out all this column (talk about giveaways!). the pretty colors. All right, so you free up Trixie and Bruno, gave Conroy the idea of him and Lee-Harvey So now you talk to Shuv-Oohl, but he but they aren't interested in going back to the using the disguise to spy on the Bigfoots wants something like his ring from inside the carnival (can't blame 'em). Instead, they take (Bigfeet?), and they step into the freezer to big ball of twine) before he'll tell you anyoff for the Savage Jungle Resort and the Bigput it on (hey, I said these guys weren't too thing important. Hey, no problem, haven't foot party. Sure, you can follow them there, bright!!). we done harder stuff already? All you need for but not being Bigfoots (Bigfeet?), S&M can't Do I have to say what comes next? Didn't this is a big reach, a helping hand, and a little get in. At least they can talk to Evelyn Morthink so. Anyway, having done a big favor for attractiveness. rison. Those brochures are handy for lighting the Bigfeet, Sam and Max are made honorary at the twine, use those up Mount Rushmore and Celebrity Vegetahotshots of the tribe and taken to the final Ero Rock (voi DID fix bles (using GREAT restraint, I make no furpuzzle of this crazy adventure the four tothem sometime or other, right?). What's that? ther comments on that last one!). tem poles—which, befitting an endgame, is You say everything looks too small? Wak! Mt. Rushmore is a great place for bungeethe toughest section of the game. Wak! Wak! (Got the idea now!) jumping. Just remember you're not doing Actually, it's not too hard when you realize Okay, so you give Shuv-Oohl the ring, and this for fun. There's a reason for almost plopthat each pole represents an item, and when he gives you some stuff and some instrucping into that tar pit. And don't miss the you figure out what the item is, you just hand tions. Just follow them (I will not attempt to dinosaur exhibit. Y'know, that woolly mamit over to the chief. Simple, eh? Okay okay, describe the results, just do it and see for morh looks pretty hot with all that fur on maybe not. I admit, I spent a lot of time trying yourself), and then it's on to lovely Bumpushim. to use the items on the poles themselves until ville! Okay, okay, you figured out our boys have I tried giving the stuff to the chief (hey, I have That's right, the home of Conroy Bumpus to disguise themselves as a Bigfoot to get in, lves as a Bigfoot to get in, my off my off days, too). himself. Be careful what you grab in here; but even all dressed up, there's no way past So let's see here. Ya need something from some things are safe and some aren't. But it's the bouncer. Unless you do him a favor, that okay to talk to Lee-Harvey (in fact, you can is. He sure has trouble with his big feet (heh). Celebrity Veggies (and it ain't Conroy; picget some interSo what can you do about it? \"I gotta go. I ture something else). Ya need something esting info from gotta go!\" (See how cleverly I snuck that hint from Mount Rushmore (think D.D.S.). Ya need something from Conroy's mansion him), and you in there? Ouch!) (yawn). And ya need a little something from don't want to So now you're at the party (Sam and Max sure make a cute Bigfoot). Talk to all of 'em Mystery Vortex, after you find a plug (hic). if you like, but the real action is in the kitchen Then just sit back and enjoy the fun. Espe(a hard place to find, as it's not evident on the cially enjoy Max's bright idea for returning screen; go left near the dancers). the Bigfoot to the carnival. A perfect ending! Hmmm. A freezer? Anything And that's abour it for now. Remember if inside? Nope, it's empty right you need help with an adventure game, you now. What about that back can reach me in the following ways: door...wonder where it leads. On Delphi: visit the GameSIG (under the OOOPS! Look who just walked in: Conroy Groups & Clubs menu). and Leo-Harvey, and they're about to snatch Sam and Max as a Bigfoot prize (yeah, someOn GEnie: Stop by the Games Roundtimes Conroy isn't too bright, either). What Table (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT). to do? By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, Well, really the only thing is to show Constamped* envelope if you live in the United roy what a mistake he's making (this is a little States): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, tricky, since just talking to him isn't enough; New York, NY 10028. play with your inventory). Of course, that Until next time, happy adventuring! Cow Page 88 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS Ultima VI PO BOX 234 ROCHESTER VT 05767 DEPT 10036 FREE GAME OFFER See Last Page for Details Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10036 Visa & MC Accepted. Chocks Hald 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. COD $8. Deleclives replaced with same prod. ul. Moslems shipped same day Shipping times not guaranteed Price R availability subject to change OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order Mall to Canada, PA HIAKAPO, FPO SA por order 4-8 day Worldwide shipping $5 per item. Handling $2 per shipment: \"ULTIMA VIII: PAGAN' You are imprisoned on a distant world where the forces of the Guardian hold absolute command. Without allies or even a familiar frame of reference, you must learn to defeat the ruling Elemental Titans on their own terms in your quest to bring the battle to the Guardian. $52 'EARTH INVASION' For Windows. On patrol in earth orbit you hear the first reports of a giant Cyborg Mothership. Only a few thousand miles from the planet, it has launched an attack on ground defense systems. Total surprise has rendered the planet helpless. You're civili-zation's only hope. $24 INVASION MULTIMEDIA ARCADE FOR WINDOWS 3DI PRODUCTIONS INC. ITILLILITE OVER EUROPE 'ACES OVER EUROPE' Experience the intensity of aerial combat in the European Theater of WWII. Fly with pilots from the U.S. Air Force, R.A.F. & German Luftwaffe. Patrol the front lines, target supply depols & come face to face with ground targets and artillery bunkers. Fly a single mission or a tour of duty. $39 \"UNDER A KILLING MOON' transports you to the virtual world of the feisty detective Tex Murphy. New feature allows you to save and splice scenes together. Digitized voices & sound effects and amazing level of detail & freedom of movement make this game visually and aurally stunning. $43 or CD$48 \"BIOFORGE' After breaking free of your security cell, you enter the ruins of an ancient alien civilization. There is a hostile alien on the prowl & an emergency situation to bring under control. 3-D synthetic actors & rendered backgrounds.$52 STARRINO BRIAN KEIT, HARCOT MODER. IBM CD ROM IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM HINTBOOKS IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM SIMULATIONS Ultima 8: Pagan $52 Ultima 8. Pagan Sp Pk $17 Ultima Uwrld 2 Labyrth $16 Ultima Uwrld Styg Abyss $19 Waxworks $19 Wizardry 6 Cos Forge $34 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $32 $39 IBM SIMULATIONS $39 $22 Auto Map $39 Castle of Dr Brain VGA $19 Dinopark Tycoon $34 Discovrs of Deep or CD $37 Dyno-Quest $29 Eagle Eye Mysteries $32 EcoQuest 2 VGA $34 Fatty Bear Bday Surprs $32 Island Of Dr. Brain VGA $29 Mario Teaches Typing $26 Mavs Bn Tch Typ WIN $34 Orbits: Voyge Solar Sys $29 Petr Pan Story Paint Adv$34 Print Shop Deluxe $49 Print Shp Dix Bus Graph $29 Putt Putt Joins Parade $32 Putt Putts Fun Pak $19 Quark Quaysoo VGA $29 Reader Rabbit 1 $32 Reader Rabbit 3 $32 Secret Isind Dr. Quandry$38 Slater & Charl Go Camp $29 Speedreader WIN $30 Stickybear Reading $24 Stickybear Shapes $29 Stickybear Spelling Tutor$32 Student Writng Cent WIN$32 Sup Solvr: Giz & Gadgt $26 Treasure Cove $29 Treasure Mountain $39 TreeHouse $39 $48 Man Enough $45 Maxim Overkill Bundle $59 Microcosm $49 Morph Man $32 Myst $64 NFL Coaches Club Fball $32 Omar Sharif Bridge DLX $46 Outpost $48 Phantasmagoria $59 Police Quest 4 $45 Protostar $39 Putt Putt Goes Moon $44 Quest for Glory Rebel Assault $48 Return To Zork $48 Return to Zork OEM $32 Sam & Max Hit Road $45 Scrabble Deluxe $25 Secret Monky Isind OEM$19 Secrt Weap Luftwff OEM$19 Shadow of the Comet $48 S Holmes Con Det 10r2 $36 Shuttle $29 Sim Ant/City/Earth each $18 Space Quest 4 OEM $16 Spectre VR Star Trek 25 Anniversar $55 Star Wars Chess $49 Star Trek Next General $46 Stronghold $36 Terror of the Deep $36 Tetris Gold $32 The Journeyman Project $48 Tornado $42 Ultima Underworld 1 & 2 $59 Under a Killing Moon $48 Where in World Deluxe $59 Who Kill Sam Rupert $21 Wing Command Ultima 6857 Wing Commd Ultima UW$55 Wolf Pack World Circuit $34 World of Xeen $42 Wrath of the Demon $29 $37 Dynamix Grt War Planes $16 Arena: Elder Scrolls $44 Eye of Beholdr 1 or 3 ea $10 Black Crypt $32 Fred Pharks Fron Pharm $8 Bloodstone $27 Gabriel Knight Champions Gateway Sav Frontier $10 CHARACTER EDITORS$16 Hand of Fate $10 Cobra Mission Indi Jones 4 Fate Atlan $10 Curse of Azure Bonds $15 King's Quest 1-6 ea $10 Cyber Space $39 Leisure Suit Larry 1-3 ea$10 Dark Sun $47 Loom $10 Drk Sn Gry Isle Exp Pak $34 Lord of the Rings V2 $6 Darklands $37 Lost Files Sher Holmes $10 Disciples of Steel $29 Magic Candle 2 or 3 ea $10 Dungeon Hack $42 Might & Magic 1 & 2 $10 Dungeon Master $29 Might & Mag 3, 4 or 5 ea$16 Dungeon Master 2 $36 Off Bk of Ultima Sec Ed $16 Eternam $19 Off Gde King Ost 3rd Ed $16 Eye of the Beholder 1 $14 Off Bk of Police Quest $12 Eye of the Beholder 3 $42 Police Quest 1,2 or 3 ea $10 Forgotten Castle $49 Populs 1&2 Off Strt Bk $16 Lands of Lore $34 Power Monger Strategy $16 Legacy: Realm of Terror $39 Privateer Playtester Gde $16 Legend $22 Protostar Lord of the Rings V1 $32 Quest for Clues 2-4 ea $21 Lord of the Rings V2 $37 Quest for Clues 5-6 ea $16 Megatraveller $24 Quest for Glory 3-4 ea $10 Might & Magic 3 $36 Questbustrs: Book Clue $18 Might & Magic 4 or 5 ea $39 Realms of Arkania $14 Pirates Gold $39 Retum to Zork $9 Pools of Darkness $38 Secrt Monk Isl 1 or 2 ea $10 Quest for Glory 4 $12 Shadow Caster $18 Realms of Arkania $35 Simcity/Simearth Book $20 Red Crystal $34 Space Quest 1 4 each $10 Rome: Pathway Power $29 Spellcasting 201 Bk $10 Spellcraft:Aspect Valor $19 Star Trek 25th Aniv $9 Star Saga 2 $19 Strike Commandr Off Bk $14 Stonekeep $52 Tales Magic:Proph Shad $12 Stronghold $36 Ultima 4 6 each $10 Tales Magic:Proph Shad $16 Ultima 7 & Underwrld BK $16 The Genies Curse $45 Ultima 7.5 Balanc Scals $16 Ultima 7 Black Gate $46 Ultima Avatar Adv Book $16 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue $16 Ultima U Stygian Abyss $12 Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle $48 Wizardry 7 $16 Ultima 7.5 Ser Isl Sp Pk $18 Yserbius $10 Ultima 7.5 Part 2 Silv Sd $20 Circle Reader Service #38 Indy Car Racing $39 M4: Sherman Tank Sim $34 Maximum Overkill $43 Maximum Overkill MD 2 $32 Mechwarrior 2 $42 MiG 29 $48 Microsoft Flight Sim 5.0 $46 Msit Sims NY/DC/Par ea$29 Microsoft Fit Sim 5 SF $32 Microsoft Space Sim 1.0 $44 Pacific Strike $52 Privateer $48 Privateer Special Oper Rally $29 Red Baron VGA $36 Sea Wolf Seal Team Spectre Virtual Reality $38 Speed Racer $34 Strike Commander $41 Strike Com Spec Ops 1 $22 Sub War 2050 $36 Syndicate $39 Task Force Admiral Pack$45 Tie Fighter Tornado S48 WC2 Operation 2 $22 WC 2 Speech Mod $13 WC Secret Mission $20 WC Sec Miss 1 & 2 BndS20 Wing Commander 3 $52 Wing Commad Acadmy $32 Wings of Glory $52 World Circuit $35 X-Wing $40 X-Wing Miss Disk 1 or 2 $18 ATP 2.0 $29 ATP Flight Sim 1.00 $29 A10 Avenger $46 A320 Airbus $36 Aces Over Europe $39 AcesEurop Miss 10r2 ea $27 Aces of the Deep $42 Aces of the Pacific $39 Across the Rhine $42 Airstrike Pacific 1942 $48 Armoured Fist $52 B17 Flying Fort Classic $19 Battle of Britain $34 Combat Classics 2 $29 Cyber Race $32 Della V $18 Design Your Own RR $19 Elite 2 $39 Elite Plus $19 F15 Strike Eagle 2 $18 Falcon 3.0 $46 Falcon 3 Scn 1 Fight Tgr $24 Falcon 3 Scn 3 FA 18 $32 Falcon 3 Scn 2 MiG 29 $32 Flat Top $48 Fleet Defndr F14 Tomcat $48 Flight Sim Toolkit $58 Great Nav Bat Am in All $21 Great Nav Batt Son Bld $24 Great Naval Battles 2 $39 Gunship 2000 VGA $37 Gunship 2000 Scen Disk$24 Harrier Assault $32 $48 IBM HINT BOOKS IBM SPORTS Advent Willie Beamish $10 Bard's Tale 1, 2 or 3 $10 Blue Force: Next of Kin $10 Castle Wolfenstein 3D $10 Civilization $16 Dark Queen of Krynn $10 Darklands $14 Death Knights of Krynn $10 Dungeon Master $10 $42 APBA Baseball $24 Baseball for Windows $46 David Robinsn NBA Act $44 Front Page Football Pro $45 CGW MAR 2 "


"REVIEW Darth Vader VS. The Terminator Star Wars And T2 Meet In A 64-Square Universe by Jay Kee Thess has been around for centuries. It has outlived empires here is the Windows driver you're using. If you aren't running a and dynasties, survived wars and rebellion, and transcended 640x480x256 color driver, you'll have to use Windows Setup to endless attempts to analyze it. There is a certain symmetry, a reconfigure before the game will run. If you don't have a 256-color fascinating depth to the game that will sustain it into the next driver, you'll need to get one-cither from your graphics card manumillennia and beyond. In the fickle world of games, it has uncanny facturer, your dealer, or the Windows support library on one of the staying power. Maybe that's why so many have tried so hard to major commercial nets, like GEnic or CompuServe. re-invent it. Although there have been variations like Archon and 3D The game runs full-screen in 640x480 and looks every bit as good Chess, no one really succeeded in doing anything really different with as in 800x600, which runs inside a non-resizable window. The SVGA the grand old game until Battle Chess hit the shelves. graphics are sharp, smooth and very attractive. The pieces are faithful Battle Chess took the simple premise of dramatizing the actual reproductions of various Star Wars characters, creatures and mechanicapture of pieces without altering the rules of the game. It was cals, and the backgrounds for the two 3-D boards are detailed without successful, and it naturally resulted in several sequels, including the being cluttered. Latest release of Interplay's Battle Chess 4000. On the down side, it Bath music and sound effects are excellent--this is a CD, after all. also spawned a host of imitations and look-alikes—some good, some Strangely enough, music and sound-effects are not independent bad, most mediocre. The latest entries in the Battle Chess look-alike options. If you turn the music off, you lose the sound effects as well. contest come from Capstone with Terminator 2: Judgment Day Chess Chess As nice as the music is, it gets monotonous after awhile, and it would Wars, and Software Toolworks with Star Wars Chess. be nice if you could turn it off without losing the effects. Nor content with simply imitating the format with animated capth animated capBring a Windowe oame Being a Windows game, Star Wars Chess uses a mouse interface. The tures, these games introduce a new element: Hollywood. Both games bod. Born games pieces are moved by a drag-and-drop method that's a bit awkward pieces are moved by are based on mega-hit movies. The boxes and literature and game until you learn to place the pointer slightly above the target piece. graphics draw heavily on themes, music and characters from the films. Until you do, you'll invariably click on the wrong piece. The idea seems to be that if you loved the movie, you'll buy the game. Let's set aside the packaging and cinematic cross-promotion for a The game menus also take some getting used to. Options are while and take a look at the actual games. selected through a series of icons located in the lower left corner of the screen. Clicking on an icon will bring up another row of icons Use the Force, Luke. Castle Kingside! which contain specific options, highlighted in text in a window bar to the right. Once you get the hang of it, it's really very comfortable. Software Toolworks' Star Wars Chess runs exclusively under Win Game options are limited to bare-bones basic chess settings, which dows 3.1. The minimum hardware requirement is a 386-33 with 4 include taking back moves, choosing side and opponent, forcing MBs of RAM, MPC-rated sound card and CD-ROM drive, and moves, replaying moves, or asking for hints. Play levels are uncompliSVGA graphics capability. A 486-33 is recommended. The one catch cated and single-ricred, consisting simply of five choices ranging from Star Wars Chess T2: Judgment Day Chess Wars THE SOFTWARE TOOLWORKS STAR WARS CHESS TERMINATOR 2 JUDGMENT DAY CHESS WARS TITLE: TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: Gondwa PRICE: SYSTEM: REQUIREMENTS: Star Wars Chess $44.95 IBM CD-ROM 386 33MHz, 4MB RAM, SVGA graphics, CD-ROM drive, Windows 3.1, Microsofl Mouse, MPC-Rated Sound Card The Software Toolworks Novato, CA (415) 883-3000 Terminator 2: Judgment Day Chess Wars (With Grandmaster Chess) $49.95 IBM CD-ROM 386 33MHz, 1MB RAM, 10MB hard drive space, VGN/SVGA graphics, mouse supports Adlib, Sound Blaster PAS, Roland, Covox Sound Boards sound cards Capstone Miami, FL (305) 591-5900 PUBLISHER: PUBLISHER: Page 90 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS PO BOX 234 ROCHESTER VT 05767 DEPT 10036 FREE GAME OFFER See Last Page for Details Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10036 Vin & MG Accepted Checks Held 4 Weeks Money Orders Treated us Cash COD 58. Defecivas replaced with same prod u Most pod sume day Slypping times not guaranteed Phao & availability slibed to change OVERNIGHT SHIPPING. US SA per order. Mail to Canada, PA HIAR APO FPO Si per order -Bday Worldwide shipping S6 per dem. Handling $2 per shipment 'THE GRANDEST FLEET' Experience the grueling campaigns, the agony of defeat & the exhilaration of Victory! Allocate natural resources to build missile sites, radar stations, shipbuilding facilities and Superships. It is up to you to destroy your nemesis. Modem play and random maps. $36 'STAR REACH' You are on a quest to conquer & colonize a galaxy of alien worlds in a mind-bending, real-time universe. First you must overcome hostile climate conditions, ward off enemies, calculate risks & make tactical decisions. $36 Pebble Beach Reel Magle ma \"PEBBLE BEACH GOLF LINKS' is the first in a series of LINKS CLASSIC EDITION courses made for the LINKS 386 PRO with VGA graphics Designers and programmers spent more than a year reproducing every nuance of Pebble Beach. Users will feel like they've actually played the course! $24 1942: THE PACIFIC AIR WAR'Dodge the relentless gunfire of Japanese Zeros. Execute gravity twisting dive-bomb attacks. Attack enemy bombers in a desperate fight to save your carrier. Virtual Cockpit allows viewing in all directions. $48 COURSE E2H *REELMAGIC' Provides a complete package allowing full playback of video & stereo sound including an MPC-2-CDROM drive, deluxe speakers, primiere entertainment titles and the ReelMagic controller. CD Kit S699 or S Board S389 ACCESS IBM SPORTS IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM TRADITIONAL IBM WAR GAMES $39 Hardball 3 Collection $39 Hardball 3 Players Disk $16 Jack Nicklaus Sign Ed $27 Joe Montana Football 2 $42 LH Pro Basketball $36 LH Pro Bktball 89-90 Tm $16 Links Crses 2 5 ea $17 Links Crses 6 Barton Ck $9 Links Crses 7 Troon No $17 Links Pro 386 Golf $34 Links Pro Crses 1 5 ea $19 Links Pro Firestone $20 Links Pro Pebble Beach $24 ML 1950-80s Wid Ser ea$17 ML Bball All Teams ea $20 ML Bball Manager's Ch $19 ML Football 2 Madden Football 2 $17 ML 82-89 Bsball Sea ea $17 Micrige Bball 4 USA Tod $28 Micrige Bsktball $28 Microsoft Golf for WIN $48 NFL Chaling Prem Edit $59 NFL Coaches Club $36 NFL Video Football $29 NHL Hockey $44 QuarterPole $30 Road to the Final Four $37 Tom Landry Football Dlx $29 TLRussa Bb112 92 Team $14 TLRssa BB2 TD 1992 S16 TLRussa Tms 1901-68 $15 Unnecessry Roughness $34 Wayne Gretzky Hock 3 $36 Battles of Destiny $36 Maelstrom $36 Theatre of War Breach 3 $36 Master of Orion $39 Theatre of War Set 1 $21 Caesar $29 Mega Lo Mania $19 Unnatural Selection $38 Campaign 2 $36 Napoleonics $34 Vikings Fields of Cong $19 Capitalist Pig WIN $19 New World Order $38 Vikings Flds Cng Enhan $34 Carriers at War $19 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 $37 Visions of Aftermath $16 Carriers at War 2 $39 Objection Enhanced $42 Walls of Rome $39 Carriers at War Cons Kit $29O peration Crusader $34 War in the Gulf $19 Castles 2 $36 Paladin 2 $34 Warlords 2 $39 Chssmstr 4000 Tur WIN $36 Patrician $34 Warlords 2 Scen Editor $29 Civilization $44 Perfect General $34 When Two Worlds War S34 Civilization WIN $42 Perfect General 2 $44 Worlds at War S19 Clash of Steel $39 Perfect Gen Scen 2 20th$23 Conquer for Windows $36 Perfct Gen Scn Dk WW2$21 Conquered Kingdoms $34 Populous 2 $26 IBM TRADITIONAL Conquerd Kingdm Scn 1 $24 Populous Promisd Lnds $14 Dark Star $36 Rags to Riches $36 Battle Chess 4000 VGA $24 Detroit $36 Railroad Tycoon 2 $40 Battle Chess EGA/VGA S18 Dominion: One King Life $41 Railroad Tycoon Classic S19 Battle Chess WIN S18 Dominus $39 Realms $16 Bridge 7 S24 Dune 2 $34 Robo Sport WIN Bridgemastr DOS or Win S29 Empire Deluxe $35 Romance 3 Kingdoms S42 Caesars Palace WIN $17 Empire Deluxe Scen 1 $21 Romance 3 Kingdoms 2 $39 Casino Game Pak WIN $32 Empire Deluxe WIN $35 Romance 3 Kingdoms 3 $36 Checkmate DOS or Win S36 Fantasy Empires $39 Rules of Engagement 2 $34 ChessManc 5 Billion & 1 542 Fields of Glory $34 Second Conflict WIN $34 Chessmaster 3000 $29 Fort Apache $19 Seven Cities Gold 2 $36 Classic 5 WIN $30 $36 ShadowGate WIN $32 Cribbage Master $29 Gellysburg $29 Sid Meir's Civil War $58 Dealer's Choice $19 Gttysbrg: Intract Bat Sim$34 SimCity 2000 DOS/Win $42 Dr Floyds Desktop Toys $14 Global Domination $29 SimCity Class DOS/Win $27 Dr Thorp's Blackjack $32 Great Nav Batt Adml Pk $49 SimAnt $29 Gambit Kasparov's $39 Harpoon 2 $48 Simcily $27 Game-Maker Ver 2.0 $49 Harpoon 2 Battle Set 1 $26 Simearth WIN $29 Go Mstr Dix Ver 5 WIN $79 Heirs to the Throne S36 Simfarm $29 Go Mr Jr V5 DOS or Win$19 Humans: Insult to Injury $14 Simhealth $29 Go Master Tool Kit $39 Kingdoms of Germany $34 Simlife WIN $29 Go Mstr V5 DOS or Win $39 Koshan Conspiracy $36 Smokin' Gun WIN $28 Grand Slam Bridge 2 S27 Laser Squad $16 Space Hulk $36 Grand Master Chess Dix S37 Lemmings 2: The Tribes $29 Spaceward Ho! WIN $36 HongKong MahJong Pro $32 Lost Admiral $19 Star Control 2 $34 Hoyle's Book Games V3 $29 Lost Admiral Enhanced $44 Strike Squad $39 Hoyle Bk Games Classc $29 Lost Admiral Scen Disk $23 Task Force 1942 $39 Joseki Genius $39 Lost Vikings $24 The Complete UMS $44 Lucky's Casino Advent $39 Circle Reader Service #38 Monoply Dix DOS or Win$29 OShri Bridge DOSorWin $32 Pinball Dreams $29 $15 Positronic Bridge $30 Risk WIN $26 Russian Six Pack WIN $19 Scrabbl Dix DOS or Win $26 Scribler $34 Shanghaii 2 $29 Solitaire WIN S26 Solitaires Journey $34 Star Wars Chess $38 Super Jeopardy $19 Super Tetris $29 Swap $29 Tactical Wizard $39 Tke-A-Brk Crosswrd WINS24 Terminator 2 Chess Wrs $37 Tesserae WIN S 16 Tetris Class DOS or Win $26 Trump Castle 3 $29 Vegas Games Pak WIN $19 Virtual Reality Studio 2 $49 Welltris S15 Word Tris S27 World Series Poker S24 Borodino Napoln Invad $29 Bravo Romeo Delta $24 Campaign $32 Campaign Mission 1 $18 Carrier Strike Carrier Strike Exp Pak $19 Civil War No Grtr Glory $21 Dreadnoughts $34 Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Dreadnoughts Deluxe $59 Dreadnoughts Ironclads $29 Drums of Glory $44 Fall Gelb $36 Fifth Eskadra $36 Gary Grigsby Pac War $45 Gary Grgsby War Russ $45 German Raider Atlantis $26 Gettysburg Intr Batt Sim S34 Gettysburg:Turn Point S36 Grand Fleet $36 Grey Seas, Grey Skies $36 Harpoon Design Ser2 $25 High Command $45 In Harms Way $36 Kampfgruppe $59 Long Lance $39 Main Batt Tank C Germy $36 Malta Storm $36 Man of War $36 Mare Nostrum $26 Northern Fleet $36 Operation Overlord $36 Pac Storm Midwy Cpgn $36 Pac Storm Solmn Cpgn $36 Patriot Red Sky Morning $36 Return to Falklands $28 Rising Sun $26 Road Sumter Appomttx $45 Rommel Batt N Africa $24 Rommel at El Alamein $36 Seventh Fleet $36 Squad Leader $48 Stalingrad Campaign $36 CGW MAR 3 IBM WAR GAMES $23 IBM STRATEGY Action North Atlantic $26 Action off River Platte $26 Air Raid Pearl Harbour $22 Am Civl War V1,20r3 ea $24 Battle Tank Barbarossa $36 Battle Tank Kursk $36 Battle of Austerlitz $26 Battle of Leyte Gulf $24 Battle of the Atlantic Battles of Napoleon $24 Battleship Bismark $26 Blood & Iron $48 Blue and the Grey $36 $36 A Train $34 A Train w/Construct Set $42 Ancient Art of War Sky $34 Archon Ultra $37 Arctic Baron $29 Armada 2525 $34 "


"FEATURE PRESENTATIONS Newcomer to Expert. There are none of the extras commonly found on standard chess programs, such as think-during-move, learning mode, time controls, tournament clocks, or the selection of openings. I find this especially surprising considering that the game was built upon the Chessmaster engine. Also conspicuous by its absence is the 2-D/3-D option. The game must be played out on the 3D board, which for all practical purposes, is next to impossible. Once the novelty of the animated captures wears off—and it wears off in a hurry-you're going to want to switch to a 2-D board to play the game. With pieces occupying the middle of the board, things get so cluttered it's impossible to analyze your position. There is a Setup option that allows the player to arrange pieces to re-create game positions on a 2-D board, but for some unfathomable reason, you can't play the game from this board. You're forced to return to the 3-D board and pieces. Personalize your Microsoft Windows environment with incredible images & digitized sounds of your favorite aircraft. Aircraft Wallpaper Over 40 images of vintage and contemporary aircraft use as Windows wallpaper or in an automated slide show. Screen Savers NE lit Animated crop dusters. bombers and skydivers all work to entertain you while preventing screen burn-in. HAT 1122 M il! <<< Aircraft Fly-Bys Aircraft Fly-Bys! 1301 NYA 1919 This visual easy-to-use aircraft encyclopedia contains vital statistics on each of the featured aircraft. Air Events Calendar Star Wars Chess As for the chess engine, it's adequate but mostly harmless. The lack of an opening library slows it down and makes for some boring, repetitive games. If you're looking for a challenge, you'll be disappointed; if you like to win, you'll be pleased. The animations in the Battle Chess genre are the stars of the show. When so much of the actual gameplay is sacrificed for the sake of sound and graphics, nothing less than spectacular will do. Battle Chess 4000 delivered—with SVGA graphics, fluid animation and digitized sound, all on a disk-based game with a lower hardware requirement. Star Wars Chess does not. While the graphics and sound are nice, the animations are a bit choppy and slow. And although the capture sequences vary randomly, they are for the most part predictable and uninspired. In fact, the best part about them is that they can be turned off. Provides the locations and dates of airshows in your area. COLOR SPECTRUM Sample aircraft images:  SR-71  B-17 Flying Fortress  F-14 Tomcat  Fokker Dr 1 Triplane International: (303) 225-1687 (800) 238-5983 Sample aircraft sounds for Windows events:  P-51 Mustang  F-15 Eagle  B-25 Mitchell  F4U Corsair You May Check Me Now, But...I'll Be Back! Capstone's Terminator 2: Judgment Day Chess Wars is also a CDROM game. It installs and runs under DOS and requires a minimum 386-33 with VGA or SVGA graphics capability, 2 MBs extended memory (SVGA), and a double-speed CD-ROM. A sound card is required, but the sound will play through the PC speaker. Again, a 486-33 is recommended. The game doesn't like compression programs; if you've got a compressed drive, it probably won't run. Right up front, I have to say that the game crashed repeatedly on my system. Configuring and various boot disks did nothing to Ask your local retailer for Feature Presentations Flight. or call Colorado Spectrum to place your order. Circle Reader Service #39 Page 92 Computer Gaming World "


"COMPANIONS OF CHIPS & BITS PO BOX 234 ROCHESTER VT 05767 DEPT 10036 FREE GAME OFFER See Last Page for Details Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10036 VisD & MC Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weeks, Money Orders Tronto as CBS COUS: Dalectivos replaced with same prod uat Most items shipped same day. Shpping times not guaranteed Pros & ilvailability subject to change OVERNIGHT SHIPPING IN US $ por order. Man to Canada PA HI, AK, APO, FPO S4 per order 4-8 Hay Worldwide Shipping S por im Handling Se per shimont COMPANIONS OF XANTH Explore a magical world of mystic wonders and become a player in a game where the stakes are the existence of magic itself. Interact with Elves. Ogres, Demons. Centaurs, a serpentine Naga princess and even the Gap Dragon. Includes \"Demons Don't Dream.\" $34 *THRUSTMASTER'S FORMULA T1'is the most realistic control for all of today's driving simulators. Features fully functional steering wheel, brake and gas pedals and turbo boost gauge used in supporting games. $129 LEGEND WHO 'ACROSS THE RHINE' Control history's most famous tanks or entire Companies & experience the fierce combat & tough decisions that gripped WWII tank commanders. Blast your way through enemy units across war-torn Europe. S42 'WINGS OF GLORY 1917-18 Learn to fly and master ditter ent planes & discover the strengths and weaknesses of each, as well as those of the enemy. Features 5 different planes, 4 channel digital sound and instant mission generator. $52 'SYSTEM SHOCK' You receive a neural jack implant that allows you to enter cyberspace. Upon awakening, you discover that a super-intelligent computer has seized control of the station and is planning to release a deadly virus. $54 IBM WAR GAMES IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET JAGUAR NEO GEO $12 $54 $12 Basketball $54 Battle Zone 2000 Checkered Flag 2 Club Drive $44 Crescent Galaxy S44 Evolution:Dino Dudes $44 Jaguar Form 1 Racing $54 Kasumi Ninja $54 NFL Football $54 Raiden $44 Tempest 2000 $44 Tiny Toon Adventures $44 $12 $9 League Bowling $129 Magician Lord $149 Mutation Nation $149 Nam 1975 $129 Ninja Combat $149 Riding Hero $129 Robo Army $149 Samurai Shodown $199 Sengoku 2 $199 Sengoku $129 Soccer Brawl $139 Super 8 Man $129 Sup Sidekicks Soccer $179 Super Spy $129 Survivor $199 Thrash Rally $129 Top Hunter $199 Top Players Golf $129 View Point $199 World Heroes 2 $199 $9 NEO GEO S6 $12 S6 $7 The Great War $39 Chess X Colossus S9 Third Reich Command HQ S9 To The Rhine $36 Conflict UMS 2 $19 Conflict: Korea $12 UMS 2 Civil War $24 Covert Action $12 UMS 2 Desrt Strm Scen $24 Crime City UMS 2 Planet Editor $16 Crime Does Not Pay $12 V Victry: Gld, Jun, Swrd S44 Dark Half $9 V Victory: Market Gardn S42 Das Boot Submarine $12 V Victory: Utah Beach S44 Diplomacy V Victory: Velikye Luki $44 Dognapped Victory at Sea $46 Don't Go Alone $6 War in the Falklands $26 Double Dragon 3 $12 WW 2 Bait of So Pacific $34 Dr Thorp's mini Bickjck $12 Dr Doom's Revenge $9 D Wng Jcks&Vid Pker 5 $12 IBM BUDGET Dragon Force $12 Dragon Strike $12 007 Jas Bond Stealth Aff$12 Dragons of Flame $9 3D Pinball S12 East v West Berlin 1948 $9 3 in 1 Players's Pack $9 Electric Jigsaw $12 Action Stations Scen 1 $6 F15 Strike Eagle 1 Acquire $9 Fighting for Rome $12 Airforce Com 2: WW2 $12 Games Master WIN $6 All Star Sports Pak $9 Gauntlet 2 $9 Allied Forces S12 Global Effect Amazing Spiderman S12 Gunship Amrillo Slims 7 Crd Stud S12 GrailQuest S12 Aracnaphobia w/Sd Srce $12 Harmony $5 Artura S4 Hearts S12 B.A.T. $12 Hole in 1 Mini Golf Delux$12 Back to the Future 3 $12 Interact Adit Sampler CDS12 Bbal Chall'87-'90Tms ea $9 Internation Ninja Rabbits S12 Backgamon by Geo WIN S9 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art $9 Battle Command $12 J Nicklaus SE Course 1 $9 Blackjack WIN $12 Jeopardy 1 or 2 Blue Max Aces Grt War 9 Jeopardy Junior dy Junior $9 Captain Blood John Elway Quarterback $6 Cardinal of the Kremlin S9 Land Sea Air Trilogy $12 Casino Craps S12 Leather Goddesses $12 Casino Lite 7 Card Stud S12 Lexicross $12 Casino Lite TX Hold'em S12 Lightspeed S9 Castles Nrthern Camp $7 Lnks Crses:Barton Creek $9 Chess Net WIN $ 9MUDS $12 ML Baseball All Stars $12 Street Ball $12 Madden Football $12 Taking of Beverly Hills $12 Marvel Trilogy $12 Team Yankee $12 Matrix Cubed $12 Teen MNT Manhatt Miss $12 Medieval Lords $12 Teen MNTurtles Arcad $12 MegaFortress $12 Tegel's Mercenaries $9 Mega Traveller 2 S12 Test Drive2: Supercars $12 Micro legue bsbl Sea 13 S12 The Tinies $12 Millenium S6 Tie Break Tennis S9 Ninja Gaiden 2 S12 Time Quest $12 Ninja Rabbits S12 Trmp Cst 2 Cas Rsrt Bay S6 Obliterator S6 Tmp Cst 2 DD1 or 2 ea $4 Oil's Well $12 Turn-n-Burn $12 Oligopoly Typhoon of Steel $12 On Target S12 Under Fire S12 Operation Combat S12 Vaxine $12 Pac Man $9 Video Poker Villa Crespo $9 Penthouse Jigsaw XXX S12 Video Poker Win $12 Pick 'n Pile Video Poker by Masque $9 Pictionary Warlords $12 Pirates Wheel of Fortune 2 $9 Playmaker Football S12 Wver Tm & Play Stats 89 $6 Power Drome S9 Wild Wheels $12 Predator 2 $12 Wrath of the Demon $12 Punisher Xiphos S9 Puzzle Gallery 1 X-Men S9 RR Tycoon W Strat Pls $12 Red Storm Rising Rings of Medusa AMIGA $12 Rotox $12 Ruckus Poker $12 Breach 1 Scen Disk Ruckus Roulette $12 Fast Break Savage S9 Heat Wave $3 S.C. Out $12 Jck Nicklaus Crse 1 $6 Sentinel Worlds 1 S9 Muscle Cars $3 Seventh Fleet S3 Shadow Sorcerer $12 JAGUAR $12 Snoopy's Fun Pack $12 Sony SRS7 Speakers $9 Jaguar CD System Sony SRS9 Speakers $14 Jaguar System $249 Spot $9 Jaguar Controller $24 Storm Across Europe $12 Alien Vs Predator $54 Strategic Forces $9 Baseball $54 Circle Reader Service #38 FREE GAME OFFER $9 S8 $9 Neo Geo Control Pad $46 Neo Geo Demo Video $3 NG Gold Sys Art Fight $569 NG Gold Sys Fatal FuryS569 NG Gld Sys King Mons $569 NG Gld Sys Mage Lord $569 NG Gold Sys Nam 75 $569 NG Gld Sys Wrdi Hero 2$569 2020 Super Bball $119 3 Count Bout $189 Alpha Mission 2 $129 Andros Dunos S199 Art of Fighting $199 Art of Fighting 2 $199 Baseball Stars Prof $129 Baseball Stars Prof 2 $149 Blues Journey $129 Burning Fight $129 Crossed Swords $129 Cyber Lip $129 Fatal Fury 2 $199 Fatal Fury $129 Fatal Fury Special $199 Football Frenzy $149 Ghost Pilots $129 King of the Monsters 2 S179 King of the Monsters $149 Last Resort $149 Spend $60 on any in stock software and choose a free IBM game from the list below. Olfer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from Feb 1st through Mar 31st or while supplies last. Siege Artura, Sound Source Grndmstr Chess. Rings of Medusa, Airborne Ranger, Gunship. Free DC. Big Business 5.25. SDI, Jeopardy. Wheel of Fortune 1 or 2 5.25 Backgammon by George. Earth Rise. Vid Poker, Obliterator, 3 in 1 Players Pack, Video Poker Villa Crespo, Magic Johnson Fast Break, Dusk of the Gods, Punisher 5.25 $299 "


"FILE GAME OMALYSIS OPENINGS PREFERENCES HELT alleviate the problem. The game would from Beginner to Grandmaster, but you load and play for a of time, then crash. can also vary the style of play by choosing Commentary on the chess engine is limActive, Passive or Balance style options. ited by the fact that not a single game The game will print moves and diagrams, was played to completion. and includes a Time Control option that The graphics are unimpressive, espeprovides a wide range of clock options. cially for SVGA. There are five different There's even a feature that will compute board designs available, but the only your rating on the USCF scale over a short thing that changes is the backgroundor long-term time-frame. Bur there are a the board stays the same. Pieces consist couple of key elements missing. of characters and machines from the T2 A 2-D board is not supported, and alfilm that move around the board either though there is a Library Option on the by walking or stepping into a \"vortex\" menu, T2 apparently does not possess an that transports them to the destination opening library. The manual states that it square. The vortex effect is fairly quick, has a library containing 4500 opening but the walking consumes too much T2: Judgment Day Chess Wars variations, but when you select the optime. Fortunately, the Preferences option allows you to turn the tion, there's nothing there. A subsequent check of the CD and various effects, animations and sounds on or off. It may be a testimony installed files also drew a blank. There's an Adjust Variety option that to the quality that I eventually turned everything but the sound off. allows you to set the variety of moves T2 chooses from the opening Captures are all dramatized by animated battles, but unlike Star library, but without a library, it's a moot point. Wars Chess, they take place off the board. The transition to and from these animated sequences is painfully slow (even with a double-speed Endgame drive), and the animations themselves are a big disappointment. They're poorly-rendered, jerky and wholly underwhelming. Both Star Wars Chess and T2 Chess Wars are examples of marketing The sound is quite good, however, and could be considered the at its best (or worst, depending on your point of view). Their appeal highlight of the game. Effects are solid, and there are two types of music, is centered on their expensive movie licenses and the genre they're Moody or Nervous, to choose from. The music does wear thin, but when imitating. Their value as chess games is minimal; their value as pure it does, the sound effects aren't lost when the music is turned off. entertainment is non-existent. While Star Wars Chess does the better T2 Chess Wars offers a better range of game options than Star Wars job with its licensed bells and whistles, both of these games are Chess. You can set playing strength by selecting one of five settings destined to collect dust on a shelf. Cow Introducing... THE UNIVERSAL COCKPITTM AB STRAP IN.AND TAKE OFF!!! The UNIVERSAL COCKPIT Allows you to Take Command of Your System Three Ways (stick, yoke or steering). Now You can have Complete Control whether on the Track or in the Air. FEATURES:  Tough Aluminum Construction  Free-Standing System. No Clumsy Desk Mounting FLIGHT SIMS AUTO RACING SIMS Clamps or Suction Cups! Stick/Rudder/Throttle Steering Brake/Throttle (not shown , yoke configuration) Push Button Shifting  3-in-1 Modular System, Easily Converted Coming Soon: The UNIVERSAL JOYSTICKTM\"Complete\" Control of Auto Racing and Flight Sims in an Economical Desktop Package. ASK FOR DETAILS! SIMULATION SYSTEMS 1-800-647-7623 SIMULATION SYSTEMS 791 E. Brokaw Rd. . San Jose, CA 95112  1-800-647-7623 . Fax (408)441-0650 Circle Reader Service #64 Page 94 Computer Gaming World "


"THE LOCALS WOULD LIKE TO HAVE YOU FOR LUNCH. the good news is you survived the plane crash. The bad news is you're on the Isle of the Dead. Now, as you search for survival items and a way off the island, you face a horrifying assortment of flesh eating zombies, hideous bats, bloodthirsty wolyes and other unsavory locals. Can we help it if the press is calling it \"gory,\" \"gruesome,\" \"graphic\" and \"sickening?\" You'll traverse dense jungles, treacherous caves and explore the local village to unlock riddles that could aid your escape. And if you're lucky, you may even rehabilitate a beautiful zombie babe. But don't forget to keep an eye out. behind you. Because on the Isle of the Dead, you're on the menu! See your dealer or call today! WARNING: This game depicts scenes of graphic violence. \"Big, briglu, oh-so-gruesome graphics ... enough blood and gore to make even George, Romero blanch. A real tongue-in-cheek, teeth-in-flesh kind of adventure.\" P PC Entertainment, October, '93 ar bu he ISLEOFTHE LONG TAX USE INVIGOPTI DEAD 1-800-238-4277 \"Definitely not for the faint-hearted. Sampled realistic sounds add to the sickening, bloody atmosphere.\" Video Games September '93 \"Brings new meaning to the term \"graphic adventure. PC Entertainment October '93 rit Software ARE 13707 Gamma Road  Dallas, Texas 75244 . 214-385-2353 IBM 3.5\" HD disks. Minimum requirements: 386 PC or 100% compatible, 4MB RAMADOS 5.0 or greater, hard drive and VGA graphics. Sound support: Sound Blaster and compatibles. 01994. Metit Software. Circle Reader Service #80 "


"REVIEW Only In America Syndicate Goes To The States In American Revolt by Jeff James evolution must be in the blood of Air Strike relies on raw explosive power. To burning shrubbery, and other animation, those damned Yanks. Your multi-nalise the Air Strike, you simply mark the target bringing even the fastest 486 machines to a tional corporation had captured the area with a crosshair and hustle your agents crawl. When presented separately, these market-share of world power through its agout of the area. A flight of military aircraft will problems are merely irksome. Combined, gressive \"marketing campaign,\" but now a then rocket overhead, decimating large tracts they can try the patience of even the most rotten apple has been found in the pie chart of real estate with explosive munitions. accepting gamer. of your global dominance. The territories in In terms of playability, American Revolt in rerms of plavabilir. American I Hard-core Syndicate nuts who couldn't get the Americas, both North and South, have leans towards the more difficult end of the enough of the original game and who have decided to vote with their firearms and viospectrum. Players who managed to bully their access to a network running NETBIOSlently secede from your young global empire, way through the original Syndicate missions will most likely be able to overlook the flies preferring reckless autonomy to forced subby loading up on mini-guns and medikits will in American Revolt's ointment and find hours servience. have a difficult time with most of the missions of enjoyment. Less interested gamers should in American Revolt. A few scenarsteer clear and wait for a more playable addiios are absurdly difficult, as if the tion to the Syndicate family. CGW developers were trying to \"get even\" with players who thought Network Notes that the original was too easy. The increased difficulty of tested American Revolt on a small American Revolt amplifies the network running Novell Netware shortcomings of the original Synworkstation shell v3.31, Novell dicate, turning niggling foibles IPX/SPX v3.10 and Novell NETBIOS into serious impediments to v3.01. The procedure for running the netgameplay. The inability to see work game is fairly straightforward. First, behind buildings and other log onto the nerwork and run NETBIOS. structures was only irritating in After starting Syndicate, select \"multithe original; in American Revolt, player game\" from the main menu. A misSyndicate: American Revolt, an add-on disk sion selection screen will appear, listing the a hidden enemy has enough firepower to to the original Syndicate program from Elecdecimate an entire squad faster than you can ten available multiplayer missions. Before tronic Arts, offers 21 single player missions in say \"cyberpunk.» The amount of graphic dewhich you must coerce the American territobeginning a multiplayer game, all players tail in the original Syndicate was one of its ries back into the union—by whatever means should select the same mission and the same number of players. necessary. In addition to the single player strengths; here, that same detail leads to slugThe instructions state that American Remissions, a new multiplayer feature allows gish animation and lethargic gameplay. The volt needs at least 510K of conventional skull-to-skull competition in ten missions missions in American Revolt are often packed memory free after all the requisite drivers with up to seven other flesh and blood Syndiwith opponents, with several dozen heavily have been loaded. While the game will cate players across a compatible network armed enemy agents not uncommon for most load in that configuration, practical playThe multiplayer mode isn't the only new missions. The combat zone can quickly being experience revealed that having at least feature. Two new weapons have come choked with explosions, rocket exhaust, 550K of conventional RAM free on each been added to every Syndicate exmachine prevented the occasional lock-up ecutive's arsenal: the clone shield Syndicate: American Revolt or drop to DOS. Getting that much free and the air strike. Useful only for conventional memory isn't easy when you multi-player games, the clone have a machine with a CD-ROM drive, Syndicale: American Revolt shield can disguise your deadly disk compression, network drivers and cyborg agents as harmless civilother memory-grubbing TSRs. Use a REQUIREMENTS: Syndicate, 1.5 MB hard clean boot disk or the multiple boot opians, allowing you to sneak close Bullirog Software tions of MS-DOS 6.0/6.2 to get the most to an unsuspecting enemy and out of your available RAM. I found the surprise him with a sneak attack. (415) 572-ARTS DOS 6 memmaker utility to be especially Whereas the clone shield empha AMERICAN REVOLT helpful at optimizing RAM for gameplay. sizes subtlety and deception, the TITLE: PRICE: SYSTEM: $29.99 IBM drive space None PROTECTION: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts San Mateo, CA Page 96 Computer Gaming World "


"Stop playing with yourself. Get 15 hours of gut-stomping fun for less than $20. No more figuring out in one day how to beat the puny A.I. of a computer game. Oh, no; I'm afraid you're up against something just a little more difficult this time: the nastiest, meanest, smartest, most cunning opponents in the game world-other humans. With a computer and modem, you can team with-or against-some of the best gamers in the Known World. Take your place as a European vassal lord in The Hundred Years' WarTM and try your Machiavellian mettle in the epic battle for empire and prestige.... Don the hauberk of a warrior and travel dangerous lands in the color graphics role-playing world of rakkarTM, or the Island of KesmaiTM Play the latest version of the very first true multi-player game, MUD II: The Quest For ImmortalityTM... or test your Strategy against dozens of other wouldHow to register for an NVN subscription: To register on-line, set your comm software to 1200, 2400 or 9600 bps, N-8-1, and be Galactic Emperors in Galaxy III full duplex. Dial 1-800-336-9092. When connected, enter CG94PL and press Expanding EmpiresTM <RETURN>. Then enter name, address and Visa, Discover Card, American So stop playing with yourself! Express, MasterCard number or EFT information. Your Starter Kit will be mailed right away. Membership is just $8.95 a month and For more information, call 1-800-336-9096. includes 4 hours of non-prime access in standard services. Need more time? How about $12.95 for 8 hours or $19.95 for 15 hours? It's your choice. Isn't that a small price to pay to get your butt waxed? Internet mail ASK ABOUT OUR OTHER INTERNET SERVICES NVN NVN-Good stuff. Good price. A SERVICE OF Subscription is $8.95/month which includes + hours: or $12.95/month which includes 8 hours: or $19.95/month which includes 15 hours of non-prime time access in standard services. 9600 bps access available at no surcharge. Standard services are $2X5Whour during non-prime (6pm 7am weekdays, and all day weekends): 57.50/hour during prime-time (7am 6pm. Mon-Fri). A few select premium services cany additional charges. Unused portions of hours provided by subscription may not be camed forward or transferred. Hourly rates and service content are subject to change without notice. NVN is a service mark of National Videotex Network. Com. All others for identification puposes only and belong to their respective companies or organizations. U.S. Videotel Circle Reader Service #91 "


"Link RE VERINA 7. Aqu. decans Over There ally Round The Wicket, Boys! | my to pri uby Robin Matthews H ... be lu any years ago Europress Software but a bit more is recommended, especially for Revenge were really big on old 8-bit formats, released a CGA/EGA racing game sound board support. Network Q RAC Rally and although Part Three was underway, the called RAC Lombard Rally. Named will be brought to the U.S. via Accolade, and purchase of its prospective publisher resulted after a well known car Rally in the United should be available as you read this. in it being shelved many years ago. Singleton Kingdom, this was a respectable first-person On the sporting fronts I have been asked Esq. and Messrs. Maelstrom intend to revive driving simulation with some elements of about computer simulations of that most the name as a PC version, either bearing the route planning and resource management. quintessentially English of pursuits, the game name Lords of Midnight or perhaps with the Europress has now brought this theme into of Cricket (a sort of baseball with more comtitle mooted for the original third part, Eye of the 90's with Network Q RAC Rally (renamed plicated rules—sides that are out trying to get Doom. The original Lords of Midnight was a simply Rally for the U.S. market, see Taking the side that is in, out). There have been a role-playing game that pushed 8-bit further A Peek, pg. 174). For those new to the RAC couple of previous efforts by U.K. software than it could really go-an interesting develRally, it's a grueling four day 350 mile race houses to reproduce the thud of leather on opment in prospect. Watch this space for with both day and night driving on surfaces willow, but these have tended to have poor further news... varying from tarmac roads to forest dirt graphics and very little gameplay. The basic tracks, and with weather from sun through rules of cricket lend themselves well to simuRough Ryder rain to snow and ice. Each day of racing a lation, and if the likes of U.S. football and Ocean, basking in the reflected glory of baseball can be converted, there is TFX, has also released another golf game. It's no reason why Chinamen, Leg Beamazing how much computer attention this fore Wicket and Full Tosses sport continues to attract. With Links 386 Pro shouldn't make a suitable case for and David Leadbetter still raking the high treatment. ground, new releases appear on the first tee at regular intervals. Nick Faldo's Golf and U.K.-based Audiogenic is now Ocean's recent Open Golf have made the PC threatening to make terms such as fairways even busier, and here is yet another. LBW, Silly Mid-off and Googlies household words with their GraRyder Cup Golfattempts to simulate probably ham Gooch World Class Cricket. the best international team sport in the world. The ridiculous control system in Open Golf Master Graham is the highest SO has in part been abandoned, and the player 2800 scorer in English first class cricket, MPHOHO . now has a choice of three control systems, one and it is to be hoped that this conEuropress Software's Rally of which is the standard power meter version will be rather more successmethod. ful than the recent English XI percertain number of stages must be completed, formances. Shots playable include hooks, Ryder Cup Golf allows you to compete in each within a time limit. Thirty-five stages of sweeps, leg glance, and back on the driving the three matchplay formats of singles, fourthe Rally are featured with a choice of five fronton, straight, off and cover. Bowling ball and foursomes. In its favor, up to four different cars. The graphics are strong, and styles will allow fast, slow, swing and pace. human players can take part and attempt to although flight-sim multiple views are not This is coming to Cricket nets near you win the cup as a team. Unfortunately, the supported (straight ahead view only), the shortly. graphics are rather dated (more like EGA night time driving is about the best in any standard) and with no feeling of medium or racing simulation. A nice touch is that of a There is lots of gossip and rumor in the long perspective. Putting is often the Achilles' speaking navigator who talks you through the ether—talk of a new Mike Singleton game, heel of PC golf games (as the famous pros say course using proper Rally jargon. The game the third part of Lords of Midnight. The origi«Drive for Show and Putt for Dough\"), and runs decently on a 386-16 MHz processor nal game and its rapid sequel Doomdark's Ryder Cup Golf is no exception with a crude R? Page 98 Computer Gaming World "


"NO MORE GARSE E TEX You're finished with training... Had your fun and games. Now TACTICAL FIGHTER EXPERIMENT it's time to face reality in the most sophisticated aerial combat simulation ever created for your PC-TFX: Tactical Fighter Experiment. Equipped with ASRAAMS, Mavericks, M615, laser-guided GBUs...you're fully loaded to tackle more than 200 «realworld\" campaigns, based on today's geopolitical realities. And to keep you sweating bullets, from Somalia to Sarajevo, the skies are swarming with Al-programmed bogeys that'll make you pay for your mistakes...with your life, Log on and engage in TFX. This time, you're not just playing games. Grab the controls of any of three USAF-spec flight models and spread democracy over five million square miles of topographically accurate landscape. Ocean Ocean of America 1855 O'Toole Avenue, Suite D-102 San Jose, CA 95131 (408) 954-0201 Suite D102 TFX 1993 Ocean of America. All rights reserved. Ocean is a registered trademark of Ocean Software Limited. Circle Reader Service #97 WIN the TFX Contest. «Be A Real Fighter Pilot\" See Package for Details. "


"long to come to the shelves. Fear not-Litil Divil has now arrived and should cause quite a stir. Basically it is a cartoon-style graphic game with a very daft plot involving recovering pieces of pizza. If you can get beyond this tacky storyline you'll find that the keyboard or mouse will control the actions of a comical demon as he navigates a large and varied subterranean world. Gremlin Graphics' Litil Divil The locations are full of puzzles and problems that mostly require and insensitive interface. In the real McCoy, an element of dexterity and can often only be it's often the delicate feel and skill on the solved after considerable trial and error. putting surface that makes all the differTreasure rooms are dotred around the world ence-forget this in Ryder Cup Golf!Nothing allowing you to spend the gold coins littered beats the real thing, and as a second best there through the locations and buy special items are far better programs lining the fairways. and provisions. You Litil Divil, You! The graphics are similar to those used in the The star this month is a delightful graphic Don Bluth laserdisk games, but Lihul Divis adventure called Litil Divil. Produced by stuffed full of game play and long term enjoyGremlin Graphics and with its final coding ment. The sound effects add considerably being produced in the Emerald Isle, Divil has and the interface, although a bit quirky, been a show stopper at the European trade works well. The main plank of this product shows for a few years. It has been delayed and slaved and is the devilish sense of humor that perv is the devilish sense of humor that pervades suffer the from start to finish. Your character takes some fate of so many products that just take too real stick-from being eaten by swamp creatures to having pianos fall on his head. It's all great fun and there is a fair amount of \"cartoon violence.\" If Tom and Jerry disturbs you, so will Litil Divil, and it's as funny! So, unusually, it looks as if it's been worth the wair, and Litil Divil is almost certain ro result in a Slightly Bigger Divil sequel and a host of clones from other software houses. The above games and any of the other games mentioned in past columns can be obtained from: Strategic Plus Software, 28 D&E The Courtyard, High Street, Hampton Hill, Middlesex. TW12 IPD Tel 01144-81-977-8088, Fax 01144-81-977-4822, or on CompuServe at 1000014,3466 Computer Adventure World has moved. Their new address: Computer Adventure World, Bank Buildings, Cha Birkenhead England, L41 6E). Tel: 01144-51-666-1132 Robin Matthews can be contacted on CompuServe on 76004,3456 and welcomes comments and requests (within reason!). Cow THE MOST COMPLETE ADVENTURE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM ON THE MARKET TODAY! INTRODUCING... THE TRIAD CAMPAIGN SYSTEM FOR GAMEMASTERS 4 USES Windows 3.1* SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS IBM/Comp with Windows 3.1*  Minimum 2 megs hard drive space 4 megs RAM RULES Designed to implement detailed campaign backgrounds and scenarios  Adaptable to multiple campaign backgrounds or worlds MAPS World size to tactical  Markers display key locations, characters and creatures  Sizeable display windows. Zoom  Applicable sound, graphics and text with map markers SPELLCASTING Adjustable parameters to create different effects. System calculates spell characteristics and appropriate level, area and range SYSTEM FEATURES Example adventure included. Formula calculator Rules documented in context sensitive help files with cross-references  Encounter generator loads all data, no need to consult charts or books . Game clock and calendar. Player's Guide . Gamemaster's Guide COMBAT Damage calculated and subtracted from target. Combat results returned in text form suitable to read to your players Spell effects applied automatically to all creatures in effect area . Set character destinations and targets and let the system perform the movements and attacks CHARACTERS Character creation quick and easy or as detailed as desired Detailed skills, professions, stats and abilities ORDER NOW! Mail check or money order for $39.95. Add $4.00 for shipping and handling Call or write for more information (904) 494-3165 GAMEMASTER'S Clip Art and Sound Clips Disks Available $12.00 ea; $10.00 with TCS order. (Specily 8 Bit Mono or 8 Bit Stereo for Sound Clips) Additional Player's Guides available, 3 for $10.00 Nawu Triad Institute PO Box 11246. Pensacola, FL 32524-1246 Florida residents and applicable sales tax Circle Reader Service #92 \"Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corp Page 100 Computer Gaming World "


"STE ..;:09.873 RYOTAK The Officially Licensed 1:09.879 INDYCAR RACING 236 2328 et 183 S TOID COURSE TV1 TOYOTA PIMO How fast can you go INDYCAR Racing? Take the default car and hit the road running. 0:0 1:53.08 Practice all eight tracks. When you're good enough, go for more. TV 1 INDYCAR * More real set-ups, game play and graphics than any racing simulation ever had before. ALUMAX PATA 0:06:02.02 Vokie PAPYRUS IBM PC screens shown. Actual screens may vary. 1 800 87 4 46 07 Distributed exclusively worldwide by Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. 18061 Fitch Avenue Irvine, CA 92714  USA IndyCar and the helmet logo are trademarks of The Indianapolis Motor Speedway Corporation, under exclusive license to Championship Auto Racing Teams, Inc. Indianapolis 5000: The Simulation is a trademark of The Indianapolis Motor Speedway Corporation Indianapolis 500 is a registered trademark of The Indianapolis Motor Speedway Corporation. Papyrus is a trademark of Papyrus Design Group, Inc. Virgin Is a trademark of Virgin Enterprises, LTD. Circle Reader Service #102 "


"REVIEW Hitler Was A Litter-Bug. . Merit Software's Kronologi The Nazi Paradox by Charles Ardai 3 1711 udging by its packaging and ads, you'd did they do next? What atrocities did they Now, maybe it's just me, but I'm getting a think Kronolog: The Nazi Paradox wants perpetrate? What crimes against humanity?\" little tired of the use of ecological miscreants to be a hard-core exercise in speculative I'll tell you, but you'd better sit down first. as our era's villain of choice. To begin with, I history, grappling with the classic \"What This is serious stuff. The Nazis.... find ecological \"crimes\" extremely uninterIf question—What if the Nazis had won Let me take a deep breath. esting: as awful as their consequences are, they World War II?-in the manner of Robert are almost never committed on purpose Okay. The Nazis.... Harris' Fatherland or Phillip K. Dick's The (Exxon did not set out to smother the Valdez Man In the High Castle. Alas, Kronolog has Failed to recycle. wildlife in crude oil) and are typically comnothing so noble or purposeful in mind. Yes, you heard me right. Those dastardly mitted by faceless bureaucracies rather than What Kronolog wants to be, as it turns out, is goosesteppers, now in charge of most of the individuals, which greatly diminishes their Captain Planet-meets-Logan's Run, with bits known world, make the most of their power dramatic potential. of Indiana Jones, Mission: Impossible, and Back by leaving empty soda cans on their desks. Second of all, I always get the feeling that I to the Future thrown in for good measure. They have plastic ferns in their offices, beam being fed ecological storylines the way a cause they've polluted the air too dutiful mother feeds her children strained much for real ones to survive. Over peas. It's something good for me, I'm told, the 75 years since the end of the often explicitly—to which I reply that I don't war, they've made several endanwant something good for me, I want entergered species extinct. They also use tainment. Political advocacy and social unsanitary sewage-handling pracpropaganda have their place, but I don't want tices. It's enough to make your blood boil. them forcibly injected into my computer games, not least of all because as bad as some The Not-So Nazis game designers are at designing games, they are infinitely worse as preachers of corrective What else do they do? Well, they philosophy. Their P.C. nostrums typically threaten and hiss in Peter Lorre bear the same relation to persuasive argumenvoices; they collect tacky art; they y tation that strained peas bear to the normal put out «termination orders\" The game features lots of skulking about sort: they're mush, pap, pabulum, call them sort they're mi against their political enemies; they wear pewhat you will. hiding in barrels, and crawling through airculiar facial hair; in the case of one scientist, vents: a surfeit of secret passwords, codes, and they ear, and are eaten by, giant cockroaches. Finally, there is the matter of the Nazis. double agents; some Native American spirit But mostly they pollute. In the naive and Computer gaming na magic hokum that comes out of nowhere sanctimonious manner of so Nazis-realistic Nazis, cardboard Nazis, (and then, thankfully, disappears); and, for many recent games (not to the finale, a bang-up action sequence that motto Kronolog: The Nazi Paradox mention films and television quotes, of all things, the Die Hard movies shows), Kronolog paints \"eco(\"Auf Wiedersehen, schmuck!\" being the PG cide\" as the worst evil imaginTITLE: Kronolog: The Nazi Paradox PRICE: version of Bruce Willis' unprintable signature able and asks you to save the SYSTEM: line). All this is strung together by a storyline REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, 2MB RAM, world» in much the way an aged VGA graphics, 25MB hard based on the premise that in 1945, through flower child might stop you on drive space, mouse: supports AdLib, PAS and Sound Blaster subterfuge, the Third Reich developed the a street corner and exhort you sound cards atomic bomb first and dropped it on the PROTECTION: to save the whales, the spotted Folding cardboard device DESIGNER: John Henson United States. owl, the coral reef, the ozone PUBLISHER: Merit Software Dallas, TX \"All right,\" I can hear you say, «so the Nazis layer, or some other vicrim du (214) 385 2353 won the war; that's a fine premise, bur what jour. $69.95 IBM INVIARUR Page 102 Computer Gaming World "


"The Video Game SOLUTION Stuck Again? Have you ever played a game and got as far as you possibly could but didn't finish? Is the frustration really worth it? The Mislea fame Would you like... ... to be invincible, have unlimited lives or grand scores? ... hints that aren't provided in the manual or help-line? to see some of the graphics & concepts of a game before purchasing it? If you have answered yes to any of the above questions. The Video Game Solution CD is the answer for you! This CD includes solutions, hints editors or cheats for popular games such as: 7th Guest Alone in the Dark  Amazon Guardians . Another World  Bio Menace. Black Cauldron  Borrowed Time  Castle of Dr. Brian Chronoquest. Caesar  Circuits Edge Civilization. Coaster Tracks Commander Keen  Dare to Dream  Deadline . Deja Vu II, Lost in Las Vegas  Demon's Forge  Dragon's Lair Dune Ecoquest  Elvira 1 & 2. Eric the Unready. Fascination. Freddy Pharkas. Future Wars. Goldrush Grand Prix Hacker Hare Raising Havoc  Heart of China Hero's Quest  Hitchhiker's Guide Hollywood Hijinks. Hugo's House of Horrors 1 to 3. Iceman Indiana Jones 3 / Fate of Atlantis . Jinxter Karateka  Ken's Labyrinth  King Quest 1 to 5  Lands of Lore Leather Goddess 1 & 2 Legend of Zyca Leisure Suit Larry 1 to 5. Lemmings 2. Loom. Manhunter NY & San Francisco  Monster Bash  Martian Memorandum  Master of Orion Maximum Overkill  Police Quest 1 to 3  Planets Edge Prince of Persia 1& 2  Privateer . Quest for Glory  RR Tycoon. Robin Hood Search for the King SimCity  Sexyvixens  Spear of Destiny  Wolfenstein 3D X-Wing AND MANY MORE! This CD-ROM also contains the top 20 SHAREWARE games on the market ! Microform SOLD AT BETTER COMPUTER STORES! TO ORDER DIRECT CALL 1-800-465-CDCD (1-800-465-2323) "


"12 lation procedure that takes more quired for years) since the computer refuses than two and a half hours if atto do it for you. tempted on a fragmented hard \"At least,\" you say, \"you can stand in the drive. Note that the game is then center of a room and interact with the various literally unplayable in the sense objects around you, right?\" Nope. Try to read that it might take up to half a mina label on a box that's two feet away from your ute of disk access between any two character and the game says \"You can't read EVA NETZEL moves until you run a defragthat from here.\" Try to open a door from one Welcome, Herr Hoffmann. Thank menter to optimize your hard foot away and the game says \"You can't open you for responding 50 quickly to Proconsul Zimmer's request. drive. (When I asked the publisher that from here.\" why their game exhibits this pecuAnd what do you suppose the designers put liar behavior, they chalked it up to on almost every screen, considering that they the enormous amount of digitized have made moving around obstacles such a Raiders of the Lost Ark Nazis, Schindler's List speech, which is true; yer other pain in the backside? That's right-obstacles! is_but using Nazis as your villains and games contain comparable amounts of speech It took me eight minutes, no exaggeration, to then accusing them of no worse than ecologiand run just fine on fragmented drives.) move from one side of a Mexican pueblo to cally destructive acts is, to my mind, like using Next, note that the speech in question sufthe other. Getting off a scientist's porch was the Huns but accusing them only of mistreatfers from dinner theater quality delivery and a breeze, comparably, at only five. ing rheir horses, or using Jeffrey Dahmer but sub-dinner theater quality scripting, on the \"So,\" you say, \"it takes five or eight minutes only accusing him of keeping the wattage of order of «I hear you're doing some kick-assofa of clicking all over the place to get Hoffman his refrigerator turned too high. These are the work\" and \"I've just doomed the world for to go where you want him to-that's not so Nazis, for crying out loud! If the worst they eternity!\" Add the fact that many sentences bad. Patience is a virtue, right?\" Wrong! Just do is erode the soil, foul the air, and to keep you on your toes, the designcommit the occasional necessary ers have chosen to fill up the last few crime, then you're talking about scenes of the game with several puzSPECTRE, SMERSH, the Republizles that are time-sensitive. Spend cans, Big Business, the Illuminati, or more than 30 seconds in Dr. Grosssomeone, but not the Nazis. man's office and you're dead; spend Never mind that no mention is made more than five in the church baseof torture or genocide or rapacious ment and your condom will blow up geographical acquisitiveness; the (don't ask). height of irresponsibility is that in There's plenty more to criticize painting the Nazis primarily as coldabout Kronolog graphics that range hearted polluters, of whose errors they from decent to rotten; endless, hardwill themselves presumably be the bigto-access text files on your Personal gest victims, the designers alleviate the Information Manager; and the fact Nazis' burden of guilt. Kronolog's Naare cut off («I just want to say goodb—\") that all conversations are of the nonzis are willfully negligent, self-destructive when the computer starts searching for the interactive, sit-back-and-watch variety. Add fools, but not the oppressive, sadistic, wannext sentence, and the fact that the game the occasional program crash, an ugly color tonly cruel butchers we know from history. doesn't even attempt to synchronize the scheme, a poorly devised plot (your character To put it another way, Kronologs Nazis are audio with the characters' wildly flailing lips, is trying to save his son, but he is still missing James Wart instead of Josef Mengele. As and you are likely to reach the same concluat game's end), and the regrettable cockmuch as I disliked James Watt, I'd much sion I did the speech might as well have roach-eating scene, and you've got a game rather live in a country run by Watt than been left out. that might have been used as a Gestapo interspend two heartbeats in the same room as Instead, what they left out are many of the rogation device. This game is exclusively for Mengele. Sadly, the designers of Kronolog technological niceties that adventure game masochists, and only uncritical, historically don't seem to understand the difference. players have grown accusmyopic ones at that. CGW An Interactive Movie To Nazi tomed to, without which Kronolog feels like a relic from \"Enough time spent on your soapbox, Arhalf a decade ago. What's dai,\" you say. \"Suppose I like playing games missing? To begin with, a with ecological themes? What if a cheesy movement system that allows eco-adventure is exactly what I have been you simply to click on the looking for?\" spot in the graphic window Well, then, more power to you—every where you want your characone's entitled to their own tastes. However, I ter to go. Instead, in Kronolog should tell you that you'd better keep lookyou must move your characMARK HOFFMANN ing. Even if Kronolog satisfies you with its ter right, then down, then Proconsul Zinner called me storyline, it is sure to disappoint with its over to discuss our newest left, then up, maneuvering development ... it looks very clumsy design. him around obstacles (somepromising. Start with a mysteriously elongated instalthing no major game has rePage 104 Computer Gaming World "


"ReadySoft Incorporated & Epicenter Interactive Present DRAGONSLAR 000 mm 20 C000 Louw her You're in for the adventure of your life... Dragon's Lair is back and better than ever on CD-ROM! This full arcade version is packed with spectacular animation and digitized sound, bringing Dragon's Lair to life like never before! SEGA You control the actions of Dirk the Daring, a valiant knight, on a quest to rescue the fair Princess from the clutches of an evil dragon. Fight your way through the castle of the dark wizard who has enchanted it with treacherous monsters and obstacles. Reel Maggie 3 DO also available for IBM PC & Macintosh Lead on brave adventurer... your quest awaits! N d ReadySoft Incorporated Licensed by Sega Enterprises Ltd. for play on the Sega CDM system. Sema and Sena co are trademarks of Sena Enterprises TIJ. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 300, the 300 logos, and Interactive Multiplayer are trademarks of The 300 Company \"REELMAGIC\" is a trademark of Sigma Designs, Inc. \"Dragon's Lair\" is a registered trademark of Bluth Group, Ltd. -01993. Character Designs 1993 Don Bluth: 1993 all audio, visual and concept used under the exclusive license of Epicenter Interactive Inc. Programming 1993 ReadySoft Incorporated. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED ReadySoft Incorporated 30 Wertheim Court, Suite 2 Richmond Hill, Ontario, Canada L4B 1B9 Tel: (905) 731-4175 Fax: (905) 764-8867 Circle Reader Service #106 VEADYO "


"REVIEW The New Age Of Crystal Power Casady & Greene's Crystal Crazy Revamps A Classic Mac Addiction By Douglas A. Winship Score: * DEH * D e ally good computer game sequels are feels a little like running around in penny picture frames that float around the screen. hard to find. They usually are so difloafers on an ice rink. Probably the hardest to accomplish on levels ferent from the original thar they are The ship has a single gun chat fires bullers with heavy critter problems is Pool, in which a different game entirely, or so bogged down in the direction the ship is traveling, at speeds you must move the ship sequentially over with \"enhancements\" that the playability of slightly faster than the ship's. Unfortunately, eight or more billiard balls rolling around the the original is destroyed. Crystal Crazy, this means that to shoot something that's playing area. The most fun new objective is Casady & Greene's sequel to Crystal Quest, chasing you (a very common situation), you Vandalism, where you shove various fragile shows how to do a sequel right. The objects such as goldfish bowls and busts player now has a variety of weapons and 1,120,825 **21 Wave: 20 Time:0:36 of Julius Caesar into the walls to shatter even some protective shields, has more them. At the higher levels, escaping to the things to do besides loot the crystal next level requires completion of more fields, and must fight his or her way than one of these objectives. After cach through a whole new set of bizarre critwave, you may be awarded a completion Exa ters. Despite all the new features, Crystal bonus based upon how fast you escaped. Crazy is no more difficult to play than A new wrinkle added in Crystal Crazy is its hallowed predecessor, and is just as the Bonus Wave which appears after fun. every third successfully completed level. All you Mac-types who've joined the On these levels, there are no Nasties or faith since Crystal Quest disappeared navigational hazards. You can zoom from store shelves will need to get up to around collecting all the free points and speed with basic game play. The first Smart Bombs lying around. The only thing to understand about Crystal Crazy must first turn around and move directly problem is the gigantic steel walls closing is that it is a mindless shoot-em-up. You move towards it (don't miss!). Another tactic is to in to crush the ship if you wait too long to a ship around the playing area to accomplish use Smart Bombs that kill everything on the escape. some task or other while avoiding mines and screen and provide a few precious seconds of There are 20 different Nasties in Crystal other hazards. All of this is complicated by peace and quiet. Smart Bombs are limited in Crazy, of which all are new except for the hordes of attacking creatures with wondrous supply, but more can be found lying around Parasites. Those players who are Quest veternames, such as Zinkleflashoxicationizers and on most levels. Using them is really a legal sort ans will recognize them as the white, \"MFracturefluffies, whose sole purpose is to of cheating, so be sure to collect as many as shaped buggers who are so relentless in their shoot and/or bump into you, with unfortupossible. pursuit that they even managed to follow into nate results. Once the task for cach level is the sequel. Nasties are released at various rates completed, doors open up to provide an es Kinda Puzzlin', These Critters from dispensers around the screen until you cape to the next level. With each higher level, The point of the game-if it can be said are killed or escape, or you smart bomb them the creatures get appropriately nastier, and with a straight face to actually have one is into tomorrow. Nasties come in two sorts: are accompanied by a collection of very those who want to shoot the ship, and those to clear cach levels objective as quickly as funny, and in some cases slightly naughty, possible. If the original Crystal Quest could be who want to touch it. Touching the ship sound effects. said to have a weakness, it was this \"open the always results in unfortunate consequences, escape hatch to the next level» usually immediate death. Those who don't Slip Slidin' Away approach. The standard tactic kill the ship are some of the Crystal Crazy was to run the ship over all the Crystal Crazy's method of motion is somewhat unique in action games. Moving the crystals scattered about the screen, which became a bit borCrystal Crazy mouse in a direction does not move the ship $49.95 in that direction, it thrusts the ship in that ing after about 30 levels. Crystal Any Mac with System 6.0.2 or Crazy alleviates this monotony direction. When you stop moving the mouse, higher, 2MB RAM (3MB with System 75, 3.5MB hard drive space the ship keeps right on going until it hits by adding four more possible obProtection: something (bad) or reaches the edge of the jectives. On some levels, you Designer: Patrick Buckland Publisher: Casady & Greene screen and stops (not necessarily bad). The must assemble one or more jigSalinas, CA 93908 result is a lag in response that takes some saw puzzles. Another objective is (800)359-4920 getting used to. Maneuvering in Crystal Crazy either erasing or filling in several Title: Price: Requirements: None Page 106 Computer Gaming World "


"MERCHANT (PRINCE & VENICE For mon 486 012 LOOP Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. Masters of the World EXPLORE THE WORLD!! Your family can rule the high seas, and crush the competition in this all out, global conquest game. Find the hidden treasures in far off lands and establish trade routes. Your popularity is at stake as you involve yourself with the church and state. The others in power say you can't do it.... Do you have the strength?? Delve into the political power struggle, entrench yourself in the ruling establishment of the church, and trade in exotic commerce to become the master of the world .... \"THE MERCHANT PRINCE.\". Historical and Random World Maps (Billions) Four Players Modem Play Complete Scoring History Strong Artificial Intelligence  Both Land and Naval Trade Routes Build Your Own Road SystemWorldwide! Manipulate the Local Politicians  Inspire the Church and People The \"Merchant Prince\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: (908) 788-2799 or by writing to QQP 495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #103 "


"21,650 Ibave: 5 Time:0:01 more interesting new Nasties. Score: Vlmlts, for instance, only slow down the ship, making it hard to escape the other Nasties on the screen. Vlimlts also leave antidore pellers behind them, but hitting these can be deadly too, as the uncontrolled burst of speed they impart might run the ship into a mine or other hazard. There are lots more new critters, all of which richly deserve extermination. Over all, the new set of Nasties is a much tougher bunch than in the old Crystal Quest. This, combined with the more complex objectives in Crystal Crazy, would make the game almost impossible to play effectively, had the designers not also introduced the special guns and shields. These are left scattered around the playing area, along with Crystals, Smart Bombs, Bonus Points, and even the occasional free ship. The five different shields offer protection from different threats. At the low end, the Rubber Hat protects against bad driving by saving the ship from collisions with Mines, the edges of Gates, Dispensers, etc. The best shield for most occasions is the Mace-Head, which makes the ship deadly to the creatures it touches, rather than vice-versa. The five special guns pack the ship with better offensive punch. The Multi-Gun, for instance, fires four shots simultaneously in various directions. Guns and Shields are lost whenever a ship is lost. Ships can mount only one Shield and one Gun at a time, so when wearing the Mace-Head you must be careful not to accidentally turn it in for a wimpy Rubber Hat! transfer to 16-color mode by itself and reset the monitor to its previous setting after the player quits. To me, this speaks volumes about the developer's commitment to a quality product. Too few of even the best Mac game developers provide this simple and much appreciated feature when a game must be run in a specific color mode. There are only two problems with the game that I can see. First, it is extremely hard to play in black and white, only because it becomes almost impossible to tell the difference between billiard balls without actually reading the numbers. This can take a fatal amount of time with Git-Brains blowing up and spreading shrapnel all over the screen. The other problem is that Crystal Crazy is not really suitable for wasting large amounts of time with a PowerBook. First, most PowerBooks are still B&W, and second, unless the player is a trackball jock of a sort I've never seen, the game really needs a mouse. The only other concern I have is for the designers and their unsettling obsession with cows. By now it should be abundantly clear that Crystal Crazy is a pretty spiffy game. It's fun, casy to learn, silly, doesn't get boring quickly, and indulges our violent tendencies egregiously—but in a manner unlikely to prompt a Senate Hearing. CGW \"We're Safe! Nothing Out There But Black & White Critters\" Crystal Crazy can be played in black and white or color. In color, the game uses its own graphics system, called MegaDraw, which runs only in 16-color mode. The game will What Do PC Jet Jockeys Want? NEW PRODUCT The Mark II WCS (Programmable Throttle; Also Allows you to Program your Joystick) Hair-Raising Sorties Death Defying Maneuvers Heroics Victory Realism HOTAS\" And.. FCS (Joystick) TurustMaster Controls RCS (Rudder Pedals) 10150 SW Nimbus Ave. Portland, OR 97223-4337 PHONE (503/689-3200 FAX (503)620-8094 Page 108 Circle Reader Service #117 Computer Gaming World "


"OTHER GAMES MAY TALK. THIS ONE HAS A VOICE. Star Trek: The Next Generation's PATRICK STEWART LANDS OF LORE: The Throne of Chaos Over Free Mist of Doom Vertex W ith Patrick Stewart as the voice of King Richard, Lands of Lore has a royal advantage over other fantasy games: An actor of real authority in a role of authority, at the head of a huge cast of heroes and villains who speak, rant and roar their way through the most vocally interactive role-playing adventure yet devised. (A mammoth 130 MB of digitized speech makes it possible.) The Dark Army is on the move, led by the shapeshifting sorceress Scotia—and each time you meet her she'll be more powerful and terrifying than the last. But your powers can grow, too. Experienced-based character development makes great warriors of those who take arms (in real-time combat) against a sea of indescribable monsters and makes mighty wizards of those who cast LargerThan-Life spells. ANA SAMAN Explore ancient del castles, living forests, hidden lairs, bustling towns, haunted caverns, through 30 enchanted NDS LORE levels made vividly real by more than 20 MB of compressed art and special effects. For the PC CD-ROM Westwood\" DISTRIBUTE EMILNVELY BY LANDS OF LORE THE THRONE OF CHAOS is a trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc. 1994 Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Ltd. Circle Reader Sonice #119 "


"REVIEW Terminators Make For Poor HouseGUESTS Bethesda Goes On A Shoot-em Up Rampage S E NAZA CFFICE by Dave Pyron Two years ago, a little-known sharemust search through the entire complex, most human-like machines are the Enforcers. ware company from Texas created scooping up medikits, armor kits, and weapClothed in suit and tie, these androids yell out 1 what was to become the most popular ons on the way to the ultimate encounter with \"Halt!\" at initial contact. They also have a acrion game in recent memory. The game, Mera-Node. The weapon fanatic has eight relatively intelligent AI and will give chase if Wolfenstein 3-D from id Software, swept types of hardware, from a weak 9mm pistol they catch sight of you. It was indeed an eerie across the U.S., stealing much time from to the powerful PPC, with which to truncate feeling to duck through a doorway and slam productive people, and perhaps contributing his enemies' appendages. Naturally, these it shut, only to have it opened seconds later to this nation's economic recession. weapons are scattered throughout the comby a virtually unstoppable man of metal! As is typical in entertainment software, plex and get proportionally better as you proAround level 9, a weird, haunting sound other companies immediately began to emugress deeper into the Cyberdyne labyrinth. will alert players to the Terminator robots. lare Wolfenstein 3-D and its success. One such The grenade launcher and shotgun are sinThese are shiny metal caricatures of humans, company was Bethesda Softworks and their gle shot weapons, but have devastating firewith red baleful eyes, and a leering grin. The form of sincerest flattery is The Terminator: power. Assault weapons, sub-machine guns, slow hiss of these hard-to-kill monsters makes Rampage, an action-packed, kill or be killed, hairs stand on end and skin crawl maze-like shoot-out in the now-familiar 3-D at first contact. perspective. If Wolfenstein 3-D didn't have Meta-Borgs-half-man, halfenough Nazis to knock off, or if the chainmachine—can take an enormous gun didn't have quite enough firepower, then amount of punishment before bethis all-out shooting fest will set up thousands ing incapacitated. Literally hunof baddies for you to violently knock down. dreds of these slow, hulking machines haunt the passageways in You Are Not Sarah Connor the lower levels, armed with devastating automatic machine guns. Rampage begins with an interesting cineThe Meta-Guards, with their matic sequence, introducing the player to the backward-jointed legs and aweplot. The premise, a close cousin to the plors some firepower, are fast-moving of the well-known movies, Terminator and robots that constitute the final dehovies, Terminator and and a chain gun are available en route to the and a chain gun are available en route to the fense of the complex. The closing encounter fansen Terminator 2, sets the stage with the player final showdown. One of the major challenges acting as a special forces commando, sent with the Mera-Node \"Minotaur» was rather in the game is discovering the 16 parts of the back in time from the year 2024 to 1984. The a disappointment, since other than being bigPPC super-weapon. Its assembly is a necesmission? To destroy the Meta-Node, a cunger, badder, tougher, and having more firesary task intrinsic to the play sequence, and ning machine zapped back in time by Skynet, no small amount of time will be spent prowlpower, it was nothing remarkably different the evil Artificial Intelligence bent on the than the previous 2,240 metallic monsters. ing all corners of the complex searching for destruction of all mankind. cach essential part. Daze in the Maze The Meta-Node's strategy was to infiltrate Relentless... Or Repetitive? The first-person, 3-dimensional view of the the giant arms-producing complex called Cyplaying screen displays the digitized walls, berdyne, a hi-tech, multi-level building perMechanical monsters come conveniently corridors and offices with amazing clarity, fect for establishing a base. In that base packaged in seven shapes and sizes, but their although the game suffers from the familiar Mera-Node planned to manufacture the strengths are in their great numthousands of lethal robots, androids, cyborgs, bers. I actually shot and destroyed Terminator: Rampage needed to wipe out the race. At the time the 2,241 machines over the course player begins the game, the Meta-Node has of one game, and that with the THE taken control of the Cyberdyne complex and game difficulty on moderate! TITLE: Terminator: Rampage TER VINATOR PRICE: $69.95 is lurking in the deepest basement, trying to 2,241 monsters! Ye Gods! SYSTEM: break into the supercomputer network in REQUIREMENTS: 386 or better, 4MB RAM, The most common opponents VGA graphics. 18MB hard order to start World War III. Obviously, this within the depths of Cyberdyne drive space, joystick or beast of a machine needs a radical re-adjustmouse; supports most are the seeker and scout robots. major sound cards ment, preferably in the form of a molecular \"They move around the complex DESIGNER: V. J. Lakshman PUBLISHER: Bethesda Softworks dispersion treatment by the player's Particle with speed and precision, search1370 Piccard Drive Projection Cannon (PPC). (301) 926-8300 ing out all human life-forms for Taking the role of humanity's savior, you immediate termination. The IBM Page 110 Computer Gaming World "


"T Wing Commander on the 3DO System! Fuller, Richer, More Visual than ever before! EXPERIENCE in the 27th century, mankind is locked in a deadly war with the Kilrathi Empire, a race of vicious aliens bent on destroying the Terran Confederation. Launching from the TCS Tiger's Claw, you and your faithful wingman fearlessly battle the Kilrathi aces in deepspace dogfights to save all of humanity. Actual screens may vary.  Dodge missiles and hurtling asteroids as you face the most ruthless Kilrathi pilots in their deadly array of ships.  Experience full digital sound as you hear mission briefings, your wingman's emphatic warnings and all other speech sequences. Listen to orchestrated musical scores that change as action escalates. KM ORIGINS  Marvel at the stunning 16-bit, 3-D graphics and believable cinematics that command a perfect performance from 3DO technology in thousands of colors! COMMANDER We create worlds An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 Copyright  1994 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin, We create worlds and Wing Commander are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. 3D0 and the 3D0 logos are trademarks of the 3D0 Company. Available at a software retailer near you, or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. 3 DO Circle Reader Service #100 "


"complex. The walls are covered at The game is essentially a shooting gallery, times with photos, paintings, flickwith the player being forced to explore pracering monitors, and other paratically every square inch of each level to find phernalia. the necessary elevator pass card and the parts Like Wolfenstein 3D the environto the PPC in order to advance down to the ment creates a great sense of antici next level. This exploration requires the pation. You must always be elimination of virtually every enemy unit, TARGET ID checking behind and to the sides turning the game into a long and tedious stalk when coming to a fork in the pasthrough 32 levels of endless corridors, sageway or a large open area. Ar bangity-bang-bang all the way. Picture it in times, the sound of far-off doors LARGE your mind...2,241 dead machines and both opening and closing adds to the trigger fingers covered with blisters! When suspense. These audio effects were so realistic that at one point I \"blockiness\" when viewing very near objects. you finally reach the grand finale, the feeling is not a sense of accomplishment or satisfacCentered ar the bottom of the screen, the thought there was a prowler in his house, tion, but of relief that the game is finally over. player's hands are shown in a semblance of instead of identifying the sound with the virtual reality, flesh tone and all, holding the game! True, Wolfenstein 3-D offered the same reselected weapon at the ready. The hands even peritive game play, but it was novel and it was jiggle in cadence with the player's gait. A Termination Schedule the first. Rampage offers a \"me-too\" product targeting window appears in the lower right Though it captures many of the elements with a design that emphasizes \"maximum corner when enemies are sighted within that made Wolf 3-D successful, it also shares overkill.\" Its thousands of monsters, miles of range. Weapon and ammunition informarange. Weapon and ammunition informa in it for in its failings. The hi-res objects in the world passageways, and multiple weapons may as... tion is shown in the upper left corner for easy are completely non-interactive. There are no thrill players with a shooting gallery mentality thrill players with a si ose frantic firefights. An burrons to press. no light switches to switch and the patience of a computer, but those overhead map displaying the immediate surand no cabinets to search. Even the retrieval looking for novelty in their 3-D shooters will rounding area proves extremely useful. of weapons, armor or medikit caches occurs want to pass Rampage by. It's a decent arRampage benefits from high-resolution automatically. At least Wolf 3-D had secret tempt for an imitative product, but you graphics, and the designers enhanced the passageways to discover, but with Rampage, might say that the effort to catch-up to and game immensely by scattering numerous what you see is what you get-no imaginacash in on id Software's success was doomed plants, chairs and dead bodies throughout the tion required. from the beginning. Cow COMPUTER BECOME THE ULTIMATE GAMER BASKETBALL THE infinit,  MPC COURT-SIDE COLLEGE BASKETBALL Included are 286 teams from the most recent season and 70 all-time greats  Player statistical accuracy from ability to tire and oul to overall contribution factor. Stats compiler. You determine style of play. whether to press or use 45 second clock, weather game played at home court or neutral site and much more! ACHIN BASKETBALL THE PRO GAME You're the coach and you choose line-ups, shot selection, style of play and much more. Stats compiler. Full team and individual player stats kept for up to an 82 game schedule. All players rated by actual statistics and tendencies  27 current teams and over 190 great teams from the past included. Standings and League Leaders! From REM Software ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $39.95 each. You may call in and order with VISA or Master Card. Please add $3.00 for shipping and handling. For more information, call or write for a free brochure. 1-800-477-7032 With the Infinity Machine\", you can make virtually any game bow to your every whim! With our easy to use realtime editing technology, you can add lives, edit character specs, and change weapons & abilities all without ever leaving your game. With our Infinity Code system, you can generate your own codes for easier access to game features! And when you're in a tough situation, Infinity Machine's slow motion feature gets the action back under your control. MasterCard LANCE HAFFNER GAMES $34.95.. U.S. VISA P.O. BOX 100594. NASHVILLE, TN 37224 615/366-8088 TO ORDER, CALL 313-457-1161 Circle Reader Service #72 Page 112 Circle Reader Service #108 Computer Gaming World "


"With All the Games Knocking at Your Door... ONLY ONE HAS THE POWER TO RIP YOU APARI Pech WHETHER SIRASIDAS Lock the doors, roll up the windows and hold onto your seat-Jurassic Park for the PC has arrived. Ocean's exclusive 3D texture-mapping process puts you in intimate contact with more than 100 tons of REAL dinosaur meat-in two nerve-splitting perspectives. Scope out the island and let razorsharp overhead graphics drop you in the middle of stampeding Brachiosaurs and Triceratops. Then strap on your \"Night Vision\" goggles and venture 3D-deep into the maze-filled corridors of the Visitor's Center, where you'll come eyeball-toeyeball with both Raptors and Spitters. And if that's not enough to make you sweat, remember...somewhere out there a famished T-Rex awaits-eager to show you a rip-roarin' good time. JURAS SIC PARK oceane ra Sre :0 Ocean of America, Inc. 1855 O'Toole Ave. Suite D-102 San Jose, CA 95131 (408) 954-0201 TM &  1992 Universal City Studios, Inc. & Amblin Entertainment Inc. All rights reserved. Ocean Soltware Authorized User Ocean is a registered trademark of Ocean Software Limited, HP Circle Reader Service #96 "


"STRATEGY JRIRT THE GENETICALLY PERFECT GENERAL HABITAT DE VIELD CENS WAL Unnatural Tactics For Maxis' Unnatural Selection by Ed Dille & Jolin Withers Tnnatural Selection, the uncharacterissince they already have a stable population of efficiency. As soon as a stable population of tic wargame from Maxis, is your zips, there is no need to use the SNI, but 200-300 theroids with homogeneous stats is average mad-scientist, brilliant gennothing could be further from the truth. established, turn the mutation dial up to cral, hassled by command, gotra breed warriWhen theroids with an abundance of one three and leave it for about five seconds before ors little game. But since there aren't any trait are added to the population, it tends to hitting the database. In the database cull out other games in that category, more than a few raise that trait in general. As such, create as the viruses first, then kill all the low scores in people out there might need a little help to many dominant maters as the fluid level will the particular trait you are breeding for until become the Ghengis Khan of the genetic allow and introduce them into the mix. Add you have around 50 to 100 theroids. Let this world. Never fear: read on and you will be ing some vision to the population at this time population stabilize and rebuild up to 200 provided with the information to give both doesn't hurt either. without any muration, then repeat the procbreeding and battlefield bravado. The real work begins as soon as the database ess. This will increase the beneficial stats in comes up. Now the ability to cull the popumanageable increments without putting the The Lab Or The Slab, lation is in your hands, and proper culling is whole population at risk. It's Up To You crucial. In a perfect world, we would be able The ultimate breeding goal is mare and The most important part of the game is to spend plenty of time sorting theroids of to spend plenty of time sorting theroids speed ratings of 255. Don't worry, you won't using the lab, and there are some important different types into little pens and carefully make this goal by the first battle, but scores techniques to maximize productivity during of over 100 in each category are these time constrained sequences. The first easily achievable. The only thing to trait you must emphasize is breeding. DiGiLiFE be careful of at this point is the cat Theroids that breed quicker than their com AL 2000 score. It needs to be kept down. An petition are more likely to conquer an island eat score of over 100 is going to than fighters. It might not be as glamorous to cause the theroids to want to eat outbreed the enemy as to fight them down, more than breed, and in food but it works. minimal battle conditions they will TE VIEWE CENSUS Experience shows zips are the best body die for want of supplies. Once these two goals are met, the retype for the breeding game, because by virtue mainder of the stats can be brought of their speed they also breed faster. When the game starts, three pens filled with an equal up to par, but at the start it is number of each body type are given. If the critical to get fast, love-minded walls between the pens are dropped, the hulk theroids. body type will come to dominate. Instead, The number in an optimum A strategy that works for us is to breed zips in an make a much larger pen around all three pens. population is a hard choice. The outer pen until they outnumber the others by 5:1. Fill it with food and let the zips out onto this Then you can release the other types and absorb more theroids alive, the more prelittle home-made range. When the zip poputheir traits into the population. cious time each culling takes. lation outnumbers the other types by about 5 However, if Griggs calls you to to 1, release the walls to the other pens. In this breeding for the perfect beast, but with Colobattle and you don't have enough troops manner the zips will dominate, but the traits nel Griggs there to help you along, it ready, death and dishonor are just a step of the other theroids will be assimilated into ildn't be too hard to remember that this away. The best population for sorting and the population. isn't a perfect world. In a combat zone, time zone, time culling seems to be just over 200. At this level, As soon as the Synthetic Neural Injectors of the or is of the essence. there are enough theroids to get a good varicomes on-line it can help strengthen the There is a technique to using the database ation when mutated, but few enough to do population. Many players may think that and mutation dials for optimum wartime quick sorts. However, in the later battles 200 MAX AAD QUANTIZE T FIGHTI TRTE I II 6_a NCLOSE TOTAL Page 114 Computer Gaming World "


"IMAGINE A GAMING DEVICE SO INTUITIVE IT'S LIKE NOT HAVING ONE AT ALL. CYBERMAN THE MOST ADVANCED WAY TO MASTER 3-D GAMES. Now moving in a game is as easy as thinking about it. Only CyberMan moves in three directions (x -y, and a and three rotations (pitch, yaw, and roll), which com relate directly to your moves inside a 3D game; your intuitive movements translate literally to the screen, It's also the only controller with tactile feedback that makes you a physical part of the game. CyberMan is avail able now at your local dealer, or call 1-800-732-2928 02 LOGITECH The Senseware Company YBERMA MAN trol Circle Reader Service #73 "


"WE'VE EERCHED THE WEST ISLAND. ACE YOU TEMPS ECRO SCONTO M TERITO 272 FIGHT 200 KID MATE 900 WALLS FOOD SPECO 9001 STRENGTH 200K STRUINA 200 KID VISZON-100 KIDA BBEL theroids aren't enough. The best solution perimeter. As soon as the first noise is to get a feel, though liberal use of saved maker runs out, drop theroids and supgames, exactly when Griggs is going to plies inside the perimeter. This gives call. Once the exact time of the bell's your creatures a few minutes to breed rolling is known, start letting your culled before wading into battle. population breed without limits two to Decoys can be used to seal small openfive minutes before the battle. At the start ings and make walls. Dropping a single HABITAT VIELE CENSUS E DATABASCE of the next lab sequence, kill any extras decoy on an opening will cause enough left over from the battle past your optibattling theroids to cluster that they will mum population. CRT 900 block the opening. By arranging the deAt first, population size can be trimmed coys inside the helicopters in a line, they universally by cutting down on the food will come down in a line on the landing 102 10 INJECT supply, but later, if breeding for low zone and make a wall with the same \"eat\", theroids can survive with no food Col. Griggs is always on your case, but you don't have properties. A bit of practice and the de(and this does come in handy on the to let him surprise you. Save the game at the coys make a good augmentation to the battlefield). When you reach this point, beginning of a scenario, play until Griggs appears, noise maker rings to give friendly noise maler ringe to note the time, and then start over using the time a few minutes must be spent killing off theroids time to breed up to strength. information to plan your strategy. the extra troops each lab sequence. To An important consideration of ferryminimize this, keep sending troops to the to the like in most like in most real battles) is air support. There ing troops and supplies is timing. The Stalfront, even when you have the island firmly are six helicopters available, three Sea Knights lions and Knights have different flying times, in control. The more troops left on the island. and three Sea Stallions. The Knights have a and it is an easy matter to accidentally drop the less precious time wasted in killing back much larger cargo capacity, but they are your troops in unintended «waves\", either in the lab. slower than the Stallions. There is also a lacking important supplies, getting to the And speaking of population, leave the little C-130, but it only provides generic food. battle after their supplies have been overrun pens to the folks with cushy research grants The helicopters are troop carriers, but they by the enemy, or arriving in numbers too back stateside. What you need are combat also carry supplies to the battlefield, and the small to survive. This can be avoided by troops, and lots of them. To this end, the use of supplies is an integral part of winning careful planning. Highlight an aircraft and proper pen ser up is one huge breeding pen all but the first couple of battles. Of the four put the cursor anywhere on an island and the that takes up almost the whole screen. Onc, food types, Lust is the most important. When flight time is shown beside the craft. Send out or maybe two, eight-block pens can be kept dropping your own troops, it is normally wise Knights, the slower machines, first. Then for a tiny bit of segregation, but bigger is to drop liberal amounts of lust-inducing food highlight the Stallions and set the cursor on generally better. with them. Remember, breeding is the key to the same landing zone. When the numbers winning. Bran and Rage can be dropped And with the small pens we come to the last for ETA of the Knights and flight time for the point about the lab: perfection. There among enemies to kill them off. Stallions are the same, launch the Stallions. will be those times where the perfect The other point of aircraft control is the theroids are among the population, but C-130. Since all the C-130 can do is drop getting their traits to spread is just about normal food, it is an easy matter to conimpossible. There is a very chancy trick trol it. Just send it out as often as possible that can be performed to perfect your to paint\" friendly areas with food. It is population, assuming the mate scores are sometimes easy to forget about the C-130 all at 255 and stamina is reasonably high. in the heat of combat, but that is a dire As a general rule, you never want to cull mistake, because the food the cargo plane below 50 or so theroids, but with luck, a provides is \"free\"; that is, it doesn't count high \"mate\" population can reproduce against your total available supplies of with only 9-18 theroids. If a small numfood. Using the C-130 to its optimum ber of perfect creatures can be isolated in can be the difference between happy time, there is a good chance of getting troops and hungry troops. them to breed true. There is also a good After dropping theroids and supplies chance of killing them all off. As such, Using a noise maker, you can create a landing zone there isn't much to do but watch what amidst enemy creatures. By encircling the first noise before attempting this dicey procedure, maker in a ring of others, you can create a safe happens. Maxis provides a satellite that ensure you have a back up population perimeter in which your troops can breed for a can induce certain behaviors in a single working in the main area. few precious seconds. theroid, but when most islands are rapTwo other items are available from supidly populated with a thousand or more Battle Stations plies: noise makers and decoys. The proper troops, the only real effect of the satellite is to make you feel like you're doing something It is fine to muck about in the lab, but the application of noise makers and decoys is the useful. As such, Unnatural Selection, reinreal test of mettle is what the theroid warriors difference between winning and losing many forces the most basic lesson of command: do on the battlefield, and even though a battles. Noise makers can be used to get a prior planning prevents poor performance. designer never feels ready, sooner or later the clear landing zone for your theroids. One of It's tough to be relegated to the role of spectender little theroids have to be pushed out of the best techniques is to drop a single noise tator, but the guiding general is often little the nest to go and kill everything in sight. The maker in a relatively open area. After a couple more than that once the action begins. Cow most important element in the battle (just of minutes, drop a ring of noise makers in a 222 HIP COMMAND BRITTING EN SATCAM SCORE ETH STALLION STATLETARGET ECTEENING  CETUTKINT SCHITUL LUN 1 IN DICIT Page 116 Computer Gaming World "


"AN ORIGIN INTERACTIVE MOVIE tripped of memory, artificially enhanced with both human and alien technology, you are intended to be the perfect untraceable assassin for the scheming Mondite's master-stroke. But it's more than a science-fiction computer game it's an ORIGIN Interactive Movie. We've made a movie for you to star in, not just another game to play. Your interaction advances the story as you take your animated 3-D synthetic \"actor\" through a dramatic action-packed adventure. Actual screens may vary.  Employs the camera and editing techniques found in your favorite movies from varied camera angles to rapid-fire cut sequences, long shots and closeups for emotional impact.  Eliminates the artificial breaks between interactive and viewed portions of a game the story is melded into a single cinematic experience.  Directs the pacing and tempo so that the plot flows swiftly but smoothly, fueled by your decisions. FOR A GREAT GAME EXPERIENCE, WE RECOMMEND AN INTEL486 DX2 OR PENTIUM PROCESSOR-BASED SYSTEM. FOR LITERATURE ON INTEL PROCESSORS, CALL 1-800-756-8766 TM ORIGIN Copyright 1994 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. BioForge and ORIGIN Interactive Movie are trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin and We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. Intel, Intel486 and Pentium are trademarks of Intel Corporation. Available at a software retailer near you, or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. Me encore north An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 Circle Reader Service #98 "


"REVIEW Jaeger's An bat The Second Flight Of Fighter Duel Pro bum \"Hawkeye\" Rathgeber: \"In air combat there are no points for secOn my virgin voyage into the program, I FlightStick Pro, including \"top hat\" view ond place.\" chose to fly one of my favorite planes of control. Roy Brown WWII: the FW TA-152, a plane with speed More colors have been added to the simuR.A.F. to burn. Once selected, a silhouette of the lation world, the most notable being the inT ifty years ago, in the winter of '43-44, aircraft appears along with a list of stats suchdividual fuselage colors on each aircraft. H a desperate struggle for control of as power plant, armament, climb rate, turn Another outstanding addition is the deflec1 Europe's skies was being waged, with rate and vulnerability. Moving on, I selected tion gunnery. In this version, it's very tough cach side striving for the best fighter technolfour different bogeys and set their skill levels to hit anything unless you're up close. The ogy that its engineers could offer. The end all at Ace, figuring I'm a pretty hot pilot. new gunnery plus the shaking of the aircraft result ushered in the age of jers along with the With a click of the \"Begin Flight\" button, the while firing can create visuals reminiscent of defeat of fascism. A half century later these screen darkened, then burst into the Fighter actual film footage taken in WWII. Jaeger has superlative aircraft are again available to flyDuel world as I had never seen it before, also gone a long way in improving the oneby-wire enthusiasts in Jaeger Software's new including a horizon that is dithered with a player mode. You can fly in Wingman, Fighter Duel Pro 2. shaded sky. Standard or Tournament mode, pick the boAfter duly admiring the skyline, geys, set the altitude, and change fighters I figured it was time to sight some without having to reboot-a nice improvebogeys. I cycled through the many ment over previous versions. An addition I different view angles with the curfind personally appealing is the ability to man sor buttons trying to find the enan anti-aircraft gun and practice shooting at emy. Off to my left at 9 o'clock diving enemy planes. low, they came in a finger four In anti-aircraft mode I must have fired over formation. 500 rounds of 20 millimeter cannon fire beHitting the «War Emergency fore I hit anything! Manning the AA gun at Power,\" I winged over and dove on first seemed like it would get boring quickly, the climbing formation. One of but two hours later I was still firing away and the past complaints about Fighter unwilling to quit. This is an extremely useful Duel was the weak AI, so I moved feature for mastering the deflection shot. in figuring to blow away at least In past versions of Fighter Duel, half the kills The original Fighter Duel which first aptwo in a quick pass. I saw tracers occurred at over 800 yards. Because of the coming at me, my plane shook violently as peared on Amigas two years ago, was an inlaser-like straight-shooting bullets, you the hit counter ran up like a pinball machine, stant hit among the serious Amiga flight sim would simply put the sight on the target and and within two seconds I was kaput. Blown pull the trigger-no deflection necessary. crowd. Its realistic flight modeling was diffiup. Swiss cheese. Dead meat. Thus I was Long distance kills are now a rarity in cult to get used to, but once mastered, the introduced to a vastly improved FDPro 2. FDPro2. In order to get good results you must program awarded the diligent with an incredget within 400 yards or less, and even then, ible frame-rate and excellent head-to-head Keyboard Cockpit modem play. Jaeger Software has since taken The maior problems with Fighter Duel Pro 2 the suggestions from their tight-knit group of the previous Fighter Duel infans and incorporated them into Fighter Duel carnations have been adTITLE: Fighter Duel Pro 2 Pro 2. dressed in this release. No SYSTEM: Amiga (reviewed), IBM (summer '94) Upon booting the program for the first longer do you have to juggle REQUIREMENTS: Kickstart 1.2 or higher, 2MB RAM, AGA mode requires an Amiga 1200 time, Fighter Duel fans will notice that the the flight controls with the or 4000 with a monitor capable of displaying DBLNTSC or DBLPAL entire interface had been revised with a much left hand on the mouse and NoFlicker screen modes; hard drive easier button format, replacing the previous the right hand on joystick. All PROTECTION: version's pull down menus. This interface controls can now be manipuDESIGNERS: William Manders, Mathew Shaw, Andrew Dorman proves handy in adjusting the many simulalated via the keyboard, and PUBLISHER: Jaeger Software tion options and selecting from the huge the program now supports Rockville, MD (301) 948-6862 hanger of aircraft. both the Thrustmaster and NOOOOO PRICE: $59.95 FIGHTER DUEL PRO installable None Page 118 Computer Gaming World "


"Tnherite Earth Quest for the Orb * Exciting Siory. Intriguing Puzzles Huge 3-D Maps Unforgettable Characters Breathtaking * * Scenery Beautiful Original Soundtrack ome to a place of unbridled wonder and unspoiled beauty: Earth! To the Morph, Humans live only in legends, but their legacy remains. Accompany Rif, a heroic tox who must journey far from home to uncover the mystery of an ancient, yet powerful human artifact. With thrilling graphics, sounds, story, and an easy-to-use interface, Inherit the Earth will provide hours of challenge and enjoyment for the whole family VEW Available at your local software retailer or order direct from New World Computing at BI 1-800-325-8898. (818-889-5650 outside the US), or by mail PO BOX 4302 Hollywood, CA 900/8-480P, Dreamers Guild creation 1994 New World Computing, Inc. Inherit the Earth is a trademark of New World Computing New World Computing and is distinctive logo oro registered trodeniarks of New World Conipoting me. All rights reserved ( '      Circle Reader Service 193 "


"to be an Aces of the Pacific-type game. On the other hand I've never found a flight simulator with such a heavy emphasis on each aircraft's aerodynamics and their abilities when pitted against other fighters. Fighter Duel Pro 2 rates as a top-notch simulator and a must have for anyone who appreciates realistic, edge of the seat, high intensity combat in 25 of the best fighters WWII ever produced. Check six! CGW YE-262 height 13880 tbt | ., + 3962 lbs Max Level Speed 1 425 knots Hax Clinb 394 ftinin 368° Turn Jine 22 SECS Arnment #1 & Bonn duration 013 secs 185 roting Argenent 82 2x 3Bnn duration 11 secs Tethailty 405 rating 3% rating For Itrial P Lightning 142) Inderboll 11:11 HL Hulu Winer Belley Spillir M1 Spilline IK IX Siell tre IK XIV Sraire MK II KI 81 Irani MIK? licorer HI 109 1 H 1AGG !!! 1900T22 H enri Machine Gunner Hone nailing the target is not guaranteed. Jaeger has brook is in the makings. When the seriousadded a lead-computing gunsight, which ness of dueling gets too intense, I recommend does help in lining up deflection shors, but in a tour of duty in the Wingman arena for a general the idea is to get as close as possible little R&R. before pulling the trigger (not too close though, as the explosion may kill the atComparisons tacker). Thankfully, the game includes an I've found only one sim that comes any\"unlimited ammo\" option so duelers won't where close to matching FDPro2. Kesmai's be running out of bullets. SVGA Air Warrior at times bears a distinct resemblance. I get more of an actual \"feeling\" Modem Wars of flight in Fighter Duel due to the unique Playability has been drastically increased in programming methods of Bill Manders and two-player mode. There are now four options company. This is not to knock Air Warrior, a for dueling. In standard mode the starting sim I enjoy immensely, especially in scenarios altitude can be ser for each side from 1,000 involving 80 people. The difficulty Kesmai up to 26,000 feet, which can help in handifaces is that it can't dwell on just the duel capping a better player against a beginner. As in the original game, there's a huge learning curve in all level OLD Especi FDPro2. A new flyer will need to spend many hours practicing in order to compete with the experts. Mex Letballity 912 rating Thanks to the new chat feature, a new player can get on-line instructions and tips from many of the duelers listed in the program's \"phone book.\" In the two seater mode you can team up with a fellow player via the modem and take on the computer I Beaur e e bandits. I tried the top turret in the P-61, and though I couldn't hit anything, I because they have a whole world of data enjoyed the roller coaster ride. Extra RAM involved. Both Kesmai and Jaeger handle G and a fast machine are required. forces differently. Jaeger lessens stick and rudder effect to simulate the forces that would My favorite modem option by far is the keep a real pilot from moving the stick and Wingman mode. Both players hook up via rudder, while Air Warrior uses red-ours and the modem, beginning in a wing or lead black-outs. Air Warrior does model debris position, and go hunting for two computer falling off planes, something I'd like to see bogeys. Each time a player or bandit is shot Jaeger put on their wish list for future imdown they reappear within seconds at their provements. Collisions add to the realism in original starting altitude. The arena becomes FDPro2, while they just aren't feasible in Air a constantly raging furball. It can really get Warrior. Both are fine sims and in my opinhot if the wingman decides to send some lead ion are not really competing for the same spot into his/her partner, initiating a real free for on the map. When the IBM version of all! Add the ability to turbo around at 16 FD Pro2 (coming this summer) comes out, it times the normal speed and a real donnywill sit nicely alongside SVGA Air Warrioron the hard drive of both novice and veteran pilots alike. The NEW CAPE COD CONNECTION Propwash ELECTRONIC SHOPPING MALL Enough cannot be said about Jaeger's unOur BBS is back 24 HOUR Electronic On-Line ending quest for the perfect dueling sim. Shopping is available. . Download our complete They started out with an aerodynamically new & used Software, Tabletop & Sports Apparel correct flight simulator, added guns, then Catalogs, updated daily with new products. OnLine Ordering 24 Hours . One of the largest used designed it to run at a smooth 28 frames per software listing available today. Have us sell your second over the modem. The effort they've used software on consignment made in listening to gamers and implementRobert Berry, Proprietor ing their suggestions speaks volumes of their 21 PLEASANT VIEW AVENUE FALMOUTH, MA 02540 commitment. FDPro2 does not have lots of BBS 508-548-2908. HELP 508-457-0738 scenery or specific campaigns built into the 24 HOUR FAX 508-457-4558 program; it is not and has never been meant Circle Reader Service #36 Page 120 Top Guns Jaeger has added nine new aircraft to Fighter Duel Pro, and of those nine, eight are among the most advanced fighters to come out of WWII. Spitfire XIV: Arguably the best prop fighter of the war, this outstanding fighter climbs like a bat out of Hell. It's only drawback is a slow roll rate. Focke Wulfe TA-152 \"Tank»: Extremely fast and deadly. Has a very good roll rate making it hard to stay with. It's also my personal favorite! KI-84 \"Frank\": A fast and highly maneuverable Japanese fighter meant to counter the Mustang, Hellcat and Corsair. In my opinion it can give all three a run for their money. Corsair F2-G: This 3000 hp monster has an excellent climb rate. That coupled with a very fast roll makes this heavy machine a deadly weapon in the hands of an experienced pilot. Yak-3: For some odd reason, the Russians named the first version of this fighter the Yak-9 and then slowly worked their way down to the Yak-3. Its ability to climb at over 5000 ft. per minute, along with its good handling characteristics, more than makes up for its lack of firepower. P-61 \"Black Widow\": A huge two seater that's hard to approach due to the four fifty's in the top turret. ME-110: The only real dog in the game. After flying this beast I understood the 110 pilot's reluctance to engage Allied fighters in a dogfight. ME-262: This jer brought chills to bomber and fighter pilots alike! If you can | keep the speed up, the 262 is pretty much invincible. The problem is, it's tough to hit anything while flying at over 500 mph, and if you slow down, you become vulnerable. Komet-163: A firecracker that moves fast and handles well. The Komet's Achilles' heel is its liquid fuel rockets that tend to blow up after taking 1 or 2 hits. Computer Gaming World "


"IBM CD-ROM AMIGA CD32 OFTWARE XPRESS Save 20-50% On Software IBM DISK CATALOG FREE! HOT! NEW RELEASES! FASTAMGA SHIPPING -*FREE! CD-ROM HUNDREDS To Choose From! CD32 JOIN AND SAVED 300221 49 P.O. Box 324 Jefferson, WI 53549-0324 300225 Uridium 2 (Renegade) $24.95 Magic Boy (Empire) $24.95 Bob's Bad Day (Psygnosis) $24.95 Prime Mover (Psygnosis) $24.95 Theatre Of Death (Psygnosis $27.95 300226 Dune 11 (Virgin Games) $29.95 300036 Tornado (Spect Holo $39.95 300047 Tom Landry Football Deluxe (Merit) $24. 95 3 00060 Street Fighter II (Capcom) $24.95 300071 Space Hulk (Elect Arts) $34.95 300092 Lemmings (Psygnosis) $24.95 300094 SimEarth (Maxis) $24.95 300227 300228 Global Domination IBM IndyCar Racing (Papyrus) $37.95 300153 Lands Of Lore: Throne Chaos SSN-21 Seawolf Virgin Games) $29.95 300001 (Elect Arts) $41.95 300155 Freddy Phark: Frontier Phar Ultima VIII: Pagan (Sierra $34 95 3 00007 (Origin $47.95 300159 Aces Over Europe Hand Of Fate (Sierra $34.95 3 00021 Westwood) $34.95 300163 Blue Force: The Next Of Kin Ringworld (Tsunami 534.95 300032 (Accolade $32.95 300175 Empire Deluxe Task Force 1942 (New World) $29.95 300040 (MicroProse) $34.95 300205 Gateway li: Homeworld Battles Of Destiny (Legend) $31.95 300041 QQP) $29.95 300232 Rags To Riches Shadow Caster (Interplay) $29.95 300045 (Origin) $46.95 300246 SimFarm Naval Battles2: Guadalcanal (Maxis) $29.95 300054 (SSD $41.95 300280 Master Of Orion (MicroProse) $29.95 300057 ARCHON ULTRA CITY 2000 (Impressions) $29.95 300103 Lemmings II: The Tribes (Psygnosis) $29.95 300106 Koshan Conspiracy (UBI Soft) $29.95 300210 Blade Of Destiny (Sir Tech) $34.95 300212 Body Blows Galactic Team 17) $25.95 300222 Perf Gen:Battles 20th Centry (QQP $19.95 300236 Caesar Impressions) $30.95 300237 War In The Gulf (Empire 524.95 300245 Oh No! More Lemmings! (Psygnosis) $24.95 300267 B-17 Flying Fortress MicroProse) $35 95 300271 Solitaire's Journey (QQP) $29.95 300272 Out Of This World (Delphine) $29.95 300274 Birds of Prey (Elect Arts) $29.95 300278 Lost Treasures Of Infocom (Infocom $34.95 300279 Zool: Ninja Of The 'Nth' Dim Gremlin $32.95 300285 Arctic Baron (Silmarils) $23.95 300288 Patrician (Readysoft) $26.95 300294 Might And Magic III (New World) $35.95 300310 CD-ROM Return Of The Phantom (MicroProse) $37.95 300004 Chess Maniac 5 Billion And 1 (Spect Holo) $31.95 300009 Iron Helix (Spect Holo) $49.95 300035 King's Quest VI (Sierra) $39.95 300102 Conspiracy (Virgin Games) $39.95 300104 Dracula Unleashed (ICOM $44.95 300107 Jutland (Soft Sorc $39.95 300114 Fantasy Empires (SSI) $3795 300125 Eric The Unready (Accolade $29.95 300174 Wacky Funsters (Accolade) $16.95 300176 Ultima Underworld I & II (Origin) $54.95 300180 7th Guest Virgin Games $49.95 300188 Inca (Sierra $34.95 300196 Forever Growing Garden (Media Vision) $32.95 300282 Journeyman Project Gametek) $39.95 300303 Wolfpack (Nova Logic) $36.95 300306 CD32 DIGeneration (Mindscape $27.95 300283 James Pand 2 / Robocod Millennium) $27.95 300284 VIMBAT SimCity 2000 (Maxis $36.95 300059 Red Crystal IQQP) $29.95 300062 Star Trek: Judgment Rites (Interplay) $31.95 300065 Sam & Max Hit The Road (Lucas Arts) $31.95 300066 Mechwarrior 2: The Clans (Activision) $37.95 300068 Speed Racer (Accolade $19.95 300072 Imperial Pursuit Lucas Arts) $14.95 300078 Lucky's Casino Adventure QOP) $35.95 300083 Heirs To The Throne (QQP) $31.95 300086 MS Flight Scenery: New York (Microsoft) $24.95 300098 Fantasy Empires (SSD) $34.95 300125 Front Pg Sprts: Football Pro Dynamix) $41.95 300134 Elder Scrolls: The Arena (Bathezda $39.95 300152 Archon Ultra (SSI) $29.95 300289 Quest Glory:Shadow Dkness (Sierra) $36.95 300290 Mortal Kombat (Acclaim) $34.95 300252 Gabriel Knight: Sins Fathers (Sierra $37.95 300291 Police Quest: Open Season (Sierra) $36.95 300292 Lels Suit Larry 6: Shape Up (Sierra) $35.95 300293 Spectre VR Velocity $30.95 300299 Comanche: Over The Edge (Nova Logic) $29.95 300304 Walls Of Rome (Mindcraft) $35.95 300307 AMIGA Ashes Of Empire (Gametek) $17.95 300117 Allens 3 Virgin Games $24.95 300181 Adams Family (Hit Squad) $10.95 300183 Disposable Hero Gremlin $24.95 300217 Mortal Kombat (Acclaim) $19.95 300252 Dennis The Menace (Ocean) $24.95 300230 Krusty's Fun House (Virgin Games) $24.95 300255 Twilight: 2001 (MicroPlay $29.95 300268 Frontier: Elite 11 Jurassic Park (Gametek) $27.95 300313 Ocean $27.95 300311 Alien Breed II Hired Guns (Team 17) $25.95 300315 Psygnosis) $31.95 300109 Campaign 11 Lost Vikings (Empire) $31.95 300317 (Interplay) $24.95 300113 Cannon Fodder Cohort II Virgin Games) $27.95 300318 (impressions) $15.95 300122 Kingmaker Syndicate (US Gold) $32.95 300322 (Elect Arts) $34.95 300135 Genesia SimCity Classic (Mindscape $27.95 300323 (Maxis 524.95 300145 Cyberpunks Pinball Dreams Core Design) $25.95 300325 (21st Century) $24 95 300147 Fatman Civilization (Kompart) $27 95 300326 (MicroProse) $39.95 300162 Micro Machines DarkSeed (Code Masters) $24.95 300331 (Merit) $34.95 300185 Morph AGA Dune (Millennium) $27.95 300334 (Virgin Games) $29.95 300186 IBM & AMIGA Legend of Kyrandia Vugin Games) $29.95 300187 Rules Of Engagement II Scrabble Deluxe (Impressions) $37 95300002 When Two Worlds War SimAnt (Impressions) $29.95 300003 (Maxis) $30.95 300190 Creepers Band Of The Cosmic Forge (Psygnosis) $24.95 300010 (Sir Tech $29.95 300197 Crusaders Of The Drk Savant Overlord (Sir Tech) $34.95 300013 (Virgin Games) $19.95 300198 Space Shuttle Warlords (Virgin Games) $24.95 300023 (SSG) $24.95 300199 Blue And The Gray David Leadbetter's Greens (Impressions) $34.95 300030 (MicroProse) $29.95 300202  ! Zool: Ninja Of The 'Nth' Dim Gremlin $27.95 300285 Liberation: Captive 2 (Mindscape) $31.95 300320 Overkill: Lunar C (Mindscape) $27.95 300324 Mean Arenas (LCE $27.95 300335 Dragon's Lair Deep Core (Readysoft) $32.95 300262 (CE) $27.95 300336 Aegis: Guardian Of The Fleet Castles 11 (Soft Sorc $44.95 3 00061 (Elect Arts) $27 95 300337 Return To Zork Fire Force (Infocom) $44.95 3 00084 (Elect Arts) $27 95 300338 Mad Dog McCree Nigel Mansell Racing (Amer Laser) $31 95300076 (Elect Arts) $27.95 300339 Rebel Assault Oscar (Lucas Arts) $37.95 300080 (Ocean $27.95 300340 Dark Sun: Shattered Lands Trolls (SSI) $46.95 300087 (U.S. Gold) $27.95 300342 YES! Count Me INI Send me my INTRODUCTORY selection Ilsted below (Which I am already receiving at up to 50% orr) and I agree to purchase at least one more selection at your full price within the next year. Selection Number: Selection Number Son Price: IBM O AMIGA MA Selection Format (Checher) 0 3.5\" Disa CD-ROM CD32 JJ or recer) UANGAI Terbuch 2 Or Bree 05. Disa Please Sand Me Future Catalogs UIBM ( W In The Following Format IS D SEE HOW EASY IT IS TO SAVE UP TO 50% ON YOUR SOFTWARE PURCHASES. . Just in and mail the coupon in this nd (Select payment method) and we send you your introductory package along with a copy of your first disk catalog . You agree to buy just ONE more selection from us in the next year (Priced $19.95 or above) you may decide to discontinue receiving our catalog at any time thereafter. Our regular prices are normaly at least 20% lower than the suggested retail price. (A shipping and handling charge will be added to all orders of $100 or loss, FREE shipping for orders over $100, axcluding tax). FREE Disk magazine oach month. Each magazine contains 250 items and can be saved to your hard drive to keep an archive of up to 4 months of items. This will give you up to 1.000 different items to choose from. Each item is described in detail and most items also have a picture description. If an item is not in your catalog and you are looking for a specific title you can request it in our REQUEST section of the catalog software program.  YOU control what you want and what you don't want. Use our Easy-Order method of placing your order via your computer modern if you are paying with a credit card or COD. (The call is FREE) or use our convenient order card which will be included in each mailing Orders are usualy shipped out within 1 week of your order. . Our BONUS plan is designed to save you 20%-50% on many of your purchases through our company. Once you have fulfilled your agreement with us you will be entitled to take a selection at 20%-50% off our regular price with each solaction you purchase at price. Depending on your purchasing habits, you can save 100's of dollars on your annual software purchases You always have the option to purchase your software in any format that the selection is available in. (CD-ROM CD32, 5% or 3% Floppy Disk). Our company supports IBM & AMIGA Computer systems only. We also carry Sega Genesis, Soga-CD, Super NES and Game Boy products. Use your Creck Card to place your order. (No Surcharge on Credit Cards) You may also Pre-Pay with a personal check only by sending us your check with your order (Using our order cards) but please alow 14 days for the check to clear. We also accept C.O.0. Orders C.O.D. order must add 55.00 to their order total. GOVERMENT AND SCHOOL P.O.'s WELCOMED. We will also have special interest issues of educational and productivity software, . Mthe Application is missing, write to: Software Express, PO Box 324, Jefferson, WI 53549-0324 Check method of payment: Payment Is Enclosed MA Sectorke PLUS S4 S5 Septie RUS Tarif applicable) U C.0.0.AN Swito PLUS 95 Spain PLUS $S DO COD. Charge Plus fait applicable) Charge to my Credit Card H MISTERCARD Acct. No IMDIUM Expire Date: Explre Date: D WI Residents Add 5.5% Tax ...........(decin pne.co......... Signiture Name Send To: Address Apt.. City Statezip. Phone Number WE DO NUT SNIP TU PO. SUXES Software Express P.O. Box 324 Jollerson. WI 53549-0324 Shipping is FREE with an order over $100. Circle Reader Service #113 "


"Letters from Paradise 1 ESPANA Sub-Subscriptions Until the carts can show the depth of comYour magazine is solid! But is ir true that puter games, please exclude them. Mathew Lu you mail the issues that are of bad printing Houston, TX condition to your subscribers? So far, two out of four issues I received had torn pages and While I appreciate your desire to cover as cover. much as possible, I don't particularly like W. Yasa your reports on \"game box» machines and Ann Arbor, MI software. If I wanted to learn more about such things, I'd buy a magazine devoted to them. We refuse to pay extra in order to get the pages Otherwise, you continue to do a fine job. and cover torn at our printer, so we let the postal Michael A. Lavoie service do it for free. Seriously, we do not send Nashua, NH the issues out in bad condition. They are usually torn when they are at the top or the bottom of a Computer Gaming World should not be wasting my money on Nintendo or Sega or postal sort bundle. arcade-type games in reviews. Real Computers Have Keyboards! Dave Fulfora Thanks for the 3DO coverage. It's the maPeoria, AZ chine I'm using for all my gaming, now. It's Stay away from 3DO coverage. I buy your incredible! Please keep covering it and the magazine because it's Computer Gaming games available for it in the future. I love your World, not the Kids' Videogame Survey. magazine. Steve Rodick Brady Brock Chicago, IL Nampa, ID The 5th Wave We appreciate your sentiment, but it wasn't O RICHIENNWT the majority viewpoint. I applaud the expansion of scope in the magazine (i.e. Kids & Computers, Shareware, etc.), I just hope the central focus remains Computer Gaming World. Dedicated game machines are not my idea of computers, B. Rosapo Crestwood, NY First, we want to thank you for your concern. We're feeling much better and the doctor says we could even be in our right minds, given a month or two to recuperate. Seriously, we knew that we would catch a certain amount offlak by covering the console conflict. There is always a backlash among computer users whenever console coverage sneaks into their publications. There is a good reason for this backlash. Videogame consoles have historically been successful enough to crowd computer software out of shelf space. For example, one major retailer, who went way overboard in restricting computer game shelf space in favor of videogame shelf space, recently had to change the mix in favor of more computer game titles because of soft videogame sales. Nevertheless, it is easy enough to understand how we can invoke fear in our readers whenever we use valuable editorial space for cartridge reviews or hardware reviews. The concern is that they will get less space for specific computer game coverage. We do not want to cheat our readers out of the editorial coverage that they need, either. HowBy Rich Tennant ditutumua ME Miller ti H . I can understand your wanting to cover 3DO and all of those neat game systems, but this is Computer Gaming World. Everyone who subscribed, probably did so because of your outstanding work with computer games. Please leave those cheap little video game systems where they belong-in other lousy magazines. By the way, I loved the relecomputing article. It really helped a lot. Lars Bergstrom Dyer, IN Please concentrate solely on computer games. The game boxes are just that-boxes. EL W .. \"I'M SORRY, BUT MR. HALLORAN IS BEING CHASED BY SIX MIDGETS WITH POISON BOOMERANGS THROUGH A MAZE IN THE DUNGEON OF A CASTLE, IF HE FINDS HIS WAY OUT AND GETS PAST THE MINOTAUR HE'LL CALL YOU RIGHT BACK, 07HERWISE TRY AGAIN THURSDAY.\" Page 122 Computer Gaming World "


"Dominion How long can you survive in a constantly changing world of alliance and intrigue? | Will u b a minor player in the politics of the age, or push the limits of empire A ? Coming soon from Mindcraft. Circle Reader Service #89 "


"n&  1990. STEVE VIZCELL NCE L . LETTERED BY 2. LOIS BUHALIS WELL WE'LL BE BURYIN HERE WE ARE IN SLIPPERY JACK ALIVE THE CARIBBEAN. ITS HELLO AND THEN AHRR RICHLY TEXTURED LITTLE MONKEYS! TREASURE WILL BE WITH ROMANTIC THEY'RE JUST LIKE PROTECTED FROM PERIOD RATS WITH PREHENSILE SUNWASHED MISCREANTS CHARM. TAILS. NEAT! LIKE US. Sshh. 1 SMELL THE FETID PRESENCE OF SOUNDS DEED.DOERS. FAIR.1 MAX. THE Guess WHAT? IT WAS THE COMMISSIONER SAM, I MEAN MAX. HE SAID THERE'S BAD TROUBLE IN THE 17TH CENTURY.' SOME KIND OF PIRATEY NONSENSE INSAM & MAX MECE FRIGHTENING PIRATES BASED ON NE NOVETTE SAM 4 MAX KZT SOM FRIGHTENINS PIRATES LET'S MOVE UNRH! YES...YES... YES? SWEET MOTHER OF MERCY IN A TOBOGGAN WE'RE ON OUR WAY! OKAY BREAK IT UP! WHAT THE HECKS GOING ON HERE? Ooh. 112 THAT'S TELLING HIM. THIS ISN'T NICE. WE'RE PIRATES AND AND I'M PRETTY 1 WE'RE REALLY SURE IT'S AGAINST A CRANKY. THAT'S THE LAW. OUR JOB OOPS MAX! MAX! WAKE UP, LITTLE BUDDY! WELL...NO Oh... THERE CERTAINLY IS NO PLACE LIKE HOME.IS IT REALLY A DREAM, SAM? YEAH. SO HOSE OFF DOG LIPS. HEY, HEY Uh-oh. EVERYTHING WILL BE JUST FINE, DON'T YOU TINK? each. ever, many months ago (before we were pursoftware titles that we find worthy of note (and titled The Journeyman Project. This game is chased by Ziff-Davis), the editorial staff decided not duplicated on personal computer platforms). cool and I would like to see it reviewed. that it would be both interesting and useful to Eric Press cover the new generation of game machines. We Help For Addicts Hamburg, NY were being asked lots of questions about these Where is the Betty Ford Clinic for Commachines, both on-line and in person. So, we puter Game Addicts? Take a Quantum Leap backward and grab decided to publish the feature, not start a trend. Sleepless in Seattle CGW #108 (July, 1993). Your wish is our Obviously, we don't believe that too many of our Everett, WA command. Back issues are available at $4.00 readers would ever convert to these machines as their exclusive gaming platform, but we do think S orry, Bill. We're not hiring at CGW right they might buy them as a supplement to their Highway To Heaven? computers. As for other coverage of these maThe forthcoming information highway chines, expect to see it restricted to occasional Journeyman Question may not be a godsend as much as something I recently purchased a CD-ROM game ento be feared. We will now be able to work, Games Too Expensive? X XXVIIKKIKIKLIK Consider Pre-owned Software \"Powerful programs of growth and adventure\"  Savc big $$$ over new MAGIC MIRROR I... a toolbox for your mind. E. Kinnie, PhD.  Original disks and manuals Clinical Psychologist, $39.95. IBM AMIGA C64 MAGIC MIRROR IL... experiences for your mind, $39.95. Hard-lo-find classics plus all the latest releases THREE GATES... Skryeing, awareness shifting, I Ching and runes, $39.95. Call or write for free catalog (specify computer) MERLIN ... an apprenticeship. $29.95. PHOENIX FIRE... high-tech Ouija Board, $39.95. Bare Bones Software MasterCard/Visa 1-800-545-6172 MAGIC MOUNTAIN... weird adventure, male and female 940 4th Ave #222 Huntington WV 25701 (after 5 p.m.) versions, not for children, $39.95. 1-800-638-1123 Blue Valley, 29 Shepard St., Walton, NY 13856 Customer Service: 304-529-0461 BBS for complete list: 304-529-7050 KUNISMULUI Circle Reader Service #31 Circle Reader Service #33 Page 124 de Reader Service #31 Computer Gaming World 999 KLIKNIKKERTY "


"MECHAMANDER FUTURISTIC STRATEGY COMBAT SIMULATION NDER FROM MINDCRAFT For a free, playable demo of MECHAMANDER. Dial BBS 310-320-5196. Circle Reader Service #88 "


"Great job Alex Koes intering en de coboyicem socialize, play and bunk from our living CGW As Hard Drive Optimizer Co-Co For Computers rooms. Does this sound healthy to you? Most I only wish I would have discovered vour I. Wilson's editorial ( Americans already watch too much televimagazine before I bought half the trash clutinto words exactly the way I feel now about sion. What happened to books, or conversatering up my hard drive. Great job. \"cutting edge» buying. I've been computing tion? Our culture is doomed. Alex Koers since the \"Color Computer\" from Radio J.B. Marysville, CA Shack came out. I'm currently on my seventh Paterson, NJ Great point. Maybe we should release our computer upgrade. I'll wait and see. Edward Leferink wiin an of the aiscussion of me 00 channegative reviews on disk as \"The Ardai Utilinels, it is easy to miss the point to connectivity. ties,\" \"Scorpia's Defrag \"and CGW Tools ComMartinez, GA Having 500 channels does not mean that people press.\" Unfortunately, too many gamers are discoverwill try or should try to watch all 500 at once, ing that the cutting edge slices both ways-for nor even that all 500 channels are worth watchTaking A Puke them in power and against them in the evering. Instead, it should supply more options so To make your magazine perfect, \"Taking A shortening upgrade cycle. Here's hoping that the that viewers can watch what they want when Peek\" needs to be discarded or replaced. I 486 generation gives gamers a chance to assimithey want it. In the same way, we like to take don't know what to replace it with, but I'm late the technological advances of the last 18 hope in noticing what has happened with tradisure the people at CGW can think of somemonths before having to move on to the next tional on-line services. Many of us have friends thing. generation. in all 50 states whom we have never met faceKris Scubla to-face. Yet, every so often we meet them at a Laguna Niguel, CA All GUSsied Up yaming convention, through business or by deWhen a game appears in \"Taking A Peek, it All the GUS users should call the Advanced sign. It's exciting to expand our gaming universe. should tell our readers that we just received a Gravis' BBS. They'll give patch files for much The information highway can expand that gamcopy of the shrink-wrapped, retail product as the better Sound Blaster emulation on most ing universe exponentially. We also hope that magazine was going to press. Since we do not 8 games. people will learn to work smarter as opposed to review games based on beta copies, a position not Lars Bergstrom working more. The potential of this information universally held in the computer game magazine Dyer, IN highway to allow us to search more databases or category, the inclusion of a product in \"Taking GUS users can reach Advanced Gravis via poll more samples should enrich our work, not A Peek\" signals that the product is available and CompuServe by typing GO PCVENB or call the dilute it. Of course, the potential for abuse and may be reviewed. Advanced Gravis BBS directly at (604) 431misuse exists in every technological advance. 5927. CGW JADIAN BECAUSE IT'S NOT JUST A GAME! A service organization developed to integrate technology and creativity to deliver a package of uncompromising high quality. DEPENDABLE, SEASONED PROFESSIONALS WITH THE FLEXIBILITY TO HANDLE ALL OF YOUR NEEDS. VERSATILITY IS OUR BUSINESS! AUDIO PRODUCTION? WE DELIVER EVERYTHING! RESULTS? WHAT DO YOU THINK? Certified developers for:  Composition, Arrangement, & Full Orchestration  Film Scoring  Sound Design MIDI/SMPTE Voice Over & ADR Service Media Vision CREATIVE We offer complete audio production for Film, Video & Multimedia.  Programming Writing. Game Design/Consulting Services also available. CREATIVE LABS, INC. @Roland Extensive list of credits in the Multimedia and Film/Video Industries. For More Information Call (512) 834-8325 12330 Metric Blvd., Ste. 7202  Austin, TX 78758-2524 Circle Reader Service #86 Page 126 Computer Gaming World "


"HOLY CHEATS THE WORLD'S FIRST GAME UTILITY AXIS reTHE GAMECHEATER You're not playing by their rules anymore... Baseline Axis the Gamecheater gives you a few new tricks in your favorite games special powers, enhanced weapons, and extra lives. So now you can get on with the adventure, past that nasty spiked pit, without burning your last life in a bad Super Dave imitation. Or you can loose your vengeance with that outlaw turbo laser cannon you've always wanted. With Axis the Gamecheater, you get the little boost you need to keep the game fun! Superpowers are yours on demand — with just the press of a key! Axis the Gamecheater provides custom cheats for dozens of the most popular games, on PCs or Macs, and we're adding new games all the time. Ask for it at your favorite software source! For more information, call 800-926-9677 PUBLISHING or 901-682-9676, Fax: 901-682-9691 Circle Reader Service #32 Copyright  1993, Baseline Publishing, Inc. All rights foreign and domestic reserved. Axis the Gamecheater and the Baseline logo are trademarks of Baseline Publishing, Inc. All other names are trademarks of their respective holders. Help! I'm being held coplive in the line-print disclaimer! Baseline "


"Reviews KIDS6 COMPUTERS Four Footed Friends that trigger animated sequences. While the search for hotspots detracts from the reading activity, the program doesn't claim to be a reading-tutor program. Yearn 2 Learn's math activities encompass several skill levels, from very simple counting, addition, and subtracThis interactive book (the first in a planned series) presents a charming children's primer about a variety of quadripedal creatures. After reading a four-line verse (which is also read aloud by the computer), the child is free to click on any one of three on-screen guides, who provide further information on that page's featured animal. Albert the Number Worm provides interesting facts and figures and invites what is the treats the amount worm!) Finally, Pablo the Picture worm (complete with beret and goatee) invites kids to paint the animal in whatever colors they see fit using a small, built-in electronic paint program. Kids can also print these pictures to color in with crayons or markers. Every screen within the program is in full color. No matter where a child clicks, he or she is rewarded with a charming, and usually quite extended, audio and visual effect. There is always some creature dancing around or some animal sounding off, eager to provide a laugh or educational tidbit. Curiously, the storybook, which is the heart of the product, is only five pages long. This brevity is due, no doubt, to the fact that full color graphics and extended digitized sound take up so much disk space. (The CD-ROM version saves the family hard disk from premature overload.) Space constraints do nothing to change the fact that five pages isn't much of a book. It must be said, however, that the little that is here is a shining example of interactive children's entertainment. — Ken Levine Trade MANOVA Look , wako Four Footed Friends Price: $57.95 In Brief: An animated, interactive children's story book. Requirements: Macintosh with 4MB RAM: 256-color display; hard disk with 12MB free space; System 6.07 or higher. For Ages: 3 and up. Other Versions: Macintosh CD-ROM, Windows, Windows CD-ROM (all $57.95 each) Yearn 2 Learn Price: $64.95 In Brief: Snoopy and the Peanuts gang read, color, count, and play. Requirements: IBM compatible with 4MB RAM; VGA display; hard disk with 12MB free space; Windows 3.1 or higher. Audio Support: Sound Blaster, Pro Audio Spectrum, and compatible devices. For Ages: 3 to 10 Other Versions: Windows CD-ROM ($64.95); Macintosh ($64.95); Macintosh CD-ROM ($64.95) Yearn 2 Learn Image Smith 1313 Sepulveda Blvd. Torrance, CA 90501 (800) 876-6679 Circle Inquiry #131 T/Maker 1390 Villa St. Mountain View, CA 94041 (415) 962-195 Circle Inquiry #130 kids to click on various parts of the selected animal. In doing so, kids are rewarded with surprising and generally amusing results. Wendy the Word Worm uses the selected animal as a springboard to teach important reading and language skills. (She'll also read the words aloud in French, Japanese or Spanish. What a Good grief! Here's a program with five terrific concepts for kids activities, great animation and great music. It could easily have been split into five separate programs. Yearn 2 Learn provides a little something for everyone, but it stretches itself a little thin in the process. To its credit, the program's Comic Strips is a terrific reading activity with familiar characters, fun stories, great animation and lots of audio and visual reinforcement. Kids can read and re-read words and phrases as often as necessary the comics make it fun. Kids are challenged to find hotspots on the screen tion, to complex multiplication. Students choose their activity by skill level. The Easy activity involves counting Woodstock's friends as they come and go; the Medium activity is a bowling game; and the Hard activity involves calculating the weight of a pumpkin. Again, the auditory and visual reinforcement is terrific. Then there's the Flying Ace games. These include an activity that asks kids Page 128 Computer Gaming World "


"KIDS COMPUTERS game works as they read about early American life. Jack M. Germain You come upon a vart bw on the west coast of Florida. Sing Into it to get out of t wo and rough water of the use you arder your this to weigh Anchor Shortly after your ships are det and Kid's Studio 200 150 X 100 SSLC MOVE CRY to match a picture with a sound effect, and an unsophisticated, arcade game billed as a memory skill tutor. The Geography Games are great introductory activities in a puzzle format. Depending on the skill level chosen, kids can drag states to their correct positions (the state's name appears and is spoken by the computer); or, kids must not only position the state, but name it as well. More options for configuring the game (like turning the guides on or off) would have been welcome. The program's Coloring Book activity consists of ten black-and-white comics that kids can color. This activity may promote tactile coordination skills in the very young, but it's too unsophisticated for older children. Crayons pop up when selected (the computer describes the color an outstanding feature), but kids won't be able to print their finished pictures (an egregious oversight). Overall, the concepts in Yearn 2 Learn are solid. Every child will find challenging things to do. But it's questionable whether parents will want a program geared to address their child's abilities seven years down the road. With the disparity between kids' abilities between the ages of 3 to 10 (the self-proclaimed target for the program), it's hard to see how an activity that entertains and challenges a three-year-old can hope to sustain the interest of a 10-year-old sibDiscovering America Price:$59.95 In Brief: The Spanish exploration of America comes to life in an action adventure game that develops critical thinking and reading skills and builds decision making abilities. Requirements: IBM compatible with 640K RAM; VGA display: hard disk with 1.6MB free space. A mouse is optional. For Ages: 8 and older Other Versions: Macintosh; $59.95 Lawrence Productions 1800 South 35th St. Galesburg, MI. 49053-9687 (616) 665-7075 Circle Inquiry #132 This exciting and innovative children's product is, at heart, not really a children's product. CyberPuppy (they get a point for the company name alone) has taken what is essentially a business presentation program (like Aldus Persuasion or Microsoft PowerPoint), and stripped out all the overly complex and non-entertaining elements. The publisher then added pictures and sound effects that invite kids to let their imaginations loose. Kid's Studio is a story-making program. Here's how it works: First, kids (and parents too) may browse through Treasure Chests, which are scrapbooks full of photos, illustrations and cartoons. (Many of the photos even display educational captions when kids click on them with the mouse.) Two hundred fifty pictures come with the program, and the publisher has promised to make more pictures available in the future. As if that weren't enough, kids and parents can import pictures directly from Photo CD discs. These discs are available for families who want to develop photographs for use on CD-ROM drives that are capable of displaying the pictures, either on a computer or on another Photo ling. Felicia Donovan Discovering America 22 This somewhat novel approach to learning about history lets students learn about early Spanish exploration in the Americas by experiencing it. Success and high scores do not come easily. Kids must read short passages and plan their moves with cunning. Playing this game takes patience and determination. For those youngsters who like to solve puzzles, this game is a sure hit. For those who prefer action and glitter, Discovering America may not sustain interest. Each player takes the role of a Spanish explorer who learns about America in a simulation of traveling and trading with natives. The game tries to combine traditional computer text-based games with the latest multimedia sights and sounds, but it doesn't always succeed. Brief musical interludes accompany movement around a map of the southeastern part of the North American continent. A dotted line marks the course of the journey between current and selected locations. The graphics are less than stunning. Colorful native villages and wilderness scenes provide a backdrop for dialogue boxes that pop open in the center of the screen. Players must constantly click arrows to scroll through the text. The playing screen combines the message box and background picture with a control panel on the bottom portion of the screen. This control panel shows icons and numbers representing the status of the explorer's health, wealth, and supplies. The panel also shows two rows of command buttons. Pressing a button results in a dialog box displaying the results of the command. These command buttons are the only interaction between player and game. The choices are: Trade, Convert, Find Gold, Pillage, Move, Encamp. Depending on which command is pressed, a message box may ask the player to press a key for the number of days the action will take or the number of gifts offered. Players can get slightly different results by redoing a command and changing the number response. Discovering America offers few surprises. Players must discover how the Kid's Studio Price: $59.95 In Brief: A computerized storybook maker. Requirements: Macintosh LC or better with 4MB RAM; 256-color display: hard disk with 7MB free space, System 7.0 or higher. CD-ROM drive supporting Photo CD is optional. For Ages: 6 and up. CyberPuppy Software P.O. Box 19500 Rochester, NY 14619 (716) 436-3570 Circle Inquiry #133 March 1994 Page 129 "


"can Serengeti. Zurk's Learning Safari offers a combination of seven different content-rich activities designed to allow children plenty of exploration and discovery time. It also introduces and reinforces basic skills like shape recognition, letter recognition, matching and counting supplemental activities for parents which can be performed at the computer or away from the keyboard. Background material on Zurk's African adventure includes an explanation of African rhythms and instruments; pictures of all the animals mentioned throughout the program; and a bibliography for further reading and exploration. Felicia Donovan Mind Castle KIDSC COMPUTERS CD device. (There's even a five-dollar coupon for CD processing from Kodak included in the package.) Each picture used in a Kid's Studio document can then be placed, resized, and even edited (with the program's paint program). Kids then add text to the image and, if equipped with a sound-capable Macintosh, record music or voice to play along with the images. Each screen they create is called a page. Pages can include any number of pictures and sounds, and the sounds may be played in any order. Kids string together numerous pages to create a story. Budding video artists can use the program's canned transitions to move from page to page. All of the created pages, sounds, and transitions can be edited at any time. Kids can play their finished story as a slide show by setting timed intervals between pages. In addition, any story may be saved as a QuickTime movie (QuickTime 1.61 is included in the package) so friends and family who do not have Kid's Studio may see the show for themselves. This is a fairly comprehensive, easy to use product that has much to offer. The only major problem is the contents of the Treasure chests. The pictures contained with the program, while of good quality and exceptional variety, are fairly useless in trying to tell a story. The broad range of subjects is hampered by the use of each subject in a limited way. For example, because the program's dinosaur picture offers but a single pose, there is a limit to what can be done visually with the picture in the context of a story. A better approach would have involved using body parts that could be manipulated by the story makers to create a variety of different poses, moods, and situations. Despite this limitation, Kid's Studio is an exceptional product. It provides a valuable creative outlet for kids, and is sophisticated enough to appeal to parents. Bringing kids and adults together around the computer is always a welcome idea. Ken Levine Zurk's Learning Safari Price: $59.95 In Brief: A delightful multimedia early learning journey. Requirements: IBM compatible (386 or better) with 2MB RAM; VGA display: hard disk; mouse. Audio Support: Sound Blaster, AdLib, Disney Sound Source, and compatible sound devices. For Ages: 3 to 7 Here's an intriguing word-skill game that takes the drudgery out of learning vocabulary. The game is ideal for independent home study or team efforts in the classroom. Players enter the Word Wizard's castle to begin a series of puzzles. They can only solve the puzzle by clicking on objects in a room and picking the correct meaning to a word challenge. Wrong answers prompt a new clue and more chances to answer correctly. Each correct answer provides another piece to a larger mystery question. When players get enough correct answers, they progress to a higher level of play. Graphics are an integral part of this game. Players move through 20 rooms in the five story castle looking for clues. Selecting various objects in each location reveals a word challenge. If enough Soleil Software 3853 Grove Ct. Palo Alto, CA 94303 (415) 494-0114 Circle Inquiry #134 Spiders are curing great fear or shecid creatures, with a these hairy legs and fans! Ingredie horrple et QUE This program distinguishes itself from the standard basic skills learning programs in many ways: from the beautifully illustrated, watercolor graphics to the rhythmic African-flavored music. In Explore Story, the cursor becomes Maya, the lion cub. Kids can easily control Maya's movements without having to hold the mouse button down as the cub explores a fully interactive jungle and tries to get back to her mother. In Hide and Seek (two separate activities), kids can hide or search for camouflaged animals and magically change animals in the \"transputer,\" a unique transformer complete with sound effects. In Puzzles, kids can play with five different puzzles and place pieces simply by clicking on them and dragging them around. Shape recognition skills are covered in the Magic Box. Positive reinforcement is provided by Zurk, an animated character that leads kids throughout the program. In addition to Zurk's rich multimedia learning experiences, the Parent's Guide (also a Rhyming Book) provides many wa Mind Castle Price: $59.95 In Brief: Players build vocabulary skills in this challenging puzzle game. Requirements: IBM compatible with 640k of RAM, VGA display; hard disk with 1MB free space. A mouse is optional. Audio Support: AdLib, Sound Blaster, and compatible sound devices. For Ages: 8 and up Other Versions: Macintosh, $59.95 Zurk's Learning Safari Imagine a magical place where storybooks come to life, letters change into animals, and kids can play hide and seek with crocodiles and caracals in the AfriLawrence Productions 1800 South 35th St. Galesburg, MI. 49053-9687 (616) 665-7075 Circle Inquiry #135 Page 130 Computer Gaming World "


"ADVERTISERS' INDEX RS# ADVERTISER PAGE # ADVERTISER PAGE RS# ADVERTISER P AGE 7th Level 137 60 Nova Logic Gosselin Computer Prod Hi-Tech Expressions Accoustic Research 72 61 144 5 3 95 96 97 goal Ocean Of America Aditus 62 Hi-Tech Expressions 8 8 AldeaLabs 166 HPS Simulations  z w o 8 Altech 83 8 Impressions Ocean Of America Origin Systems Origin Systems Origin Systems Paper Mayhem Papyrus Publishing 8 Apogee Software Inner Circle 111 8 Avalon Hill 171 Interplay 172 124 21 102 101 8 4 Interplay Keyboard Commander 127 140 122 Prometheus Bare Bones Software Baseline Publishing Bethesda Softworks Blue Valley 8 63 Koei 149103 QQP Inc o 8 124 Kraft 66 104 QQP Inc 8 Broderbund 40-41 Lance Haffner Games 112 105 QQP Inc 157 8 80-81 102 Quarterdeck 145 Logitech Logitech Readysoft 8 8 Mallard 115 141 29,31 Bryon Preiss Interactive 32 73 Cape Cod Connection 120 74 Carey DeVuono Games 75 124 Chips & Bits 87,89,91,93 75 Colorado Spectrum 92 76 Compsult 152 78 152 106 107 108 Realism 165 8 Maxis REM Software 112 8 92 Media Vision 52,53 109 Sideline Software 166 8 Megatech Sierra On-Line 139 8 CompuServe 37 Merit Software % 8 80 Merit Software 9 Computer Express 58,59,60,61 Computer Express 132, 133 Creative Labs 49 Micro Sports 67 125 69 110 95 64 65 111 103 112 77 113 159 Sigma Designs Simulation Systems Simulations Canada Sir Tech Software Software Express Spectrum Electronics * 81 Microforum * Crystal Dynamics 8,9 MicroLeague 121 ô Disk-Count Software 177 MicroLeague 144  Dongleware 135 MicroProse Spectrum HoloByte 84-85 g Dongleware 179 MicroProse 35 SSI 151 0 Electronic Arts 46-47 86 Midian 126 153 SSI SSI 8 Entertainment Int'l 173 87 Midnight Games 163 155 8 Falcon Northwest 7 88 Mindcraft Suncom 9 Flagship Magazine 154 89 Mindcraft Thrustmaster, Inc. 3 Formgen Mission Control 123 146-147 97 117 123 118 Time Warner I. Group S 143 8 161 National Videotex Titan Games 175 3 Future Vision G.E. Info Systems Gamer's Gold 23 100 119 Virgin Interactive 109 167 Nawu Triad New World Computing 93 8 8 119 12 * No Reader Service Number. Please call advertiser for information. Genovation Nova Logic March 1994 Page 131 "


"ROCK & BACH STUDIO KID KEYS COMPUTER Express Rock Ages 7:14. Produce your own action packed music video! Assemblea band from a large cast of outrageous charac ters with their own individual music styles. Teach them your songs, or choose from a funky collection of programmed selections. Conduct, lead the jam, or let them go wild on their own. You control the sound and light mixer. Put it all together and create videos for your friends to play! See how sound is related to music. Try out the instruments in o symphony Orchestra. Travel through music history with Bach, Mozart and others. Features SVGA grophics and digitized sound PUBLISHER: Binary Zoo DOS Ages 4-8. A mogi cal typing program that builds skills for young children. A Kid Keys friendly dragon named Keystone guides children through three excit ing activities that familiarize them with basic key board functions Kids can explore the keyboard with unique and animated imagery in the Magic keyboard. As they type, different animations appear that reinforce letters and key positions Once children are familiar with the keyboard, they con play Drogon Tunes and the Alphabet Song Game Features cosy to read type, digitized speech, music and sound effects PUBLISHER: Davidson $28 DOS Since 1985 800-228-7449 62 TOLL FREE ORDER LINE $21 GREAT COMPUTER ADVENTURE THE BACKYARD WORD TALES CD MATH ACE drink Core Begin a heart pounding adven ture when you find the secret message from the lost chil dren. In your quest to save the chil dron, you chal lenge the gremlin, search the cove attic and other hid ing places, solve riddles, puzzles and unravel troubling myster ies Learning about computers has never been so excitingl Teaches and entertains children ages 7-12. Pit your skills against the gremlin and play the game again and again for hours of fun and learning Step into the Backyard, where whimsical and c n activities encourage your children to explore the environment around them. They'll enjoy end less hours of fun BACKYARD while they born about nature, map reading and more. Six major games and activities that focus on a fascinating range of skills and subjects. Children increase knowl edge of animal anatomy, behavior and habi tats. Write a song, draw in the sky or chal longe to a game of Tic Tac Tool Help your children begin to spell by playing fun games with Milo, a word loving, kid pleas ing alien. They'll discover a jungle, complete with low els and joguars. They'll play volley ball with a visor A NEW WAY TO PLAY AND LEARN wearing vulture. Engaging animo fion and music provide hours of fun and learning, Designed for children agos 4 through 7. Game of words, letters and surprises. So simple to use, children can play on their own! Ages 8-14 Turns your kids on to moth Includes cop tivating arcade style game, essential skill building exercises and an intro duction to 70 major math con cepts. Features engaging graphics, MIDI music, and sound effects. Hundreds of real world challenges with Bir-Bot, your animal ed math navigator. More than 3000 math problems with a visual math function genera tor. Also foctures Smart lab, an interactive math workshop, PUBLISHER: Magic Quest DOS, MAC PUBLISHER: ATI DOS PUBLISHER: Broderbund DOS, MAC $29 PUBLISHER: Time Warner IBM-CD, MAC-CD $31 $28 TYPING IBM REFERENCE SS 46 20 Easy Working Typing.... Barron's Book Notes WIN ................ Easy Working Typing WIN. Body Works 3.0... Mario Teaches Typing..... CNN Newsroom Global View CD Mavis Beacon Typing 3.0 Creep Crawlies CD............ Movis Beacon Typing CD Cute 'n' Cuddlies....... Typing Tutor V Plus ..., Dictionaries & languages CD Typing Tutor V Plus WIN, Dictionary of Living World CD. Dinosaur Adventuro CD. Berlitz Think & Talk French CD.......... Dinosaurs by Microsoft CD Berlitz Think & Talk Italinn Dinner MPC Encyclopedia CD.. Berlitz Think/Talks ik Collection CD Language Assistan nation CD. language Assistar Plus. longuage Assista Multimedia CD Language Assiste the Solar System .... Language Assist mary Language Assie unture....... Longuor BINARY ZOO SCIENCE & HISTORY 62 29 Quarky & Quaysoo's Science ......... Science Adventure 20 Space Adventure .... Space Adventure CD.... Space Adventure II CD.. Time Riders American History..... Time Teeks Undersco Adventure WIN Webster's Dictionary WIN Where in America's Past Carmen..... Where in Space Carmen Deluxe Where in Time is Carmen?... Where in World Deluxe CD.............. Where in the USA Deluxe. Where in the USA is Carmen?......... Where in the World Deluxe Where in the World is Carmen?... Wild Science Arcade w/T.SHIRT Zookeeper.................................. Zugs Roce Through Space ....... 40 ska 29 40 34 -45 26 34 MACINTOSH TITLES Addition & Subtraction ........... Advanced Spelling Tricks Algebra Algebra Blaster Plus Calculus Studyware Cuckoo Zoo CD ... Dinosaur Adventure.. Early Math ....... Early Math CD Fatty Bears Fun Pack Kid's Studio....... Kid's Typing... KidDesk... Lifemap: Animals CD.... Lifemap: Animals w/Backbones CD... Mac USA 20. Mario Teaches Typing Math Blastor Plus... Math Rabbit 2.0.. Millie's Moth House Mind Castle... My First World Atlas. My Own Stories New Kid on the Black CD Oregon Trail... Peanuts: Your to learn CD Phonics...... Playroom 2.0..... Principles of Chemistry Putt Put Goes to the Moon Reader Rabbit I.... . Reader Rabbit Ready for letter .......... Spell It Plus.... StickyBeur Reading Room.. Super Solvers: Out Numbered... Super Solvers: Spellbound ......... Treasure Math Storm... TreeHouse ... Vocabulearn French I... Vocabulearn Spanish .......... Where in America's Past 222.. Where in Time is Carmen? Where in the World Deluxe Where in the World is Carmen??.. Zookeeper... .39 Request your Free T-Shirt with purchase of: Rock 'n Bach Mystery at the Museums Wild Science Arcade 29 20 50 34 30 MATH Odc Oregon Pepper's Aa. Query & Quaya. Science Adventure 2......... Greatest Book Collection CD....... JFK Assassination CD Key Dictionary Plus ........ MS Dinosaurs Multimedia CD.......... Orbits: Voyage the Solar System ......... Webster's Dictionary.... Alge Blaster Plus................... Algebra................. Algebra By Example... Calculus WIN.... Chemistry Works DOS/WIN Dinosoit Addition & Subtract.. Dinosolt Math Flashcards Dinosoft Multiply & Divide Early Math WIN.... Geometry Concepts ..... Kid Cad WIN ....... Learn About Fractions.. Line & Shape Eater CD..... Math Blaster Spot/Kid Works Il.. Math Blaster WIN... Math Rabbit Enhanced .. Math Rabha WIN Mathology Mega Moth...... Mental Math Games 20 Millie's Math House Operation Neptune Sticky Bear Math Tutor Supor Solvers: Midnight Rescue... Super Solvers: Oul Numbered.. Treasuro MathStorml...... Treasure MathStorml WIN..... Treasure Mountain ............. What's My Angle LANGUAGE slobal View CD.... Creer CD........ Berlitz Think & Talk French CD... Berlitz Think & Talk Italian CD.......... Berlitz Think/Talk Spanish CD........ Language Assistant: French 5.0...... language Assistant: French WIN language Assistant: German 5.0........ Language Assistant German WIN......... Language Assistant: Italian 5.0....... language Assistant: Italian WIN... Language Assistant: Spanish 5.0.... language Assistant: Spanish WIN Learn to Speak Spanish CD Lyric language French CD lyric language Spanish CD Vocabulearn French I... Vocabulearn French I WIN Vocobulearn Italian I... Vocabuloarn Japanese 1...... Vocabulearn Japanese I WIN. Vocabulearn Spanish .............. Vocabulourn Spanish I WIN.. 29 TEST PREPARATION A. Grade Builder CD... ACT W/Cliff Notes Biology Studyware..... Calculus Studyware Chemistry Studyware.... GMAT w/Cliff Notos.... GRE w/Cliff Notes. LSAT w/Cliff Notes. Physics Studyware SAT I NEW Personal Trainer WIN... SAT I Studyware.... Score RX for ACT at Homo... Score RX for GRE at Homo............. Score RX for SAT oHote. Score RX for SAT at Home SCIENCE & HISTORY 3-D Dinosaur Adventure........... Body Illustrated. Computer Works Dandy Dinosaurs CD.... DinoPark Tycoon Discover Space EZ Cosmos 4.0 Earth Treks.. Eco Quest Search for Cetus CD Ecology Treks... Jurassic Dinosaurs CD... Jurassic Dinosaurs WIN..... Kid's Zoo CD Kid's Zoo DOS/WIN. Oceans Below CD.... Odell Down Under WIN Oregon Troil Deluxe... Pepper's Adventures in Time Aesop's Fables CD ....... Aladdin and His Lamp CD..... Amanda Stories CD ........... Arthur's Teacher Trouble CD... Bailey's Book House..... Beauty and the Beast CD...... BookMaster for Speed Reading ....... Cinderella CD... Dinosoft Phonics........ Follow the Reader .34 READING American Heritage Dictionary............34 Amenicons in Spoco CD Animals: San Diego Zoo CD......... 56 "


"BEGINNING READING BIG GREEN DISC ALGE BLASTER 3 MARIO'S TIME MACHINE The unique Dream DAMIT Team lalking char acters have emerged as on absolutely remark SREADING oble teaching tool. Using proven learn ing methods, Yobi, Bananas, Jack Spooky and loid establish a one on one relationship with your child while giving positive reinforce ment. Challenging puzzles and exciting story lines are skillfully blended with music, sound effects and articulate chorocters to create on extraordinary learning experience Leads your child through the process of learning to read An interactive doc EDC umentary on the futute of our plan el, Informs you of the environmental issues threatening our planet and what you can do to help solve them looks at problems including global warming, pollo tion, ozone deple tion, acid rain, and the potential solutions recycling, alternative energy sources and conservation Alter examining the facts, enter into an environmental debate. Fully narrat ed with stunning photograply throughout Features specially filmed video sequences in depth photo stores, and animated diagrams Ages 12 to adult. ALGE-BLASTER Newest version of the world's best selling algebro DO gram Guides you through an entire year's algebra cur riculum, using on interactive tutorial approach, Four unique activities with all new SVGA graphics, animo tions and sound will help you develop a better understanding of the algebraic process. Learn how to solve equations and translate word problems into algebraic expressions. Two challenging new graphic games will ensure that you become a graphing expert Covers all subject areas and features on screen hints, PUBLISHER: Davidson WIN Join the Mario MARIO'S Brothers on a wild TIME MACHINE ride through time as they re-live groot moments in history in this new series Take a tomp with the dinosaurs during the Jurassic period stop off in ancient Egypt to meet Cleopatra, and Urrive just in time to witness the first successful powered light of the 20th Century-ollino day's work for the popular plumbers. See Maria visit the workshop of Thomas Edison, ride along with Neil Armstrong and cheer for Babe Ruth, in addition to witnessing scores of other historic events Entertaining and educa tional for the whole family PUBUSHER: Software Toolworks S28 DOS PUBLISHER: Sierra WIN $28 PUBLISHER: Sony Imagesoft IBM CD $33 RICHARD SCARRY BUSY TOWN COMPANY OF WHALES EAGLE EYE MYSTERIES IN LONDON AMAZON TRAIL ISYA Introduce your child to the world of discovery in Busytown. It's a BU fascinating world TOWN of total interaction where the lovable characters from the Busy World of Richard Scarry are up to all kinds of fun. Twelve unique playgrounds nich with realife expe riences gives your child the thrill of learning by doing Thirteen original music scores, including everything from top and reggoe to salsa. Develops skills in addition and subtraction, body parts, counting, directionality, pot tern matching, problem solving and reading. PUBLISHER: Paramount Interactive 529 IBM-CD, MAC-CD; DOS, MAC The Discovery Channel, the leader in real world entertain ment, tokes you on a spellbinding multimedia jour ney with nature's most spectacular WH Creatures. Experience extra ordinary encoun ters, never before captured on film, with some of the rorest wholes on Earth. Investigate their intriguing social behavior and intelligence. Listen to whale communications and understand the mystery of their songs. Includes 45 minutes of exclusive video and more than 200 com pelling photos and illustrations PUBLISHER: Discovery Channel IBM-CD Match wils with the world's Smartest junior detectives! Jake and Jennifer Eagle run the hottest detective egency, and they are looking for 8-14 year old volunteers to help them salve their latest series of cases Solve over 50 new progressive ly challenging cases. Use your deductive tec soning and reading comprehension skills. FREE poster size mop of London included. Use the map for clute to solve the cases Keeps chil dien enthralled while strengthening theit deductive reasoning skills MAC wision: $35 Journey through time from the mouth of the Amazon to its lofty Sources in the Andes high coun ty. Find the medi. cinal plant that will save the ancien! Inces from extinc tion and deliver it to the Inca king Meet as many as 30 other historic explorers, naturalists, scien tists and natives. Exercise problem solving and reading comprehension skills. Develop navigational abilities. Introduces ecosystems and provides insights into South American his tory from the time of the Spanish Conquistadors to present PUBLISHER: MECC DOS, MAC $31 PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts DOS $30 $33 CREATIVITY Print Shop Deluxe 1.2 WIN... Print Shop Deluxe Comic WIN............ Print Shop Deluxe Comics Print Shop Deluxe Companion... Print Shop Deluxe Companion WIN.. Print Shop Deluxe Sampler................. Print Shop Deluxe Sampler WIN Show & Tell for Kids... Sound Source... Story Book Weaver..... Wild Learning Safari 20 26 EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 OVU\" 220/447 602 FAX:508-443-5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 ***. -* *ANC FAX:0011-508-143-5645 Xit, CompuServeID:70007, 1534CW 318 vab ,  FREE UPS GROUND SHIPPING 10,000 IN STOCK ITEMS READING SPEWING Heather Hits Homerun CD ....................19 Jr High Grade Builder 3 Pack.............. Just Grandma & Me CD Long Hard Day at the Ranch CD Mind Castle... Moving Gives A Sturriach Ache CD Mud Puddle CD....... New Kid on the Block CD Once Upon A Time il Paper Bag Princess CD Peter and the Wolf CD Reader Rabbit i Enhanced Reoder Robbit 11 WIN... Reader Rabbit 111.......... Reader Rabbit Ready for Letter ..... Reading Adventures in O2 Reading and Me Talking Ready, Set, Read WIN Rusty & Rosy Volume 1 WIN...... Rusty & Rosy Volume 2 WIN... Scary Poems for Rotten Kids CD School House: 30 Programs.... Sleeping Beauty Storybook CD........ Spoed... StickyBear Reading Tutor... StickyBear Reading Tutor Super Solvers. Ancient Empires... Tale of Benjamin Bunny CD Tale of Peter Rabbit CD. Talking Classic Tales CD. Talking Jungle Safari CD Talking Phonics Plus...... Tell Tale Heart CD Thomas' Snowsuit CD Tortoise & The Hare CD. Treasure Cove....... Ugly Duckling CD Zugs Dinosaur World... Advanced Spelling Tricks WIN Alphabet Blocks WIN. Mario's Fun with letters. Mickey's ARC's Enhanced Spell It Plus.... Super Solvers: Spellbound Word Attack 3 Word Munchers Word Tales CD Yobi's Spelling Tricks WIN 22 CALI EARLY LEARNING Discovering America..... Expert Maps Lost Tribe My First World Atlas... Mystery al Museums w/T-SHIRT Nigel's World....... PC Globe Maps & Facts... PC Globe Maps & Facts CD. PC USA 3.0... World Atlas 4.0 WIN..... 23 GEOGRAPHY Power Hits Kids.. Putt Putt Goes to the Moon Put Pult Goes to the Moon CD.... Pult Putt Fun Pack Putt Pul Jains the Parade....... Race the Clock CD... Scooter's Magic Castle Slater & Charlie Go Camping Snoopy's Game Club......... Stickbear Preschool CD..... Stickybeor Preschool Treehouse Word Munchers.... 28 MULTIMEDIA HARDWARE AR Partner 622 Specker System. 198 Altec ACS100 Speakers.............. Koss HD MPC Speakers... Labtec CS-1000 Speakers. Labtec CS-180 Shielded Speaker... Labtec CS-550 Speakers Labtec CS-800 Speakers........ Labtec CS 900 Speakers Labtec SS-100 Stereo Speakers...... Labtec S5700 Speckers.... DigitalEdge CD Mult, Kit....................666 Discovery Int. Dbl. 16 bit Kit....... 453 Fusion Double CD Internal Kit. ..497 Memphis Multimedia Upgrade Kit....... Mitsumi Double Speed Int.................. MultiSpin 3XE Ext. 195ms.. MultiSpin 3XI Int. 195ms...............529 MultiSpin 3XP Portable 195ms.........480 OmniCD Upgrade Kit................... 313 PAS.16 II Multimedia Kit..... .. .....863 Sound System W/Microphone 2.0.......50 Sound System w/Sound Card 2.0 .139 Texel DM3028 Int. 240ms Toxol DM5028 Ext 240m... 488 759 231 620 23 Flight Stick Flight Stick Pro.......... GForce Flight Yoko............ GameCard Autoset GameCard Ill Automatic..... GameCard Ill MCA Automatic Notebook Gameport Thrustmaster Flight Control............... Virtual Pilot ACS300 Speaker Pair/Subwoofer... 39 30 282 Aladdin Print Kit Animation Studio WIN......... Betty Crocker Boys & Girls.... Creation Stories CD ......... Creative Writer WIN.... Fine Artist...... Kid Cuts Kid Doodle WIN Kid Fun CD Kid Pictures..... Kid Pix Kid Rhymes Leam to Play Guitar CD Lenny's Music Toons CD. Lenny's Music Toons WIN. Logo Writer ................. MetroGnomes' Music.... Miracle Piano System .... My Own Stories Peter Pan: Story Painting Adv. Peter Pan: Story Painting CD.... Print Shop Deluxe 1.2 EARLY LEARNING AJ World of Discovery... Borenstain Bears Fun LunchPak Berenstuin Bears Junior Jigsaw... Berenstain Bears learn At Home Cuckoo Zoo Cuckoo Zoo CD... Fatty Bears B Day Surprise CD........ Fatty Bears Birthday Surprise...... Fally Bears Fun Pack CD. First letters & Words... First Shapes ....... Fisher Price Classics .......... Fisher Price Picture Dictionary Kid Pix Companion WIN Kid Pix WIN... KidDesk..... Mario Early Years Collection CD Mcgee Series Bundlo... Mickey's 123's Enhanced. Mickey's ABC's Enhanced Mickey's Jigsaw Puzzles.... Mixed Up Fairy Tales ...... Mixed Up Mother Goose CD Number Munchers.... Peanuts: Yearn to learn CD. Peanuts: Yearn to learn WIN... Playroom 2.0... CREATIVITY 20 800 228 7449 Order Only, 508 443 6125 all other business. Sales Dept Hours Monday Fnday. BAM till 8PM, Saturday 9AM bil 5PM. All other Business Monday Friday9AM till SPM. Most orders ship within 24 hours. Temporary shortagos aro normally filled within 10 days. Books, Memory chips, and some electronic components are not returnable. We stop only to verified billing addresses International orders welcome Airbome Express Shipping charges $7 per order up to 6 lbs. $1 per ibnbove 6 lbs UPS Ground service charge $3 per order. Actual freight charges apply for computers, hard disk, Bernoulli's, tape back.ups, print ers, Multimedia kits, monitors, etc. Alaska, Hawan, outsido continental U.S., APO/FPO call for information Prices subject to chango without notice. Some product not available outside the US Paco call for more inform tion. Not responsible for errors or omissions, Mastercard, Visa, Discover, proprad orders, purchase orders, wire transfor, cash, and cashiers chock accepted. Personal and Company chocks allow 14 days to clear No surcharge for credit card orders. Your credit card is not charged until the merchandise is shipped We check for stolen credit cards. All returns for credit repair, or exchange must have a retum autho tization number Returned orders or ordered wrong itoms are subject to a 15% restocking foo. We ship latest versions of software available. Over nine years of solvico. Thousands of satisfied cus tomors. Send your Fax today! All quotes answered immediately. Product covered by manufacturer's warranty. Defective items toplaced immediately. Educational government, and corporate purchase orders welcomo. All item numbers represent 3.5 floppy, except where noted 288 OUCOVO Circle Reader Service #120 "


"KIDS COMPUTERS ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXY questions aren't answered before the digital timer reaches zero, the game is over and players must start again. Mind Castle is based on proven language learning strategies. Players respond to vocabulary drills in a non-repetitive manner that draws them into reacting positively. Vocabulary questions are posed with context clues so youngsters can rely on their reading skills rather than mere memory. The game reinforces spelling skills, too. And it teaches students to choose the appropriate word meaning among words of multiple meanings. Students learn more than word skills playing this game. They also learn to budget their time wisely. Guessing wildly and moving aimlessly about the castle takes time. Solving puzzles adds bonus time. Mind Castle is ideal for students with either weak or strong language skills. And players who get easily frustrated can use shortcuts to locate the hidden puzzles. Jack M. Germain Mario's Early Years! Fun With Letters Price: $39.95 In Brief: Mario teaches letters and letter sounds in 10 fun-filled activities. Requirements: IBM compatible (386 or better) with 640K RAM; VGA display; hard disk with 14MB free space; mouse. Audio Support: AdLib, Sound Blaster and compatible sound devices. For Ages: 3 to 6 come with the program. Kids can belt out a tune to Mr. Drumstix's musical accompaniment, adjust the tempo, and even change the instruments all with the click of the mouse. Additional song files are available from the publisher. Several musical games of varying complexity challenge young ears. These range from a simple test of counting notes, to a more advanced game that trains kids to recognize and distinguish different chords. To help guide them through the musical games, kids can rely on three computer characters: Ms. Florida Keys, Guitar George and, of course, Mr. Drumstix. Kids use these campy characters to make music, while learning about the instruments at the same time. Before long, kids will be improvising new musical compositions. Ambitious young composers can take advantage of the program's rhythm editor to create original melodies and drum parts, which can be played back using any of the 128 different musical instruments that are synthesized within the program. Sounds range from the sublime to the ridiculous, and can be plugged in at virtually any point of a composition. Mr. Drumstix is easy to install and use. The clear and readable manual does a good job of explaining all of the compoThe Software Toolworks 60 Leveroni Ct. Novato, CA 94949 (800) 234-3088 Circle Inquiry #136 Mario's Early Years: Fun With Letters beweet can easily switch between the two modes by clicking on Luigi. A Parents' Information Center provides a resource with a wealth of information on what each world attempts to do, which helps parents guide young learners toward specific skill areas. It includes an explanation of the natural stages of learning in young children; home play follow-up activities; and what the purpose behind each activity is. Parents can also configure the program in a variety of ways to suit their child's learning styles. The only option missing is a printing feature. All of the activities are fun, and they cover just about everything kids need to know about letter and letter-sound recognition. Fun with Letters has enough balance between active and passive activities to keep kids engaged for hours. Felicia Donovan DZEV AFrere Jacques Frere Jacque permet OV. Dermer you? SS Good teachers know that the best way to teach a new concept is to introduce it; then teach it in as many possible ways to address all different learning styles. This learning game follows the same formula with fun activities that introduce letters and letter sounds. At the opening screen, kids decide whether Mario or Princess Toadstool will be the active character. They then select from ten different worlds for their learning adventure. These worlds include a variety of activities: simple songs; letter recognition; alphabetic order; sentence fill-in; letter-sound recognition (phonics); vowel recognition; letter blending; letter building; and identification of first letter and last letter sounds. Several of the game's activities can be played in one of two modes; Discovery Mode or Learning Mode. In Discovery Mode, Luigi sleeps soundly and kids click on interactive objects or characters without any restrictions. In Learning Mode, Luigi wakes-up and invites kids to participate in specific activities such as pointing to particular letters or finding words that end in specific letters. Kids 1 WWLWWLLLILLIILLILII Mr. Drumstix' Music Studio Price: $69.95 In Brief: A lively and entertaining program that lets kids express their creativity while exploring the world of music. Requirements: IBM compatible (386 or higher) with 4MB RAM; VGA display; hard disk; sound device or MIDI interface: Windows 3.1 or higher. Audio Support: Sound Blaster compatible devices. For Ages: 3 to 9 Mr. Drumstix' Music Studio Even a novice can't help but acquire new musical skills after using this engaging program. Its games and activities provide serious musical training for young minds eager to learn about the world of notes, rhythms, and chords. For beginners, the program offers activities as basic as a Karaoke-style singalong. Twenty classic children's songs Howling Dog Systems Kanata North Postal Outlet Box 72071 Kanata, ON, Canada, K2K2P4 (619) 599-7927 Circle Inquiry #137 Puge 134 Computer Gaming World "


"My son and I love this game!!! Great work!! Roben Strous, fubenk Robert Strauss, Burbank Oxydo magnum! for PC, Mac, A500-A2000, ST, TT or Falcon Computers. Sequel of the award winning Oxyd, now at a store near you! Moc: 1MB RAM, color or monochrome! PC: 386 or above, 2.SMB RAM, EGA or VGA, Soundbla. or Adl. optional. PROPE My daughter (11 years old) and I have become \"Oxyd\" addicts. We cannot wait to begin exploring the many other levels. Thanks for creating such an excellent product. R. S., Germantown I enjoy this game a great deal and so do my children and their friends. It is just what I have been looking for !! Jerome Wescott, Minneapolis My whole family enjoyed your game a great deal. Michael C. Moore, Columbia This is, without question, the most impressive game have ever seen. I am amazed at the audio, visual and action. George L. Tanty, Arlington Heights Outstanding program!!!! John Bernauer, Los Gatos Wow! That's all I can say about Oxyd. What an incredible game! Hurry! I can't wait to play!! Oxyd has to be the most artistically superb piece of programming that I have seen. From my position of having completed about one third of the single-player levels, the landscapes have been continuously varied with a marvelous attention to graphic and audible detail that makes each new one a continuing delight. I especially appreciate how the marble interacts in seemingly realistic but different ways when rolling over or bouncing against different \"natural\" (or unnatural) substances like stone, wood, swamp, freefall etc. At this point, I'm already worrying that I'll run out of levels (assuming! keep solving the puzzles). Jeffrey R. Harrow Oxyl Credits: Best Brain Game Ma World Game Hall of Fome 1993 Game of the Year Carmputer & Podagogik 06/93 Score this game a solid 10 Current Notes 06/93 \"A\" rating Wow! Exquisite. A must for your games library. Amiga World 06/93 Game of the Month. MaxWelt 02/93 Top of the Charts Bruin leaser Category PC Garnes German edition. This game is highly addictive. Stuart Ritchie, Canada One of the nicest games I have seen in a long time. Thanks for creating such a challenging piece of software. Steve Brannan, Canada Even our 3yr old enjoys the game. I'm completely hooked! Patricia B. Smith, NH 100 new landscapes New objects and game elements to explore. The game is a blast! Excellent graphics, extremely well done. Interesting challenges in each landscape also. I look forward to the next 90 landscapes. David Mangini, a I just had to write to tell you how much fun I've had playing Oxyd. The attention to detail the sounds, the textures of the surfaces really adds to the fun of the game. It invites the imagination for a ride. Thanks also for making all of the landscapes challenging but not impossible. At first I thought that landscape 76 was unfairly difficult, but when I found the way through it, I really admired the ingenuity. Tom Phoenix, Portland Oxyd magnum/ is an entirely new and riveting challenge for Oxyd experts and beginners alike. The game is really slick, well designed. Those first 10 levels alone were worth paying for! It is rare to find such a visually appealing, addictive and playable game. Kathryn Wilson, Australia Call 617-497-1130 for the Oxyd magnum! retailer nearest you One of the most elegant games I've played. Thanks a lot for a great game. Jeffrey Jondahl, San Diego Get a free appetizer for PC, Mac, Amiga or ST: Send S 4.00 for shipping & handling for 10 challenging landscapes of Oxyd to Dongleware, 35 Howard Street, Cambridge, MA 02139. Send S 4.00 for a Slevel teaser of Oxyd magnum! (PC or Mac only) I'm really impressed with your game, Oxyd. Congratulations on a unique and fun product, and best luck to you all. John M. Dodd, Thousand Oaks Ok so we got hooked! Circle Reader Service #49 "


"KIDS COMPUTERS nents. Some advanced computer users, especially those skilled in using Microsoft Windows, may object to certain design elements, such as the inability to minimize the program to the desktop. But if parents recognize such features as a means of guarding important computer data against accidental erasure, the design makes sense. The ease with which kids can begin to explore music and sound is the major attraction of this program. It's notable features will have kids singing its praises. Dennis McCauley King Arthur's Magic Castle Price: $49 In Brief: A mix of fact and fantasy for entertaining kids. Requirements: Macintosh with 2MB RAM, 256-color display; CD-ROM drive; System 6.07 or higher. Parenting program is the largest weakness of this mostly excellent reference. Still, it gives parents a tool that provides immediate answers to thousands of problems that arise with children during the first formative years. Six minutes of audio examples of children's normal language development is followed by a child development specialist's comments and examples of normal child-to-adult conversations. There are over 400 color and black-and-white digitized photographs of parents and children from different ethnic backgrounds, and in utero fetal development pictures. The six references are controlled and cross-referenced by a logical system that performs searches and retrievals on the information. Those who find extensive text difficult to read on the computer display will find the ability to print a welcome feature. Saving information to a file for use in other programs, like a word processor used in a research report, is also available. Topics covered in the book include: fertility, pregnancy, baby book, birth, baby name book, question and answer book, and a children's medical guide. Many parents will enjoy the complete baby name book. The home medical guide is a thorough reference of useful information. Most parents will find their prenatal-to-preschool concerns answered with this publication. -AI Giovetti Orange Cherry/New Media Schoolhouse PO Box 390 Pound Ridge, NY 10576-0390 (800) 672-6002 Circle Inquiry #139 Young parents and would-be parents are always looking for good reference books about parenting. This interactive reference provides six different popular publications in one location, produced by a husband and wife pediatrician and pediatric nurse team who, with their four children, have survived the parenting process. The Parenting guide is primarily a set of electronic books, bringing to bear the convenience of the powerful searchand-cross-referencing ability of the CDROM medium. The sparse utilization of the full powers of multimedia in this King Arthur's Magic Castle but the youngest will soon find tiresome. The interest level generated by this contest cannot compete with more modern battles waged on popular video games. Following the Joust, kids can make a quick stop up in Merlin's tower. Here, a player may click on any visible object and be rewarded with an entertaining animated sequence. But while every click brings about a musical, witty surprise, there are only so many places to click, and the animation and sounds are repetitious. Unless Merlin comes up with some new guests for his party, he will most likely find himself a very lonely wizard. Finally, there is a fantasy role playing element that takes place underneath the castle. Players wander through a relatively simple maze, hunting for treasures and fleeing danger. This type of game has been done before, with much more panache. Despite the overall attractiveness of its sound and graphics, King Arthur's Magic Castle tries to be too many things and loses its focus in the process. Parents whose primary educational goal for their children is to make them marginally conversant in the layout of a medieval castle should make this addition to their software library. The rest of us will find more food for thought elsewhere. Ken Levine CGW A medieval playground sandwiched in plastic is a good description for this child's adventure game. Kids are free to explore one of four areas, but the game offers nothing new to distinguish it from other adventure games, or from educational games using the adventure motif. From the Castle, players may click on any one of a number of on-screen hot spots (the moat or the drawbridge, for example). Each spot provides a little animation and an accompanying narration explaining the purpose of the particular structure. This tour is essentially the entire educational portion of the game. After the grand tour, nascent knights may try their lances at a joust. Jousters are given their choice of horse and opponents. The Joust is an extremely simple hand-eye coordination contest, which all Parenting Price: $79.99 In Brief: A set of six books on CD-ROM subjects concerning the prenatal-topreschool period. Requirements: IBM compatible with 640K RAM; VGA display; CD-ROM drive. Audio Support: Direct CD audio output For Ages: 10 and up Creative Multimedia 514 NW 11th Ave. Portland, OR 97209 (503) 241-4351 Circle Inquiry #138 Page 136 Computer Gaming World "


"Ured HOWIE MANDEL Join your kids on an adventure they'll never forget! G TODO ANONI GODINI Jom A ] DIY Take them to Tuneland, a magical place of fun, music and laughter! Tuneland stars Howie Mandel as Lil' Howie, a loveable, \"animated playmate, in the first fully-animated interactive cartoon. Join your child and Lil' Howie for hour after hour of playing, singing and learning that computers can be fun. Oh! By the way, Mom and Dad, when you play with Tuneland by yourself, Lil' Howie promises not to tell! See your nearest software dealer today! \"The best product of its kind I've seen all year.» Gina Smith Editor-in-Chief, Electronic Entertainment DESKTOP Magazine RAYGROUND SERIES 7th LEVEL 7th Level, Inc., 5225 San Fernando Road West, Los Angeles, CA 90039 1993 7th Level, Inc., Tuneland, Desktop Playground and 7th Level are tmndemarks of 7th Lavel, Inc. All rights reserved.  SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS: IBM: Tandy or compatible 386 26 MHz or better with a minimum of AMB of RAM, SVGA display and CD-ROM drive with CD audio connector, MPC compatible sound card, MS-DOS\" 3.3 w/Windows 3.1 or later. Optional: amplified speakers, headphones. Circle Reader Service #25 "


"BEST OF THE REST Blasters, Dinos and Voodoo Dolls Du Jour by Chuck Miller cards). To order, send your payment to: Apogee Software, PO Box 496389, Garland TX 75049-6389, or call (800) GAME123 with a charge card in hand. Ugh! and Bunga Binga! Take Gambling Back To The Stone Age This month's menu of shareware picks With 66 levels of explosive action through features rather eclectic fare. Topping six missions (the shareware version provides the list, our main course is another one mission to lure you into ordering the Apogee release destined for success—Blake other five), Blake Stone takes you on a futurStone: Aliens of Gold, a 3-D action game in the istic, mutant-mangling adventure. Of course, tradition of Wolfenstein 3-D. Also being several levels of difficulty have been provided served is Dino Slot from BFM Software, a to tune the quantity of mass destruction to Windows-based slot machine with a prehisyour preferred level. toric twist. For dessert we have Voodoo Doll Regardless of the difficulty level chosen, the for Windows, a program that allows you to overall score is determined by several factors: \"stick it\" to friends and foes in more ways roral points carncd, informants left alive, and than one. the number of enemy creatures destroyed. Scores are tallied for each floor and mission, I Think You've Got Your Genes displaying ratings based on Blake's profiOn Backwards ciency, and they can be viewed at any time to Dr. Pyrus Goldfire, a sinister madman from check on progress. Just a hot key away is the the future, is using genetics to create a bizarre auto-map of the floor currently occupied. army of creatures with which he intends to Major features such as open and locked wage war against Earth. In the timeless tradidoors, and the player's position are clearly tion of the B-movie, Goldfire's plan of condepicted. As in Wolfenstein 3-D, secret doors quest and destruction must be stopped, and and walls exist, requiring your thorough and careful efforts to locate. A new feaFLODR I MUTANT HOLDING CHAMBERS LIVES: 3 turc-one-way doors-add to the difficulty of clearing a level. Fortunately, the weaponry provided eases that burden for those lesssubtle players. Visually and audibly, Blake Stone has much the same feel as Wolfenstein 3-D. High quality 256-color graphics offer a familiar look, but Sp02 feature brighter colors and greater SOLD BARS megemist LALDUB detail. There are also more opponents to face in this sci-fi setting, Blake Stone: Aliens of Gold giving a total of 20 unique characters. Graphically, atmosphere rates only our illustrious hero can save the day. Six high, accompanied and enhanced hidden mutant hatcheries must be cleared to by 15 musical soundtracks and appropriate put the dastardly fiends out of commission. digitized gunfire, punctuated by screams and Blake Stone: Aliens of Gold, produced by thunderous explosions in AdLib and Sound JAM Productions, is Apogee's follow-up to Blaster sound. Overall, Blake Stone delivers the eminently successful Wolfenstein 3-D. the goods on all counts. While not quite up to the overall quality of All six missions of Blake Stone: Aliens of Gold Id's latest creation, Doom, Blake Stone is are available for a registration fee of $59.95, nonetheless a high quality, first person blastplus $5 shipping and handling. As a special fest. Those who already have the first release concession to CGW readers, Apogee will give should note that version 2.0 is now available, you a $10 discount if you mention this article. featuring several improvements, including included with the registered version is the lower memory requirements, light sourcing, game manual, a hints and secrets guide, and and auto-maps that rotate to show your accheat code (enabling full health, all weapons, tual facing direction. full ammo, and all necessary level access key Regardless of whether cave men and women gambled, today's dino lovers can certainly do so with Dino Slot, a cute and educational game from BFM Software. Play is simple, as you place a bet of one to five rocks and pull the slot machine (club) arm. The more bets placed, the greater the chance of winning (five bets, for example, increase the total ways of winning by five-across each of three rows and diagonally from corner to corner). As the last wheel comes to rest, your winnings, if any, pour from the slot (watch your toes!). An \"Ugh!\" means no win, while «Bunga Binga!\" reaps cold, hard...stone. In addition to the basic slot machine functions, Dino Slot allows you to increase your winnings by taking a Dino-Quiz.. Answer the posed questions correctly and earn extra rocks. Guess incorrectly and feel that continental shift in your pockets. For the most part, the questions are relatively easy, though a few ringers are thrown in to keep it from being too simple. Also provided are a handy Wheel Editor and Payoff Editor, with which Dino Slot (tm) Elle Options Tools Help Bari Won: Tards: jih KLASA Dino Slot Page 138 Computer Gaming World "


"New Orleans Masse The Darkest Knight is Still Ahead GABRIEL ROKGHT See your favorite retailer or call: 1-800-757-7707 mesto SIERRA Circle Reader Service #125 "


"Head Brain Eyes Teeth Back ODICATE Heat Uro finals O In Laws Vin O Rash Baldest GOOD Remove Pani Elfect Curse VAN Alcat Hard to come by. And harder til to find on your check stub after deductions. you can edit the wheel combinations el Voodoo Dall for Windows remove them to start again or effect the curse. and payoff combinations to your likGood Choosing the latter will result in some visual ing. OHapping O Death mumbo jumbo-the screen dancing left and While Dino Slot is geared primarGood Health Dismemberment right for a few seconds, then disappearing. At O Win Lottery ily for the younger gamer and does Shoulder OSTD @ Pay Raise this point, you can consider your \"victim\" to not classify as a true gambling proGood Grader Divorce be under the spell of voodoo magic. gram, more mature types will cerO Tax Return O Lore Job Frequent Sex Computer Crash Thankfully, Voodoo Doll for Windows is just tainly gain some pleasure trying to Healthy Hait a software toy and is not intended to be a beat the odds in this prehistoric Love Good Luck functional program. The author, Ian Firth of game of chance. Both fun and eduDiversions Software, while visiting New Orcational, Dino Slot will keep players leans, found the subject of voodoo to be entertained long enough to learn interesting and put together this neat little some interesting facts or, at least, digital plaything. Voodoo Doll for Windows is relieve some workday stress. Dino available for a modest $5 registration fee. Slot may be tried free for 15 days, QUE About Checks and money orders are accepted, and after which it must be registered. Just Us Help upon registration, the author promises you send a check or money order for Voodoo Doll for Windows the peace of mind that he won't use his $13.95 made out to Brett McDonvoodoo doll against you. To register, contact: ald at: BFM Software, Brett McDonald, you can inflict others with disease, rashes, Ian Firth, Diversions Softwarc, 966 Kramer 38602 Lancaster Drive, Farmington Hills MI baldness, job loss, divorce and a visit from the Court. Aurora CO 80010. CompuServe 48331. in laws, you can also \"curse\" them with the 76450,3711. benefits of happiness, good health, a pay raise, When You Do The Voodoo love and healthy hair. You cannot mix curses This concludes our look at shareware for That You Do in your recipe, however. All must be either another issue. Software reviewed in this colCertainly not a game but still entertaining, good or bad. umn is available through distributors of shareware and public domain software, as Windows allows you to pin \"To assist in the proper placement of voodoo well as on many on-line services. And remempoint\" good and bad curses to inflicr on the pins, a handy button calls up an overlay of ber, if you find a shareware program enjoypeople of your choice. Curse a friend, ncighvital areas. Head, brain, eyes, heart and groin able, please register it with the author. Until bor, spouse, boss, anyone actually. The good (yow!) are carefully identified for greatest of next time, be sure to get your fair \"share\" of news is that curses need not be bad. While accuracy. Once pins are placed, you can either great games! Cow Gary D. Gamer KEYBOARD COMMANDER CORPS + PREMIUM TEMPLATES FALCON, MIG OR HORNET COMMANDER UTILITIES\" *Finally! Total control of your Falcon 3.0, MiG-29 or Hornet squadrons and campaigns!! FALCON COMMANDER OR PER SET! on 3.0 squadrons For one low price you get all six: ONLY FALCCALC/MIGCALC/HORNETCALC: Superb campaign intelligence gathering MIG COMMANDER UTILITIES tools. Viewable/Printable theater map with detailed info on every site, ground forces & all flight paths! Printable Fuel consumption, Waypoint timing Strategic Tactical reports + F3 TEMPLATE and \"Kneeboard sheet'. Even tells you the conditions for victory or defeat + 13/MIG/HORNET REQUISITION: Take full command of Falcon 3.0 squadrons ONLY $24.95!! Customize squadron names and pilot's roster, including names, callsigns, skill talingsind status. IMPORTANTA *FCU is compatible with Falcon3.0: Operation Fighting Tiger Replenish supplies including F-16's! Sort/print roster by rank or skill, Sierra Hotel list and more! MCU is compatible with Falcon 3.0 AND MIG-29: D.A.F. + les FALCON MAPPER: The famous Red Flag Instant Action and HUD customizing HCU is compatible with Falcon 3.0 AND Hornet: N.S.F. Du 1 utility! Change default theaters for Red Flag and Instant Action. \"Declutter\" HUD. Set default I difficulty level. Auto-generates Red Flag missions in any theater. New graphical Premium TemplatesTM standardized, color-coded layout map shows entire Red Flag theater, flight paths, enemy positions and more! destroys \"Keyboard Confusion\"!! SITOWE 3: Viewer for screen shots taken with Falcon's secret screen capture program! View shots individually or in \"slide show. New conversion feature saves screen-shots to popular .GIF or PCX formats. Includes easy instructions for Falcon's hidden capture commands! REON ROAR RH + KCCMENU: Fantastic menu-shell that brings it all together! Use ready-to-go menus Keyboard Commander Templates reduce confusion or customize to your preference. Add new menu items or create sub-menus to add other and increase one's gaming pleasure. -COW sims, games, TSRs or bat files. Completely unloads from memory while running selection!! INTERIORES I R Falcon 3.0/3.01/MIG-29 Aces of the Pacific + KCC'S COMBAT MISSIONS: All new gut wrenching action-packed Red Flag Strike Commander Secret Weapons Luftwaflo missions, Includes all type missions in different theaters. See if you've got what it takes to Privateer MS Flight Simulator 4.0 & 5.0 Tornado A.T.P. fly these volunteers only thrillers! Strike Eagle III Jettighter 1 & 11 X-Wing B-17 Flying Fortress Gunship 20001&1 To Order Call Computer Express: CY Air Combat Comanche: Max. Overkill F117A Stealth CHECK SIXI. 1-800-228-7449, Ext. 522 8:30-6:30 EST BB39S All other inquiries to: Keyboard Commander Corp. 4819 SW 148 Ave, #402, Davle, FL 33330 300-262-6066 Falcon Man Home Comm a ndemum Imtare trademarks of Mayan Tak Rendale * High Quality, 3-D Graphics * Color-coded Layout * Laminated Stock * * Fits all AT101 Keyboards * Standardized Format * Affixes to Keyboard * Template Special: 1$12.95, Any 2$21.50 Any 3$30.00, Any 4 or more $9.25 each!! sion 9.99 BHA VISA puiko Sunilobyte. Mi 20 Ay Ay Ikan All Nike luderance t o Sulle Circle Reader Service #69 Page 140 Computer Gaming World "


"PREPARE YOURSELF FOR A POWER RIDE! FLIGHT SIMULATOR FLIGHT SHOP THE ADVANCED AIRCRAFT & FLIGHT DESIGN SOFTWARE FROM MALLARD & BAO FLIGHT SIMULATOR You're a simulator pilot who's looking for something more in an aircraft than just two wings and an engine. You're a power pilot that's looking for a power airplane to take on a power trip. That's why Mallard Software and BAO bring you Flight Simulator Flight Shop; the advanced aircraft and flight adventure design program that gives you the tools you need to create the flight experience you've always dreamed of. With Flight Simulator Flight Shop you can build, from scratch, a visual airplane model to your personal specifications for use in Microsoft's Flight Simulator v.5.0. Combine aircraft flight aero mod els from Microsoft's Aircraft & Scenery Designer, or fly one of several great airplanes that are included and ready to fly in any one of the precompiled adventures. If interactive multimedia adventures are what you seek, you can use the adventure factory to set a course for danger, random events, rewards and endless thrills. And for your plane's exterior treatment, there's a new paint shop that will let you give any of the aircraft your personal, artistic touch. Add digitized sound, a flight path editor and other great tools to the list of features and you've got a ride that requires more than a seat belt! So if you're a power pilot looking for a power ride, look to Flight Simulator Flight Shop from Mallard Software and BAO and push your own envelope! M Mallard Mallardo 1-800-WEB-FEET Circle Reader Service #124  1993 Mallud Software, Inc "


"REVIEW A Bridge Too Near A Glimpse At The Cards Of Positronic Bridge by David E. Lindeman SPLAVUNG: UULNERANILITY: STUDE CCT t was the best of times, it was the on the preceding trick, the open hand(s) are Positronic comes with precisely one style of worst of times.\" So Charles Dickens revealed on the table, with the cards displayed bidding. The book that accompanies the started his classic story, A Tale of Two in the center. When Positronic stops to evalugame describes most of its bidding convenCities, at once providing not only a great work ate a play or bid, it displays a cute graphic of tions. Not to worry, though, because Poof literature, but a quote to be used by endless a brain with neurons firing in the upper left sitronic will not allow you to bid incorrectly. generations of writers to describe duality. corner. A feature of Grand Slam Il that I miss If you make a bid other than the one the Bridge is, itself, a game of two parts, bidding is the ability to display all tricks played up to program would makc, it will rell you that and play. Many players are stronger in one the current point. your bid is wrong and to try again or ask the area than another, sometimes markedly so. It At the conclusion of each hand, Positronic suggestion box for the right answer. While should come as no surprise that we now have shows the contract and current score. The the attempt at tutoring the player is reasona computer bridge game that shares the same game scores all hands using the rubber-bridgeable, it comes across as patronizing, especially characteristics. method. There is apparently no option in the to seasoned players. The bidding system Poentry into the works to support duplicate scoring like Micrositronic uses is similar to Standard American, computer briage game market, coming on Bridge does. You can then choose to replay although it does not use the five card major the heels of such earlier products as suit convention for an opening bid Grand Slam Bridge II and Micro Bridge of \"one\" that is so common today. Companion. Since I reviewed both of SPZ 24: EXST\" STY: Since I play a bidding system these games previously in CGW, I'll use known as \"two over one,\" I found them as a basis for comparison. Coming the game's bidding system to be oca year after Grand Slam Iland three after casionally confusing, providing me Micro Bridge, one would expect it to with ample opportunity to read the capitalize on existing techniques to \"Your bid is incorrect» box. If you make general improvements on both. are new to the game of bridge, howWell... ever, you will find the program to be Silent Screens a consistent, if not brilliant, bidder. Ref It does do some things that I find to Positronic opens with a simple screen, : be poor practice; for instance, since featuring a small rotating planet and the it will open a 4-card suit, you may Positronic Bridge logo. No sound, just a find yourself in a 3-notrump conlittle note saying \"Press any key to continue,\" the hand, go on to a new deal, or exit. Selecttract when you have a 5-3 major suit fit. And another screen, again ing exit does not, however, return you to the since Positronic won't let you vary from its with the Positronic logo. This gives way to a main menu, but to the two logo screens inbids, you cannot correct such hands to 4 of menu of three options-Serup, Play and steadas if we don t get enough advertising stcad—as if we don't get enough advertising the major, which is where most people agree Exit—which is rather reminiscent of a BASIC on TV. they should be played. This is, to some extent, game written for an EGA display. Even Do You Wish To Bid? an artifact of the bidding system, and one of worse, about one third of the options under the primary reasons for the use of the fivesetup are non-functional until you buy the Bidding is the most varied and hotly argued card major opening 1-bid. It also denies the Positronic Bridge Advanced Edition. Apparpart of bridge. There are more syshuman player the ently, the enhanced version provides a whole v. the enhanced version provides a whole tems and conventions in the wide tems and convention series of bidding options—but more on bidworld of contract bridge than any ding later. one person can possibly remember. The display improves once you select play Your reactions to any bidding sys$49.95 a simple and and get to the bidding screen SYSTEM: tem depend a lot on your personal REQUIREMENTS: 286 or better, EGA VGA attractive layout that uses a grid to represent experience and how you think about graphics, 2MB hard drive possible bids. The mouse may be used to the game. Of course, this is the most Key disk check select the bid you want, or to ask the program difficult part of the game to reprePUBLISHER: ReadySoft Inc. for a suggestion. Once bidding is complete, sent by computer, since human play the hand play is similarly simple and attracdepends on agreements and is sub(416) 731-4175 rive. The left corner displays the cards played ject to change, error and intuition. TO PLAY CARD CLICK ON IT CLICK HERE POR CLAIM ALL Positronic Bridge TITLE: PRICE: IBM space, mouse supported PROTECTION: DESIGNER: Dr. David Lever Ontario, Canada Page 142 Computer Gaming World "


"A Pepe Moreno Production TIME WARNER INTERACTIVE GROUP WARNING: THIS GAME MAY BE HAZARDOUS TO YOUR SOUL! ONIDOW Ild PRODUCTIONS TAXI #1 CD-ROM of 1993! Billboard magazine NEW YORK HELL CAB TAKE THE RIDE SF YOUR LIFE! An interactive epic adventure on CD-ROM, Hell Cab is more than a game, it's a journey in the devil's time machine. Hop in! Check out the Empire State Building and get set for a hell ride through history's most infamous periods. You'll Dazzling animated sequences; original music, walk with the dinosaurs, fight to the death with lifelike sound effects; rich, 3-D graphics  Multiple environments; complex strategies Roman gladiators, even witness infantry Realistic, first-person interaction attacks in the WWI trenches of Verdun. CD-ROM for: Windows\"#21019 PC Macintosh» — #14019 Multimedia PC Available at your local computer store or call toll-free to order (800) 482-3766 Circle Reader Service #123 D311 08P4 by t er The del Castello "


"opportunity to make a brilliant bid, or to help option. If you ask for help after the first sitronic's bidding system is an adequate one make an incredibly bad bid and learn why at lead, you will get a mathematical display for learning the game. If you already play the school of hard knocks. claiming to show the relative number of tricks bridge and are looking for that 24-hour game, The Advanced game may correct these winnable by cach card you could legally play. it might conceivably turn you into an ax problems. It claims to provide a tool for Being a computer programmer by profession, murderer. I found the bidding to be so irribuilding a new bidding system using an artiI took a fair amount of math in college, but I tating that I had to take periodic breaks from ficial intelligence model called an engram. found this display to be rather uninformative. the game. A feature like the bidding flowSince this was not available for the review, I According to the instructions, Positronic charts used in Micro Bridge would be incredcannot comment on its ease of use or features. will learn and adjust to your playing style over ibly helpful in explaining how to get time. Some part of its artificial intelligence Positronic to make the bid you are convinced It's Your Turn, Buddy routine theoretically grades the results of each is correct. This serves as a necessary replacePositronic has options to use both suit count hand and makes minor adjustments as it acment for the feedback you would get from a human partner as you reviewed hands after and attitude signals. Even berter, it actually cumulates data. In the time I played the game play (\"No, no, when you made that bid, I pays attention to your suit count and attitude to prepare for this review, it is hard for me to signals, a consistent problem with Grand state that the game adjusted to my playing thought you had 6 spades, because otherwise Slam 2. While Positronic does not seem to style. My opinion is that it had made some you could have just bid notrump...\"). I found understand suit shift signals, this is a universal changes, but I would be hard-pressed to exthis to be particularly frustrating because its failing in computer bridge games. Positronic plain exactly what. Positronic's play is consisplay is good and, if the documentation is uses very standard openings, making it fairly tent and generally good, which makes it a tent and generally good, which makes it a correct, will only improve. easy to understand, and it also goofs from good practice tool for playing hands. It will I would only recommend the current vertime to time by sticking too closely to the occasionally get creative with a lead, with sion of Positronic Bridge to a beginning player standard leads, as do other bridge programs. mixed results, which can be a little disconcertor to one willing to learn an entirely new, On the plus side, Positronic will lead the top ing, but I like this feature. The program albeit primitive, bidding system. The features card of your bid suit, giving it an advantage encourages you to stay on your toes, to conadvertised as being part of the Expert edition over most other bridge games. scantly think about why a specific lead was might make it a truly useful, if not terribly chosen, and gives the program the chance to attractive, tool. I hope this is true, because I A minor failing in play is an option to claim make an occasional really great lead. find the concept of the product to be very all remaining tricks. Positronic will take your interesting. CGW word for this and concede all remaining tricks A Jumbled Scoresheet even if it holds a clear winner that you have missed, so be careful. Another quirk is the If you are a beginning bridge player, PoSPECTRUM ELECTRONICS $45 388888888 861 S45 $49 P.O. BOX 6295 SALINAS, CA 93912-6295 1-800-983-4321 CALL US TODAY!! ask for catalog Rebum to Zork $48 Soal Team 7 Obes of Gold (commered) Shadowcasbr Sim City 2000 Star Control SSN 21 Seawoll The Great Wa 1914-1918 Tie Fighter Uloma VII: Pagan Vlor Victory Gold Juno Sword Warlord!! Wing Commander Academy CD ROM DRIVES Creatve Omri CD 5379 Sound Blaster Discover CD 16 Muimeda K S479 Sound Blaster Edutainment CD 16 Multermedia Kit $639 Texel CD ROM 5439 WE SELL: 18M SEGA MAC SNES 300 ATARI JAGUAR WE SELL ALL COMPUTER & VIDEO ENTERTANMENT PRODUCTS THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive helpanda complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit 30 of the games listed below (including Might and Magic 1-4 Ultima 4-7, all SSI AD&D games, Bard's Tale 1-3, Wizardry 6-7 and more). The price for this editor is $59.95. So, for the price of 3 editors, you will be getting 30 editors. Upgrades will be available to handle new games as they are released for only $9.95 per game, CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1,2,3, 4 or 5), Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3). Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3), Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasurers of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I, Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Drakkhen, Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2), Keef the Thief, Darklands, Escape from Hell, Ultima (3, 4, 5, 6, 7 or 7 pt. 2), Savage Empire, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Tunnels and Trolls, Lord of the Rings (1 or 2), Countdown to Doomsday, Eye of the Beholder (1. 2 or 3), Darklands, Death Knights of Krynn, Fountain of Dreams, Magic Candle (1, 2 or 3), Pools of Darkness, Ultima Underworld (1 of 2), Twilight 2000, Planets' Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, Prophecy of the Shadow, Martian Dreams, Realms of Arkania. HINT BOOKS $9.95 each except where noted Might and Magic 1, Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or Crusaders ($12.95)), Eye of the Beholder 2, Might and Magic 3 ($12.95). IBM listed. Apple and C64 versions also available. Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling VASA W Open from 9 AM 9 PM every day for your convenience. $45 CD 7h Guest $54 ADSD Al Qadm: Gories Ourse S45 ADSD Dark Sun $56 AD&D Dungeon Hack $10 ADSD Ravenlott $56 Blue Force S42 Chaos Continuum $7 Draaja Unleashed Dune Great Naval Battles II Iron Heix $69 Journeyman Project S52 Labyrint of Time $60 Machamander Rebel Assault 545 Return to Zork Sherlock Holmes, Consoll $39 Sherlock Homes, Consulting Il $1 Shiko Commader $69 Tony La Russa Baseball $68 Urima l $$9 Utima Underworld I & II $69 Wing Commander 1 Deluxe $40 Wing Commander 2 Duo S40 Wing Commander / Ultima VI SAD Wolfpack S42 IBM ADSD. Al Oadim: Gonies Cure $50 ADSD: Dak Sun 868 AD&D Dungeon Hack 546 Alone in the Dark $38 Arena Eklar Scrolls 849 Amored Fist $62 Bo Forge $59 Bloodhet Bu and the Gray $46 Clash of Sted 545 Comanche & Mission Disk #1 $62 Command Adventures: Starship 543 D&D Stronghold Delta V Dominion Dunel Eye of the Beholder Toril $16 Eye of the Beholder 11 $48 Faloon 3.0 Front Page F.B.Pro Global Domination Great Naval Bardes Il High Command $60 Inca 2 $46 Isle of the Dead ws Gunt Master of Orion Mochamander Poice Quest 4 Prince of Persia 2 Privater Ouest for Glory 4 38 a33333 MasterCard GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS P.O. Box 1083. Brighton, MI 48116 (313) 229-2453 ALL SALES FINAL, NO REFUNDS PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE, CONTACT PUBLISHERS FOR DEFECTS 20% RESTOCKING FEE ON RETURNED & REFUSED ITEMS PAYMENT: CHECKS (ORDERS SHIPPED WHEN CHECK CLEARS) MONEY ORDERS (TREATED AS CASH) CA residents add $7.25 sales tax / HANDLING $2 PER ORDER SHIPPING: FREE SHIPPING WITH 5100 PURCHASE, UNDER $100 ADD $S PER ORDER, 2ND DAY AIR ADD 57 OTHER SHIPPING TERMS ARRANGED. COD ADD $5 Circle Reader Service #60 Circle Reader Service #114 Computer Gaming World Page 144 "


"Conquer Memory Nothing masters memory like QEMM». And now, for just a few dollars more than you would pay for QEMMalone, get QEMM7 with some of the hottest games arund! Game Game Game Pack 2 E QEMM & 2 HOT GAMES QEMM & 2 HOT GAMES Pack1 INCREDO SPECI Pack 3. ON PRIVATEER ISOLD OUT QEMM was once the power users' secret. Now it's the power players' secret. As Compute Magazines reviewer said: \"If you're a Power user who wants to play with the monster games, then MemMaker probably won't free enough memory. You'll need Quarterdeck's QEMM7 memory manager utility, which not only will free up more than enough memory but will even optimize parts of your multiply-configured system.\"No wonder it's the number one selling PC utility. And now, it's virtually free when you buy our game packs. 30 Check with your favorite retailer or call Quarterdeck direct. With QEMM on your side, you'll never be defeated by the memory monster again. Game Pack 2 includes the hot Aces of the Pacific, a realistic World War II fighter simulation and Front l'age Sports: Football, a Superdetailed sports simulation. Game Pack 3 features Shadow Caster, the exciting graphic roleplaying game and Privateer, a challenging Space adventure in the Wing Commander Series. -40 Quarterdece MicroWarehouse (800) 367-7080 PC Connection (800) 243-8088 800 Software (800 888-4880 Circle Reader Service #102 (800) CompUSA for the dealer nearest you Quarterdeck Direct: (800) 354-3222 01993 Quartendek Ottice Systems Trademarks are property of their rispustive owners. "


"MISSION Call 800.999.7995 FREE SHIPPING! ON ALL U.S. ORDERS OVER $50. VIA UPS GROUND WITH COUPON. THE BATTLE OF THE ROBO BABES emas R co WEBCO ACOPO 18 METAL & LAGE CISSORS STONES SCISSORS N STRIP POKER PRO BM 25 By Megatech STONES By Artworx In the 21st century, staged by Pixis Interactive Combines the strategic play lighting has become a lucrative action of 5 Card Draw Poker profession for female hardbodBeautiful women engage with some very different table ies. But the real money comes you in an all or nothing, stakes. Laura. Kami and Greta from the illegal bouts held outhead-to-head competition of are three gorgeous opponents side the city. li's dream babes high stakes, the stakes are who are willing and able to bet it in heavy armor battling for not for money but rather for all for the chance to \"beat the prize money. Action packed, articles of clothing. Your pants off you.\" You can play arcade style fun for your PC. goal is to make your oppogainst one, two or three oppoBut be warned Metal and Lice nents bare all without having to expose yourself. Scissors N Stones is the first interactive crotis for mature audiences only. nents simultaneously. 35 Dil $34. $34. PG-13 ic game that features full motion video merged with 3D generated animation that adds an extra dimension of realism, never before Data Disks I thru 6 S20. each $40. NR-18 available. Includes, Realistic 3D) walk through sequences. Hull person point-of-view. Addicitve gameplay, multiple opponents. FINGERS FOR CD ROM $69. WINNER TAKES ALL WINNEB WINDOWS DREAM MACHINE By Vivid Video by PC Compo-Net By New Machine A fascinating interactive adult Learn to type, learn a new video game of chance. You score language, or learn both at The most innovative CD the points and a host of Vivid the same time! Over 2.500 ever! Navigate through a megastars like Racquel, Justine 3D world where your excercises in each language. dobplus Lenay. Ginger Lynn, Ashlyn Gere Exciting practice games, ultimate fantasics come will pay of in exciting visuals that Fingers for Windows comprehensive 10-key alive. The Dream will leave you breathless! Round instruction. Har the voices .  Machine's beautiful host and Round you go, risking it all not a drea? of native speakers, hundreds ess will lead you on an for a host of sizzling beauties... of usclul phases for travel interactive journey and they're worth it! Types in: English, Spanish and French. CD ROM $59. through your imaginaCD ROM $39. tion. The only CD that adapts to your choices. As seen on Donahue, Joan Rivers and CNN. CD ROM $69. MAYO CLINIC FAMILY HEALTH BOOK by IVI Publishing ART OF PICKING UP INTERACTIVE Mayo Clinic Family Health GIRLS ADVENTURES OF Book on CD-Rom represents the contributions of by PC Compo-Net SEYMORE hundreds of medical experts 22 gorgeous girls share their and may be the most comby New Machine secret desires with radio D.J. prehensive, up-to-date health Steve Morris, as he roams Join the legendary hunter resource available. This Southern California scarching Seymore on a madeapped interactive, multimedia disc for the answer to man's cternal adventure. Help Seymore combines text. illustration, Starting Hood. quest. The Art of Picking Up meet and mate with the animation, video and audio STEVE MORRIS Girls is the ultimate guide for girls of his dreams. Seymore needs your help, so INTERto unveil the mysteries of the human body in a totally revolutionmen of all ages. Candid. lively ary way. Vital health information is provided in hundreds of arcas ACTION is required. CD ROM $69. and educational! including First Aid, Exercise and fitness. Pregnancy. Newborn and CD ROM $59. intant care, Cancer. Infectious diseases and more. CD ROM $43. GAMES VAULT Sottwar CYANES MOVIE ALMANAC SIZZLE By American Data Unscal this latest collecThe Instany By New Machine By Sweet Dreams Adult Movie tion of the hottest games ALMANAC Stars, directors, studios, all on the market today! Games Make your own Screen at your fingertips. Over 750 Saver and create wall Contains games of all Library reviews, 250 Star biograpaper. DOS or WINtypes... Arcade games, on CD-ROM phies; all with full color, war games, flight simulaDOWS compatible. We knew you were sick and tors, casino games, high res images. Jim tired of cumbersome, adventure games, puzzles Holliday gives you all the Troublesome viewers thai and much, much more! Months of entertainment, hun inside facts, history & trivia were supposed to be easy dreds of games packed on one CD ROM, Comes comof the industry! Includes to lis. Say Good Night to the viewers of the past! Try plete with the Software VAULT Librarian to manage promotion clips from the Sirle Now! CD ROM $39. the many files included. CD ROM $34. LaserDisc library. CD ROM$99. (Buy All 3 for $89 or $34. cach) Software Vault: Windows Collection Software Vallcollection R Art of Picking Up D LECTION UNNE 800-999-7995 "


"ROM CENTRAL an 45 150 888888888888888 .43 ...34 ..54 45 3D Darlings ..45 ...44 .......44 .30 ........50 .32 888 $$$88 Hell Cab . ....37 FREE SHIPPING On All US Orders over $50 via UPS Ground ASI .69 Aces of the Deep .. ... Aces Over Europe ........... AD&D Al Qadim Genie's Curse 45 7th Guest ..... ..........52 Interplay's Classic Collection.47 Street Atlas USA ...............99 High Volume Nudes ..............39 AD&D Dungeon Hack.. Intro to Wordperfect 5.2 .........37 AD&D Dungeon Hack ..........37 ADULT MOVIES Strike Commander ...........58 Hot Peppers... AD&D Fantasy Empire.. AD&D Fantasy Empires ......45 Iron Hellx ..............................62 Tetris Gold . ................. ...39 Island Girls 3 In 1 . Air Warrior ... ....... Aegis Guardian of the Fleet....53 Just Grandma and Me .........37 The Journeyman Project .......47 Local Girls 2 .............. After Dark Trilogy Archon Ultra Alone in the Dark .52 Kings Quest 8. ..47 The Tortoise & The Hare ........40 More Northern Delights... Amorous Asian Girls Armored Fist Animals Labyrinth of Time Tony LaRussa 2.... ....... Northern Delights..........44 Best of Vivid Axis The GameCheater.... Arthur's Teacher Trouble .......40 Learn Fly Fishing ............SI Where USA Carmen Dlx ............52 Betrayal Beat the House ....... Astrology Source Lord of the Rings ........4 Where World Carmen Dlx .......39 Southern Beauties ..................44 Busting Out Betrayal at Krondor Battlechess Enhanced Lost in Time Wing Commander 2 Dlx ........30 Super Models Go Wild .............49 College Girls Blood Net ....... .... Bible Ubrary........................8 Mad Dog McCree..................42 Wing Commander Dlx ............30 Tropical Girls.... 39 Deception ... Bloodstone ............ Blood Net....... . Mayo Clinio .............................45 WolfPack ........ .... Venus Model Search 93/94 ....44 DirtyTalk Bram Stoker's Dracula Comanche ............ MM 2 Day of Tentacle ....... World of Xeen ...... Winner Take All ... Girls of Mardi Gras ... Caesar ..... Conspiracy ............. Oregon Trall....................40 Women on Wheels ...............44 Hidden Obsessions ......... Carrier Strike .............. Cyber Race ................. ......45 PhoneDisc Residential USA .....59 ADULT CD GIF'S House of Sleeping Beauties ...59 Carriers at War 2..... Daemonsgate ..... PhoneDisc USA Business. ...59 ADULT INTERACTIVE Inferno ... Civilization Windows.. Dark Sun Shattered Lands ...54 PhoneDisc USA Reverse ........179 101 Positions 2 ... ..69 Insatiable Rom ................ Clash of Steel ... Dracula Unleashed ....... ...52 Putt Putt Goes to the Moon ....47 Adult Movie Almanac ...........99 Kama Sutra ....... ......... Cobra Mission ............... Dune ..... ..... ........59 Putt Putt Joins Parade .......39 3D DreamGirls ............ ....44 Adult Sampler ... ........14 Legends of Prn II Comanche Bundle... European Racer's Putt Putt's Fun Pack. .. ...39 Amateur Models ............. Adventures Seymore Btts ......69 Mystique of Orient Comanche Mission Disk 1... Eye of Beholder 1,2,3..... Rebel Assault .................52 .........52 American Girls .....................39 Bttman's Euro Vacation .........69 New Wave Hookers Rom... Comanche Mission Disk 2 .......35 F15 Strike Eagle 3........ Return of the Phantom ..........47 Bikini Beach ...................44 Cat and Mouse ................ One-Nine Hundred ........ Command Adven. Starship ....43 Fatty Bear Birthday Surprise 45 Return to Zork .50 Bodaclous Beauties Condo Cuties Pinch of Pepper. .. Companions of Xanth.. Fatty Bear's Fun Pack Shareware Explorer B. Babes 2 Digital Dancing Princess of Persia ......... Conquered Kingdoms ......... Gabriel Knight .. ...............50 Sherlock Holmes Detective 2 32 Digital Dreams Doors of Passion Racquel Released .... Conquered Kingdoms DD 1....27 Gifs Galore Sherlock Holmes Exotic Girls........ ....... Dream Machine Sweet Dreams Cyber Race....... Global Explorer...... Sherlock Holmes IIl... GBL Lifestyles ... LA. Strippers The Barlow Affair Daemonsgate ....... Great Naval Battles .............54 Small Blue Planet ...... Girls in Vivid 1 or 2 ........... Maddam's Family Traci I Love You ... Dark Sun Shattered Lands ....52 Groliers Encyclopedia ........79 Star Trek 26th ............60 Girls of J. Stephen Hicks II.....29 Night Watch..... Wicked Delta V ...... .......67 Star Wars Chess..............45 Girls of Risque ..................44 Scissors N Stones.......... ..79 Wicked Whispers Detroit.... Dominion Doom.... ................. Dragon Knight 3......... King's Ransom.... ..37 Putt Putt's Fun Pack ........25 World Circuit Grand Prix .....37 Eagle Eye Mysteries London ...35 King's Table .... ...27 Quarterpole ........................35 WW II Battles of South Pacific 37 Earth Invasion Windows.........27 Kronolog The Nazi Paradox ....43 Quest Glry 4 Shdws Darkness 43 X Wing MD 2 B Wing..... ........ Eight Ball Deluxe....................32 Krusty's Super Funhouse .......32 Railroad Tycoon Deluxe ..........43 X-Wing ...... Elder Scrolls The Arena........43 Lands of Lore Real Weather Pilot... ........27 X-Wing Mission Disk 1............22 Empire Deluxe Leasure Suit Larry 6.... ....43 Red Crystal ......... Empire Dix. Scenerio Builder.22 Legacy Realm of Terror ..........43 Return to Zork ...................47 JOYSTICKS Empire Deluxe Windows...........37 Legend Kyrandia 2 Hand Fate 40 Rules of Engagement 2 ........ Simply send in coupon with your order! Eye of Beholder 1,2,3 Bundle...52 Links 386 Pro ............... .........42 Sailing Simulator III VGA........49 ACM Game Card .... Eye of the Beholder 3.............37 Links Course Banff Springs ...22 Sam & Max Hit The Road........37 Analog Plus... F-18 Hornet..... ..........35 Links Course Innisbrook .........22 San Francisco Scenery Disk...32 Flight Control Pro .............115 FA-18 Hornet... Links Course Mauna Kea ........22 Course Mauna Kea ........22 Shadowcaster .......... ..45 Flight Control System ..........69 Offer expires 03/31/94 Falcon 3.0 ........................... ..........50 Links Course Pebble Beach ....29 Siege Walls of Rome. ..40 Flight Control Yoke Falcon 3.0 Mig 29..... ...37 Lucky's Casino.......................40 Sim City 2000 .........................43 Flight Stick......................39 Falcon Fighting Tiger ..............30 Master of Orion ....................45 Master of Orion ...... Sim Farm..... .35 Flight Stick Pro CH Products..65 Fatty Bear's B'day Surprise .35 Meadowlark Bridge Windows.59 Simon the Sorcerer. 34 Formula 11. Fatty Bear's Fun Pack. ..24 Metal and Lace .....................34 Slater & Charlie Go Camping.32 G Force Yoke ..................... Get the facts via FaxBack... Flashback ........................ ..... ...35 ... Metal and Lace Upgrade...........9 Solitaire's Journey. .. Gameport Ill Automatic ........34 Fleet Defender F-14 Tomcat...50 Microsoft Arcade Windows.....34 Spectre VR.................... .....37 Machi Call 201.676.7454 from your fax Flight Light................... Microsoft Flight Sim 5.0 ........49 Speed Racer Ching Racer X....37 PC Command Control machine. Receive information on Flight Sim Toolkit.............. -57 MM 2 Day of Tentacle ........40 SSN-21 Seawolf... Rudder Pedals... new releases, Adult CD rom, Forgotten Castle Awakening..50 More Vegas Games Windows..22 Star Reach... .37 Virtual Pilot. Front Page Football Pro .........47 Mortal Kombat.......... ........40 Star Trek Judgement Rights...37 Weapons Controller Mark 2...99 specials, and more. Gabriel Knight......................43 New York Scenery Disk.. .34 Star Wars Chess.. .......45 Gary Grigsby's War in Russia 47 NFL Coaches Club Football .....43 Stonekeep.... ..47 SOUNDCARDS 24 HOURS A DAY 7 DAYS A WEEK Gateway 2.. .............. ........37 NHL Hockey 94.. ............43 Street Fighter II..................37 Great Naval Admiral's Pack...54 Pacific Strike..... .........50 Strike Command Mission 1......22 Ad Lib Gold 1000... .. Harpoon 2... ...45 Pacific Strike Speech Pack....22 Strike Commander .39 Digital Edge CD ROM Kit.........695 Harpoon 2 =2 WESTPAC...........30 Paris Scenery Disk.. .34 Strike Comm Speech Pack .....20 Discovery CD 16 bit Internal.595 Harpoon 2 Scenario Editor.....30 Perfect General Bundle.. . ..37 Strike Squad ..... .........40 Edutainment 16 Internal.......595 Heirs to the Throne.... Peter Pan Story Paint Adven..35 Strip Poker Professional....34 Pro Audio Spectrum 16.........189 High Command ....... Pinball Dreams .32 Stronghold. ...40 Sound Blaster 16... .....138 with New items, Incredible Toons.. .32 Police Quest 4. 43 SVGA Harrier ........ ..52 Sound Blaster 16 ASP .219 IndyCar Racing ... Powerboating Simulator III ....49 Syndicate ..... Sound Blaster Deluxe............. CD Rom, Adult CD Isle of the Dead... Prince of Persia 2... .45 Syndicate American Revolt.....25 Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe.....122 Italy Scenery Disk ........ Privateer ........................... .52 T2 Arcade Game.. ............32 Sound Blaster Pro MCA..... Jeopardy Alex... Privateer Mission Disk 1......25 Take a Break Pinball Windows 32 Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16... Rom, Discount Jeopardy Alex Windows. 27 Privateer Speech Pack...........22 Terminator 2029 Op Scour ....22 Sound Machine Sound Klt. Kasparov's Gambit. ..........39 Pro League Football.... Terminator Rampage.... .....43 Soundman 16...... ... Coupons, Complete 37 Putt Putt Goes to the Moon....35 The Blue and The Gray... ..43 Ultrasound.. ........ King's Quest 6 .... .47 Putt Putt Joins the Parade ....33 The Great War 1914-18.. ...47 Voice Blaster ... .... The Merchant Prince. ....40 Wave Blaster .... ..... Tom Landry Football Deluxe...32 FREE with your order, Methods of Payment Tornado .............. ........4 ACCESSORIES We accept Visa, MC, Discover Card & Money Tower......... otherwise send $2.00. orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to Ultima VII Silver Seed............22 Art of the kill.. Ultima VIII Pagan...... CD Rom Caddie clear. School, State & City purchase orders (Outside of Ultima VIII Speech Pack...........22 Cyber Man................. accepted. Undersea Adventure ... Gameblaster.... US and Canada send Shipping Unlimited Adventures. Koss HD/4 Speakers... ...37 UPS Ground (S5 minimum)/UPS Blue ($7 Unnatural Selection................35 Notebook Gameport........ ..42 Unnecessary Roughness......37 Sound Blaster Speakers......22 $5.00) minimum); APO & FPO ( $7 minimum); V Victory 4: Gold Juno Sword 43 Supra V32 Int. Fax Modem.....169 Overseas minimum $30 shipping (please fax Victory at Sea..... orders) Send money orders or checks to: Victory Pak.......... CD Rom Caddies S7. (1-10) Video Jam...... $6 (11-20) $5.50 20. MISSION CONTROL Warlords 2.... 551 Valley Road, Suite 211 Washington Scenery... Mitsumi Double Speed Dept. CGW0394 WC 2 & Speech Pak.... Internal CD Rom Drive. WC 2 Special Ops 1&2. Upper Montclair, NJ 07043 High Performence Operation, When Two Worlds War ... 250 ms access time, powered Where in Space Carmen Dix ..43 Overseas & Military Orders given special attention! tray loading, double shellWing Commander & Ultima 6.39 dust-scaled mechanism. Wing Commander Academy ...35 Wizardry Trilogy 2.. .37 On Sale! $235. Circle Reader Service #90 *** .37 Our New Mission Control Communique is here! Order our color catalogue filled ........37 ACOUNTQUE CONTROL Features Kid Pix ..... ...  Listings and more! Picks Look Inside For Der Money Save Coupons CONTROL  -67-11,  "


"COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD A Wargamer's Scouting Report From CES by Alan Emrich Ithough you'll have to read our CES Gary Grigsby is busy working on his as yet they were showing The Perfect General 2, feature for the complete picture, aluntitled Panzer Strike! update. Armed with which I've become a de facto play-tester of. 1 low me to present a quick warsome SSI power programming tools, Gary The new unit types have been carefully chogamer's-eye view of upcoming products will be hot-rodding his future games, and artsen, and a lot of spunk has been added to the shown at CES. In general, things look pretty director Tom Wall will greatly enhance their look and feel. Since the AI isn't in any version good for wargamers for the next six months graphic look. What really knocked my comI've seen yet, I can't comment on how it's to a year. bat boots off was the announcement of Pancoming along. Their Grandest Fleet is someIn the Things Are Ofren What They Sim zer General, inspired by-brace yourselves thing many have been hoping for The Lost department, I had a great time at the Origin a Japanese SEGA cartridge wargame. Now, I Admiral on steroids. They're putting a lot booth. While I appreciate deep flight sims, I more of both sizzle and steak in this product, enjoy easier ones. Along those lines, both Paparticularly on the economic side of the cific Strike and Wings of Glory games cover 41 Came, game. While The Grandest Fleet looks like their respective WWII and WWI aerial comQQP in their glory, I was very pleasantly bat eras with grace and narrative story lines. I Played, surprised to see an out-of-house design Apparently, they've listened to a lot of player I Conquered\" they're calling The Pure Wargame (what a feedback, and have made playability their prigreat title!). The first volume (can you say mary design objective. Both games add an series?) features airborne battles on an operaenjoyable Wing Commander feel to their subtional scale. It's a real historical wargame from jects, and I quickly found myself having a QQP, with a fine graphic look and all of the good time with them. bases covered from what I could see. Lacking Changeling Software is still working away the time to shake down the AI, I am curious on an IBM version of their hot Macintosh to see if it's up to the Lost Admiral. It's a shame space conquest game, Pax Imperia, although that it lacks modem support, as it would seem they were not sure if modem support would a natural for on-line play. make it in time for the IBM release. Also unsure about modem support was ImpresTake That Hill! sions with Ed Grabowski's next wargame, For the finale of my CES tour I stopped by tentatively titled D-Day. Based on an imthe Avalon Hill booth where they were showproved The Blue & The Gray engine, D-Day ing Kingmaker, based on the advanced verincludes distinctions between leaders unlike sion of their popular board game (see Johnny its predecessor. Also showcased was Castle Wilson's preview in this issue for more deConquest, a sort of Caesar meets Castles Il in tails). AH was also showing a very V for medieval England which will support up to Victory-looking operational WWII desert two human players via modem. wargame called Operation Crusader. Both Crusader and the upcoming Beyond Squad I was a Spy at SSI Art by Rodger MacGowan; Copyright 1994 RBM Graphics Leader are projects Avalon Hill is working on SSI had a five wargame line-up to talk with Atomic Games. Designer Keith about, not all of which were available to look can imagine what you're thinking, but keep Zabalaoui from Atomic and Jim Rose of The at. Norm Kroeger's Iron Fist will present tacan open mind. I've actually played the game Hill's computer division were eager to answer tical armored combat from WWI to the near that inspired this highly Americanized vermany tough wargamer questions, particularly future at the platoon level (200 yards per hex) sion and it's pretty addicting. Players conduct those about their Computer Third Reich, in a computerized board game style. It will campaigns, such as the invasion of Poland, which they were also showing (albeit without feature scenarios, campaigns, and designoverrunning the west, etc., at the appropriate AI). your-own features in eras such as 1917/8, operational level. Panzer General has a familAnd that's my thumbnail scouting report. 1939, 1967, etc. Their Great Naval Battles II iar cozy hexgrid structure and enough tactical Don't forget that we're still beating the drums voyages to the Pacific and includes carrier nuance to make any wargamer feel right at for strategy, replay, player aid and deep operations a la Carrier Strike. From the team home. I admit to owning a lot of Japanese analysis» war/strategy gaming articles. Conthat brought you Clash of Steel will be Operawargames, but none have I enjoyed as much tact me at the office, (714) 283-3000 x25, or tion Overlord, a D-Day to Berlin campaign as this one. on any on-line service if you have an idea to with that same strong boardgame feel. At QQP, always a wargamer's favorite stop, pitch. cow Page 148 Computer Gaming World "


"Cao Cao Genghis Khan It took 1400 years, but we finally got them together! CLAN OF THE GRAY WOLF 2131 I of The Three kingilomis. DRAGON O DESTINY icture this, two of history's most ruthless and ambitious leaders in the same room. Now throw in the fact that both are looking towards world domic nation with massive armies following their every command. Sounds interesting, doesn't it. This winter, Koei's bringing Genghis Khan and Cao Cao together to a store near you, and it's going to be exciting. After all, Genghis Khan is out to lead his Mongol hordes victoriously across Asia and Europe in GENGHIS KHAN II: CLAN OF THE GRAY Wolf and Cao Cao's devising new ways to reunite China after the collapse of the Second Han Dynasty in ROMANCE OF THE THREE KINGDOMS III: DRAGON OF DESTINY. The contest for world domination is about to begin. Are you ready? CONQUER THE WORLD! SEIZE THE BATTLE ADVANTAGE VGA color Bater , SEAL AN ALLIANCE. PREPARE FOR Mouse support Sound Blaster & AdLibTM sound support KOEI ALSO AVAILABLE FOR SNES & SEGA. KOEI Games are available for all systems in retail outlets nationwide! If you can't find the KOEI product you are looking for, call us at (415)348-0500 (9am to 5pm PST PC KOEI Corporation, 1350 Bayshore Highway, Suite 540 Burlingame, CA 94010 Compatible Genghis Khan I and Romance of the Three Kingdoms ili arc trademarks of KOEI Corporation, Circle Reader Service #70 "


"SNEAK PREVIEW A Throne By Any Other Name The Gamer as Kingmaker in Avalon Hill's War of the Roses Game by Johnny L. Wilson Kingmaker Mowbray \"And therefore, since I cannot prove a lover, 70 entertain these fair well-spoken days, 7 am determined to prove q villain And hate the idle pleasures of these days.' -Shakespeare, Richard III, I, 1, 28-31. Though Richard III's opening monoics constantly underscore this logue begins by implying that fact, as each noble is repreI England's long \"winter of disconsented by his appropriate tent,\" featuring the red rose of Lancaster heraldic shield, and the shields upon the throne, is finally over, the selfmove about the map to show proclaimed villain announces a chilling the location of each noble. series of plots and schemes designed to Each noble has the same sized shield. bring himself to the throne. The history of regardless of army strength or political posiis assumed to have his army with his machinations would be written in the tion, and is assumed to have his army with blood of his fellow nobility. Between 1455 him. Hence, the flow of the game seems to and 1485, three kings (Henry VI, Edward emphasize the leadership of the nobles V, and Richard III), one crown prince, nine rather than the movements of armies and dukes, one marquis, 13 earls and 24 barons the numbers of casualties as in more tradilost their lives, and two royal houses, both tional wargames. Kingmaker (in both the Nevilles and the Beauforts, were totally boardgame and computer forms) focuses destroyed. upon the partisanship, power and survival Computer Kingmaker, like its boardgame of individual nobles such as Neville, known predecessor (Kingmaker), focuses on the historically as \"Warwick the Kingmaker.\" actions and alignments of the nobility. As in the boardgame, gamers represent as opposed to the strategies factions to which are dealt hands of nobles, and tactics of pitched titles and resources. You can play battles, during the with as few as two factions and as War of the many as five. The larger the numRoses. The ber of factions, the smaller the graphnumber of resources to be distributed within each faction. Then, it is your job as leader of a faction to divide the titles (a noble must be at least an Earl in order to hold an office within the kingdom and be able to wield more power) and resources (offices, ships, archers, crossbowmen, soldiers, etc.) among the nobles in order to assemble the most formidable fighting forces and determine the initial starting positions of each noble (when there is a choice). It is very important to balance your nobility with regard to strength, because the game contains enough randomality from the effects of plague, weather, and a wide variety of summons to assure that any noble may end up alone and vulnerable to another faction at any point in the game. Indeed, when a noble is killed by plague or execution, the entire military and political strength of that noble is lost to the faction. Hence, a well-balanced faction, with its power divided equally between its nobles, is a faction that is likely to survive. Once the resources are distributed, your task is to maneuver the heraldic devices representing your nobles across the map of England. In so doing, you attempt to capture a claimant to the throne to be your puppet monarch and to capture rival claimants in order to extinguish the claims of the rivals by surgical decapitation. The player who manages to have the highest surviving claimant and brings enough episcopal force to bear to effect a coronation will win the game. The clear nature of the victory conditions is, within itself, an improvement over the boardgame where many gamers have never actually finished a THE COUNTY PALATINE 15. CHESTER CHAMBERLAIN COVENTRY Le Rose Ship of Plymouth FRENCH FODT SOLDIERS 9999 Earl of Westmorland Duke of Lancaster Page 150 Computer Gaming World PLANTAGENET "


"GREAT NAVAL BATTLES« VOL. II GUADALCANAL 1942-1943 This one will blow you away! SUPER VGA: Get ready for the second volume in SSI's hugely successful ADVANCED SIMULATOR SERIES! GREAT NAVAL BATTLES VOLUME II: GUADALCANAL sends you to the South Pacific for the monumental conflict that rocked these remote islands. Five tactical, battles, three carrier battles, and one full campaign provide limitless hours of cutting-edge World War II naval combat simulation. All in crisply detailed Super-VGA! Build your forces from 100 ship types and 20 plane types as you engage enemy forces on land, at sea, and in the air. Sophisticated command and control features let the computer handle the details while you make the big decisions. Or, micro-manage every detail — right down to the targeting of individual guns! IBM 256-COLOR SVGA DISPLAYS GREAT NAVAL BATTLES VOL. II: GUADALCANAL THE PREMIUM NAVAL COMBAT SIMULATOR. IBM & COMPATIBLES Available on 3.5\" disks and CD-ROM ege. To order: Visit your retailer or call: 1-800-245-4525 with visa/Mc (U.S. and Canada only) GOGORO  Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved, "


"game of Kingmaker. Computer get the equivalent of «Fresh wargamer and offers something of a miniaKingmaker can be won and offers a Horses\" and be able to move furtures feel to the battles. To be sure, these suitable challenge on many levels. ther by land, or draw the equivabattle sequences could easily be described as Naturally, acquiring a claimant lent of \"Fair Winds Assist This limited, but attractive, versions of the comand offing the rival pretenders requires the Ship\" and be able to move further by sea. bat system found in Sword of the Samurai construction of forces large enough to The random nature of the game causes the from Micro Prose, Electronic Arts besiege castles and defeat rival forces. As in sands of history to shift as swiftly as the cirCenturion or Impressions' Microhistory, however, you may find that you cumstances faced by the feudal lords of that Miniatures series. cumstances faced by the feudal lords of that have worked for several turns to prepare an chaotic era. assault, only to have one of your nobles Battle is initiated whenever a Glorious Summer? summoned home to quell a peasant revolt heraldic device, representing one or Computer Kingmaker plays so or to defend against a Scots raid. Worse yet, more nobles in a faction, stops in smoothly, once you get used to a you may build a massive assault force and the same location as another rival few clumsy conventions (I had to experience the plague on the verge of winheraldic device. Battle is decided in force myself to remember to distribning. Fortunately, random factors may also one of two ways. First, you can click ute titles and resources before moving my benefit you. As in the boardgame, you may on the attack button, enabling the computput nobles and prematurely ending my turn er to make a quick and dirty when the nobles were out of movement calculation based on the genpoints), that it feels like playing the eral odds and to report the boardgame with human opponents. Some to victory, defeat or inconclusive of the artificial opponents (particularly the result immediately. This is the yellow, gray and purple factions) play with way battle was handled in the ruthlessness and abandon, rushing to seize original boardgame. Second, and kill anyone or anything in their path. you can choose to control the Others (particularly the blue and orange forces. This allows you to factions) tend to wait patiently and move deploy all of your forces and seldom until opportunistic circumstances to be able to set tactical objecarise. Unfortunately, there is no provision tives for each unit. This in the European version or the American approach is much more satisbeta version used for this sneak preview for haro fying to the traditional multiple human players, whether by e-mail, SOFTWARE CLOSEOUTS HAVE YOU EVER WONDERED WHY THOSE OTHER \"SIMULATIONS\" ARE SO UNREAL? PERHAPS, WHILE DOING MORE PICTURES, THEY FORGOT ABOUT RESEARCH, TESTING, & DESIGN. >>>COMMERCIAL SOFTWARE FOR IBM AT BARGAIN PRICES<<< MICROPROSE HITS THREE-SIXTY SPECIALS SPELLCASTING 201 $20 DR. DOOM'S REVENGE $10 V FOR VICTORY: VELKYE LUNI (Russian Front) 815 F-117A STEALTH FIGHTER $25 GUNSHIP 2000 $25 HARPOON 810 THE RIDGE 85 ARMOR ALLEY 810 PIRATES $10 GUNSHIP $10 X-MEN 2 $20 BLUE MAX 815 MEGAFORTRE88 810 NICHT 815 SILENT SERVICE 2 $20 ALLIED FORCES BUNDLE $20. V FOR VICTORY: D-DAY UTAH BEACH 815 REX NEBULAR $20 ATAC: The War on Drugs $20 V FOR VICTOAY: MARKET GARDEN 820 DARKLANDS $25 LAND, SEA & AIR 3 BUNDLE $35. HARPOON SCEMARIO EDITOR 810 PATRIOT $15 DECISION IN THE DESERT $10 MID WINTER $10 OPERATION SLEDGEHAMMER FOR MEGAFORTRESS 88 ANCIENT ART OF WAR IN THE SKIES $25 OPERATION SKYMASTER FOR MEGAFORTRESS 85 FLAMES OF FREEDOM 515 SPECIAL FORCES $15. GREENS $15 LIGHTSPEED 515 COVERT ACTION $15, F-15 STRIKE EAGLE 2 $15 MEGATRAVELLER 1 $15 ACCOLADE CLOSEOUTS MILLENIUM $15 TROIKA $15 TWILIGHT 2000 $15. ELVIRA: MISTRESS OF THE DARK 820 HOVERFORCE 815 ........... .. . ..: SEARCH FOR THE KING 815 WAXWORKS $20 P 515 SPECIAL FROM MILLENIUM STAR CONTROL 820 DONT CO ALOME 85 CHOOSE FROM: THIRD MOURER & STEEL THUMDER 810 T.X.O.85 HARDBALL 2 820 TEST DRIVE 810 BAR GAMES 810' DAUGHTER OF THE SERPANTS WE DI DN T . SIMULATIONS CANADA.. FOR SERIOUS WARGAMING NAVAL COMBAT: ***New***RED SKY AT MORNING, Global Naval Strategic Combat In The Modern Era. TTYNew TTTMAN OF WAR, Grand Tactical Naval Combat Under Sail, 1765 1815. SIERRA SUPER SPECIAL GLOBAL HECT $20 each, 3 or more $15 each LQUEST FOR GLORY 1 or 2, MORE GREAT DEALS KINGS QUEST 1, 2, 3 or 4, SPACE QUEST 1, RISE OF THE DRAGON, FREE D.C. 815 EARL WEAVER BASEBALL 2 815 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 1, 2 or 3, ZA IARD, GRAND SLAM BRIDGE 815 PIT RIGHTER $15 POLICE QUEST 1, HEART OF CHINA, CASTLE MASTER $10 ARMADA 2525 $15 CODENAME ICEMAN, FIREHAWK, THEXDER. DUSK OF THE GODS 815 MARTIAN DREAMS 820 SIERRA $10 BARGAINS PERSONAL PRO GOLF 810 LOST ADMIRAL 820 CONQUEST OF CAMELOT SECRET OF THE SILVER BLADES $15 POLICE QUEST 2 DRAGONS OF FLAME $10 MATRIX CUBE $15 THE COLONEL'S BEQUEST VISA/MC ORDERS CALL TOLL-FREE 1000's more Items for all different 1-800-676-6616 computers... Apple, Atarl, Amiga, C64/128, Credit Card Orders Only 111(S25 minimum) MAC, & lots more IBM/MS-DOS !! COMPSUIT TO ORDER: Send check or money order including shipping charges of S5 for U.S.A. 58 for Canada, 516 all others. Califomians must include 7.25% sales tax To receive our P.O. BOX 5160 catalog with 1000's of closcouts for all computer types, send S2 in cash or U.S. SAN LUIS OBISPO postage stamps.. DO NOT CALL FOR A CATALOG!!! A catalog is free with any CA 93403 order from this ad. To check for an item not listed here, call (805) 544-6616. THE MIDWAY CAMPAIGN, Operations In The Central Pacific, 1942. THE SOLOMONS CAMPAIGN, Operations In The South Pacific, 1942-1943. FLEET MED, Tactical Naval Combat in the Med, 1939-1943. MALTA STORM, The Battle For The Mediterranean, 1941-1942. KRIEGSMARINE, Tactical Naval Combat In The Atlantic, 1939-1944. NORTHERN FLEET, Modern Naval Operations In The Atlantic Ocean. GRAND FLEET, Tactical Naval Combat In The North Sea, 1906-1920. IN HARM'S WAY, Tactical Naval Combat In The Pacific, 1943-1944. LONG LANCE, Tactical Naval Combat In The Pacific, 1942. SEVENTH FLEET, Modern Naval Operations In The Pacific Ocean. FIFTH ESKADRA, Modern Naval Operations In The Mediterranean Sea. GREY SEAS, GREY SKIES, Tactical Modern Naval Combat. ORDERING INFORMATION, PLEASE READ CAREFULLY: All games are $60.00 each for Americans, $80.00 each for Canadians (GST included), and $65.00 each for purchasers outside North America. We will let cheques clear before shipping (6 weeks!), so, money orders are preferred. PLEASE be sure to tell us which computer you own. Purchasers from outside of Canada should send payment in U.S. funds.\" Nova Scotia residents must add an extra 10% of the total for Provincial tax. SIMULATIONS CANADA, P.O. Box 452, Bridgewater, NS, Canada, B4V 2X6. Circle Reader Service #111 Computer Gaming World Circle Reader Service #40 Page 152 "


"OUTKIAI Advanced Dungeons & Dragons Ind Edition COMPUTA GAME THE GENIE'S CURSE Explore a new game world in the style of the Arabian Nights! High magic and dark deeds reign as you face the evil Genie Lords in a quest to restore your family honor! A complex, pregenerated character grants you quick entrance into the all-new AD&D AL-QADIM\" game world. Encounter genies, sinister sorcerers, wise hermits, and many more mysterious beings, each with their own secrets and challenges. Use magical items to face the challenge of real-time combat and puzzle solving. And savor a tightly woven story line that's enhanced by grand cinematic musical themes all in the exotic new AL-QADIM game world! 1 to Holcicielreinic i eirra A IBM 256-color VGA Displays YUSRY  IBM & COMPATIBLES Available on 3.5\" disks and CD-ROM TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call: 1-800-245-4525 with Visa or MasterCard (U.S. & Canada only). SIL ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D. AL-OADIM. the TSR logo and all TSR characters, character names, and the distinctive likenesses thereof, are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSA, Inc.  TSR, Inc. 1994 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. By "


"modem, or \"hot seating\" one computer. This is a loss, because Computer Kingmaker plays faster than any game I've played of the boardgame and would make a wonderful referee/utility for multiple human players. Nonetheless, it is a very playable solitaire game until you learn the styles of the opponents and make mental notes like \"Do unto Yellow before Yellow doeth unto you.\" Fortunately, there may be a mechanism for mixing up the Al in the final version, though this is not definite. Computer Kingmaker plays so much like the boardgame that non-boardgamers may become impatient with the speed with which the artificial opponents make their moves. Because the emphasis sequences where nobles meet their end, the of the game is upon the movestorm sequences telling ships to move ments of nobles, each step of directly to port, and the plague sequences each noble is animated on the where monks march from door to door screen as the noble's heraldic announcing death. Some may counter that device moves from location to the battle sequences are nice, but purists location. This animated may wonder if this is enough to justify the movement provides important purchase of a computer game. Those of us visual cues to the experienced who still play boardgames will answer to boardgamer, letting the gamer the affirmative. Others will wonder at our know about the artificial patience. opponent's vulnerability or, as several nobles Capers Nimbly? begin to zero in on a certain locale, strategic objectives. Computer Kingmaker may signal Those who dislike boardgames may the emergence of the type of comfeel that this sacrifices the computer's puter wargame that many of us strength of providing limited intelligence have always wanted to see our of Avalon and may feel disappointed by this design Hill. It does not challenge the state-of-thechoice. art in terms of computer graphics, nor does C it up the ante with expensive video footage. Finally, many computer gamers will feel It merely replicates its colorful and distinthat the conceit of having the guished predecessor. While the game does heraldic markers, taken literally not provide unbeatable Al at every level, it from the boardgame, move across still offers plenty of options for letting an analog to the actual game board gamers discover their own level of comis inadequate compared to the comfort/competition. Indeed, its greatest virtue puter's capability of providing digitized is the gamer's reward in that playing video, detailed animation and CD-quality Computer Kingmaker is like-playing audio. Some will discount the limited aniKingmaker. Warwick would be proud. cow Kinom mation available in the beheading TEMPTATION IN THE MAIL It's fun or it's free! We want to seduce you into the amazing hobby of play-by-mail (PBM), America's subtlest, most challenging gaming experience. To further our evil plans, we've worked on producing an offer that even a battlehardened veteran will hesitate to refuse. Quite simply, we guarantee that you'll enjoy it, or that it will cost you nothing. This is how it works. Take a $19.99 subscription to FLAGSHIP, the leading international PBM magazine, published since 1983. We'll send you: (a) Your first issue, showing you just how PBM games work, and reviewing the latest offerings (b) A coupon worth $20 in any of dozens of different games, with a description of each to help you choose. We hope you'll enjoy the issue and you'll like the look of your first game. Then you've got a whole new games hobby to explore, and ourfiendish plot has succeeded. But what if you don't enjoy it? Just send us a postcard within a month to cancel, and we'll return your $19.99. it's as simple as that. Why not try it? Send $19.99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW offer, PO Box 454, Fair Lawn, NJ 07410-0454. [European readers: send  to FLAGSHIP, CGW offer, PO Box 1733, Birmingham B20 2PP Circle Reader Service #54 for the equivalent Euro-offer!) "


"Advanced Dungeons Dragons Ravenloft Strahd's Possession Inmask and defeat Strahd, one of the most nefarious of all gothic horror characters, or you'll never escape the terror of the AD&D RAVENLOFT\"game world! Presented in High Resolution 320 x 400 256-color VGA, STRAHD'S POSSESSION delivers twice the quality of VGA without the cost of a Super-VGA card! So you experience gothic horror role-playing at its best in this visually stunning game. Bask in the glow of an exceptionally large 3-D gaming window. Explore bonechilling dungeons. Challenge 30 authentic RAVENLOFT game world creatures. Cast over 60 mage and priest spells. Let automapping keep track of your travels with maps that print complete with any notes you made on them along the way. All this plus a haunting musical score and digitized sound effects will keep you on edge for hours and hours! Just be careful, things get pretty eerie when the sun sels! Available for IBM & Compatibles on 3.5\" disks and Enhanced CD-ROM. IBM HI-RES 256-color VGA Displays muti S TROPEUTTAA CHEILD BE TO ORDER: Visit your local retailer or call: 1-800-245-4525 with Visa/MC (U.S. & Canada only). ASSEN BLEINS SUNT INSIDE TRANSCE A CEL. (  SRL  DPE Technology developed by DreamForge Intertainment ADVANCED DUNGEONS & ORAGONS AD&D, RAVENLOFT the TSR logo and as TSR characters, character names, and the astinctive keresses thereof are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR, Inc. 1994 TSR, Inc. 1994 Strategic Simulations. Joc Alrorts reserves "


"SNEAK PREVIEW Wargamers May OPFOR TacOps ARSENAL PUBLISHING LAUNCHES ALL SURGICAL STRIKE ON WARGAMING \\ By M. Evan Brooks File Combat Orders Display Reports Comas Unit Information No Reference Prints: WOOD E X .00 Iwwer foretration: 300 0 11 im DeGoey, President of Arsenal Pub18 months. The enhancements will allow may be superimposed on the map, with grid lishing, Inc., is a well-known wargamer previous scenarios to be saved, but will tweak coordinates representing the actual UTM and author. He is best known for his the model to the state-of-the-art. TacOps 2 military mode (in Version 2.0). Harpoon Battlebook, and will soon reLine of sight can be checked by lease a similar guide for V for Victory Utah simple mouse input, and Pk (probBeach (co-authored with Ed Rains), as well as abilities of kill) are detailed. In fact, Weapons Free, a battlebook on contemporary normal Pk tables show percentage of naval simulations. Though he and his comkill ratios delincated in ranges (from pany have emphasized publications, they are 0-500 meters, from 500 meters to now prepared to enter the software realm, 1500, etc.). TacOps uses information and may well cause a stirring in the wargamfrom the designer which strerches out ing world. the Pk. In cffect, if a 50% Pk were Arsenal's philosophy may best be summcd Photo OK normally noted for ranges from 1500up as \"serious wargames and serious enter2000 meters, the program will have a tainment.\" TacOps, the debut product for higher Pk for 1500 meters, and it will Arsenal and designer Major L. Holdridge, is gradually decrease as it reaches the a serious simulation of contemporary military end of the range. tac-tical operations—serious enough, in fact, (with a 1995 release date) will add fully digthat an earlier version of the game was used The map itself is functional, alamoden though there is only one differential in elevainformally by the U.S. Marine Corps for itized 1:50,000 DMA maps and a modem training purposes. Based upon what I've seen, option, and will allow you to play either side tion due to memory requirements. This will it appears to be both an excellent training tool in a solitaire contest. The modem option will be adjusted in Version 2.0, which will also add a scenario editor. Note that the enemy AI feature a background communications proand an excellent game system. gram for real-time based operations. is hard-coded, so any scenario designs by the In TacOps, the units are portrayed at the squad/platoon level, with scenarios ranging The initial release will offer 24 scenarios of user will be two-player mode only. upwards to regimental size. You may play U.S. forces (either Army or Marine Corps) TacOps 1.0 will emphasize hasty attack and against OPFOR. But since you can vary the either U.S. or OPFOR (opposing forces) in a defense operations. Although some prepared two player game (face-to-face, E-mail or netweapons systems (c.g., adjust from Ml positions may be availah positions may be available, the emphasis is on work), or U.S. forces against the computer Abrams to M60A3s, from T-80s to T-72s), a \"come-as-you-are\" battle. With the entire OPFOR. In the late 70s and early 80s, one in effect there will be roughly 10 variants for scenario covering only one to two hours of could not call an enemy force «Soviet;\" ineach scenario for a total of around stead, OPFOR was the required designation. 240 scenarios. indirect lire Control Spa I still have manuals detailing the political The game is turn-based, with each ot!!! I am history of OPFOR as well as insignia patches turn consisting of four 15-second for that totalitarian nation. By the mid-80s, phases. Up to five minutes of turns the artificiality was dropped, and it is some may be pre-loaded. Artillery and air what humorous to see the term OPFOR support are available, with the forcome back into vogue. Of course, now the he back into vogue. Of course, now the mer requiring registration and adSoviets are no longer available as a threat, and justment for fires. Of course, therefore, OPFOR fills the requisite need. te need. adjusting artillery fires and tactical (Iraq attempted to supplant this void, but was air support comes with a built-in quickly determined to be too marginal.) delav. and you can often end up TacOps is envisioned as a dynamic design, destroying vegetation instead of the with revisions due to be published every 12enemy. A 1000-meter grid square File Combat Orders Display Reports Coins H offmep Artillery Support In Page 156 Computer Gaming World "


"S THE GRANDEST FLEET IEDZ T OOP, Quantum Quality Productions Inc Only one fleet will be left afloat in this thrilling masterpiece from QQP. Experience the grueling campaigns, the agony of defeat and the exhilaration of VICTORY!!! Develop cultural resources and manage the growth of your population. Allocate natural resources to build missile sites, radar stations, shipbuilding facilities and SUPERSHIPS. It is up to you to destroy your nemesis... or end up in Davy Jones' Locker.  MODEM PLAY (A QQP Hallmark)  City Economics-Cultural and Industrial aspects Campaign Play  Player History  A wide selection of ship types  Random Maps-unlimited variation  A truly challenging Al  Battles Include: Falkland Campaign, Battle of Northcape, The Bismark-Tirpitz Connection, Surigao Straight, Yamamoto's Trap, etc. Plus some \"What if\" Battles A tactician's and strategist's delight!!! \"The Grandest Fleet\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: 1-908-788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1994 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #105 "


"File Combal Orders Display Reports Comuns Also From Arsenal... File Cumbal Orders Display Reports Comms real-time, battlefield supply is not a critical issue. Units may be resupplied, and it occurs automatically. I initially questioned this, but with the short duration of the scenarios, it can be assumed that the supplies have been prepositioned in preparation for the attack/defense. Units will be in either exposed or defilade (default) mode. You can play with all units visible or with \"combat conditions,\" which would take terrain and smoke screens into consideration. In a demonstration at the Arsenal offices, I watched a Soviet reinforced tuitive, and you can spend most of your time battalion attempt to penetrare a Marine defighting the battle, and not fighting the sysfensive line (vicrory conditions were simpletem. While most of the Marine data is curthe OPFOR had to exit 40 percent of its rently encoded, the Army dara is being forces), and its southern forces were virtually constructed as of this writing. MAJ decimated by minefields and tactical air supHoldridge's military background is evident port. The northern enemy forces deployed in when the computer acknowledges user input line and attempted to break through a thinlywith «Aye aye, sir!\" Hopefully for us grunts, held Marine line, while the southern element the response will be modified to a simple was only beginning to regroup after its bout «Yes, sir!» Nonetheless, even with my look at with the minefields and air opposition. What a work-in-process, I was impressed. Yes, the the OPFOR did not realize was that this was two levels of elevation prevent the product only the first of a string of blocking positions. from simulating varied terrain features, but After an hour of play, OPFOR casualties were TacOpsis a dynamic development tool which almost 40 percent of engaged forces, while bodes well for tactical wargamers. the U.S. MaCurrent memory rines had inrequirements mancurred only a 10 date 2 MB, with 4 percent loss. MB recommended Nevertheless, (but 8 MB for optithe OPFOR still mization) for the had not even next edition. You brought its seccan play with less ond echelon memory, but the battalion onto map (which may be the map, and if as large as 10 x 25 the first echelon km) will require had spotted disk access and remost of the Maloading into memrine positions, it ory. would be difficult for the Marines to sustain their defensive in the face of overwhelming L ater anticipated releases will include Korea numbers. What looked like a clear-cut victory (historical and modern, a la Larry Bond's Red in mid-game could easily develop into an Phoenix), Arab-Israeli (historical and hypoindecisive battle at the conclusion of the scethetical) and also World War II. TacOps is a nario. generational descendant of Mech Brigade, and You can choose when to fire, and adjust its proposed incarnations will likely replace your units accordingly. Just because a weapon Kampfgruppe in the hearts and minds of grogcan fire out to 3000 meters does not mean it nards everywhere. is an effective killer at that range. Thus, you TacOps will have a suggested retail price of may choose to hold fire until the enemy $79.95, although it may be ordered direct by enters the \"killing fields» of an ambush. mail or phone for $49.95, and a user returnSomewhat akin to Harpoon, the program will allow the user to view the weapons platforms ing the registration card will receive an addiand determine optimum uses. tional 12 scenarios for five dollars (only available through direct order). For more inLike V for Victory, you can use the mouse formation contact Arsenal Publishing at for virtually all operations. User input is in(703) 742-3801. CGW Indirect Fire Control Special torti sint 155 Holte adjust HE 11. Sin e sitter adjust TacOps is not the only wargame in Arsenal's arsenal. E.T.O., or European Theater of Operations, is currently in the works. Based on a preliminary look, it appears to be a cross between Crusade in Europe and the V for Victory series in terms of coverage and game play. Designed by Ed Rains (formerly of Atomic Games), the simulation covers the period 1 June 1944 15 September 1944, with the strategic map covering an area from Britain through France, Belgium, Holland and western Germany (to the Rhine). Individual scenarios will include D-Day, Operation Cobra (the breakout from the Normandy beachheads), Operation Market-Garden (a.k.a. Monty's Airborne Follics), Anvil-Dragoon (the invasion of southern France) and the campaign. Also in development is a scenario involving a hypothetical invasion of France in 1943 (historically proposed as Operation Bolero, but never executed). Each game begins with a strategic turn, whereby the Allies can choose where to invade. In terms of completion, the American and German units have been completed, and the designer is currently working on the British and Canadian forces (as of January 8, 1994). The scale is ten miles per hex with each turn representing three days. The map itself is composed of an area comprising 67 x 93 hex squares. Units portrayed are divisions, with three zoom levels breaking down to regiments and separate battalions. Generally, stacking is allowed with up to three divisions per hex. With over 300 units per side, historically accurate orders of battle and game play, E.T.O. appears to be a product that should receive an enthusiastic welcome. The program will be released in SVGA mode only; in addition, user friendliness has been emphasized so that the entire simulation is playable without keyboard input. While the appearance of menus and input is similar to V for Victory, the map is larger since the menus are free-floating and visible only when accessed. Overall, E.T.O. looks to be a potential success for the fledgling company The designer hopes to follow up this release with Blitzkrieg in the West, the 1940 Invasion of France. It will use a similar system (and virtually the same map), but will recreate the strategic options available to the Allies and Axis in the earlier time period. CGW 1:00:00 Page 158 Computer Gaming World "


"You can play war games or you can make history. Hannibal takes history out of the books and into your PC. Experience the life and times of one of history's most controversial heros. You are Hannibal. Think his thoughts, fight his battles befriend his allies and negotiate his treaties. Do everything as he did, or dare to do more. Based upon the actual history of Roman and Carthagan campaigns. *+700 towns, each a possible friend or foe. + Go to market to equip your armiy with horses, ships, mercenaries and elephants, Keep labs on the political situation: don't raise tax rates loo high or you may suffer the consequences. Negotiate peace or seige and destroy to mcrease your finances. Includes historical survey of Hannibal and his times. Can you conquer the powerful Roman Empire? Suggested Retail Price: $49.95 Published by UPC Code: 037523-84113-1 Developed by Format: IBM/PC Compatible U.O.P., 201 Bellevue Building MICROLEAGUE System Requirements: 640K RAM, 286/16mhz or faster, hard drive, Newark, DE 19702 G E T DOS 3.3 or higher, VGA supports SoundBlaster and SoundBlaster compatible, mouse recommended. 1-800-334-6572 Circle Reader Service #83 Interactive software "


"REVIEW BOMBS AWAY! Air War In An Evening With WW2 Air Force Commander by Bob Proctor ir Force Commander is a solitaire marched Poles, to a most difficult \"nine\" for reflect the efficiency of my squadrons and strategy game covering the air war in those brave enough to fly the RAF in the full bases—a much more critical factor. I World War 2. It's based on an interBattle of Britain scenario. The interface uses the mouse heavily. Basiesting idea—to separate the air war from In spite of the number of scenarios, AFC is cally, you click on something with the left other aspects and boil the decisions down to a small game. It is the first in a long time that button to zoom in or get more information, the basics. Should I bomb military or civilian did not require that I remove something else and click with the right button to zoom out. targets? If I choose military targets, should I from my hard disk. Those of you still using To give orders to a squadron, you first select bomb airfields or try to take out radar instal286 systems, take notehere's one you can the base it is assigned to, pull up a list of lations first? Since I don't have enough fuel actually play! Graphics are 256-color VGA, squadrons, and use the left button to select to put all my planes in the air, how much and while sound is supported on the PC one. Once you're at the squadron order should I allocate for fighters and how much speaker, you may also use your Adlib or screen, there are next and previous buttons to for bombers: Sound Blaster card. The cycle through all the squadrons. It's easy to map, which fills most of get confused here though, because when you the screen, is simple: land cycle to a squadron there is no indication of UK NOR: areas are black and oceans which base it is at! If the name of the assigned GER DEN are dark blue. Airfields base were shown, this would be a more useful 1920.a show up as white dots, screen. USR UK military targers as orange TEEMMES us POLAN dots, and civilian targets as Don't Believe Everything You Read 19 blue dots. At first, this FRANCE The front of the box for AFC says «Reach seems rather simplistic, but for the Sky with this Epic World War 2 Air USA TRONASI once you start playing and Warfare Simulation» in big red letters. SimiBULGARIA get a couple of dozen lar blandishments appear on the back. Let's squadrons in the air, you clear the air immediately—this is just marketrealize that spotting enemy IN HISTORY THAT THE FATE OF A NATION DEPENDED ON ing flak! \"Simulation,\" as perceived by game air activity quickly is a key THE RESULT OF AN AIR HAR. players, implies that the game is one of the to the game. Squadrons apmost realistic available on the subject. RealBy and large, the game works. There is a pear on the map as colism is tricky-our opinion of it is subjective, winning strategy that you first must discover, umns: the bottom of the column represents varies from subject to subject, is different for and then you must implement that strategy the actual location, and the height of board games and computer games, and in a variety of increasingly difficult situations. column represents the altitude. Color coding \"S changes over time. This WW2 version of In some, you may be badly outnumbered: in indicates friend or foe and, for others, resources may be very limited or the friendlies only, what type of airW W2 Air Force Commander population may not support the war effort. craft. All of this works well WW2 Air Force Commander (AFC) includes enough, my only criticism be WW2 WW2 Air Force Commander $19.95 14 scenarios that are rated for complexity, ing that a lot of space is devoted SYSTEM: from a \"one\" for Germany vs. the RAF in to showing you the altitude, REQUIREMENTS: 286, 640K RAM, VGA graphics, supports Microsoft mouse, Norway to a \"nine\" for the entire air war in when the altitude doesn't seem Adlib and Sound Blaster sound Europe. Your only option is to play against very important. You can't conPROTECTION: the computer, but you can play either side in trolit, other than to send your DESIGNER: David Lester & Mark Saunders PUBLISHER: Impressions any of the scenarios, giving you 28 choices in bombers in at (high) «altitude\" Cambridge, MA all. Each side is also rated for difficulty, from or \"ground level.\" I would Impressions (617) 225-0848 a \"rwo\" for playing Germany against the outmuch rather see graphics that SCENARIS, LEO THE FAMOURE BABAE HESTIRST ALONE TITLE: PRICE: AIR FORCE COMMANDER IBM cards None Page 160 Computer Gaming World "


"SOFTWARE FutureVision WHY FUTUREVISION? FREE GIFTS Educational & Games EXPANDING EDUCATIONAL FRONTIERS THROUGH TECHNOLOGY  Money back guarantee  Matched pricing  Same day shipping  Free electronic catalog  No restocking fee  Toll free fax line  Toll free customer service  Educational software experts For every $100 order choose: 10 3.5\" or 5.25\" disks CD caddy Coloring book & crayolns FREE HELP! Math Blaster Mystery ........... Math Blaster: Spot. .............. Mavis Beacon Typing ........... Metrognome Music ............. Millie's Math House ............. Mixed up Mother Goose...... 20 PC USA 3.0 ....................... 33 Playroom ......... ... ...28 Principles of (Biology, Calculus, Chemistry, Economics, Physics, Statistics) ........... 26 Print Shop Deluxe ................ 48 Professor Windows ............ Putt Putt Goes to the Moon .31 Reader Rabbit 3 .............. Scooter's Magic Castle ........ 30 Sim City 2000 .......................41 Sim Farm ............ ............. Sotrybook Weaver ............... 32 Studyware (ACT, CBEST, GRE, GMAT, LSAT, SAT) .......... 30 Super Munchers ........... ...29 Talking Spell-it Plus .......... Test Quick ............................52 Word Attack 3 .................. ...37 Game Pak ........... Game Pak II ... ......... 35 Guiness Disc 1993 MPC ...... Gunship 2000...................... 27 Indiana Jones Atlantis ...........54 Jones in the Fast Lane ........ KGB World Fact Book ......... Our award King's Quest V ..................... 20 winning staff will LE Library of the Future ......... help you select LOOM ................................. 20 MacMillan Dictionary .......... 24 the best educational software! Manhole .............................. 35 Maniac Mansion ................. 56 Mantis Experimental Fighter 21 CD's Mario's Missing/World Atlas 24 Adv. of Willy Beamish .......... 20 Mavis Beacon Typing MPC ..23 Aircraft Encyclopedia ...........33 Mayo Clinic Family Health ... 23 Amer. Bus. PhoneBook '92 ... 20 MicroProse, 4 game pak ...... 35 Animals Encyclopedia ..........33 Mixed up Mother Goose......20 Arcade Battles ..................... 20 Monkey Island ..................... 20 EDUCATIONAL Arthur's Teacher Trouble ..... 25 Nat'l Geographic Mammals. 24 Algeblaster 3...................... Audubon Birds ...............23 National Parks. ............. ..27 Amazon Trail .................... Audubon Mammals ............23 Peter and the Wolf... ..20 Calculus .......................... 56 Barney Bear Goes to School.20 Plant Doctor .......................29 Carmen Sandiego ................28 ...20 Playing w/Languages ........... 24 Castle of Dr. Brain ............. 24 Barron's College Guide ........24 Roger Ebert's Movie Comp ... 33 Eagle Eye Mystery ............. Battle Chess Enhanced ........30 San Diego Zoo/Animals .......23 EcoQuest 2 ... Beauty and the Beast .......... 20 Secret Weapons Luftwaffe ....23 El Fish ........ Bible Library (King James) .... 26 Seventh Guest .....................48 Even More Inc. Machines .....28 Bibles and Religions ...........17 Shakespeare.........................23 Fatty Bears B-Day Surprise ... 31 Career Opportunities .......... 30 Sleeping Beauty .............. 20 Foreign Languages ............. call Carmen Sandiego dlx ...... Space Adventure............. 26 Grade Quick ...................... Chaos and Fractules ............. 29 Space Quest IV .. 20 Grammar Gremlins ............ Chess Maniac ...................... 44 Star Wars Chess ... 38 Ind. Trainer dBASE ............. Chessmaster 3000 MPC ....... 20 Stellar Seven .. 20 Ind. Trainer Excel .............. Cinemania by Microsoft ...... 64 Storytime.. ......... 25 Ind. Trainer Lotus 1-2-3 ....... Composer Quest.................. 26 Time Table of Hist/Sci .......... 23 Ind. Trainer Pagemaker ........65 Cookbook Heaven .............17 Total Baseball .................... 21 Ind. Trainer Word ............... Crossword Cracker ................ 23 U.S. Atlas ............................. 18 Ind. Trainer Word Perfect .....65 Desert Storm ....................... 23 U.S. History .......................... 33 Kid CAD ............. Dict. of the Living World ...... 26 U.S./World Atlas Pack .........21 Kid Desk ............ ............. EcoQuest .... ............ 23 U.S.A. State Fact Book ......... 34 Kid Pix .... ................. Education Master .................23 Who Killed Sam Rupert ........45 Kid Rhymes ...... ........ Family Doctor MPC ............ .23 Wing Comm./Ultima VI ....... 19 Kid Works 2 .... Family Education Collection.24 World Atlas MPC .................. 18 Learn to use DOS.. ............. 23 Spar ........... GAMES We have them all. Find it in another ad and call us, we'll give you an extra 50 off! ...... CALL YOUR PERSONAL EDUCATIONAL CURRICULUM CONSULTANT 800.995.4661 FAX — 800.995.4669  Phone orders accepted M-F 8:00am 5:00pm PST  Orders received before 2:00pm will be shipped same day if in stock  55.00 shipping charge per order including AK, HI, PR, APO, FPO  call for air or international shipping costs  No surcharge for MC or Visa, please add $6.00 for C.O.D. orders  School, government, corporate purchase orders accepted  Many more titles available, call for latest pricing and availability  Mail in orders to: 644 N Santa Cruz Ave, Ste 12  Los Gatos, CA 95030 INTERNATIONAL CUSTOMERS: 408-370-4650  FAX 408-370.9466 "


"BRITAIN DAY lacy of this theory of terror your efforts. It can launch squadrons conbombing.\" If anything, tinuously on the same mission, which is the support for the war innormal thing to do with bombers. Be sure to creases when the populacheck their efficiency from time to time, as tion is being bombed. It is the computer will not rest them. Neither will SS possible that the designers RE RA the computer warn you when a target is out of AFC intended that we of range. Instead, it launches the mission, lets discover that targeting ciit fly to the limit of its effective range, and vilians is a bad strategy and then aborts the mission. You don't lose the included the possibility as airplane (gee, thanks), but it is unavailable for part of the \"simulation.\" If the entire time of the flight. If any of Goer| ACKLINGTON 1 DAYSNI so, then what the game ating's staff had been this dumb, they would 0.14 190% , 488 F 2000 BAR tempts to simulate is more have been shot! the military mindset of the Lastly, there's no way to turn the sound AFCshould not be called a simulation, at least pre-WW2 years and not effects off. This is a serious omission for tv not by today's standards. the military reality of the war. reasons. First, the sounds are not very good. Why not? Well, first off, there are no Pitfalls To Avoid They consist mostly of explosion sounds weather rules, and the game plays 24 hours which play every time there's a bomb run or around the clock with no day/night considIn spite of its failure as a simulation, AFC is air-to-air combat. Second, the mouse goes crations. The time scale is all wrong, with the a good game, though it does have some rather dead whenever the sounds play, which is game's scenarios running a few hours to two strange features. For one, it won't pause to let really irritating when things get hot. I finally you give orders to squadrons. Maybe a better or three days of game time, but the campaigns unplugged my speakers to save my sanity, but represented took weeks or even years. Furway to say this is that the game \"unpauses» that still didn't keep the mouse from going thermore, a squadron in the air is represented automatically as soon as you give an order. dead frequently. This becomes important by a single airplane and therefore can only immediately, because every lose a maximum of one plane per mission. squadron in every scenario This devalues pilot and airframe superiority starts in mothballs. As soon and even numerical superiority. No \"Great as you give the first activaMarinas Turkey Shoots\" (where hundreds of tion order, enemy planes planes are lost in a day) are possible. Airbases rise from their bases and can be totally destroyed, at which point they head your way. You'd betdisappear from the map and can never be ter get some kind of CAP brought back. I am not aware of a single in the air right away or precedent for this. And finally, all counbombs will be falling on tries-even Poland in 1939-have radar invou before you can acrivate GERMANY stallations! all your squadrons. Maybe DIFFICULTY 7 The nail in the coffin of AFC's claim to this is what happened to COMPLEXITY 5 simulation-hood is that the underlying premMacArthur in the Philipise of the game is invalid.The manual states pines? It sure would be nice to be able to Interestingly, there is no \"Quit\" command. that prolonged bombing of civilian targets activate more than one at a time. The only way to stop playing is to rebootwill make the population of the enemy counThe enemy will strike first if you forget to unless of course, you are running under Wintry so unhappy that they will overthrow the slow down the clock. The game clock has five dows or some memory manager that will let government and sue for peace. You can't speeds and, for some reason, the default is default is you kill the program. I am happy to report actually target cities in AFC. Instead, you speed four, which is called \"normal\" but is far that AFC runs nicely under Windows. Since bomb power plants, water treatment plants, too fast for the beginning of any scenario. Be it is a DOS program, you must create a PIF hospitals, and other \"amenities.\" If the Battle sure to slow ir down to speed one until you file for it. As there are no instructions on how of Britain taught us anything, it was the falhave all of your squadrons to make Arc Windows-compatible, to make AFC Windows-compatible, ImThe TSITAT activated and missions aspressions might want to consider maki RI signed. If you are playing a PIF file available on the boards. defensive scenario, like the AFC is an interesting and playable game. As 9120 RAF defending Britain, long as you don't believe what you read on you may want to keep it the box and expect a state-of-the-art simulaslow so that you can scroll tion, you won't be disappointed. I place it in the map looking for inthe same category as Empire, as they are both coming strikes and vector solitaire strategy games based loosely on miliout interceptors in time to tary conquest. It challenges you to find a winning strategy and then offers multiple meet them before they levels of complexity to let you perfect that reach their targets. ACKLINGTON BRITAIN strategy. If you are using a \"low end» system, STATUS E 1007 400 F 2000 2 The computer does not IN USE this may be one of the better wargames you do much to help you in can still run. (GW BRITAINE GER FRA INTRO 345 HR Page 162 Computer Gaming World "


"REVIEW March On, Valiant Soldiers U.S. Army units in Korea (photo courtesy of D.O.D.) Empire Software Launches Another Campaign by M. Evan Brooks Campince Wiki 01 In 1992, Empire released Campaign, a static, and have nothing to do with the simumuch of their martial prowess may be actually game which met with somewhat less than lation. attributed to their knowledge that, due to the La roar of approval. For an encore, gamers The User Guide is the true tale of documengeography of their nation, they can't afford to are now treated to Campaign II, a game covtation, and a sorry tale ar that. Aside from lose a single battle. ering the major wars since 1945: Korea omitting certain basic functions (such as how \"The historical scenarios are challenging, but (1950), Six Day War (1967), Yom Kippur to quit the program experimentation reoften wrong. Korea (1950) postulates an (1973), Vietnam (1962), Iran/Iraq (1980), vealed that the standard \"Ctrl-Q\" does work), American force pinned in the southern exand Kuwait (1991), together with a campaign it delincares the program options in meager tremity of the peninsula. While the Pusan map editor for design-your-own scenarios. detail. Actual understanding of program me Perimeter was a historical fact, the scenario With the additional technology of modern chanics is definitely an on-the-job task. only shows «Bulldog» Walker's Eighth Army; warfare, the simulation adds completely absent is the amphibious invasion helicopter/gunship support of Inchon by Douglas MacArthur and the and battlefield missile systems Dasr-e-Shirin Tenth Army. Similarly, Vietnam (1962) pos(rockets/guided misKhanaquil tulates an American Army (west) and a RVN siles/TOWs) in the appropri(Republic of Vietnam) Army (east) facing two ate time frames. NVA (North Vietnam) Armies. In 1962, Mandali Fourteen training maps layer Ilam American forces were less than 1500 \"advison complexity ranging from Baghdad 22 a TP ers\"; the war was in a guerrilla phase, and both battalion (fairly simple) to the Americans and the NVA did not commit Mehran corps level exercises (more difcombat troops in cohesive formations until ficult, with the added bonus of IC II 1965. When U.S. combat troops were comminefields ). Operational mamitted, they did not assume responsibility for Al Kut neuver zooms down to tactical the western sector; instead, the country was level on separate maps, and divided up into corps AOS (areas of operayou can choose to fight out The narrative describing the distinction betion). Also, the course of the Vietnam War particular engagements from the individual tween strategy and tactics is muddled. \"Strat was not determined by traditional military tactical vehicle viewpoint, or simply allow the egy is the art of controlling multiple forces prowess as much as it was by psychological computer to handle such details automat(groups or units). Tactics is the art of controlfactors. Hence, a scenario of military supeically and command from the top. ling individual vehicles.\" The former defini riority yields flawed and incorrect answers. tion is clearly wrong, and seems to apply more Discussions with the designer revealed that Strategy + Tactics = Confusion to operational warfare. Blitzkrieg is described the scenarios were based on guesstimates. He as \"the most famous strategy of simply could not find valid orders The documentation consists of three manu recent times,\" when it is really a Campaign II of battle for Korea, the Arab-Isals: a User Guide, an Equipment Fact Finder form of operational maneuver. and the Images of Conflict. The Equipment Similarly, modern US Army TITLE: Campaign 11 Fact Finder is a detailed resource guide on «strategy\" (AirLand Battle PRICE: SYSTEMS: AMPAIGN approximately 150 pieces of military equipAmiga, Atari ST, IRM (reviewed) 2000) is actually described in REQUIREMENTS IBM: 386 (20MHz rec.), 2MB ment, and is used for the copy protection. FM 101-5 (entitled \"OperaRAM, VGA graphics, 3MB hard drive space supports Sound The last document is simply a 28-page blacktions\"). The high esprit de corps Blaster and Roland sound cards Documentation look up and-white picture booklet (with perforated of the Israelis is attributed to the DESIGNER: Jonathan Griffiths pages, suitable for framing?). However, alfact that \"they have always been PUBLISHER: Empire Software empire Gaithersburg, MD though the photographs cover the latter half the victors in any battles with (301) 216-9707 of the 20th century, they are unlabelled, their Arab neighbors,\" while $69.95 QCIDIAL CONFLICI March 1994 Page 163 "


"TO VIET Nen Phuc Loi 1932 a Vinh I Lang và Ngang Tri atena lho.com Foan raeli Wars or Vietnam. Quite \"left track forward.\" No template has been to the contrary, such informaNIETNAM L Phuc Loi provided, although you can remap the keytion is readily available, and akivek board to personal taste. As a result, moving is the \"rush to publish\" before RSS clumsy, awkward and tiresome. Given that the Christmas buying scene the other vehicles are moving too fast for cannot be seen as justification 2. E | 0 Dong Hoi reality, you can only get off an occasional shot for such an ahistorical backas before bailing out into a new vehicle. ground. Finally, the documentation SIDE It's Two, Two, look-up scheme is flawed. TOTEM Two Games In One! When it asks for the range of CAMBODIA | Kratie (10 Is Campaign II a simulation or an arcade the British \"5-inch,\" there is game? It's both, and neither—it's a schizono such data in the \"Fact thom Penhill. Ta phrenic game that fails at all levels. At the Finder.\" Similarly, it will ask trollably, more akin to a silent film than a tactical level, the user interface is awkward, for the range of a vehicle—not specifying contemporary piece of software. and what does the tactical level portray? Only whether it wants weapons range or opera16 vehicles are allowed per side at any given tional (traveling) range (the latter range is the The scenario maps are easy to understand, time. Thus, vehicles only reinforce as losses correct answer). but graphically mediocre. When battle is occur. What this amounts to is a total negajoined, the operational battlefield is reminisIf the program lives down to the standard cent of SSI's Combat Leader (1984). What tion of the military principle of concentraof the documentation, we have a major probtion. The key to military success is to bring was accepted in 1984 is not even marginal lem. overwhelming firepower to bear on a hopetoday. fully isolated enemy force. Here, the player Sounds Great, But Why In zooming down to the individual vehicle engages in a tactical mishmash that yields screen, thc tanks, vehicles and infantry are Is The Enemy So Stiff? little of the reality. somewhat chunky, although they are clearly rly Merely driving around the battlefield can The graphics are marginal. Map scrolling recognizable. However, the vehicles are fast, be a difficult task. Why a proportionate rereveals an annoying flicker, as do the intromuch faster than they should be, and it makes duction in force could not have been impleductory screens. Upon booting up, several target acquisition and firing more of a chore mented is unanswered. For instance, a combat scenes are shown; the planc/rank is than a game. The designer simply chose to division cncountering a battalion could well clearly imposed on a static background, and make off-road speed equivalent to 50% of the have its 16 vehicles face only four enemy the foreground vehicle flickers unconunconroad speed, a choice easily proven incorrect vehicles, thereby yielding a better semblance by most data sources. of massed and concentrated firepower. DesSon, If I Ever Get This Joystick MIDNIGHT GAMES tination orders seem to be reinterpreted by the computer, and even more disconcerting FINEST IN INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT Loaded, You're A Goner is the automatic realignment of the main SINCE 1984 Although the joystick is noted as being turret gun. After shifting the turret to engage LEGENDS available, it simply did not work. There was an enemy to the flank, you can fire off a single A RICHLY DETAILED AND no joystick calibration routine, no joystick shot before the turret automatically returns to REALISTIC COMPUTER recognition, period (although the designer the front. When this occurs, the player loses MODERATED PLAY-BY-MAIL has assured me that the joystick routine does valuable time in regaining target acquisition, GAME SIMULATION COMBINING in fact work on the Amiga). Mouse and keywhile the enemy forces close and engage. The THE FINEST ELEMENTS OF board inputs are used and present no problem designer once again maintains that this probFANTASY ROLE-PLAYING in the scenario map, but are inappropriate for lem is not present in the Amiga version. AND EMPIRE BUILDING! fighting battles. Units may adopt different formations (disRULES BOOKS $15.00 While battles may be fought automatically, persed square, close order, diamond, line CAMPAIGN MODULE $15.00 you can drop into individual vehicles and take astern, etc.). However, it is virtually impossi(INCLUDES SET-UP AND MAP) the details into your own hands. Each vehicle ble to determine the effect that such formatread has a separate input, such as «H» for tions have on actual combat MIDNIGHT GAMES O E Bell UH-1 Huey operations in the game other PO BOX 280 DEPT G than in the tactical setup. In a MEDFORD OR 97501-0019 nod to reality, night-fighting is BBS# 503-857-8537 an option in more recent conPHONE# 503-772-7872 flicts. However, one cannot FAX# 503-772-0636 keep the troops on the run COMPUSERVE# 71241,455 continuously. A unit using night movement will be forced GIVE OUR MULTI-LINE BBS A Rockets: CALL AND CHECK OUT THE to rest up for 16 hours before ou available for targetting Guided Missiles: TOW moving again. This is both LATEST IN WINDOWS AND Homing Missiles: Maximum Armour Penetration (mm) sense and nonsense. Military OS/2 SHAREWARE, OR VISIT Cruising Speed (km/h) 100 writings are filled with articles Maximum Range (km) 400 OUR GAMING SECTIONI delineating the impact of sleep Circle Reader Service #87 Page 164 Computer Gaming World BROD "


"Brian Vodnikis Stores NOW! Zingdoms Available in DE TM Germany The BEST Medieval Strategy Game Series made. Period. Features New Additions Kingdoms Brian Vodnite's  1-6 Players, 196 Territories Artificial intelligence (AI) that makes  7 Troop types and catapults extremely tough computer opponents at the  5 Difficulty levels with handicapping higher difficulty levels (even tough enough  Control of up to 20 armies and to beat the game designer, Brian Vodnik!) 5 flotillas per kingdom, 5 Castle types QuickmoveTM and Double QuickmoveTM Toggle each kingdom between human, which greatly speeds up the computer's turn computer, and off Quick and easy food shortagel Resource management of food, crop increase notification for faster turns wood, stone, iron  Quick siege Beautifully HAND-DRAWN graphics Dispatch/Gather troops to or from castle Huge 832 X 711 pixel map that you garrisons to adjacent territories actually play on! Immediate/Delayed catapult construction Simple point and click interface to an option intricate and detailed game  End of turn checking for movable armies Actual IBM Screen Shots Germany Available NOW! Belao Vodoib's Wikings Terosor Ronquest ENSKO CONEXI REDUCED!! Call or send $4.00 for a 7-turn playable demo or download it FREE from our BBS @ (708) 545-1410 and get hooked! Save $20 off of the list price of $59.95 and get Kingdoms of GermanyTM for only $39.95 + $3.50 S&H Reduced! Get Vikings for only $29.95 + $3.50 S&H. Registered users can upgrade to Vikings Enhanced for $10. Call for Details, Buy Vikings and Kingdoms of Germany for $64.95 + 3.50 S&H and get the VikingsTM Enhanced upgrade (a $10.00 value) FREE! Check, Money Order, and Visa/Mastercard accepted. Call Realism Entertainment for more details on all offers at (708) 595-7487. Realism TEntertainment\" VikingsTM is available for Amiga and IBM. Kindgoms of Germany available for IBM. Coming soon for Color Macintosh. Realism EntertainmentTM 6N522 Pine Street VISA Bensenville, IL 60106 Mastercard (708) 595-7487 VIKINGSIM, Fields of Conquest Kingdoms of Germany and TRUE 32-BITTM, are trademarks of Realism EntertainmentTM 1993 Realism Entertainment All Rights Reserved Worldwide. The video game perfectionists... details, details, details Circle Reader Service #107 "


"10-0--1 1-0-0-| 100deprivation on troops; they simply cannot go Shou structure of group without sleep. Still, in a hot action, a loss of effectiveness may have to be accepted in order EENH99 USAI to achieve mission success. When I rolled into Kuwait City in February 1991, I had been without sleep for nearly 60 hours. Would it have made sense for me to call my higher command and tell them that I would begin in 16 hours, after I had caught up on my sleep? I questioned the designer as to this aspect and suggested that a loss of efficiency would have been a better design decision, and he concurred. Mincfields can provide a major impact to battlefield success, and Campaign II is one of maps do provide an interesting and somefew simulations that attempt to portray the times valuable lesson in managing military channelization of forces that minefields can elements from battalion through corps level. create. Actually, military forces traditionally The tactical engagement on a manual play have underemphasized the employment of level is too much of an arcade shoot-cm-up, mines Nored author and wargame designer but you can complete such battles in a comJim Dunnigan has attributed this to the fact puter-automatic mode. While the computer that minefields are inexpensive, and not run often fights less than optimally (in Operation by troops. Hence, no one wants to decorate a Desert Storm, both sides ran out of ammuniminefield for valor or military success. At any tion with little damage to either side), as a rate, minefields have a major impact on the commander, is it really your role to get into a modern battlefield, and it is a refreshing single tank and engage the enemy? In reality, change to see them employed. a commander who would be forced to emThe actual campaign scenarios are flawed ploy a direct fire weapons system would be historically. The lessons they reach are simply one whose tactical position could best be wrong, wrong, wrong. However, the training described as \"deep kimchee.\" Finally, troop levels of efficiency are the same; there are no elite troops or any distinction whatsoever. Hence, the Iraqis of Desert Storm will be of the same caliber as their Coalition opponents rather than conscripts. Yet, the tactical engagement can be fun. Destroying trees, homes and the occasional enemy vehicle can be a satisfying diversion, but it has no relation to combat operations, and therein lies the largest defect of this product. As additional proof, engagement ranges are limited to around 300-500 meters. Why? Perhaps because contemporary engagement ranges of up to 3200 meters and beyond would have a target the size of a pixel, and hence \"not gameable.\" Playability can affect reality, but in matters of this magnitude, the discrepancy is simply too strained. Campaion II. although virtually bug-free has flaws that prevent it from being an interesting wargame, and its arcade/simulation aspects are simply cumbersome. The program has aspects of Patriot (military organizational structure) and U.M.S. (campaign editor), and a game is known by the company it keeps.... CGW SIDELINE SOFTWARE D ORDERS 1-800-888-9273 ONLY Four comprenang Watch me come alive in your computer! YOUR PC IMPORT & CLOSEOUT CONNECTION NEW PC TITLES TYPE Alien Breed Arcade Alone in the Dark 2 Adventure Battle Isle '93 War Simulation Brutal Sports Football Arcade Simulation Daemonsgate Role Playing Game Elite 2 Space Strategy Fields of Glory StrategySimulation Fire and Ice Arcade Ishar 2 Role Playing Game Jurrassic Park Arcade Strategy King Maker Strategy Lil' Devil Arcade Adventure Simon the Sorcerer Graphic Adventure Star Lord Strategy Sub War 2050 (Microprose) Simulation T.F.X. Simulation T-2 The Coin-Op Arcade PC MAGAZINES Get the latest news on the best PC titles from the US & Europe! These high gloss, full color magazines also feature demo-packed PLAYABLE cover DISKS with each issue! PC Format, PC Review, PC Zone, PC Player, PC Plus, PC Power, PC Action, or PC Games each only $10 OBRADA N Girlfriend Teri Shown Here The World's First Artificially Intelligent Virtual Woman! G2GOG CD COPS 25 First Samurai 18.95 Four Crystals of Trazzar 21.95 Flight af the Intruder 18.95 Global Conquest (Micropose) 21.95 GP Unlimited Road & Track 21.95 Greg Norman Goll 18.95 Heart of China 18.95 Hero Ouest 18.95 Hook 16.95 It Came From the Desert 14.95 Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 16.95 Joe and Mac Caveman 18.95 King of Chicago 14.95 King's Ouest 6 21.95 Legend of Kyrandia 21.95 Lemnings 2 28.95 Links 386 29.95 Lure of the Temptress 19.95 Mands 24.95 Mavis Beacon Typing Tutor 18.95 Microprose Greens 26.95 Mike Ditka Football 18.95 Mig 29 Fulenum 18.95 Nigel Manselfs Grand Prix 21.95 Obitus 18.95 Pacific Islands 21.95 Paperboy 2 16.95 Papulaus & Promised Lands 24.95 Power Hanger 21.95 Pushover 18.95 RBI Baseball 2 14.95 Rex Nebular 24.95 RoboCop 3 19.95 Rocket Ranger 16.95 Sargans 18.95 Shadowlands 18.95 Sim Ant 21.95 Sim City Terrain Editor 9.95 Sleepwalker 21.95 Sleeping Gods Lie 14.95 Spaceweched 16.95 Special Forces 24.95 Spell Casting 101 18.95 Spoils of War (RAW) 18.95 Storm Rasters 18.95 Strike Fleet 19.95 Super Off Road 16.95 Super Space Invaders 18.95 Super Telnis 19.95 Team Yankee 21.95 The Immortal 19.95 The Lost Adntiral 21.99 T.V Sports Baseball 21.95 TV Sports Boxing 21.95 TV Sports Football 14.95 Trump Casino 2 18.95 Ultimua 6 21 95 Velle 14.95 Waxwarks 24.95 White Death (Raw) 18.95 Wizkid 18.95 Wallpack 18.95 World of Legends/Son of intl 24.95 WWF 2 24.95 Zool 21.95 Order from your favorite dealer or send check or M.O. for $69.95 Plus $4 shipping. Add $4 if C.O.D. Specify 3.5\" or 5.25\" disk  Revolutionary new game for PC compatibles  Artificial intelligence, Interactive Conversation 3000+ word vocabulary. synonmys, idioms She lives in your computer, and talks to you on the screen VGA video of a REAL woman no cartoons! Runs on any 286, 386, 486 (12MHz min.) Requires 640K RAM and 10Mb hard disk No nudity, possible mature situations Also available Girlfriend Lisa! now only $59.95 SHIPPING UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment Mastercard & Visa $5.00 C.O.D. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping, Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to change! No refunds or exchanges. Defective products exchanged with same item Products warrantied through Sideline FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Into? Call (305) 491-9519 DEALER INQUIRIES INVITED! 840 N.W.57th Court, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33309 DON'T MISS THESE DISCOUNT PC DEALS! 4. Sports Boxing18.95 Carrier Command 14.95 688 Attack Sub 18.95 Carriers al War 21.95 A-Train 26.95 Centurion Delender of Rome 18.95 Action Stations 18.95 Chuck Yenger's Adv. Contbal 21.95 Ancient Art of War in Skes 24.95 Collossus Bridge 4 16.95 Alac (Microprose) 24.95 Command HO 18.95 8-17 Bomber Microprose) 24.95 Creepers 18.95 Bard's Tale 3 18.95 Deluxe Strip Poker 2 18.95 BAT2 21.95 Dune 18.95 Ballle Isle 18.95 El Fish 21.95 Battlechess 18.95 Elvira 2 18.95 Birds of Prey 21.95 F16 Falcon 94.95 Blood wych 14.95 Fire Team 2200 16.95 \"If your dealer dosent carry Girlfriend, show them this ad and they can order it from us!\" AldeaLabs 709 Lingco, Suite #106 Dept. #CGW Richardson, TX 75081 (274) 235-4999 FAX 235-4992 Circle Reader Service #109 Circle Reader Service #28 Page 166 Computer Gaming World "


"USED IBM GAMES COMPLETE & VIRUS FREE WITH THE ORIGINAL BOX DOCUMENTATION AND DISKS 32 26 16 24 19 ERIC THE UNREADY ESCAPE FROM HELL ETERNAV EYE OF THE BEHOLDER EYE OF BEHOLDER 2 EYE OF BEHOLDER 3 EYE OF BEHOLDER 3-CD F-117A STEALTH FIGHTER F15 STRIKE EAGLE 2 F15 STRIKE EAGLE 3 F19 STEALTH FIGHTER FALCON 3 CE FIGHT FALCON 3.0 FALCON AT FANTASY EMPIRE FIGHTING FOR ROME FINAL CONFLICT FIRETEAM 2200 FLAMES OF FREEDOM FLASHBACK FLIGHT OF INTRUDER FLIGHT PLANNER FLIGHT SIM AIRCRAFT FLIGHT SIMULATOR 4,0 FLIGHT SIMULATOR 5.0 FLOOR 13 FOUNTAIN OF DREAMS FOUR CRYSTALS TRAZER FREDDY PHARKAS FRTR FREE DC FRONT PAGE FOOTBALL DATEN HOYLE'S BK GAMES VOL 3 HUMANS HUNT RED OCTOBER HYPERSPEED IMMORTAL INCA INCREDIBLE MACHINE VGA INDIANAPOLIS 500 INDY JONES FATE ATLA INDY JONES: LAST CRUS ISHIDO ISLAND OF OR BRAIN VGA JCK NICKLAUS GRTST 18 JACK NICKLAUS SE CRS JACK NICKLAUS SIGNATU JACK NICKLAUS UNL GOLF JAMES BOND STEALTH JET FIGHTER 2 MISSION JET FIGHTER 2.0 JOE MONTANA FOOTBALL JUMP JET JUST GRANDMA & ME-CO KEYS TO MARAMON KGB KILLING CLOUD KING'S QUEST 4 EGA KING'S QUEST 5-VGA KING'S QUEST 6 VGA KNIGHTS OF THE SKY KOSHAN CONSPIRACY KRISTAL MERCHANT COLONY MICHAEL JORDAN FLT SIM MICKEY'S 123'S MICKEY'S ABC'S MICKEY'S JIGSAW PUZZLE MIDWINTER MIG 29 FULCRUM MIGHT & MAGIC 1 MIGHT & MAGIC 2 MIGHT & MAGIC 3 MIGHT & MAGIC 4 MIGHT & MAGIC 5 MIKE DITKA FOOTBALL MILLENIUM MINES OF TITAN MISSION: IMPOSSIBLE ML BASEBALL 4 USAT ML BASEBALL GMOWNER ML BASEBALL MANAGERS ML FOOTBALL 2 ML FOOTBALL DELUXE MONKEY ISLAND 2 MONKEY ISLAND VGA MOONBASE MURDER NASCAR CHALLENGE NFL COACH'S CLUB NFL FOOTBALL NFL PRO LEAGUE F9 91 NFL PRO LEAGUE FO '92 NIGHTBREED RIDERS OF ROHAN RISE OF DRAGON-VGA ROAD & TRACK GRAN PR ROAD TO FINAL FOUR ROBOSPORT WIN FILTER ROMANCE 3 KINGDOMS ROMANCE 3 KINGDOMS 2 ROME: PATHWAY TO POW ROMMEL ATN, AFRICA RULES OF ENGAGEMENT RULES OF ENGAGMNT 2 S.C. OUT SAVAGE EMPIRE SCRABBLE SEA ROGUE SEAL TEAM SEARCH FOR THE KING SECOND FRONT SECRET OF SILVER BLADE SECRET WEAPONS LUFTW SENTINEL WORLDS SHADOW CASTER SHADOW OF YSERBIUS SHADOW PRESIDENT SHADOW SORCERER SHADOWGATE WIN SHADOWLANDS SHERLOCK HOLMES-CD SHUTTLE SIEGE 29 12 GAMER'S GOLD WE PAY CASH FOR USED GAMES We want your current used games 1-800-377-8578 call for authorization before shipping or FAX list for current quotes to 605-334-8766 In Canada, call 605-339-2060 WE SELL USED GAMES All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked ganesore in original box with original documentation Call for current title availibility WE ACCEPT TILL VISA/MasterCard/Discover 4D BOXING 688 ATTACK SUB 7TH GUEST.CD A-TRAIN ATAC A10 TANK KILLER 1.5 ABC BOXING ABC MONDAY NIGHT FB ACES OF THE PACIFIC ACTION SPORTS SOCCER ACTION STATIONS ADV OF WILLY BEAMISH AIR BUCKS AIR BUCKS VER 1.2 AIR FORCE COMMANDER ALL AMERICAN COLLG FB ALONE IN THE DARK ALTERED DESTINY AMAZON AMBUSH ANCIENT ART WAR SEA ANCIENT ART WAR. SKY APEA FOOTBALL ARE WE THERE YET? ARMADA 2525 ARMOUR ALLEY BAT. B17 FLYING FORTRESS BAD BLOOD BALANCE OF POWER 1990 BALANCE OF THE PLANE BARD'S TALE 1 BARD'S TALE 2 BARD'S TALE 3 BARD'S TALE CONST SET BATTLE CHESS BATTLE CHESS.CD BATTLE ISLE BATTLES OF DESTINY BATTLETECH 1 BATTLETECH 2 BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR BIG BUSINESS BLITZKRIEG ARDENNES BLOODSTONE BLOODWYCH BLUE ANGELS BLUE FORCE NEXT OF KIN BO JACKSON BASEBALL BRAIN BLASTER BREACH 2 BREACH 2 SCEN DISK BUCK ROGERS 1 BUZZ ALDRIN RACE INT CAESAR CAESARS PALACE CAMPAIGN CAR DRIVER CARRIER COMMAND CARRIER STRIKE CARRIERS AT WAR CASTLE DR BRAIN VGA CASTLES CASTLES 2 CASTLES NATHAN CMPN CENTERION OFNOR ROME CHALLENGE OF S REALM CHAMBER SCI MUT PRST CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN CHESSMASTER 3000 WIN CIVILIZATION CLASH OF STEEL CLUE MASTER DETECTIV COASTER CODE NAME: ICEMAN COLONEL'S BEQUEST COMMAND HO CONAN CONFLICT: KOREA CONFLICT: MIDDLE EAST CONQUERED KINGDOMS CONQUESTS OF JAPAN CONQUESTS OF LONGBO CONTINUIM CORPORATION COUNTDOWN COVERT ACTION CRACK DOWN CRIBBAGE GIN KING CAIME WAVE CRISIS IN THE KREMLIN CRUISE FOR A CORPSE CURSE OF AZURE BONDS CYBER EMPIRES CYBERGENIC RANGER DAGGER OF AMMON RA DARK CENTURY DARK QUEEN OF KRYNN DARK SUN DARKLANDS DARKLANDS MASTER ED DARKSEED DARKSPYRE DAVID WOLF: SECRET AG DAY OF THE VIPER DEJA VU 2 LOST IN LV DEATH KNIGHT OF KRYN DICK TRACY DONT GO ALONE DOUBLE DRAGON 2 DRAGON FORCE DRAGON LORD DRAGON WARS DRAGONS OF FLANE DRAKKHEN DUNE DUNE 2 DUSK OF THE GODS EARTHRISE ELVIRA 1 ELVIRA 2 EPIC WE'RE BUYING! IBM & MAC GAMES Got Something To Sell? Follow these Easy Steps 1. Prepare a list of the games you are selling. Specify IBM or MAC. Call, fax, or mail your list to GAMER'S GOLD. 2. GAMER'S GOLD will quote the current buying prices & issue an authorization number for your shipment Games will not be accepted without an authorization no. Price quotes are good for 14 days. 3. Pack games in box. Write outhorization no. clearly on outsido of box. Mail to GAMER'S GOLD 4. If you would like to use your money or credit to purchase gamos, include a wish list of titles you are interested in. 5. Your check will usually be mailed within 5.7 working days of receiving your games, Games will be checked for viruses & completeness. Games must be complete with all disks, printed materials, & in original box. Incomplete games will be returned at your expense. AMER'S STREET FIGHTER 2 STREET ROD 2 STRIKE ACES STRIKE COMMANDER STRIKE COMMANDER SP STUNT DRIVER STUNT DRIVER STUNTS SUMMONING SUPER OFF ROAD SUPER TETRIS SWORD OF ARAGON SYNDICATE TANGLED TALES TANK TASK FORCE 1942 TEAM YANKEE TEENAGE MNT ARCADE TEENAGE NT MAH MIS TEGEL'S MERCENARIES TERMINATOR TERMINATOR 2029 TEST DRIVE2 TEST DRIVE 3 TEST DRIVE 3. ROADSCAR THE PROPHECY THEATRE OF WAR THEIR FINEST HOUR THEXDER 1 THUNDER HAWK THUNDERSTRIKE TIME QUEST TIMES OF LORE TOM LANDRY FOOTBALL TONY LARUSSA BB TONY LARUSSAULT BB TOP GUN DANGER ZONE TORNADO TRACON TRACON 2 TREASURE TRAP TREASURES SAVAGE FR TRILOGY TRISTAN PINBALL TUNNELS & TROLLS TWILIGHT 2000 VGA TYPHOON OF STEEL ULTIMA 4 QUEST AVAT ULTIMA 5 WARRIORS DE ULTIMA 6 FALSE PROPH ULTIMA 7 BLACK GATE ULTIMA 7 FORGE OF VIRT ULTIMA 7.5 SERPENT ISLE ULTIMA 75 SILVER SE ULTIMA TRILOGY 1 ULTIMA TRILOGY 2 ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 1 ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 2 ULTRABOTS SANCTIONE UMS 2 UNCHARTED WATERS UNDER FIRE UNLIMITED ADVENTURES UTOPIA V VICTORY: UTAH BEACH VEIL OF DARKNESS VENGEANCE OF EXCALIBR VIKING CHILD VISIONS OF AFTERMATH WACKY FUNSTERS WAR IN MIDDLE EARTH WAR IN THE FALKLANDS WAR IN THE GULF WARLORDS WARLORDS 2 WATERLOO WAXWORKS WC 2 SPEC OPERATION 1 WC 2 SPEC OPERATION 2 WC 2 SPEECH PACK WC SECRET MISSION 1 WC SECRET MISSION 2 WC ULTIMA 6 CD WEAVER BASEBALL 2 WEAVER COMMISIONERS WEAVER MLBPA PLR ST WESTERN FRONT WHEN TWO WORLDS WR WHERE IN WORLD CSD WHERE IN WALD CSD-CD WING COMMANDER 1 WING COMMANDER 2 WING COMM ACADEMY WIZARDY 4 WIZARDRY 5 WIZARDRY 6-COSMIC FOR WIZARDRY 7-CRUSADERS WOLFENSTEIN 30 WOLFPACK WONDERLAND WORLD CIRCUIT WORLDS AT WAR X-WING X-WING B WING X-WING IMPERIAL PURS XIPHOS YEAGER'S AFT YEAGER'S AIR COMBAT CO-ROMGames CALL Prices & availability subject to change. Call Toll Free for current titles and those not listedwe've got lots more! All Used Games are complete & virus free with original box, documentation & disks. All sales are final-defective games replaced with same title. Free shipping (Regular Ground) in the continental USA on orders over $150. Most items shipped same day. $5 UPS/S7 2nd Day Air GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls  South Dakota  57105 18 14 NES 16 12 17 22 10 10 19 19 26 13 an 35 19 19 24 21 FRONT PAGE FB PRO FULL METAL PLANET FUTURE WARS GARY GRIGSBY PACIFIC GATEWAY GATEWAY 2: HOMEWRLD GATEWAY SAVAGE FRTR GENGHIS KHAN GHOSTS & GOBLINS GLOBAL CONQUEST GLOBAL EFFECT GOBLINS 2. VGA GOBLINS VGA GODFATHER GOLD OF AZTECS GOLD OF THE AMERICAS GRAIL QUEST GRANDSLAM BRIDGE GREAT NAVAL BATTLES GREAT NAVAL BATT CD GREAT NB AMERICA ATL GREAT NB SUPER SHIPS GREENS G GRIGSBY'S PAC WAR GUNBOAT GUNSHIP GUNSHIP 2000 SCEN OSK GUNSHIP 2000 VGA HALLS OF MONTEZUMA HARD NOVA HARDBALL 3 HARDBALL 3 PLAYERSD HARDBALL 3 STADIUM U HARPOON HARPOON DESIGNER SER HARPOON EDITOR HARRIER ASSAULT HEART OF CHINA VGA HEAVEN & EARTH HEAVY METAL HEROES OF THE 357TH HEROES OF THE LANCE HIGH COMMAND HILLSFAR HOOK HOVERFORCE HOYLE'S BK GAMES VOL 1 HOYLE'S BK GAMES VOL 2 L'EMPEREUR LAKERS VS CELTICS \"LAND, SEA AIR TRILOGY LANDS OF LORE LASER SQUAD LEATHER GODDESSES 2 LEGACY:REALM OF TERR LEGEND OF FAERGHAIL LEGEND OF KYRANDIA LEGENDS OF VALOR LEMMINGS LEMMINGS 2 LEXICROSS LHX ATTACK CHOPPER LIGHTSPEED LINE IN THE SAND LINKS 386 PRO LINKS GOLF LORD OF THE RINGS 2 LOST ADMIRAL ENHANCED LOST FILES SHERLOCK LOST IN LA LOST PATROL MADDEN FOOTBALL 1 MADDEN FOOTBALL 2 MAEL STROM MAGIC CANDLE 1 MAGIC CANDLE 2 MAGIC CANDLE 3 MAGIC JOHNSON MVP MANHOLE MANHUNTER SF MANTIS EXP FIGHTER-VGA MANTIS EXP SPEECH PA MARTIAN DREAMS MARTIAN MEMORANDUM MATRIX CUBED MAXIMUM OVERKILL MAXIMUM OVERKILL MISS MEAN STREETS MECHWARRIOR MEDIEVAL LORDS MEDIEVAL WARRIORS MEGAFORTRESS MEGAFORTRESS MISS DK MEGATRAVELLER 1 ZHOD MEGATRAVELLER 2 MEGATRAVELLER 3 NO GREATER GLORY NOVA 9 VGA OBITUS OIL'S WELL OPERATION COMBAT OUT OF THIS WORLD PALADIN 2 PAPERBOY 2 PATRIOT PERFECT GENERAL PGA TOUR GOLF TOURN PIRATES PLANETS EDGE PLAYMAKER FOOTBALL POLICE QUEST 1 VGA POLICE QUEST 3 VGA POLICE QUEST 4 POOL OF RADIANCE POOLS OF DARKNESS POPULOUS POPULOUS 2 POWER HITS: MOVIES POWER HITS: SCI/FI POWER HITS: SPORTS POWERHITS: BATTLETEC POWERMONGER PRINCE OF PERSIA PRINCE OF PERSIA 2 PRIVATEER PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL PROPHECY 1 PROPHECY OF SHADOW PROTOSTAR PSYCHIC WAR QUEST FOR GLORY 1 EGA QUEST FOR GLORY 1-VGA QUEST FOR GLORY 2.EGA QUEST FOR GLORY3-VGA RAILROAD TYCOON RAILROAD TYCOON 2 RAMPART REALMS REALMS OF ARKANIA RED LIGHTNING RETURN OF PHANTOM RETURN TO ZORK REVOLUTION 76 REX NEBULAR COS GEN SIEGE EXP.DOGS OF WAR SIERRA AOV BUNDLE SIERRA FAMILY FUN PK SILENT SERVICE 2 SILPHEED SIM CITY SIM CITY GRAPHICS SET 1 SIM CITY GRAPHICS SET 2 SIM CITY TERRAIN EDIT SIM ANT SIM EARTH IM LIFE SIMPSONS ARCADE GAM SKATE OR DIE SOLITAIRE'S JOURNEY SORCERIAN SPACE 1869 SPACE ACE SPACE ACE 3 SPACE HULK SPACE QUEST 1 VGA SPACE QUEST 2 EGA SPACE QUEST 3 SPACE QUEST 4 VGA SPACE QUEST 5. VGA SPACE QUEST BUNDLE SPACE ROGUE SPACEWARD HO! SPACEWRECKED SPEAR OF DESTINY SPECIAL FORCES SPECTRE SPEEDBALL 2 SPELLCASTING 101 SPELLCASTING 201 SPELLCASTING 301 SPELLCRAFT: ASPECT SPELLJAMMER.PIRATES SPIRIT OF EXCALIBUR STAR CONTROL STAR CONTROL 2 STAR FLEET 2 STAR LEGIONS STAR TREK 25TH ANNIV STARFLIGHT 1 STARFLIGHT 2 STELLAR 7 STORMOVIK 19 24 17 16 No 15 & 26 Circle Reader Service #58 "


"REPLAY What If Napoleon Was Himself At Ligny? Reger MacConan A Replay Of Ligny From Battles of Napoleon by Terry Lee Coleman 20 Blucher still holds the all-important bridges around Ligny, and while shaken, is confident that the French are running out of steam. Repositioning his remaining artillery on the heights overlooking Ligny, the old Prussian prepares to bombard Grouchy's forces, which are now pinned down in the small town. Grouchy frantically brings up more infantry, but stops short of attacking Blucher's strong position. Napoleon sends cavalry under Exelman far around the Prussian left. Grouchy is unhappy about the use of his cavalry so far out on the flank. Still, he realizes thar cavalry charges are useless in the boggeddown center, and the Emperor is in no mood for arguments in any case. The Prussian 21st Line attempts to sneak through the woods and counterattack at Ligny, but French forces discover and repel them easily. Blucher learns from this setback, screening his thrusts on the French left with light cavalry. eleased in 1988, Battles of Napoleon was ahead of its time in many ways. Most wargames at that time were generic, with the same system often being used to cover everything from ancient battles to WWII conflicts. Designers Chuck Kroegel and David Landrey actually played board wargames, which gave them a bit of an edge over many of their compatriots. Understanding what kind of detail gamers required, they set out to include it in a playable format. Most wargamers will agree that they did quite well. The clean game system manages to showcase the differences between column, line, open and square formations. Cavalry charges and countercharges are implemented well, and are one of the most exciting parts of Napoleon surrounds the defenders of St. Amand. the game. Skirmishers are used properly, giving the game at times almost a miniatures feel. freshly polished boot-leather, bedrolls imAdd the excellent command control rules. maculately folded in that manner only memand you have a simulation which far outbers of the Prussian military could achieve. shines any Napoleonic game released since. Blucher looked at his aides and asked, \"Firm, With designer David Landrey continuing to good ground, is it not? The French dogs will crank our scenarios, the rumors persist that break their backs on our strong position!\" the game may be re-released-something The Ligny scenario of SSI's Battles of Napoboth CGW and the game's many fans would leon provides a good look at a classic Napolevery much like to see. With that in mind, weonic set-piece battle, which helped to decide thought we'd take a look back at the game in the fate of Europe. The battle begins with the a replay and talk to David Landrey about his French having strategically outmanuvered continuing series of scenario disks and the the Prussians. Napoleon plans to crush them future prospects for Battles of Napolcon. before they and the British can combine to defeat him, as ultimately happened at WaterLigny Redux loo. The terrain is somewhat beneficial to the Prussians, but they must be careful of the The small village of Ligny is quiet, like French firepower French firepower. many others in 19th-century Belgium. Its sole strategic importance is that it conveniently lies between France and Brussels. On a A Whiff of Grapeshot small hillock overlooking the town, a horse Napoleon's assault is well-timed, with St. stirs restlessly, sensing its rider's excitement. ent. Amand and half of Ligny falling almost imAmand and After quieting his steed, Napoleon looks outmediately. The Prussians counterattack, and over the field of battle and says very softly, although unsuccessful, they are unconcerned \"Today, Blucher, old friend, you will not about the number of casualties. Blucher beescape me. Ligny will be the beginning of a lieves that a war of artrition is the sure way to new era for the people of France.\" beat the French. Grouchy disabuses Blucher Far from looking to escape, Blucher was of that notion by overrunning two of the preparing to meet his enemy head-on. The Prussian's best artillery batteries, as Ligny is Prussian camp was filled with the smell of secured. The Prussians frantically deploy artillery to stop the French attack. The Prussian infantry is taking a pounding, but fresh units keep arriving. Blucher rails at his staff for the haphazard way in which the units were deployed, conveniently forgetting that he issued the orders. Theilman is sent with both cavalry and infantry to the Prussian left flank, as Blucher is well aware of NapoPage 168 Computer Gaming World "


"TIGERS « THE PRob` HPS Simulations, the WARGAMER'S Computer Company, and designer Scott Hamilton bring you the ULTIMATE WWII tactical combat simulation. overing the ENTIRE Eastern Front from 1939-45, Tigers On The Prowl includes a detailed database of hundreds Uof fighting vehicles, weapons, and force structures for the Axis, Allied and Soviet forces. Likewise, combat is resolved by precise calculations of armor thickness and round penetration at the instant of impact. It also features morale, hidden movement, communications, airstrikes, night fighting, forest fires, and much more. Designed for all levels of wargamers, Tigers On The Prowl includes 5 scenarios, a VISA/MC: CALL flexible scenario builder, and three levels of complexity. Orders are given to platoons or sec(408) 554-8381 tions, with a maximum of a supported combat brigade on each side. Can be played Dealer Inquiries solitaire against the computer, or by Welcome two players either face to face or by maille-mail. Tigers On The Requires VGA, Prowl can use maps and symbols created with Aide De 570KB free RAM and 2 MB hard disk Camp. Tigers On The SIVULATIONS space. Mouse optional. Prowl is as real as HPS Simulations For IBM and compatibles. you can get withP.O. Box 3245 out being there. Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 Copyright 1993 by Scott Hamilton/HPS Simulations. All rights reserved. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. "


"leon's fondness for outflanking maneuvers. With the French having won the battle of the Napoleon seems to be noodling about has cannonades, Grouchy's troops finally burst he forgotten where the victory point spaces out of Ligny, taking the Prussians from two are? sides. The Prussians fought bravely, but could not easily extricate themselves from the meEven A Rubber Band Only lee. Sensing that the time was right, Napoleon Stretches So Far threw the Guard units into the fray, scattering Napoleon may have been small in stature, the demoralized Prussian forces. but the dice rolls made him look larger than Meanwhile, Exclman's cavalry met Theil life, as his veteran infantry forced two of the bridges opposite Ligny. Blucher nevertheless stuck to his position on the high ground and waited for the inevitable assault. What the Prussian leader didn't count on was the power of the French artillery, who had heard the Prussians boasting before the battle, and wished to prove that Frenchmen make better marksmen. Blucher had deployed his troops man's forces, trouncing their horsemen in record time. The Prussian infantry frantically formed squares, but were hit in the rear by advancing French forces from Ligny, and were captured. Their desperate struggle allowed some of the Prussian forces to escape, but those surviving could hardly be considered a cohesive force. The attempted counterattack by the PrusMore Napoleon Than You Can Shake A Saber At Scenario Disks For SSI's Battles of Napoleon 2 =lag Dam @DOC Blucher counterattacks on the front side of the slopes, where the French could target them at will. Despite horrendous casualties, the Prussian forces still held the slopes, although the cavalry finally withdrew. What Napoleon had been doing was stretching the Prussian line to the right, making Blucher commit the last of his reserves. Tf you prefer your Beef Wellington its winter combat. Plancenoit, Bladensburg, served in more of a wargame platter, the Hill are all here, in a near-embarrassthen fret no longer, as a smorgasbord of ment of riches. Even alternate Waterloo and Napoleonic dishes are waiting for you. BatLeipzig battles are offered. tles of Napoleon designer David Landrey and Our next course is not quite up to #4, but friends have published (with SSI's permisthe fifth set of battles can be more easily sion) enough battles to keep even the most digested. Another Leipzig is followed by yer fanatical of Bonaparte connoisseurs deanother Quatre Bras, but Vimiero gives us lighted for years to come. Junot versus Wellington in Spain. AspernWhat's On The Menu Essling is a quiet classic, balanced by Podubno, Village and Retreat (an apt title). Scenario disk # 1 has a variety of struggles, Ligny is one of the best games in the whole the best of which is Austerlitz, Napoleon's collection, filled with lots of nail-biting degreatest achievement, and one of the most cisions for the players. flawlessly executed tactical plans in history. For dessert, we have a look at the PyraFrench players will have a hard time repeatmids. Bonaparte's Egyptian adventures. ing history here. Marengo, from Bonaparte's More exotic conflicts, such as Raab, early days, is also a tense aflair. Maida Craonne, and Corunna are quite a change of Utitsa, and Redoubt round out the disk. pace from the ordinary Nappy fare, alFor our next course, disk # 2 offers the though we do have to put up with Borodino unusual Albuera, complete with Polish 2 and the oddly-titled North. Jena and Lancers and numerous cavalry charges. Wavre are some of the best games of the Medellin moves us to Spain, where Hussars, entire collection. Dragoons and cavalry meer in a wild enBattles of Napoleon Scenario Disks 1-6 will gagement near the Guadiana River. Two run on most any IBM, and require only more normal scenarios, Bridge Battle and EGA/CGA graphics. Mouse support is proSanton are included, but most gamers will vided, but you will probably find the game have trouble resisting New Orleans with Anjust as easy to play with the keyboard. The drew Jackson. scenarios were designed by David Landrey The American theme continues with disk with Chuck Kroegel and Michael Merritt # 3, where such Revolutionary War stand(who did disk #6). All scenarios are curards as Camden and Cowpens are showcased. rently available from Novastar Games, P.O. If nothing else, the names are unique: Kings Box 1813, Rocklin, CA (916) 624-7113. Mountain, Hobkirk and Eutaw Springs. Scenario disks run $10, with an extra $2 for While not as popular as the Napoleonic shipping, a bargain, especially considering battles, they are still worth a look. what wargames tend to cost these days. Disk # 4 is a return to the strength of the Hopefully, SSI will see fit to re-release Batseries, with several prime choice scenarios tles of Napoleon in a format more suited to for the gamer with a hearty appetite. Wacomputer gaming in the 1990s. Until then, gram is a marvelously balanced affair, if true Napoleonic fans will happily struggle somewhat long. Smolensk is tough for the through these fine collections of battles. French to win, and Eylau is an oddity, with French pursuit Page 170 Computer Gaming World "


"kingmaker. The Quest for the Crown Actual screens many vary. Step back in history to the time of the War of the Roses. In England, racked by civil war, the crown hangs by a thread and the throne is there for the taking. Take command of your own faction and begin the quest for the crown. Will you fall to face the executioners blade? Or can you outwit your opponents and win, for your Royal Heir, the throne of all England? Based on the best selling strategy board game, Kingmaker brings the intrigue and anarchy of the 15th Century warring England to life. No matter how many times you play, highly-sophisticated artificial intelligence guarantees a challenge for novice and master strategist alike. Available at Leading Resellers, including: Babbages Comp USA Computer City Electronics Boutique Egghead Radio Shack Software Etc. Walden's Software. Coming Soon... 3rd Reich PC, and Operation: Crusader-Part 1 of the World at War Series! The Opposition finds voice through Richard of York, botlu Pival Claimont ind: voice Shakespeare's grent drama llenry VI recounts the War of the Roses throughout Kingmaker. \"Come, let us four to dinner. I dare say this quarrel will drink blood another day.\" BANNED in the UK! Can you place your candidate upon the throne? Or will you end, as so many did, bent beneath the headman's axe... The Avalon Hill Game Company Available on: IBM PC compatibles. Required: Processor 286 or better. Min. 640K memory. High Density Hard Drive. VGA graphic support AdLib, Roland, SoundBlaster Sound support for digitized speech. Also available: Commodore Amiga. 1 MB reqd. HD recommended. DIVISION OF MONARCH AVALON, INC. 4517 Harford Road, Baltimore, MD 21214 If Kingmaker cannot be found locally, please call TOLL FREE 1-800-999-3222 Circle Reader Service #126 GAMES OF STRATEGY "


"sians past St. Amand took the French initially keeps its goal in mind. While striving for deploying on the wrong side of the slopesby surprise. Napoleon himself rode among objectives and enemy casualties may seem at with the expected results. Nevertheless, the the troops and rallied them by sheer force of first to be artificial, it is more often than not counterattack on the French cxtended flank will. After the front stabilized, it became apsimilar to human strategies. The French side parent to the Prussians that they were facing was played aggressively, almost with abanOnly the timing of the French breakthrough army with a mere shell of don. Stretching the enemy line to create a near Ligny averted a potential disaster for their own force. Blucher, who had miracuweakness was a tactic used often by NapoNapoleon. The Prussian withdrawal was imlously escaped the infantry assault and the leon, particularly at Austerlitz, his most notaportant portant, as it reduced the chance of a French cavalry charges near Ligny, took the hint and ble victory. That the computer conceived of major victory. The balance of the scenario is crept away to the cast. cvident when you consider that the resoundand effectively carried out such a plan shows what might have happened had Napolcon ing French victory in this replay only gives Silicon Bonaparte Napoleon a tactical success, because the \"been himself\" ar Ligny. French would still have to face a victorious Although a 5-year-old game, Battles of NaWhile the computer side did not play the Wellington at Waterloo. Rather impressive, poleon still has a solid historical feel. The Prussian side as well from a technical standconsidering the recent state of Al opponents computer Al is reasonably fast-moving, and point, it did emulate Blucher's strategy of for wargamers. Cow CGW Speaks With David Landrey attles of Napoleon is that rarity showed that strategy games and wargames CGW: David, sum up your design phiamong computer games, one which could sell well, given the right treatment? losophy for us. has gained a veritable cult following DL: Sure, but for every re-release that DL: The research must be solid, of course. despite its 5-year-old design. Amid persistsucceeds, there's one that doesn't. If I had a Never forget, though, that the game must be ent rumors that the game might be re-re choice, I'd do Battles of Napoleon over again playable above all else. What good does it do leased, we thought it appropriate to touch with 256-color VGA, digitized sound and to have a game which is praised for its realbase with one of Napoleon's designers, David really use the power of a 486. Before a ism, but collects dust on the shelf? I've felt Landrey. company takes a chance with that, they have very fortunate that Battles of Napoleon, GetCGW: David, for those gamers unfamiliar to be sure that the audience is out there. tysbure, and some of my with you, why don't you give us some backCGW: So where does Napoleon stand perceived as giving the right historical feel, ground information? What other games now? while still being played. Awards are great, have you worked on? DL: As you know, I've had permission to but I listen most to my customers. From a DL: Well, in addition to Battles of Napopublish official scenarios for the game for the more rechnical standpoint, I've always foleon, I also designed Shiloh and Gettysburg last couple of years. With Michael Merritt, cused on the operational-level game, befor SSI, both of which did very well. Chuck I've now published six scenario disks, with cause it shows you things you don't get from Kroegel and I made a very successful team over three dozen battles to choose from, the purely tactical or strategic viewpoints. I back in the mid-to-late 80s. from my company, Novastar Games. Retry to give the players a good mixture of CGW: Are there any games that stand out, cently, a company in Germany wanted to strategic and tactical choices, to keep them good or bad? publish Battles of Napoleon, letting us know involved in the game throughout. DL: When we did Knights of the Desert for that there was an overseas market. We are CGW: Are there any designers whose SSI, it was very well received at the time, and currently negotiating with a gentleman from work you particularly admire? won all kinds of awards. People liked it Israel, who wants to carry Napoleon in his DL: Sid Meier is a marvelous designer, because it was one of the first computer 300+ stores, which is why we are reprinting with a lot of good ideas. The guys at Atomic wargames that played like a board wargame copies of the original game. Whether this Games really impressed me with their V for to a degree. Personally. I always liked the will lead to anything more, I really can't say. Victory games; they looked incredible, just 19th-Century. American Civil War and Na CGW: What is the appeal of Napoleon? like a board game. poleonic, games better than the WWII-era. DL: For me, I was never into Ancients or CGW: Where do you see computer games A lot of gamers seem to agree with me, given Medicval warfare. Too much crash and five years down the line? that Battles of Napoleon is still so popular. bash-not a lot of subtlety. Modern Warfare DI: It's funny, because software still CGW: Which brings us to the question of is rough, with the killing power of the weap hasn't caught up to the 486, and now we Napoleon. Is it being re-released and why or ons, and the guerrilla tactics and so on. I have the Pentium. Then there are the new why not? guess Napoleonics gives a good mix of tacconsoles, the 3DO and those types, which I DL: First, let me say that SSI is not plan tics, with line and column, and enough think are interesting, but won't replace the ning on redoing Napoleon at this time, al movement to keep me interested. I suspect computer. Wargames have come a long way though it has been considered. Sales of the gamers are very familiar with Napolcon, in the past five years, so I can only assume average wargame are far below sales of rolesince there is so much information available that the graphics, sound and interfaces will playing, flight simulators and other genres about him. Gamers like to think they can be continue to get better. Wargames still have of games. While I might be disappointed, it Napoleon for a few hours. Lots of gamers a good following, and I figure they'll be just makes good business sense for SSI. have told me that they really like the cavalry as strong five years from now. CGW. Don't you think that new versions charges! The main reason that Battles of NaCGW: We can only hope. of older games, such as Empire Deluxe, polcon is still so popular, is that nothing on the market has come close to replacing it. Page 172 Computer Gaming World "


"St-Ge 50 YEARS Manteig OF GHORT CONTACT la campanheralds a new generation of War Simulations Campaign I heralds a new eneration of War Simulations vith more depth the efore and fabulous real3D action brought his knowledge to bear on computer gaming with an end result that tooks and feels more realistic than ever before. All aspects involved in the running of an army have been considered, so that now you can place yourself in command oth either side at any level in the chain of command. Over 1307 templates of the most signiticant military forces from 56 different nations of the last 50 years have been included to gain an insight into real conflicts such as Korea, Vietnam and Operation Desen Storm. enter the battlefield in one of the 152 types of military vehicles. APCs and Mobile Artillery, utilise weapons ranging from wire-gulded missiles, rockets, homing missiles, and machineguns supported by laser rangefinders to tracer rangefinders, night vision, and qun stabilizers Tiedepth to Campaign II is Vied by the all new strategy. Exen Military consultant, Wilf Owen, from recent conflicts has The action takes the form of last 3D graphics if you choose to JONATHAN GRIFFITHS A Company. Platoon 2: Friendly Mi Abrams Half Speed NAMPAIGN EARS OF GLOBAL CONFLICT domu empire ---020-8-1 en haged as the most Lonkahensiy a tion with new proved e ny level in the Cher on ESTO ], closely resembling that of a real OLE V sluation landels-on action as ou il helicopters in all-to-ground hairair attacks Leploy the animag a r during fece battlefield ac on da m i proved 3D eni on mereka Featuring all the modern weapole systems: gu del missiles rockets, homing misil, laser angefinders, gur-stawilizers and right sights. CAMPAIGN WAS BIG CAMPAIGN WAS GOOD CAMPAIGN II IS BIGGER, BETTER ANI QUITE SIMPLY THE MILITARY SIMULATION OF INE YEAR! Arguin Mandal 000E 1840-00E 60 2002 10 00 orded IRAQ Empire Software. The Spires, 677 High Road. North Finchley, London N12 ODA. Telephone: 081-343 9143 Empire Software is a registered trademark of Entertainment International (UK) Ltd. 1993 Empire Software Jonathan Griffiths Circle Reader Service #52 garaia empire S 0 W ARE "


"would no doubt wince at the number of bugs infesting this half-baked dish. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #2. Taking |  H ADIO A quick look at titles now appearing on a store shel near you. Rally Casady & Greene 22734 Portola Dr. Salinas, CA 93908-1119 (408) 484-9228 SPACEWAY 2000: We Southern Californians were immediately drawn to this Mac action game. The player is plopped in a space ship on an intergalactic freeway filled with all sorts of «highway scum» out to run him or her off the road. Drones and Flies pursue you relentlessly, Wall creepers fire from the shoulder, Blockers try to hinder your movementall act like drivers we are all too familiar with. Yet, while driving this «freeway» is a daunting task, you can make it home using missiles, smart bombs, lasers and shields to your best advantage and collecting every key, crystal and crate that crosses your path. Crisp, colorful graphics and great digitized sounds make playing this game of super arcade madness all the more exciting. Macintosh ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #3. Unnecessary Roughness Accolade 5300 Stevens Creek Blvd. San Jose, CA 95129 (800) 245-7744 RALLY: For every American who's ever wanted to go blasting down English country lanes in a good old-fashioned high speed Rally, here's an alternative to tearing up a rented Renault and sending countless bystanders to the Last Great Pit Stop. Rally lets you hop in one of five 300 hp, turbocharged factory racers for the final stop on the World Championship Series. The actual course has been recreared to simulate the timed stages broken up among four days on British backroads. With your co-driver by your side calling out every bend and dip in the road, you'll go roaring down narrow country roads lined with trees, hay bales and race fans (read: fanblade fondue) through rain or shine to reach the end of the stretch in the shortest possible time. A number of customizable configs let you change cars, driver, co-driver, tires, or keyboard controls, which is a must because joystick configuration on two test machines failed to calibrate. It might be a fun experience for serious rally sports, but those racing fans who've grow accustomed to more detailed driving sims will probably race on by. IBM ($59.95) Circle Reader Service #1. THE ZONE OF AVOIDANCE: Defending an enormous circling space station in orbit over an unknown planet is your assignment as you stand your ground alone on the edge of The Zone of Avoidance. Though you are not accompanied by any comrades in arms, you are not completely alone. There are plenty of asteroids, missiles and hostile aliens to keep you company as you man your solitary post. Defense: that's the simple agenda in a far from simple game of 3D space-flight. You've got missiles. You've got lasers. You've got radar. The only thing you don't have is time to spare! Linger too long or ler down your guard, and be enveloped by the cold of space. If you like space-flight sims with a good dose of arcade action, The Zone of Avoidance is just what the doctor ordered. Macintosh ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #4. Spaceway 2000 Set 12 W GARRABEERSO KO N SERVETARY BD EINER roc). The Zone of Avoidance UNNECESSARY ROUGHNESS: Accolade has long been known for exciting sports games. While 4th And Inches might have been lacking in realism, having fun was never a M problem. Instead of relying on the tested arcade formula, the designers of Unnecessary Roughness decided to make a simulation more akin to Dynamix's Front Page Sports Football. With the NFLPA license, you can test your gridiron knowledge against a host of all-pros. Problem is, the game resembles more of an arcade game, with none of the realistic feel of its more storied competitors. Moreover, the Super VGA graphics are not as enticing as the box cover would have you believe, and program crashes occur so often, you may feel like you've been tackled on astro turf. Monday Night Football's announcer Al Michaels is as thrilling as ever in digitized voice, but he CD-ROMIX! 19840 Pioneer Ave. Torrance, CA 90503 (800) 556-6141 CD-ROMIX!: Meld the colorful world of comics with the multimedia capabilities of CD-ROM and what do you get? CDROMIX! In particular, you get three titles from Malibu Comics' best-selling Ultraverse comic line: Prime #1, Freex #1 and Hardcase #1. Each of these CD-based comic books expands the illustrated world of the paper comic with high-resolution graphics, real-life character voices, special visual effects, original musical scores, and dynamic sound effects. In addition to providing an unabridged recreation of the original story, each CD-ROMIX! CD-ROMIX Page 174 Computer Gaming World "


"ARMED AND DANGEROUST TO GRAB THE LATEST IN IBM GAMES CALL: 1-800-247-5447 GAMES MARCH'S TOP 50 844 836 Ultima l $38 $ 47 $ 48 $45 852 $42 ACES OVER EUROPE AD&D: THE GENIE'S CURSE $49 CAMPAIGN 2 $37 CARRIERS AT WAR 2 841 COMMAND ADV. STARSHIP 843 COMPANIONS OF XANTH $36 DAEMONSGATE DARK SUN: SHAT. LANDS $ 46 DUNE 2 838 DUNGEON HACK DUNGEON MASTER 2 $38 FANTASY EMPIRES FORGOTTEN CASTLE GREAT NAVAL BATTLES 2 847 HAND OF FATE $35 HARPOON 2 HEIRS TO THE THRONE 836 INDY CAR RACING $ 45 IRON HELIX $59 KASPROV'S GAMBIT KINGS QUEST 6 847 VINTURY LUCKY'S CASINO MAXIMUM OVERKILL $42 ASEA NHL HOCKEY '94 PACIFIC STRIKE PIRATES OF GOLD POLICE QUEST 4 $ 42 PRINCE OF PERSIA 2 PRIVATEER 847 QUEST FOR GLORY 4 REBEL ASSAULT CD RED CRYSTAL $37 SEAL TEAM SHADOWCASTER SIM CITY 2000 842 STAR TREK: JUDGE. RITES 835 STRIKE COMMANDER $36 SYNDICATE $37 THIRD REICH $38 ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 2 ULTIMA VINI: PAGAN 848 UNNATURAL SELECTION 335 V FOR VICTORY: GJ, S VICTORY AT SEA $ 45 WARLORDS 2 842  OPEN 8:00 A.M. TO 9:00 P.M. WING COM. ACADEMY $32 MONDAY-SATURDAY EST WIZARDRY 7: CRUSADERS $39  FEDERAL EXPRESS SHIPPING WORLDS OF XEEN CD 87.00 PER ORDER WW2 BTTLS OF S. PACIFIC $ 37 . ALL RETURNS MUST HAVE AN X WING $ 41 RMA NUMBER  NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR ERRORS OR OMISSIONS TITAN GAMES 1 WEST SEMINARY ST. BRANDON, VT 05733 $42 $ 42 $50 The Seven Secrets $41 $ 47 $ 47 $ 42 EEPER VISA Circle Reader Service #118 "


"title contains over 130 panels and 60 screens. Stories may be viewed on \"autoplay\" or paced by the viewer. Each title also offers a \"behind the scenes\" interview with the creators of the comic characters and an overview of the Ultraverse world. So, if you're ready for the next step in comic entertainment, stop by your favorite software or comic retailer. IBM CDROM ($24.95). Circle Reader Service #5. Bending over Aladdin, the Genie roared out, IWhat is your command, my master?I IC-C-Command?! stammered Aladdin. IYes, yes, your command. You are the master of the lamp. Since you possess it! serve the master of the lamp. So, command me. Perhaps his recent adventures had finally made Aladdin cautious. He did not therefore, rush into anything. Imagitec Design, Inc. 921 West Main St., Suite 13 Nashville, TN (615) 824-1960 DAEMONSGATE: It's been 18 months and several publishers since Daemonsgate was scheduled for release, but it has finally emerged, quite damp, from Vapor Land. The graphics in this mega-role-playing environment are reminiscent of Ultima VIT, but it's not so easy to interact with everything in the environment hiere. Some 70,000 words of conversation are included, with friendly types almost falling over each other for a chance to talk to our hero. Much of the artwork is quite stunning, and it will be a welcome sight for role-playing fans who have experienced a bit of a drought lately. Still, one can't help but feel that the game would have made a bigger splash if it hadn't been delayed for over a year. IBM, IBM CD-ROM. Circle Reader Service #8. Aladdin and the Wonderful Lamp Ebook, Inc. 32970 Alvarado-Niles Rd., Suite 704 Union City, CA 94587 (510) 429-1331 ALADDIN AND THE WONDERFUL LAMP: Polishing up EBook's newest CD title won't result in any unusual surprises. However, it is the most interesting and visually impressive multimedia storybook they have released thus far. Beginning with a Video for Windows full-motion video introduction by Sheherezade, the narrator, Aladdin is primarily an audio/video rendition of the classic tale, coming from the collection of stories known as the Thousand and One Arabian Nights. Though it follows the traditional storyline, interactive decisions made in Aladdin and the Wonderful Lamp allow the viewer to throw Aladdin a few unsuspected curves along the way. A learning guide, preface to the Thousand and One Arabian Nights, and an onscreen dictionary enhance the value of this entertaining educational tool. Narration and music can also be played on a standard music CD player. IBM CD-ROM with Windows ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #6. 3DPC CONTROLLBORSKERESEGYSEES BRETERESHERIGEN Inline Software, Inc. 308 Main St. Lakeville, CT 06039-1204 (800) 453-7671 DELIVERANCE: Is it a river rafring simulation with a banjo score? No, it's an action game shooter in a fantasy adventure setting that mixes elements of Gods and Shadow of the Beast. As the Storm Lord, you must axe your way through Tnrom's Palace to free the fairies imprisoned there. Succeed in your mission and you will save the land. Fail and Tnrom will destroy all. Whatever the outcome, Deliverance will entertain actionand strategygamers for hours with its superb graphics and challenging play. A black belt in the joystick arts is required. Macintosh w/color display ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #9. JERAMIAM NAMELESS SAVE \"I HAVE HEARD THAT YOU WILL BE LERVING THE CITY S00N. IF YOU NEED A 2000 SHORD ARN THEN I AM HIT SELECT BUTTON TO CONTINUE >> Daemonsgate Deliverance Forte 2141 Palomar Airport Rd., Suite 100 Carlsbad, CA 92009 (619) 431-6499 3DPC: 3DPC bills itself as the first screen saver offering realistic 3-dimensional, raytraced animations. And while it does deliver a sugary burst of eye candy, the rush quickly passes. There are nine animations here on 6.5 MB, which can be arranged and played when you wanr them as long as you want them. Options enable privacy protection with a password and the ability to start or stop animations on demand. A few of the animations show off the modeling technology used to create 3-D shapes with smooth, glossy, reflective surfaces, while the rest...well, wouldn't win any animation awards. The flying pigs are cute (\"pigs in spaaaace»), and a folding, geometrical, Escher-esque design is intriguing, but the slithering sperm-like liquid silver slugs aren't exactly fetching. Marvel for a minute on the monitor at the computer store, and save your green for games. IBM ($19.99) Circle Reader Service #7. Media Vision Multimedia Publishing 47300 Bayside Parkway Fremont, CA 94538 (510) 770-8600 QUANTUM GATE: No longer just a hardware manufacturer, Media Vision debuts Quantum Gate, their first interactive movie employing a three-dimensional software interface known as VirtualCinema. Thanks in part to this interface and featuring over 1,000 pages of text, almost two full hours of video, and extensive audio, Quantum Gate provides an intriguing \"you-are-in-the-movie\" gaming experience unmatched by many other interacrive CD titles. It is also the first in a series of science fiction adventures on CD-ROM. Set in the year 2057 A.D., the game's focus is on saving an environmentally doomed earth. Interaction is comprised of dialogue choices during video segments, 3D movement through the station on Planet AJ-3905, accessing on-line information terminals and virtual arcade sequences similar to that of Spectre Quantum Gate Page 176 Computer Gaming World "


"Lowest delivered prices with great customer service. DUCOVER Mastercard VISA 800-448-6658 .. READERSA CHOICE HOICE 1995 29% 3995 39 319 29% Pinbal\" 75 37\" 47\" 1995 35% 29% no 49 han 29 39% C NO SURCHARGE SHIPPING IS ONLY $4.00 DISK-COUNT PER ORDER, NOT PER HOURS: M-F 9 AM-8 PM SAT 10 AM-3 PM EST SOFTWARE ITEM READERE PRODUCT INFO & OTHER BUSINESS: 908-396-8880 HARDWARE INCLUDEDINI CD ROM Libry of Art:Renaisn 65 SOFTWARE . Comanche 426 Great Britian 37 Lord of Rings 2 37 Putt Putt Fun Pack 26 Stronghold 37\" sion Disk Loom 25% Hawaii 19 Lost File Sherlock 27\" Quarter Pole 29% Aesops Fables Studyware for ACT 33 A Train Lost Treasure 49 17 Instant Fadt Loc. 19 Comic Bk Creator Lost Treas Infocom 42 Quest for Glory 1 Aircraft Encyclopda 45 22 GMAT,GRE,SAT 30 Construction Set 22 MacMillian Child Dict49 Japan Scenery Compan of Xanth 35% 19\" Across the Rhine 47 Lost Treasures 2 29% Amer Bus. Phnbk. 39 Quest for Glory 3 39 Studyware Biology, 7 Manhole 49 New York |Amer Hert Pict Dict 75 29 Computer Works 46% Lost Tribe 25 Rags lo Riches Aces Over Europe 44% Calc.,Chem.,Econ... Cohort 2 Paris 29 Aces of the Pacific 420 Lunar Command 35% Reach for Skies 195 Arthur Teacher Trbl 41 Maniac Mansion 39 Physics, Statistic 25 Pilots Pwer Tools 24 19 Lost Vikings Conquest of Japan 35% Mission Disk Reader Rabbit 35% Autodesk Explorer 119 Mantis Studyware LSAT 37 Mario is Missing 47 426 Contraption Zak 25% Rescue Air 911 17 AD&D Collect 2 Maelstom Reader Rabbit 2 Barney Bear Goes 35% Syndicate 37% Mavis Beacon Crusader Drk Savnt39% San Fransisco 29 Magic Candle 3 37% Ready for Letter 35% AD&D Starter Kit 42 Take a break X-Word 29 to School 26 Mayo Clinic 49 Cuckoo Zoo Maniac Mansion 1135% Scenery St A or B 37 Ready Set Read 2995 AD&D Unlimited into Space Pinball 3786 26 Mived in Moth Mixed Up Moth Gs 37 Cyber Space Scenery Enhn Ed 25 Adlbou&Junior #1 349 Reading Adv in Oz 36 Task Force 1942 37 Battlechess 34 Monarch Notes Daemonsgate 35% Sound & Graphic 25 Speech Disk Air Bucks 17 Reading Comp 32 Admiral Edit Beauty & Beast 43% 3425 49 Monkey Island 39 Darklands Air Bus A320 Tahiti Mario is Missing 35% Ready Set Read 29° Beethoven Ninth Terminator 2029 39% 59 MM Music: Mozart 33 Darkseed Air Duel Mario Teach Type 25 3335 39 Washington DC 29% Berlitz Think & Talk Realms of Arcadia 35% Tesserae MM Music: Vivaldi 33 Air Warrior SVGA 35 Darkside of Xeen 39% West USA Sonry 39% Master of Orion 37% Red Baron Trmtr 2 Cyrchess 35 105 Our Solar System 29 Dark Sun West Europe 19 AJ World Discvry 2995 Math Blaster Plus 29\" Mission Disk 17 Tetris Classic Spanish 31 105 Pool Shark 19\" Freddy Pharkas Daughter of Serpnt 31% 39% 29% Mystery Retum Of Phantm 33\" Bloodnet AlgeBlaster Plus 4195 Time Riders Amer. 35 30 41 84\" Prcision Map Deja Vu 1 & 2 37* Front Page Pro 45% Search of Spot 35\" Rex Nebular Alone in The Dark 35% Blue Force 37 Tony LaRussa Base.17 39 39% Protostar Design your Railrd. 35 Fun School Fred Frog Math Blaster Wind 36 Ring World Alphabet Blocks 29 34 Tony LaRussa II Bookshelf 37\" 129 Publish it! 69 Amazon 389 Diet Pro DOS/Win 25/36 Sam Spy Teddy Br 17 Math Rabbit Britanica Family Cho49 Reference Library Robosports Wind 25% Expansion Disk 19% 59 Dino Park Mathology y 35% 29 G-Force Amazon Trail 3495 Buzz Aldrin Race 59 Return of Phantom 37 Rock & Bach Studo35% Top Class Series ea 16 Dino Quest Ambush 31% Gateway Il 370 29 Mavis Beacon Carmen World Dixe 65 Rodney Fun Screen31 Tornado 45% Rotor/Airball/Time 25 Dinosaur Adventure 34 Gearworks Mega Lo Mania 29% Rome 29% Treasure Cove Ancient Art War Sky35 35 Cautious Condor 45 San Diego Zoo 49 Ancient Empires Discovering Amer 35 30 Geekwad Games 22. Mental Math Games 37 Rule Engagment 239% CD Game Pack Treasur Math Storm 35 55 Secret Weapons 59 Distant Sun Animal Adventure 47 39% Gobblins 1 or 2 22 Michl Jordon Fight 37 Science Adventure 42 Treasure Mountain 35 CD Speedway 57 Seventh Guest 59 Dog Fight Animation Studio 37% 75 Grand Slam Bridg II 32 Chess Maniac Micro Cookbook 4. 31 Scooter Magic Castl32 Treehouse 34\" Sherlock Holmes 39 Dr Floyd Desktop 19% Microsoft Golf Great Naval Admrl 48% Arcade for Wind 29% 39 Saable Delx Chnstmas Carol 32 Tristan Pinball 33 Sherlock Holmes 2 42 Dr Jam Window 59% Super Ships Midnight Rescue 20% 35 Amored Fist Seal Team 37% Turbo Science CIA World Fact 39 Sherlock Holmes 3 49 Dr. Quandry Ashes of Empire Great Works Might & Magic 4 35% Clipart Goliath 40 Sat Weapn Luftwf 2995 Turtle Tools 30 Sleeping Beauty 37 A.T.A.C. Dragon Sphere 35 Gunship 2000 29 Might & Magc 5 39% Tour of Duty ea. Conan Cimerion 20 Ultima 7 36 Sound Works 35 Dragon Lair 3 3995 Auto Insight Scenario Disk 24 Millies Math House 31 Seven Cities Gold 38 Creative Kids Forge of Virtue 36\" Space Quest 4 37 Dreadnoughts 40% Automap Hardball 3 Mind Castle 35 Curse of Enchantia25 Shadow President 39% Space Series-Apollo49 Automap Wind Dune 2 59 Data Disk (ea.) 17 Mixed-Up Fairy Tal 30 Shadowcaster Deathstar Arcade 30 475 Ultima 7 Part 2 Space Shutle 29 Harrier Assault Dungeon Master 29% 74 349 Automap Europe Mixed-Up Mother Gs30 Shadowlands Dictionaries & Lang 30 29\" Ultima Trilogy Spirit of Excalibur 37 39 42 Money/Clocks Wrk 19 Dynamix Bundle Sierra Action Five Dune Autoworks 25 Ultima Trilogy 2 47\" 45% Stellar 7 Health & Diet Pro 26 Eagle Eye Mystery 31% Monkey Island 1/2 23 Education Master 32 Sierra Award Winner47 Ultima Underworld 47 B-17 Flying Fortress 19 Strange Deadfellow 39 High Command 425 Monopoly Deluxe Bailey's Bookhouse29% Eco-Quest 1 or 2 29\" 34 Sierra Family Fun 32 Electronic Cookbk 75 Part 2 Star Trek Enhanced49 Eight Ball Delx Bane Cosmic Forge 36 35% all Hong Kong Mahjong32 More Vegas Game19\" Elect. Home Library 49 Street Atlas Sierra Starter Bndl 39 Ultrabots 99 35 Hoyle Bk Game 1/3 30 El Fish Mutanoid Challenge31 Silent Service 2 19% Elctmn Traveler Call 33 Uninvited Window 37\" Batman Returns 39% Talking Classic Tale75 35% Humans Empire Deluxe 25 Mystery at Museum35 Sim Ant Encarta Encyclpd249% 5 34% Unnecessry Rough35 Talkng Jungle Safari75 Battlochess 4000 SVGA36 Scenario Disk 19% Inca 35% 34% NFL Challenge 59 Battle of Destiny Sim Ant French European Monarchs49 35 U.S.Atlas DOS 3 1 Time Table Science 59 29 Incredible Machine 29 NFL Coaches Club 33 Beat the House Entrmt Pak Win (ea.)28 F-15 Sim City Classic 25° Utopia Ultimate Shareware 59 Indiana Jones 4 37 Eric the Unready 35% Nigel's World 31 254 Windows F-117A V for Victory (ea) Betrayal of Krondor39% US Atlas Eternam Inspector Gadget 35\" No Greater Glory 20% Sim Earth 399 Botty Crocker Cook Call Vista Pro Vista Pri Family Doctor 39 US Atlas w/Automap19 31% Eye of Beholder 20 Black Crypt Island of Dr. Brain 29% Omar Shariff Bridge 37 Fally Bear Sim Life Dos/Wind 39% Vocabulary Devl 43 US History Eye Beholder 2 38 Bloodnel Jetfighter 2 3 9 Open Dialog 44\" Font Master Sing a Long Wind 31% Wacky Funsters US Presidents 49 Eye of Beholder 3 42 Ady Mission Disk 19 Blue & Gray Operation Neptune 35 Snap Dragon G Force 3 2 War in Gulf USA Wars:Civil War 49 39 Bluefore EZ Cosmos 4 2 John Madden 2 31% Orbits Snoopy Game Club 29 War in Russia Gateway II 35\" USA Wars:Korea 49 Body Illustrated * 475 Ez Language Series Johnny Quest Oregon Trail Delx 34% Solitaire Window Gettysburg:MM Hist43 USA Wars:Vietnam 49 29% Warrior of Legend 19% 42 Fr. Grit,Sp.Jp.Rs 31% Bodyworks 38% Jump Jet Ongin FX Solitaires Journey 35 Wayne Gretzky 3 Gofer Winkles Adv 33 USA Wars: WWII 49 35 F14 Fleet Defend 44% MPE Version 48% Bug Bunny WrkShp 31 Out of This World 36 Space Ace 2:Bort 36 Waynes World Golden Immortal 29\" 28 Voyage Planet ea 69 F 15 III 44 Kye Deluxe 30% Buzz Aldrin Outnumbered 30 Space Adventure 42 What's My Angle 30 Great Cities Vol 1 49 Who Killd Sam Rup 25 Master Edition 35% 49% kid Cad Caesar Pacific Wars 47 Gunship 2000 Space Hulk 37% When2Worlds War35% Willy Beamish 37 F117a Stealth Car and Driver 299 27% Kid Cuts Paladin 2 35 Space Quest 5 Guy Spy Where Crmn San Diego 32 Win CD ... 39 Falcon 3.0 Camer Strike Kid Desk 25 Patriot Spear of Destiny 39 Humans America Past 34 25 Wing Comm & Miss 45 Oper Fight Tiger 25 19% kid Pictures PC Study Bible 42 Expansion Disk 19% Special Forces 29 Europe 35 Wing Com/Ultima 6 45 Kid Pix Mig 29 Data Disk 34% 35% Peppers Adventure 29\" 35% Spectre Carriers at War 2 42 Inspector Ga. Aet 37° Wing Comm 2 Space 57 21% Cash for Kids Family Tree Maker 42 Kid Pix Companion 25 Perfect General 36 Spellbound Interactive Old Test52 Time 31% W 2/Ulti. Undrwld 57 35% Castle 2 Fantasy Empire 42 Kid Works 2 Pinball Dreams 29 Spellcasting 301 35 Interactive Storytime45 World Atlas 42 Castle of Dr. Brain Farm Creativity Kit 18 30 Kids Zoo Pirtate's Gold 38% Spell-it Plus Intro Games Fr/Sp 79 World War II Pak 37 USA Deluxe 44\" Falty Bear Birthday31% Kings Ransom Center Court Ten. 12 Playroom 2.0 30% SpellJammer 37% World Deluxe Its a Wonderful Life 48 44\" Adults Only-Must be 21 Fields of Glory Challnge 5 Realm 33\" 33% King's Quest 6 45 Police Quest 3 39% Sports Adventure Jazz:Multimedia Hist69 33 Wild Science Arcad35% Animation Fantasy 65 Flashback 32 Champions Land Of Lore Pool Shark 19% Star Control 2 Jets & Props 35% Ween:Prophecy 55 35\" 34\" PC Pix Vol 1 or 2 65 Flight Simul ATP 28% Chemistry Works Legacy 38 39 Prince of Persia 2 39% Jones in Fast Lane 37 Star Trek 25th Aniv. 37 Wing Comandr 2 47 65 Porkware og Just Grandma & Me36 Legacy Necromnc 19 Print Shop Deluxe 45 Private Collection Chessmster 29% Star Trek AudioClip 34 Flight Simulator 5 43 Wing Com Acadm 31 65 Private Collection 65 Air Trc Cntrir Children Writ & Publ 39 34 Legion's of Krella 37 Graphic Coll. (ea) 30 Jutland Next Generation 38% World Circuit 34% 44% Priv. Pictures 1 or 265 Arcft/Scen Dsgn City Streets 28 59% 42 Lemmings Print Shop, New 35 Star Trek Screen Sav37 Kings Quest 5 MPE Edition 44% Seedy Vol 1-7 ea. 65 Civilization Aircraft Adv Factry 25 Graphics (ea) Lemmings 2 37 22 King Quest 6 Up 26% Stickybr Math Tutor 30 World Tour Tennis32 Storm 1 or 2 # 685 65 Civilization Deluxe 450 Lethal Weapon 35% Print Shp Compion 31 Stickybr Pre School 30 World War II Land Of Lore 35% 349 Visual Fantasy 65 Civilization Win # 701 41% 17 Links 25 Privateer Languages of World99 Caddies 7.95éa. 3/$ 19 Clash of Steel Stickybr Read Tutor 30 X Wing Airport Facty Loc 39% 17 Links 386 Pro 39 Prophecy Stickbr Spell Tutor 30 Mission Disk Learn to Speak Spn59 19% California Coaster 37 Course Disk ea 16 Protostar Storybook Weaver2995 Yobi Spelling Trick29 Leisure Suit Larry 42 Cobra Mission East USA Scen 39% 386 Courses ea 19\" Putt Putt Parade 32 Strike Commander 45% Zodiac Signs 39\" Sound Cards SB CDROM Intel 369 MIDI Software CD DRIVES Joysticks Multimedia Speech Disk 17 Zoo Keeper Strip Poker 3 149 k y SB Portblaster 32 Zug's Spelling Ady 22 AutStereo Fix Balade Windows 79 Toshiba CH Flightstick 37' Aitech 147 Data Disk (ea) SB Video Blastor 349 StereoFix CD 17 Ady of Eco Island 22 Band in a Box 3041 Internal 489\" 69 SB Video Spigot 41995 CH Game Card 3 31 Audio Show 369 Covox Voice Bistr 64 SR Wavallerier au Cadenza 125 3041 External 594% CH Mach 3 28% Store: 1060 Randolph Ave. Rahway N.J. Pro 256 Gravis Ultra Sound 129 SB Waveblaster 234\" Cakewalk Texcel America CH Virtual Pilot Pro Color Plus 529 65 299% Roland RAP-10 4599 CD-ROM Kit Cakewalk Win SCC-1 G$ 375 129% 3021 Internal 349 Eliminator Card 26 TERMS AND CONDITIONS PTOVGA TV Media Vision 459 Audio Port SC-7 139 3024 Dbl Spd Cakewalk Pro 390 169 Gravis Analog Pro 39 Pro PC IV Plus 249 Master Card, Visa, American Express & COPC 959 SC-55 3024 Business 679 Cakewalk Win Pro 240 Gravis Joystick 32 Pro VGATY + 659 Discover Accepted. No Surcharge on COPCXL 1159 MA-12C ea 105 Encore 379 3024 Education 604 Gravis PC GamePad21 VideoSurge 659 Credit Cards. By mail: P.O. Box 3. Pro Audio 16 179 SPEAKERS Jammer Pro 125 3024 Home 569 Kidz Mouse 30% VideoSurg SVHS729 Carteret, N.J. 07008. All Sales Are Pro Audio Studio 224 CS-150 Shielded 28 Laser Music Proces 79 3024 Multimeda844 Kraft KC3 Joystick 28 Wave Watcher 419 Final. NO REFUNDS! Exchange on defective Pro 16 Multimedia CS-550 Shielded 35 Master Tracks Pro 249 5024 Dbl Spd 495 Maxx Flight Yoke 69 TV/GRX TV 269 merchandise with the same item only. No Upgrade Kit 2 935 W/3 band Equilizer 45 MCS Stereo 55 5024 Business 769 Maxx Pedal 39 exceptions. All Products are now from Pro Movie Audio 339na Skins & Pads Midiscan 269 8 CS-1000 4\" manufacturer. All claims and guarantees 5024 Education 729 Quickshot Game Cd14 Logitech Audioport 134 Altec Lansing 200 219 210 Midisoft Studio 159 5024 Multimed 969 Quickshot Warrior 18 Dust Covers 15 are from the manufacturer Call for Soundman 1326 299 Music Bytes Vol 1 65 Suncom Command 19\" current price and availability. COVERMENT Modem & Fax Grounded Wrist Strp 9 R5AOS 300 Sound Blaster Music Mentor 79 Keyboard Skins AND SCHOOL. P.O.'s WELCOMED). 15 For your SB Midi Kit 59% MIDI Interface Thrustmaster US Robotic Sportster Music Printer Plus 419 Snd Blast Pro MCA 259 Midiator 101 Serial 95 Music Time protection. We will only ship to the 2400 Int. 99% Sttic Pads 69 address the credit card company has on Sound Blaster Dex 132 PC Midi Card 169 FCS Pro Large-System 14.4 v.42bS162 79 15 file, therefore shipping to Ak.. Hi.. SB Pro 16 Piano Works 164\" 99 2 Port SE 149 W/S/R Fax Wrist Pads 1839 Game Card PR., P.O. Boxcs, APO/FPO extra. SB Pro 16 ASP Quick Score Deluxe99 209% Weapons 2 Stax (Dust Repellent)5 95% 14.4 v.42bis Ext 183\" International orders call for shipping Songwright 5 SB Discovery 161 459 Hello Music 27795 89 Rudder Pedal W/S/R Fax 213 109 Statx Complele chargos. N.J. Resident add 6sales tax. 325 The Miracle Trax\" for Windows 601 So Edutanmnt 16 5494 UPROM Chip 29\" Cleaning System 15 201 restocking fee for all refused items. 43 1995 29\" 29 35% 39 24% Inca USA Pirta 33\" 34% 3495 29 17 25 39 280 95 315 54955 FCS 109 Circle Reader Service #45 "


"VR. The quality of acting is good to excellent, with actors participating under a performance agreement approved by the Screen Actors Guild. Whether or not this latest CD extravaganza is a \"quantum» leap beyond the competition, it's nonetheless one of the most engaging CD titles yet to appear. IBM CDROM with Windows ($79.95). Circle Reader Service #10. DIELELLI ELLE selves in and take an aerial tour of two of the world's most interesting and renowned cities: New York and Paris. Both of these new scenery packs offer the latest in photo-realistic detail, adding a much needed touch of life. While over Paris, you can soar above the Eiffel Tower or the Louvre, and test your skills as you maneuver through the pinnacles of the French skyline. In New York, you can circle the Statue of Liberty or swoop in low over Central Park. As you dive between the canyons of towering skyscrapers, keep an eye on the streets below. There you'll see the tiny yellow taxis cruising in search of their fares. Requires Microsoft Flight Simulator 5.0. IBM ($39.95 each). Circle Reader Service #13. Alien Breed Q 99090 2 3. D D It's A Wonderful Life CD-ROM MicroLeague Interactive Software University Office Plaza, Bellevue Bldg., Suite 201 262 Chapman Road Newark, DE 19702 (800) 334-6572 ALIEN BREED: Alien Breed brings some traditional top-down perspective, four-way scrolling arcade action to the PC. Your mission, as stated on the box, is to «kick some mean, green Alien butt!\" That about sums up the game. Trapped on a space station set to self-destruct, you must survive 18 levels of alien-infested turf before losing all your allottcd lives. Run out of ammo before locating a new supply and say your prayers! One or two players can take part in this 256-color alien blast-fest. Though hampered by asinine copy protection (you must locate code numbers on one of four faint yellow code tables each time you begin play), Alien Breed is still a good action title for those who like their play quick and simple. IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #11. MicroProse 180 Lakefront Dr. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 (410) 771-0440 IT'S A WONDERFUL LIFE CD-ROM: Yes, it's a wonderful movie, but this heavenly story did give us a devil of a time with some improperly working control mechanisms. Still the prospect of examining the entire film under the multimedia microscope can be worth it. This package includes on its two CD-ROMs the full, uncut (black & white) film, the trailer, the entire shooting script, stills, reviews-all cross-indexed for reference use. While this product has enough bells to carn its wings, at least one CGW editorial curmudgeon still prefers the jazzy night life in Potrersville to the warmth of Bedford Falls. IBM CD-ROM ($79.95). Circle Reader Service #12. Microsoft Corporation One Microsoft Way Redmond, WA 98052-6399 (206) 882-8080 MICROSOFT NEW YORK and MICROSOFT PARIS: It's only been a short time since Microsoft took off with Flight Simulator 5.0. Now with a couple of new add-ons, pilots everywhere can strap themQQP, Inc. 1046 River Ave. Flemington, NJ 08822 (908) 788-2799 THE RED CRYSTAL: This arcade strategy can be summed up as Gauntlet gone amuck. In a good-sized world inhabited by many towns and castles, a player's fantasy character will travel from encounter to encounter to defeat the ubiquitous UBG (ultimate bad guy) and, in the process, learn the seven secrets of life. Although players can interacr with others in towns and dungeons, it is in the latter where the arcade combat takes place, and one must use cowardly hit and run tactics to excess in order to develop their characters early on. While modem play is supported, many have reported difficulty making connections via the game's software. Other communication programs, however, can be used. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #14. THITHIEU Microsoft New York and Microsoft Paris TOK RCD The Red Crystal Sierra On-Line, Inc. P.O. Box 485 Coarsegold, CA 93614 (800) 757-7707 QUEST FOR GLORY: SHADOWS OF DARKNESS: The latest installment in the award winning Quest for Glory series by Lori and Corey Cole, Shadows of Darkness takes our fighter/mage/thief to a mythical Transylvanian valley in an unusual blend of the adventure and role-playing genres. Prior to their final encounter with the Dark One himself, you will have to face a land fraught with the undead, wraiths, vampires and grotesque monsters. Of course, your success in Shadows of Darkness will depend primarily on how well you can fight, conjure or steal your way to the game's conclusion. Improved features in this new Sierra title include a refined icon bar with more available options and an upgraded arcade combat system. As before, you can begin anew or import your hero from previous Quest for Glory titles. Three skill levels allow for basic customization to provide just the right blend of arcade elements and puzzle Quest For Glory: Shadows of Darkness Page 178 Computer Gaming World "


"\"LET THERE BE PAX!\" Play PAX IMPERIA, the strategic, multi-player simulation of intergalactic empire building. DOS, Mac and network versions available, along with full color posters of this Great Moment From The Future. \"totally engaging throughout\" -Computer Gaming World \"a definite must for Mac gamers\" Dragon Magazine \"strategically elegant\" SMPERTAMA Mac Home Journal PAX IMPERIA.. lets you live like a King and play like an Emperor! Available now at your nearest dealer or call 800-769-2768. CompuServe, GO: GAMEPUBC Visa, Mastercard, check or money orders accepted. Changeling Changeling Software, Inc 596 Elm Street Windsor Locks, CT 06096 Imperial Stardate 2407... Melina Pariknova Lands The Fleet In The Vega System. Circle Reader Service #50 "


"CEMES LSU VITE EST LEFT. solving, while audio and graphics are of traditional Sierra quality. Offering a unique mix of dark mystery and light humor, Shadows of Darkness is another award winning adventure. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #15. another fine learning tool), Ruckus Roulette, Ruckus Poker (for less serious, more ruckus games, complete with rudimentary player personalities), and Casino Craps (a quick-anddirty foray that covers all the basics and then some). Nothing new has been added to the games, but many dollars have been subtracted from their individual retail prices. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #18. DALEKO 11 HOTEL : Hornet: Naval Strike Fighter Spectrum HoloByte 2490 Mariner Square Loop Alameda, CA (510) 522-1164 HORNET: NAVAL STRIKE FIGHTER: Flying against those MiG-29s got you down? Reinforcement for Falcon 3.0 fans is on the way in the form of the F/A-18 Hornet, everyone's favorite carrier-based strike fighter. Flight sim fanatics will thrill to this craft's ability to make tight turns at high speed. Sleek, beautiful and deadly, the Hornet sports Hughes AN/APG-65 multimode radar, with which to more effectively target its complement of Maverick missiles. A real challenge is the trial of landing this high-tech, expensive aircraft on a moving carrier. If you survive the landing, your next mission could take you to Bosnia, Israel, or any of five other theatres, where you can fly via network with your compatriots against those dreaded MiGs. Quite stunning for those whose systems both human and computer-can handle it. Requires Falcon 3.0 or the stand-alone version of MiG-29. IBM ($48.00). Circle Reader Service #16. Interplay Productions, Inc. 17922 Fitch Ave. Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 553-6655 XPLORA 1: PETER GABRIEL'S SECRET WORLD: From his carly days with the art-rock group Genesis, Peter Gabriel has been nothing but innovative. Musically, he draws from every influence imaginable, and his music videos defy all traditions with their originality and depth. No surprise then, that Gabriel comes up with a multimedia presentation of his work, focusing on his latest album, Us. Nearly two hours of video footage and 30 minutes of audio combine with more than 100 still images, allowing you to search through the making of Us, the filming of the Kiss That Frog video, or sample music of 40 different artists from around the world. While viewing artwork, videos or backstage shots at the Grammy's might be interesting, explorers will have the most fun remixing their own Peter Gabriel music videos and joining in on jam sessions. Multimedia is a much abused term, but this beautiful work deserves the title. Macintosh CD-ROM ($44.99). Circle Reader Service #19. Galaxy Trek Casino Gambler Kit ( M 2310120 GOODGIEM TAC Enterprises 422 210th Ave. N.E. Redmond, WA 98053 (206) 868-6150 GALAXY TREK: The zero-gravity action of Asteroids combines with features from the carly Trek games to create this strategic science fiction shooter. The player takes command of a supership on a mission to blast the alicn hordes threatening the galaxy. Not only must you cleverly probe sectors and blast tiny spaceships, but you must also acquire comets and space pods that will provide the materials for continued cxistence and full operating capacity. Choosing between three weapons types, using the tractor beam, switching power between engines and shields, and so forth, are the strategic options of which this simplistic game is made. IBM ($34.00). Circle Reader Service #17. ht Xplora 1: Peter Gabriel's Secret World Waite Group Press 200 Tamal Plaza Corte Madera, CA 94925 (800) 368-9369 SOUND EFFECTS PLAYHOUSE: From those productive folks at Waite Group comes another entertaining book/disk combo for the DOS or Windows user. With Sound Effects Playhouse, you can create, edit and play sounds on your PC, plus assign sounds to events such as switching drives, scrolling the screen, and changing directories. In addition, you can instruct your computer to execute DOS commands at the sound of your voice or direct the action of voice-activated games (microphone not included). Among the many shareware and freeware programs provided on the two supplied 3.5\" floppy disks are QSound samples that exhibit multi-dimensional sound effects and several sound editors. Anyone with an ear to hear more about WAV, VOC, IBK, MID, and MOD files, and how to edit them, should tune in to Sound Effects Playhouse. A Sound Blaster compatible sound card is required. IBM ($24.95). Circle Reader Service #20. CGW TheIT Villa Crespo Software, Inc. 1725 McGovern St. Highland Park, IL 60035 (708) 433-0500 CASINO GAMBLER KIT: This \"shovelware\" collection combines five of Villa Crespo's games into a single collection. Included are Dr. Wong's Jacks+ Video Poker (an excellent little program for students and addicts of the game), Dr. Thorp's Mini-Blackjack (again, Sound Effects Playhouse hegame), program for Video Page 180 Computer Gaming World "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD HALL OF FAME Ultima IV Origin Systems, Inc., 1985 Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, IBM Questof the Avalar The world of CRPGs was revolutionized by both the character-generation system in Ultima IV and the concept of Avatarhood. From the time players responded to the cthical choices depicted in the introductory sequence to the time they had completed the quest, personal accountability played a major role in either the successful completion or failure of the game. For the first time, ethics had become a significant part of a computer game, and non-player characters reacted to players on the basis of their reputation rather than merely responding to their immediate actions. The games in Computer Gaming World's Hall of Fame have been highly rated by our readers over time. They have been rated for their impact on the computer gaming hobby during their peak period of influence and acceptance by our readership. Note that the dates listed for each game are the copyright dates and may precede the actual release dates. Specific formats listed are those which CGW has in its possession. The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Many Formats Chessmaster (The Software Toolworks, 1986) Many Formats Civilization (MicroProse, Inc., 1991) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Empire (Interstel, 1978) Amiga, Atari ST, C-64, IBM F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, Inc., 1988) IBM Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM Gunship (MicroProse, Inc., 1989) Amiga, C-64, IBM Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many Formats King's Quest V (Sierra On-Line, Inc., 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh M-1 Tank Platoon (Micro Prose, Inc., 1989) Amiga, IBM Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many Formats Might Magic (New World Computing, 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64. IBM, Macintosh M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Atari 8-bit, C-64 Pirates (MicroProse, Inc., 1987) Many Formats Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse, Inc., 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Red Baron (Dynamix 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Many Formats Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, C-64, IBM, Mac, Sega The Secret of Monkey Island (LucasArts Entertainment Company, 1990) Many Formats Their Finest Hour (LucasArts Entertainment Company, 1989) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Ultima III (Origin Systems, Inc., 1983) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, C-64, IBM Ultima IV (Origin Systems, Inc., 1985) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, IBM Ultima VI (Origin Systems, Inc., 1990) C64, IBM War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) Apple Wasteland (Interplay Productions, Inc., 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM Wing Commander (Origin Systems, Inc., 1991) Amiga, IBM, Sega Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Many Formats Zork (Infocom, 1981) Many Formats Ultima VI Origin Systems, Inc., 1990 Amiga, IBM Ultima I With this release, Lord British brought defined objects and realistic world models into the realm of the CRPG. The moral lesson in the story was related to the idea of avoiding racial prejudice, and the game regularly placed the player's character into situations where he/she would have to grapple with the forces which lend themselves to reinforcing prejudice. Along with the new look and the sixbutton interface, Ultima VI showed that Lord British was nowhere near finished with the world of Britannia. March 1994 Page 187 "


"Top Adventure Games Reader Poll #114 NON GAME Day of the Tentacle Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis Dracula Unleashed Quest for Glory III Sherlock Holmes CDI Star Control II The Seventh Guest Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes King's Quest VI: Heir Today... COMPANY LucasArts LucasArts LucasArts Viacom Sierra Viacom Accolade Virgin Electronic Arts Sierra SCORE 10.07 9.91 9.79 9.71 9.56 9.55 9.33 9.32 9.20 9.17 Top 100 Games The GAMING WORLD Computer Game Magazine Type 9 10 SP ST OOOOOO RP SP 0 VOULAWN WG newSrld Top Role Playing Games AD AC ST NOUAWOGAME COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.29 Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix 9.87 Lands of Lore Virgin 9.55 Ultima Underworld II Origin 9.42 Might & Magic III New World Computing 9.41 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing 9.37 Ultima VII Origin 9.34 Eye of the Beholder il SSI 9.34 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing 9.34 Wizardry VII. Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 9.10 WG AD RP ST AD SI 10 WG AD WG WG SI WG SI AD RP AD RP ram Top Simulation Games GAME COMPANY X-Wing LucasArts Falcon 3.0 Spectrum Holo Byte World Circuit MicroProse Aces of the Pacific Dynamix Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts Gunship 2000 MicroProse Stunt Island Disney F-117A MicroProse 10 F.15 Strike Eagle III MicroProse SCORE 9.76 9.59 9.57 9.38 9.27 9.19 9.02 9.00 8.92 8.88 Game Company 1 Links 386 Pro Access Master of Orion MicroProse Ultima Underworld Origin Front Page Sports Football Pro Dynamix Warlords II SSG Day of the Tentacle LucasArts 7 Wing Commander II Origin 8 Solitaire's Journey QQP 9 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty Pacific 10 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts 11 Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix 12 Dune Il Virgin 13 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts 14 X-Wing LucasArts 15 The Perfect General QQP 16 Dracula Unleashed Viacom 17 Carriers at War Construction Kit SSG 18 V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Pacific 19 Falcon 3.0 Spectrum Holo Byte 20 V for Victory: Market Garden Three-Sixty Pacific 21 World Circuit MicroProse 22 Quest for Glory III Sierra 23 Sherlock Holmes CD Viacom Lands of Lore Virgin Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 26 Conquered Kingdoms QQP 27 Privateer Origin 28 NHLPA Hockey Electronic Arts 29 War in Russia SSI 30 Ultima Underworld Il Origin 31 Might & Magic III New World Computing 32 Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 33 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing Hardball III Accolade 35 Pacific War SSI Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing Eye of the Beholder II SSI Ultima VII Origin 39 Star Control 11 Accolade 40 Syndicate Electronic Arts The Seventh Guest Virgin Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks 43 Kasparov's Gambit Electronic Arts 44 Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade 46 V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword Three-Sixty Pacific 47 Lemmings Psygnosis 48 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electronic Arts Clash of Steel SSI 50 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts AC WG,ST AC SP WG RP RP SI RP SP WG Score 10.41 10.32 10.29 10.26 10.11 10.07 10.00 9.97 9.93 9.91 9.87 9.86 9.79 9.76 9.75 9.71 9.68 9.63 9.59 9.58 9.57 9.56 9.55 9.55 9.55 9.53 9.52 9.48 9.47 9.42 9.41 9.38 9.37 9.37 9.34 9.34 9.34 9.34 9.33 9.32 9.32 9.32 9.28 9.27 9.27 9.24 9.21 9.20 9.20 9.19 RP RP RP AD, AC ST.AC SCORE 10.32 9.97 9.86 HORION AD Top Strategy Games GAME COMPANY Master of Orion MicroProse Solitaire's Journey QQP Dunell Virgin Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks Syndicate Electronic Arts 6 Kasparov's Gambit Electronic Arts 7 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electronic Arts B The Lost Admiral COP 9 The Incredible Machine Dynamix 10 The Island of Dr. Brain Sierra ST ST VOULAN SI 9.32 9.28 9.15 9.05 8.92 8.91 SP WG AC,ST AD WG SI "


"ST awarlord's AD 9.17 9.15 9.14 9.11 9.10 9.10 9.09 RP 9.08 9.07 Top Wargames GAME Warlords II V for Victory: Velikiye Luki The Perfect General Carriers at War Construction Kit V for Victory: Utah Beach V for Victory: Market Garden Conquered Kingdoms War in Russia Pacific War 10 V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword 9.06 COMPANY SSG Three-Sixty Pacific QQP SSG Three-Sixty Pacific Three-Sixty Pacific QOP SS) SSI Three-Sixty Pacific SCORE 10.11 9.93 9.75 9.68 9.63 9.58 9.53 9.47 9.34 9.24 NO AD SI CONDS ADET Top Action Games AD OVOU A UNA GAME Wing Commander II Wolfenstein 3-D Privateer Lemmings Tetris Classic Oh, No! More Lemmings Prince of Persia 2 Out of this World The Lost Vikings Flashback COMPANY Origin Id Software Origin Psygnosis Spectrum HoloByte Psygnosis Broderbund Interplay Interplay SSI SCORE 10.00 9.55 9.52 9.21 9.14 8.92 8.60 8.57 8.46 8.38 51 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... 52 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro 53 Tetris Classic 54 The Castle of Dr. Brain 55 Eye of the Beholder Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant 57 The Dagger of Amon Ra 58 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle 59 Empire Deluxe 60 Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. 61 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Quest for Glory I (VGA) The Lost Admiral 64 Eric the Unready Conquests of the Longbow 66 Gunship 2000 67 Police Quest 3 68 Stunt Island Battles of Destiny 70 Space Quest IV Western Front 72 Carriers At War 73 The Adventures of Willy Beamish Freddy Pharkas Frontier Pharmacist 75 Alone in the Dark 76 The Incredible Machine F-117A Oh, No! More Lemmings 79 The Island of Dr. Brain 80 F-15 Strike Eagle III 81 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat 82 Indianapolis 500 83 Spellcasting 301: Spring Break 84 Rex Nebular 85 Gateway to the Savage Frontier 86 Tony La Russa Baseball 11 Populous II Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 High Command 90 Heart of China 91 Veil of Darkness 92 Gateway 93 Starflight II 94 Pools of Darkness 95 MiG-29 Great Naval Battles 97 Armada 2525 98 Amazon 99 Space Quest V: Mutation Prince of Persia 2 Sierra AD Electronic Arts Spectrum HoloByte AC Sierra SSI RP Sir-Tech RP Sierra AD Origin New World Computing WG Accolade AD Sir-Tech RP Sierra AD,RP QQP ST Legend Sierra MicroProse SI Sierra AD Disney QQP WG.ST Sierra AD SSI WG SSG WG Dynamix AD Sierra AD 1-Motion Dynamix MicroProse Psygnosis Sierra MicroProse Electronic Arts Electronic Arts Legend MicroProse SSI SSI Electronic Arts Sierra Three-Sixty Pacific Dynamix AD SSI RP Legend AD Electronic Arts RP SSI Spectrum HoloByte SI SSI WG,ST Interstel ST Access Sierra Broderbund AC tt 9.05 9.05 9.05 9.04 9.04 9.02 9.01 9.00 9.00 8.98 8.98 8.97 8.96 8.96 8.95 8.92 8.92 8.92 8.91 8.88 8.87 8.83 8.81 8.80 8.79 8.78 8.78 8.78 8.78 8.75 8.74 8.72 8.71 8.68 8.64 Top Sports Games WG GAME Links 386 Pro Front Page Sports Football Pro NHLPA Hockey Hardball III Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Tony La Russa Baseball II NFL Pro League Football The Games: Winter Challenge 4 -D Boxing 10 Wayne Gretzky Hockey III COMPANY Access Dynamix Electronic Arts Accolade Accolade SSI Micro Sports Accolade Electronic Arts Bethesda SCORE 10.41 10.26 9.48 9.37 9.27 8.78 8.54 8.50 8.87 8.30 RP 9 8.64 AD AD 8.63 8.62 8.60 8.60 Poll is based on reader survey cards in each issue of CGW and published two issues subsequent. Data on more than 100 games is archived and top ten lists may contain games which scored below the Top 100 cutoff. Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. = Top game of type. Magenta=New Game AD=Adventure, RP=Role Playing. Sl=Simulation, ST Strategy, WG=Wargame, AC=Action, SP Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine. "


"uhat's Hot What You've Been Playing Lately Every month our mailbox bulges with hundreds of Reader Input Cards from our most loyal and outspoken readers. Over the years we've found these cards to be an invaluable source of feedback. Within 10 days of releasing our latest issue we can expect to see cards pouring in with sug. gestions, encouragements, tirades and many good laughs, in addition to the data for our Top 100 poll. Through your efforts, we know exactly where we stand with our readers (you don't mince words!), and we are treated to well-articulated opinions on anything and everything related to gaming. This column is a forum for these responses and for the results of our \"Playing Lately query on the Reader Input Card. Thanks for taking the time to fill them out...keep em coming! Playing Lately? Results For CGW #114, January 1994 Master of Orion (MicroProse, Inc.) Doom (id Software) Privateer (Origin Systems, Inc.) X-Wing (LucasArts Entertainment) Front Page Sports Football Pro (Dynamix, Inc.) Aces Over Europe (Dynamix, Inc.) Warlords II (Strategic Studies Group) Betrayal at Krondor (Dynamix, Inc.) Civilization (MicroProse, Inc.) Dungeon Hack (Strategic Simulation, Inc.) 10. FONSO PC Research Hits List Of Top-Selling Software November, 1993 PC Games (MS-DOS/Windows) Rank Title and Source Microsoft Flight Simulator 5.0 (Microsoft Corporation 2. X-Wing: B-Wing (LucasArts Entertainment) Aces Over Europe (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Star Wars Rebel Assault (LucasArts Entertainment) Links: Pebble Beach (Access Software, Inc.) Leisure Suit Larry VI (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) The 7th Guest (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Privateer (Origin Systems, Inc.) Front Page Sports Football Pro (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) X-Wing (LucasArts Entertainment) Microsoft Arcade (Microsoft Corporation) 12 SimCity (Maxis Software) 13. Street Fighter II (Hi Tech Expressions) Master of Orion (MicroProse, Inc.) 15. Wolfenstein 3D/Spear of Destiny (Formgen) Terminator: Rampage (Bethesda Softwarks) 17 Indy Car Racing (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Links 386 Pro (Access Software, Inc.) The Blue & The Gray (Impressions) Chessmaster 4000 (The Software Toolworks) Amiga Games Rank Title and Source Overlord (Virgin Interacrive Entertainment) Hoyle's Book of Games (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) John Madden Football (Electronic Arts) Operation Combat (Merit Software) Populous II (Electronic Arts) Macintosh Games Rank Title and Source SimCity 2000 (Maxis Software) Chessmaster 3000 (The Software Toolworks) Myst (Brderbund Software, Inc.) SimCity (Maxis Software) Star Trek: 25th Anniversary (Interplay Productions, Inc.) CD-ROM Products Rank Title and Source Star Wars Rebel Assault (LucasArts Entertainment) The 7th Guest (Virgin Interactive Entertainment) Microsoft Encarta (Microsoft Corporation) Iron Helix (Spectrum HoloByte, Inc.) King's Quest VI (Sierra On-Line, Inc.) Return to Zork (Activision) Dracula Unleashed (Viacom New Media) ROMaterial (Moon Valley) MPC Wizard (Aris Entertainment) 10. Mad Dog McCree (American Laser Games) Christmas The Whole Year Round Though we've published the results of our Computer Gaming Carol contest in the previous issue, many more entries have poured in since. Here are a few of the late comers that deserve honorary mention 20.    AN(sung to the tune of Tiere Comes Santa Claus) Here comes Pentium, Here comes Pentium, Right down Intel lanc, I just bought a 486 and man I'm feeling lanie. VI-Bus, CD-ROM Oh what confusing terms. I don't know what I'm to do cuz my Mastercard's maxed tonight. Bill Schounmaker, Salisbury, NC (sung to the tune of Jingle Bells) Dashing through the air, In Falcon 3.0 O'er the targets I go, Strating all the way. (Blam, Blam, Blam!) On my tail arc SAMS, Making my flares bright. Oh. What fun it is to shoot down Mig's, Nearly every night. Christopher Laws, Tulsa, OK (sung to the tune of Jingle Bells) Whistles & Bells, Whistles & Bells Graphics rule the day. Computer games take 30 megs but gameplay's gone away. Whistles & Bells, Whistles & Bells can be such a strain. I can't play my favorite game for fear I must upgrade. -Tim Mosbarger, Sacramento, CA VON Page 184 Computer Gaming World "


"matches The Patch File Vomputer game programs have grown so massive and the number of lems, improves the Al, and adds some new features. 12/14/93 possible configurations has become so huge that incompatibilities Omar Sharif on Bridge Upgrade (IBM/Windows): The latest version of and glitches seem to be breeding at an exponential rate. Consumers Interplay's bridge game for Windows. 9/03/93 and publishers are both frustrated at the need for adding patches into ** Police Quest 4 Patch: Corrects various memory allocation errors and buggy programs, but they seem to be an interim solution that is going to lockups that some players are encountering. 12/16/93 be with the hobby for a whilc (presumably, until a standard platform con** Quest For Glory 4 Patch: Corrects various memory allocation errors figuration is agreed upon). So, until the golden age of standardized platand lockups that some player have been encountering. 12/16/93 forms and bug-free programs, Computer Gaming World will publish a regular list of the latest updates of which we are aware. Railroad Tycoon Deluxe Version 2: Fixes a few problems and adds some These patches can usually be downloaded from most major networks features. 11/23/93 (e.g., CompuServe or GEnie), but can also be obtained from individual ** Rebel Assault V1.4 Upgrade: Fixes joystick control and calibration software publisher's own BBSs or direct from the publisher with proof of problems, as well as some random lock-ups. 12/16/93 purchase. We continue to urge publishers to keep us updated on the latest Rules of Engagement 2 V1.05 to 1.06 Update: Patch for those having versions/patches to their games. problems running the game with a Viper graphics cards. 10/09/93 (** indicates new files) Rules of Engagement 2 V1.07 Update (Amiga): Update to the Amiga verBlue And The Gray Update V1.01 Update: With this patch, poor quality sion of Impression's game. 12/02/93 units will now rout at 15% rather than 10%, transporting troops will not Solitaire's Journey For Windows Patch: Corrects minor bugs in the \"pop\" back into a train or ship, and the Al will now be tougher and quickWindows version of SJ. 11/11/93 er in battle. 10/23/93 Tornado 1.0 to 1.0c Upgrade: An update for the US version of the game. Clash of Steel V1.1 Update: Fixes a number of small bugs. 11/18/93 10/29/93 ** Companions of Xanth V1.1.0 Upgrade: Corrects graphic corruption War In Russia 1.1 Upgrade: Fixes three bugs and adds an enhancement. problems associated with Microsoft (V8.2+) and Logitech (V6.13) mouse 10/04/93 drivers. 12/23/93 Warlords Version 1.1.5 Update (Macintosh): Updates any version of ** Conquered Kingdoms Update: Fixes some save game problems that Warlords Mac to V1.1.5. 10/09/93 have been reported. 12/22/93 Warlords II c1.02 to v1.02a Update: Fixes a bug with certain VGA cards ** CyberRace CD-ROM V1.1 Upgrade: Lowers the base memory require (Diamond) and updates a few sound drivers, including PAS 16. 10/26/93 ments and fixes the save game problems with the CD version. 1/06/94 ** World of Xeen CD-ROM Patch: Fixes the problems with switching Darksun V1.1 Update: Fixes problems with Wave Blaster and Sound CDs and with the boat ride into Rivercity. 1/03/94 Blaster + LAPCISCC1. Eliminates the crash that may occur after the final WW2: Battles of the South Pacific: Corrects a problem with the ranking battle, and random crashes when changing regions. 10/26/93 system. 9/21/93 Empire Deluxe V3.11a Upgrade: Updates Version 3.11 to Version 3.11a. Corrects a number of minor bugs and extends the sound card support. 12/02/93 The PRODIGY Weekly Top Ten Even More Incredible Machine Windows Patch: Corrects several problems including these specific errors: \"You cannot run more than one copy Computer Gaming World is Prodigy's on-line games expert. Look for of this program\" error message when in 256-color mode, and «RunTime us in their Game Center, a forum where users read articles posted onError: Stack Overflow» error message when Windows MIDI Mapper is not line by CGW and exchange messages on the bulletin boards (we can configured correctly. 10/19/93 be reached there at EXPT40B). The Prodigy Game Poll is run by Prodigy based on a list of games provided by CGW and is updated Fantasy Empires V1.1 Update: Fixes the Multiplying Siege Engine Bug, weekly. Note that it is not a cumulative rating over time (like the the Disappearing Hero Bug, and eliminates most random crashes. CGW Top 100 Poll). Instead, the Prodigy Game Poll is a weekly 11/25/93 \"Snapshot\" of game popularity with gamers rating their favorites on a ** Gabriel Knight Floppy V1.0A Patch: Corrects various memory alloca1 10 scale. The highest total point earners make their Top 10. We tion and \"fatal -\"errors that some players have encountered. 12/16/93 provide this data to our readers as another barometer of \"what's hot\" IndyCar Racing v1.02 Update: Fixes random crashes/hangs and low in computer gaming. memory problems. 11/25/93 Kasparov's Gambit Version 1.1: In addition to restoring the chess engine to the full strength of the original 32-bit Socrates II program, this patch also improves driver setups, low-memory detection, time controls, ratings TOP TEN PANIT GAMES and much more. 12/3/93 Week of December 21 to January Leisure Suit Larry 6 Update: Fixes the \"Oops errors\" that occur while RAMS SCORE TITLE playing. Also contains the bonus sound effects for 8-bit sound cards. 11/24/93 3845 Castle Wolfenstein31 6 165: Sinity 2003 22381 X-Wing ** Lucky's Casino Adventure Update: Enables the program to recognize 2153 Kings Quest VI  1454 103 most VESA drivers, and allows the users to set the IRQ and Base address 1998 civilization  1133 LINE 186 Pra for any sound card. 12/30/93 S 1827 Seventh Guest 131378 ling formande: ** Master of Orion V1.3 Upgrade: This patch features tougher opponents, adjusted play balance, and legions of minor combat tweaks. 1/06/94 FREE UPGRADE! ** Merchant Prince Update: Corrects some minor bugs in QQP's latest. 12/29/93 PRODIGY Software for Windows Look ** NFL Coaches Club Football V2.0 Update: Corrects some rare probMenu Jump Path A-Z Xref Copy Tools? Exil CORE GAE POLE HERESEBEL-RESESPEREM March 1993 Page 185 "


"THE RUMOR BAG A Portrait Of The Journalist As A DIRTY OLD MAN as Bloom thought Molly to be asked for the information she wanted. \"Ooh, Liam, tell me about Battles in Time.\" Well, I knew it wasn't a military secret, but Battles in Time is still in the pre-programming playtest stage at QQP. It is a game of move, bluff and counterbluff that makes armchair generals perspire more than British undercover agents at a Sinn Fein rally. QQP's goal is to create a playable campaign game where everything, including small tactical battles, can be played within an hour. The fiction behind the game is that the action is initiated in a poverty-stricken future earth which has been conquered by aliens. The gamer has to go back into different eras via a time machine in order to learn the various tactics/strategies of battles. The first set of games will feature by Liam Thomas O'Riley tactics from World War II, the prehistoric era, World War I, and the Roman Empire. QQP has been playtesting the concept in a in that night, there was literally game machines to be published by Sega and paper game format for over a year and a half. thunder in paradise. I know that's Sony. One paper said that the Sega Saturn the name of an upcoming Software was going to feature Hitachi's SH7032 32-bit the point of hoping that the game would be Toolworks game, Hulk Hogan's Thunder In RISC chip running at 27Mhz, along with successful enough for a second set of games Paradise, named after the television series, but special chips to handle sprites, polygons, and covering medieval tactics from Europe and the wind was at gale force and the rain was texture-mapping. The Saturn is supposed to Japan, modern tactics, and those from the pouring as I reached the harbor. Indeed, the have 3 MB of RAM, as well as a 4 MB cache American Civil War. Then, her mood turned weather was so rough that the ship missed its on the quadruple-speed CD-ROM drive. It serious. \"I suppose you've heard about The mooring twice before we could finally dock will also display more than 16,000 colors, Trial.\" I was concerned. Which friend in the safely. handle 24 million pixels per frame of animaSinn Fein movement had been arrested? SeeI reached the telephone at the end of the tion, and offer MPEG video as an option. ing my worry, she grasped my hand and said, picr and called for a taxi. I waited and waited, The machine will release in Japan before the \"It's a game, silly, from Broderbund. The expecting that the hack would be there in a end of the year and is expected to retail for player can take on the role of judge, prosecumoment or two. None came. The crowd of somewhere between $250-300. tor or defender as they experience a multimepassengers began to dissipate as private cars an to dissipate as private cars The second paper said that the Sony PS-X dia courtroom experience in the United picked up the other passengers, until only a will feature an R3000A 32-bit RISC chip States.\" beautiful blonde and I were left. running at 33Mhz, along with custom chips So much for the luck of the Irish, though. The blonde suggested that we huddle roto handle sprites, polygons, and texture-mapNo sooner had she calmed my fears than a gether for warmth and I had no objection ping. The custom chips will reputedly handle huge specimen of a man entered the pub, whatsoever to that. I adjusted my trench coat 1.5 million ordinary polygons per second and million ordinary polygons per second and grabbed a mug of stout and began to aparound both of us and breathed deeply, in500,000 texture-mapped and light-sourced proach our table. He hardened his jaw like toxicated by the floral scent of her hair. Then, polygons per second. Like the Sega machine, one of those oversized faces in a Terry Gilliam for a moment, I was excited as I felt her icy the PS-X will display more than 16,000 colanimation and began to mouth indecipherfingers exploring the buttons of my shirt. ors, but it will offer 5 MB of RAM and able platitudes and axioms. Then, before I Unfortunately, it turned out that she was built-in JPEG and MPEG digital comprescould ask for clarification, he poured the more interested in sliding some papers into sion schemes. It should be released in Japan stout directly into my lap. I felt like the victim my shirt than in removing my shirt from my before the end of this year and will retail for in a John Cleese sketch and watched in disbody. Strains of «As Time Goes By» began to less than $400. There was even a scribbled appointment as he escorted my lovely source play in my head and I began to feel more like rumor that the CD for the PlayStation may to the door. \"All right,\" I said, mingling my a character in Activision's recently signed be compatible with Philips' CD-I system. natural brogue with my best Cleese impresWilliam Colby's Covert Action than the dirty the dirty It turned out that my lovely informant sion, guess we won't be talking about 7th old journalist most knew me to be. wasn't willing to give me all of that informaLevel's game based on Monty Python's Flying It turned out that those papers were pretty tion for nothing, however. She had scribbled Circus. And I won't tell you Terry Gilliam is interesting, too. When I reached my hotel a note at the bottom of one sheet of paper to working on it, either! room, I pulled them out (sniffing the remainmeet her at Davy Byrne's Pub. There, where At least, the folks in the pub were amused der of my informant's perfume) and looked James Joyce had spent many a drunken night, by my impression. Then, again, maybe it was at them. They were specifications for the two this woman who looked every bit as beautiful the condition of my pants. Cow Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Ziff-Davis Publishing Company, a division of Ziff Communications Co., 130 Chaparral Ct., Suite 260, Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Second-class postage paid at Erlanger, KY 41011 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322. Page 186 Computer Gaming World "


"CASINO ADVENTURE 000 Welcome to CITY LIMITS Quantum Quality Productions, Inc. It is vacation time... you can sit at home watching the grass grow or enter our world ... LUCKY'S CASINO ADVENTURE. This could just be your lucky break. Everyone can \"win\", but only the best can hold out for the full three weeks. Travel between the many casinos, have a bite to eat and rest in the hotels Nothing has been left out in this state of the art experience of a lifetime. Games Included: 5 Different Pokers, 8 Different Slots (all completely different), Paigow, Bingo, Keno, Baccarat, 3 Different Video Pokers, Money Wheel, Blackjack, Casino, Craps, Red Dog, Roulette, Caribbean Stud (ALL REAL CASINO QUALITY) Supports All Major Sound Cards 256 Spectacular Colors Tournament Play Scoring History 640 x 400 VESA VBE 1.2 Compatible Three Week Adventures to experience Circle Reader Service #104 The \"Lucky's Casino Adventure\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: 1-908-788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1993 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. "


"PACIFIC * s T R 1 K E * RECHACING THE MISSIONS OF WORLD WAR | FLYING ACES IS FASCINATING BUT REWRITING HISTORY IS THE ULTIMATE CHALLENGE. In Pacific Strike, you cruise into all major battles of the Pacific theatre Pearl Harbor, The Coral Sea, Midway, Guadalcanal, the Solomon Islands, the Marianas, Leyte Gulf, Iwo Jima and Okinawa. Now you can change the outcome of each battle and the entire war through your own successes and failures. Can you force an end to the war before the bomb is dropped on Hiroshima? Fly the Wildcat, Corsair, Hellcat, Devastator, Dauntless, Avenger and Helldiver, enjoying the astounding realism of their fully instrumented cockpits. You'll do more than practice! Hone your skills as you face relentless enemy pilots in Zeros, Kates, Vals, Bakas, Betties and more so graphically detailed that you can even see enemy pilots and insignia. o Prove those skills in a stunning variety of missions grueling dogfights over the Pacific, dive-bombing runs against carriers and warships (including the Yamato! and challenging rocket attacks on pillboxes, airfields and other ground installations. ORIGIN We create worlds. An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 Copyright 1993, ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Pacific Strike is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin and We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. Available at a software retailer near you or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. Actual screens may vary.. A Stand-Alone Game. Made in the USA Circle Reader Service #99 "

