"Covering Interactive & Multimedia Entertainment OCTOBER 1994 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD THE #1 COMPUTER GAME MAGAZINE STONEKEEP : 200 RATED FURIOUS COMBAT IN 3D Hard-Hitting Reviews TIE Fighter Falcon CD Superhero League of Hoboken Shadow Of The Comet Dark Legions Alien Legacy Outpost Winning Strategies Harpoon II Grandest Fleet Get It On, On-Line! Your Guide to Multi-Player Games "


"FormGEN INCORPORATED New! New Super CD Pack! * Spear of Destiny MGame, 2 New Missions, 3 Hint Books & Game Generator! ZE FLOOR SCORE LIUES 16 225800 9 REALTH ARMO 90% 97 HEALTH ANKO FLOOR SCOE LIVES 5 300600 9 627 61 FUNGUN HH FLOOR SCORE LIVES 17 2208009 HEALTH A LOT 100% 99 You get it all... in the complete Spear of Destiny CD collection-enjoy the original ground-breaking virtual reality game, then conquer two brand, new Nazi fortresses in two allnew missions. We include hint books for all three games, and a terrific game generator that you can use to make a variety of new missions for your enjoyment! Return to Danger... as an Allied commando, fighting your way into the enemy HQ to seize the prize that he must not be allowed to keep! Battle the best the enemy has to offer, taking the Spear from the megalomaniac Axis leader. See why its stunning first-person perspective, and digital stereo sound made this the Game of the Year. FLOOR SCORE LIVES 10 3044009 HEALTH AND 17% 889 Mission Disks were not developed or produced by id Software. Spear of Destiny is a trademark of id Software, FormGen Inc. 7641 East Gray Road, Scottsdale, AZ 85260 (800) 263-2390 (905) 857-4141 Circle Reader Service #143 "


"BATTLE BUGS 8.7 WE WILL FIGHT IN THE PIZZA. WE WILL FIGHT IN THE COOKIES. WE WILL FIGHT IN THE COLESLAW. WE WILL NEVER GIVE UP. WINSTON ANTHILL ANTENNAE STRAINING, the warriors raise the flag above the carnage. A stink bug lets a big one rip, and yet another falls victim to the horrors of chemical warfare. Welcome to Battle Bugs.\" With over fifty strategically demanding levels you command the field of battle. On your IBM or compatible, plan campaigns and give orders to 22 different bugs each with different tactical abilities and armaments -who will storm junk food targets like cheesecake, ploptarts and pimento loaf. While mental toughness and tactical savvy will serve you well, you must first visit the nearest retail store or call 1-800-757-7707 to enlist your battle ready troops. Will your armada of spiders cross the cola lake in time to save the flag? Will the suicide run of a kamikaze mosquito take out the praying mantis? At what cost? What price victory? SIERRA 0194 Sierra On-Linc. Inc. Battle Bupa ba trademark of Epys. Circle Reader Service #223 "


"\"Leading horror adventure game of the year!» Chuck Miller, InterActive Gaming «Takes players on a heart-racing roller coaster ride of terror.» Russ Ceccola, Electronic Games ROBERTA WILLIAM PIANTASMAGORIA SIERRA An experience in terror like nothing ever seen or heard before on PC. The fate of a young woman rests in your hands in this shocking cinematic tour-de-force. Phantasmagoria's stunning setting was created using the most advanced cinematography and computer graphics techniques ever for a computer game. AS TERRA "


"PRAY IT'S ONLY A NIGHTMARE ROBERTA WILLIAMS PHANTASMAGORIA MULTIMEDIA CD COMING SOON Circle Reader Service #120 "


"DELTA It's Not a Game YOUR MISSION: You control the most agile racer known to man as you fly down the 256 color, 3-D, polygonalshaded landscape at speeds where thought and action are one and mistakes are paid for in blood! If you and your Trace Vehicle survive, use your bonus points to modify its armor, firepower or speed to suit your style, then jack back into the Net for another Run! In Delta V, a new type of Virtual Reality has been brought to the PC! "


"ERDE: DE8-891 ALPHF: Pra PETER TONPEOU AFDE. DIESE ALPHAEG DESTROHTapete Normal View Hormal View 4244 250 2.520 EREE: 021:30:09 ALPHA: 1126 DESTROY: 0/6 BORSE EN TORPEDO Normal View L6 12-09-2147 17H34.48 \"So chummer, you want to know about runnin? \"The Net's the most dangerous cyber-dream you'll ever have, 'cept it's not a dream. You gotta be ruthless and quick, huggin' the lattice like an Olthan lungworm on a Borian air-grazer. Once you jack in, it's just you and your Trace. \"Like I always said. Netrunnin' is like a drug, the speed gets you higher than a 'ject of Cephilene Blue, but a mistake'll leave you deader than a jacked out straightliner. \"That chum, is as permanent as it gets ... END 1949 2R4 -GROTHAN JHIR, ex-Netrunner. ...It's a State of Mind BECHESDA SOFTWORKS Currently Available on IBM PC VGA, minimum 386/33 processor (486/33+ really cooks!), minimum memory 590K Ram, 2MB EMS memory and high density disk drive required. Supports: Roland SoundBlaster and Gravis Ultrasound. Copyright 1994 Bethesda Softworks. All rights reserved. Bethesda Softworks and Delta V are trademarks of Media Technology Limited. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #40 "


"FEATURES 22 Stonekeep 22 A ROLLING STONEKEEP GATHERS NO MOSS CGW's Johnny Wilson braves the cataclysm of The Devastation, survives terrible Magicks, and meets with arcane Runecasters to find out if Interplay's STONEKEEP really is the heir apparent to THE BARD'S TALE. Our exclusive Sneak Preview considers thi full-screen role-playing fest, over two years in the making 26 ON-LINE GAMING GALORE With Cyberspace more accessible a the time, on-line, multi-player games are finally getting the attention they deserve. The crack CGW editorial staff takes you on a whirlwind network tour of the latest and greatest games. 36 MUD-DY WATERS What is it about Multi-User Dungeons that massages our collective unconscious? Mark Clarkson offers some answers, as we enter his fantasy text-adventure world. 44 MARCHING TO CYBERIA Silicon Graphics Workstations and Hollywood talent continue to blur the lines between games and cinema. CGW's Ken Brown and Mike Weksler go behind the screens for a look at Interplay's CYBERIA. 36 Petey wants to play with you in the MUD ADVENTURE / ROLE-PLAYING COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 49 SCORPIA'S STING CGW's super-seer turns her X-ray eye to the mysterious pizza box containing SUPERHERO LEAGUE OF HOBOKEN, the latest from the maniacal Steve Meretzky. 56 SHADOW OF THE COMET Allen Greenberg hints of matters ne to be spoken of, even by excellent voice-over actors within th Lovecraftian terrors of I-Motion's new CD-ROM game. 62 PSYCHOTRON Is there a conspiracy forcing Special Agent Charles Ardai to divide his time between exploration and investigation in Merit Software's short-lived world? 68 MIDNIGHT STRANGER Eden Maxwell picks up on a world of \"virtual intimacy,\" where characters ebb and flow to the vagaries of a Mood Bar. 82 Tie Fighter ACTION 82 TIE FIGHTER Once, in a galaxy not so far away, LucasArts ruled the stars with X-WING. Jeff James is seduced by the dar side of the sequel. 88 DARK LEGIONS SSI offers up the Black Sheep of the ARCHO ULTRA family for shearing by our Dave Pyron, who finds the resulting garment somewhat of a loose but comfortable fit. 96 BREAKTHRU! Charles Ardai thinks this TETRIS clone could use a bit more chip off the old block. 100 SENSORY OVERLOAD Avoiding jagged graphic edges, Sgt. Chris Breen empties his semi-automatic word processor into this MacDOOM-wannabe. 68 Midnight Stranger 106 GOOD TO FIRM Checking his stable of racing game thoroughbreds, Johnny Wilson expects this entry to come frobehind. 110 PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL Our pitching coach, Jim Gindin, spends a simulated season with this game, only to find that it out on strike. "


"SIMULATIO 19 BOGEY'S BAR & GRILL Even with a virtual cockpit, Tom Basham finds that the view from flight sims may leave you vondering, \"Which way is up?\" 124 G-FORCE Gordon Goble discovers that Suncom Technologies' new flight yoke makes both economic and ergonomic sense. 126 WORLD WAR II: FLIGHT SIM TOOLKIT Fighting the interface as much as the enemy aircraft, \"KC\" Basham flies through he newly-generated world of this next-generation DOMARK product. In it, he finds realistic torpedoes, prop wash effects, and an upgraded flight model. 132 FALCON GOLD CD As Spectrum HoloByte takes its Foremost bird-of-prey for a final soaring flight, Tom \"KC\" Basham reflects on the history of this most dynamic flight sim series. STRATEGY WAR GAMES 22 Confronting demons in Stonekeep Cover design and illustration by Larry Fukuoka 126 World War II 152 Outpost DEPARTMENTS 135 BROADSIDES & GRIPESHOT According to Alan Emrich, old computer wargames never die, their hardware just fades way. 138 PREVIEW! 5TH FLEET Naval war buffs may now enjoy Joe Balkoski's award-winning boardgame design on the PC battlefield. Terry Lee Coleman surmises that it might end up as the best board wargame yet converted to the PC. 142 E-MAIL WARS Tired of playing with yourself? Robert Gurske shows how playing games with others by e-mail can Felieve those single player blues. 146 MILLENNIUM AUCTION Well-known fat cat Allen Greenberg cruises through multimedia cyber-parties to see if his latest objet d'art is worth the bidding price. 152 OUTPOST In CGW's first look at the final product, SF vriter Martin Cirulis wonders why Sierra didn't finish cooking the game before they removed it from the oven. 158 ALIEN LEGACY In yet another journey to a far-off world, Martin Cirulis finds that even at sub-light speeds, this game offers a lot more alien adventure than its over-hyped sibling, DUTPOST. 164 BRIDGE OLYMPIAD The bidding conventions seem to come at times from another world, and the documentation is missing in action. Still, Terry Coleman finds that while not a Grand Slam, this game manages to capture its share of ricks. 170 SIMCITY CD Interplay brings the silver screen to the PC screen, as Will Wright's masterpiece is revived in multimedia. Neil Harris reports on this unusual marriage of hackers and Hollywood. 174 STRATEGY! HARPOON II Tom Basham begins a course in HARPOON Micro-Management. In this first of three nstallments, would-be admirals discover how to issue orders, assign missions and use the formation editor. 177 STRATEGY! GRANDEST FLEET Strategy Professor Emeritus Tim Carter lectures on the synthesis of civilian and military plans to emerge triumphant in QQP's naval exercise. 10 EDITORIAL Cyberspace Showdown 12 INTERFACE Letters From The Gaming Elite 16 READ.ME The Latest Buzz 54 SCORPIA'S MAIL Crystal Ball Q & A 184 HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL People, Technology, Good Times 190 OPPONENTS WANTED Personal Ads For Gamers 192 ADVERTISER INDEX 200 UNDER THE HOOD Hardware Tips 204 NOW PLAYING What's Really On The Shelves 211 HALL OF FAME All-Time Great Games 212 SCORE Readers Rate The Top Games 214 PATCHES Game Files To Kill Bugs Dead 216 THE RUMOR BAG Agro Hickum Yokel "


"From the Publisher Who Are Those Guys? by Russell Sipe That's my all-time favorite movie quote. Do you rememOne reason for CGW's success over the years has been ber what movie it came from? I did an informal poll of our that you, our readers, are not only the best customers in the office on the question. Our baby boomer employees all knew market, you are the \"evangelists\" who turn others on to our the answer. Our X-Generation employees didn't. I imagine exciting hobby. According to the survey, the average CGW if I were to poll our readership there would be a similar rereader recommends games to friends nine times per month sult. The average reader of CGW is 30 years old (actually it's He also makes hardware recommendations seven times a 29.92), which I guess would put about half our readers in the month. so called X-Generation or below and hall in the babyAs to what your computer looks like: 79 percent of you boomer generation or above. run Windows. The most common configuration is a 486 (61 So, that was the question we wanted to ask when we did percent). Sixty eight percent of you run SVGA graphics. Sixour reader survey in the May issue \"who are those guys.\" ty percent of you own a CD-ROM, half the remaining 40 And we did mean \"guys,\" since it turns out that 97 percent percent are planning to buy one in the next 12 months. of you are male. Who are those guys? They are you, the cutting edge It also turns out that more than three out of four of you play gamers that force the companies to create great games and computer games six or more hours per week, while an amazpush the creative envelope in an all-out campaign to win ing 44 percent of you play more than ten hours per week. You your patronage. Oh, and who are those guys mentioned at own an average of 28 computer games, and three out of five of the start of this letter? They were the posse that relentlessly you buy a game every month. Thirty eight percent of you buy dogged Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid, causing at least two games a month. There is no question, CGW readRobert Redford and Paul Newman to ask the question again ers are the heart and soul of the computer game hobby. and again....who are those guys? COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994, NUMBER 123 Publisher Russell Sipe Associate Publisher Jonathan Lane Editor-in-Chief Johnny Wilson Editor Chris Lombardi On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Technical Editor Mike Weksler Assistant Editor Terry Coleman Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Production Assistant Christine Kloss M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Advertising Manager Lee J. Uniacke Advertising Sales Coordinator Kathy Garcia Account Representative Marci Yamaguchi Contributing Editors Scorpia (Adventure Games), M. Evan Brooks (Wargames) Tom Basham (Simulations) Contents are copyrighted by Zift-Davis Publishing Co.. 1994. Subscription Services: For subscription service questions, address changes or ordering information, call toll free (800) 827-1450 within the U.S. and Canada. All other countries call (303) 447-9330 or fax to (303) 4-135080 (international subscribers only) or write to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167. Back Issues: For back issues (subject to availability). $6.00 per issue ($8.00 outside the U.S.), send check, money order or credit card information to Back Issues Dept., Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., P.O. Box 53131. Boulder, CO 80322-3131. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe (76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy. EXPT40B GEnie: CGW ImagiNATION: Box 1018 Internet: 76703.622@compuserve.com Telephone: (714) 289-3000 Fax: (711) 283-3:144 For advertising information only, call: Lee J. Uniacke, (714) 283-3000 x41 President, Business Media Group: Ronni Sonnenberg: President, Computer Intelligence/InfoCorp: Bob Brown: President, Information Access Company: Robert Howells: President, International Media Group: J.B. Holston III; President, ZD Expos: Bill Lolse: President, Zill-Davis Internctive: Michael Kolowich; President, Zift Technology Group: Ken Jeffers, Senior Vice President. Circulation: Baird Davis: Senior Vice President: Rachel Greenfield: Vice President, Assistant to the Chairman: Tom McGrade: Vice President, Circulation Services: James F. Ramaley: Vice President, Creative Services: Ilerbert Stern: Vice President. General Manager: Bruce W. Bourne:Vice President. Human Resources: Rayna Brown: Vice President, Production: Roger Herrmann: Vice President. Research: Rolf M. Wulfsberg: Vice President, Strategic Planning: Robert Ziff: Vice President, Technology: Bill Machrone; Chief Information Officer: Wellington Y. Chiu; Internal Marketing Consultant: Paul H. Chook: Editorial Director: Lewis D'Vorkin: Executive Director, Information Systems: Owen Weekley: Executive Director, Marketing Services: Jim Manning: Production Director: Walter ). Terlecki: Director of Licensing: Jean Lamensdorf Director of Public Relations: Gregory Jarboe Subscription Rate: The subscription rate is $27.91 for a one year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $11.00 for postage. Airmail subscriptions are $78.00 per year. Canadian GST registration number is R123669673. Payment must be in U.S. dollars made by check or money order drawn upon al U.S. bank. Visa, MasterCard, AMEX accepted. ZIFF-DAVIS PUBLISHING COMPANY Chai: Eric Hippeal Consumer Media Group President: J. Scott Briggs Executive Vice President: Mike Edelhart Vice President: J. Thomas Cottingham VP, Editor-in-Chief Computer Life: John Dickinson Vice President, Marketing: Ruth P. Stevens Director of Electronic Publishing: Sherry Huss Business Manager: D. Ian McKinnon ZIFF COMMUNICATIONS COMPANY Chairman and CEO: Eric Hippeau Senior Vice President & Chiel Financial Ollicer: Bruce R. Barnes Senior Vice President: Steven C. Feinman Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary: J. Malcolm Morris Vice President, Business Manager: T.L. Thompson Vice President, Controller and Treasurer: Timothy J. Mitchell Chairman Emeritus: William B. Zill. Jr. 8 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  OCTOBER 1994 "


"Stalking the corridors is a thief with a stolen device of enormous Untold poe. . Let the Hunt begin. STAR TREK DEEP SPACE NINE     U N UNT Coming this fall. For PC and Mac on CD-ROM nuom/ Paramount Interactive please call 415-813-8040. TM &  1994 Paramount Pictures. All Rights Reserved, Star Trek: Deep Space Nine is a trademark of Paramount Pictures, Circle Reader Service #102 "


"Rants & Raves Showdown On The Electronic Frontier by Johnny L. Wilson Rumors abound as software publishers, TLETECH boardgame via Joe's BBS or an The letter explains that such terms as on-line services, and information Internet site, it isn't any of FASA's business \"Hit Dice\" and \"Armor Class» are part of providers try to survey the route of the (since I own a copy of the game) and it is their valuable assets and that any use of proposed info superhighway. As with acactually a commercial for a great product. those terms infringes on their copyrights. tual highway construction, you can expect So, imagine my irritation when I dis\"Sometime very soon,\" reads the letter a certain amount of cyburban land specucovered that TSR, owners of the Dunas it explains TSR's intent, \"we're going lation prior to the determination of the fiGEONS & DRAGONS and ADVANCED to create a place where gamers can legally nal route. Everyone wants those ideal sites DUNGEONS & DRAGONS copyrights, were upload and share their creations, includfor the cyberspace equivalent of fast food sending letters to System Administrators ing modules, stories, and software.\" Well, restaurants, gas stations and mini-marts. along the Internet, telling them that the there you have the real motive. TSR sees Intellectual property is a key issue in use of those game systems and custom the Internet as the key to the info superthis cyberspace claim rush, and some modifications thereof for on-line rolehighway, and this letter is the foundation publishers are trying to use their copyplaying is a violation of their copyrights, for a MENZOBERRANZAN Mini-Mart or a rights as a bludgeon to ensure that they and that they intend to start charging a liDARK Sun Burger on that superhighway. get prime real estate. It's as though some censing fee to referees, as well as to creWhile we laud the foresight that enbelieve that, in order to protect their auators of help files and rules modifications. ables game companies to visualize a proftomobile copyright, they need to make TSR's letter was specific about custom itable future on the info superhighway, we sure that owners of their make of automomodifications to the games. The letter hardly think that this type of excessive bile keep their cars off the highway. It's a read: \"As we have begun to explore the diligence is the best way to bring about confusing issue, so let's try to clarify it. on-line community in depth, we've found that profitable future. We present this ediAssume I purchase a Ford Mustang. many avid gamers and fans. We're intertorial as a cautionary observation with reThe Ford Motor Company does not tell ested in providing you with the best in gard to the future. As gamers who have me where I can drive that automobile. gaming products that meet our own stanplayed our share of play-by-email games Yet, some boardgame and role-playing dards of quality, as well as suiting other and BBS role-playing experiences (and game publishers believe that if I purchase materials entirely for our own use. materials entirely for our own use. We who have modified rules and created our their game, they can tell me where I can think this is great! However, when gamers own scenarios), we wanted to express our play it. If I purchase a Mustang, it's none begin sharing their creations with the pubcollective alarm in print. Anyone agree? of Ford's business whether or not I use lic, whether for profit or not, they are inEither write us or join our discussion durthat car as a delivery vehicle in order to fringing our rights. If we don't make an ing the week of October 10-14 on the make money by selling my services as earnest attempt to prevent this infringeCGW Forum (On Ziffnet, Go GAMEFOcourier, delivery boy or cab driver. Some ment of our trademarks and copyrights, RUM, Section 16 Frontier Showdown). game manufacturers believe, however, our ownership of these extremely valuable We would like to make that a gold-plated that I would be wrong to make money by assets may be jeopardized.» invitation to TSR representatives. selling my services as a referee or game It went on to say, \"A gamer in this situmaster for any games that I've purchased. ation has a few options. He can strip every The iconic ratings symbolize the Our belief is that individuals who have TSR trademark and all copyright from his following editorial verdicts: purchased games, like individuals who creations before putting them in public. ***** Potential Benchmark have purchased cars, have the right to use Or, he can share his creations with the  Excellent them. If I give a friend a ride in my hypopublic in a way that is licensed and ap *** Average Mainly For thetical Mustang, it's not only none of proved by TSR. This is the more desirGenre Enthusiasts Ford's business, but it is actually a free adable solution, as it protects our rights, and ** Weak Has Significant vertisement for Ford's product. If, to follow still leaves room for gamers to share their Problems the thought, I host a game of FASA's BATcreative expressions.\" * Abysmal 10 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"SKIM THE CLOUDS, BUST A FEW BALLOONS AND DOGFIGHT YOUR WAY THROUGH THE GREAT WAR. LIVING O GLORY limb into the cockpit of a Sopwith Camel and test your skills as a daring aviator in the War to End All Wars. Fly for the British and Americans, ilscovering the strengths and weaknesses of your different planes as well as those of the enemy. Earn the respect of both sides as you secure your place in the company of aces! Actual screens may vary.  4-channel digital sound gives you the roar of dogfighting the way WWI pilots heard it.  Instant mission generator lets you fly against any combination of enemies you choose.  Refined game engine generates realistic clouds, trees and increased plane detail. FOR A GREAT GAME EXPERIENCE, WE RECOMMEND AN INTEL486\" DX2 OR PENTIUMTM PROCESSOR-BASED SYSTEM. FOR LITERATURE ON INTEL PROCESSORS, CALL 1-800-756-8766 CHURIGIN Copyright  1994 ORIGIN Systems, Inc, Wings of Glory is a trademark of ORIGIN Systeins, Inc. Origin and We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. Intel, Intel486 and Pentium are trademarks of Intel Corporation. We acte worls Available at a software retailer near you, or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. Circle Reader Service #99 An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 "


"Interface LETTERS FROMC GW READERS OUTPOSTcame out three weeks before not save the game if any ro look alike. There is no sense MORTEM the game did. However, the bodozers are on-screen), but of wonder, no discovery, no I have been an avid reader for final product is incomplete, nowhere in the manual nor in humor (except for sophomoric 6 years now and have found extremely poorly documentthe README file does it spell comments by the AI, such as, your reviews unfailingly to be ed, poorly put together and this out. It simply says that the \"Your colony is in \"on the mark\" and informadesigned, and a horror to simulation is so complex that trouble... have a nice day!\"). tive. However, the comments play (it is nice to look at, but you can only save at certain There are no announcements concerning OUTPOST are ludias one angry purchaser said points when internal process to alert you to trouble, no easy crous when compared to the on-line, I thought I was buy-ing is complete, but it doesn't way to find out what the troureal game. For the last few ing a game not a screen say when or where those ble is, no clear instructions on months I have been anxiously saver!). points are! how to get your robots workawaiting getting OUTPOST Only The whole thing looks like After some struggle, I did ing, how to find new mines, to find it is an extremely shodit was rushed out the door befigure out this game, only to just the tedium of figuring out dy work of software pushed fore it was close to being findiscover that it is actually very a faulty game design. out the door in an obvious ished. Many of the features boring. It is \"SimCITY in In fact, the one word that hurry. What is distressing is that were given prominent Space,\" but not done anymost describes this turkey is that your magazine, (and space in the hint book and in where near as well as SimCriy. \"boring.\" All the factors that many others) published review what passes for a manual, And since almost everything could make it interestingafter review claiming this to be such as trade, diplomacy, gets built underground, it is and more importantly for a the best thing since sliced roads, monorails, Al managereally \"SimCity in a Hole.\" All game, fun—are left to future bread. It is, in fact, basically a ment of daughter colonies, the planets you can colonize modules, which, if the game is glorified screen saver, and an etc., (items that appeared to are the same, game after returned to stores at the rate ineptly documented one at be vital to making the game game, and important data suggested by the comments that. I am astonished that a dynamic), were left out and about the planets (such as on-line, will never be created. magazine of CGW's caliber are now promised in a future their Hostility rating) is left To top it off, instead of using could possibly positively enmodule for which we must out of the information you are CD space to add more feadorse this product. I will respend more money. And this given on-screen (though it is tures to the game (including main an avid reader of CGW to get what was originally given in the Hint book). Since the ones that had been but I would like to see an expromised us! the manual tells you how impromised), there are advertiseplanatory note in some future There is an on-line help feaportant it is to refer to such inments and promos for future issue retracting the glowing ture, masquerading as your asformation and the only place modules, and a set-up propraise that was issued for OUTsistant Al, but all it is is a to get it is in the Hint book, is gram for INN, Sierra's on-line POST. Keep up the otherwise) text-reading program that this a suggestion you must buy network! great work! reads word-for-word (and the manual? The planets all I feel this product is an inBrad Wallace slowly) the text that appears Gilbert, AZ on your screen. Unlike Sid The 5th Wave By Rich Tennant MEIER'S CIVILIZATION, there is I don't know if you are aware no advice from this so-called of all the outrage being exAI, no hints, no help in actualpressed over Sierra's new rely playing the game, only a delease, OUTPOST. Since you scription of each item you can have editorialized in past isbuild. Neither the manual nor IT'S THEIR BSS ARCHT sues over a trend in computer the AI tells you how to build AIDI THINK THEY E FIGURE OUT WHO \"STRANDED games to go for high end or acquire some of these 15, SO BE CAREFUL WHAT graphics while neglecting things, resulting in needless YOU SAY game play, this seems to me frustration. to be a horrible example of The game itself — the game exactly this condition. As a system, that is appears to sorty owner of OUTPOST who be the main puzzle the player WoWN bought it from a store must solve in order to succeed; (Egghead) that does not aceven the save game feature cept returns, I had awaited will not work unless certain this game for months. I even conditions are existing on the bought the hint book which screen (for example, you can12 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"ARNOBRO FIST Scope out the terrain. Slew your turret. Lock on target. And brace yourself or a me stom 553 Encounter startlingly realistic prebut missions or construct your Own Dig trenches, lay mines, even plant trees. You're in the heart of an advanced fighting machine. Peering through the thick smoke billowing off your last victim, you feel you're being watched. Switching to thermal shows something hot behind the trees ahead. Advanced optics zoom in and reveal a Soviet T-80 tank turning its turret toward you. Now is not the time to hesitate... Lock and load. FIRE! Choose American M1A2 Abrams main battle tanks, M3 Bradley IFV's equipped with thermal sights, Russian 1-80 tanks, or BMP APC's equipped with image intensifiers. Forge ahead on the digital battlefield of the future in this modern tank simulation from NovaLogic (the creators of Comanche, WolfPack and Ultrabots). Engage your enemy in accurate battle environments where you encounter translucent smoke, explosions and grenades. Strap on your helmet for the ride of your life! Command multiple tanks over 3-D, Voxel Space (patent pending), terrain and call in remote artillery or tactical air support to ensure victory. Suggested Retail Price $69.95 Available for PC 3.5' and PC CD-ROM NOVA 18080 993 DUTC+ Armoria Fist. Comanche. WalPack UrabotVoret Spore. Novalogo and Novalogic Logo Tiademarks of loval.ooc. Inc Acta Circle Reader Service #218 "


"sult to the gaming public. a government mandated set of public reasons.\" Tom always clined, the villain/villainess). In a What the computer game standards into gaming, I am had good feel about would-be movie, you watch the stars figure press has been ballyhooing as reminded of some of the critimorals regulators. out how to get out of scrapes. In a the next \"Game of the Year\" iscisms the classic science fiction Dave Schneider gume, you try to figure out how to nothing but junk. If an asterwriter H.G. Wells ran into with Pittsburgh, PA get out of scrapes. In a movie, you oid does hit the earth, it will the publication of his book, admire the protagonist's ingenuity. be welcome to end the tedium Lillle Wars, which documented BASHIN' BASHAM in a game, you get to brag about this game provides, but I hope for the first time rules for ATTN: Tom Basham, [In refyour own creative solutions. it lands on Sierra first! On secwargames, in this case using erence to your column, If every solution has to be ond thought, never mind, toy soldiers. Yes, true 3-D \"What's in a sim?\" CGW filmed, that's either going to be since I live only live miles gaming, rather than virtual #121.] Is it a simulation or tremendously expensive for your from their new headquarters anything, right on the front not? I don't care! Is it enjoystudios or you are going to have to in Bellevue, WA parlor floor in 1913. Incidenable, fun, entertaining? I care! severely restrict the number of soDavid Spangler tally, in that sense Wells was The armed forces spend lutions available. If every converBelleme, WA the father of modern popular years and millions training pisation requires union-scale actors, wargaming both on hardwood lots to fly these babies. A you are going to film an incredible CGW previewed an early version and hardware. Despite the fact \"true\" sim would be unflyable, number of permutations that will of Sierra's Outpost in our Nothat Wells was in real life unusable and unsuitable for make movie-making seem cheap, vember, 1993 issue. Although our something of a pacifist, the 99.9% of players. Lighten up, or you are going to severely limit Sneak Previews are based on acnascent hobby managed to get bud! the scope of conversations within tually playing the games we cover stereotyped as somehow leadTodd Repke the game. (even if, as in this case, the ing its practitioners to a Owatonna, MN That's what our readers want amount of code and options propredilection for actual rather us to explain to you about how vided were rather limited), we look than virtual slaughter. Post PC'S PLAYHOUSE more can be less. You can give particular care lo let our readers WWI British manufacturers When are game makers going them more and better images, but know exactly how early and limitduly and almost literally beat to realize that animation and actually offer less game play. ed the Sneak Preview was, and their swords into plowshares scanned photos are not a reMaybe even some of the software clearly labeled the piece with our by cutting back on toy soldier placement for good solid publishers will understand that, \"SNEAK PREVIEW: Game Still production and launching into game play? Players are only 100. In Development\" stamp). We run the production of model going to wait so long to see the Sneak Preview because we farms, etc. And, thank God those glitzy images. INFORMATION were very excited about the concept they did, for surely if they had Todd Parker CATTLE PATH of the game, the people who were continued their old lines a Centerville, UT The information highway is working on the design, and the newly brainwashed generation Please explain the evolution of great except for one thing. early materials from the game that might have found themselves role-playing to the Hollywood There are too ew on-ramps. we were seeing. We perceived that in yet another World War. crowd. They don't understand Living in Northern Indiana, OUTPOST was going to be \"big Yeah, sure. what it's all about. We don't there are 3-4 lines of access news\" and to be the kind of game Perhaps, il erstwhile lawneed well-known actors to that are free. Only 3-4 small that our readers could really get makers would betake themportray us or upstage us in a areas that have free access. excited about. It is safe to say, from selves into the city streets and game. We are our worst and The rest have to pay for long reading many letters and on-line talk to gang members, maybe best partner. Marketeers are distance charges. At that cost, messages like yours, as well as they would find that street viotrying for the mass market. I can afford the car (computMartin Cirulis' actual review in lence did not suddenly dawn and I'm afraid, for us roleer), but can't afford to drive on this issue, that the game fell far upon some otherwise happy players, it's back to the graph the road (information supershort of the initial vision. child while playing video paper. At least, give us credit highway). We run previews because you, games or while venturing onto for some imagination. Ted Hiner our readers, have told us that you his parent's PC to putz around Russ Reed Laporte, IN value early coverage as an indicawith his father's DOOM file. Brandon, FL lor of what's coming on the horiTo them I say, please get your  Ted, don't panic! (Hmm! Seems zon. In selecting games for preview reality out of virtuality, FAST. Dear Mr. Goldwyn, Zanuck, like we read that somewhere bewe try to pick out what we think is Thomas Jefferson's reWarner, Wasserman, et. al, of fore.) The so-called superhighway going to be the cream of the crop. marks, on the idea of a state Hollywood, CA: isn't here, yet. Right now, brave We have a fairly good track religion, may have some appliAl our reader's request, we'd souls like you are still four-wheelrecord, but there is always the occacation here, «It is error alone like to explain a little about roleing on some telecommuting cattle sional exception. Would that we which needs the support of playing to you. Role-playing is paths. If you're adventurous, you could be correct on every count. government. Truth can stand about pretending to be someone may enjoy this issue's survey of Unfortunately, that isn't the way by itself. Subject opinion to coelse, usually in a world somewhere some of the toll roads and turnlife or even journalism works. ercion: whom will you make else. In a movie, you identify with pikes in today's world of telegamyour inquisitors? Fallible me; a hero or heroine. In a role-playing, but we have a long journey WELLS-SPOKEN men governed by bad pasing experience, you are that hero ahead of us before we reach the suConcerning the imposition of sions, by private as well as or heroine (or, if you're so inperhighway. 14 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1993 "


"LayerSMKER Landing This Fall! NEW For more information contact New World Computing at 1-800-325-8898 (818-889-6070 outside the U.S.) or by mail: P.O. Box 4302 Hollywood, CA 90078-4302. C 1994 New World Computing, Inc. Hammer of the Gods is a trademark of New World Computing. New World Computing and its distinctive logo are registered trademarks of New World Computing, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #217 "


"READ.ME THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE GAMING WORLD The 'Magic' Is In The Cards The Magic: The Gathering Card Game Goes CD The Gathering The amazing success of MAGIC: tion as a ruckus head-to-head exexpansions fantasy art, much THE GATHERING, an innovative perience, as well as a terrific col(Arabian Nights, of which will be collectable trading card game, lectable. Antiquities, Legscanned and has spawned an electronic offThe design team for the ends and The used in hi-res spring. Magic's publisher, Wizcomputer game faced the Dark). Players (640 x 480). The ards of the Coast, has teamed challenge of keeping \"rare\" will be able to computer game up with MicroProse to put the cards rare, while allowing buy, trade and will also feature craze on computer. players to trade them eleccollect their own special forms of In the card game, each player tronically. Their solution is to unique set of Casting this spell creates a player advancecomputer game able to summon a builds his or her own deck of produce the game on CDcards to build cult of card game collectors. For ment, quests, spells and magical power (mana) ROM and to allow card \"tradtheir decks, and each CD-ROM generated, caster and tournaments gains 1 profit point. which is tapped to cast spells (for ing\" on an on-line service. In future releases to spark more insummoning minions, enchantiaddition to solitaire play will offer expanteractive player ng things, wielding sorcery, etc.). against a computer opponent, sion sets. interest. Stay Since players often build custom on-line multi-player duels will B oth Wizards of the Coast tuned to see if MicroProse credecks in the five colors of magic, also be possible. Each CDand MicroProse see graphics ates new magic cards that artifacts and lands, and since ROM will have some cards as the key to success for the could only work in a computer some cards are more scarce than from the Revised Edition of MAGIC: THE GATHERING CD. gaming environment. others, the game has a reputathe card game, plus its four The card game featured top -Alan Emrich AFFAIRS Doomed to Win PC Magazine & CGW Shower DOOM FPS Football Pro Coming To INN, With Awards At ONE BBSCON DOOM II Conference Files Downloadable Since CGW's philosophy about the model of films by indeTailgate Party! 'Scuse us. For more information, use shareware has undergone a pendent film makers and auWe're rootin tootin excited your ImagiNation. dramatic change over the last teurs, Wilson suggested. over ImagiNation's announceDOOM II's long-awaited refew years, this year's Summer \"The differences between ment that they are building a lease is October 10th, but to Shareware Showcase, sponshareware and commercial virtual stadium for Dynamix' keep you occupied until then sored by Zifr-Davis and held software are no longer of FRONT PAGE SPORTS FOOTBALL check out the DOOM conference in Atlanta, gave Editor-in perceived quality, but Pro. The game will go into round up in the Computer GamChief Johnny Wilson a merely differences in distesting sometime around the ing World Forum. A full tranchance to clarify the 1994 tribution and budgets,\" end of the year, and will inscript of the conversation magazine's position he said. \"The dispariclude all the game's usual feabetween id Software and about shareware. ties in budgets betures, plus chat. The on-line ZiffNet members is available, as Once relegated to Ziff-Davis tween the version of CGW's Sports Game well as the winning program in second-class sta Shareware traditional softof the Year for '93 will be in our ROOM of DOOM contest. tus as eccentric Awards warehouses 640x480, perfect res to go GO GAMEWORLD and search budgetware, and small with hotdogs, cold beer, or the library 17, DOOM Files, for all shareware shareware sports attire of your choice. the goodies. now fits designers 16 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"TOP O Readers' can be largely described in PLAYING LATELY terms of special effects and Here are the titles that gamers are spending the most expensive production values.\" quality time with. Let us know which game you've been He went on to challenge playing lately by writing the name of your current addicthe designers to take advantion in the \"Playing Lately?\" entry of the CGW Top 100 [tage of their limited financial poll card (page 208). Results for CGW #121, August 1994 exposure to create games that take risks in subject matter Doom (id Software) and/or innovative gameplay. At the 1st Annual Ziff 2. X-COM: UFO Defense (MicroProse) Davis Shareware Awards, Wilson pointed out how, in 3. TIE Fighter (LucasArts) the film world, quality independent films sometimes Master of Orion (MicroProse) capture the imagination of movie-goers and outperform 5. X-Wing (LucasArts) big budget films. Given his analogy, he found it appro6. Sim City 2000 (Maxis) priate that Doom should win both CGW's Premier Award IndyCar (Papyrus) for Game of the Year and 8. The Elder Scrolls: Arena (Bethesda) the Game of the Year award in the special shareware pre9. Ultima 8: Pagan (Origin) sentation. It was no surprise to most 10. Outpost (Sierra) attendees that DOOM was a winner. However, not even Jay Wilbur, business manag \"There once was a Notable Quotes ments are more than er for id Software, had a game called DOOM/ actually represented. hint that he would walk That kept me busy in Wit, wisdom and caustic quips It's too hard to get away with four awards before my room/ from dusk from gaming's harshest critics around in the prothe ceremonies were com to dawn/ With Brains gram. The so-called plete. In one day, Doom beand Brawn/ id is a \"manual\" is an abomicame the most highly winner/ va-va-vanation-obviously, a awarded shareware game in voom!\" balf-baked, prematurely released project. Serves the history of computer enChris Herold, Milwaukee WI me right for getting version 1.0!\" tertainment. Qualifying titles for the «X-Com is the best game I have ever played. Jim Sylvester, Austin TX Not one bug--so far, no flaws-and it's addic «X-COM is great, and the playability is very awards were selected from tive. Cheers to MicroProse.\" hundreds of nominees, prohigh. Also, the 3D battlescapes are fantastic. If M.B. Greene, New York City this game doesn't make you xenophobic, I don't grams representing the best know what will...a real winner!\" new or significantly upgradOUTPOST-frustrating. The hardware requireRay Kelly, Omaha NE ed shareware released between January 1, 1993 and June 1, 1994. Six CGW tainment value. BRIDGE for best card game, or The Year. staffers and nine members of Winners selected by CGW's ANIMATED VGA MEMORY GAME. The winners of the SharePC Magazine judged the 19 fijudges included id Software's by Tom Guthery for best puzware Awards can be nalists, awarding prizes to Doom, for best action/advenzle game, and HEXXAGON downloaded from ZiflNet on only six games. The judges ture, EPIC PINBALL by Epic from Software Creations for CompuServe (GO based their decisions on orig-MegaGames for best arcade top strategy release. DOOM ZDAWARDS). inality, creativity and entergame, MVP Software's MVP took the award for Best Game --Chuck Miller OCTOBER 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 17 "


"READ.ME Plextor Makes The Jump To Lightspeed Introduces 600kb Quad Speed CD-ROM Drive ESTIMATED RELEASE DATES BASED ON THE LATEST INFORMATION FROM GAME DEVELOPERS NAME OF GAME, COMPANY RELEASE DATE 4PLEX The \"Year of the CD-ROM\" cess time and 300kb throughnot recommend attaching the hasn't quite been as momenput. A IMB on-board buffer 4PLEX to an 8-bit SCSI host, tous for CD-ROM drives as it keeps video streaming from as it would reduce perforhas for software. The 1994 the CD smoothly, without the mance by at least 25%. crop of entertainment on CDThe unit goes ROM requires at least a doubeyond MPC level ble-speed drive, but even 2 specifications \"deuces\" make for frequent with SCSI-2, XA periods of clock-watching. and Kodak Photo Triple speed drives accelerate CD multi-session the installation and viewing of compatibility. At video off of CD-ROMs, but $549 for the interthey don't offer a noticeable nal unit ($599 with improvement in most games, Future Domain 16which need to be written to bit SCSI card), it take advantage of the higher would be hard to throughput. Now Plextor has justify a tripleanswered the call of those speed CD anywho are waiting for \"somepauses and skipped frames more. For Mac owners, thing better\" by leapfrogging that plague games running off4PLEX also makes an external the triple-speed drive and of slower units. unit, the 4PLEX PX-45CH for heading straight for the quad. In our preliminary test, we $649 ($699 with the 16-bit The 4PLEX' 220ms access attached the internal halfSCSI card). time and a blistering 600kb height 4PLEX PX-43CH to a For more information, conthroughput far exceeds that of 16-bit Adaptec AHA-1522tact Plextor at (800) 4PLEXa typical double-speed CDSCSI adapter, and the installaTOR (475-3986). ROM drive's 180-350ms action was a snap. Plextor does --Mike Weksler 5TH FLEET AVALON HILL .........10/94 ACES OF THE DEEP DYNAMIX......10/94 ACROSS THE RHINE MICROPROSE ..10/94 LIVE ACTION FOOTBALL ACCOLADE 10/94 BIOFORGE ORIGIN ..............11/94 BLACKBEARD AVALON HILL .......10/94 BREACH 3 IMPRESSIONS .......10/94 BRETT HULL HOCKEY ACCOLADE ...10/94 US NAVY FIGHTERS EA.......... .11/94 CELTIC TALES KOEI .............11/94 COLONIZATION MICROPROSE.....11/94 CYBERIA INTERPLAY ............11/94 CYBERJUDAS MERIT .......... .10/94 DARK FORCES LUCASARTS .......11/94 DESCENT INTERPLAY .11/94 DUNGEON MASTER II INTERPLAY ...11/94 FRONT LINES IMPRESSIONS........10/94 FPS: FOOTBALL '95 DYNAMIX.....11/94 FULL THROTTLE LUCASARTS ......12/94 HARDBALL 4 ACCOLADE..........11/94 HARVESTER MERIT ..11/94 HELL: CYBERPUNK THRILLER MERIT 10/94 HEROES OF M&M NEW WORLD.....11/94 HIGH SEAS TRADER IMPRESSIONS. .11/94 INCREDIBLE MACHINE 2 DYNAMIX 10/94 ISLE OF THE DEAD MERIT ..........10/94 JORUNE: ALIEN LOGIC SSI ........10/94 KING'S QUEST VII SIERRA .........11/94 LEMMINGS 3 PSYGNOSIS .........11/94 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT DOMARK......10/94 MASTER OF MAGIC MICROPROSE ..10/94 MENZOBERRANZAN SSI ..........11/94 NOCTROPOLIS EA ........... ..10/94 PANZER GENERAL SSI ............11/94 PHANTASMAGORIA SIERRA .......12/94 SPACEWARD HO! 4.0 NEW WORLD ..10/94 STALINGRAD AVALON HILL ........10/94 STAR TRAIL SIR-TECH ...........11/94 STAR TREK: TNG SPECTRUM ......11/94 STONEKEEP INTERPLAY ..........11/94 WARCRAFT BLIZZARD ...........11/94 WING COMMANDER 3 ORIGIN .....11/94 WINGS OF GLORY ORIGIN ........10/94 ZEPHYR NEW WORLD ............10/94 Byte Sized Biz Bits The entertainment industry is than 7% of the company's outmake a decision on the purchase shaking like a California earthstanding debt) has forced Mediuntil late September. ... 3DO has quake with all the recent corpoa Vision to file for Chapter 11 just officially announced their rate moves and high-level protection. It has also encour-new 64-bit M2 Accelerator. The personnel changes. MediaViaged the company to begin new system is based on the Powsion has been forced into Chapshopping high profile titles like erPC microprocessor and is exter 11 bankruptcy, largely due to THE DAEDALUS ENCOUNTER to pected to be backwards the concerns of two banks. As reother software publishers. Such compatible with the current ported earlier in CGW, the comauctions may indicate that work 3DO system. ... Trip Hawkins pany had successfully negotiated is slowing on the project, pendhas resigned from the Board of an understanding of terms with ing further financing. ... IntraDirectors of Electronic Arts, 90% of the outstanding creditors Corp, Inc., parent company of where he served as Chairman, that would have kept the compaCapstone, has filed their intent and Larry Probst, President and ny out of a Chapter 11 filing to purchase Three-Sixty Pacific CEO of EA, has succeeded The action of the two banks with the latter's bankruptcy referHawkins as Chairman. (whose exposure represents less ee. The judge is not expected to Johnny Wilson 18 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"925 SALE CHRISTICS at BET 25 own PEASA ries of scenarios depicting an meets Car interspecies war spanning five WARS, comdecades, interspersed with plete with Short takes on games undergoing beta dramatic cut scenes. The CDland mines, testing and soon to be released. ROM format contains tire spikes, sonorous voice-overs from rapid-fire maWarcraft: Orcs and Humans confident actors. We're waitchine guns t's a tough life, being an ing to see how the Orc voices and a host of orc-pillage and plunder, fare in the finished version, other wicked bash skulls and abduct some of those consonantweaponry. slaves, year after year. And heavy names are pretty For those who find themgoals: begin as a young wolf those pesky, soft, irritating tough. Certainly, with over selves locked into a frenzy of and challenge the alpha humans! How they meddle two dozen unit types ranging killing, the program allows male; kill a requisite number and tresspass on what everyfrom clerics and catapults to you to shoot at anything, of caribou; or out-fox a pack one knows is sovereign Orc giant spiders and semi-intellieven your potential passenof hunters. In the career territory. Why, it's enough to gent slime, there is plenty to gers. The tires squeal as you mode, you simply live out the make you want to annihilate bash about for any wargamer. make high-speed turns, and life of a wolf, hunting, sleepThose only the feeling of acceleration is ing, mating, caring for the marginally definitely there, but collisions young ones, and terrorizing interested in with walls and other cars feel little girls in red capes. The the combat almost elastic, and the entire environment of WOLF is cusaspects maytown has an eerie, empty feel tomizable, allowing you to seyet be to it. With perhaps even less lect climate, food supply, hooked by of a storyline than DOOM, it proximity to humans, and PAO the many inwill be interesting to see how type of wolf (timber, arctic, truguing the final version of QUARANplains). Behind the game is quests, which \"TINE fleshes out. Projected rean info-rich database of wolf include chaslease: October. images and facts, ready to DRENG ing down leap forward if you should the entire useless race! Thus outlaw Ogre hombres in the Wolf have questions about any asdo the folks at Blizzard give Icebone Peaks, visiting you can thank your lucky pect of the wolf and its enviwargamers a view from the Kobolds in abandoned salt stars, game fans: this is ronment. Created by Orcish perspective, as well as mines, and even ending a not a Hollywood-tainted, Sanctuary Woods in conjuncthe Human. WARCRAFT is a plague of lycanthropy. Probarely-interactive, multimedia tion with Wolf Haven Internareal-time strategy game with jected release: November. version of the Jack Nicholson tional, WOLF exudes a love for several twists. In addition to movie. It is actually a unique its subject matter, and will no battles and the inevitable side Quarantine simulation of life as canis doubt be received with same trips for magic items and lot since HELL CAB have lupus, the loved and feared by fans of the beasts and gold, players must also con Nwe seen such an unusual wolf. Much like a combat sim, those looking for an unusual struct a medieval town and automotive game as this. the play options in Wolf are simulated experience. CDmanage its growth in an alThe opening interface divided between scenarios ROM only. Projected release: most SimCITY style. Mining \"checks your ID» in order to with specific objectives and October. for gold, harvesting lumber, allow you entry into a bizarre what would be developing military units in world of armed-to-the-teeth equivalent to barracks bring to mind Civitaxicabs. The object of this aca \"career\" or LIZATION as well, especially tion-filled game is to elimi\"campaign\" since the technology does nate the various vehicles mode in a evolve (although you end up which stand in your way of sim. In the 40 with magic missiles instead of picking up a fare. The endifferent scenuclear weapons). Taking eiclosed texture-mapped town narios, you ther the Human or Orcish where you ply your trade have specific Thunder Paw race, you play through a selooks very much like DOOM wolf-like W IDZIANINOWANIA OCTOBER 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 19 "


"GET READY TO BE BLOWN AWAY METALTECH EARTHSIEGEN We had it coming. We created Cybrids with breakthrough Al to perform dangerous tasks with lightning precision. But we should never have taught them to fight. Magnificent light-sourced texture-mapping with fluid 3Space animation One apocalypse later, it's EarthSiege. Your squad of HERCs prowls a target-rich environment, ready to deliver some heavily mechanized payback. But beware-the Sybrids are an intelligent and relentless enemy. You'll constantly have to train new pilots, develop new tactics, and acquire new weapons-like EM Pulse Cannons, optically guided missiles and Electron Flux weapons-to secure an advantage. Or your burnt-jelly remains won't fill a teacup. PANT OF THE SIERRA FAMILY EARTHSIEGEBLAST INTO THE METALTECH ERA! The mission generator guarantees Available at retail for IBM/compatibles or call a restart isn't just a replay 1-800-757-7707  Dynamix, Inc. or Indicate trademarks of, or licensed to Dynamix, Inc. all rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #111 "


"   ExcELLENCE FRONT PAGE SPORTS PLAYERS FOOTBALL PRO '95 ALL PRO SANDERS CONVERTS FOR TWO IN FOOTBALL PRO 95 NEW RULES PROMISE MORE AGGRESSIVE PLAY Expressing excitement about the in both 93 and 94, this best-seller is set addition of 2-point conversions and for another goal-to-goal run. In addition kickoffs from the 30-yard line, running to the rule changes, the game kicks off back Barry Sanders said today to watch with exciting new features. Players will be for \"higher scoring games, more riskable to use existing team lineups or build taking and plenty of bone-crunching their own league from scratch starting action! The hottest action will be wherwith a common player draft pool. A ever the nation's best, Football Pro '95 new fast simulation mode will generate is played. Winner of Computer Gaming complete game statistics before you can World's Best Sports Simulation award make it to the refrigerator and back. Front Page Sports' exclusive Camera Angle Management System (CAMS) lets you review plays from all angles. New 3-D stadiums bring the crowd into the game. See plenty of bone-crunching hits as players spin, flip and dive in 2-point conversion attempts. FINAL TEAM ROSTERS ANNOUNCED With the first game just hours away, coaches announced their final 53-man rosters. For some, it was an easy choice. New Football Pro '95 starts you out with all the 1994/95 lineups and lets you put up to 6 players on injured reserve. Many coaches admitted, though, that the inclusion of these NFLPA players and their latest statistics made last-minute trades inevitable. At press time, rumors were flying of a trade involving several top quarterbacks. 129 PD PECAT PE SPORTS FOOTBALL DDOVOR LAST YEAR'S CHAMPS SACK COACH FOR ROOKIE In a move that surprised everyone, it is, yardage, score, time-remaining last year's winners were taken over or other play conditions. What's more. by a complete unknown. Amidst the with 3,000 stock plays on the floppy nationwide uproar, analysts said it version (over 10,000 on the CD) and was only to be expected in a game a powerful play editor, there's plenty like Football Pro '95 where anyone for a coach to draw on. The secret can become a coach. Coaches decide to winning is a good strategy, a great play-calling logic for over 2,500 play team and a whole lot of luck—just situations depending on what down like the real game. N75 DESSES SEASON TICKETS ON SALE NOW Reserve-or renew—your 50-yard-line seats to the game that sets the standard for football action. Football Pro '95 makes it first and goal for the entire season! (Available on CD and floppy disk for IBM PCs and compatibles. Upgrades are available for registered owners of Football Pro. See your local retailer for details, or call 1-800-757-7707 and ask for D860. GEBOTEAZA T Officially licensed by the National Football League Players Association andare trademarks of, or licensed to. Sierra Online, Inc. *1944 Sima Ostia, Inc. All rights reserved SIERRA Garude Redes Service 1222 "


"SNEAK PREVIEW Ca Si Developmcat What's Keeping Stonekeep? The Reality Behind Interplay's New Role-Playing Game by Johnny L. Wilson in the first installment of the 1993 Winter CES Report, CGW mentioned the unobtrusive pop-up interface design used in Interplay's STONEKEEP. In the role-playing section of the second installment of that report, CGW commented favorably on the rotoscoped monsters, interesting approach to realtime combat, and impressive special effects. We said, «If the story has as much punch as the special effects, this game is likely to be the true heir to THE BARD'S TALE series.\" At the time, we were expecting the game \"crunch to be ready for Fall '93 release and time\" and planned for the game to be one of our Fall the compacover stories. We knew that designer Peter ny devoted Oliphant wanted the game to be a real a full quartechnological showcase and, when progress ter of on the game was agonizingly slow, we attributed the delay to integrating Oliphant's video advances and full-screen dungeon views with the traditional world building problems inherent in the design of any their role-playing game. So, we booked a Spring resources to*94 cover. Again, there was a delay. So ward finishing much of a delay, in fact, that we wonSTONEKEEP, we dered if the game wouldn't look like old took another technology when it was released. The look. This other game was \"old news,\" and we were belook makes us wonginning to wonder if it would even apder if our early compeal to role-players in light of the new ments weren't correct graphic glitz appearing all over the indus-, after all. STONEKEEP may try. Not only was the game moving from a well become the true heir to floppy-disk release to a CD-ROM-only THE BARD'S TALE series, product, but we heard rumors of stripping out the old technology and rebuilding THE FOUNDATION STONEKEEP. Of course, we weren't entirely STONEKEEP is a first-person, 3-D sure that the result would be a \"six million perspective role-playing game. It dollar man\"-better, stronger, faster. is most similar to Bethesda's THE Then, as the game began to enter ELDER SCROLLS: ARENA in terms of combat, but the action is full-screen and uses both digitized video monsters and rendered characters in pre-rendered environments (almost like a fast-moving THE 7TH GUEST) rather than the more traditional, real-time generated environs of ARENA. It also uses a less obtrusive command interface, since STONEKEEN's cursor changes to reflect the player's options: a hand to grab, a targeting star for combat, a scroll for the inventory, a mirror for the player's image, and a book for character statistics, rune spells, notes and auto-mapping. This offers more of a full screen feel than having to work 22 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"from a command panel. There is a price and the others of the Youngest added the tapestried effect of musical to be paid, however, since STONEKEEP Gods from their imprisonment within themes which correspond to the domiforces you to use both keyboard an assortment of ten different orbs. nant cultures present in the game, an opand mouse rather than being In order to accomplish that goal, you eratic technique of associating aural totally mouse-driven like will have to explore 13 dungeon levels, signatures with various characters. ARENA. representing everything from ruins The story is set in through sewers and mines to ice tunnels, a MIRROR, a vividly connecropolis and the inner sanctum of the MIRROR IN THE MARGIN ceived alterAs mentioned earlier, nate earth you always have a fullwhere The screen view of the dunDevastation, a geon. If you need to cataclysm of apocaequip your character, lyptic proportions, was you move the cursor to caused by magick rather the side until it bethan nuclear power. The comes a mirror icon events within the game take and double-click. A place about one thousand years digitized video image after the holocaust caused by the of your character apominous magick of the two rival cabals: pears and you can The Lord Sorcerers of Atlantis and the point and click in orDark Warlocks of Ys. The background stoder to place armor on ny, a novella by veteran role-playing auWhe him or place weapons thors Steve Jackson and David Pulver, is in his hands as easily called Thera Awakening. In these few as dressing a paper pages, gamers will glean hints as to: Shadow King himthe Ithark (the rune-based magick self. At the beginsystem used in the game); the ning, you only Taces to be found in the control the characgame ter of Drake. As you progress from level to level, however, (Huyou'll meet new and man/Dwarf; interesting NPCs to Throg/Sharga; add to your potenFaeries/Elves); the tial for success. Inmythology behind terplay's Chris the orbs that you must Taylor (whose writretrieve in order to win ing serves as crethe game; and a better ative counterpoint understanding of the goddess Thera and to Oliphant's techthe Shadow King Khull-Khuum-two of nological expertise) the gods who play significant roles in the has added a fascinating cast of non-player doll. If you need to make notes about a game world. characters. One character who plays a marumor you've heard or clarify the nature Yet, the well-tapestried underpinning jor role in the game is known as Wahooka, of a rune, you can move the cursor until it of the novella merely sets up the cinethe great prankster. Philip Jose Farmer becomes a book and double-click to open matic opening of the game where the fans should not confuse this prankster with it, and type notes in your own mysterious player's character, a hero named Kickala, the human prankster of the World \"book of many things.\" This diary proDrake who is presumably some of Tiers series, but should recognize this vides for auto-mapping, auto-note taking, ollspring of the two lovers in Thera King of the Goblins as being more akin to character updates, and your own personal Awakening, is nearly destroyed by the more perverse of those the Irish call, notes. If you need to check your inventoKhull-Khuum in a juxtaposition of *the good people.\" Like many of the lep ry, move the cursor until it becomes a light and darkness. The safe, se rechauns of Irish folklore, however, Wa scroll and open it to divulge the contents cure environs of STONEKEEP are ravhooka is both tricky and trickable, often of your bag of tricks. The basic interface aged by the Shadow King, buried in a falling victim to his own machinations. In seems to work extremely well. deep gorge, and Drake alone has escaped addition, Drake will befriend two dwarves, In addition to the standard assortment to redress the balance. As the cinematica frightened Sharga, one of the elves that of medieval weapons, STONEKEEP also ofintroduction reaches its denouement, an had presumably disappeared during The fers the following slings and arrows for older and wiser Drake is recruited by Devastation, and a Tinkerbell-esque faerie your enemies' outrageous misfortune: Thera to continue the quest started by his named Sparkle. iceswords, shadowswords, icehammers, ancestors in the novella-freeing Thera Finally, composer Charles Deenen has shadowhammers, shadowdaggers, black OCTOBER 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 23 "


"Then, you use earlier, it is Drake's job to retrieve these the mouse to orbs which contain the imprisoned souls aim the crossof the Youngest Gods. Hence, the addibow and click tion of each orb to Drake's inventory will again to fire the also give him added magickal capabiliquarrel. ties. For example, one orb ensures that the party will not take any damage from THIS falling into pits. Another increases MAGICK Drake's strength. Another provides a MOMENT proximity map, complete with active As noted earlimonsters. Of course, half the fun will be er, STONEKEEP's determining which orbs help the party in magick system what ways. is rune-based. To cast a spell, NOT WHAT YOU SAY you must have THAT COUNTS MR. BONE JANGLES Drake checks his inventory for more firepower in order to the appropriate Perhaps the weakest role-playing element turn this undead into a spineless toothpick. rune placed in the game is the conversational aspect. into a slot on The designers opted early in the design for seeking arrows, and stoneshooters. Natuyour magick wand-a Runecaster. There full digitized speech. They didn't want rally, these special weapons are relatively are five levels of Runecastersmenu-based or icon-based conversation to rare and deliver significantly more damRunewand, Runescepter, Throg interrupt the dramatic flow of the converage than the usual place settings of hackRunecaster, Elfstaff and Silver sational encounters, so they pre-set all the ware. Yet, the most interesting part of Runestaff-each holding progressively conversations to run uninterrupted by the combat in STONEKEEP is not its weapons more mana points and runes. player. The good news is that there is no assortment, but its combat resolution. Stonekeep doesn't have a particularly interface interference to disrupt the draClose combat is resolved via an interestlarge tome of spells (28 total), and they matic nature of each encounter, but the ing design in STONEKEEP. First of all, the are the usual mix of area spells (wards counterpoint is that there is also no real incursor changes into a targeting star. You and teleport circles), duration spells teraction taking place in these encounters. move the star onto the target, aim for the (those which last a limited general area in which you wish to hit your length of time to provide opponent, and click on the left mouse light, enhance defense, enbutton if you want to attack with the dow special knowledge, reweapon in your left hand, or the right duce noise or slow time), button if you want to attack with the and instantaneous spells weapon in your right. Then, Drake's basic (throw firebolts and iceattributes and familiarity with the weapon bolts, teleport, or any other (as well as any magickal attributes which spell which you would exthe weapon may have and the quality of pect to create an immediate the weapon) are factored in to determine impact. how closely the weapon struck where it in addition to the runewas aimed, or if it struck at all. As you sucbased portion of the magic cessfully use each weapon, you progress to system, there are ten orbs TAKE THIS YOU FRIGID WITCH Drake meets the Ice Queen's freeze the next level of \"familiarity\" with that to be located and retrieved attack with some cold steel. weapon. This design means that weapons, from the ruins. As noted as well as characters, have To us, this seems unnecessarily limiting experience levels in this and is a problem that all designers using game. Naturally, as you acdigital video and speech must iron out. cumulate weapon experNaturally, successful completion of the tise, you will hit the exact quest will mean the release of the spot where you aim more Youngest Gods and the resurrection of frequently the fortress-town of Stonekeep from its Missile combat is similar. cavernous cenotaph. This means that, asIf you wanted to shoot a suming this release is successful, there is Throg with a Sharga crossplenty of room for a sequel that would enbow, you would click the able you to venture into the fascinating inouse button for the hand countryside depicted in the novella. If our in which you held the crossexperience with STONEKEEP is any indicabow. The crossbow will THANK HEAVEN FOR LITTLE GHOULS Sparkle's daisy wand might tion, we can only hope the next installthen appear on the screen. improve Drake's odor in the sewer level. ment won't take nearly as long. O 24 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"Advertisement Ox04 WACY BLOMBO Coming October 15, 1994 MODEM PLAY Elmer «Wacky Wheels: A fun, action-packed 3D racing game you can play alone or against friends via modem!» Once you play Wacky Wheels, you just can't stop. Ask yourself: Is that a bad thing? hat's right, nothing beats the There are three classes of excitement of playing against tracks, from novice to expert, as other human racers. You really feel well as two racing car speeds. the thrill of racing when you blast All tracks have special obstaby your opponent, slam their carcles and dangers: Water traps into a water trap, and beat them by (you can race underwater!), lava a hair to the finish line. It's so fun, lakes, jump ramps, posts, turbo you'll hate to finish! lanes, ice, oil slicks, bushes, and Two players can compete on the many other hazards. same computer (split-screen mode) or on separate computers using Wacky weapons help you win! modems to race each other or battle But what you're not expecting is in one of the six Comm-batTM zones the hedgehogs! Grab all the trackthat are included. populated hedgehogs you can and hurl them like baseballs at the The wild kingdom of racing! other racers to send them spinning You can play any of eight wacky out of control giving you time animals in Wacky Wheels. Each to pass em by. Other weapons to animal has its own colorful antics, collect include bombs, oil slicks, sounds and animations, including a and flame balls. tiger, elephant, racoon, panda, shark, and more. High-speed racing action Apogee games are action-packed. UROLEX O RXU and Wacky Wheels is a perfect example. From start to finish you get edge-of-your-seat excitement and action. When playing, you'll XURAXgrit your teeth, lean your body into the corners and scream \"EAT MAGMA!\" as you launch a hedgehog that sends the racer in front of you spinning into the lava! The Split-Screen mode allows two players to race on the same computer. REX QX18 You get 15 original race tracks After you select your wacky race character, you get to select any of fifteen unique race tracks (30 if you have the Upgrade Edition). Each track has a distinctive winning strategy. It's up to you to figure out the best way Speed across a narrow bridge to avoid the to race each one. bubbling lava! Circle Reader Service #43 You get all the winning features High-speed, 3D point-of-view racing!  Large variety of race tracks.  16 songs with multi-channel digital sound effects, with native support for the GUS, PAS-16, Sound Canvas, SB 16/Pro, Wave Blaster, and General MIDI.  Two-player, head-to-head modes via modem connection, serial link, or at the same computer. Time trial mode allows you to go for a record time on each track. RemoteRidiculet feature allows you to send a funny, distracting message to your opponent during modem matches. BLOMBO Try Apogee's games for FREE Anyone with a modem can call the huge Software Creations BBS, and download Apogee's games for free! The BBS numbers to call: 508-365-2359 @ 2400 baud 508-368-7036 @ 9600-14.4k v.32bis 508-365-4035 @ 28.8k v.fast (v.fc) Or, to order directly from Apogee. call 1-800-APOGEE1. Price: $24.95 plus shipping. (Ask about our Upgrade Edition.) If you're looking for genuine action games with boundless energy and play ability, look into Apogee. As our slogan says, «Apogee means Action!\" "


"Baudy Tales From The Cyburbs A Guide To On-Line Games cow COON Vu SJR CMAN n-line games aren't just text-based games for troduction of Internet access and, as a result, its membermultiple players anymore. But even if they ship has skyrocketed to about one million users. were, they would still fill the desire of some AOL is one of the largest full service on-line networks. It of us to play games where we can socialize sports a clean and friendly interface, and has an active with real people—even if those real people group of users. AOL's game support hasn't been terrific, are at the other end of a telephone wire, mebut it does offer some interesting sights. The most popular diated through modems at each end and a is NEVERWINTER NIGHTS, a fully graphical multi-user rolemainframe in the middle. The world of on-line network playing game. NEVERWINTER NIGHTS is based on SSI's early games is continually expanding, and it has SB CHANSHA ALL series of rolebegun to provide something of the same NAME playing games variety we have come to expect in retail DELMAGE set in TSR's ADsoftware. SIB SEAN NA BALDOR VANCED DUNNow, you can play maze-based exploBRETS4 TRA BON1 GEONS AND ration games, turn-based strategy games, PARRHASJA <EAST DRAGONS unireal-time simulations, card games, sports verse. Players of games, and role-playing games. Some are, SSI's solo games indeed, merely text-based games. Others 8,7 X 18:02 (the \"Gold Box\" support a text-based mode, but also offer series) will find a graphic interface of sorts (usually ANSI the system very graphics). Others have a complete graphic familiar, right interface via front end software (software MOVE CUSÉ ARROW KEYSNEXTT down to the font which resides on your computer's hard used for the disk and expedites the handling of a Neverwinter Nights on America Online game's text. The graphic interface between your computer difference is, of and the mainframe where the game is provided). In this course, that many people can explore this fantasy land tospecial section, the CGW staff shares its impressions of, exgether. The graphics are a bit crude and the level of interperiences on, and descriptions of the commercial on-line player communication is limited compared to other on-line services and the games they offer. RPGs, but NEVERWINTER NIGHTS makes a great starting point for the adventurer new to multi-player games. NEVERWINTER NIGHTS can also be a friendlier place than most, NO LONGER AMERICA ON HOLD as combat between human players is somewhat restricted (AMERICA ON-LINE) by the system. Be careful if you reach out to touch America Online -it's Another interesting AOL locale is RABBITJACKS' CASINO. very hot. AOL has made a lot of news recently with the inHere, players can get together for fun and/or competitive Sony TELLS A 26 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"-games of FIVE-CARD STU, BLACKJACK, and Bingo, or yank this one is fairly representative of the lot. the arms of slot machines. The tables and machines are British LEGENDS is a text-based multi-player role-playing displayed graphically, and players can kibitz with each game with an emphasis on magic. The major goal of the other as the cards are dealt and their fortunes lost. There game is to become a Wizard and use special powers like inare regular competitions and special events hosted by the visibility. Indeed, some unscrupulous wizards like to slink area Sysops to keep things hoppin'. about the world invisibly and wreak all sorts of havoc. Access Fees: $9.95 per month (first month free) for five I SLAND OF RESMAI is the text-based role-playing game hours of access, $3.50 for each subsequent hour. For more that put Kesmai Corporation on the map. Soon to be information, contact America Online at (800) 827-3338. available on more than one network, it has always been one of CompuServe's anchor products. The game consists of two segments: a basic game for novice through intermeGRANDFATHERED IN diate players and an advanced game for veterans. Kesmai (COMPUSERVE) even adds occasional new locations to sweeten the pot. When the commercial on-line services of the world gather MEGAWARS III is a space combat game that looks a lot for Thanksgiving dinner, CompuServe usually sits at the like Interstel's out-of-print STAR FLEET I. head of the table. One of the oldest, largest, and well-estab. SNIPER!, a head-to-head game of WWII squad combat, is lished systems around, it is the Granddaddy of the on-line based on the TSR/SPI board wargame, but the on-line world. It offers a wide variety of services for the general version is even more fun, as the software takes care of the user, and has a streamlined and easy to use Windows interoften complex rules. A fairly simple graphic package alface. The good and the bad news for gamers is that it treats lows two players to lead a squad of soldiers in firefights gaming like a grandchild: it will love and nourish them through small European towns in 1944. Victorious comwhile they sit nicely at the manders are promoted, and even table and behave, but sends losers complain little (despite bigthem out of the house if they ger telephone bills). There is no start horsing around. other game which captures quite so Without question, Comwell the eerie feeling of having only puServe is one of the best one soldier left, with the enemy out there for gamer supclosing in around you...with the opport. The system has lively portunity to turn the tables the gamer message areas, terrifnext time around. ic support from game pubOnesting initia. data. Access Fees: $8.95 per month for lishers, and a file transfer basic services and $4.80 per hour area (with shareware, patch(2400 baud) or $9.60 per hour (up es, and other game support US / O 10% o to 14.4) for extended services files) that is well-kept. Live Hit the dirt in CompuServe's Sniper! (which include game areas). For role-playing groups, flight more information, contact Comsim squadrons, modem-topuServe at (800) 848-8990. modem competitors, and play-by-email gamers all call CompuServe home and use it as a telecom clubhouse, Oddly, however, multiplayer games are not are part of the CONCENTRIC INFLUENCES CompuServe game plan. They have a few games, which (CRIS IN they've had for years, but they've invested very little in imAt first glance, Concentric Research's CRIS II looks like a proving those games and have no plans to expand in the very slick BBS that uses ANSI graphics. This is somewhat multiplayer direction. Indeed, it took a few fanatical users appropriate, since it incorporates technology that allows its with programming skills to develop graphic interfaces for users to connect with 60,000 independent bulletin board their older text-based role-playing games. services and the Internet. However, the initial impression AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLER may ring a bell with veteran does not rellect the attractive graphic user interface which gamers. The air traffic controllers' strike during the Reaallows for point and click navigation, or the fact that the gan administration inspired several such simulations, and service connects with Kesmai's ARIES system in order to Nex OOOOR 1944 OCTOBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 27 "


"allow gamers to challenge Wargames: ANDROIDS is a game of areto make money and move up in prestige the users of other services at na combat in the far future. It can be toward the ultimate goal of becoming the AIR WARRIOR, HARPOON, ISplayed with ANSI graphics or in pure text BLADEMASTER is to light more and stronger LAND OF KESMAI, MUD II: THE mode. It would probably be more accuopponents (both computerand humanQUEST FOR IMMORTALITY and STELrately named \"Cyborgs,\" since gamers becontrolled) in the arena. LAR EMPEROR. At press time, the come hybrid human/machine warriors EMPIRE OF THE PEASANTS has mechanics Kesmai gateway was in testing. playing a high-stakes, real-time scavenger similar to a classic PBM game called FEUEven without the Kesmai gateway, hunt with combat. The goal is to pick up DAL LORDS. Both games require you to CRIS II offers a formidable list of games, as many valuable objects as possible by build up your lief as an economic base bemost of which are ANSI graphics or textpassing over them, while avoiding the viofore you can be successful as a conquering based, but there are several that require lent onslaughts of your human-controlled lord. EMPIRE OF THE PEASANTS has less comtheir own graphic front ends. The game opponents. plex game mechanics, however, with the list for CRIS II is so extensive that it is diBLADEMASTER is a game of arena combat added benefit of allowing you to play as vided into eight different categories: in the past. The game is purely text-based many turns as you like on a given phone wargames, space games, adventure games, and features a simple fantasy town environcall. Each turn, you get a production recard games, board games, casino games, ment where you can purchase better port and have the ability to buy/sell land miscellaneous games and flash games (acweapons/armor and get healing and ruand commodities, as well as purchase intion games). mors between death matches. The only way dustries, soldiers and the nobility. Once the economic base is established, you can then attack the opposing lord or lady of Usenet Message Groups for Gamers your choice. SUB STRIKER is a real-time submarine strateby Andy Patrizio More popular games often have a com gy game. Portraying a struggle between two So, you've found your way onto the Inplete help file written and maintained by global superpowers in a fictional sea, the ternet? Or your local BBS is now carryone dedicated person who posts it when gameplay is something like a simulation, but ing Usenet newsgroups? Welcome to the requested. As new tips and information without a graphic interface. The submarines fun. Although Internet was designed as a are posted to the net, those tidbits are are based upon thorough research, the comresearch network, people who work hard added to the file. mand set is very rich, and the game supports also play hard. Among the gigabytes of Requests for files are also common. several human players at one time. The research in theoretical physics and the People ask for walk-throughs, cheats, graphics are limited to ANSI, but the simulaHuman Genome Project, you'll find character editors, patches, and more. tion aspects seem solid. plenty of message groups for hard-core Users-in-the-know point to the file trans RING MASTERS is a boxing strategy game game players. fer (FTP) site where the file can be where you try to take your boxer to the Here is a list of the most popular PC found. One of the most popular is championship. There is a ladder of comgames groups: ftp.uwp.edu, which has a very large puterand human-controlled contenders comp.sys.ibm.pc.games.action games directory, but there are many to be defeated in order to reach the chamcomp.sys.ibm.pc.games.adventure more in the US and around the world. If pionship level. All commands are entered comp.sys.ibm.pc.games.announce you're familiar with Archie, the FTP via a text parser, and there are occasional comp.sys.ibm.pc.games.flight-sim database, do a search on \"games\" and lapses in the interface due to the latency comp.sys.ibm.pc.games.misc see what comes up. I guarantee the result problem inherent in many telegames. For comp.sys.ibm.pc.games.rpg will be one huge file! example, the referee threw our staffer's comp.sys.ibm.pc.games.strategic The comp.* game groups are also a boxer out of the ring because of fighting You'll notice that the topics are usually great marketplace for second-hand between rounds, but the illegal blows were divided by game genre. So far, there's games--something you never see on the actually the result of communications latenonly one Usenet news group dedicated commercial services. It's an opportunity cy. Yet, it is still an interesting, albeit slow, to a single company or product: to make some good deals or clean out game. alt.games.doom. The number of mesyour shelves. Space Games: TRADE WARS is similar to a sages for id Software's Doom was becomAs for deals, I recently picked up pure strategy version of PRIVATEER or ELITE, ing too much for the strategy games MIGHT AND MAGIC 4&5, CLOUDS OF except that there is no real-time combat group, so a special group was started. XEEN and DARKSIDE OF XEEN, for $25 and no elaborate graphic effects. Gamers Most of the people posting on these each. That's half the retail price! Unfor merely try to build their fortunes and presgroups are college students who have the tunately, the DARKSIDE disks are bad. tige by buying low and traveling to the time and money to devote to gaming. Caveat emptor. You roll the dice, and right planets to sell high. You can earn The day a game hits the shelves, you can sometimes you lose. your way into an elite group of overachievbe sure there will be messages about it on That caveat extends to just about every ers with extra power to wield in the game. the appropriate group. facet of the Internet, especially for new NOVATREK is actually GALTITREK, almost Requests for help are the most commodem users. It's a wild and woolly place a STARFLEET BATTLES campaign with a mon message posted. Just ask how to get out there, but as far as networks go, it's map of 38 x 12 sectors and 350 bases hidpast a certain spot in an adventure game the only place to be. den within those sectors. Players build and and you'll have a reply soon enough. improve their own bases while trying to blast their opponents into history. 28 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"SUPER Nova is an intergalactic BATILEtraditional HEARTS game. Access Fees: The pricing SHIP-style game. You hide five different Board Games: This area contains the structure for Kesmai games Doomsday devices within a grid and then big four which are available on most onhad not been determined at try to destroy the other player's devices. line networks: CHESS, CHECKERS, BACKGAMpress time, but the overall service is TK-WARS IV is the most elaborate space MON and OTHELLO. available for a flat rate of $30.00 game offered on CRIS II. You not only Miscellaneous Games: TRIVIA PURSUIT per month. Call (517) 895-0500 for get to build starships and starbases a la bears no similarity to the boardgame, more information. MASTER OF ORION, you also get to explore, Trivial Pursuit, nor the NTN TRIVIA games expand, exploit, and exterminate the which appear on other networks. It offers space hulks of your fellow human admireal-time questions and then begins to fill ORACLE OF ASCII rals. Detail is the name of the game in this in-the-blanks of the answers HANGMAN(DELPHI cosmic slugfest. style as two or more players try to answer The only way you'll find a \"Page Three Adventure Games: FAZUUL is an adventure and ring up the highest score. Girl\" (one of those ubiquitous bare-bogame set on a once lavish pleasure planet. ASSIGNMENT: WALL STREET reminds us somed beauties on page three of most Now, anyone who embarks on FAZUUL is of the space-trading game, FEDERATION II. British tabloids) on Rupert Murdoch's doomed to remain. That doesn't mean there You get to explore, interact, trade securiDelphi Internet Service is to find the isn't plenty to do in this text-adventure, just ties and move up in society. In Fed II, you right .GIF file on one of the Internet FTP that the exploration is often enlivened by enget to explore the real solar system and sites. It can be done, but you'll need to be counters with human-controlled characters lots of star systems that aren't so real. In computer literate enough to accomplish it. and strange casino games left over from the this game, you get to navigate five areas of In fact, you have to be somewhat literate planet's previous incarnation. New York City: airport/shopping, hotel to do anything on Delphi, because the first KYRANDIA is not to be confused with Westdistrict, uptown, the downtown business thing you see when you actually connect is wood Studios' lavish graphic adventure sedistrict and Central Park. a menu and a command line. You need to ries. It is a traditional, text-based Flash Games: The following are realtype in keywords to go anywhere on Delmulti-player environment where the goal is time arcade-style games which require phi and that becomes increasingly necesto become the most powerful mage in the their own software to play: FLASH ATTACK, sary as you use Telnet and FTP kingdom. You explore forests, towns and FLASH MAZE, FLASH SPACEWAR, and FLASH commands to navigate the Internet. This temples in order to be able to cast such spells TANK. All offer several variations of play is especially true when you Telnet into as noouch (a mild healing spell) and clut(time-limit battles, grudge matches, etc.) such locales as Steve Jackson Games' Illuzopho (make an enemy less coordinated). and all require full-screen ANSI support. minati Online service which uses a UNIX Much of the game is like playing an old version of ADVENTURE, but there is always a chance of running into human player characters. Cross ROADS is a text-based game that offers occasional ASCII maps. Set in a fantasy world, characters follow the path of one of the four elements of the ancient world (Earth, Fire, Water, and Air) in order to master the game's magic system. WILDERLANDS is a traditional \"guess the parser\" adventure game with some fantasy role-playing elements. Characters are generated with regard to race, sex and attributes, but have to join a character class (druids, rangers, etc.) and successfully complete a class quest before they can advance in the game. SWORDS & SORCERY is a traditional RPG with a \"guess the parser\" interface and multiple attributes for each character. The command line is supplemented by a statistics display at the bottom of the screen and a limited color ANSI map. Card Games: CRIS II supports a poker ladder of sorts called CARD SHARKS, but it requires a separate fee to enter the tournament. Without a separate fee, players can compete against live opponents in AUTO WARS (similar to the Parker Brothers card game, MILLE BOURNES) and the ...EE EE EEEE... Circle Reader Service #244 OCTOBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 29 "


"30 sec NATO Plane Group. ACA Fighter PC Gane Orders Settings Reports Misc command line. The upside, additional charge of $3.00 per 1: 20 A Bx GROUP 20 Apr 20:30:48 however, is that Delphi promonth for Internet access. At vides a true Internet gateway, press time, Air WARRIOR gatea forum moderated by CGW's way was the only Kesmai game own Scorpia, and an area known functioning, and the additional as Electropolis. In Electropolis, charge was $.96 per hour. Call you will eventually be able to gate(800) 695-4005 for more inforway directly to Kesmai's ARIES sysmation. 1 2 X EX UNIT tem and play ATR WARRIOR, Speed: 422 kls Course: 39° Throttle: Cruise Alt: High FEDERATION II, ISLAND OF KESMAI, Taryel Group: NONE Mission Type: Patrol MUD II, and STELLAR EMPEROR with GAMES IN A Original Present Strike gamers on other networks. BOTTLE (GENIE) Support 1 AIR WARRIOR was described in CGW A former games manager at [Full Report Display #120, p. 80. It is a moderately easy simuGEnie once told us that the Air Group ACA is completely launched and forned up. lation of air combat for multiple players company would never move to Harpoon is coming soon to Genie which allows you to select a theater of war, a graphical user interface bechoose one of three countries (teams) to join, cause they felt that text transand enter the constantly on-going cammission was both machine independent action/strategy game where teams of paign. Featuring polygon-filled SVGA and an effective way to reach the visually mechs attempt to increase their stranglegraphics, AIR WARRIOR requires its own impaired through voice emulation softhold on cyberspace by building up a powfront-end software and is literally what Tom ware. Whatever the rationale, GEnie is a er web of towers (essentially booster Basham calls, \"the largest electronic furball rather unique mix, both in community stations) and destroying the opposition's you have ever seen.\" Fortunately, there are and technology. The interface is distinctly mechs. There are role-playing elements plenty of opportunities for training to help archaic. You navigate by keywords, page as you strive to build up your 'mech's cayou get over the steep learning curve. numbers and, once you arrive in a particupabilities by upgrading weapons and techSTELLAR CONQUEST is reminiscent of, but lar forum, by menu selection. nology, tactical elements as you simpler than the STAR FLEET BATTLES Yet, Genie has been at the forefront of communicate with your teammates on the the major commercial services in best way to take out the competition, and adapting new front ends to older reflex-determined elements as you dodge games and paying developers to incoming attacks and try to aim at the create games with their own mechs lighting on other teams. front-end software. Besides offerDRAGON'S GATE is a text-based fantasy ing the wide variety of games de role-playing game set in a world defined scribed here, GEnie has a by a massive crater. One hour of \"realmulti-player HARPOON in testing, time\" equals two hours of game time witha multi-player MEGATRAVELLER in the game, and DRAGON'S GATE has game in development, and some of the most interesting races we've MODUS OPERANDI, a murder mysseen in an on-line (or any) role-playing tery game being developed in cogame. It also features a fascinating hot down operation with Mysterious mythology. Those who play the people Multiplayer furballs in Genie's Air Warrior Press. There are also rumors of and paper version of RUNEQUEST should a high-profile role-playing game feel right at home with some of the detail that has just been signed. in this game. boardgame, and more akin to Interstel's In addition to multi-player out-of-print STAR FLEET I. games, Genie also hosts two TQ TRIVIA is a challenging trivia game roundtables which are imporarea where you can usually find a few hutant to computer game playman players with which to compete. It is ers. One roundtable is for more challenging than TRIVIA PURSUIT on computer game designers, CRIS II or YGI! on CompuServe, but it and the other is hosted by lacks the boldness of Prodigy's all-orScorpia, CGW's contributing nothing GUTS quiz or the huge participaeditor for role-playing games. tion level of NTN TRIVIA on GEnie, Both offer interesting discusImagiNation, and various hotels and bars. sions of everything from curAccess Fees: The 10/4 plan costs a minirent games to magazine SE2303NBE mum of $10 per month (including the reviews. first four hours of usage) and $4.00 per AIR WARRIOR is the original hour beyond that basic usage. The 20/20 Kesmai product described in plan costs $20 per month (including the the discussion of Delphi DDDDDDDDD first 20 hours of usage) and $1.80 per games. Wreck robots in Genie's CyberStrike hour beyond that. In addition, there is an CYBERSTRIKE is the sim-like P kell has been recorded Strategic Map : Red 2 Black A2 Neutral: 56 72 30 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"M LASE FEDERATION II is, ostensibly, a space \"gy are the necessary elements for being an Entertainment and a role trading game where gamers purchase, integral part of the winning side in this playing setting that is, in our build and outfit ships for cosmic explogame. Game mechanics are something opinion, superior to the oneration and exploitation, but it is also aplike a highly-advanced version of the FEUshot combat experiences of the propriately billed as a game for adults. DAL LORDS PBM game described elseamusement centers. Characters en-> The game has relationships between charwhere, but there are many more list in the service of a particular acters (marriages, textual intercourse and sub-elements to this game that nobles can house (the dynasties in the Batblood feuds) that represent tleTech Universe) or function as part 1080 osat almost any lifestyle, and the hotellit of mercenary units and fight real-time players are so close-knit battles as they try to climb upward sothat they even have inforcially in the service of their liege lords. mal face-to-face \"FedCons\" The game requires a graphic front end whenever there is a critical which looks similar to the interface mass of Fed addicts in the used in Activision's original MECHWARmaiSGEL same area. There is even an RIOR product. on-line newspaper called NTN TRIVIA has been available on GEUnderFED that is available nie for a long time, but it no longer supon e-mail which details the ports text-only mode. Il you've ever dirt on the prominent charplayed a trivia game against other on-line acters to be found in this alplayers in a bar or hotel room, it was probternate reality. There is also Captain mercenary 'mech brigades in GEnie's BattleTech ably this game. The most common game traditional \"guess the parsis COUNTDOWN, where players try to get er\" exploration, interaction the most points out of a series of multipleand puzzle-solving access on a daily basis. A graphic frontchoice questions covering general knowlGALAXY I is a PBEM game of space exend is currently being developed which edge, but there are also separate ploration, expansion, exploitation and exmay shorten game time by assisting playcompetitions with regard to Music, Movie termination where you input orders and ers with travel and navigation. and Sports trivia. What is truly interesting wait to see the results. The goal is to build MULTI-PLAYER BATTLETECH is an on-line is the fact that you are competing against up your empire so that your score, an universe that offers sim-style combat a la opponents all over the country, including amalgamation of the number of ships and the BattleTech Centers of Virtual World those on Imagination and in the the quality levels of your planets, will be higher than anyone else in the game. Unlike many such space empire games, this one is detailed enough that you often need to print-out reports of your fleets, planets and moves. The graphics support VT100 and ANSI terminal emulation and it does not require a graphic front end. GEMSTONE III is a text-based role-playing game with rules based on Iron Crown Enterprises' ROLEMASTER series of games. It features lots of active players, live game masters, and plenty of new quests which crop up on a monthly basis. GEMSTONE III emphasizes role-playing, and each character class has its own particular benefits/liabilities. Though the game has a graphic front-end (more of a graphic wrap for the text), the joy of this game is the textual interaction with like-minded gamers and the continual freshening of the environment by creative designers. HUNDRED YEARS WAR is based on a monster game of medieval strategy/role-playing which was conceived years ago by the Dean of Wargame Design, James F. Dunnigan. You take on the role of a French, English or Independent aristocrat (or the Pope) during the circa one hundred year's of French/English strife. Fief management, delicate diplomacy, and solid strateCircle Reader Service #245 OCTOBER 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 31 ... YAAAAAA... "


"ALANE FRKY:15%N 16 YD HOLE PAR hotels/lounges. (9600 baud) for cach subsequent hour. phere. In addition, INN is probably the ORB WARS is a real-time Call (800) 638-9636 for more information. least male dominated of all the networks role-playing game where covered in this survey. mages compete across an ASCII The Clubhouse is the \"parlor\" where THE ROOMS AT THE INN traditional games are offered. This area character generation which deter(IMAGINATION) includes BRIDGE, CHESS, CHECKERS, mines the wyzard's major attributThe cartoonish graphic interface for The BACKGAMMON, CRIBBAGE, HEARTS, FLIP es and the style of magic he or she ImagiNation Network (INN) only sets the FLOP (Othello), Go, SPADES and EUCHRE. will employ in the game, gameplay tone for part of this on-line network. It's as The Club House also offers bulletin boards consists of the fast typing of commands easy to get from place to place as it is to and hint boards, but these are usually less to cast spells, collect objects, move in navigate a children's boardgame, but the extensive than the other, more informathe compass directions, and change action and interaction is more equivalent tion-oriented computer networks. Spontaorbs to the color of your team. Scoring to an on-line gaming convention where neous conferences, along with regularly is handled on both an individual and the action never ceases. The emphasis for scheduled ones, are held in the Clubteam basis, since the goal is to advance this friendly looking cyburb is community. House. Members receive their notificaup the ladder of wyzardry and become the In fact, before entering any area of the tions of such activities through e-mail and most prestigious mage prior to the occanetwork, you must create an on-screen the system's colorful newsletter regularly sional game resets at the end of a camsent to every member. paign. The SierraLand Castle QBI is another NTN game that is not represents family fun. It's only available on Genie, but in hotel the amusement park of the lounges and sports bars throughout the service and features a wide country. It is played simultaneously with variety of games. The star the telecast of an NFL game and requires attraction is an on-line vergamers to call plays ahead of the action sion of the excellent WWI depicted on the TV. Serving as both a test flight simulation, PW of strategy and of the knowledge of the Dynamix' RED BARON. The tendencies of professional football coachdifference is that this veres, QBI allows you to compete against sion allows two to four spectators all over the country. players to enter on-line STELLAR EMPEROR is a space combat furballs with considerable game divided into two basic activities: exImagiNation's 3-D Golf is in the green variation in the scenarios. ploration and economic management. ExThis program was reviewed ploration requires you to be in charge of in CGW #120, p. 79. your individual spaceship and to react to persona, including a self portrait and 3-D GOLF also takes a stand-alone prodwhat you encounter. Economic managesome personal information. With these uct and transforms it into a multi-player ment is handled via menu screens. The \"ice breakers» in place, INN becomes experience. Based on Konami's WILSON game's objective is to build PROSTAFF GOLF, it allows you to play 18 up your empire to the point holes with an on-line foursome. Those where you become one of seeking a different slice of golf may want the Lords of Empire and atto try MINI-GOLF, an extremely wacky tain one of two titles at the miniature golf course. end of a four week camPAINT WARS is an interesting two-to-four paign. If you are the greatest player game that resembles the live-action founder of space colonies, paint gun battles that appear to be sweepyou may become the Presiing the country. This on-line game feadent of the Imperial Senate. tures a more structured playing area and If you are the greatest warsome interesting computer gaming twists rior, you may become Lord to enhance the experience. That's a bit Emperor of All The GalaxThe Castle also contains an eclectic ies. A graphics front end is group of games. These include the classic Check your six in Imagination's Red Baron available for Windows users. Milton Bradley boardgame STRATEGO, STELLAR WARRIOR is a SNEAKATAG (a four-tiered, four-in-a-row strategy game that plays like something in largely a matter of enjoying games and Tic-Tac-Toe game), BOOGERS (a wild 2-4 between the old STAR FLEET I from Intersmaking friends (lots of 'em!). It is a simple player variation of FLIP FLOP), and GRAFFItel and the boardgame, STAR FLEET BATmatter to find others on-line with a com'11 a multi-user paint program with lots of TLES, from Task Force Games. The goal is mon INN gaming interest: just invite an amusing features for the artist inside simply to amass the highest possible score interesting and interested) person to play, everyone). by destroying enemy ships and bases. and the game is afoot. The system is perTrivia fans will also enjoy the lightly Access Fees: $8.95 per month for four fectly suited to \"table top conversations\" in played ROCKET QUIZ math trivia and the free hours, plus $3.00 (2400 baud) or $9 this competitive, though relaxed, atmosheavily trafficked NTN TRIVIA game. 32 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"MedievaLand is the home of the netkind of place you would never visit in \"that RAILS AND work's resident dungeon crawl, THE part of town\" where you live, here in the GRAILS SHADOW OF YSERBIUS. This role-playing cyburbs, LEFTY'S LOUNGE is just the oppo(MPGN) game uses an interface familiar to DUNsite of Cheers (in that, here, nobody knows As you connect with the Multi-PlayGEON MASTER players and veterans of your real name). er Games Network, you feel some many other similar games. In YSERBIUS, Access Fees: $9.95 per month for five thing like an honored guest in a however, you play a single character in a hours, and $3.50 for each subsequent medieval castle. The entire network party of up to four players. ... Las Vegas Larryland v2.3 functions as a graphic interface where The others have to be found TIMER you select one of four currently active (usually at the tavern), orgagames. In addition to those games curnized into an effective team rently available, future plans include (based upon each characmulti-player versions of GDW's DARK ter's attributes) and lead CONSPIRACY RPG of dark tech/horror into battle. In addition to and R. Talsorian's CYBERPUNK 2020, as the dungeon's larger quest, well as MEKTON II (an RPG based on a number of smaller side Japanime). Also, work is progressing toquests are available for ward offering: FIEFQUEST (economic and $390 building up characters to A BUSTAN AWON military strategy a la HUNDRED YEARS the higher levels of perfor$1258 $1889 $1908 WAR), MUD II (Richard Bartles classic mance they'll need to comNATURAL Options WOMO WON multi-player dungeon which allegedly plete the adventure. That The poker action is fast and loose in Imagination's CasinoLand started it all), and WARLORDS (a post-holoaccomplished, TWINION, the caust empire building game where you try newest RPG area, awaits for to become the lost planet version of John further adventuring! hour. Although the software lists for Carter, Warlord of Mars). CasinoLand is the on-line version of $5.95, it can often be found free in game EMPIRE BUILDER is the fastest way to play the ribald world of Leisure Suit Larry and magazine promotions. For more in the computer version of the popular and Passionate Patty. Donning caricaformation, contact The ImagiNation Net boardgame from Mayfair Games. Retures with a Larry-esque cartoon look to work at (800) 695-4002. viewed in CGW #108, p. 88, the game rethem, mature gamers can romp in this area where adult language and themes (Continued on Page 182) are standard. While the gaming focuses on gambling games such as SLOTS, ROULETTE, BLACKJACK and several varieties of table PORER, it is the people who drop in on LarryLand that make it what it is. Most visitors really let their hair down in this red light district of Cyberspace. Here, cross-dressers, homosexuals, bisexuals, make out artists (and would-be ones) freely converse with those who are comfortably more mundane in their sexual habits. While a more lurid type of fun can be had by all, this is definitely a \"better class of rift rall\" than can be found on many BBS' dedicated to UNLIMITED sexual matters. Often with a wink and a smile, visitors to Larry Land are obscene and heard as they gamble their fictitious Larry Bucks. LEFTY'S LOUNGE, a meeting room with a particularly tacky bar-like atmosphere, is where it all hangs out. Conversations flow very freely here, and people can buy each other flowers or give kisses (which, if accepted, adorn that giftee's self portrait for Looking Glass Technologies, Inc the remainder of their session in LarryLand). In LEFTY's there are \"bar\" games, including liars poker and several games 420 Bedford Street along the theme of TRUTH OR DARE, allowLexington, MA 02173 ing players to really get to know some617-863-5810 thing about each other. While this is the Circle Reader Service #246 OCTOBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 33 ... H00 0 0 0 0 Coming Soon "


" IVAITEUVERS COMOVONLY PERFORIZED VITE ITEV WAIGIANT EXTREME. 2 Barrel Roll Attack. The Immelman. Offset Head-on Pass. Low Speed Yoyo. Rollaway. Barrel Roll. "


"MAITEUVERS COMVOITLY PERFORIVED WITH OTHER JOYSTICKS. Warriors of the cyber skies rejoice: project Wingman Extreme is complete, the joystick has been perfected. Never has guidance control been so fluid, trigger action so responsive, view control so easy. Wing Man Extreme conforms Wing Man Extreme can be the difference between the thrill of victory and the ejection seat of defeat: a solid professional in a field of puny lightweights. WingMan Extreme is waiting at your dealer, or call 1 800 889 0038 or fax back at 1 800 245 0000. to all required joystick slandards. LOGITECH I LEV VINGMAN EXTREME. THE JOYSTICK WITH ATTITUDE! CESTE STVAHETTY inmac BEST Circle Reader Service #82 "


"Welcome To My Fantasy Me Illustration by Brian Clarke A Personal Tour Through \"Shared Consensual Hallucinations» On The Internet by Mark Clarkson ooking for some fun on the information superhighway? Does the notion of trying on different bodies, personalities, even genders, intrigue you? Perhaps you'd enjoy hanging out in a hot tub discussing philosophy and William S. Burroughs novels with a disembodied head and a talking race horse. Or maybe you'd just like to bash some trolls or slay some demons. Whichever way you swing, I think I've got what you're looking for right here. Wait a second while I log on... *** Connected *** Cyd's Place A dim room, black with red velvets, accented by twisting strands of light that crawl slowly over the walls, the ceiling, you. A stand-up desk in one corner holds a pile of books and an oddly-shaped keyboard. A flat screen monitor hangs on the wall, displaying a Modigliani nude. There is a teepee in the opposite corner, its door-flap tied open. To the north, heavy, blood-red curtains undulate slowly in a breeze of unseen origin. Oh, you say, a text adventure-been there, seen it, done it. Well, it is a text adventure and it isn't. There are two major differences between this place and other text adventures you've seen. Number one, I made Cyd's Place and almost everything in it, mysell. Number two, if you have access to the Internet, you can join me there. We can talk, I can show you around. We can enter the teepee and smoke the peace pipe together, or have at each other with swords, as is your wont. Cyd's Place is more than text deep. There 36 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"BUU904401 7:2513 OX04/30 1:54 UUU897303231 U U SHAREWARE TRY IT TODAY! U90 roncar Remember the story of the Tortoise and the Hare? It's 3,000 years later and they're back. Now it's a fight for the galaxy and the love of a beautiful princess. Jazz Jackrabbit brings all the speed and action of your favorite console games to your PC. Buy all six episodes for only $39 plus $4 s&h. Try Jazz on CompuServe, just GO EPIC. For a free CompuServe sign-up kit, call 800-524-3388 and ask for representative 536. Or call EXEC-PC, (414) 789-4360 (for V.32bis), for free downloads on your first call. On Internet FTP from \"ftp.uml.edu» in \"/msdos/games/Epic\". EPIC \"TO ORDER CALL EPIC MEGAGAMES 1-800-972-7434 VISA, MasterCard and cheques accepted. Please add $4 shipping and handling. Each order includes a bonus shareware game. Call 301-983-9771 for inquiries, Epic MegaGames 10406 Holbrook Drive, Potomac MD 20854  CompuServe: 70007,1631   "


"is a structure that underlies the words, one that's far richer than any text adventure. For example, that computer in the corner of the room actually works. I can use it to send and receive e-mail from others. It's \"voice-actuated\" and controls the light, heat and security systems in my rooms. Cyd's Place is my home in LambdaMOO, a thriving cyberspace community housed inside of some computers in Palo Alto, California. Thousands of people live sist stroking it. >stroke buffalo skin Ooooh. Soft. > Smoke peace pipe You cough and choke as the smoke hits your lungs. Pale face! You can also move about following another player, or teleporting directly to your desired location with a go or teleport command. with nearly 8000 users who connect 200 at a time, to the little MUSH-clone running on the one-line BBS in my brother-in-law's basement. There are MUDs where people pretend to be speaking animals, sign up with the Klingon empire, or play themselves in 18th century London. For the most part, MUDs come in one of four flavors: savage, sweet, surreal, serious. The original MUD, and most MUDs to this day are built around the sword-and-sorcery There are about 300 MUDs, MOOS, MUCKS, MUSHS, MUSEs in operation, mostly running on university computers. The actual number fluctuates as new worlds are created and old ones are destroyed, or sometimes shut down by irritated university officials. here, sort of, depending on how you define the term. People are building new objects and rooms every day and adding them to the mix. THE PRIMORDIAL MUD It all started way, way back, in 1980, or maybe even a little bit before, when Dungeons and Dragons was an extraordinarily popular game. Two students at the University of Essex in Great Britain, Richard Bartle and Roy Trubshaw, wrote the original MUD, which stood for Multi-User Dungeon. It ran on a computer at the university, and was very popular with its users...when they could get on-line. Today, there are a couple of dozen MUD derivatives out there, with as many names: MUSH, MUCK, MOO, MUSE, etc. For the purposes of this article, I'll refer to them, collectively, as MUDs. A MUD of any sort is really just a text adventure that can be shared by many people at once. If you've ever played an Infocom game like ZORK or PLANETFALL, you'll feel right at home. You navigate as you would in a text adventure, typing commands such as \"go up,\" \"go south,\" and \"pick up the penguin.\" >enter teepee The Teepee A cozy little teepee, with just enough room for two or three friends to sprawl on the fur rugs. The air smells faintly of smoke and leather. You see a buffalo skin rug and a peace pipe here. >sit You sit down on the buffalo skin. The fur is surprisingly deep and thick. You can't re>go alternative living room Alternative Living Room The first thing you notice is that it is not so bright, open, or airy here--but that is fine, 'cause you were looking for a dark, quiet place, weren't you? Every time you come here, you seem to notice new things inside, and new exits to explore. Dilettante, Peaches, Christo, Ultraviolet_Guest, Nearco, and Schizophrenia (listening to the voices in her head) are here. Nearco puts a leather muzzle on Ultraviolet_Guest carefully avoiding snapping jaws. Nearco asks, \"Is there a verb for giving people tracheotomies?\" You can communicate with your fellow players by speaking or by emoting, which is sometimes called \"posing.\" >say Hi, all! You say, Hi all. >emote smile and bow. You smile and bow. Nearco [to you] Hi. motil, with magic, rippling thews, broadswords, and lots and lots of blood. [*chat*] Corwin: I like hacking tissue from skeletons. That, and spraying blood everywhere. :) The object in these MUDs is to gain experience points and thereby advance through the levels, perhaps eventually to join the immortal gods of the MUD and gain the power to create dungeons and monsters of your own. You gain experience by killing things or by finding treasures, which usually involves killing things. As you rise in experience and levels, you take on tougher and tougher foes, including, perhaps, your fellow players. To keep from running out of monsters and treasure, most of these MUDs are reset every day or so. Dead demons rise from the grave. Pilfered treasure is restored to its chests, and so on. Put your gold in the bank before you log off, or you may lose it. Next come the all-in-good-clean-fun role-playing school of MUDs, such as TrekMuse MUD based on the Star Trek universe, or MUDs for kids. The MIT MediaLab runs a whole slew of MUDs especially for kids K-12 and those who love them. You can spend an entire night logged onto one of these without seeing a single person experience virtual sex, virtual drugs or virtual death. Then there are the make-it-up-as-yougo-along MUDS, like LambdaMOO, with little theme and few rules. Logging onto one of these is like taking an acid trip. Instead of entering rooms through the door, people walk through the walls, or arrive atop flaming meteors. They sport names THE 31 FLAVORS OF MUD There are in the neighborhood of 300 MUDs, MOOS, MUCKS, MUSHs, MUSES in operation, mostly running on university computers. The actual number fluctuates from day to day as new worlds are created and old ones are destroyed, or sometimes shut down by irritated university oflicials. They range in size from LambdaMOO, 38 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"Slow moving, \"choppy\" graphics cost lives. NEW LOWER PRICING & 10 Free CD-ROMs with each MACH VI \"if you want to go all out tor games, the Falcon is the best bet for your money.\" -Computer Gaming World If this guy owned a MACH V, he'd still be here. It's a cruel fact of computer gaming: better graphics demand more computer power. Smoother animation requires a higher frame-rate. Your eyes can see 30 frames every second, If your computer is doing anything less, your aircraft won't roll smoothly, your axe will miss the dragon right in front of you, and your shotgun won't pul a dent in the demons. And if you think today's games are demanding, just wait until you see tomorrow's! The Falcon MACH V and MACH Vp are not your average computers. They were specifically designed with the needs of gamers in mind: extreme frame-rales, brutal amounts of CPU power, unreal hard disk transfer rates, and all of the multimedia and gaming extras that you'd normally have lo add yoursell. Sure, they're great for spreadsheets, word processing, and general business -any compuler can do thal. When you're ready for something more, you're ready for a MACH V. The MACH V $1,995 45 VGA frames per second! Featuring an Intel 486 DX/2-66' CPU, 4 megabytes of RAM, and a 255 megabyte hard disk The MACH Vp Pentium $2,995 59 VGA frames per second! Featuring an Intel 66 MHz PENTIUMTM CPU, 8 megabytes of RAM, and a 425 megabyte hard disk Optional 15\" monitor shown Each MACH V system comes standard with our VESA Local Bus graphics and hard disk controllers, 12 & 1.4 megabyle floppy drives, minilower case w/ 250 watt power supply, 101 key keyboard, 250ms double-speed CD-ROM, Creative Labs SoundBlaster PRO Labtec multimedia speakers, CH Products FLIGHTSTICK PROM and dual high-speed joystick ports, licensed Microsoft DOS 6.2x and Windows 3 button mouse, and CTX 11\" non interlaced full screen SVGA monitor. Many upgrades are available, please call for pricing and availability THE FALCON MACH V: THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE FALCON NORTHWEST To Order Call: 1-800-258-6778 See us at Fall COMDEX! Booth IIM7658 COMPUTER SYSTEMS 263 South Bayshore Dr. Coos Bay, OR 97420 Ph: (503) 269-0775 Fax:(503) 267-2575 VISA & MasterCard Accepted Financing Available on Approved Credit Circle Reader Service #141 "


"With the aid of my trusty 14.4 modem, I can enter a magical world where I can fashion my own insane monkey and carry it around in a Dr. Seuss book bag—where some of my best friends aren't even human. like nivek.ogre, Hate, and Little-Bunnyoriented MUD relies in large part on social spend time in. Foo-Foo. Players seek fulfillment, not by interaction for its success. Without the othWhen you reach the log-on screen, you killing monsters, but by making friends and er players in there, hacking and slashing can usually enter as a guest with a comcollecting ever-cooler feature objects-prowith or at you, it's just a circa 1979 text admand such as \"@connect guest.\" The loggrams written in MUD-code that give your venture game, played long distance. With on screen should give you the particulars. character new abilities, such as morphing people behind the text, the environment Once you decide to make a MUD your from one body to another, or bonking othbecomes a fantasy play-ground more vipermanent hang-out, you'll need a characer players. brant and creative than any fantasy comter. Some MUDs allow you to create a new Frisbee bonks you on the puter game ever created. character as soon as you connect. Just type in head and you dance and sing: a character name and password and you're Fish heads, fish heads! GETTING YOUR FEET off and running. Some MUDs require you to Kanani quickly morphs into WET (AND MUDDY) send e-mail to the system administrators, reOrphic_Machine. There are two ways to experience a MUD: questing a character. Most allow guests to reYou see a man's severed head as a guest or as a permanent character. If quest a character on-line, from within the floating in the air. His eyes you connect as a guest, you usually can't MUD, with some sort of request, or register are half-closed, face twisted describe yoursell, create objects, or do command. Some MUDs don't accept guest into a painful sort of ecsta much of anything except observe. Instead, connections, so you'll have to obtain a charsy, and you hear him say, \"TO you're there to wander around and drink acter before you can visit them at all. write is to make oneself the in the atmosphere. If you find a MUD that What comes next differs from MUD to echo of what cannot cease interests you, play tourist for a while and MUD. At first, your character is only a speaking.\" He is awake and see if it is the kind of place you'd like to name and a password; you'll have to fill looks alert. Carrying: Snow_Crash's MAKING YOUR WAY THROUGH THE MUD Friendship Nearco says, There are hundreds of MUDs to be discovered pose: show actions and expressions to the other That's one fine on the Internet, but here are a few you might players see emote morph....\" start out with look/look at: look at an object in the MUD People here spend a lot of MUD Internet Address >look chair. time showing off newly-ac CyberMUSH 146.227.102.4 6250 It looks uncomfortable. quired goodies. \"Check out Apocalypse IV sapphire.geo.wvu.edu 4000 examine: sometimes provides you with more inthis plate of oatmeal-raisin Deeper Trouble alk.iesc.auc.dk 4242 formation about an object than just looking at it cookies...try one!\", \"Look, I LambdaMOO lambda.parc.xerox.com 8888 will. made a little flying pig to de TrekMUSE laurel.cnidr.org 1701 >examine chair liver messages for me,\" or Once you're logged into a MUD, here are some The Balanz Chair (aka chair, and the time honored, «Hey, useful commands you might try: Balanz) is owned by Cyd pull my finger.\" join: moves your character to the same location It looks uncomfortable Finally, there are serious as another character Other verbs: and semi-serious MUDs >join Corto sit on chair where professionals meet to There is a flash of light and you show map to <anything> share information and work appear on the Tennis Court. get/take chair on joint projects ranging Corto is here. drop/throw chair from astronomy to artificial follow: starts your character automatically fol give/hand chair to <anything> lowing another player around the MUD. go/@go: sometimes, you can teleport directly to As you can see, you can't >follow Avatar a place if you know its name really shove every MUD into You are now following Avatar. >@go The Coat Closet a convenient pigeonhole. say: say something to another player You teleport to the Coat Closet. The lines between types are >say Yo, Avatar, what s up? get/take: pick an object up blurry at best. Lamb. You say. Yo, Avatar, what s up? wield: get a weapon ready for use daMOO, basically a social inemote: show actions and expressions to the other : common abbreviation for the emote or pose teraction MUD, contains a players keywords. full-blown combat and magic >emote smiles and bows to you. \"p common abbreviations for \"say\" command oriented MUD within itsell. Mark smiles and bows to you. And even the most combat life. 40 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"2.5 MILLION FORMER ADDICTS CAN'T BE WRONG! LODE RUNNER THE LEGEND RETURNS TERTRETERGEE It's more addicting than ever. With all new graphics and sound effects, plus 150 new levels of non-stop action. Play alone or head-to-head. Use the lightning-fast Game Generator to create torturous worlds of your own. See your retailer or call 1-800-757-7707 (Ask for offer D844). RUNNER SUHE LEGENDSTELPN SIERRA Asailable for. DOS, Windows MA, DOS CD-ROM, LODE RUNNER is a registered trademark licensed exclusively to Douglas E Smith 1983 1991 Douglas Smith, Sierra On-Line Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #254 "


"in the blanks. to the orc race. His conThe first time you connect to a sword science will not stop him A (VERY) INCOMPLETE and sorcery or science fiction MUD, you'll from killing other players. GLOSSARY OF MUD TERMS probably begin by selecting a race. You Corto looks fierce and MUD: Multi-User Dungeon might get to choose from among Dwarf, frightening MUSH: Multi-User Shared HallucinaFairy and Elf for example, or Human, Corto bows gracefully. tion Klingon and Romulan. Next you'll choose Corto says: hi wassup? MUSE: May mean Multi-User Shared a profession, or a guild such as warp drive >say How do I gain experi Environment, may not mean anything at mechanic, or runesinger. ence? all. Now, you'll probably want to set your You say: How do I gain ex MOO: MUD, Object-Oriented gender. Your choice is usually limited to perience? Tiny or Teeny: smaller versions of male or female, but three or more genders Corto says: kill some mon larger MUDs, as in TinyMOO and Teenyare not uncommon, and I know of at least sters MUSE. one MUD with twelve. (No, I'm not going The scrawny dog lifts its bonk: to hit someone in the head and to elaborate.) back leg and pisses on a make them do or say crazy things. As in, Finally, the MUD may allow you to en building. \"Cyd bonks you and you sing, Fish heads! ter a description of yourself, which other >kill scrawny dog Fish heads!\" players will see when they look at you. For You failed to penetrate toad, or @toad: in some MUDs, it example, describe me as tall, dark, and Dog's armor. means that the player's character is literalhandsome with a winning smile and luxu Dog scratched you on the ly turned into a toad. In others, it means riant fur. In some MUDs which lack this right arm. that the character is killed, destroyed, rekind of description facility, players convey Dog barks loudly and howls cycled...never to return. People are toadextra information through their names, in pain! ed for being jerks. Don't be a jerk. becoming \"Cleo the Beautiful but Con Dog grazed you on the right spam: to throw huge quantities of text fused,\" or \"Sir Roderick who wants to sell arm. onto the screen, filling up other's termian OrcHelm, cheap.\" You failed to penetrate nals and washing away all other conversaSuitably described and gendered, you're Dog's armor. tions away on a wave of text. ready to enter the MUD. Corto rolls his eyes. whuggle: to hug affectionately, to really On the big road to Tweeple. like, as in \"Tarmac whuggles Billy HoliThe great town stands be PLEASE WIPE YOUR FEET day.\" fore you, its walls shining Be forewarned: not every MUD is looking ugh: to dislike, the opposite of whugin the sun. There is an open for new players. As a MUD gains in popugle, as in \"I ugh Michael Bolton\" portcullis to the north. larity, it can succumb to lag-the delay benewbie: a new player, fresh meat. You, Above you is a hot, moving, tween my typing a command and its until you learn your way around. clear night sky. There is a execution. The last time I logged on to brisk wind. LambdaMOO, 179 other users were conA scrawny dog is here. It nected, and the lag was 96 seconds. That is, ing LambdaMOO, Legion took me into his is very thin, and looks to be between the time I said something and the apartment so my character wouldn't have on its last legs. time others heard it, more than a minute to lie around in the coat closet when I If this is a lack-and-slash MUD, you'll and a half transpired. logged oll. At almost every MUD, I've been have to build up experience points by Peaches says, \"Lag here be given advice, encouragement, even killing things. There's usually a beginners' comes torturous\" weapons and gold, by people who didn't area where you can gain experience by Nearco says, \"Oh, when it know me at all. killing bunnies and dogs. With each dead nears 200 seconds it becomes As I finish this article, it's 4:00 a.m. in Wilido, you become stronger, richer, smarter. sort of fun, like being chita, Kansas. I'm alone, in my underwear, When in doubt, type \"help.\" All MUDS stoned on cough syrup... with no one to talk to. But with the aid of offer you some form of on-line help. Some Schizophrenia giggles at my trusty 14.4 modem, I can enter a magieven provide on-line tutorials to walk you Nearco. cal world where I can fashion my own inthrough the early stages of becoming a Upon arrival as a guest at one MUD, I sane monkey and carry it around in a Dr. MUDer. And don't overlook your most was bitten repeatedly by one player and, Seuss book bag—where some of my best valuable on-line help resource—your fellow when I explained that I was visiting in confriends aren't even human. players. nection with this article, was told by another Gotta go. I'll see you, or some phantas> shout Will someone please player to \"go away—we don't like publicimagoric, telecommunicated ghost of you, help out a newbie? ty.\" Luckily, soon thereafter my head was on-line. Corto the legion commander bashed in by a Hill Giant, who presumably Mark Clarkson is a full-time writer and game arrives to aid you! did not care for guests either. player. He ranges the Internet from his home Corto hates the scummy New Realize that many people, when logging base in Wichita, Kansas, where he lives with his York Rangers and is really on as a guest, are rude and annoying. So be wife, daughter and a host of furry animals. His depressed he can't chant nice. Be friendly. You'll find people willing new book on artificial life, WINDOWS \"1940\" anymore. Corto belongs to give you a hand. When I first began visitTOTHOUSE, is hot off the press. 42 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"EPIC X ENCHANTING ENTICING E VIL COMING SOON ON MULTIMEDIA CD WINGS QUEST THE PRINCELESS BRIDE SIERRA Circle Reader Service #98 "


"WHERE Will Hollywood And or the last year or two, we've PC and cartridge titles. As a result of his blasting helos and jets with percussive been following what some have broad experience, he is as adept with canon rounds. The experience is very been calling the \"digital conhigh-end Silicon Graphics equipment as reminiscent of the Star Wars scene when vergence\" of Hollywood and with a film camera. Silicon Valley. The goal of this convergence is a heightened fiWhich Way To Cyberia? nancial state of mind, a sort of Cyberia takes place in 2027, five years afmarketing bliss where computer games ter the world economy takes its long exand Hollywood merge together like a rivpected swan dive and collapses in flames. er confluence that flows out to the sea of The player wears the cybershades of Zak, the mass market. So far, about the only a hacker with a flair for cybernetics, nantangible thing to come out of this converotechnology and murder. Zak's got a job gence, aside from a huge ball of hot air, is to do: find and destroy a nanotechnology the addition of Hollywood acting talent to doomsday device buried in the frozen a few traditional computer games-a wasteland of Siberia. small, but very welcome addition. The story unfolds in linear fashion as Xatrix Interactive, a development Zak, rendered in 3D, navigates bizarre fugroup out of Burbank, CA, is one of the turistic settings, solves puzzles, shoots bad first boats to come down the Sillywood rivguys with a wrist gun like Spiderman's web er that can demonstrate seaworthiness shooter, and flies \"TransFighters\" in some with its very first title, CYBERIA. CYBERIA is of the most spectacular cinematic action a cinematically rich action-adventure sequences yet created for the PC. game set in a dark near future, and it may The opening set is an oil drilling rig somewhere in the North Atlantic. There is a low throbbing hum and echoes of dripping water as Zak exits a hovercraft and walks stiffly into the station like an inflatable man with an attitude. Your view of Zak is from a third-person perspective, and his world is built using a blend of techniques seen in games like I-Motion's ALONE Han Solo and Luke fired at incoming TIE IN THE DARK and Virgin's 7TH Fighters in the Millennium Falcon. GUEST. At key intervals, like Yet the most visceral experiences in Cywhen a puzzle must be solved, BERIA, the ones for which many gamers ARMED & DANGEROUS This is how you'll look in 2027— the player's perspective shifts to will pay the price of admission, are the cybergoggles, a gun strapped to your arm, and out of control. Zak's cybershades which have a \"TransFighter\" sequences that unfold beHUD-style readout to help tween adventure segments. These are well be indicative of what computer identify objects and targets. The oil rig is beautiful, pre-rendered scenes which look gamers can expect to inherit from the dark, dramatically lit, and densely furnished better than a REBEL ASSAULT canyon run marriage of computer games and film. with pipes, platforms and strange controls. and almost as good as the rushing, comThat CYBERIA is a spectacular cinematic Your objective, as in most adventure-style puter-generated terrain in the IMAX film experience comes as no surprise considergames, is not to get killed while trying to Blue Planel. Unlike REBEL ASSAULT, the ing the credentials of the designer, Drew solve a few puzzles, whack a few bad guys, view is first-person, and you are not in Markham. Markham is one of the early and get the hell out. control of the ship. You sling around a breed of \"crossover designers\" who, in adBut Zak is in for more than adventure. gunsight trying to turn enemy craft into dition to being an award-winning TV diOne of the more interesting action sepyrotechnically perfect flameballs, while rector, editor and sound engineer, has quences occurs when he hops into the the craft flies a pre-determined path. also been involved with game design for cockpit of an anti-aircraft gun and starts Zooming past all the voluptuously conSOMEWH 44 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"33S toured 3D terrain is unquestionably Playmate Dream Date peal games and the hard-core gaming authrilling and will be proudly shown and Playing CYBERIA is like a dream date with dience,\" he says. «We're trying to convert re-shown on many a gaming machine, but a playmate: Gorgeous to look at, but non-game players into game players. At without the flight control of most action with interactivity likely limited to things the heart of it, what we're trying to do is games, replayability may suffer. physical. Likewise, CYBERIA is, graphicalget more people into gaming. I am a true Silicon Valley MEET? ly, one of the hottest games alive, but its hard-core gamer, and I know it's tough to flying sequences are in the same interacconvert people to our point of view.\" tive league as the submarine ride at Disneyland. On Walt's submarine, you travel in The Can through various undersea regions, reThe graphics are amazing, and they plete with beautiful scenery, but the subshould be considering the machinery and marine is on a track and you can only sit talent involved. Everything is created on there, glassy eyed, along for the ride. If high-end Silicon Graphics Reality Enyou had a big gun mounted on the sub gines, while texture maps for aircraft, setto dispatch nefarious sea creatures, then tings, and even the uniforms worn by you'd approximate the level of interacpeople in the game are all meticulously tivity in one of CYBERIA's flight sehand-painted by talented Photoshop quences. artists. These textures are placed into a liTo be fair, designer Drew Markham brary where the Silicon Graphics gurus planned it that way. His goal was to create apply them to 3D settings to create a lush visual experience that non-gamers hangars, the oil rig, corridors, people, etc. could easily play and enjoy without spendThe technology used makes other game ing a lot of time learning. \"We recognize development techniques seem bronze age there is a large schism between mass apby comparison. Rendering of the 3D scenes is done on the fly\" in the SGI's native mode 1280x1024 resolution in 32-bit color. Using a proprietary tool called Tracker, Xatrix hackers can have nontechnical designers \"fly\" real-time through a rendered scene at 30 frames per second and then record their journeys as \"canned\" footage that can be played back like a virtual home movie. Getting the same sort of canned footage on a PC requires much more effort. Using traditional means, a wireframe drawing must be created, texture maps must be assigned to the wireframes. \"cameras\" (or viewing perspectives) must be set up at the proper angle, and finally the scene must be rendered frame by frame. If something is wrong with the final rendered scene (something's out of place, there's an incorrect texture, or the designer simply doesn't like the way it came out), the process begins all over again. With the Xatrix system, things are much more flexible. The Xatrix gurus can set up a scene and apply texture maps to polygon shapes in real time! Then, effects like lighting and atmospheric haze can be added instantly, and the entire scene can be viewed from any angle almost instantaneously. A Pentium running 3D STUDIO RE IN TARGET AQUIRED Cyberia by Mike Weksler and Ken Brown OCTOBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 45 "


"TARGET SUIREO would be taxed to produce a single frame ments in real life. Once someone does a It soon became apparent to Xatrix that of the animation we saw running at 30 suitable combination of maneuvers, such as the technology for location-based enterframes per second. walking or ducking, then the sequence is tainment wasn't yet affordable enough to The Tracker technology was developed captured and the Reality Engine artists make a viable business, so they switched by Xatrix for location-based virtual reality dress the characters with texture map gears and began working on CYBERIA in and for a new technique of computerized clothes. This is all blended with back the summer of '93. It was a natural proset building for next-generation animated grounds and saved into animation files. gression for Markham, who had consulted TV shows. It enables the designers to creon other interactive entertainate a scene like a tunnel or a verdant valment products, and had so ley and fly through it using a 6-axis Space many interests he was someBall controller. Once a path has been times considered \"aimless flown to the designer's liking, he or she and unguided,\" he says. To merely saves the sequence to a file andwhich he replied, \"Well, that's blammo!-instant TIE FIGHTER-like cut multimedia!\" scene, KING QUEST VI introductory animaSince Markham was going aftion, or REBEL ASSAULT-like flight path. ter a graphic look similar to The images are anti-aliased (the edges ALONE IN THE DARK and OUT OF smoothed out) with the Reality Engine, THIS WORLD, he went out and scaled down to 320x200 (what Xatrix hired three French programrefers to as \"taking an 8 bit dump\"), and mers who had worked on those are then ready for use in the game. MISSED A SPOT Your TransFighter Swoops in to attack an projects: Franck DeGirolami, Although the resulting game sequences Michel Royer, and Pierre Schiro. enemy munitions dump. Don't be overhead when she blows! aren't very interactive, the beauty is that, Now with a company roster since the imagery is \"canned,\" it doesn't approaching 20 people, Xatrix take much processing power to run. So Since the characters and settings are both is hurriedly finishing CYBERIA for a Christwhile it might take a 486-66 to run the latcomputer generated, they blend together mas release. Whether it will appeal to expeest flight simulation, CYBERIA will run on a well, avoiding the \"cookie cutter\" look assorienced gamers or not, one thing is clear: 386 with 4MB of RAM. ciated with the blue screen techniques used this product was not slapped together. Character movement was handled difin 711 GUEST and RETURN TO ZORK. There are over 25 gigalytes of Cyberia files ferently to offer the player greater control. parked on Xatrix machines and storage The method Xatrix chose is similar to that who's This Drew Dude? media, from which they are determined to used in ALONE IN THE DARK. The polygon Drew Markham can trace his roots in comdistill a \"mere\" 650 megs to fit on one CD. character in ALONE IN THE DARK was genputer gaming back to SPACEWAR on the DEC erated on the fly using real 3D shaded PDP-1. In 1982 Markham flew an American Love It, Baby, Love it polygons, so you could completely control Airlines 747 simulator and was smitten with If Hollywood must have a hand in computyour character's actions. In CYBERIA, the dreams of building them for the masses. He er games, it's best left with guys like this action is, again, a bit more \"canned.\" If founded Xatrix with computer animator rather than the status-seeking, barracuda you hit the left arrow key, an stereotypes associated with the movie inanimation will run of your dustry. Xatrix's first release, with technolcharacter walking to the ogy spun-off from their real left-backgrounds and all. focus-location based virtual reality enterPress an \"up\" key, and an anitainment—will attract a lot of neophytes mation will run until it reachand people who want to show off their es a \"node,\" or the next point new multimedia machines. Titles like where another move can be REBEL ASSAULT, with their enormous, made. Think of it as if Don record-breaking sales figures, have proven Bluth's DRAGON'S Lair game that they can appeal to a wider audience was rendered in 3D, rather than traditional gamers. But games of this than with cel animation. Like nature are like umbrella-toting tropical ALONE, different camera andrinks: they might be tasty, but if you want gles are used to bring out a something with more of an interactive cinematic quality. This techAIRCRAFT, CHECK Zak pre-flights his TF-22 TransFighter before kick, you'll need a stronger tonic. nique avoids the graphic limiheading out and smoking stogeys... er, bogeys. There's little doubt that CYBERIA will fit tations of ALONE's \"on the fly\" the bill as a good entry-level action/adventechnique, while still providing a semBarry Dempsey, and the two trooped down ture experience. The \"convergence\" will be blance of character control. to the local SGI office for a little friendly arm good to the new gamer, but it remains to To get the animation of the characters, twisting. They somehow managed to perbe seen what Hollywood will do for the real actors wear a special suit and are \"capsuade the SGI people to let them have a gamer. We look forward to subsequent Xatured\" via Optical Motion Capture equipCrimson VGXT (a Reality Engine precurtrix products which might exploit this rich ment. While they move, real-time shaded sor), and the two started building a simulator technology to give more experienced 3D characters correspond to their move in Markham's living room. gamers more bang for their cyberbuck, 46 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"! MITPIREERDEN Go Gentle M Into The 7% Irma mu ennum City of No NOCTROPOLIS WARNING: The dark holds a hero you never dreanit of Coining in October on IBM CD-ROM. CONTAINS MATURE THEMES ELECTRONIC ARK The Flashpoint jogo is a trademark ol. Fashpoint Pollutions, Ine: Noctropolis is a trademark of Electronic Arts. Circle Reader Service #138 "


"On CD-ROM and 3.5\" disks for IBM & Compatibles. A NA ning Hell on Earth is here. Rejoice. If you've played DOOM, stop reading and haul ass to the nearest game store now. If you haven't, we can only say (respectfully, of course): Go to hell. 1912 E TI in the annals of computer once you start playing entertainment, there's no DOOM I game that had the rave This time, you'll wage following quite like DOOM. war against the entire There's also no game forces of Hell. Bigger, that's quite as breathlessly nastier, deadlier demons awaited as its sequel. and monsters. More Well, go ahead and powerful weapons. More suck in some air. Because mind-blowing explosions DOOM II: Hell on Earth is and more of the bloodiest, here! And because it'll be a fiercest, most awesome cold day in hell before you action-packed blastfest can breathe easily again you've ever experienced! Gileractive Software SOFTWARE Visit your local software retailer today, or call 1-800-362-9400. DOOM. the DOOM Il logo and the DOOM likeness are trademarks of id Software. All rights reserved. Developed by Id Soltware. Distributed by GT Interactive Software. 1994 GT Interactive Soltware. All rights reserved. TU KABUL ARDIAN "


"ADVENTURE/RPG Red Tape And |Rubber Chickens SUPERHERO Bean Eaters, Samurai Welders, Albino Dinos, SCORPIA EXPLORES LEAGUE OF HOBOUnrepeatable Bugs, One-Armed Bandits, Cruise KEN IS THE LATEST Missiletoes, and Steroid Men, to name but a few. creation from the All these wacko good guys and bad guys inTHE MAD. MAD. MAD warped mind of habit a future world slowly rebuilding from the Steve Meretzky, aldevastation of various ecological disasters. Ordiready infamous for narily, that would be a grim scenario. In this WORLD OF STEVE such games as LEATHER game, however, it merely serves as the springGODDESSES OF PHOBOS and the board for a number of bizarre and hilarious misSPELLCASTING 101-301 series. Anyone who has sions, while incidentally poking fun at modern MERETZKY'S played any of those games will have some life. inkling of what's in store with this one. Our dauntless band performs such heroic acThe superheroes are a collection of human, tions as defusing limberger cheese bombs, resSUPERHERO LEAGUE partly-human, and non-human crusaders for cuing cats trapped under the Liberty Bell, good with such powers as Eat Spicy Foods Withdispensing lead-lined longjohns in high radiaout Distress, Clean Almost Any Mess, Induce tion areas, and similar leats of derring-do. A OF HOBOKEN Rust, and Refold Road Maps. Right there, you hero's life is a busy one, indeed. know these aren't your typical comic book heroes and heroines. STOP ENTROPY! Their opponents aren't typical, either. Dr. SUPERHERO is divided into seven segments, with Entropy, the main villain, is a jack-in-the box; the first six composed of five missions cach, and other nasties include Terrible Twos, Glowing the seventh being the big finale showdown with Dr. Entropy. That doesn't mean you wait until the end to see him, though, as each collection of missions ends with your team of super heThis month's gaze into the crystal reveals high energy transac roes foiling yet another of tions on the Ethereal Plane between two role-playing giants: TSR his dastardly schemes. and Interplay Productions. It seems that Interplay has picked up Each segment begins with TSR's ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS license, which had been dropped Matilda, the computer, deby SSI earlier this year. The agreement grants Interplay the exclutailing the current assignments. You generally have a sive right to produce computer, home video, coin-op and on-line choice as to the order in games for TSR's FORGOTTEN REALMS and PLANESCAPE product lines. which they're completed, Northstar Studios will produce two Forgotten Realms games for In but Dr. Entropy is always the terplay: one PC game that will be a traditional AD&D computer last one. That's because fingame; the other will appear on a console system and will be modishing the others always eled more like Nintendo's ZELDA 3. Interplay is developing a strategy gives you the four special items you need to stop Engame set in the PLANESCAPE universe. tropy's latest fiendish plot. All his schemes are, like him, totally demented. Who by Scorpia SCRY SIGHT OCTOBER 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 49 "


"Location: SECTOR 20 HIGHWAY SYSTEM HERO PARTY else could conceive of radio-guided bomfollowed by one at 15% will give a charac. However, unlike many CRPGs, these critbardier pigeons, or cross-breeding rats ter the power at 25% total. This is importers have limits. There are only so many and horses, or inventing a machine to tant, because it's the only way to increase of them wandering around in any one mix up road signs? Obviously, someone secondary powers; they are the one thing area, and eventually your hearty crew can like this needs to be stopped and put that does not go up at level gain time. completely clean up a sector of nasty inaway (far away, and lose the key, too). As you might expect, weapons and artruders, which will also net you an experiThat's where the Crimson Tape and mor are, at times, a little odd. Modified ence point bonus. his buddies come in. The Tape is the jet engines, arsenic-tipped deer antlers, To help determine how deadly an area party leader, and must be present at all Look might be, you have a most times in the group. The other members useful item, the danare pretty much up to you, and can be gerometer. The readout swapped in and out as desired. All are DE 2 displays ten levels of danpre-created; you simply enter the SUPERger, starting with green HERO lunchroom and choose the heroes (not too bad) to bright red you want at any time. The only restriction (really deadly) to off the is that you must always have a full party; scale (really, REALLY, you can't leave headquarters with any deadly!). With this handy emply slots. device, you can keep your At the beginning of the game, there is fledgling team from going room for four in the group. After each into areas where they MISSION batch of missions is finished, another slot would be trashed in no opens up, and usually one or more new THIS TOWN GOT AN ENEMA The downtown area of Hoboken has been time flat. When an area heroes arrives in the lunchroom. On a flooded due to global ecological disaster. Only the Superheroes has been cleaned out, the couple of occasions, potential members can nurse society back to health. dangerometer is not lit up must be rescued before they're available. at all. Each hero comes with a primary superthe Slinky of Death, bullet-proof bries, Combat is a fairly simple procedure. power, and can learn up to four sec asbestos fanny packs, and fortified GrouUnless the team is surprised, the heroes ondary ones as the game progresses. cho glasses may not be typical gear for a will go first in a fight. The current memHeroes also come with four physical stats: role-playing game, but they get the jobbers are displayed in a row along the botbrawn, brains, health and toughness. All done. tom of the screen, and they act in that these stats increase automatically as the order (monsters are displayed in a simiheroes gain experience from combat and COVERING THE TURF lar row at the top of the sreen). A supercompleting missions. They can also be With 30 missions plus endgame, you'd power can be used any time. Otherwise, enhanced by eating certain foods: fish inexpect to cover a lot of territory, and that the first three heroes in line usually encreases brains, beef increases brawn, and is certainly the case here. Aside from nipgage in melee combat, and the rest use vegetables increase health. Those are all ping around the immediate New Jer distance weapons. There are no multiple permanent gains. Toughness can be imsey/New York area, you also get to take actions, a hero can only do one thing per proved by wearing armor. trips to Scranton, Poughkeepsie, round. New powers can be acquired by drinkPhiladelphia, Buffalo, Harrisburg, New Aside from fighting, you can also try ing special isotopes. These are usually Haven and Atlantic City. Throw in Manbegging for mercy, cowering (to improve available from the pawnbrokers in the hattan (uptown and downtown), part of defense), bribery, rallying other party markets scattered across the countryside. the subway system, and underground members, or running away. My philosoThe ellects are cumulative, so drinking, Philadelphia, and you'll have taken quite phy tends to be aggressive: kill 'em all, let say, an isotope of Cause Root Rot at 10% a tour of the northeast coast by the time the computer sort 'em out! So, no surSUPERHERO LEAGUE OF HOBOKEN you're done. prise, my team never ran, or begged for The map of each area starts off obmercy, or tried bribing the critters to Price: $59.95 scured by a black cloud of ignorance, and leave (I had better use for the cash). System Requirements: the landscape is revealed as you walk Apparently, superheroes don't die, IBM compatible across it. Much of the outdoor areas are they just get zonked. Taking a short rest 386-20MHz or ruins, woods, hills, and radioactive spots, after combat will restore to full health better, 2MB but there are a few remaining civilized anyone who was knocked out during the RAM, VGA places, mostly market towns, mansions of fight. Of course, if everyone gets zonked, graphics, 8MB warlords, temples, and other structures of the game ends and you'll have to restore. hard drive interest. When your team has completely You can, in fact, restore in the middle of space, mouse; supports AdLib, explored a section of the map, it receives a combat if your team is being trounced, Roland, and Sound Blaster sound cards. an experience point bonus. This is a nice feature that should be in Protection: None Of course, these perambulations are every CRPG. Why waste time sitting there Designer: Steve Meretzky not without hazard. Everywhere lurk to the bitter end when there's no hope? Publisher: Legend Entertainment hordes of vicious and improbable monFar better to just break out and go back Chantilly, VA (800) 658-8891 sters, with apparently nothing better to to the last save position. do than chow down on superheroes. After the last monster has run away or Superhero 50 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"FEAR. EXHILARATION. COURAGE. MADNESS. BRAVERY. EVIL DI MARK Spectrum Holobyte All in one little box. COMING IN SEPTEMBER '94. DMARK For order information call 800-695-GAME today. Circle Reader Service #132 "


"PARTY D335132 been killed, a little treasure usually shows At another market, you come across a ally important. up, typically in the form of a mysterious can of sheep spray for sale. There are The game ran quite cleanly; it never pizza box or sinister-looking water coolmany such trivial situations in the game. crashed or did other unexpected things. er. Often they contain money, sometimes At the same time, you can also become However, Gravis Soundcard owners will also a weapon or piece of armor, or other frustrated if you overlook something. have to play this in Sound Blaster mode; goody. Once in awhile, these things also This happened to me a couple of times. I couldn't find a way to get Roland emublow up in your face, causing damage or On one occasion, I had forgotten to listen lation to work with SUPERHERO, even irradiating the party. Opening a \"treato the chatterbox (news of the day) at though Roland MT-32 is supported. sure chest\" is always something of a gamheadquarters. Later, after finding the Actually, there is one technical probble, but it's safe most of the time. lem with the game, alThe combat is pretty well-balanced. though not everyone may The dangerometer keeps the party from run into it. SUPERHERO is venturing into areas that are too difficult Cusing the tire iron) incapable of handling The Crimson Tape reveals early on, and the fights in the \"low dandetails about Espevangelist's more than 199 saves. I ger\" places are about as much as a lowaffair with an altar boy. All the tears in the world fail to discovered this when, aflevel group can handle. As the party gets save Espevangelist from 34 ter finishing the game the dataage points. larger and more powerful, they can start first time, I went back and exploring the more deadly sectors, and SOE played again, this time by the time the end game is reached, you taking detailed notes. will be glad to have nine people in the Everything went well ungroup (this is where the dangerometer til, far into the game, I overloads, and for good reason). noticed that new save STRANGE DAYS INDEED! The Superheroes must battle all sorts of games weren't registering: YOU TALKING TO ME?! mutations, like this cross between Frankenstein and a the position was being There isn't much in the way of character Televangelist who walks with a distinct Swaggart. saved, but it never showed interaction here. You in the person of up on the \"Restore\" Crimson Tape) can ask silly questions of case of nitrous oxide, and being unable screen. your party members or merchants in the to open it (shades of the Zork egg!), I had Deleting some of the older saves didn't markets, but that's about it most of the no idea what to do. There followed a help, and I also found that overwriting time. There is definitely nothing of ULTIlong boring period of traipsing around, earlier saves caused them to vanish from MA-style conversation or involvement in revisiting places to no avail, until I finally the restore screen, as well. The only safe this game. went back to HQ and remembered the position to save to was the most recent My one real quarrel with the CRPG chatterbox. After that, everything was (top) one. Examination of the directory portion is the fact that zonked characters simple. showed me that the save files were being get no experience points at the end of So while the puzzles are not at all difli numbered sequentially, starting with combat. Since these heroes are not dead, cult, finding the right item or place to go HOBO001.SAV and going on from there is no reason to deny them a share can be aggravating, especially as more of there, up to HOBO200.SAV, but 200 was of the victory. Consider not being picked up by the program. I this: a hero in the back Put got around this by renaming all the save might spend the whole files, starting with the oldest, as 001, 002, Wait fight doing nothing exLook etc. After that, I was able to save again cept cowering, and he will properly. get points at the end, just Naturally, I reported this to Legend. because he's still standing. There isn't much to be done about the Meanwhile, a hero up current floppy version, so there you'll front, who has been lightVou serow the bulb into the socket. The workers cheer have to be careful about save games (esing hard and dispatching pecially if you decide to replay with a difshe 0396mbly line. Two moments later, someone yells.\" nasties, receives nothing, ferent team mix). However, Legend will factory grinds to a hot, and the workers retrieve their even though his contribualso be bringing out a CD version later tion to the victory was the this year, and in that one, the problem greater one. GUACAMOLE WORKERS UNION When saving the world, you've got will not occur. Considered from a to start small. Here, the Superheroes must end a strike at the Those matters aside, SUPERHERO purely adventure perspecguacamole factory, lest there be no dip for the Superheros' LEAGUE OF HOBOKEN is much like a sumlive, most of the puzzles next bash. mertime action movie: fast, furious, and are absurdly simple. Many not too hard on the brain. It is lightimportant items are just lying around, the game opens up to you. Therefore, weight fare, and as such, may disappoint waiting to be picked up or purchased you really have to be extremely thorough those looking for challenging puzzles. from a pawnbroker, and once you find when meandering around the outdoors, On the other hand, this zany melange such an item, its use is generally quite oband always remember to listen to that makes up what is the first true comedy vious. For instance, the East Orange Marchatterbox first thing when a new segCRPG ever, and that alone is worth the ket is overrun by a flock of rabid sheep.ment begins, as one or two items are usuprice of admission. Take nfair Look at ook a t09s away their signs, and take their stations.A moment later, a large helping of guacamole comes off the end of Sixty-nine point seven degree A ral whistle blows, the -MOREUNDO 52 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"CyberJudas The sequel to SHADOW PRESIDENT YOU ARE THE PRESIDENT AND THE PREY deep within cyberspace... hunt begins Coming FallA1994 For PC CD-ROM TM D.C True, Ltd. Merit Software 1994 D.C. True, Ltd. Circle Reader Service #249 Dallas, Texas 800-238-4277 "


"GAME HINTS The Ultimate Hints 20 HERE WE ARE, POISED, thanks mainly to the teleWE HOPE, ON THE VERGE porter that keeps sending OF A FLOOD OF NEW you back down the pasgames for the Holiday Seasage. So, going backson. There better be some, wards or forwards doesn't because overall it hasn't work, but there are other been a great (or even good) directions. Horace Greeyear for new releases in the ley had it backwards role-playing/adventure arkeep that in mind. eas. Most of the mail coming Ultima VII—Silver in is about older games, but then, there isSeed: Some adventurers have been surn't much else to play at the moment. prised (and a little dismayed) that, after linA fair number of letters have come in ishing this segment, nothing has changed recently about the Ultimas. Perhaps that's in the greater world of SERPENT ISLE. Yup, because Origin recently brought out the that's how it is (kinda like Quentin, huh?). complete ULTIMA VII set (BLACK GATE, SILVER SEED is mainly an add-in designed FORGE OF VIRTUE, SERPENT ISLE, and Silto give you some new commands and Neat VER SEED) in one package-a handy way Items. Nothing you do here will affect the of getting everything at once. Also a main game, including planting the seed. handy way of getting stuck in multiple It's a nice gesture, but otherwise ineffective; places at once (heh). nothing can undo the work of the Banes of Ultima VII—Black Gate: Every so ofChaos. Pity about that. ten, a flurry of letters comes in asking Ultima Underworld II: Another quesabout Quentin's murder, and how it cantion that comes in cycles is the void and the be solved. Simply put, there ain't no way pyramid. Anyone out there remember Qof doing that. The whole business is there BERT? That's what we have here. You must mainly as window dressing, so to speak. follow the four colored paths to the pyraYou can't talk to Quentin (no, not even mid, one at a time, of course, and jump all with the spell), and regardless how sure over the thing until it's the same color as you are of \"whodunit,\" there is no evithe path you took, and you end at the top, dence anywhere to prove it. So, just igso you can jump through the moongate. It nore the poor ghost, and get on with gets a little harder with each visit, maybe playing the game (disappointing, but even a little tedious, but unfortunately it has that's how it is). to be done. Happy jumping! Ultima VII—Forge of Virtue: This is a Ultima VIII—Pagan: Hey, I really two-question game. People ask about eiwasn't kidding about the ULTIMA mail, ther the Amulet or the helmets. Right eh? Anyway, not surprisingly, people are now, it seems helmets are popular. The having a bit of trouble with the test ques. whole thing is really quite simple. tions on Argentrock Isle. Not surprising, They're not doing much good where they because the material in the library (which are, so maybe they should be someplace is supposed to help with this) is all on the else. Just think in reverse, and the little air spells, and not the philosophy of the light bulb in your brain may switch on healers. This is where you have to reach Ultima VII—Serpent Isle: Continuing back in memory to the good old days with the ULTIMA questions, folks are wanwhen you were a real Avatar, and recall dering around in the Mountains of Freethe precepts of Honesty, Compassion dom, stuck in the endless corridor. Not a and Humility. Whatever question comes great place to be, and it really is endless,\" up, look over the answers and see which of those three applies (Honesty above all). After that, it shouldn't take too long to pass the test. Lands of Lore: Some folks are having a bit of difficulty in the Catwalk Caverns. They've found only one key, and it takes two to tango, that is, two of them to open the doors to the next section of the game. Well, if you go back to where you opened up the first section of caves (hand print) and look around at the other walls, you just might find the entrance to the other half of the caverns. Also, the duplicator is an optional event. If you use the glove to herd three of the electrical critters into the machine, you can duplicate any one item you desire (but only once). Eye Of The Beholder II: A number of dungeon-delvers have collected all four horns, and now they don't know what to do with them, or at least, where to use them. This one isn't really too hard. Maybe you've come across something somewhere that is related to the four elements? I don't really have to draw you a picture of this, do I? The Elder Scrolls-Arena: It is an extremely rare event for me to tell anyone how to cheat in a game in fact, this is only the second time in 11 years). However, ARENA is so unbalanced in favor of spellcasters (who are well-nigh invulnerable with the right mix of spells), that we do want to do something for the poor fighters and thieves (having played a fighter, I know all too well how hard it is, especially in the latter stages of the game!). So, it is possible to have more than one artifact at a time. Put the one you have in for repairs. Then go talk to people until you hear about another artifact that you want. Pay for the information (to fix the dungeons), then retrieve your artifact from the weapon store (you must do this or it will vanish), and go after the second one. Note: no guarantees here, as this is second-hand info. I only learned about it after finishing up and taking the game off my drive. Caveat emptor, and all that. And that does seem to be it for this look into the mailbag. Until next time, if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the following ways: On Delphi: visit the GameSIG. On GEnie: Stop by the Games RoundTable. By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the US): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY, 10028. 54 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"If you think the skies over Berlin are scary, wait 'til you get the bill. t Beat outrageous online charges with the best value in multi-player games. he world's most popular multi-player games are Check us out with our five hour offer any time of the now on Delphi Internet\". That's great news because: day or night. To order your games software kit 1) Our rates are as low as 33% less than other online and get your five hours free, services that offer Kesmai's big hits. dial by modem 2) We offer the broadest access to the Internet world 1-800-365-4636 wide (and always have). So now you can take instant Press return 'til you get a real-time pot shots at some Japanese ace without prompt. At 'password? committing financial hara-kari. enter 2CRUSH ce hours diag Phi Inte AIR WARRIOR STELLAR EMPEROR ISLAND OF KESMAI\" HARPOON HARPOON Online A DELPHL The world's most respected wir Mest popular mul strategy INTERNET Master the far ronches of deep The classic demonscumbat simulation. ue in Ex ster Verr...r at least try Perywherr-geme -here adrenture, \"The five free hours offor applies to new Delphi members only. Valid credit card required for immediate access, other restrictions apply details provided during registration. Questions? Call 1-800-695-4005. Software is $6.95 including shipping and handling. DELPHI INTERNET is a trademark of Delphi Internet Services Corporation. KESMAI and ISLAND of KESMAI are trademarks, and AIR WARRIOR and STELLAR EMPEROR are registered trademarks, of Kesmal Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of The News Corporation. HARPOON is a trademark of Three-Sixty Pacific Inc. Circle Reader Service #238 "


"REVIEW Creeping Shadows Lovecraft's Legacy Finds Its Way To The Silicon Screen by Allen L. Greenberg Y ASTOUNDING COINCIDENCE, THE craftian horror in such games as Microthat connects their universe of exile with ADVENTURES OF THE YOUNG, HEROProse's LEGACY, and paper game players that of our own. For this venture, they IC WRITER IN SHADOW OF THE have had a faithful adaptation of CALL OF have settled on certain occupants of the COMET mirrors many of my own CTHULHU available to them for some small New England town of Ilsmouth. early experiences in the field of time now. However, as popular as that The mechanics of opening this doorway journalism. I first joined Computer Gaming author's name may be, it is actually quite are strictly mystical in nature, and are World in 1934, during which time the rare for one of Lovecraft's stories to be closely linked with the appearance of Haworld was experiencing one of its greatest transferred to some other media without ley's Comet. One hundred and sixty years shortages of recremajor alterations ago, the appearance of that comet was ational computer SHADOW OF THE COMET to its characters observed from Ilsmouth by another Engsoftware. I had stumPrice: $79.95 and setting. lishman, Boloskin, who went insane bled onto a theory System Along with the shortly thereafter. In the year 1910 which proposed that Requirements: paper CTHULHU, Jonathan Parker, equipped with the newthe current abun IBM compatible SHADOW OF THE Iy invented art of photography, returns to dance of nonexistent 386-16MHz, COMET (COMET) the town in order to track Boloskin's 2MB RAM, VGA software, or \"vaporeasily ranks quarry. Waiting for him in Ilsmouth are a graphics, CDware,\" was due to ROM; supports among the truest series of mysterious occupants and enigmysterious astrologimost major representationsm atic settings, all of which conspire to cal reasons (as op sound cards. of his work. Slow defy inspection. posed to the more Protection: None moving at times, While the threat of supernatural consepopular hypothesis Publisher: I-Motion the program esquences hangs ceaselessly over Parker, Santa Monica, CA that no one, as yet, chews the evisCOMET spends much of its time as a con(800) 443-3386 owned a computer). cerating gore ventional mystery game before it finally I studied the night associated with emerges as an occult thriller. Faded messky with obsessive enthusiasm for nearly modern horror in favor of Lovecraft's sages, obscure diary entries, and a vague half a century, until CGW's kindly old edibrand of spiritual terror. Once again, we Biblical reference are the main instrutor had come to fear for my sanity and are told the story of a race of unspeakments with which you, in the role of moved me on to some other assignment.ably horrible god-like creatures who young Parker, will save the human race. In the first of their CALL OF CTHULHU once occupied our Earth. To return The town is filled with a variety of indicomputer adventure games, based on the here, all they need are certain natural viduals, most of whom appear to share writing and mythology of H.P. Lovecraft, conditions, and a corrupt human soul to more than a few features with modern a young journalist, obsessed with stars take advantage of them. Hollywood personas. and comets, may not find himself so COMET is a supernatural mystery adNearly every town member appears delucky. venture in which a humble British jourfensive and eccentric to the wide-eyed, Attached to such cult films as Re-Aninalist, Jonathan Parker, must battle young Englishman. After several intermator and From Beyond, H.P. Lovecraft's forces set in motion by Lovecraft's race of views some begin to appear as friendly, name has become closely associated with angry, outcast gods. Employing their usuwhile others do little to hide their distaste 20th century supernatural-based enteral hard-sell tactics, the gods have offered for outsiders. These townspeople are not tainment. Computer game players have power and immortality to any human mere window-dressing for the game, and often been treated to glimpses of Lovewho is willing to reopen the passageway it will be necessary for you to know each 56 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"THE YEAR.... 2 4 8 9 THE SPORL... BLOOD BOWL HK COMING THIS FALL S MICROLEAGUE AVAILABLE FOR IBM COMPATIBLES ON 3.5\" Disk AND CO-ROM 1-800-334-6572 1994 MicroLeague Interactive Software.  1994 Games Workshop Inc. Blood Bowl is a registered trademark of Games Workshop Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #214 "


"Lacta For the most As the game progresses, Parker discovpart, you may take eries become increasingly bizarre, and your time as you the solutions to his puzzles increasingly carefully assemble supernatural, and therefore far less obviBoleskine's diary each piece of Parkous. Finally, Boloskin's spirit, mysteriouser's puzzle. Howevly restored to sanity, is forced to make a er, there are return appearance on Earth in order to several moments drop some clues that will help his succeswhen anything exsor make the right decisions. With his cept rapid-fire achelp, certain words must be spoken in a tion will lead to specific order, and a collection of colorParker's death. coded gems must be manipulated in a What is easily the highly specific fashion in order to set free most claustrophoIlsmouth's trapped souls and close the BLESS MY PERIPHERAL VISION From the corner of his eye, Parker spots an bic and stressful doorway on the unwanted intruders. moment of the COMET was originally released in Euimportant clue. game occurs midrope as a somewhat conventional game way through the on floppy-disk only. For its American reof them well in order to finally put to rest story, as Parker descends below the town lease, the game has been upgraded to the evil in Ilsmouth. cemetery and discovers a cryptic maze, CD-ROM featuring enhanced mouse As Parker first assembles his clues, the the home of one of game proceeds very slowly. Often, events Ilsmouth's major come to a standstill until the hero stumdemons. Like some bles on some useful material tucked away Lovecraftian veron a book shelf or inside a dresser drawsion of Indiana er. At one frustrating moment, you are Jones, Parker finds called upon to examine a drawing. \"Usehimself dodging less!\" declares Parker, as the game comes traps and triggerto a screeching halt. It is only when you ing hidden doors attempt to examine that same drawing in order to claw his while standing next to a desk that events way through. It is are once again allowed to proceed. Ofimportant to map ten, characters throughout Ilsmouth will this maze, because be caught in an endless loop of repeated the hero will then activity in one location until Parker unbe forced to find ravels a puzzle or makes his next discovhis way out followA DEGREE OF DANGER Perusing Doctor Cobble's diplomas, you find that he ery. The most useful indicator of your ing a high-speed learned his craft at Miskatonic University-hmm. success is a diary in which the hero's chase in which thoughts are automatically entered. It there is virtually no time allowed for exsupport and digitized voices. The voices not only contains a record of what has ploration or error. are provided by a competent group of achappened, but often that which Parker Parker is often called upon to engage in tors who easily embrace their Hollywood considers his next objective as well. multiple-choice conversations. Unfortunate stereotypical characters. Young Parker ly, you must occafaces his challenges with a resolute \"vedsionally base your dy well\" as would make any respectable choice on a sentence British hero proud. The real talent show, fragment that does however, occurs as this unsuspecting not necessarily indigroup of thespians are called upon to arcate the nature of ticulate some of Lovecraft's demonic the entire sentence. names which are as unpronounceable as Should you be unthe author often claimed they were unhappy with your speakable. As you enjoy such phrases as choice, the only solu\"...f'thangnh cthulhu iaeeh...\" you may tion is to go back look forward to the showering burst of and replay that secsaliva which accompanies each syllable. tion of the game, Graphically, this adventure game may this time choosing fall slightly short of expectations. Each another sentence scene is painted somewhat two-dimenTHIS OLD HOUSE If warning lights aren't going off in your head as you fragment. Needlesssionally, and animation is minimal. The to say, frequent characters are likewise flat in appearance, approach, then you're probably playing the wrong game (or should seek employment as a witless victim in a B-rate slash movie). game saves are and little effort has been spent to allow strongly advised. them any range or expression of feelings. 58 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"where you wish him to solved mysteries. A stern, mysterious go. Use of the keyvoice, in the tradition of Ripley's Believe Il board requires less ef or Not, describes each item on command, fort to move Parker, pointing out some baffling quality which although the mouse is may or may not be related to Lovecraftsomewhat less confusian legend. ing than the keyboard COMET is a difficult game which will when it comes to inprobably frustrate any novice who does ventory and object not have access to a seasoned gaming manipulation. Either \"coach,\" or at least a generous supply of the right mouse buthints. Experienced players who either ton or the Tab key feel at home with Lovecraft's lore, or who brings up a set of have enjoyed the CALL OF CTHULHU paicons including per game, will find themselves more at SYLVAN MYSTERIES UNFOLD Not all of your discoveries take place in \"speak,\" \"examine,\" home with the adventure, although they cold, dark places. Is that a light at the end of the forest? \"take\" or \"use\" as well too will doubtless endure several frustratas commands to save ing moments. While not an eye-popping, or restore a game in page-turner of a story, COMET is a chalClose-up views of the character's faces are progress. \"Examine\" works only when lenging test of adventurer skills. Please be occasionally used as they deliver their disomething unusual enters Parker's naradvised that a conglomeration of alogue, although these are equally flat row field of vision, and is usually, though grotesque, other-worldly gods may very and somewhat repetitive. The game's not always, indicated by a visible line bewell be observing you as you attempt to beasts and other horrors will not deprive tween the character's eyes and an object solve this game, and that these creatures even the most squeamish players of any of interest. \"Use\" is a poorly defined are quite experienced at recognizing hulate night sleep. command which generally applies to man obsession and taking full advantage Nonetheless, these creatures are drawn whatever object has been previously seof it. Don't sign anything until you have in classically Lovecraft fashion, so that lected from the hero's inventory. The completed the game and are once again they somewhat resemble a sea-food dingame would have greatly benefited from thinking clearly. ner that has suddenly turned on its a clearly defined process for using one THE EDITORS SPEAK would-be eater. Rather more impressive object in conjunction with another. As is, than its graphics are the game's sound efyou must experiment by \"using\" objects SHADOW OF THE COMET fects, which make for an effective backin various locations until you stumble on RATING *** 1/2 ground to the drama. The game's music that which the program is expecting. is also quite effective, although its harsh A bonus program, \"Visit to the Love PROS Long, challenging and exringing quality may convince many playcraft Museum\" is also included on the tremely loyal to Lovecraft's fiction. ers to take advantage of the game's softCOMET CD-ROM disk. This program is The voice acting is very convincing ware-controlled volume control. related to the game by theme only, and CONS Weak interface, weak graphCOMET's interface is its most noticeable contains no hints or information which ics, and, yes, yet another back-breakweakness. While the mouse may be used pertain to it. The Museum program fol ing arcade chase through a maze. to guide Parker, it is necessary to move lows a casual observer through several Note To Designers: We are gamers, the cursor from one side of the character hallways filled with paintings, manu not mice! to another, rather than simply point out scripts and various testimonials to unScreen boredom annihilated!! THE STAR WARS YOU'VE NEVER SEEN Beyond screen savers: film secrets revealed You meet ALL kinds here. TAR Nobody asks what's your sign at the Cantina. SCREEN ENTERTAINMENT\" For Windows and Macintosh  At your favorite software retailer or call 1-800-STARWARS Art BELARE "


"THE HUMAN RETINA CONTAINS 132 MILLION LIGHT-SENSITIVE COMPONENTS. Suggested taipnice Games require optional D ual Video Cartridge Space Ace and Dragon's Lair 192.1994 Don Bu nd Licensed exclusively to Super Dub The h ost 1930 Philips Peteractive Media Intestinal Limited Licensed by Virgin Interactive Entertainment Europa The 7th Guest and literactive Drams are trademarks of Virgin reactive Entertainment ing. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises Ltd 1980 Vieninteractive Entertainment (Europe) Lid and Trilobyte Ing. All rights reserved. Mad Dog McCree is a trademark and licensed product from American Laser Games, Inc. 1999, 1993, 1994 1994 CapDisc International Tennis Open 1992 Philips Interactive Media France and Pathe Interactive. All rights reserved. Compton's Interactive Encyclopedia o 1992 Compton's New Media, Inc. All rights reserved 1931 Philips Media All rights reserved "


"The 7th Guest standard...beautifully rendered es with tons of live-action video thrown This gorgeous game marks a new standar computer images, with to heighten the ghastly game play.\" Gamer Dragon's Lair I faithful to the original en lack of control and grainy graphics Space Ace Ace is a blast to play and is truly faithful to op. The digital video is perfect and the ontrols great Electronic Gaming Monthly raphics. The 'Space Ace is a blast coin-op. The digita The Sega CD version suffers from la hics and sound just can't match up to the done on the CD-t. Electronic Gaming Mon nup to the incredible job aming Monthly 3D graphics...and so that was done on the CD. NON BLUTH ACE WAKE THEIR TIRED BUTTS UP WITH THESE IMPROVED CLASSICS. CARO Mad MICROCOSMO DUSTR Shootrok Game a quality light gun, the CD-ive outperforms all others...package \"Microcosm on CD positively the best version per Crocosm on CD-1 is 100% absolutely immediate respons ...packaged with -1 version allows faster aimning, systems to shame...exo on period. It outs all other game cuts... Electronic Games ! response... instantaneous cuts... Mad Dog McCree name.. excellent sci-fi adventure. Microcosm venture. Video Games So, you've already played these games on other formats. Good. Then you'll be the first to appreciate the full-on sonic and visual overhaul CD-i has made on them. Remember the blurry, pixilated graphics? The dime-store sound effects? Well it wasn't your vision and hearing that sucked. We've replaced them with razor-sharp video and digitally crisp audio. And those with quicker reflexes than the average 80-year-old will dig the faster response time. But we've bent your ear long enough. Experience the classics on CD-i for yourself. After all, you've got 132 million photoreceptors leaning dangerously towards the snooze button. Circle Reader Service #195 PHILIPS MEDIA Magnavox 450 CD player now S299.99 includes 2 free titles "


"REVIEW One For TheXFiles Conspiracy Abounds In Merit Software's THE PSYCHOTRON by Charles Ardai The Lucy ORCET J.F.K. IF CONSPIRACY THEOlayer by layer, starting out in the offices ject you've clicked on, which usually conRIES ARE YOUR CUP OF TEA, I'VE GOT of four C.L.A. agents who (apparently) tains a clue of some sort. In interrogation A DOOZY FOR YOU. THE CUBANS died in a plane crash. The Psychotron scenes, you select from a menu of diaaren't part of this one, but the was on the plane in question and might logue choices and watch actors playing Russians are, and so are the Mafia, have gone up in flames along with the the parts of witnesses, grieving widows, the C.I.A., and the media. At the heart of passengers, but if it did, why is there no television reporters, and so forth as they the affair is a machine that endows its trace of it in the wreckage? Why is one of respond to your questions. user with psychotronic powers. The Rusthe bodies missing? And why is there a These video sequences are what make sians built this machine and we bought it, still-undetonated bomb tucked away in an the game appealing. We are still at a but somewhere between their hands and overhead compartment? stage in the evolution of computer gamours it vanished. THE PSYCHOTRON Interrogating ing where the mere fact that a game conThe Director of the relatives and tains footage of human actors is enough C.I.A. thinks his Price: $69.95 friends of the deto get a rise out of the average player. System people might be inceased agents Never mind that the actors are mostly awRequirements: PSYCHOTRON volved in the heist, IBM compatible gives you some ful and never better than mediocre, or so he's brought you, 486-25Mhz, information, as that the script is packed with caricatures an outsider, on 4MB RAM, does a highinstead of characters and clichés for diaboard to investigate. SVGA graphics, stakes poker logue, or that the footage is grainy and Just who you are is 8MB hard drive game with some jumpy, especially if you choose to view space, Windows never entirely clear, of the rogue the scenes at full-screen size instead of set 3.1. double nor even how many speed CD-ROM; agent's unsavory into a quarter-screen window; it's still a of you there are. supports all MPC compatible sound cards. cohorts. Mean thrill to play a game in which actors talk (Some characters re Protection: None while, behind the to you in response to the choices you er to you in plural Designer: Rick Gonzales scenes, C.I.A. Dimake. Unfortunately, the interaction THE terms, as in \"Did you Publisher: Merit Software rector Darin Bird PSYCHOTRON offers is extremely limited, Dallas, TX people come to pulls some which means, for one thing, that the (214) 385-2353 clean up our barn?\") strings to help game is quite short and, for another, that What is clear is that there is more going you out. Between his work and yours, you the thrill of interacting with the actors is on than any of the characters you meet should be able to track the Psychotron considerably less intense and shorterrealize. The Mafia is being psychotronidown-assuming that you don't get your lived than it might otherwise be. cally manipulated into giving free assisself shot along the way. At first glance, and even from my detance to a renegade C.I.A. agent. The scription of it above, THE PSYCHOTRON President of the United States is manipuPSYCHO PATHS appears to be a highly interactive game. lating the C.L.A. to shore up his flagging THE PSYCHOTRON is divided more or less What isn't evident until you start playing popularity in an election year. The media evenly between two types of activity, init is that the game allows the player no is being fed stories about clandestine vestigation and interrogation. When control over what path the story takes or arms deals with Russia to cloak the even you're in an investigation scene, your job what events occur—or much at all, really. more clandestine transactions being conis to move a cursor around the screen unThe opening screen presents the player ducted regarding E.S.P. technology. And til it passes over \"hot spots\" and turns with four offices to search, each containso on. into a question mark. Click on these locaing three clues; find these (and it's essenYou uncover the details of the story tions and you get a closer look at the obtially impossible not to, since there's only 62 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"AMAZING GRAPHICS POWERFUL WEAPONS CHALLENGING STRATEGIES < 2200 ONLY ONE THING STANDS BETWEEN THE ROBOTIC FORCES OF TITAN-NET AND TOTAL VICTORY... YOU — THE STRATEGIST \"Battle Isle 2200 invigorates the strategy genre by making it fun again.» — Computer Player CD LOOK FOR THE CD VERSION AT A RETAIL STORE NEAR YOU. ENTER A FUTURISTIC WORLD WHERE BRILLIANT GRAPHICS PUT YOU RIGHT IN THE ACTION. FLOPPY DISK CALL \"Both wargame novices and enthusiasts will find a lot in here to enjoy.» — PC Gamer 1-800-245-7744 ($29.95 PLUS TAX, SHIPPING AND HANDLING) FOR THE PO VERSION.  EXECUTE GRAND STRATEGIES AND WATCH EACH BATTLE PLAYED OUT INSTANTLY IN INCREDIBLE 3-D ANIMATIONS. A FUTURISTIC WAR STRATEGY DEMO TRY THE DEMO VERSION BY CALLING 1-800-245-7744 ($7.50 FOR S/H) OR LOOK FOR IT ON BULLETIN BOARD SERVICES. SERER GAME ON CD-ROM, PC FLOPPY AND DEMO DISK REFERENCE A COMPLETE ONLINE DATABASE WITH EXQUISITE 3-D ANIMATED WEAPONS. TECHNICAL  PLAY AGAINST THE COMPUTER OR WITH UP TO 4 PLAYERS OVER A NETWORK* OR BY E-MAIL. IBM CD-ROM IBM PC OR COMPATIBLE WITH DOUBLE-SPEED CD-ROM DRIVE, 6 MB HARD DISK SPACE, 4 MB AVAILABLE RAM, VGA MONITOR OR BETTER.  OVER 20 TURN-BASED BATTLE SCENARIOS. ECHTER FLAN  USOK COMMAND OVER 50 TYPES OF FORCES.  ADDITIONAL GAME COPIES REQUIRED FOR MULTIPLE PLAYERS OVER A NETWORK. IBM PC FLOPPY IBM PC OR COMPATIBLE, 12 MB HARD DISK SPACE, 4 MB AVAILABLE RAM, VGA OR BETTER. BATTLE ISLE IS A TRADEMARK OF BLUE BIYTE SOFTWARE GMBH. 01994 BLUE BYTE SOFTWARE GMBH. LICENSED DY ACCOLADE. INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED CCOL DE Circle Reader Service #33 "


"ZEPHYR Jom THE BATE! 3522 CRIOCKT LIEVITORI 3-D rendered tanks and obstacles. Intense combat action. Easy to use keyboard, mouse, or joystick interface. Complete network and modem support allow up to six human and/or computer players, BAScasX HEVDORES MIKE WARF SPEED DRIVE ZEPHYR is the ultimate 3-D, futuristic tank simulator from New World Computing. Strap yourself behind the control panel of a state-of-the-art Zephyr battle craft and blast the competition to atoms. Pilot your Zephyr through subway systems, under water, and over alien landscapes as you vie for fame, glory, and corporate sponsorship. WORLD COMPUTING, INC P.O. Box 4302, Hollywood, CA 90078 Available at your local software retailer or order direct from New World Computing 1-800-325-8898 (818-889-5650 outside the U.S.), or by mail: P.O. Box 4302, 1994 Nuw. World Computing, Inc. Zephyr is a trademark of New World Computing, New World Com Hollywood, CA 90078-4302. and its distinctive logo are registered trademarks of Now World Compuling, Inc. All rights reserve Circle Reader Service #151 IBM screens shown. Actual scrgons may vary "


"The Psychotron mum score for which you are striving). In short, THE PSYCHOTRON gives you very little to do and very little free space in which to do it. The whole game takes no more than two or three hours to play, less if you apply common sense to the few choices you are given. (Which is the right choice, saying \"My condolences\" to a woman at her husband's grave or saying \"What's your problem\"? During the card game, choosing \"Bet reasonably\" or \"Bet all you've got\"?) Jerry Rivers: Jerry is a reporter for State Press Magazine. The magazine has been publishing articles on the U.S.'s dealings with economically threatened Russia. Slaut Ext one puzzle and it's trivial) and the game automatically moves you to a memorial service. Have four conversations with attendees and the game automatically moves you to the crash site. Talk to the three witnesses and explore the wreckage and you're automatically moved to the poker game. Play four hands of poker and you're moved to the compound where the game reaches its climax. That's it—that's the entire the entire THE INVESTIGATOR WORE BLACK Crashing a memorial service is T game. Offices, memorial seran unfortunate necessity, if you want to uncover the hidden vice, farm, poker game, conspiracy. compound. And none of these sequences are especially long or almost deceptive to use the word \"puzzle\" complex. Until the poker game, there is to describe them. There is an arcane n't even any threat to the player's safety. point scoring system intended to give you There are better and worse questions feedback on the choices you make, but no among those you can ask, and you do one going through a piece of interactive have some influence over which direction fiction ever pays attention to their score a particular conversation takes, but none (except possibly as an indication of how of this allects the progression of the overclose to the end of the game they are, all story. There are also a handful of puzwhich THE PSYCHOTRON's system doesn't zles, but these are so insubstantial that it's permit since it doesn't reveal the maxiPSYCHO LOGICAL If you do plow through the game at top speed, what do you come away with? Memories of bad acting, no better than decent animation, and an annoying rock soundtrack, plus the feeling that you've been shortchanged, since the designers clearly only put a cursory effort into making the game coherent. Asking that a game about an E.S.P. machine be believable is, to be sure, asking too much—but is it too much to ask that when you spend a hundred dollars to buy one character's watch and shovel he not still be holding the shovel and wearing the watch when you see him in the next MAS The U.N. tower is infested with pests. Circle Reader Service #237 OCTOBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 65 "


"FORGET READING \"Impressive, a must have for computer gamers.\" Steve Wartofsky, Editor Strategy Plus Magazine INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT In Windows Program Manager choose Run from the File menu and enter D INSTALL whore D IS VAN.CD.CA MAG EPISODE 4 JIM CHECK THIS OUT. IT HAS PLAYABLE DEMOS FULL MOTION REVIEWS TALKING PREVIEWS MULTIMEDIA HINTS VIDEO INTERVIEWS IOR 2 PREVIEW KLEY INTERVIEW ECIS MERCENARIES Rolics SHOW COVERAGE MORER FIST KASUMI NINJA \"IE can showcase product ZER GENERAL ZEPHYR THROTTLESTAR TRATT features like no printed G TUBIRA VORTEX publication can...\" ITS ONLY $9.95 OH, AND A FREE GAME TOO! \"The ideal way for gamers to get an in-depth look at what's new.\" Bob Bates Legend Entertainment PINTERACTIVE I ENTERTAINMENT The #1 Entertainment GD MAG Interactive TV for your CD ROM 12 episodes $59.95 1 episode $9.95 800 283 3542 or 802 767 4622 Visa & Mastercard accepted. Make checks payable to: Interactive Entertainment PO Box 21 Hancock VT 05748. Fax: 802 767 3382  1994 Chips & Bits, Inc. Circle Reader Service #209 "


"The Psychotron I'm part of a special investigation friends e 0 Score 1500 A wire tap on the Knight's residential phone has failed to yleld results. N Steve Nu allve, he has not cared to contact his Wite. Rumors of Steve's involvement with It is certainly not too in the same locations—and the interrogamuch to ask that the game tions offer only token variety. The perforwork, but it doesn't even do mances are not worth watching once, this consistently. The save much less twice, and there are no hidden I was one of Steve's game function appears to pleasures for you to uncover as you play work, for instance, but when the game for the tenth or eleventh time. you try to restore any of the In THE PSYCHOTRON, Merit Software games you've so diligently has produced a game of fleeting interest saved, you discover that it is at best. It wants to be a computer game impossible to do so. Why? I version of The Manchurian Candidate, or PEXX don't know, but instead of a something along those lines, but in the player 1 list of your saved games, the end has more in common with such game gives you a blank downmarket fare as G.I. Joe cartoons and Mala Staten Edit menu and an error message Get Smart—or, worst of all, those TV ansaying that it can't find a file nouncements of days gone by: \"We are DAMSEL IN DISTRESS? With wiretaps and other covert it needs. Fortunately, it's not experiencing technical difficulties. Please surveillance techniques coming up zero, it's time to get into the too hard to get to the end of stand by.\" old-fashioned way—by interrogating Steve's friends. the game without dying, making the save game funcTHE EDITORS SPEAK scene? Is it too much to ask, when intertion somewhat superfluous anyway; still, THE PSYCHOTRON rogating a hick who makes Jim Varney's it is possible to regret some of the choices \"Ernest\" sound like Bertrand Russell and you make, and it is distressing to find that RATING one of your choices is \"Correct his Engyou have to replay the whole game from PROS Plenty of live action video, a lish,\" that the game not contain a good scratch. fun card game sequence. number of language errors itself? (In that it is especially distressing when you reCONS Too few sequences, too few very scene, \"wasn't\" is spelled \"was'nt\"; alize that there is not all that much new puzzles, too little that is under the elsewhere, \"breach\" is spelled \"breech\" to see the second time through. The inplayer's control. and there is a reference to \"diseased,\" investigation scenes are the same every stead of \"deceased,\" President Roosevelt.) time-the same couple of clues sprinkled And you're the Orkin Man. Operation Body Count.\" Coming this fall. Even a good heavy spray from dual Uzis and a flamethrower will have trouble exterminating vermin like this. Call (305) 591-5900 (800) 468-7226  BBS (305) 471-8962 Capstone Software Creations BBS (508) 365-2359, 2400 Baud (508) 368-7139, U.S. Robotics (508) 365-9352. 14.4-28.8K Circle Reader Service #237 "


"REVIEW : Relationships That Pass In The Night MIDNIGHT STRANGER's 'Virtual Intimacy'Brings Character Interaction Closer To Life by Eden Maxwell MLD NICHT PM Anthem ATURE AUDIENCES WILL FIND you roam freely from one location to anvalues and better judgment wane under THEMSELVES CAPTIVATED BY MIDother, you can connect with up to 18 difpressure? Will you commit a violent NIGHT STRANGER FROM THE ferent people. Certain individuals are crime? Will you avert a murder? Will you opening screen, since it doesn't critical to the core story, others supportmeet the lady of your dreams? play any games with sophoing, still others merely backdrop. After moric introductions. When you're encountering several of the main players, FACES COME OUT OF THE RAIN dropped into this dark and digitized subtle links evolve and involve you as you A sense of realism within a complex plot world, get ready to become part of of varying possibilities is achieved by land on your social MIDNIGHT STRANGER the plot, which combining muted, color photographs for skills with your con Price: $69.95 has hundreds of locations with live motion QuickTime science on the firing System STRANGE variations that videos for interactive conversations and line and your values Requirements: depend on your key action sequences. There are also Color Macintosh up for grabs. mood and rapfunky touches within the story such as a (68030-25Mhz Imagine waking or better port with those film, performance art, stand-up comediup in a strange, recommended), you encounter. ans, plus an original musical soundtrack, sprawling, danger 8-bit 13\" The cast of and a live rock band with a catchy nihilisous, compelling, monitor or characters intic tech-noir beat. gritty metropolis larger, 8MB cludes men and What distinguishes STRANGER from a suRAM, CD-ROM without a friend or a women from a vaperficial multimedia ollering is an intelliProtection: None clue as to where to Audience: Adults Only (18+); contains riety of backgent script that elevates key characters go or who to talk to. some nudity and strong language grounds, interests from objects to people you develop feelUnlike other such Designer: Simon Goodwin, Jeff Green and persuasions: ings for-positive and negative. As you hackneyed plot de Publisher: Gazelle Technologies, Inc. a hood, a comedimove from one location to another, each vices, you don't have San Diego, CA an, a lesbian, an still does a slow dissolve into another amnesia, and you (800) 237-6675 actress, a party scene, as does your suspension of belief. aren't running from gangsters or the law girl, a woman with multiple personalities. As you slowly become a thread in the tabecause you've murdered someone—at an artist talking about John Lily and pestry of events, this dark, artificial world least, not yet. You're free to be yourself, aliens, and an Albert Camus and Tom becomes eerily lifelike. You make emoor act out deviant behavior hidden beRobbins quoting bum, to name a few. tional decisions and guide conversations, hind that suit of propriety inside your Some characters are open, others cauwhich may involve you in experiences that psychological closet. tious, others appealing, still others danmight turn violent, sensual, bizarre or Through an innovative approach to gerous. What are their motives, and what amusing within a framework of adult first-person interaction, you control the secrets, if any, do they have to hide? themes: love, sex, philosophy, profanity plot, where you go, and inevitably how Things are often not what they appear to and criminal behavior. To add a sort of the story plays out. You are both directorbe, which is the point and strength of the \"X Files\" effect to the goings on, there's a and performer. Visit a cafe, nightclub, game's value. Then, there's the issue of lost alien artifact that some would kill for. restaurant, movie, the theater, or haunts the player's own behavior. How much can Strange powers may be within your grasp of fringe elements and the very weird. As you be influenced by others? Will your if you can find the off-world object. 68 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"HELL ACYBER HUN UNK THRILLER STARRING DENNIS HOPPER STEP ANIE SEYMOUR a GRACE JONES GEOFFREY HOLDER AVAILABLE THIS HALLOWEEN TAKE GAMETEK INTERACTIVI OFTWARE Circle Reader Service #184 "


"STREETS ARE UP EVEN gests your dialog based on feeling, which even though your mood is consistent. WHEN YOU'RE DOWN remains abstract. The premise is that you If enough real time has elapsed, you Opening screens vary, showing a location are saying something appropriate to the might happen upon an \"ending,\" a statephoto within the cityscape, with traffic, exchange, determined by the degree and ment or action by the character(s) you are sirens, horns, and other sounds filling the shade of color selected. with that triggers a cue for a conclusion night air. To get around town, you posiand for the credits to roll. tion the cursor on the scene (a door, This isn't a limitation, but a down the street, a building, etc.) until it reinforcement of the mode becomes a directional icon: go, enter, of play. An ending repreexit, and so on. Once you enter a situasents an experience, a fintion, you move about (within the still ished work that might be photo environment) and find a character viewed as winning in the of interest. If the cursor says \"Talk,\" then traditional gaming sense. clicking activates a rectangular portion of Players wishing to re-expethe picture into live motion video. The rience a film with another character begins speaking while the surattitude from a particular rounding scene remains a photo still. Alpoint, or resume the action though not the most elegant solution to at another time, can save current technological limitations, this games. At any time from trade-off approach works well enough to within a film session, playmaintain the intended illusion. ers can opt for starting a Realistic communication with virtual YOU'RE PERFECT, HOP IN With no history and no identity, your new game, and be transcharacters in real time has been the es character can comfortably jump into many scenarios, like this ported to a new location to sential missing byte in interactive games. back-alley guerrilla photo shoot. begin with. STRANGER has partially succeeded in overcoming this hurdle with what the develCharacters say and do things based on WHEN YOU'RE STRANGER... opers call \"Virtual Intimacy.\" The how you steer the conversation. As char. Since you are a stranger in cybertown, simulation projects the subjective atmosacters speak to you, they invite a reyou may act without regard for what othphere of reality; the characters appear as sponse. Dialog can be sophisticated, er people will think; you have the freeif they're actually talking to the player, strong, intellectually stimulating, and dom to make decisions about your sometimes sexy. The exbehavior that you would never consider perimental, fun part is not acting out in the real world. As a result of knowing how a character your exploration, reflection, and experiwill react to your mood.ences, the game may develop into a wonFor example, will a young derful dream or a bleak Kafka-esque lady you've just met renightmare of frustration that seems to spond to keen interest, last forever. Directing the characters, inmild interest, or a \"who cluding yourself, in this free form cinema cares?\" attitude? Occaverité experiment is, on one hand, excitsionally, a character's reing and habit forming; on the other, you sponse indicates you have may also become disappointed, wishing made a clear-cut statefor more interaction and depth than the ment, which supports the game can deliver. illusion of conversation One thing's for sure, it's going to be a and may call for creative long and bumpy night. W reflection on your part. CAFE SHIVA Despite gestures in QuickTime that conflict with the Although non-specific THE EDITORS SPEAK still image, this actress' performance is top notch. (you really don't know what you said, only how MIDNIGHT STRANGER and there is no finite duration, concluyou feel), typical instances along the RATING  sion, or solution. Mood Bar scale might reflect mild interA Mood Bar, a color scale on the botest to distaste, casual encouragement, PROS An interesting experiment in tom of the screen, is the pump of the Vir passive neutrality, and nuances of negarich, character-based storytelling. The tual Intimacy engine that beats tive indifference in between. Responses acting and writing stands out in the interactive life into this simulation. Incan also swing from joy to anger to fear, current sea of multi-mediocre perforstead of selecting from pre-written textuor a simple yes or no. The range and al questions or replies to make number of these emotions varies from sitCONS Limited replay. The \"mood conversation, the Mood Bar represents uation to situation; the idea is to play bar\" interface still leaves us looking for an emotional expression. You respond by with your moods and see what happens. an elegant solution to the problem of clicking along a color scale (ranging from Some characters are fickle as they may \"interactive dialogue.\" red negative to green positive) that sugrespond differently from game to game, mances. 70 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"MAJOR IN PHYSICAL EDUCATION SIRORTY HOUSE | An Interactive Game of Hide and Pecky CD-ROM FOR IBM PC COMPATIBLE \"Without a doubt, the funniest CD-ROM on the market\" -GO! Digital Magazine OIO OHO IDTH 2 . Your Mission: Infiltrate the hottest sorority on campus, but don't get caught! Circle Reader Service #240 Elmfield Elmfield Distributed by ELECTROMEDIA: 1-800-57-CDROM "


"CHIPS & BITS pentru Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10119 PO Box 234 Dept 10119 Rochester, VT 05767 REALMS OL ARKANIA SEAR PRAVICE Master of Bagh \"MASTER OF MAGIC' is a game of exploration, spell-casting, combal and strategy set in a fantasy world. Features strategic use of resources and magic energy Offers new fantasy worlds and mystical planes of existence, five difficulty settings, and an icon-based interface. $41 'STAR TRAIL: REALMS OF ARKANIA' Anancient feud fueled by a millennia of hatred exists and you must choose wisely for the fate of Arkania is in your hands. Features smoothscrolling 3D movement, fully animated combat and over 350 weapons. $41 'M4: SHERMAN TANK SIMULATOR' You and your buddies go for a ride. Only it is WW2, and it's a long way to Germany. Your communications equip ment allows you to keep in touch with other units in the field. Gain experience and skill as you get deeper into the game. $34 MICROPROSE BIBTECH Malla NIGHTWATCH FREE SHIPPING! Its Time to Lay Down The Can 0. INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT' the world's first CD MAG, is an episode of interactive television for your CD Rom. Devoted to entertainment software, IE features full-motion reviews, multimedia hints, and interactive video interviews with key figures in the gaming industry. CD $9 Cowb2 PAEVIEW CALCULATORIEM CAMEPIROLL COLCACERIES Place an order for an out of stock item and recieve FREE overnight shipping when product becomes available. Handling $2 per shipment. MeditINE \"NIGHTWATCH INTERACTIVE 2' Abeautiful late-night security guard makes her rounds at the most erotic hotel in the civilized world! You are in control as you explore the sex-styles of the rich and shameless. CD $45 IBM HARDWARE IBM HARDWARE IBM HARDWARE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE $19 $17 $36 $46 Elf Teac Spr Qud CD Drv $459 Thrustmstr Driving Sys $111 Thrustmaster FCS Pro $99 Thrust FCS Pro UProm $14 Thrustm FLC Sys F16 $118 Thrustmstr Flight Sys $59 Thrustmstr Game Card $25 Thrustmstr Rudder Sys $99 Thrustmaster WCS 2 $94 Thrustm WCS2 UProm $14 Universal Cockpit $219 Universal Neverlock $39 VFX 1 Vrt Reality Hdgr $949 Video Blaster Virtual Pilot $64 Virtual Pilot Pro $75 Vivid 3D Plus Sound $89 Vivid 3D Sound $59 Voice Blaster $39 33% Acoustic Resrch P570 $299 AdLib Sound Card $34 Advancd Gravis Ultrsd $129 Advncd Grus Ultrd Mx $185 Altec ACS 100 Speakrs $69 Altec ACS 150 Subwir $109 Altec ACS 200 Spkrs $209 Altec ACS 3 Spkr Sys $169 Altec ACS 300 Sp wSb $249 Altec ACS 50 Speakers S79 Audiophile Ref 10 A sp S125 Audiophile Ref 30 A Sp$199 Audiophile SW 20 A SbS139 Auto Cockpit $159 Cyberman $79 Flight Cockpit $219 Flight Control Stand $18 Flight Stick $35 Flight Stick Pro $57 Game Card 3 Automatic $25 Gravis Analog Joystick $29 Gravis Anolog Pro Jystk $34 Gravis PC Game Pad $19 Jet Stick Joystick Extensn Cable $12 Joystick Y-Cable $12 Joyswitch $39 Labtec CS-1000 Spkers S75 Labtec CS-1200 Spkers $84 Labtec CS-1400 Spkers $99 Labtec CS-150 Spkers $14 Labtec CS-550 Spkers $24 Labtec CS-700 Spkers $32 Labtec CS-800 Spkers $30 Labtec CS-900 Spkers $69 Mach 3 Joystick $27 Maxx Cobra Flightstick $59 Maxx Control Yoke $54 $19 Media Cncpt Solstr Cin $39 MS FIl Sim 5 Grvs Jystk $49 MS FIt Sim 5 Grvs Pro $56 NEC 3XE Ext CD Drv $549 NEC 3XI Int CD Drive $459 Notebook Gameport $42 PC Symphny Adlib Cpt $29 PC Virtual Golf Club $129 Pro Audio Spct 16 Bsc $104 Pro Audio Spect Plus S89 Pro Audio Studio 16 $169 Reel Magic CD Upgrd $599 Reel Magic Lite $289 Reel Magic Vid Upgrd $349 Sony SRS9 Speakers $14 SBistr 16 ASP SCSI2 $214 Snd Blaster 16 Basic $119 Sound Blaster 16 MCD$179 Snd Blaster 16 Value $109 Sound Blaster 32 AWE $263 SBistr Discovry CD 16 $299 SBistr Gmblstr CD 16 $379 SBlaster Omni CD Drv $209 Snd Blaster Pro Value $85 Sound Blaster Value $59 SBistr Vid Spigot WIN $199 SBlaster Voice Assist $42 SGalaxy BX2 wSpkrs $49 SGalaxy NX2 wspkers $59 Snd Galaxy NXPRO S109 Blake Stone Episode 1 $9 Blood Society CD $34 Bloodnet $39 Bloodnet CD Blue Force: Next of Kin S19 Blue Forc: Next Kin CD $19 Buccaneers CD $48 Cadillcs & Dinosrs CD $46 Castle Wollstn 3D MD2 $24 Castle Wollstn 3D MD3 $24 Castle Wolfenstein CD $42 Castle Wolfstn-Spr Dest $29 Chaos Continuum CD S44 City 2000 CD $29 Companions of Xanth $32 Companions Xanth CD $33 Conan CD $26 Conqust Robin Hd VGA $24 Conquests of Camelot $15 Conspiracy CD $39 Corridor 7 $28 Corridor 7 CD $29 Covert Action $6 Creature Shock CD $48 Crime Does Not Pay $12 Critical Path WIN CD $48 Cruise for a Corpse $14 Curse of Enchantia CD $23 Cyberia CD $46 Dark Forces CD $48 Dark Seed CD $39 Darkseed 2 $42 Day of the Tentacle $35 Day of the Tentacle CD $42 Death Gate CD $34 Don't Go Alone $6 Doom 2: Hell on Earth $45 Doom 2: Hell Earth CD $45 Doom Episode 1 Dracula $32 Dracula Unleashed CD 547 Dragon's Lair 2 Tm Wrp $34 Dragonsphere $25 Dragonsphere CD $48 Dreamweb Dune CD $49 Earth Invasion WIN $24 $24 Epic $32 Eric The Unready CD $35 Eric the Unready $24 Evolution S29 Evolution CD $29 Flashback $19 Fortress of Dr. Radiaki $48 Fourplay WIN Fred P. Frontier Pharm $24 Fred P. Frntr Pharm CD $39 Fred P. Frtr Pharm 2 $44 Free DC $9 Freelancer 2120 $42 Freelancer 2120 CD $42 Full Throttle CD $42 G-Nome CD $48 G-force $19 Gabriel Knight $39 Gabriel Knight CD $45 $45 Gamma Force $6 Gateway 2 CD $29 Gateway 2:Homeworld $26 Gateway Collct 182 CD $36 Gobliiins CD $19 Gobliiins 2 CD $19 Goblins 3 CD $19 Guy Spy CD $29 Hand of Fate $25 Hand of Fate CD $39 Harvester CD $45 Heart of China EGA $34 Heart of China VGA Heaven and Earth $32 Heimdall Hell Cab CD Hired Guns Hook Horde Horde CD In Extremus Inca Inca CD Inca 2 $19 Inca 2 CD $24 Indy Jones Fate Atintis $36 Indy Jones Ft Atintis CD $42 Inherit the Earth Inherit the Earth CD $32 Innocent Until Caught $34 Inspector Gadget $34 Iron Helix CD $56 Isle of the Dead $31 Jagged Alliance $48 Jonny Quest $26 Journeyman Project CD $34 Journymn Pri Sp Ed CD $47 Jurassic Park King's Quest 5 VGA $32 King's Quest 5 WIN CD $41 King's Quest 6 CD $45 King's Qust 6 Upgrd CD $24 King's Quest 6 VGA $45 King's Quest 7 CD $49 King's Ransom $33 King's Ransom CD $33 Kronolog : Nazi Paradx S36 IBM ADVENTURE 7th Guest CD 7th Guest 2:11th Hr CD $51 Advt Will Beamish VGA $24 Adv Willie Beamish CD $24 Alone in the Dark $34 Alone in the Dark CD $48 Alone in the Dark 2 $34 Alone in the Dark 2 CD $41 Altered Destiny $29 Amazon $16 Animation Classics $39 Beneath a Steel Sky CD$39 Beverly Hillbillies Bioforge Bioforge CD $54 SGIX NXPRO 16 SCSI S139 SGIX NXPRO Mmd Kit $249 Sound Man Wave $188 Sd Scape 16 Bit Wytbl S199 $9 SoundMan 16 Teac Quad Spd CD Drv$595 $19 $48 CGW OCT 1 "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR. HI. AK APO, FPO $4 per order. Worldwide airmail S6 per item Handling $2 per shipment Visa, MC and Discover Accepted Checks Held 4 Weeks Money Orders same as cash COD S8 Detectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary Price availability may change. All sales final. Call for details FREE GAME OFFER* AV HARPLAN -CLASSIC HOOROPOLIS New BROAD Version 1.5 \"NOCTROPOLIS Dark-sheer, the greatest superhero of his day, fights his last battle. Now a horrifying new evil is poised to invade the city upon Darksheer's departure for his retirement Offers more than a full hour of video, an interactive movie style, and digitized video characters. CD $54 \"HARPOON CLASSIC The first serious, unclassified computer Simulation of how best to conduct a major campaign at sea. Offers the excitement and tension of a simulated battle based on fact. Over 200 scenarios and every add-on product produced for the original. CD $28 \"BATTLECRUISER: 3000 AD' You command a mighty Battlecruiser in order to thwart the attack of the power hun. gry Gammulan Empire who hover on the brink of galactic conquest. Offers advanced 3D modeling, 12 alien species, and extra credits eamed by trading. S44 UPDATED AND IMPROVED! miasi N ADOGNOME CONQUER  . *FREE GAME OFFER tre FON WITOWS Spend the specified amount on any in stock IBM software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from September 1st through October 31st or while supplies last. LIBETE CARE AU Brat... SPEND $60 GET 'CONQUER FOR WINDOWS' A full feature Windows game taking advantage of high resolution & speed Windows systems. Use tanks, planes, and other troops to conquer the world. Features a variety of resolutions, up to 4 players via network, and head to head combat by modem. $19 Playmaker Football Combo, Cardinal of Kremlin 3.5, Darkhalf3.5, Trump Castlo 2 Data Disk 1 of 2 3.5 or 5.25, Gunship 5.25, Pirates 5.25. Star Legions 5.25. Magic Candle 25.25. MacArthurs War 5.25. Crime Does Not Pay 5.25, Warlords 5.25, X-Men 525 SPEND $100 GET \"DREAM MACHINE Featuring seductive female escorts who guide you through a fantasy virtual world, The Dream Machine realistically adapts itself to fulfill you. CD $59 Airborne Ranger 5.25. Tegel's Mercenaries 5.25, Command HQ 5.25, F15 SE 25 25, M1 Tank Platoon 3.5, Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25, Red Storm Rising 3.5. Battles of Destiny 3.5 IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ARCADE IBM ARCADE $34 $29 $38 Where in Time Carmen $29 Where USA Crmn Dlx $45 Where in USA Carmen $29 Where in World Carmen$29 Where Wild Carmn Dix $44 Where In World Dix CD $54 Who Killd Sam Rprt CD $24 Wing Comm Ultm 6 CD $29 Wolf: Hnt or Be Hntd CD$39 Wrath of Gods CD WIN $44 Yserbius $26 Zomble Dino CD Zorro $39 Space Ace 2 $34 Street Fighter 2 Super Arcd Games CD $19 T2:Arcade Game $29 Take-A-Brk Pinball WIN $19 Taking of Beverly Hills S6 Teenage Mut Ninja Trti $12 Tetris $15 Tetris Gold CD The Tinies Titan Tristan Pinball S19 Vaxine $12 Welltris $15 Who Shot John Rck CD $34 Wild Streets $24 Wrath of the Demon $21 Xiphos IBM ARCADE $24 Labyrinth of Time CD $47 Lands of Lore 2 $42 Lands of Lore 2 CD $46 Laura Bow 2 $24 Laura Bow 2 CD $24 Leather Goddesses 2 $19 Legend of Kyrandia $32 Legend of Kyrandia CD $32 Legend Kyrandia 3 CD $39 Leisure St Larry 1 VGA $19 Leisure Suit Larry 5 $34 Leisure St Larry 5 VGA $24 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $39 Leisure Suit Larry 6 CD $39 Leisure St Lrry Anthi CD$54 Little Big Adventure $47 Loadstar CD $38 Lost Eden $42 Lost Eden CD $48 Lost Files Sherick Hims $26 Lost Treasures Inlocom $32 Lost in Time $19 Lost in Time CD $19 Lunicus CD $42 Magic Death CD $26 Man Enough CD $34 Manhole $24 Mario is Missing CD $44 Martian Memorandum $24 Mission Critical CD $34 Mixed Up Fry Tale EGA $14 Mixed Up Fry Tale VGA $29 Mixed-Up Mothr Goose $29 Morph Man CD $29 Myst CD $46 No Mth & I Must Screm $44 No Mth &l Mst Scrm CD$44 Noctropolis CD $54 Nomad $35 Nomad CD $36 Out of this World S19 Out of this World 2 CD $45 Peppr's Adv Time VGA $29 Phantasmagoria CD $49 Police Quest 1 VGA $19 Police Quest 3 VGA $24 Police Qust 4 DOS/WIN $39 Police Quest 4 CD $39 Prince of Persia $25 Prince of Persia 2 $42 Psychotron CD $39 Quantum Gate WIN CD $45 Quest for Glory 1 $18 Quest for Glory 3 Quest for Glory 4 $38 Quest for Glory 4 CD $44 Red Shift WIN CD $44 Return To Zork CD Return of the Phantom $34 Return of Phantom CD $38 Return to Zork $44 Rillwar Legacy VGA S39 Ringworld $19 Ringworld CD $19 Robinson's Requiem $33 Robinson's Requm CD $33 Robocop 3 $32 Robot City CD $48 SDI S6 Sam & Max Hit Road $34 Sam & Max Hit Rd CD $42 Screen Antics WIN $19 Secret Monkey Island 2 $21 Secret Mnky Islnd VGA S23 Shadow Caster $24 Shadow of Comet CD 540 Simon the Sorcerer $18 Skull Cracker CD $41 Space Quest 1 VGA $16 Space Quest 4 VGA $28 Space Quest 4 CD $37 Space Quest 5 VGA $36 Space Ship Brainlck CD $49 Spawn $42 Spellcasting 101 $19 Star Reach $36 Star Trek 25 Annivrsary $26 Star Trek 25 Anniv CD $54 Star Trek: Judgmnt Rts $33 Star Trk Judgmt Rts CD $42 Star Trk NG Collt Ed CD$79 Star Trk: Str Fit Acd CD $52 Starship $23 Stellar 7 CD $24 System Shock CD $47 Terminator 2029 $24 Terminator 2029 Op Scr $19 Terminator Rampage $42 Terminator Rampg CD $45 Terror of the Deep S36 Terror of the Deep CD $36 The Dig $40 The Prophecy $19 Touche $39 Trance Mission CD $36 Tubular Worlds $36 Tuneland CD $48 Ultimate Domain $39 Ullimate Domain CD 544 Under Killing Moon CD $55 Voyeur CD $46 Walker $32 Warriors of Legend $18 Where Space Crmn Dix $39 Gorg CD $29 Guy Spy $24 Incredible Mach 2 WIN $29 Incredible Toons Innocent Ishar 3 $33 Jump Raven CD $42 Jurassic Park CD $36 Loderunner WIN $38 Mad Dog Mcree CD $35 Mad Dog Macree 2 CD $35 Magnaflux Runner $29 Metal & Lace NR13 $29 Metl & Lace NR18 Upgd $5 Microcosm CD $45 Microsoft Arcade WIN $29 Mirage Thunder $39 Mortal Kombat $36 Never Mind $9 Obliterator $6 Oxyd Magnum $36 Pick'n Pile Pinball Dreams Di Disk $18 Pinball Fantasies $29 Power Rangers CD $25 Prehistorik $29 Raiden $29 Raiden CD $36 Rebel Assault CD $44 Rise of the Robots CD $48 Rotox $9 S.C. Out $12 Silverball $29 Sink or Swim $19 Sleepwalker $24 Space Ace $32 Space Ace CD S39 Space Ace MPEG CD 542 $44 IBM ROLE PLAYING 500 CC Race Bike $29 Alien Breed $19 Aliens Ate My Babysittr $27 Animation Classics 2 $42 Breakthru WIN $35 Capitol Punishment $37 Capitol Punishment CD $39 Crazy Cars $25 Creepers $34 Dr Doom's Revenge $9 Dragon's Lair $34 Dragon's Lair CD $34 Dragons Lair 2 CD Dragn Lair 2 MPEG CD $42 Dragon's Lair 3 $34 EMotion Eight Ball Deluxe Finale Fire & Forget Gobliiins VGA $16 Gobliiins 3 $19 $6 $39 ADD Collectrs Edition 3 $19 Absolute Zero CD $41 Al-Qadim CD Al-Qadim:Genie Curse $42 Alien Legacy $38 Alien Legacy CD $39 Amberstar $19 Arborea Journy Inr Snct $34 Arena: Elder Scrolls $39 Bard's Tale Constructn S12 Blackmoore CD Blackthorne Bloodstone Captain Blood Challenge of 5 Realms $39 Champions $24 $37 CGW OCT 2 Circle Reader Service #54 "


"CHIPS & BITS Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10119 PO Box 234 Dept 10119 Rochester, VT 05767 eli so 3-18-29058 Fax Source 1013 ples U 'SUPERHERO LEAGUE OF HOBOKEN' Lead a band of mutant superheros into battle in the postnuclear wasteland of Hoboken, NJ. Your party includes Captain Excite ment and Tropical Oil Man. Your archnemesis is Dr. Entropy, determined to thwart the rebirth of civilization. $34 'SIMCITY 2000 is the long awaited follow up to SimCity that takes urban planning into the next century. SimCity 2000 adds a new level of realism & sophisticated gameplay. New features include un derground water and transportation systems, 3D views & SVGA graphics. $36 \"VIVID 3D' What does 3D sound mean? It means game sounds come alive all around you. You can hear enemy planes flying overhead. Provides dynamic 3D sound from 2 speakers. S59 FREE COMPUTER GAMES STRATEGY PLUS! Recieve an issue of Strategy Plus magazine FREE with every IBM software order. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from September 1st to October 31st or while supplies last. 'LINKS 386 PRO offers SUPERVGA graphics and advanced features designed for your 386 or 486. New features include computer opponent, save game option that allows your friends to play against you in an existing game. Play at Harbour Town or use the course disks. $32 LINKS(386 'AIR COMBAT PACIFIC 1942' Dodge relentless gunfire of Japanese Zeros. Defy gravity, execute attacks on enemy bombers in a desperate fight. Virtual Cockpit allows viewing in all directions. $48 IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM SIMULATIONS $48 Ultima Uwrld 2 Labyrnth $48 Ultima Uwrld Stygn Abs $21 Unlimited Adventures $19 War of the Lance Waxworks $14 Witch World $42 Wizardry 4 $19 Wizardry 6 Csmc Forge $22 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $29 World of Xeen CD $40 $34 $27 Print Shop Deluxe $49 Print Shp Dix Bus Grph $26 Putt Putt Goes to Moon $42 Putt Plt Goes Moon CD $44 Putt Putt Joins Parade $32 Putt Plt Joins Parde CD $48 Putt Putt's Funpack CD S34 Putt Pults Fun Pak $19 Quarky Quys Trb Sci $29 Reader Rabbit 2 WIN S29 Scooter's Magic Castle $32 Secret Isle Dr. Quandry $29 Slater & Charlie CD $42 Sitr & Charlie Go Camp $29 Software Tlwrk Ref CD $79 Stickybear Reading $24 SS: Gizmos & Gadgets $26 Wacky Funster $9 $44 IBM EDUCATIONAL Champions of Krynn $12 Character Editors (Specify Game) Each $16 Cobra Mission $33 Curse of Azure Bonds $15 Cyberjudas CD Cyclones $44 Cyclones CD $44 Daemonsgate Daemonsgate CD $19 Dark Sun S47 Darksun CD $49 Dark Sun 2: Wake Rvg $48 Dark Sun 2: Wk Rvg CD$49 Darklands Daughter of Serpents $19 Demon Hunter $42 Disciples of Steel $34 Dragon Strike $12 Dragon Tales CD $38 Dragons of Flame $9 Dungeon Hack $38 Dungeon Hack CD $39 Dungeon Master $29 Dungeon Master 2 $37 Dungeon Master 2 CD $48 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus $16 Eye of the Beholder 1 $14 Eye of the Beholder 2 $19 Eye of the Beholder 3 $19 Eye of Beholder 3 CD $42 Fire King $24 Flames Freedom MWII S24 Four Crystals of Trazere$16 Gateway Svge Frontier $32 Hero's Mt & Magic CD $45 Hero's Might & Magic $45 Hexx: Heresy of Wizard $32 Hunters of Ralk CD $54 Intrplay's 10 Yr Anth CD $48 Ishar 3 CD $33 Kingdm Far Reachs CD $44 Knights Xentar PG 13 $44 Knights of Xentar CD $48 Knight Xentar NR 18 Up $5 Lands of Lore Lands of Lore CD Legacy: Realm Terror $39 Lord of the Rings V1 S15 Lord of the Rings CD $39 Lord of the Rings V2 $15 Lord of the Rings 2 CD $38 Lord of Rings Vol 1 & 2 $19 Lords of Midnight S44 Lords of Midnight CD $48 Loremaster $19 Magic Candle 2 $9 Magic Candle 3 Masters of Magic $41 Masters of Magic CD $48 Matrix Cubed Mega Traveller:Zhodani $6 Mega Traveller 2 $12 Menzoberranzan $39 Menzoberranzan CD $39 Might & Magic 3 $19 Might & Magic 4 $37 Might & Magic 5 $36 Pirates Gold $39 Pool of Radiance $15 Pools of Darkness S38 Protostar $19 Ravenloft CD $51 Ravenloft:Strahd's Pssn $48 Realms of Arkania $25 Red Crystal $21 Return to Ringworld CD $44 Riftwar Legacy CD $23 Rome: Pathway Power $29 Secret Silver Blades $15 Sentinel Worlds 1 $9 Shadow Caster CD $45 Shadow Sorcerer $9 Sherlock Holmes 1 CD $36 Sherlock Holmes 2 CD $36 Sherlock Holmes 3 CD $51 Skyrealms Jotune CD $50 Skyrim Jen: Alien Logic $48 Sleeping Gods Lie $6 SpellJamr:Pirates Rim $16 Spellcraft:Aspect Valor $19 Star Trail $41 Star Trail CD $46 Star Trk Dp Space 9 CD$41 Startrek Next Gen CD $56 Stonekeep CD $46 Stronghold $36 Summoning $16 Suprhero Lg. Hoboken $34 Suprhro Lg. Hobokn CD$34 Sword of China $42 Syndicate $39 Syndicate Plus CD $41 Tales Magic:Prphc Shd $16 Terran Envoy Treasures Suge Frontier $9 Ultima 6 False Prophet $19 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue $16 Ultima 7 Series CD $42 Ultima 8 CD w/spch pk $47 Ultima 8: Lost Vale $19 Ultima 8: Pagan $46 Ultima 8: Speech Pack $17 Ultima Undrwild 182 CD$29 Air Combat Pacfc 1942 $45 Air Cmbt Pacf 1942 CD 548 Air Combat: Mig Kll CD $47 Air Duel $33 Air Warrior SVGA $34 Air Warrior SVGA CD $35 Air Warrior 2 $34 Air Warrior 2 CD Armored Fist Armored Fisl CD $47 Armour Geddon $32 Army Air Corps: 1942 $48 Art of the Kill $24 Assignment Miami $19 B17 Flying Fort Classic $19 B17 Fly Fort WSS2 CD $37 Backroad Racers CD $29 Battle Command S6 Battle of Britain Battlecruiser 3000 Big One $29 Blue Max Aces Grt War $9 Chopper Pack CD $38 Chopper Strike $48 Combat Classics 2 $19 Conqueror Multi Tank Cyber Race $19 Cyber Race CD $39 Cyclemania CD Delta V $40 Elite Plus $19 European Racers CD $29 Evasive Action $34 Evolver F117A Stih Fighter VGA $29 *F15 Strike Eagle 2 $15 F15 Strike Eagle 3 CD 548 F15 Strike Eagle Ill $34 $34 $44 Alge Blaster Plus $32 Annbi's Ancnt EgyptCD $52 Auto Insight $29 Body Insight $29 Boom Box $12 Castle of Dr Brain VGA $19 Childrn's Write /Publish $42 Clock Works $19 Don Quixote CD $24 Dyno-Quest $19 EcoQust Srch Cetus CD$29 EcoQuest VGA $32 Fatty Bear's Bday Surp $32 Fatty Bear's Fnpck CD $34 Island Ol Dr. Brain VGA $29 Island of Dr Quandry $26 Last Chnc See WIN CD $38 Mario Teaches Typing $24 Mario Tchs Typing CD $48 Mavis B. Tchs Typing 35$29 Multimedia: Vivaldi CD $24 Orbits: Voyage Sir Sys $24 Oregon Trail WIN $34 Oregon Trail WIND CD $39 IBM SIMULATIONS $6 $38 $34 ATP 2.0 $29 ATP Flight Simulir 1.0 $12 A320 Airbus $29 AH-64 B Longbow $54 Aces Europe MDisk 1 $27 Aces Europe MDisk 2 $27 Aces Over Europe Aces of the Deep $44 Aces of the Deep CD $47 Aces of the Pacific $44 Aces of the Pacific CD $39 Aces over Europe CD $39 Across the Rhine Across Rhine Ex Set 1 $32 Across Rhine Ex Set 2 $32 Air Cmbt Pac 1942 Sc 1 $32 $38 CGw o  "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING IN US 4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR, HI, AK, APO, FPO $4 per order. Worldwide airmail $6 per item Handling $2 per shipment Visa, MC and Discovar Accepted. Checks Held 4 Wooks Money Orders same as cash. COD $8. Defectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary. Price/availability may change. All sales final Call for details FREE GAME OFFER* 'WARLORDS 2' The excitement of the first Warlords with better graphics, a map option and new Al system. Features random mapping for infinite replayability, troop transports for amphibious warfare, & a diplomacy option that provides the framework for backstabbing. $29 \"QUEST FOR GLORY 4' Your challenge is to rid the land of evil by destroying the Dark One himself. Explore the realm of the undead to find him. Wraiths and vampires will be waiting for your next mistake. CD $44 \"DEATH GATE' Locate the pieces of the World Seal! Travel to magical realms in this epic fantasy adventure! Offers 3D-modeled animations and digitized audio. Based on the Death Gate novels. $34 *FREE GAME OFFER Spend the specified amount on any in stock IBM software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from September 1st through October 31st or while supplies last. SPEND $60 GET \"V FOR VICTORY VELIKIYE LUKI' takes you to the Russian Front during WW 2. As the German commander, you must rescue your encircled forces that are hold up in Velikiye Luki. Offers 9 types of combat, choice of German or Russian command, and 7 scenarios. $19 'WARLORDS 2 SCENARIO EDITOR' Contains routines which smooth the transitions between terrain types. Offers complete control of scenario creation and 24 new sce narios. Create new maps, edit existing maps, set city revenues, build roads, and place ruins and temples. $29 Playmaker Football Combo, Cardinal of Kremlin 3.5, Darkhalf 3.5, Trump Castle 2 Data Disk 1 or 2 3.5 or 5.25, Gunship 5.25, Pirates 5.25. Star Legions 5.25. Magic Candle 25.25. MacArthurs War 5.25, Crime Does Not Pay 5.25, Warlords 5.25, X-Men 5.25 SPEND $100 GET Scenario Ruilder Airbome Ranger 5.25. Tegel's Mercenaries 5.25. Command HO 525, F15 SE 2525, M1 Tank Platoon 3.5, Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25, Red Storm Rising 3.5, Battles of Destiny 3.5 IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS X-Wing $39 X-Wing Mission Disk 1 $19 X-Wing Mission Disk 2 $19 Zephyr $45 Zephyr CD $45 $6 IBM SPORTS $39 $44 $44 F40 Pursuit Simulator $29 FA 18 Hornet $54 FA 18 Hornet CD $54 Falcon 3.0 $34 Falcon 3 S1 Fight Tiger $24 Falcon 3 S2 MiG 29 $32 Falcon 3 S3 FA 18 Hrnt $32 Falcon 4.0 $59 Falcon AT $16 Falcon Gold CD $52 Fast Attack CD $48 Fighter Duel Pro 2 $33 Fighter Wing CD $39 Fleet Defender CD $48 Fleet Dindr F14 Tomcat $45 Fleet Defender SDisk 1 $32 Flight $52 Flight Light $19 Flight Light CD $19 Flight Sim Toolkit $58 Flight Sim Toolkit CD $54 Flight Sim Toolkit Son 2 $19 Flight Sim Tkit WW2 $19 Flight Sim Tkit WW2 CD$19 Flight Unlimited CD $48 Fly the Grand Canyon $32 Flying Circus S39 Formula 1 S24 Frontier Elite 2 $36 Grand Canyon Scenery $16 Grand Prix 500 2 $14 Great Nav Bat Ships All $19 Great Naval Battles CD $52 Great Naval Battles 2 $44 Great Naval Batt 2 CD $39 Gunship 2000 VGA $34 H.A.W.C. $32 Harrier Assault $19 Harrier Assault SVGA $47 Harrier Assit SVGA CD $44 Heatwave $6 Hell CD $48 Heroes of the 357th $12 Hyperspeed $16 Indy Car Racing $31 Indy Cr Race Add On 1 $22 Indy Cr Race Add On 2 $22 Inferno Inferno CD $39 Iron Angel $39 Iron Angel CD $39 Jet Pack CD $44 Jetfighter 3 Jump Jet $39 Jump Jet Aces Pack $46 Jutland CD $44 Kawasaki Super Bikes $24 Killing Cloud Lawn Mower Man CD $39 Life and Death $19 Life and Death 2 $24 Lightspeed Loderunner $37 Loderunner CD Lunar Command $24 M1 Tank Platoon 2 $44 *M1 Tnk Platoon Classc $19 M4: Sherman Tank Sim S34 Magic Carpet $54 Mantis Exp Speech Pk $19 Mantis Experm Fir VGA $28 Maxim Ovrkill Bndl CD $56 Maximum Overkill MD 2 S32 Mech Commander $38 Mech Commander CD $38 MechWarrior 2 $46 Mechwarrior 2 Add-on $19 MechWarrior 2 CD $46 MegaFortress $12 Megarace CD $39 Metal Tech: Battledrme $36 Metitch 2: Earthsieg CD $47 Metaltech: Earth Siege $45 MiG 29 (Stand Alone) $44 Microsoft Flight Sim 5.0 $44 MS FIt Sim 5 Las Vegas $29 MS Fit Sim 5 New York $29 MS FII Sim 5 Paris $29 MS FIt Sim 5 Sn Fran $29 MS Fit Sim 5 Portland $32 MS Fit Sim 5 DC S29 MS FIt Sim Flight Shop $32 MS Space Simulatr 10 $44 Mig 29 Fulcrum S29 Mig 29 Gold CD $49 Nascar Racing $39 Nascar Racing CD $39 New Facilities Locator $9 PT Boat Simulator $16 Pacific Strike $39 Pacific Strike Spch Pak $17 Pacific Strike wSpch CD$48 Pheonix Fighter CD Power Politics WIN S12 Privateer $48 Privateer CD $48 Privateer Special Ops $19 Privateer Special Op 2 $22 Privateer Speech Pack $17 Rally $32 Reach for the Skies S19 Real Weather Pilot $24 Red Brn A10 Tnk Kll CD $39 Red Baron VGA $29 Red Baron WM Builder $29 Renegade $44 Renegade CD $44 Road & Track Grnd Prix $19 Sailing Simulator 3 $42 Sailg Sim 3 East Coast $32 Sailg Sim 3 West Coast $32 Scenery Collin California S9 Scenery Collt Grt Britain $9 Sea Woll $42 Sea Wolf CD $44 Seal Team $26 Seaworthy CD S18 Secret Weap Ex He 162 $18 Semper Fi Shuttle $26 Shuttle CD $24 Silent Service 2 $21 Sim City Cls Graph 182 $14 Space Clipper $42 Spectre Virtual Reality $35 Spectre VR CD $45 Speed Racer $19 Star Crusader Star Crusader CD $41 Starlord Strike Commander $26 Strike Commander CD $55 Strike Comm Spc Op 1 $22 Strike Comm Spch Pak $19 Sub Battle Simulator $19 Sub Battle Simulator 2 $39 Sub Ball Sim 2 Win CD $39 Sub War 2050 $33 Syndicte Sc1 Amer Rvil $22 TFX CD $39 TFX: Tactical Fighter Ex $35 Task Force Admirals Pk $45 Test Drive 3 Test Drive 3: Passion $19 Test Drive 3:Road & Car $9 Test Pilot CD $44 The Big One CD S26 Theme Park $40 Theme Park CD $40 Thunderhawk Tie Fighter $45 Tie Fighter Msn Disk #1 $24 Tie Fighter Msn Disk #2 $24 Tornado $48 Train Engineer $29 U-Boat 2 $36 Ultrabots Sanction Earth $26 Voice Commder Bundle $18 WC 2 Operation 2 $22 WC 2 Speech Mod $13 WC Secret Mission $20 WC Sert Msn 182 Bndl $20 WC Secret Mssn 2 HD $20 Wing Commander $19 Wing Commdr 2 Bndl $29 Wing Commd 2 Dlx CD $29 Wing Comm 2 wsp Pk $26 Wing Commander 3 $48 Wing Commander 3 CD $48 Wing Commder Acadm $24 Wing Commder Armada $48 Wing Comm Armda CD $48 Wings of Glory $47 Wings Glory Enhnd CD $48 Wolf Pack CD Wolfpack $26 World Circuit $29 World Circuit CD World Circuit 2 $42 World Circuit 2 CD $44 $9 $38 APBA Baseball $24 APBA Bsball Innovator $34 All Amer Coll Fball '94 $42 All Star Sprts Collct CD $23 Barkley: Shut Up & Jam $42 Baseball for Windows $46 Bball Chall 1987 Teams 59 Bball Chall 1988 Teams $9 Bball Chall 1989 Teams $9 Blood Bowl $39 Bret Hull Hockey '95 $34 Brett Hull Hockey $42 Empire Soccer '94 $29 FIFA Internatnal Soccer $39 Front Page Football Pro S29 Front Page FB Pro '95 $44 Front Pg FB Pro '95 CD 547 Front Pg Sports Bsball $44 Front Pg Sports BB CD $47 Frnt Pg Sprt FB Pro Up $29 Greens $34 Hardball 3 $19 Hardball 3 Collection $39 Hardball 3 Players Disk $16 Hardball 3 Stadium Disk$16 Hardball 4 $34 Hole In One Mini Golf $6 Hole In 1 Mini GII Crs Dk $3 International Sports ChallS6 $39 $39 $33 $34 CGW OCT 4 Circle Reader Service #54 "


"CHIPS & BITS en estos Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10119 PO Box 234 Dept 10119 Rochester, VT 05767 \"AWARD WINNING WARGAMES Here's an impressive boxed set! Includes Carrier Strike, Clash of Steel, Gary Grisby's War in Russia when in 1941 Hitler turns east, and Gary Grisby's Pacific War when in 1941 the Japanese Navy launched a massive strike. $39 THRUSTMASTER F-16 FLCS' A stick with almost unlimited programmability. It looks and feels like it was ripped out of the jet. The ultimate edge for a flight sim. A grip modeled after the F-16 Fighting Falcon, four 8-way hat switches, a dual stage trigger and 3 strategically placed buttons. $119 'SOUND GALAXY BX2' Bringing high quality sound to your PC has never been easier. Simply plug the Sound Galaxy BX2 into your PC. Offers supports for Sound Blaster and Adlib standards. Includes speakers. $49 FREE INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT! 'INTERACTIVE ENTERTAIN MENT' the world's first CD MAG, is an episode of interactive television for your CD Rom. Devoted to entertainment software, IE features full-motion reviews, multimedia hints, and interactive video interviews with key figures in the gaming industry. CD $9 ONDERHILLING MOON MAPAGAN REVIEW Receive an episode of Interactive Entertainment, the world's first CD MAG devoted to entertainment software, FREE with every CD ROM software order. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from September 1st to October 31st or while supplies last. 'WINGS OF GLORY 1917-18 Learn to fly different planes & discover the strengths and weaknesses of each. Features 5 different planes, 4 channel digital sound and instant mission generator. $49 IBM SPORTS IBM SPORTS IBM SPORTS IBM BUNDLES IBM BUNDLES IBM BUNDLES Tony LRs 8B2 Fan Man $14 Tony LaRussa Bsball 2 $35 Tony LRssa BB2 Stad $18 Tony LaRussa BB 1990 $12 Tony LaRussa BB 1991 $12 Tony LaRussa Baseball $9 Tony LaRussa BB 2 94 $39 Tony LRss BB2 94 CD $47 Tony LRssa NL Stadms $15 Tony LRs BB2 Tm '93 $16 Troy Aikman Fball CD $49 Ultimate Football $48 Ultimate Football CD $48 Unnecssary Roughnss S33 Unnecsry Roughnss '95 $34 Wayne Gretzky Hcky 3 $35 Weaver Tm/Plyr Stats 89 $3 Wng Comm 182 Dlx CD$29 Wing Commnder 1 Dlx $48 Wing Commander, Sort Missions 1 & 2 Wing Commd 1 Dlx CD $29 Wizardry Trilogy $32 Wizardry 1-3 Wizardry Trilogy 2 $33 Wizardry 4-6 $19 IBM STRATEGY Jack Nicklaus Clip Art S3 Jack Nicklaus Crs Disk 3 $6 Jack Nicklaus Crs Disk 5 $4 Jack Nicklaus Golf CD $39 Jack Nicklaus SE Crs 1 $4 Jack Nicklaus Signlr Ed $27 Jack Nicklaus SE Crs 2 $16 Joe Montana Football $46 Joe Montana Fball CD $54 Joe Montana Fball 2 $46 Links Crs 2 Firestone $17 Links Pro 386 Golf $32 Links Pro 486 CD $49 Links Pro C1 Mana Kea $19 Links Pro C2 Pinehurst $16 Links Pro C3 Banff Spr $19 Links Pro C4 Belfry $19 Links Pro C5 Innisbrook $19 Links Pro G6 Firestone $20 Links Pro C7 Pebbl Bch $24 Links Pro C8 Cast Pns $19 Links Pro C9 Big Horn $19 ML 1950s World Series $17 ML 1960s World Series $17 ML 1970s World Series $17 ML 1980s World Series $17 ML BB 4 USAT Fan Mn $25 ML BB 4 USAT Gen Mn $19 ML Baseball All Stars $12 ML Baseball Pro Tm ea $20 ML Bsball Manage's Ch $12 ML Personal Pro Golf $28 Madden Plyr Slats 1989 $8 Micro League Fball 2 $12 MicroL BB Seattle 13 $12 MicroL 82-88 BB Ssn ea$17 MicroL 89 FB Season $17 MicroL BB 4 USA Today S28 Microsoft Golf CD $48 Microsoft Golf WIN $48 NFL Chall Col Almn Tms $9 NFL Chall Pre Ssn 90 $9 NFL Chall Pre Ssn 91 $9 NFL Chall All Star Team $9 NFL Chall Dream Teams $9 NFL Chall Premium Ed $59 NFL Coaches Club $34 NFL Coaches Clb Ex Dk$19 NFL Coaches Clb FB 2 $44 NFL Proleague Fball $12 NFL Video Football $12 NHL Hockey NHL Hcky '93 Stats BK $39 NHL Hockey '95 CD $47 PGA Tour Golf 486 CD $47 PGA Tour Golf Crs 1 $17 PGA Tour Golf Ltd Ed $32 PGA Tour Golf WIN $26 Picture Perfect Golf CD $42 Planet Soccer $29 Pro Tennis Cup ProFball Analyst 92 Edt 39 Proleague Baseball '94 $35 Proleague Football '94 $29 Quarter Pole $26 Road to Final Four 2 $41 Serious Soccer $18 Sporting Triangle $3 Tie Break Tennis $9 Time Out Sports Bsball $22 Time Out Sports Bball $39 Tom Landry Football $29 Tom Landry Fball Dix $29 Tony LRussa Cisc Stad $12 Tony LaRussa BB2 CD $46 Tony LaRussa BB2 92 $14 IBM BUNDLES A-10 Tank Killer 1.5 Heart of China Stellar 7 Eye of Beholder Collct $49 Eye of Beholder Tril CD $51 Falcon 3.0 wThrust FCS$99 Five Foot Ten Pack CD $29 Gateway Collectn 1 & 2 $36 King's Quest Anthol CD $54 Land Sea Air 2 Command HO Red Storm Rising F15 Strike Eagle Lemming's 1 & 2 CD $28 Lost Treasrs Infcm CD $39 Infidel, Lurking Horror, Deadline, Witness, Suspect, Ballyhoo. Hitchhiker's Gde/Galaxy Suspended, StarCross, MoonMist, PlanetFall, StationFall, Enchanter, Sorcerer, SpellBreaker, Zork 1-3, Beyond Zork, Zork Zero Lost Treasrs Infocom 2 $29 Border Zone, Plundered Hearts, Bureaucracy. Cutthroats, A Mind For Voyaging, Hollywood Hi Jinx, Seastalker, Sherlock Holmes: Riddle of Crown Jewels, Wishbringer, Nord and Bert, Trinity Lost Treasts Infcm 2 CD$29 Lucas Classic Adventrs $36 Indiana Jones, Secret Monkey Island 1. Maniac Mansion Magnetic Scrolls Bundle $16 Fish, Corruption, Guild of Thieves Maximum Overkill wDk $44 Megafortress Mega-Pk $38 Megafortress Megafortress Mis Disk 1 Megafortress 3-D Editor Perfect General Trilogy $34 Perfect General Greatest Battles of 20th C WW2 Battles Power Hits: Battletech $29 Battletech 1, Battletech 2. Mech Warrior SSI's Fantasy Fest CD $47 Sierra Value Pak CD $39 Space Quest Anthol CD $48 Space Quest Bndl 1-4 $42 Spellcasting Bundle $29 Spellcasting 101. 201, 301 Spellcasting Bundle CD $29 Strike Comm Privtr CD $44 Tsk Frc 1942 WRSR CD $35 The Victory Pack $39 V for Victory: Utah Beach, Velikiye Luki, Mrkt Garden Top 50 Games DOS CD S26 Top 50 Games WIN CD $26 Turning Point $29 Gettysburg, Spanish Armada, Waterloo Ultima Bundle 1-6 CD $32 Ultima Trilogy $39 Ultima 1-3 Ultima Trilogy 2 $48 Ulrima 4-6 $38 $22 7th Gust Dune Bndl CD $39 Access Super Bundle $34 Amazon and Martian Memorandom Air Combat Classics $22 Their Finest Hour Battle Hawks Secret Weap ol Lullwall Allied Forces M1 Tank Platoon, Gunship Award Bundle $44 Kings Quest 5, Red Brn, Rise of the Dragon Award Bundle CD $44 Award Win Wargames $39 Award Win Wargms CD $39 Dynamix Bundle 1 S24 18th Air Squadron $36 A Train $34 A Train Construction Set $9 A Train wConstruct Set $36 Advanced Civilization $35 Air Force Commander $9 Airbucks 1.2 $26 Ancient Art of War Sky $26 Archon Ultra $34 Arctic Baron $29 Arctic Baron CD $29 Armada Battle Isle Battle Isle 2 CD Battle Isle 2200 $34 Battle Isle 2200 CD $34 Battle of Chickamagua $38 Battle Chickamagua CD $42 Battlecruiser 3000 CD $48 Battles in Time $36 \"Battles of Destiny $19 Black Beard $35 Breach 3 $34 Buzz A. Race Space CD$39 Buzz Race into Space $26 CGW OCT 5 "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING IN US S4 per order. Mall to Canada, PR. HI, AK, APO, FPO $4 per order. Worldwide airmail S6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment. Visa, MC and Discover Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders same as cash. COD $8. Defectives replaced with same product. Most Items shipped same day. Shipping times may vary Price/availability may change. All sales final. Call for details. FREE GAME OFFER* VIRTUAL VIXENS AIREW *A320 AIRBUS' is a true pilot's flight simulator. Start out as a trainee and go through an intensive program designed to help you understand the laws of flight physics and use them in flight. Features authentic navigational system and simulation of actual A320 instrumentation. $29 'VIRTUAL VIX ENS' BY PIXIS Save your friend from Crystal, who imprisoned him in a VR Pleasure World, for failing to please her. You must satisfy 3 women before you reach Crystal and solve the mystery of her erotic existence. A VR science fiction adventure with 3D animation. CD $59 \"LINKS PRO CASTLE PINES' Golf Club designed by Jack Nicklaus is set in beautiful Colorado. Offers 7,495 yards of golfing challenge, the longest PGA Tour course, and realistic graphics. $19 Tuan Grought *FREE GAME OFFER Spend the specified amount on any in stock IBM software and choose a froo IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from September 1st through October 31st or while supplies last. SPEND $60 GET 'MAN ENOUGH' Five women and you. They want it all. But its not going to be easy. An interactive social adventure, Man Enough features almost an hour of liveaction video, stimulating dialogue, which comes to life through digitized speech and 320 x 400 enhanced VGA graphics. CD $35 'CONQUERED KINGDOMS' Plunge into a medieval world to conquer Cascatia. Invade castles, fly over mountains and use the forests to your advantage. Features human and fantasy combat troops, 21 levels of difficulty modem play, and complete game scoring history. $12 Playmaker Football Combo, Cardinal of Kremlin 3.5, Darkhalf 3.5, Trump Castle 2 Data Disk 1 or 2 3.5 or 5.25, Gunship 5.25, Pirates 5.25, Star Legions 5.25, Magic Candle 2 5.25, MacArthurs War 5.25, Crimo Does Not Pay 5.25. Warlords 5.25. X-Men 5.25 SPEND $100 GET Airbome Ranger 5.25. Tegol's Mercenaries 5.25, Command HQ 5.25. F15 SE 25.25, M1 Tank Platoon 3.5, Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25, Red Storm Rising 3.5, Battles of Destiny 3.5 IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY $24 $36 $29 War in the Gulf $12 Warlords 2 Warlords 2 Scen Editor $29 Warlords $12 When Two Worlds War $24 Worlds at War X-Com: UFO Defense $39 X-Com: UFO Defns CD $41 $19 $29 IBM HINT BOOKS $39 $12 Caesar Campaign 2 $36 Cannon Fodder $22 Cannon Fodder CD $22 Capitalist Pig WIN S 19 Carriers at War Cnst Kit $34 Castles $19 Castles 2 $19 Castles 2 CD $48 Castles Northern Cpgn $12 Celtic Tales: Balor Evil $39 Chssmst 4000 Trb WIN $36 Civilization $44 Civilization WIN $48 Clash of Steel $39 Cohort 2 $18 Colonization $48 Colonization CD $48 *Command HQ Classic $18 Command and Conquer$38 Conquer for Windows $19 Conquered Kingdoms $19 Conquered Kingdoms 2 $36 Conqurd Kngdm Scn 1 $12 Conquest $36 Conquest of Japan $36 Crime City $12 Crisis in the Kremlin $32 Darklegions Darklegions CD Dead Zone CD Detroit $39 Discovry Sip Columbus $34 Dragon Force $12 Dragon Lord $9 Dune $21 Dune 2 $34 El Fish $34 Empire Builder Empire Deluxe $19 Empire Deluxe 2 $38 Empire Dix 2 WIN CD $39 Empire Dix Mstr Ed CD $23 Empire Dix Scenario 1 $21 Empire Deluxe WIN $35 Even More Incrdb Mach $28 Fantasy Empires $39 Fantasy Empires CD $42 Fantasy Fieldom CD $48 Fighting for Rome $12 Fort Apache $19 Front Lines Genghis Khan 2 $34 Gettysburg S29 Gettysburg: Turning Pt $18 Global Dominalion $34 Gobliiins 2 Princes Bfin $16 Gold of the Americas $24 Grandest Fleet $35 Grandest Fleet CD $35 Great Nav Btt Admrl Pk $19 Hammer of the Gods $42 Hannibal $26 Harpoon 2 Harpoon 2 Battle Set 1 $26 Harpoon Chalingr Pak $24 Heirs to the Throne $19 High Seas Trader $39 High Seas Trader CD $39 Hollywood Mogul $39 Humans CD S22 Humans: Insult to injury $9 Incredible Machine 2 S38 Incredible Mach 2 CD $39 Jagged Alliance CD $48 Jagged Alliance Sp Pk $22 Kingdoms of France $34 Kingdoms of Germany $34 Kingdm: Far Rchs CD $41 Kingmaker $34 Koshan Conspiracy S36 Koshan Conspiracy CD $19 L'Empereur S37 Lemmings Datadisk $19 Lemmings 2: Tribes $29 Lemmings 3 $39 Liberty or Death $37 Lords of the Realm $39 Lords of the Realm CD $39 Lost Admiral $19 Lost Admiral 2 $39 Lost Vikings Maelstrom $32 Master of Orion $39 Mega Lo Mania $19 Merchant Prince $39 Millenium Millenium Auction CD $48 New World Order $38 No World Order CD $24 Nobunaga's Ambition $37 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 $37 Objection $19 Operation Combat $12 Outpost Outpost CD Outpost Pint Add On CD$33 Patrician $34 Patrician CD S36 Pax Imperia $39 Perfect General $21 Perfect General 2 $36 Perfect General 2 CD $36 Perfect Gnrl Scn WW2 $16 Perfect Gnrl Scn 2 20th $24 Pirates Gold WIN S48 Populous 2 $28 Populous 2 Challenge $19 Power House $39 Power House CD $39 Powermonger Project USA $29 Project USA CD $29 Protostar CD $19 Rags to Riches $36 Railroad Tycoon 2 $39 Railroad Tycoon Cisc Reach for the Stars Realms $16 Red Zone S32 Robo Sport WIN $34 Romance 3 Kingdms 2 $39 Romance 3 Kingdms 3 $39 Rules of Engagement $9 Rules of Engagement 2 $29 Rules of Engag 2 Cpgn $19 Second Conflict WIN $34 Sert City: Life is Feudal $39 Seven Cities Gold 2 $19 Sid Meir's Civil War $58 Slege $12 Sioge With Exp Disk $19 Sim Ant $29 Sim Ant CD $41 Sim Ant Windows $34 Sim City $27 Sim City WIN S29 Sim City CD $47 Sim City Classic $26 Sim City Classic Win $26 Sim City 2000 $36 Sim City 2000 CD $45 Sim City 2000: Grt Dist $14 Sim City 2000 Windows $42 Sim Earth CD $40 Sim Earth WIN $29 Sim Farm $29 Sim Health $25 Sim Life $29 Sim Life WIN Sim Town $42 Sim Town CD $42 Smokin' Gun WIN $28 Space Hulk $19 Space Hulk CD $39 Space Miner $36 Space Raiders CD $42 Spaceward Ho! $36 Spaceward Ho! WIN $36 Spaceword Ho 3 WIN S29 Star Control 2 $39 Star Legions $12 Starlord CD $39 Starship: Rgrn Agnd CD$39 Stronghold CD $36 Sub Version $36 Tank $36 Task Force 1942 $36 Tegel's Mercenaries $9 Termintr 2 Chsswrs CD $27 The Complete UMS $44 Theatre of War $16 Ticonderoga $46 Unnatural Selection $29 Victory or Defeat WIN $42 Viking Conquest $36 Vikings 2 $36 Vikings Fields Conqust $19 Visions of Aftermath $12 Walls of Rome $39 $12 7th Gust 2: 11th Hr Gd $16 A-Train $16 Ace Maker Instr. Video $19 Aces Ovr Eurp Guide $16 Across the Rhine Gde $16 Advent Willie Beamish $10 Aegis: Gurdn Fleet Sirt $16 Aircombat Pacific Strat $16 Al Qadim Alone in the Dark2 $10 Arena $10 Bioforge $12 Blue Force: Next of kin $10 Castle Wolfenstein 3D $10 Castle of Dr Brain $10 Champions of Krynn $10 Civilization $16 Codename Iceman S10 Colonization: Strategy $16 Comptr Adv Gm Secrts $16 Conquests Robin Hood $10 Conquests of Camelot $10 Curse of Azure Bonds $10 Cyclones $12 Dark Queen of Krynn $10 Dark Sun $10 $42 $38 $38 S52 $39 $44 CGW OCT 6 Circle Reader Service #54 "


"CHPS & BITS Int'l 802-767-3033 Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'I 802-767-3033 Source 10119 PO Box 234 Dept 10119 Rochester, VT 05767 Source 10119 GO  \"DOOM 2' Sequel to the award-winning DOOM. DOOM 2 provides more levels, more demons, more weapons, more excitement and a whole new story line! Stunning graphics and intense gameplay make this the ultimate action game. Up to four players using a LAN. $45 'WING COMMANDER ARMANDA' You are now the sole commander, responsible for heading up a strike against your enemy. Pit yourself against a friend or fly with a friend against the computer via modem. Explore, fortify and mine up to 2,000 planets. S48 BONIO \"SOUND SCAPE' The first wavetable sound board that gives you professional 16-bit sound and compatibility with today's hottest game titles and multimedia applications. Offers compatibility with virtually all PC standards. $199 FREE Cliance of the LIGHT BRIGADE *THE CHARGE OF THE LIGHT BRIGADE' During the Crimean War, was one of the bravest, and saddest incidents in British Military History. Of the 673men who began the charge only 195 were fit for action at its end. Features 2 player mode, animated graphics, & tactical maps. $12 SHIPPING! Place an order for an out of stock item and recieve FREE overnight shipping when product becomes available. Handling $2 per shipment. DE UNDERWATER COMBAT SIMULATION 'SUBWAR 2050 Oceans have become a vital source of food, energy, and minerals. Corporations have turned the the sea into the world's most lucrative industry. Explore thousands of miles of 3D seascapes, pilot four submarines, and engage in simulated combat. $33 ANON MICROPROSE IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS IBM TRADITIONAL IBM TRADITIONAL Lord of the Rings V1 $12 Lord of the Rings V2 S12 Lost Files Sherick Hims $14 LucasArts Advt Book $16 LucasArts Air Cmbt Strt $16 Manhunter San Francs $10 Master of Orion Stratgy $16 Matrix Cubed $10 Menzoberranzan $12 Might & Magic 1 & 2 $10 Might & Magic 3 $16 Might & Magic 4 $16 Might & Magic 5 $16 Might & Magic Omondm $16 Off Bk Lsr St Larry 2nd $14 Off Bk Ultima 2nd Editn $16 Off Gde Wilco Spc Advt $14 $29 Dark Sun 2 $12 Doom Battlebook $14 Dracula Unleashd Strat $16 Dungeon Master $10 Dynamix Grt War Pins $16 EcoQuest Search Cetus$10 Eye of the Beholder $10 Eye of the Beholder 2 $12 Eye of the Beholder 3 $12 Fleet Defender Strategy $16 Flights of 13 Mike $16 Fred Phrks Fron Pharm $8 GEN Secrets of Game $10 Gabriel Knight $10 Gateway Svge Frontier $10 Global Cnqust Strt w/dk $21 Goblilins $10 Gold Rush Gunship 2000 $16 Hand of Fate $10 Harpoon 2 Strategy Gde$19 Heart of China $10 Inca 2 $10 Indi Jones 4 Ft Atlantis $10 Indy Jones Grix Adv S10 Inherit the Earth $16 Jetfighter 2.0 $16 King's Quest 4 S10 King's Quest 5 $10 King's Quest 6 $10 Laura Bow 2 HintBook $10 Leisure Suit Larry 1 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 2 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 3 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 5 $9 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $10 Lemmings /disk $18 Loom $10 Questbusters $18 Ultima 7 $12 Questbusters 2: Keys $18 Ultima 7 Pentology S12 Ravenlott $10 Ultima 7 & Uworld Book $16 Realms of Arkania $14 Ultima 7.5 Bincg Scales $16 Rebel Assault Insiders $16 Ultima Avatar Advt Bk $16 Return to Zork $9 Ultima U Stygian Abyss $12 Return to Zork Adventr $14 Ultima Uwrld 2 Lab Bk $12 Rise of the Dragon $10 V Victory $16 Rise Dragon SEGA CD $9 Wing Armada Playtstrs $12 Sam and Max S10 Wings of Glory Playtsirs $12 Sea Woll Strategy Gde $16 Wizardry 6 Csmc Forge $12 Secret Monkey Island $10W izardry 7 Secret Monkey Island 2 $10 X-Wing Official Strat S16 Secret Silver Blades $10 Yserbius $12 Shadow Caster S18 Shadow of Comet Strat $16 Sherlock Holmes Strat $16 IBM TRADITIONAL Sim City 2000 Strategy $16 Sim Earth $16 3D Pinball $12 Sim Farm Strat: Almnc $16 Acquire $9 Simlife Official Strategy $16 Armada Villa Crespo 59 Simon the Sorcerer Hint $10 Baseball Facts Sky Realms of Jorune $12 Battle Bugs Sonic Strategy Guide $16 Battle Chss 4000 SVGA $26 Space Quest 2 $10 Battle Chess 4000 VGA $19 Space Quest 3 $10 Battle Chess CD $45 Space Quest 4 $10 Battle Chess WIN $19 Star Trek 25th Aniv $12 Beat the House $29 Star Trek Judgmnt Rts $10 Blackjack $9 Strike Commander Olli S14 Bridge 7 $24 Stunt Island $16 Bridge Baron Windows $34 Subwar Official Stral $16 Bridge Deluxe CD $43 Summoning $16 Bridge Deluxe 2 $29 System Shock $12 Bridge Olympiad $29 Tie Fighter Strategy $16 CD-Romix 1 Hardcase $16 Treasures Svg Frontier $10 CD-Romix 2 Prime $16 Tunnels & Trolls $16 CD-Romix 3 Free X CD $16 Ultima 6 $10 Caesar's Wrld Gmg CD $37 Casino Game Pak WIN $19 Casino Mastr Gold WIN $43 Casino WIN $25 Checkmate WIN $36 Chess Net WIN $9 ChessManiac 5 Bill & 1 $39 Chssmnc 5 Bill & 1 CD $34 Chessmaster 3000 $29 Chessmaster 3000 CD $46 Chessmaster 3000 WIN $35 Classic 5 $19 Classic 5 WIN $24 Classic Casino WIN $16 Classic Solitaire WIN $16 Clue CD $19 Coffee Break Colict CD $29 Combination Lock $9 Demon Blue Dr Floyds Desktop Toys $14 Dr Thorp's mini Blackjack $9 Dr Wong's JK/Vid Pkr 5 $9 Even Mr Incrd Mach CD$39 Faces Tetris 3 S15 Gambit, Kasparov's $35 Game-Maker Ver 2.0 $48 Go Master Jr Ver 5 WIN$19 Go Master Tool Kit $26 Go Master Ver 4 WIN $39 Gofer's Winkel Adv CD $12 Grandmaster Chess CD$32 Hanna B. Animtn Wishp$39 Hard Day's Night CD $25 Hearts $12 Hong Kong Mh ng Pro $32 Hoyle's Bk Games V3 $29 Hoyle's Bk Games Cisc $29 Incredible Toons CD $39 Jeopardy Dlx WIN WAlx $34 Outpost Strategy Guide $16 Pacific Strike Playtsters $12 Police Quest 1 $10 Police Quest 2 $10 Police Quest 3 $10 Pool of Radiance $10 Pools of Darkness $12 Populous 182 Offi Strat $16 Power Monger Strategy $16 Powermonger $10 Privateer Playtester's $16 Protostar Quest For Clues 2 $21 Quest For Clues 3 $21 Quest for Clues 4 $21 Quest for Clues 5 $16 Quest for Clues 6 $16 Quest for Glory 3 $10 Quest for Glory 4 $10 Quest for Glory Stratgy $19 Jeopardy Dlx wAlex $34 Lexicross $24 Lucky's Casino Adventr $38 Mario Game Gallery $25 Monopoly Deluxe $27 Monopoly Deluxe WIN $29 Oligopoly Omar Sharif Brdge WIN $19 Omar Sharif on Bridge $19 On Target $9 Origamo $29 Pictionary $12 Pinball Arcade CD $35 Pinball Dreams Positronic Bridge $30 Power Poker WIN $39 Puzzle Gallery 1 Radio Actv: Msc Trv CD $24 Risk $28 Risk WIN $26 Russian Six Pack $15 Scrabble Deluxe $26 Scrabble Deluxe CD S25 Shanghaii 2 $19 Solitaire WIN $19 Solitaires Journey $12 Space Vegetables Spot Stan Wongs Video Pokr $19 Star Wars Chess $38 Star Wars Chess CD $44 Swap $29 Tactical Wizard $39 Terminator 2 Chss Wrs $37 Tetris Classic $26 Tetris Classic WIN $26 Trivia Madness CD $28 $24 Sorry $9 S6 S8 CGW OCT 7 "


"OVEANIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per orders Mall to Canada PR, HAK APO. FPO S4 per order. Worldwide alrmall 55 per item. Handling $2 per shipment. Visa, MC and Discover Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weeks Money Orders same as cash. COD $8. Delectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shipping ilmes may vary. Price availability may change. All sales linal. Call for details: FREE GAME OFFER* MULUI ReclMagie KO 'UNDER A KILLING MOON' Transports you to the world of the feisty detective Tex Murphy. Features allow you to save and splice scenes together. Digitized voices and an amazing level of detail & freedom of movement make this game visually & aurally stunning. CD S55 \"MIDWAY CincPac, short for Commander-inChief Pacific Fleet is your computer commander.Chose to play either Admiral Spruance, commander of Enterprise and Homet, or Admiral Nagumo, in charge of four Japanese fleet camers. Gather the information from the Tactical Map. $42 UNDES \"REEL MAGIC' Provides a complete package allowing full playback of video & stereo sound. Includes CD-ROM disk with a demonstration, premiere entertainment titles and the Reel Magic controller. Board $359 repot Seres une *FREE GAME OFFER MERCENARIES PATTYLES LESTINY Spend the specified amount on any in stock IBM software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from Septomber 1st through October 31st or whilo supplies last SPEND $60 GET 'TEGEL'S MERCENARIES' A futuristic strategy game with roleplaying character. General Tegel doesn't care who you hire as long as you get the job done. Exotic locales and sticky situations, a scenario builder to challenge advanced warriors, and digitized sound. $9 'BATTLES OF DESTINY' In order to conquer the world you must seek out and destroy up to three opponents. Features modem play; air, ground and naval combat; 22 units to construct; 20 worlds to conquer, and a complete player history $19 Playmaker Football Combo, Cardinal of Kremlin 3.5, Darkhalf 3.5, Trump Castle 2 Data Disk 1 or 2 3.5 or 5.25. Gunship 5.25. Pirates 5.25, Star Legions 5.25, Magic Candle 25.25, MacArthurs War 5.25, Crime Does Not Pay 5.25, Warlords 525, X-Men 5.25 SPEND $100 GET EMNINA Airborne Ranger 5.25, Tegel's Mercenaries 5.25, Command HO 5.25, F15 SE 25.25, M1 Tank Platoon 3.5 Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25. Red Storm Rising 3.5. Battles of Destiny 3.5 IBM TRADITIONAL IBM WAR GAMES IBM WAR GAMES IBM WAR GAMES IBM ADULT INTERACTIVE IBM ADULT MOTION $12 Trivial Pursuit CD $35 Trump Castle 2 DD1 $4 Trump Castle 2 DD2 $4 Trump Castle 3 Trump Castle 3 CD $29 Turn-n-Burn $9 Vegas Entrenmt PK WIN $21 Vegas Games Pak WIN $21 Video Cube CD $39 Videogame Solution CD $29 Virtual Reality Studio 2 $59 Wheel of Fortune $6 Wheel of Fortune 3 $9 Wheel of Fortune Dlx $34 Wheel Fortune Dlx WIN $34 Word Tris $27 Wrath of Demon CD $29 Zig-Zag $29 $39 Battles of Napoleon $18 Battleship Bismark $26 Beyond Squad Leader $45 Blitzkrieg Ardennes $19 Blue & The Gray CD $39 Blue and the Grey $38 Borodino Napleon Invds $24 Bravo Romeo Delta $24 Campaign $32 Campaign CD $35 Campaign Mission 1 $18 Carrier Strike Carrier Strike Exp Pak $19 Carriers at War $32 Carriers at War 2 $39 Charge of Light Brigade $12 Civil War No Grtr Glory $21 Conflict: Korea $19 Decision at Gettysburg $18 Dreadnoughts $29 Dreadnoughts Bismark $19 Dreadnoughts Deluxe $59 Dreadnoughts Ironcids $19 Fall Gelb $36 Fields of Glory S37 Fifth Eskadra $36 Fifth Fleet $39 Fifth Fleet CD $39 Fleet Med $27 Gary Grigsby Pacf War $44 Gary Grigsby Wr Russia$45 German Raider Atlantis $26 Gettysburg: Intr Batt CD$42 Golan Front $36 Grey Seas, Grey Skies $36 Halls of Montezuma $24 Harpoon Classic CD $28 Harpoon Designer Srs $7 High Command $34 Kampfgruppe $16 Kriegsmarine $36 Kursk Campaign $36 Last Blitzkrieg $40 Line in the Sand $12 Long Lance $39 MacArthur's War $9 Main Batt Tank C Germ $36 Main Batt Tank MidEast $36 Main Batt Tank N Germ $36 Malta Storm $36 Man of War $36 Mare Nostrum $26 Marianas Turkey Shoot S12 Midway $24 Moscow Campaign $36 Napoleonics $34 Northern Fleet $36 Operation Crusader $39 Operation Overlord $36 Pacifc Strm Mdwy Cpgn $36 Pacific Sirm Simn Cpgn $36 Panzer Battles Panzer General CD $39 Patriot $12 Point of Attack $32 Prelude to Jutland $24 Red Sky Morning $36 Return to Falklands $28 Rising Sun $24 Rd Sumter to Appomtx $45 Rommel Batt for N Afrca$24 Rommel at El Alamein $36 Rommel at Gazala $36 Second Front $21 Seventh Fleet $36 Stalingrad $39 Stalingrad Campaign $36 Storm Across Europe Task Force 1942 $36 The Great War $39 Third Reich $34 Tigers on the Prowl $48 To The Rhine $36 Typhoon of Steel $21 UMS 2 $12 UMS 2 Planet Editor $9 Under Fire $12 V Victory Market Gardn $19 V Victory: Gld, Jn. Swrd $34 V Victory: Utah Beach $19 V Victory: Velikye Luki $19 Victory at Sea $43 War in the Falklands $24 Wargame Cnt St 2: Tnk $39 Warpoint $36 Warship Chngd History $26 Waterloo $19 White Death $19 WW2 Batt of S. Pacific $21 Girlfriend Suzie (R) $44 Girlfriend Teri (R) $49 Hot Slots CD $39 Intract Adv Semt Bt 2 $59 Interactive Lovers CD $45 Int'l Strip Poker CD $34 Ladies Club Pkr Nit CD $35 Love Slaves CD $39 Maddams Familly CD $49 Midnight Stranger CD $59 Neurodancer CD $59 Nightwatch Intract 2 CD $45 Paradise Club CD $69 Penthouse Intract 2 CD $64 Penthouse Intract 3 CD $64 Scissrs N' Sins WIN CD $59 Secrets Interactive CD $35 Sexual Obsession CD $34 Sorority House CD $49 Space Sirens CD $69 Spy Club (R) CD $59 Strip Poker Professional$34 Surfer Girls CD $39 Virtual Vegas CD $24 Virtual Vixens CD $59 Winner Takes All CD $39 Art of Pleasing Lovr CD $32 Asian Invasion CD $19 Baby's Got Butt CD $32 Bare Assets CD $39 Beaverly Hillbillies CD $19 Best Digital XTC 1 CD $39 Best Drty Debtnts 1 CD $49 Best of Inferno CD $39 Best of Vivid CD $36 Best Barlow Affairs CD $39 Best of Best V. 1 CD $19 Best of Best V. 2 CD $29 Best of Best V. 3 CD $34 Best of Best V. 4 CD $34 Betrayal CD $36 Beverly Hills 90269 CD $39 Beyond Explicit CD $28 Big Bust Babes CD $28 Big Town CD $39 Blond Justice CD $25 Bodycello CD Bra Busting Babes CD $29 Busting Out CD $39 Buttman's Euro Vctn CD$39 CD Rom Collectbls CD $26 Cafe Flesh CD $29 California Daydrmer CD $29 Camp Double D CD $29 Cat and Mouse CD $39 Cheating CD $25 Condo Cuties CD $34 Curse of Catwoman CD $26 Dangerous Blondes CD $34 Debby Does Dallas CD $38 Deception CD $39 Deep Throat CD $36 Deep Throat Girls CD $29 Digital Seduction CD $34 IBM WAR GAMES $12 IBM ADULT INTERACTIVE IBM ADULT MOTION Action North Atlantic $26 Action Stations Scen 1 $3 Action of River Platte $26 Aegis: Guardn Fleet CD $53 Aide de Camp $54 Air Raid Pearl Harbour $22 American Civil War V1 $24 American Civil War V2 $24 American Civil War V3 $24 Banzai Battle Stations $20 Battle Tank Barbarossa $36 Battle Tank Kursk $39 Battle of Austerlitz $24 Battle of Leyte Gulf $24 Battle of the Atlantic $36 S9 CD Brothel CD $29 Centrlids & Cvrgris CD $32 Come Play With Me CD $36 Cyber-Peep Intrety CD $19 Desktop Mistress CD $54 Desktop Voyeur V. 1 CD$54 Digital Dancing CD $36 Dream Girl CD $29 Dream Machine CD $59 Fantasies Intractive CD $35 Fox Pack CD $39 Adult Movie Almanc CD $59 Advt of Mikki Finn CD $39 After Dark Trilogy CD $33 Amateur Models 2 CD $34 Amateur Video WIN CD $22 Amorous Asian Girls CD$32 Animated Fantasies CD $34 Animatd Fantsies 2 CD $34 CGW OCT B Circle Reader Service #54 "


"CHIPS & BITS THE Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'I 802-767-3033 Source 10119 PO Box 234 Dept 10119 Rochester, VT 05767 BATTAVO or the MUSTER FALCON 'MASTERS OF ORION' is a fascinating game of space exploration, combat, and strategy set in the future. You must conquer over half the known star systems. Includes 10 different alien races with which to trade, battle and negotiate. Build a powerful fleet of spaceships. $39 'KNIGHTS OF XENTAR' Forcenturies, war has raged among the demons and fairies, devastating this mystical land. TWO knights are chosen for the ultimate battle that decides the fate of heaven and earth. As Desmond you will be striving to overcome menacing foes. $44 'FALCON 3.0' Plot the West's most proven dogfighter, the F16 Fighting Falcon. As the commander you'll lead a flight of up to eight jets through three explosive campaigns. Offers instant action mode for arcade. varied skill levels and unique weapons. $46 MICROPROSE KNIGHTS XENTAR FREE FAR INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT! 'INCA 2' Set 500 years in the future, aboard a Lost City afloat in space they fly ships cut from stone and forged from brass and tin. They fight against evil conquistadors that navigate the heavens. An asteroid brings danger to the empire. Prepare for battle at the helm of a stolen spaceship. CD $24 Receive an episode of Interactive Entertainment, the world's first CD MAG devoted to entertainment software, FREE with every CD ROM software order. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from September 1st to October 31st or while supplies last. HAT 'SOUND GALAXY NX PRO 16' supports the 5 most popular sound cards. Features CD ROM interface, 16 Bit stereo playback up to 14.4 KHz, volume control, midi interface, 4 walt amp, and software setup. $139 IBM ADULT MOTION IBM ADULT MOTION IBM ADULT MOTION IBM ADULT STILLS IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET $12 se Tracy I Love You CD $29 Treasure Chest CD $24 Ultimate Teasers CD $29 Ultra Sex CD $29 Urotsukidoji CD $25 Urotsukidoji Pr Cilt CD $69 Virgins V. 1 CD $39 Virtual Vivid CD $12 Volcano CD $34 Wanda 2 CD $28 Weekend at Ernies CD $26 Wickd Q-Tme Movie CD$39 Wicked Whispers CD $29 Womn Who Lv Men CD $32 X-Rated Bloopers CD $27 $6 $24 IBM ADULT STILLS Dirly Adult Cartoons CD $38 Dirty Debutantes CD $28 Dirty Laundry CD $39 Divorce Law (R) CD $22 Doors of Passion CD $36 Dungn Dominance CD $36 Ecstacy CD $34 Endangered CD $29 ErotiCale CD S48 Frat Girls Double D CD $39 Girls Doin' Girls CD $25 Girls from Big East CD $39 Girls of Mardi Gras CD $39 Girls with Girls CD $39 Graduatn From F.U. CD $39 Group Therapy CD $39 Hidden Agenda CD $39 Hidden Obsessions CD $28 Hollywood Scandal CD $39 House of Dreams CD $24 House Sleep Beauts CD$39 Immortal Desires CD $25 Indiscretion CD $39 Insatiable CD $32 Intrct Adv Chssie Mr CD$39 Kama Sutra CD $38 L.A. Strippers CD $34 Leather & Lace CD $39 Legend 4 CD $28 Legends of Porn 1 CD $25 Legends of Porn 2 CD $25 Loads of Fun CD $32 Love Bites CD $26 Main Street USA CD $26 Mark of Zara CD $38 Mask CD $25 Model's Memoirs CD $48 Murphy's Brown CD $39 Mystique of Orient CD $34 New Wave Hkrs 1 CD $29 New Wave Hkrs 2 CD $32 Night Trips CD $29 Night at Drive-In (R) CD $26 Nova Collect Vol 3 CD $24 Orient XXXPress CD $29 Pandor....AAAH'S CD $27 Parlor Games CD S25 Pink Lady CD $19 Pixis Adult Sampler CD $12 Planet X CD $36 Racquelle Released CD $34 Rimfire Pacifc Video CD $32 Sakura CD Secrets CD $32 Seductions CD $29 Sex CD $25 Semr Bt Blwn Away CD $36 Semr Bl Insd Shane CD $36 Semr Bt Paradise CD $36 Semr Bt Honeymn CD $36 Sinfully Yours CD $29 Sizzle CD $26 Steamy Windows CD $25 Super Mdls Go Wild CD $39 Superstars of Porn CD $24 Swap 2 CD $26 Taste of Erotica Spl CD $12 Temptation CD The Coven CD $25 The Devil Ms Jones CD $34 The Face CD The Fishrmn's Wife CD $38 The Othr Sd Chlsea CD $29 The Swap CD $25 Touch Me, Feel Me CD $34 Toy's Not Boys CD $29 Creme de la Creme CD $29 Double Play Vol 1 CD $36 Double Play Vol 2 CD $36 Erotica CD $34 European Erotica CD $34 Eurotica CD $19 Exotic Girls 3 in 1 CD $24 Expose CD $24 Extreme Delight CD $28 G.I.Fs keep Giving CD $27 Girls Steven J Hicks CD $29 Girls of Vivid V. 1 CD $29 Girls of Vivid V.2 CD $32 Girls on Girls CD Girls, Girls, Girls CD $29 Glamour Girls 1943 CD $36 Heavenly Bodies 1 CD $39 Heavenly Bodies 2 CD $39 Heavenly Bodies 3 CD $39 High Volume Nudes CD $28 Hooter Heavens CD S36 L.A. Lust CD $19 Local Girls V.2 CD $22 Lovely Ladies II CD $39 Massive Mellons CD $39 More Northrn Dights CD$34 Northern Delights CD $32 Nova Collection V. 1 CD $26 Nova Collection V.2 CD $24 Overexposed CD $39 Select A Pet CD Sexiest Women on CD $24 Sexiest Womn on CD 2 $24 Southern Beauties CD $34 Super Smutware CD $26 Sweet Dreams CD $29 Undergrnd Adult Rir CD $26 Women of Venus CD $22 3 D Pinball $12 ATP Flight Simultr 1.0 $12 Acquire $9 Air Force Commander $9 Armada Villa Crespo $9 Banzai $9 Bard's Tale Constructn $12 Baseball Facts $9 Battle Command Bball Chall 1987 Teams $9 Bball Chall 1988 Teams $9 Bball Chall 1989 Teams $9 Blackjack $9 Blue Max Aces Grt War $9 Boom Box $12 Captain Blood Castles Northern Cpgn $12 Champions of Krynn $12 Charge of Light Brigade $12 Chess Net WIN Combination Lock $9 Conqueror Multi Tank $6 Covert Action $6 Crime City $12 *Crime Does Not Pay $12 Demon Blue Don't Go Alone Dr Doom's Revenge $9 Dr Thorp's mini Blackjack $9 Dr Wong's Jk/Vid Pkr 5 $9 Dragon Force $12 Dragon Lord $9 Dragon Strike $12 Dragons of Flame $9 EMotion $6 Fighting for Rome $12 Finale $3 Free DC $9 Gamma Force Gofer's Winkel Adv CD $12 Hearts Heatwave Heroes of the 357th $12 Hole In One Mini Golf SE Hole In 1 Mini Glf Crs Dk $ Humans: Insult to Injury $s International Sports Chall$ Jack Nicklaus Clip Art $ Jack Nicklaus Crs Disk 3 $ Jack Nicklaus Crs Disk 5 $Jack Nicklaus SE Crs 1 $Killing Cloud Lightspeed Line in the Sand $1E Lost Vikings $15 \"MacArthur's War $ Madden Plyr Stats 1989 SE \"Magic Candle 2 $5 Magic Candle 3 SS Marianas Turkey Shoot $12 Matrix Cubed SS MegaFortress $15 *Mega Traveller.Zhodani se Mega Traveller 2 $12 ML Baseball All Stars $15 ML Bsball Manage's Ch $15 Micro League Fball 2 $15 MicroL BB Seattle 13 $15 Millenium Never Mind New Facilities Locator $ NFL Chall Col Almn Tms $ NFL Chall Pre Ssn 90 $ NFL Chall Pre Ssn 91 $ NFL Chall All Star Team S NFL Chall Dream Teams $ 101 Sex Positions CD $39 101 Sex Positions 2 CD $39 3D Beauties CD $19 3D Darling CD $34 3D Dream Girls CD $36 94-95 CDX Calendr CD $29 Adult Palate 2 CD $29 Amateur Allstars CD $29 Amateur Models CD $22 American Girls CD $32 American Girls 2 CD $34 American Pie CD $19 Asian Hot Pix CD $19 Asian Palate CD $34 Asian Palate V.2 CD $36 Biker Babes CD $29 Bodacious Beauties CD $36 Busty Babes 2 CD $36 College Girls CD $36 $28 CGW OCT 9 "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR HI, AK, APO, FPO S4 per order. Worldwide airmail S6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment. Visa, MO and Discover Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders same as cash COD S8. Detectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day Shinping times may vary Price availability may change. All sales final. Call for details. FREE GAME OFFER* STRATEGY Dreadnaughts T ERENU SEA BARU UFO DEFENSE 'DREADNOUGHTS DELUXE' Includes Dreadnoughts and the Bismark and Ironcalds scenarios. Models the looks and tactics of fighting fleets during the great age of the battleship. Features menu interface, external 3D view and hidden movement. $59 IN \"X-COM: UFO DE FENSE'You control X-COM, formed by the world's goverments to fight the aliens. Shoot UFO's down and investigate the site. Make the crucial decisions, complete ground missions to help scientists and tackle the aliens with rifles and rocket launchers. CD $39 'SOUND GALAXY NX2' Provides total software compatibility and supports the 4 most popular sound standards. With built-in CD-ROM interface, Sound Galaxy NX2 is top in its class. Includes speakers. $59 MICROPROSE *FREE GAME OFFER Spend the specified amount on any in stock IBM software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Otter subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from September 1st through October 31st or while supplies last SPEND $60 GET 'INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT' the world's first CD MAG, is an episode of interactive television for your CD Rom. Devoted to entertainment software, IE features full-motion reviews, multimedia hints and tips, and interactive video interviews with key figures in the gaming industry. CD S9 \"MAGIC CANDLE 2'30 characters will join your hero, for specific quests or as long-term companions. Fight the forces of darkness. Sail to the farthest comers of the continent of Gurtex, lose yourself in the intrigue and face the horrors of the dungeons, catacombs and dark towers. Playmaker Football Combo, Cardinal of Kremlin 3.5, Darkhall 3.5 Trump Castle 2 Data Disk 1 or 2 3.5 or 5.25. Gunship 5.25 Pirates 5.25, Star Legions 5.25, Magic Candle 25.25, MacArthurs War 5.25, Crime Does Not Pay 5.25. Warlords 5.25, X-Men 5.25 LTH OUR PREVIEW THE FIGHTENINTERVIEW SPEND $100 GET Airbome Ranger 5.25, Tegel's Mercenaries 5.25, Command HO 5.25, F15 SE 25.25, M1 Tank Platoon 3.5 Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25, Red Storm Rising 3.5. Battles of Destiny 3.5 $9 IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET JAGUAR JAGUAR 3DO 3DO $52 $46 VR Stalker Vikings Way of the Warrior Who Shot John Rock Wing Commander World Cp Gif Dorado $52 $52 $49 $9 $12 $42 Tony LaRussa BB 1991 S12 Tony LaRussa Baseball $9 Treasures Suge Frontier $9 Trump Castle 2 DD1 S4 Trump Castle 2 DD2 S4 Turn-n-Burn UMS 2 Planet Editor Under Fire $12 Visions of Aftermath $12 Wacky Funster $9 War in the Gulf $12 War of the Lance S9 Warlords $12 Weaver Tm/Plyr Stats 89 $3 Wheel of Fortune Wheel of Fortune 3 Xiphos Soccer Kid $54 Space Wars $52 Star Raiders 2000 $52 Syndicate $54 Tempest 2000 $52 Theme Park $54 Tiny Toon Adventures $52 Troy Aikman Football $58 Ultimate Brain Games $56 Ultra Vortex $62 Valus Force $54 White Men Can't Jump $54 Wild Cup Soccer $54 World Cup Kickoff Scr $54 Zool 2 $54 NEO GEO $19 $9 $46 S9 3DO $6 NFL Proleague Fball $12 NFL Video Football $12 Obliterator $6 Oligopoly S9 On Target Operation Combat $12 Patriot Pick'n Pite $6 Pictionary $12 Power Politics WIN $12 ProFball Analyst 92 Edi $9 Puzzle Gallery 1 Rotox $9 Rules of Engagement $9 S.C. Out $12 Scenery Collin California $9 Scenery Collt Grt Britain S9 SDI Sentinel Worlds 1 $9 Shadow Sorcerer Siege $12 Sleeping Gods Lie Sorry Space Vegetables Sporting Triangle Spot Star Legions $12 Storm Across Europe $12 Taking of Beverly Hills 96 Teenage Mut Ninja Trt $12 *Tegel's Mercenaries $9 Teran Envoy Test Drive 3:Road & Car $9 Tho Tinies $12 Thunderhawk $6 Tie Break Tennis $9 Tony LRussa Cisc Stad S12 Tony LaRussa BB 1990 $12 JAGUAR Car Wars S54 Castle Wolfenstein 3D $54 Chaos Agenda CD $52 Checkered Flag 2 $58 Club Drive $52 Creature Shock $52 Crescent Galaxy Demolition Man $52 Doom $58 Double Dragon 5 $52 Dragon $52 Dragon's Lair $54 Dragon's Lair CD $52 Dune $54 Dungeon Depths European Soccer Chall $56 Evolution:Dino Dudes $44 Flashback S52 Galactic Gladiators $54 Gunship 2000 $54 Hardball 3 $52 Highlander CD $52 Horrorscope $54 Hosenose & Booger $54 Iron Soldier $52 Jack Nicklaus Golf CD $52 Jaguar Formula 1 Race $54 Kasumi Ninja $54 Legions of the Undead $52 Lester the Unlikely S54 NFL Football $54 Pinball Dreams Pinball Fantasies $52 Raiden $44 Rayman $54 Return to Zork $54 Rise of the Robots $54 Robinson's Requiem $54 FIFA Internalnal Soccer $52 Family Feud $52 Flying Nightmares $52 GEX $52 Gridders $49 Horde $52 Incredible Machine $52 Jurassic Park $52 Kingdom:Far Reaches $46 Lost Files Sherick Hims $49 Mad Dog McCree 2 $52 Madden Football $49 Megarace $44 Microcosm $52 Off World Interceptor $52 Out of this World PGA Tour GA $52 Pataank $52 Pebble Beach Golf $52 Red Baron $52 Rise of the Robots $49 Road Rash $56 Rock & Roll Racing $49 SHADOW:Wr Sucssion $52 Samurai Showdown S52 Sewer Shark $52 Shadow Caster $52 Shock Wave Slayer $52 Space Pirates $52 Star Control 2 $52 Star Trek Next Genertn $54 Star Wars Chess $52 Super Street Fighter 2 $56 Syndicate $52 Theme Park $52 Trance Mission $56 Twisted $49 $56 Neo Geo Gold System $569 3 Count Bout $199 Art of Fighting 2 $199 Baseball Stars Pro $139 Fatal Fury $99 Fatal Fury 2 $199 Fatal Fury Special $199 Karnov's Revenge $199 King of the Monsters 2 $169 King of the Monsters $99 Magician Lord $99 Nam 1975 $149 Ninja Combat $99 Riding Hero $129 Samurai Showdown S199 Sengoku 2 $199 Spin Master $199 Super 8 Man $99 Super Sideks Soccer $169 Super Sideks Soccr 2 $199 Super Spy $99 Survivor Thrash Rally $129 Top Hunter $199 Top Players Golf $119 Windjammers $199 World Heroes 2 Jet $199 World Heroes 2 $199 Jaguar System $249 Jaguar CD System S199 Air Car Wars $49 Alien Vs Predator $58 Arena Football $54 Assault S49 BIOS Fear $54 Barkley Basketball CD $52 Battle Morph CD $52 Battle Wheels Battle Zone 2000 $52 Blue Lightning CD $52 BrainDead 13 CD $49 Brett Hull Hockey $58 Brutal Sports Football $56 Bubsy $44 Cannon Fodder $54 $56 3DO System $449 11th Hour $59 Atlas $62 Air Warrior $52 Alone in the Dark $46 Battle Chess $46 BrainDead 13 $49 Claylighter 2 $46 Creature Shock CyberClash $52 Cyberia S46 Demolition Man $56 DinoBlaze S56 Doom Dragon Tales $46 Dragons Lair 2:Tm Wrp $52 Duelin' Firomen $52 ESPN Baseball Escape Monster Manor $52 $54 S9 $52 $199 $52 CGW OCT 10 Circle Reader Service #54 "


"REVIEW  The TIES That Bind Unify The Galaxy Under The Emperor's Iron Hand In LucasArts' TIE FIGHTER by Jeff James TE HE WORLD OF FICTION IS FILLED Empire, LucasArts created an interesting Unlike X-WING, which held more closeWITH DIAMETRICALLY OPPOSED moral dilemma. How can players fightly to the original concept of the films, TIE FORCES: KING ARTHUR AND against the Rebels-heroes of the Star FIGHTER incorporates data from many Morgan LeFay, Robin Hood and Wars films-and cozy up to the Empire sources. In addition to the three Star Wars Prince John, Gandalf and Sauron. Presenting the Empire in a positive light films, TIE FIGHTER draws inspiration In the world of George Lucas' Star Wars is a task that would make even the most from Timothy Zahn's Star Wars novels trilogy, those irreconcilable positions are accomplished of political spin doctors which, among other embellishments, inheld by Darth Vader, as evil representablanch, but LucasArts has handled this troduce the nefarious Admiral Thrawn. tive of the EmTIE FIGHTER delicate issue with This commingling of creative sources repire, and Luke aplomb, casting the sults in a deeper game world than that of Price: $63.95 Skywalker, the Empire in a newX-WING, filled with the gritty detail that Requirements: fair-haired poster FIGHTER yet ultimately baneStar Wars fans will appreciate. IBM compatible child of the Rebel 386-33Mhz ful—light. Instead of Alliance. In X (486 recombeing the band of FIT TO BE TIED WING, LucasArts mended), 1MB goose-stepping inThe heart of TIE FIGHTER is what ultifirst attempt at RAM (2MB tergalactic thugs that mately made its progenitor so successful: bringing the Star recommended) movie-goers saw in an addictively playable polygon-generatVGA graphics, Wars saga to comthe three Star Wars ed flight experience. TIE FIGHTER brings 15 MB hard puter gamers, the drive space, films, the Empire in a mound of new features and improveplayer was cast as joystick; supports PAS, Roland, Sound TIE FIGHTER is porments to the venerable flight model used a young starfight Blaster (Pro, 16, AWE32) sound cards. trayed as a unionist in X-WING, with the most noticeable beer pilot fighting Protection: Documentation check force promoting law ing the improved graphic quality. Each for the Rebels. Designers: Lawrence Holland and Edward and order through of the objects in TIE are Gouraud shadKilham With the release out the galaxy.ed, making each appear more defined Publisher: LucasArts of TIE FIGHTER, San Rafael, CA Much like the North and realistic. Computer-controlled ships LucasArts has (800) STAR WAR during the Amerireact more intelligently during combat, made an enorcan Civil War, the performing intricate maneuvers and apmous shift in the Force, giving gamers Empire is attempting to restore order to pearing to fly as if their pilots actually the chance to take the controls of an Ima war-torn society and keep the Empire wanted to survive to see another mission. perial TIE fighter and become the Emin one piece. The rebels are painted in TIE FIGHTER also brings a number of pire's agent of retribution against the broad, blood-soaked strokes as ruthless welcome improvements to the cockpit. In Rebel Alliance. terrorists and pirates. The player is X-WING, a static picture of the selected thrown into the mix as a fresh recruit in target provided a limited amount of inUNIONISTS AND TERRORISTS the Imperial Navy, ready to risk all to rid formation on the currently targeted craft. In casting the player as an agent of the the galaxy of those pesky Rebel scum. In TIE FIGHTER, that display has been re82 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"U inflight Map CENTERS HAP ON TARGET CHECA ELUL 4 FIGHTER provides a number of training and mission options. In the training simulator, the player must navigate an Imperial craft through a series of obstacle-filled tubes. Accomplish four training levels in the same craft and you're awarded a training patch. Next up is the combat chamber, which gives players the opportunity to put each of the craft through their paces in a variety of combat missions. The combat chamber can also be used to replay battles that liave already been fought in actual combat missions. As the player progresses through combat after combat, the completed missions will appear here, ready for replay. The tech room provides a rotating 3D image and a variety of stats on each craft in the game, while the film placed by a real-time, 3D, angled view of JUST LIKE SHOOTING BEGGARS room allows you to view your latest exa target, with more detailed information BACK IN REBEL'S CANYON ploits on tape. Finally, the battles secon the shield, hull and system strength of One of the most controversial aspects of tion-similar to a Tour of Duty in the craft. For even more info, pressing the original X-WING was the migraine-inX-WING-puts you into front line action. the «Z» key will bring up the threat disducing difficulty of some of the missions. At the outset, there are only four batplay, which offers detailed information While some missions where relatively tles available covering expected Imperial on the weapons, target and status of the simple to complete, others required an conflicts: pursuing rebels, quelling civil selected ship. One irksome foible in Xalmost supernatural level WING concerned the defense of missionof coordination and reSPACEZAR TOCCLES 2-073-0 HODE critical craft: in a swirling melee of flexes, leaving some playfighters and other vessels, it was difficulters practically ripping PONOTI One to determine which ships were actually their joysticks to splinters attacking the vessel you were attempting after repeated mission to defend. In TIE FIGHTER, you simply failures. Thankfully, TIE target the craft needing protection, then FIGHTER provides a numpress the \"A\" key. This will immediately ber of solutions to this highlight and target the nearest attacker problem. First, there are of the targeted craft, which is extremely three difficulty levels: useful for defending weak-shielded trans\"easy\" for novice players, ports and the like. In the map depart-\"medium\" for standard ment, the flat 2-D map in X-WING has play, and \"hard\" for been replaced with a 3-D light map in masochists. Plaving at the FRIEND OR REBEL SCUM? The flight map shows the position of which you can use the mouse or joystick easy level will cause a 25% bogies, friendlies, and neutrals in both 2and 3-D. to zoom in, zoom out and circle around point penalty to be allotall the craft in the vicinity. ted in each mission, while playing at the war, building a base on the galaxy fronhard level adds a 25% tier, and battling pirates on the outer point bonus. rim. As the player advances through the Second, no TIE Fighter storyline, more battles become available. is an island; you can usual Perhaps the most impressive element ly call for reinforcements of TIE FIGHTER is the plot and setting. during a battle by pressing The Empire is filled with intrigue and \"SHIFT-S.\" Supply vessels rife with treachery, with secret societies are usually available if you and other factions vying for ultimate conneed to reload your mistrol of the Empire. This complexity of siles or torpedoes during plot and setting goes several steps bethe battle. Finally, a flight yond the storyline presented in the Xofficer provides you with a WING series, in which the comparatively 2-95 Headhunter Blue 2 has been destroyed. helpful menu of advice ho-hum story always pitted the player GOT THOSE HEADHUNTER BLUES A TIE Advanced pulls escort duty and information, both be against the forces of the Empire. In one for a Star Destroyer and tries to stay intact despite losing its front fore and after the battle battle, an opportunistic Admiral decides shields in a scrape with Rebel forces. has been fought. to defect from the Empire and side with Just as in X-WING, TIE the rebels, which ultimately results in a DLATONALI IMPERIALS! SHO! NEUTGILS: SHOHIN NO CARS FUSELRCEV OCTOBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 83 "


"100 100. TYMIN LASA TU conflict in which TIE fighters and star deflying deathtrap that tends stroyers are battling one another. For to rupture like a thinfaithful X-WING pilots who consider shelled piata at the first themselves to be Rebel to the core, this sign of trouble. Thankfulengagement gives them the opportunity ly, the standard TIE is to finally give in to the good side and generally employed in blast some TIES. missions where the oppoIn keeping with the layered storyline, sition is mediocre at best. players can choose two paths of advance. In addition to new craft CRU HAR QUUN ment in the Imperial Navy. In the first, to fly, powerful new players can simply accept the missions weaponry becomes availgiven by their officer and advance able through the course of TIE Detender Della u entering area of 2 km through the ranks normally. But in addithe game. Advanced mistion, the player can join the Secret Order siles and torpedoes fly DON'T SHOOT OR I'LL MOVE A TIE Defender spot welds a Rebel of the Emperor, a secret society of Impefaster, track longer and Corvette with quad laser cannon. A couple more shots like that and rial officers dedicated to the Emperor inflict more damage than the crew will be sucking vacuum. and his aims. As expected, the Empire is their less-advanced counextremely intolerant of incompetence: terparts. Still further into the game, adgraphics are improved over X-WING, they fail too many missions, and your pilot is vanced secret weapons-such as a fall short when compared to the texturelikely to be shipped off to a sweltering pint-sized tractor beam to lasso a fast mapped objects found in other products. jungle Gulag for an indefinite vacation. moving target and reel it in for the kill LucasArts opted for the more responsive become available. gameplay that polygon graphics provide, SECRET WEAPONS In addition to new fighters, the world resulting in greater playability. The arguOF THE IMPERIAL WAFFEN of TIE Fighter is filled with more than a ment between graphics quality and playaA rich game world amounts to nothing if dozen new types of support craft. New bility is a heated one, and TIE strikes a you don't have a speedy craft equipped mine and container types provide an nearly ideal balance. TIE shares a few with laser cannons to explore it. TIE endlessly diverse mix of obstacles to delimitations with X-WING: players can't FIGHTER doesn't disappoint, giving playstroy and avoid, while new transport and choose their spacecraft when lighting in ers an impressive number of Imperial attack craft are given for both the Rebels battle missions—you fly what you are asand the Empire. Even the signed. TIE also does not allow players to Tractor beam slows other ship class to which the noassign their own wingmen. In the Orcraft down so that they torious Millennium Falwellian world of the Empire, your wingare easier to attack. con belongs is men have been chosen for you. Finally, included the speedy X-WING grognards may find many of the Corellian transport. Inmissions-even at the \"Hard\" difficulty cluded among the new setting-to be a bit on the easy side. Imperial capital ships is These quibbles detract little from what Blast rating of 150 BLS Exit Velocity of 140 MGLT the Interdictor Star Deis a clearly superlative product. There Homes for up to 50 seconds stroyer, a deadly craft simply isn't much to dislike about the LAUNCH which has the nasty capagame. With its addictive game-play, BRIEFING bility of preventing hyperpulse-pounding soundtrack and engrossspace travel within a ing storyline, TIE FIGHTER is clearly the LOAD IT FOR BEAR Unlike X-WING, you can equip your Imperial craft certain range, perfect for best space combat game yet released capturing enemy vessels. from the creative folks at LucasArts. Mowith armaments like advanced torpedoes and tractor beams to fry Rebel craft like a womp rat in a reactor vent. Every pilot fights better dem and serial support would have been with a rousing light song welcome, but enough said. The Empire filling his ears, and Impewill have you, young one; serve well, and craft to pilot. In addition to the standard rial pilots are no exception. The music is you will have your reward. TIE lighter, TIE FIGHTER give players the artfully crafted, with a driving, martial chance to sit behind the controls of the tempo not unlike a forceful Red Army THE EDITORS SPEAK TIE interceptor, TIE bomber, Assault marching tune crossed with a heroic TIE FIGHTER Gunboat, and the very latest in TIE techJohn Williams soundtrack. As in X-WING, nology: the TIE Advanced. If the player LucasArts has reproduced the unique RATING  chooses to delve into the campaign sounds of the Star Wars universe-such PROS An excellent sequel to a games, an even more powerful TIE Fightas the screeching wail of a TIE lighter gaming classic. TIE FIGHTER brings er will be developed and placed into serand the sizzling \"blat\" of a Rebel laser loads of new and improved features, vice: the TIE Defender, a three-winged cannon—with remarkable accuracy. and a great story to a proven game terror that is sure to give Rebel pilots the system. jitters. DEBRIEFING CONS Veteran X-Wingers may scoff At the beginning, however, the player As polished as TIE FIGHTER is, a few at the easier mission difficulty. must make due with the standard TIE, a blemishes are apparent. Although the Tractor Ceam Advanced Torpedo 84 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"REMEMBER THAT GAME YOU PLAYED SO MUCH YOU LOST YOUR GIRLFRIEND... YOUR JOB... YOUR CAR... GOOD NEWS... IT'S BACK. (LODE RUNNER THE LEGEND RETURNS T UFITATEARATON TEL TUT It's more addicting than ever. With all new graphics and sound effects, plus 150 new levels of non-stop action. Play alone or head-to-head. Use the Lightning-fast Game Generator to create torturous worlds of your own. See your retailer or call 1-800-757-7707 (Ask for offer D845). SIERRA THE LEGENDS Available for: DOS, Windows, MAC, DOS CD-ROM. LODE RUNNER is a registered trademark licensed exclusively to Douglas E. Smith, 1983, 1994 Douglas E. Smith, Sierra On-Line Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #181 "


"Is What Happens When Eng But Have To Drive Over TAXI With a 5-liter V8 and lwin 50mm machine guns, the O-CAB will blow away anything else on the road. NXT PCTM A restraining device in harmony with our ouerall philosophy: the best defense is a good offense. You are a 21st Century cabby in a 52 Checker hovercab armed with machine guns. Pick up or With a revolutionary new titanium bumper manencrability simply wasn't a priority. SYAAB 90000 O CAB GAMETEK WETEK Available for IBM PCs and compatibles on 35 disks and PC CD-ROM. Coming soon for 3DO. To test drive a Q-CAB, visit your local QUARANTINE retailer or call 1-800-GAME "


"neers Work In An Ivory Tower Few Pedestrians To Get There ANT To make your journey as peaceful as possible, we've installed a targeting system that can eliminate the inconvenience of busy crosswalks. A full 180 degrees of unobstructed visibility. Offering the driver complete awareness of the road, making potential accidents easier to pursue. op off fares as you shoot your way through the quarantined city of Kemo. Escape if you can. QUARANTINE The relentless pursuit of the pedestrian. Il boasts an impressive drug coefficient of 0.60. 1994 Game Tek/Imagexcel. All Rights Reserved Circle Reader Service #68 "


"REVIEW Fighting Wheels Rank And V1 SSI's DARK LEGIONS Combines Good Graphics, Bad AI, And Ugly Creatures by Dave Pyron HE ENEMY MINIONS ADVANCE, mind is already far from the battlecore of the \"setup\" games. THEIR GROTESQUE SHAPES SILHOUground, searching for the final hiding Customization is the key, as up to 50 ETTED AGAINST A BLOODY SUNSET. place of the mysterious Orb of Power. It characters may be purchased and distribAlthough we've maneuvered well is said that he who controls the Orb, has uted strategically about the battle map and are prepared for battle, our all the world at his command. alongside deadly traps and magical rings. front ranks are caught by surprise as a Players will find themselves up to their Scream of Terror, the battle cry of a DeTHE DARK SIDE OF ARCHON waist bands in options and possibilities, mon, rattles the teeth of our stunned SSI'S DARK LEGIONS is a hybrid game of with potential terror and mayhem limittroops. Horrible to behold, the Demon strategy and action that owes no smalled only by their imagination. quickly dominates debt to the first The rings, of which up to five may be the battlefield with DARK LEGIONS such hybrid game, given to any of your valiant soldiers, inits supporting Price: $69.95 ARCHON. Like ARcrease character attributes such as power, ranks of foul System CHON, DARK LEstamina, speed, life-force and rejuvenaRequirements: mouthed, flatulent GIONS can be tion. Skillful allocation of these magical IBM compatible Orcs. My front le386-33 or bloodlessly cleaved aids will prove invaluable to your fantasgions show signs better, 4 MB in half, leaving two tic forces, often giving your chosen warof breaking—I can RAM, VGA distinct parts: the riors the extra edge needed to survive wait no longer, graphics, 40MB strategic portion, even the deadliest armed encounter. and I unleash my hard drive where players careStrategically placed magical traps can own legions of space (full CD fully maneuver bring the most deadly of opponents to an installation). darkness. A Fire CD-ROM drive; supports most major sound their characters ignoble end: pushed over the brink to inElemental, swift cards. Floppy and CD versions available. much like a game sanity, immolated by an uncaring flame, and deadly, # of Players: 1 or 2 (modem) of chess; and the or perhaps sucked into a vortex and dances its fiery fla Protection: Documentation Check (floppy), action screen or flushed into the sewers of space-time. menco within the None (CD-ROM) battle map where Victory in DARK LEGIONS is achieved by Orcish ranks, Designer: Silicon Knights two \"pieces\" duel killing the enemy's Orb-Holder, the Publisher: Strategic Simulations, Inc. sending the surSunnyvale, CA to the death. In character you have designated during vivors fleeing for (800) 245-4525 this way, the game game setup. The bearer of the Orb doescover in which to is a well rounded n't actually lend any strength other than lick their smoking wounds. Adding to the exercise that demands both reflex and his presence to the battlefield, but he confusion is an Illusionist who makes the reflection, muscle and mind. must be protected at all costs; in this way, Fire Elemental appear to be everywhere Before engaging in a battle, you must he is much like a king in Chess. Generalat once. My Shapeshifter transforms to choose between several \"quick start\" scely, it is a good idea to assign suitable eslight fire with fire, and catches the elenarios or a \"setup\" game. The quick start corts to the Orb Holder lest a fast moving mental by surprise, sending it back to the scenarios make good introductions for Wraith or Water Elemental execute a surNetherworld in disgrace. With the enemy novice players, since the difficulty settings prise attack and \"grope\" or flood his way in disarray, I send in my Berzerkers to are set on the \"hopeless\" or \"weak» scale. to victory. Although a strong warrior such finish off the scattered troops. Even beOf course, most players will soon find as a Demon is often given the Orb, parfore the last Orc skull has been bashed, I these pre-fab skirmishes lacking in ticularly crafty opponents may seek to degive thanks to the appropriate deities depth, and will graduate to the recruiting ceive an unwary rival by giving the Orb to and begin the ritual cleansing, for my and map selection that is the strategic an orc or other lesser creature. 88 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"MEN AT SEA T O ALL ABLE-BODIED SEAMEN WHO I HAVE A MIND TO DISTINGUISH THEMSELVES AND SEEK THEIR FORTUNES, AN OPPORTUNITY IS NOW OFFERED. BE PREPARED, FOR YOU WILL ENDURE TESTS OF COURAGE AND SKILL AS YOU VOYAGE TO DISTANT AND NEWLY CHARTED PORTS IN PURSUIT OF GREAT WEALTH. BE ALERT ... ANNOUNCEMENTS PERTAINING TO THESE HIGH SEAS ADVENTURES ARE FORTHCOMING. VGH SEAS Trader COMING SOON Impressions IMPRESSIONS SOFTWARE INC., 222 THIRD STREET, SUITE 0234, CAMBRIDGE, MA 02142 Circle Reader Service 177 "


"LIVE BY THE SWORD, found myself looking forward to a fight, through it all, lightning and thunder DIE BY THE DEMON if only to hear the war cry of the Fire Elecrackle, providing percussion for the After selection and placement of warmental, \"You shall burn!\" haunting music. The presentation, on a riors, rings, and traps in the starting Also noteworthy is the attention to whole, is captivating; even after many zone, your characters will advance, move graphic detail. Each warrior appears as hours of play, I am still intrigued by by move, across the battlefield and enan artful fantasy of vibrant colors and DARK LEGION's spectacles. gage your opponent in a mortal duel. subtle shading. Demons are drawn in Mastery of the particular strengths and hell-fire red, wizards wear rippling cloaks A SIDE TOO DARK weaknesses of each of your characters is of dark blue, and the putrid mauve of Unfortunately, DARK LEGIONS has some essential in battle. Fire Elementals sling Orcs makes one think of carrion. The unintentionally dark corners. The profireballs faster than a Roman Candle, but longed setup time when are powerless when confronted by their playing by modem renemesis, the Water Elementals. Lumberquires players to have ing across the landscape, Trolls carry a monumental patience. vicious-looking club that can crush an op Worse is the unfairness of ponent with one swing, yet are slow to the computer intelligence evade attacks by an adept Vampire. Perat higher dilliculty levels. haps the most fearsome, however, are the During setup matches, the Demons. Four clawed arms combine with computer can be awarded searing fire-breath, allowing Demons to up to twice as many points fillet and fry their opponents as if they as its human counterpart were Satan's master barbecue chef. to allow for the presumOther battlefield denizen rely far less ably inferior intellect of on brute force. Thieves' gymnastic abilithe computer. Good comties give them a defensive advantage, but UGLY SONS OF WITCHES The forces of light (Berserker and Fire puter intelligence is crutheir small throwing daggers are of little Elemental) face the fearsome forces of darkness (Demons, cial to any strategy game, effect in most encounters. Vampires flitBerserker, Orc and Troll) on the strategic map. and I looked forward to a about serenely, then suddenly swoop to cunning and shrewd opdrain the life-force of ponent. It was with dismay that, instead, I their victims. Wraiths faced a numerically superior force, but reach out to unwary prey, with the same klutzy moves used in the with bony hands clutching \"easy\" levels. One also feels cheated when vital energy from their dueling in the arcade portion of the foe. Their cousins, the game at upper levels. Again, the computPhantoms, use the cloak er pieces are given extra skill points, supof invisibility to sneak in posedly to deal with the superior reflexes close and taint the living of we humans. This becomes especially flesh of their victims with frustrating when your lethal, almost godtheir leprous appendages. like, demons are defeated handily by the While expensive, Conjurlikes of mere orcs or berserkers. ers are invaluable if your If the design team had spent some forces are thinned in batYOU SHALL DROWN (IF YOU DON'T CLOBBER ME) The player's quality time with the computer intellitle, as they summon addiWater Elemental mounts a Tidal Wave Attack against a Troll in gence, DARK LEGIONS could have been an tional creatures to the combat mode. all-time winner. As it is, it's a beautiful party. game that offers a lot up front, but quickly peters out. YOU SHALL BURN characters move in accord with their THE EDITORS SPEAK The graphics and sounds of DARK LEphysical form: Trolls clump clumsily, huGIONS are as finely tuned as the balance manoids hulk, elementals warp and twist DARK LEGIONS between action and strategy. During indiin supple slitherings, and Vampire Bats vidual battles, both combatants grunt, flap through the air like pteranodon. At RATING /2 wheeze, scream, and hiss in keeping with the same time, like a musical motif, a PROS A great mix of strategy and the action. At the moment of death, a cry sound characteristic of each creature acaction that requires both brains and of agony gurgles forth from the vancompanies its moves. Just slightly overbrawn. Hot graphics and sound. quished. Each piece also has a trademark done, this aspect could become tedious CONS Modem play is oppressively challenge or remark that it makes upon after several days of play, but it provides slow. Computer opponent is weighted entering into battle. The demon growls, an element lacking in so many games of unfairly. Higher difliculty levels grant \"You shall feel pain,\" while the sub-menthis genre. The battle map undergoes a the computer more \"numbers\" rather tal troll drools out, «Me crush you.\" daily cycle of daylight, dusk, and dark, than more smarts, making the arcade These audio bits and blurbs added so with no small effect on the strengths and action frustrating much to the quality of the game that I weaknesses of the combatants, and 90 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  OCTOBER 1994 "


"For All You Wargamers Out There... You Asked For It. We Did It. It's your game on your terms, Hex-based. tactical, detailed Sounds good. Looks even better. You know the rules. Time to play. The Future of Combat is Now. Features  Tactical, turn-based hex wargame  Superb 256 color SUGA graphics  Full scenario builder & unit editor  18 types of near-future military hardware  Modem play I hex 1 km (range) I turn = 5 minutes  Fully animated movement & combat Impressions O 1994 Impressions Software Inc 222 Third Street. Suite 0234 Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142 TEM PC SUCA Screenshots may vary FRONT LINIS GORGE UNIT Ben LA Heavy Artillery BAM URL N ery UNE BELL Demag 23-30 Ricarey 5 This the most tant of the Artillery on 11 tres servard rounde hat are compare to UN Armor FIAR The set of the Laht Artalery very slow but it is manuverava DAME Artery untiare quite Vand for the quick fringility and that they are way to move They are se favored for their section 4 ALA Quality   Height Full scenario editor and builder Combat! Animated units defend HQ Pull up information on any class of units Circle Reader Service #78 "


"EPSON STYLUS INK JET KOSS HD 50 SPEAKERS KOS KOSS COMPUTER Express Since 1985 The best color inkjet in the market today. Incredible 720 DPI resolution. Exclusive Epson Stylus Technology produces a precise dot, eliminates the feathering of other inkjetprinters, gives the shorpest, most brilliant color output Get 720 DPI color performance on spe cially cooled paper for stunning results. Special Windows printer driver software for faster printing. Build in sheet fooder for single sheels, envelopes, and transporencies. Two year warranty. Parallel Interface EPSON IBM 35800 Hear the difference, Koss odds a new dimension to your mutimedia PC HD 50 Speakers have dual amplified drivers and 4.5 watts per chonnel. Boss ond treble controls, and microphone . headphone jocks offer the greatest flexibility. Magnetically shield. od to protect your screen image. Full sound for your games, music, and pleasure. Compatible with the best sound card technology. Get Koss for multimedia sound performance KOSS 36173 800-228-7449EXT $599 $331 ORDER LINE ONLY KNIGHTS OF XENTAR VIRTUAL VEGAS CD Surrealistic VIDA future of casi VLGAS no gambling Come to Virtual Vegas The First Wonder of the CyberWorld. and wonder thru a Cyber Casino where beautiful blackjack dealers try to steal your heart and your money Your goal; win big. Her mission empty your wallet. The more you play the more playful at gets. Written by the crazy editors of NATIONAL LAMPOON, this game is packed with over 600 meg of stunning graphics, and features quicktima video, and voice recognition UNDER A KILLING MOON CD One of the season's top IELTICULULUI new titles. This is a visu ally stunning interactive movie that takes you too the streets of post-war World War II San Francisco Transport yourself to a VIRTUAL WORLD full of people and places shown with rich detail, giving the sense of actually being there. Hollywood stars add talent and believability Original music score and hiquolity digitized voices and effects make this eye appealing and exciting title a stunning experience. ACCESS BMCD 32937 DRAGON'S LAIR CD All the origi nal excite ROLA ment from the originol laser disk is here Rescue the fair Princess Daphne from Singe the EVIL DRAGON Relive the original quest Jadventurer and his bat les thru the castle of the Dark Wizzard; keeping out of the clutches of the monsters and obstacles in your path. Duel your twin to the death, fight doemons and faries, live in a mystical land deciding the fate of heaven and earth. Twin brothers, separated from birth, never meet until their own true, dark destiny forces them to fight to stay alive, rescue lovely maidens, slave off menacing enemies. All part of the quest to be the Ruler of Kontor ELECTROMEDIA BMCD 435816 $17 $56 READYSOFT IBM CD 131493 $41 MEGATECH IBM D435209 DOS 131595 $401 SADVANCED ORDER . 35 36 36042 Battintsla 2200....... 32602 Beneath a Steel Sky... 33860 Buzz Aldrin's Space... 35318 Capitol Punishment 35442 Celebrity Poker MPC 35005 Championship Pinball............ 35420 ChessMaster 4000 Turbo MPC 34031 Command Starship... 33909 Companions of Xanth... 34659 Cowboy Cosino............. 33400 Critical Path ........... 32715 CyberRace........... 35768 Cyberjudos..... 36043 Cyclemania... 34973 D Day: Operation Overlord........... 33235 Daemonsgate 33920 Dare to Fly.... 34163 Dark Legion........ 33701 Great Naval Battles Il........ 32120 Great Naval Battles Pack 34149 Hand of Fate... 33905 Harvester 35863 Hockey 95.... ..... 34421 Horde... 31790 Humans 35346 Incredible Machine 2 35350 Incredible Toons........ 31351 Indiono Fole of Atlantis... 34759 Inherit the Earth 31162 Iron Helix........ 32128 Journeyman Project.. ... 343.47 Jump Roven. 31132 Jutland.. ......... 34702 King's Quest Anthology 30892 King's Quest VI... 32904 King's Quest VI Upgrade .48 SO 30 25 ...CAIL 33976 1st Encounter DOS 30 35975 1st Encounter IBM CD..................... 36011 Absolute Zero . MAC CD....................38 35254 Aces of the Deep 1M CD 34302 Advanced Civilization DOS.... ..35 35311 Babylon 5. IBM CD..... ...... CALL 34650 Banledrome DOS.................... 34448 Baklodrome IBM CD.....................38 34638 Bioforge Interactive Movie IBM CD.. 33389 Bioforge Interactive Movie DOS 32980 Blood Net-DOS......... 39 34696 Command and Conquer.DOS... 35736 CyberSpace IBM CD...... ...40 35738 Dawn Patrol 18M CD 35944 Family Feud MPC IBM CD......... 35744 Fleet Defender: F.14 Scenario.DOS......30 34154 H.A.W.C. DOS..................... 36048 HardBall '94-1BM CD. 35946 Hell IBM CD. 36047 Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf. IBM CDCALL 35326 King's Quest VII IBM CD...... .........49 35328 leisure Suit Larry Anthology IBM CD ....45 33865 Mech Commander. SM CD 36049 Mission Critical '95 IBM CD ......34 35739 Pacific Air War: 1942 Scenario.DOS..30 34085 Phantasmagoria IBM CD.... 35331 Phantasmagoria MAC CD 35745 Piratesl Gold WINDOWS 35941 Quarantine IBM CD. 35754 Simlower MAC........ CALL 11575 Squad Leader DOS...... ...CALL 3456B Stor Trek: TNG. A Final Unity IBM CD..58 23134 Terror of the Deep-DOS 23148 Terror of the Deep IBM CD 23194 Terror of the Deep MAC....... 36012 Test Pilot IBM CD. .. 36013 Test Pilot MAC CD........ ...... 32154 The Dig. DOS............ 32859 Victory at Soc. DOS.... 34345 Viper: Assault on the Outfit IBM CD.....41 34276 Wing Commander III. DOS.... . CALL 34763 Witchworld DOS.. CALL LUE-L 17:: Gyrix .46 35363 MPEG Psychotron.... ...... CALL 34627 MPEG. Return to Zork... 34624 MPEG Space Ace 35773 Maelstrom 32595 Man Enough.. 34559 Maniac Sports 36008 Master of Magic.... 34155 MechWarrior il 33310 Mega Race 34865 Metaltech: Earth Siege... 34010 Microsoft Baseball... 31659 Microsoft Golf 34741 Mig 29 Gold 33217 Might & Magic World of Xeen 34796 Millennium Auction 34743 More Incredible Mochine... 33204 Mysl... 35864 No World Order......... 34173 Outpost. 34911 Pacific Strike & Speech Pack 32791 Police Quest IV... 35305 Privateer 35774 Psychotron MPC 35332 Quest for Glory IV ... 34609 Raiden... 32155 Rebel Assault 34718 Red Baron/A 10 Tank 35449 Return to Ring World.. 31705 Return to Zork 11497 SSN 21: Sea Wolf 32153 Sam & Max Hit the Rood. 35943 Saturday Night Live 20th 34288 Saurus 30708 Scrabble Deluxe .... .... 32515 Shadow of the Comt....... 31479 SimCity Enhanced 34086 SimEarth ............ 34866 Space Hulk... 34693 Space Quest Anthology 34296 Spear of Destiny Super CD Pak... 34608 Spectre VR. 35724 Star Crusader 29366 Star Trek 25th Enhanced. 34021 Star Trek: Collectibles Guide ....... 34343 Star Trek: DSN . The Hunt... 34350 Star Trek: TNG Toch Manual 32109 Strike Commander/loctical 34425 Superhero League of Hoboken 35872 System Shock 35018 Terminofor: Rompoge 34916 Theme Park 35309 Tony loRusso Baseball II 2.0.... 30925 Ultima Underworld I & ..... 15416 Ultima Vil: Pagan w/ Speech 35421 Ultimate Domain.... ...... 32937 Under a Killing Moon............ 36045 Unnecessary Roughness 93 32480 Video Cube Space..... ... 35400 Worren Miller's Skiing Safari 34202 Who Shot Johnny Rocks 34573 Wild Blue Yonder: Episode One..... 35874 Wing Commander Armado 35405 Wings of Glory 1917-1918 30400 Wolfpack.... ..... . 33088 World Circuit Grand Prix.... 33917 Wrath of the Gods. 35439 Zephyf.... into a Sizzling Call for Pricing! IBM RECREATION CD SO 33683 10-Year Anthology Classics............... 32903 116 H 29037 7th Guest... ... .. .. 32855 AD&D Dark Sun: Shattered londs..... 35878 AD&D Dark Sun: Wake Ravager ...... 32925 AD&D Dungeon Hock ...... .36 34161 AD&D Genie's Curse 34165 AD&D Ravenloft: Strahds Posses..........47 36009 Absolute Zero..... 34717 Aces of the Pacific 38 34719 Aces over Europe... 33011 Aegis: Guardian of the Fleel... 35365 Air Warrior Super MPC 35806 Alien Legacy 35720 All Pro Football.......... .. 32513 Alone in the Dark........ 35869 Armored Fist. 36010 Bandits ........................... ... .38 30880 Day of the Tentacle.... 36044 Deathgate. 31493 Dragon's lat. 35808 ESPN: Let's Play Boseboll 35809 ESPN: Let's Play Soccer... 35812 ESPN: Let's Play Tunnis... 35361 Empire Dolce Masters Edition 347 40 Falcon Gold.. 35769 Fighter Wing.... 34348 Five on 5 27755 Flight Simulator Toolkit.......... 35323 Freddy Phorkos......... 34613 Freelancer 2120 35312 Front Page Sports: Baseball ............ 35315 Front Page Sports Football 95..... 32784 Gabriel Knight 35209 Knights of Xantor 32591 Labyrinth of Time..... 32526 Lands of Lore... 33294 lawnmower Mon... 32792 leisure Suit Larry VI.... 35322 Lode Runner 31348 lord of the Rings... 35737 lost Eden 31815 Lost in Time. 34349 lunicus 33703 MPEG-Dragon's Lair. 34620 MPEG. Horde... .... 34623 MPEG.Lord of the Rings 34629 MPEG Man Enough... 35364 MPEG. Outpost....... ...... 34630 MPEG. Police Quest IV. 40 30 41 .. .45 CALL 45 "


"PHOENIX FLIGHT CONTROLLER PINBALL FANTASIES Exquisite third generation pinboll The first game to use exclusive REAL MOTION technology giving the most accurate ball move ment possible .. Fast full screen tablo coverogo, Totally authen tic ball move ment. Play for A u tor hours, great sound effects 4 new and unique tables. Ultra hi res graphics, full table tilt, with 2 graphics modes to allow using each table in two different sizes. The latest, best example of pinball yet! STAR CRUSADER The EMPIRE is of war again. This time it's the Gorene Empire Jogainst the Alien Alliance. Fly over 100 dit ferent mis sions, choose from 11 dit forent space craft. Switch sides for the ultimate in STRIP POKER PROFESSIONAL St Poker Give them \"shirt off your AR bockor IBMX rother TRY NOT TO 1 Poker with very dafferent stokes Play against one two or three players at the some time. The more you win. the more they take off This new version hos o now screen layout with Super VGA graphics and Sound Board Support. Digitized speech lets each player have \"her own library of comments. Features include SAVE game mode and sound board support STAR CRUSADER playability Plot strate GAMETER gies, who wil control the Ascalon Rih? Hyper Realistic 3D graphics, texture mapped ships, cinematic mutli media videos, full digi tized speech with professional actors on the CD Rom Version) Searing sound effects and driving music! GAMETEK DOS 435723 The NEW Phoenix Hands on Flight System Contoller is the latest in Game Player Technology TOTAL control is in your hands Instant Access to your weapons array and Right control functions of your fingertips, 24 Controllable buttons, compatible with all flight pro grams The 46 button settings allow for easy access to oll game functions and flight mechanisms Power, speed, and control with GRAVIS I Install program includes flight and weapons system checkout! GRAVIS BM #35133 21ST CENTURY DOS #25088 $30 $34 $92 ARTWORK pos 31802 $30 RALLO GUMP CD RALLO GU 00 BATTLECRUISER 3000 AD  Space com bat strategy combat real ism and bal Heship man agement. The GALCOM is counting on you to thwart the GAMMU. LANS Expansive 3-D universe, excellent graphic detail, 4 fightercraft and 75 crew MISSEA members. Negotiato, trade or fight the alien nations battle the power hun gry galactic enemies. The latest in space exploration, galactic battlefields and spaceflight simulation. The guys at INTERPLAY have done it again. The Biggest Newest 100 levels, 20 soundtracks, 30 Enemies, 100's of digi fized sound effects 300 Megs al game che! lenges HELP HELPHI Ralla has to fren his friends, fam ly, and the townspeople from the evils of GLUMP \"CATTWORLD and the GLUMPITES Jump over pits, obstacles, bottle bosses and other weird creatures. Hours of fun for all ages! How many lovels con you win SIM CITY 2000   Windows ver sion is now horel Get all the realism, run the city of your dreams. raise taxes, build solar powerplants. 200s, push education bills through the city coun cil. Fires, for nadoes. earthquakes, maybe on alien Invasion \"might make your job a challenge or a disaster. Bring the city to life, get SIMCITY 2000 the ultimate city simulator Another SIM Challengel LYRIQ CROSSWORDS LYRIO Never be of a CROSSWORDS No words. This is Oxbestilo Dost A S (HNWADY the ultimate windows word chal lenge. Over 250 quality puzzles! Crosswords by lyriq is unmatched for its quality and crossword playoblity Crossplay. their unique graphic con trol shows the grid anyway you choose. Built-in hints and auto verify 4 levels of play. Auto solve when you got stuck, Multiple payers on the same puzzle. Timed Tournament modo. Print and take an unfinished puzzle with you LYRIQ WIN 432805 BATTLECRUISER INTERPLAY DOS #33837 $43 JUST SOFTWORKS IBM CD #35841 529 MAXIS WIN#34246 $40 $29 IBM RECREATION 800-228-7449 EXT: BU UPS $5 PER AIR $7 PER 33877 ADD Dark Sun: Weke Reveger ...47 34164 AD&D Ravenloft: Strohds Posses 29238 ADSD: Dark Sun Shattered lands. 32924 ADED: Dungeon Hock 36 34087 AD&D: Genie's Curse.. 31940 APBA Baseball. WINDOWS..... 34275 Aces Over Korea... 33336 Aces of the Deep.... .... 28445 Aces over Europe..... 32985 Across the Rhine.. . 39 35740 Across the Rhine Scenario 34695 Alien Legacy.... 33809 Alone in the Dark II 33341 Arena Elder Scrolls....... 32546 Aut of the Kill 36027 Battle Bugs... 33857 Battle Cruiser 3000AD 36040 Bottle Isle 2200 25445 Batle of Britain 2 WINDOWS 34742 Big One WINDOWS 34762 Blitzkrieg 33738 Breach 3.. 34239 Brutal Sports Football ... 35317 Copitol Punishment 27743 Carrier Strike.......... 31523 Carriers at War II......... 34074 Celtic Tales: Balor Evil Eye... CALL 26806 Civilization 31328 Clash of Steel: WWII 1939 45 32884 Command Starship..... 32129 Companions of Xanth 22035 Corridor 7 32369 Cyber Race 33602 D Day: Operation Overlord..... 34028 D Day: The Beginning of End.... 34162 Dark legion....... 34765 Dawn Patrol ... .. ..41 30897 Day of the Tentacle: Maniac Il.... 33334 Delta V. 32010 Detroit 3.4307 Disciples of Steel....... 33894 Doom : Kneo Deep in the Dead 35719 Doom : Hell on Earth 32967 DreamWeb.................. . ....35 32978 Dungeon Master 32082 Empire Deluxe . WINDOWS 34605 Empire Soccer 3330B Evasive Action......... 31816 Even More Incredible Machines 34593 Evolution.......... 32880 F 14 Fleet Defender 35288 FIFA International Soccer 26585 Falcon 3.0....... .. ...... 34272 Falcon 40... 33664 Falcon FA-18 Hornet... ..32 31442 Falcon: Mig 29/Deadly Adversary......31 26783 Fields of Glory..................................38 34273 Flat Top........ CALL 1728 Flight Sim: New York Scenery ..........28 31657 Flight Sim: Paris Scenery... ......29 31273 Flight Simulator 5.0........ .. 44 34277 Formula One Grand Prix 2...............CALL 34611 Freelancer 2120 ........................35 35313 Front Page Sports Foot Upged.. .28 35314 Front Page Sports Football 95 31820 Front Page Sports: Football Pro........ ALL INQUIRIES CALL: 32972 Frontier Elite II.......... 33739 Genghis Khan II. 336 INFO:508-443-6125 34283 Global Responso........ ORDER LINE ONLY 33343 Goblilins FAX:508-443-5645 ......... 28300 Golf. WINDOWS 33335 Grandest Fleet... . 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 33704 Great Naval Barles II...... 35743 Gunship 2000 Classic... * ** O**AKT FAX:0011-508-443-5645 3.4006 HardBall IV... ..... 32122 Harpoon 11... Xia, CompuServe ID:70007.1534CM A T &). 35767 Harpoon il Bottleset #2  34284 Heavy Hockey... 34761 Heroes of Might & Magic...... SHIPPING & HANDLING: 35725 Hexx. Heresy of the Wizord. 35345 Incredible Machine 2....... 35349 Incredible Toons WINDOWS............. 26926 Indiana Jones Fole of Atlantis.... 31471 IndyCar Racing 35105 IndyCar: Circuits Expansion Pack GROUND SHIPMENT SHIPMENT BORNE 35106 IndyCor: Indianapolis Speedway... 34449 Inherit the Earth: Orb Quest.... 32982 Isle of the Dead...... .. HI, PR, AK, APO SENT BY US MAIL FOR SS. INTL ORDERS WELCOME. 27314 Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf 28696 Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 1 30628 Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 2.. 35722 Noctropolis... .......... 35723 Star Crusader 32968 Jeopardy Deluxe WINDOWS 33340 Outpost 33245 Star Reach.... ..... ... 33322 Joe Montono Football.... 33464 Oxyd Magnum 26706 Star Trek: 25th Anniversary.... 35875 Jorune: Alien Logie........ 33087 Pacific Air War: 1942... 34341 Star Trek, DSN . The Hunt 33741 Jurassic Park........ 32502 Pacific Strike..... 17189 Star Trek: J.R. Movie & Sound .... 23919 King's Quest V............... 35303 Pacific Strike Mission Disk...... 31772 Star Trek: Judgment Rites.. .. 28004 King's Quest VI........... 32503 Pacife Strike Speech Disk... 32808 Star Wars Chess... ... 34303 Kingmaker ... .... 30098 Pirates! Gold ....... 35507 Strot O Matie Baseball 25133 Klotski 32079 Police Quest IV 35359 Stral O Matic Basketball............. 30630 Prince of Persia il.. . 30926 Street Fighter IBM RECREATION 31511 Private 27180 Strike Commander 34159 Privateer Righteous Fire AddOn 30608 Strike Commander Speech Pack 32705 Leisuro Svil lorry VI.................... 37 32107 Privateer Speech Pack 33331 Subwar 2050..................... 30372 Lemmings ..... 34655 Pro League Baseball..... .... ..... 34383 Superhero League of Hoboken... 27660 Links 386 Pro.. 35935 Quarantine. . 33858 System Shock.......... .. 39 30488 Links: Banff Springs SVGA 32863 Quest for Glory IV........ 35160 TacOps WINDOWS....... 31444 Links: Belfrey Course SVGA 34596 Raiden. 17179 Terminator 2029 32478 Links: Firestone Course SVGA.... 33329 Rally: The Final Round........ 34291 Theatre of Death ............. CALL 29740 links: Mauna Kea Course SVGA 22868 Realms of Arkania........... 34914 Theme Park 30798 Links: Pinehurst Country SVGA...... 35355 Red Baron w/ Mission Builder 33332 Third Reich... . . .34 35319 Lode Runner ...... 31061 Return of the Phantom......... 35308 Tony LaRussa Baseball II 2.0... ....36 ............ 33910 Lord Of The Rings/Two Towers... 31561 Royal Flush........ . ..... 35776 Tunnel Rot........... 34286 Lords of Midnight...... 31343 Rules of Engagement Il..... 35873 Ultima Vill: Lost Vale Addon...... 26904 Lost Treasures of Infocom ...... 33206 SSN 21. Seo Wolf 32879 Ultima Vill: Pogon ............. 33501 M4 Sherman Tonk... 32605 SVGA Hartier 33777 Ultima Vol. Pogon Speech Pok 35741 Master of Magic........ 32979 Sam & Max Hit the Road...... 34434 Ultimate Domain 31433 Master of Orion...... 34656 Serf City ... .... 36041 Unnecessary Roughness 95 32003 MechWarrior il 35316 Serious Soccer........ 33634 Virtus VR WINDOWS 34156 MochWarrior II Add On.. 34289 Shadow of the Comet 2.... ......... CALL 34653 Wargame Construction Set Il: Tanks...... 31594 Metal & loce. PG13....... 33915 SimCity 2000. Great Disasters...... ..15 31643 When Two Worlds War............... 34698 Metoltech: Earth Siege 31410 SimCity Classic..... 34939 Wing Armadu. 25031 Metamorph.. 34708 SimCity Classic Graphics......... 31509 Wing Commander Academy............. . 31656 Microsofi Space Simulator 31454 Simform 33624 Wings of Glory 1917-1918.......... 33387 Mig 29 Stand Alone Version.................46 25115 Sim Health ............ 32909 Wizardry Trilogy I V/V/VIJ.... 28378 Might & Magic Clouds of Xeen............21 30833 Simile. WINDOWS 27709 World Circuit Grand Prix........... 31019 Might & Magic DarkSide of Xeen......... 22085 Solitaire Anties. WINDOWS 32477 World War It: Bahle S Pacific.......... 35813 Mighty Morphin Power Rangers.............25 31503 Solitaire's Journey WINDOWS 35215 XCOM UFO Defense 34658 Mortal Kombat/GamePod Bundle... 30590 Space Hulk... 28941 X-Wing. 35818 NASCAR Racing........ CALL ... 28.440 Space Quest V... 32152 X Wing Il Tie Fighter 35937 NFL 95 WINDOWS........ 34764 Spaceward Holi 32034 X-Wing: B-Wing Tour of Duty..... 31741 NHL Hockey.... 30899 X-Wing: Imperial Pursuit 29854 Spear of Destiny... . 33342 Spectre VR... 34699 Zephy. 46 Circle Reader Service #56 21 35 "


"TIMEOUT SPORTS BASEBALL PLAY BALL Four great now Boll Gume Screen Savers, Zony great games like Umpire Arguing. SPORTS Banting Practice. COMPUTER Express WORLD CUP INTERACTIVE CD CD-ROM All of the excitement of World Cup Soccer with out high Ticket Prices Relive all of the World Cup Championship Games Play by play of each game ever played Statistics and details of the Interactive best players: Peln, Maradonna, and many others. Over 45 minutes of video clips and much more. A have to for every Soccer Fanatiel Study the scores, stats, and the supurb play of the world's best Vorid Fungo Fielding and Sign Calling 101! These are great 24 he attention grabber entertainment WINDOW monitor savers that can be set for hourly randomly, or at any timed peri ods. Fun, baseball screen savers and Apple Pie, (just kidding about the Apple Pie !) Since 1985 800-228-7449 Ext ORDER LINE ONLY MICROLEAGUE WN 134634 521 SOFTBIT DOS 43540i MAC 135491 $300 Storybook Maker apresenta ULTIMATE FOOTBALL The best action simula tion of the NFL Use the real NFL play of fosters, manage the teams with drafting. trades innjuries, and aging of play FRONT PAGE SPORTS BASEBALL No Baseball FRONT PAGE SPORTS Strike Here All the 1993 DAOCD. BASEBAL Baseball play ers. Over 500 Statistics Mange your own team STARTS TODAY! Hire, fire make the Braing norrlplayoffs w er Trade, devel op new tal Jent. Up to 50 players on leach team: 125 on the Mojor league roster; 15 of the AAA level or disabled list and 10 in the low minors. Work with your favorite players for their whole careers. Handle 30 teams in 3 divisions per loogue. TRAIN ENGINEER Ground-breaking y Design loy Aouts and run cab-view simulation! your own train from the Engineer's cob. 24 easy torun layouts are included with dozens of other lay outs detailed inside. Ready touse or mod ifyond run. Real train sounds, spe cial crash on mation, and fastclock dis plays add reclism. Weather, time of day or night, speed, -all functions are adjustable. Run up to 8 troinsat once. STORYBOOK MAKER CD hombud Thushahi All that your child can imagine, sto o ries, pictures and sound These ole ments are all in the comput er for your children to create stories paint, or add in their own voices Use hundreds of different picture cards h e has a large Mary with animals (0-2 for Mariniesl Windows objects, and colors. All of the stories can be printed out to make your child the star, the director, or the creator of their own stories, postcards, or live narratives. A delightforthe image nation JOSTEN'S LEARNING BMCD +35823 MAC OD 435828 30 Authentic 1994 foar ball fields and stadiums Fantasy play Conter S PROSEhru PRODIGY or FSP Bulletin Board. Automatically download the 1994 NFL Weekly STATS thru FSP or Prodigy BBS services. Optional RESET SEASON lets commissioners tost league scoring SPECTRUM DOS #35713 BM CD 435712 $46 SIERRA ONLINE IBM CD 135312 $45 ABRACADATA WIN 126142 DOS +22956 MAC #26142 $30 MAC RECREATIONS SOUND CARDS 22956 Train Engineer 33912 U-Boot 32971 Valkyrie... 25515 Vegos Games Entertainment Pack... 33635 Virtus VR... 29248 Wheel of Fortune w/Vanna White 35670 Wolipack...... . 34450 World of War: Operation Crusader... 34180 Zig Zag... . 998 35 41 46 ...30 34723 Labyrinth of Time.... ... 33353 lawnmower Man....... 36026 Leisure Suit Lorry VI... 33541 Lunicus. 26461 Madness of Roland ..... 34560 Manioc Sports 35443 Might & Magic World of Xoen 35398 No World Order 34236 Planetary Taxi 34720 Police Quest IV......... 34581 Rebel Assoul 33914 Redshift....... 25496 Return to Zot. 35942 Saturday Night Live 20th 35755 Sim Town 25473 Sitting on the form 25 29 MAC RECREATION CD 18 48 41 33603 11th Hour 34592 3 Balloons 314727th Guest... 36046 AB Pro Football 45 588 CALL 126 4 MB? 8 MB? 16 MB? Call for Pricing! 26433 Audio Magician 16CD... 33346 Audio Magician Plus.. 30958 AudioMan 35760 Aztech Sound Galaxy Nova 16. 35761 Aztech Sound Galaxy Noval Extra.....113 34224 Digital Sound Pro 1.... 31615 Digital Sound Pro 16 Plus 28247 Gravis Ultra Sound.. 26292 Gravis UltraSound Max............ 33725 Gravis UhrSound Midi Adopter... 27926 Jazz Soundcard SCSI 31059 Port Able Sound Plus.. 35056 Premium 3D Multi-CD 35055 Premium 3D SCS2........ 35054 Pro 3D SCS12 w/ Wavelable...... 32059 Pro Audio 16 Basic 30563 Pro Audio Studio 16... 27503 Pro Audio Spectrum 16....... 34615 RoolMagic lite 32312 RoelMagic Multimedia Playback 32031 Roland RAP 10 Audio Producer ..... 35480 Roland SCD-10 DB Sound Canvas... 35628 Roland SCD-15 DB Sound Canvas....208 32530 Sound Blaster 16 MCD.... 32533 Sound Blaster 16 MCD ASP... ..178 32531 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI2... 32532 Sound Blaster 16 SCSI2 ASP. 34807 Sound Blaster 16 Value Edition... 21735 Sound Blaster AWE32.. 34661 Sound Blaster Pro Value Ed. 34660 Sound Blaster Volue Edition 300209_red a l HHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH .106 33751 SoundMan Wave SPEAKERS 33864 Alone in the Dark.... 34167 Astrochose... 33640 Axis the Gamecheater. 32008 Caesar........ .... 32289 Caesars Palace... 30493 Corriers At Wor... 27185 Castles ll.... 30891 Citadel of the Dead. 29214 Civilization 34304 CyberRace............ 32714 Dark Seed... . 34027 Detroit..... 33534 Empire Deluxe....... 34610 Evolution 33089 F.1 17A Stealth Fighter... 33737 Flight Commander 26045 Flight Simulator 4.0........ 21495 Flying Nightmares........ 34612 Freelancer 2120 34883 G Netix.... ......... 34172 Gabriel Knight....... . 25497 Harpoon II. 35351 Incredible Toons... 29667 Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis ........... 35440 Inherit the Earth Orb Quest 33995 Jeopardy Sports Edition 32703 Jeopardy with Alex Trebeck ....... 30832 King's Quest VI....... 30705 Legend of Kyrandia.. 33398 leisure Suit Larry ....... ..... 35257 Links Pro w/ Harbortown Couto 35374 links: Pinehurst Country... 35321 lode Runner 31684 M4 Sherman Tonk. 32969 Mac Anack... 32970 Moc Full O'Humans 32841 More Incredible Machines 33466 Oxyd Magnum ... 33824 PGA Tour Golf Il.. .... 32172 Pathway into Darkness......... 34174 Police Cuest IV.. 35289 Populous II.... 33826 Powermonger. 35135 Prince of Persia ll................ 34863 Quest for Glory IV...... 34597 Raiden 31560 Royal Flush..... 26522 SimAnt........ 32616 SimCity 2000 33916 SimCity 2000. Great Disasters....... 31456 SimCity Classic.... 34799 SimCity Classic Graphics 28383 SimLife... 22090 Solitaire Antics........ ...... 35447 Space Word Hall 33391 Spectre VR.... .... 31474 Star Trek 25th Anniversary 34342 Star Trek: DSN . The Hunt 35360 Stra: O Matic Basketball........ 33465 Sword of Sodon............... 35159 Tacos... 34915 Theme Park.. 35775 Tom Landry Football Deluxe .......... 188 Out of BERBE  ? 35543 ACS-100.1 Speaker Pair 103 28122 ACS 300.1 Speakers w/Subwoofer .240 30475 AR Partner 570 Speaker System 27392 koss HD.1 Speakers 27950 Koss HD 4 Speakers... 30730 Koss HD 6 MPC Speakers............ 32228 totec CS-1000 Speakers 27905 Labtec CS 700 Speakers............. 31689 Lobles CS 800 Speakers....... 32220 Lobtec CS-900 Speakers... CD DRIVE UPGRADE 26 35766 Castles Siege & Conquest 34578 Chessmaster 3000... 26459 Cyberplasm Formula.... 33919 Dare to Fly 33689 Dark Seed 34595 Evolution... 35138 Firefighter....... ....... 26874 Flying Nightmares......... 34614 freelancer 2120 34722 Gabriel Knight...... 27866 Hell Cab..... ......... 32951 Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis... 35441 Inherit the Earth: Orb Quest.... 30822 Iron Helix..... ....... 30442 JourneyMon Project. 33998 Jump Raven 21435 Soft Kill... 33553 Spectre VR 34344 Star Trek: DSN . The Hunt 34351 Star Trek: TNG Tech Monval.. 34724 Syndicate 34917 Theme Park. home Park 29639 Total Distortion.... 34346 Viper Assault on the Outfit 32133 Vittual Tarot 35399 Warren Miller's Skiing Safari... 34574 Wild Blue Yonder 35871 Wolfpack.. 35491 World Cup Interactive..... 33918 Wrath of the Gods.... 34261 Xplora 1: Poter Gabriel World 35 3557 4PLEX Quad speed EXT w/ctrl. ..704 35856 4PLEX Quad speed Ext wo/chil 642 35855 4PLEX Quad speed INT w/el 35103 4PLEX Quad speed INT wo/ctrl...........499 35733 Aztech CDA26B01AFP INT w/Chi...142 35762 Aztech Sound Galaxy Orion 16 122 35734 Axech Voyager INT MMK 305 35735 Aztech Zeta INT CDROM w/Cul........151 21729 DigitalEdge 3X INT CDROM 34144 DoubleSpeed. Ext. Upgr. Pro Audio 16556 34948 Family Deluxe Multimedia Kit............349 31530 Fusion Double CD Internal kit...........308 30 30 45 27 26 "


"SHARKS CD WINGS WINGS OVER EUROPE WWII CD An engaging   aviation played in World War 11 Begin this adventure in a 3D briefing room in which a guide assists you in maneu vering between key battles, aces, and planes that take you from the beginning to the end of the air war 3D models and interactive fact cards con help you compare characteristics of featured aircraft Participate in the fascinating bottles of World War II with short video documentaries, biographies of flying aces, and interactive challenges. DISCOVERY CHANNEL MPC 636111 $30 Thrilling multi media shark adventure with real bite Feared Admired Hunted Witness the awesome speed, power, grace and fury of nature's most misunder. stood preda tor. This spell binding multi media explo ration gives you hundreds of spectacular photographs, 30 minutes of too close video, easy to read text, interviews with top shork experts, and a fun filled concentration game for all oges MAGIC THEATRE CD Lets kids cre cate their own animated computer screenplays. paint their own magic worlds, add music and voice with a THEATRZE microphone (supplied) be the hero of their own pro ductions or create and animate their own special characters 'Fun for the whole family easy to usel Props, scenery, background colors, exotic Rowers, and sound effects can all be odded to the productions JETS CD The jets, the giants, the legends of AVIATION Watch, heat, and relive the lives of those first jet pilots The 'Sky's the limit!\" Man's first supersonic Night ara highlighted with video interviews, full color pho tos and flying action Includes acclaimed book, The X PLANES by Miller and Hallion. Over 30 minutes of full motion, full color video clips. Hundreds of photos, schematics, cula way views Dozens of 3D animations. For the excitement danger, and the speed get JETS 1 MEDIO MULTIMEDIA MPC 436072 $34 2 DISCOVERY CHANNEL MPC 436110 $30 KNOWLEDGE ADVENTURE MPC 627660 $35 1944 GRANDEST De 1944 ACROSS THE RHINE American M4 Shormons, Tigers of the Third Reich, ACROSS THE SINE These were the tanks that rocked Europe from D Day to the fall of Berlin in WWII. The same armored jvg gernauts that you'll com mand in Across the Rhine. Jump USE into history's most famous tooks and experience the fierce combat and tough decisions that gripped WWII tank commanders. Take command of U.S. or German forces. Contral single tanks or entire Companies, Blast your way through enemy units across Europe MICROPROSE DOS 432985 THE GRANDEST FLEET You're in the THE NAVY now Build your own modo of the biggest FLEETS ond best ships of oot Enjoy victory pursue your foe. or lose and end up on the bottom of Davey Jone's locker. Unlimited maps, truly challenging Reenact the Faukland Campaign the Battle of Northcape, Find the Bismark. Fight against Yamamoto's Trap, survive Surigao Straight Build Misslo sitos, radar stations, shipyards, and superships QQP DOS# 33335 IBM CD 35618 A.D.A.M.: THE INSIDE STORY CD ADAM the Inside A.D.A.M A A M Story is the . ultimate multi The Torside Sa The Inside Story ance for the media experi entire family to explore the human body Originally written and designed for the top med ical schools, this version lets you explore layer NEW outstanding color details of the human body. A light hearted tour of the HUMAN BODY, there are over 4 hours of exciting animations, live action video, and dynamic sound effects. Learning fun with a Modern Day Adam and Eve. ADAM IBM CD #36172 EASY KEYS CD Make music ok JINSTANTLY and EASILY with Easy keys I Turn your sound card into on electronic key board and JamBox Create, Play and record riffs, chords, and Melodies with the on ROAR treni screen piano Choose Country Jazz, Dance, Jazz, Dance, Funk, Hip Hop, Boogie, Rock, orleans, Rap and Reggae styles. Includes over 100 cool. WAV files sound effects. Soundcard and speakers required. EASYKEYS n ofter layer of $39 $35 $46 INTERSOUND MEDIA DOS #35288 $29 800-228-7449 EXT: ..999 21560 Game Blaster CD 16............... ....392 32938 Memphis Multimedia Upgrade Kit 524 32933 MultiSpin 3XE External 195ms............508 32932 MultiSpin 3XI Internal 195ms.............472 32934 MultiSpin 3XP Portable 195ms... 424 34923 MultiSpin 4X Pro External ....... 34320 OmniCD Upgrade Kit External 31809 OmniCD Upgrade Kit Internal 221 34947 Premium Deluxe Multimedia Kit ....... 31531 Pro 16 l Multimedia Kit... 490 34206 Pro 16 il Triple Speed Kit............. 777 34946 Pro Deluxe Multimedia Kit..................735 34133 Reelmagic CD-ROM Kit......................706 33859 Reno CDROM Portable Player..... 294 27924 Sensory Starter Upgrade Kit.............366 34225 Sensory System I INT. Multimedia Kit...440 34950 Super Deluxe Multimedia Kit 333 99999 33832 MLBPA Baseball. SNES.... 33025 Mad Dog McCree 300. 33026 Mortal Kombat SEGA.... 35034 Mortal Kombat . SEGA CD 32574 Mortal Kombat SNES... 31971 NBA Jam SEGA 35062 NBA Jom SNES 33828 NBA Showdown 94 SEGA 32051 NHL '94. SEGA...... 33829 Normy's Beach SEGA 33070 Oceans Below 3DO... 26132 Out of this World 300 21531 Pele II SEGA..... 34003 Pelel Soccer SNES 35397 Road Rush 300 34667 Shadowrun SEGA 33851 Sonic the Hedgehog 3 SEGA 33077 Space Shuttle 3DO... 25909 Stor Control ll. 3DO 35096 Star Trek: TNG Echoes SEGA 35046 Star Trek: TNG Future's Past SNES 32578 Street Fighter 11. SEGA 32541 Street Fighter II. SNES 33546 Super NBA Basketball SEGA 32576 Super Oft Road Baja SNES 35521 Super Street Fighter ISEGA 35520 Super Street Fighter ISNES... .64 33734 Super Wing Commander 3DO 35037 Tomcat Alley . SEGA CD.......... 35093 Vittua Racing SEGA 33237 Virtual Pinball SEGA..... ...... CALL 32540 X Men SEGA... ALL INQUIRIES CALL: INFO:508-443-6125 ORDERS ONLY FAX:508-443-5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 ***** -*-* *MC FAX: 0011-508-443-5645. Xis,CompuServo ID:70007,15340 WM V #T .  SHIPPING & HANDLING: AIR $7 PER GROUND SHIPMENT BORNE SHIPMENT UPS $5 PER JOYSTICKS/GAMECARDS HI, PR, AK, APO SENT BY US MAIL FOR SS. INTL ORDERS WELCOME. CPU UPGRADES 36130 PNY Electronics 2MB Simms MAC.....CALL 36125 PNY Electronics 4MB Simms ...............CALL 36131 PNY Electronies 4MB Simms MAC.CALL 36128 PNY Electronics 8MB Simms ........... CALL MOTHERBOARDS 33226 Flight Stand.... 16439 Flight Stick 31417 Fight Stick Pro 27914 Flightstick PRO-MAC.... 31148 G Force Flight Yoke... 32333 Game Zapper 24018 GameCard III MCA Automatie...... 33855 Gameport 2000 Up to BOMHz.. 33292 Genovation Parallel Game Port.............31 29404 Gravis Analog Pro Joystick 28366 Gravis Eliminator Card..... 35572 Gravis Flight Pack Pro... 27815 Gravis Gamepad IBM 32174 Gravis Gamepad MAC .......... 30003 Gravis MouseStick MAC ........ 35458 PC Golf System 30825 Thrustmastar ACM Game Card....... 35104 Thrustmaster F-16 FLCS....... ....CALL 26850 Thrustmaster Flight Control .............. 33344 Theustmaster Formula TI 29522 Thrustmaster Pro Flight Control .101 29863 Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals... 33780 Thrustmaster Weapon Markl . MAC.......61 31258 Thrustmaster Weapon Markll.... ..90 29434 Virtual Pilot Yoke....... 33052 Y Cable for 2 Joysticks..... MATURE 20 33753 Dream Girl..... ........ 34001 Girlfriend Lisa (PG-13)........ 34436 Girlfriend Teri... 33227 Penthouse Interactive IBM CD 35086 Penthouse Interactive MAC CD.. 32891 Playboy Electronic DateBook 32290 Strip Poker Pro #01 Data Disk IBM......17 32291 Strip Poker Pro #02 Data Disk. IBM 32292 Strip Poker Pro #03 Data Disk-18M 17 32293 Strip Poker Pro #04 Data Disk IBM......17 32294 Strip Poker Pro #05 Data Disk IBM......17 32295 Strip Poker Pro 806 Data Disk. IBM ...17 25457 Strip Poker Pro #07 Data Disk IBM...... 18 25458 Strip Poker Pro #08 Data Disk IBM......18 35211 Strip Poker Pro #09 Dota Disk IBM...18 35212 Strip Poker Pro #10 Dola Disk IBM...... 18 35613 Strip Poker Pro #11 Dota Disk. IBM......18 35614 Strip Poker Pro #12 Data Disk IBM...... 18 31686 Strip Poker Prolossional IBM............29 31887 Strip Poker Professional MAC... ...30 36121 AM 486DX 33 715A, 2018 560 36123 AMT 486DX 33 ZISA, ZVLB. 588 36122 AMT 486DX-50 ZISA, ZVLB .653 31720 AMT 486DX2-66 SISA, 2VB.... 36124 AMT 486SX-33 7ISA, 2V1B............ 428 36115 Micronics 486DX 33 GISA, 2V.... 534 36109 Micronics 486DX-33 EISA 36120 Micronies 486DX2 SO VLB 581 36108 Micronics 486DX2-66 ISA, 2V1B.......580 36119 Micronics 486DX2.66 VIB SOB 36116 Micronics 486SX25 ISA 245 36118 Micronics 486SX 25 VLB ..................291 36117 Micronica PENT60 SEISA, 2PCI 1 086 31841 Cyrix 83D87-25 FasMathDX Copr........62 31842 Cyrix 8308733 FosMathDX Cope... 57 31884 Cyrix 3D87.40 FasiathDX Cop.........62 31885 Cyrix 8358725 FusMathSX Copr.........51 33455 Cyrix B3587-33 SX CoProcessor..........64 31739 Cyrix CX486DRX2-16/32 386DX-16...256 33620 Cyrix CX486DRX2-25/50 386DX25...291 31738 Cyrix CX486DRX233/66 386DX-33. 342 31836 Cyrix CX4865RX2-20/40 386SX 20. 221 34409 Cyrix CX486SRX225/50 386SX25 249 24196 Math Co Processor 387DX 35501 Moth Co Processor 387SL 80 24200 Math Co Processor 387SX.. 35134 Overdrive 486DX-50 CPU... 30884 Overdrive 486DX.50 CPU WO/OD....245 31505 Overdrive 486DX 66 CPU WO/OD....291 35502 Overdrive 486DX-86 FOR SX/DX33 291 35599 Overdrive 4865X2.50 CPU WO/FPU. 196 SEGA/SNES/3DO 04 VISA MEMORY 33027 Aladdin.SEGA 33547 Art of Fighting SNES... 33606 Cliffhanger SEGA 25550 Drogon's Lair. 3DO..... 32543 Dungeon Master SNES ....... .... 33073 Escape from Monster Manor. 3DO. 33561 Eternal Champions SEGA 34004 Hardball I SNES 25850 Horde 3DO.............. 35352 Incredible Toons SEGA CD. 33823 John Madden NFL '94. 3DO 32535 Jungle Striko SEGA.. 32534 Jurassic Park . SEGA 34598 Kombor Cars SEGA.................. 35036 lethal Enforcers SEGA CD 33074 Lemmings. 300 Our order lines are open Bam midnight MF, 10am-6pm, Sat-Sun, ET Business office hours aro 508 443 6125, M F 9am-5pm ET. Credit cards are not charged until orders ship No surcharge is added to credit card orders. In-stock orders placed by 6 pm. ET ship same day. Temporary shortages usually filled in 3 days. VISA, MC, Discovor, AMEX, PO's, wire transfers, cash, and cashiers checks accepted. Upon recuit and approval, personal and company checks clear within 14 days for immediato shipment Products covered by manufacturor's warranties. Dolective software replaced immediately. Defective hardware repaired or replaced at our discretion Books, memory chips, and some electronic compo nents not returnable. Returns require authorization and are subject to 15% restocking foe. Returns accepted only within 30 days. All items offered for sale are subject to availability. Some products are not available outside the U.S. . We are not responsible for typographical errors.  Airborne chargos: $7 up to 6 lbs. $1 per lb. over 6 lbs. Actual freight charges apply to large items To protect customers from fraudulent credit card caims, each credit card purchase is verified and shipped only to billing addresses Maste DISCO 36132 Kingston 1MB Simms. CALL 36133 Kingston 2MB Simms. 36134 Kingston 4MB Simms................ CALL 36135 Kingston 8MB Simms.... 36126 PNY Electronics IMB Simms CALL 36129 PNY Electronics IMB Simms MAC......CALL 36127 PNY Electronics 2MB Simms. CALL 36 CALL Circle Reader Service #56 "


"REVIEW 0 .10 0 Chip Off The Old Bloc 0 S Spectrum HoloByte's BREAKTHRU! Follows In The Ideological Footsteps of TETRIS by Charles Ardai HE FIRST TILE IN A NEW LINE OF and all the orange bricks that share an have to start the current screen over from TETRIS-INSPIRED PUZZLE GAMES, edge with those. All bricks that were on scratch. You also have the new, incoming BREAKTHRU! SHOWS ITS LINEAGE top of the eliminated bricks fall to fill the bricks to worry about. These suckers from (you'll pardon the expresempty spaces, thus creating a new patcrawl along the top of the screen from sion) square one. Not only does it tern and possibly permitting additional right to left and then drop into the play come with an endorsement from the crebricks to be removed. area either when you click on them or ator of TETRIS, You can remove when they decide to plummet. Russia's Alexey BREAKTHRU! as few as two bricks Helping you clear the screen are Pajitnov, but it Price: $39.95 at a time, but this is bombs, which can only be set off if they looks and sounds System a time-consuming are in the bottom row (or if they are remarkably like its Requirements: way to go about struck by another bomb), and which deillustrious ances IBM 386 or things, and one stroy the contents of the squares immeditor. There is the better, VGA which tends to ately surrounding them. There are also rectangular playgraphics, 5MB leave you with a lot rockets which can be set off anywhere on hard drive area set into a of unremovable, the screen, and which take out any bricks space, Windows sketch of an inter3.1; supports solitary bricks pepin their path. Finally, there are \"supernational setting; most major pering the screen: a bricks,\" which look like tiny Rubik's there are the sound cards. green here, a blue Cubes and which, when clicked on, allow blocks feeding in Protection: Documentation Check there, an orange you to eliminate all bricks of a chosen from the top of Publisher: Spectrum HoloByte sandwiched in becolor at once. the screen, filling Alameda, CA tween. Better by far That's the nut of the game, the set of (510) 522-1164 up the play area is the strategy of basic elements that will either hook you as you frantically work to empty it; and searching out large complexes of bricks or not, depending on your propensity for there is the tinny music, goading you on that can be removed with a single click this sort of thing. There are other eleto ever-greater feats of geometric obliteror, better still, arranging for such comments that turn up in later screens and ation. plexes to be created as other sets of bricks act as obstacles (spiders that dangle and So where's the difference? Unlike are removed. prevent bricks above them from dropTETRIS, BREAKTHRU! starts with a screen ping, soda cans that can only be dealready full of bricks—a wall, if you will. JUST ANOTHER BRICK stroyed by an explosion); there are also a (It is no accident that the first backdrop is IN THE WALL variety of gameplay options, such as the Berlin.) Your job is to deconstruct the With plenty of time to think about what option for two players to go head-to-head wall, brick by brick, the gimmick being to do, you could presumably chart the in separate, half-size windows, or to comthat there are four different colors of optimal set of moves to get you from a pete on the same screen, or to work cobrick, and that you can only remove a full to an empty screen. However, you operatively to empty a single play area. brick when it is adjacent to other bricks don't have plenty of time: there is a timer These are worth enumerating and they of the same color. Click on an orange counting down the seconds on the left do add variety to what would otherwise brick and it vanishes, along with all the side of the screen, and when it reaches be rather static gameplay, but it's the baorange bricks that share an edge with it, zero you lose one of your three lives and sic game that you will either dislike or 96 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"It's coming. STONEKEEP CHRISTMAS OF '94. 1994 Interplay Productions. All trademarks are properties of Interplay Productions. Circle Rearler Service #175 "


"Breakthru Help Game Top Scores Options View like, shelve after a single session or wake There are so many bricks on the screen the superbricks, you'll always get one up in the middle of the night craving. when each level starts that one's first impretty quickly, and they make your task pulse is just to click blindly in the hopes considerably easier. (Minimum odds of GIMME A BREAK of whittling the task down to size. Unforadjacency leap from 58% to 70%.) Get a My reaction fell somewhere in between.tunately, this approach works-somesecond superbrick and it's all overBREAKTHRU! is good, old-fashioned fun, times better, sometimes worse—but it shooting fish in a barrel would be harder but I would not mind especially if I never always makes the task at hand more manthan the mop-up work you'll have left. played it again. In some ways it is more ageable. I think any game that encourIs every screen easy? No. Sometimes the enjoyable than TETRIS, since it offers a ages you to start each screen with a starting pattern is especially thorny, or you greater variety of things to do and more routine or random activity diminishes itmiss your chance at a superbrick, or you rules and more game \"pieces,\" but it is self. You have to make each move with accidentally blow up your superbrick with less of an intellectual challenge, lacks care in TETRIS; not so here, where you a rocket. But the game's not brain surgery. TETRIS' elegant simplicity, and is considsometimes have four things going on at On the whole, it reminds me of those erably less addictive, once and too large and chaotic a pattern place mat puzzles you used to find in dinme on the screen for you to hold ers: fun while you're waiting for your panin your head. It is natural to cakes to arrive, but it doesn't break your decide to click here and there heart if you spill syrup on them. and see what happens—but to BREAKTHRU! hasn't got the TETRIS the extent that this (or any) magic. Then again, how many games do? game pushes you to make that BREAKTHRU! is a B-grade brainteaser, an decision, it has failed to enelectronic fidget toy. For Windows users gross you and to convince you who have grown tired of SOLITAIRE and of its value as a purposeful, MINESWEEPER, it should provide an inofrule-based activity. fensive enough way to kill some time. After a few games, obvious THE EDITORS SPEAK strategies emerge. It is a good idea to start by moving all BREAKTHRU! bombs and soda cans to the THE BERLIN WALL Click on groups of blocks of the same color bottom of the screen, since to tear down the walls of Berlin. Bombs and rockets are handy that's the only way you'll be PROS Easy to learn, easy on the eyes. for taking out \"tin cans\" and other trash. able to get rid of them. Hav CONS Easy to master, easy to forget. ing done that, you watch for RATING  Interplay Productions is a fast-moving company on the leading edge of entertainment software & interactive multimedia. We are seeking those individuals who can live up to the ideals of a company that has its sights set on the future. Team Players who can for exceed the demands of an ever changing Industry. $S2 X-Wng $55 7 11th How \"BY GAMERS FOR GAMERS Interplay is looking for Artists. Experienced team players. High-end individuals who know how to take charge in a high intensity, production oriented industry. Experienced artists who are ready to take on the future with the emphasis on the cutting edge.  2D and 3D Computer Animators Cartoonists and Cell Animators Matte Painters Clay Sculptors experienced in stop frame animation Story Boarders These are not trainee positions. Experience is a must, not a plus. Please send samples on disks or video along with rosume and references to: Interplay Productions, c/o Art Dept., 17922 Fitch Ave., Irvine, CA 92714. No walk-in interviews please. INTERPLAY IS AN ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE COMPANY. SPECTRUM HOURS: P.O. BOX 6295 6AM-11PM PST ES SALINAS, CA 93912-6295 7-DAYS 1-800-983-4321 CALL FOR ELECTRONICS CURRENT PRICES Wng Amaca 35CD 548 Stela Crusade 11h Hou-CD $56 Wngs of Goy.co m 548 Som Across Euse 1942 Pack A Wa 548 Woersten 36: Sour of Destry-CD 543 Wargane Constructon Set Across the fire 548 X-Com:UFO Defense (03.5 540 Wasno 515 AD&D Das Sun 2-CD $42 Western Front AD&D:Eye of the Beholder 1.203 $15 X-Wing Mission 1: mperial Persut $19 SCENARO DISKS Aera: Elder Scots C035 CALL X-Wing Mission 2: B-Wing $19 Battes of Napoleon-1-6 Amored Fist-CD BMOEM Bites of Napoleon-1-6 $10 ea Bartecuse 3000 A.D. $45 Th Quest $24 Wargame Cons. Set 2: Tarks 1-12 $15 ea Crization RA Tycoon Douxe-CD $35 Gabriel Kright 300 Cyclones CD3.5 546 hdana Jones. Alants $24 3D System Doom 2 546 Ion Hex Dragonsphase C0035 $25 Jand 3 ADSD Sayer Dunia Auding a Dynasy 4 Lc  Krada 520 Nonen tie Dark Flashback $15 Lod of the Rings $25 Escape ton Morste Maro Hgh Commyd-CD $20 Maniac Harson 2 $24 Horde Master of Magic CD 35 $40 Maca Race 56 John Madden Football Master of Orion $39 Reimo Zor $1 Kingdom: The For Recres Moch Wartori 0035 546 Sacret of Monkey Band $15 Losfiles of Sherlook Holmes Mora Kombe S Sim CY 200 $34 Osolnis Word Privace/Srike Comm. CO 547 Sar Trek 23 $25 Road Resh Rse of the Triad $34 TFX 528 Shock Wave Robinson's Roquen 0035 SS.CLASSES Sa Control 2 Sar Contd 102 $18 B 24 $15 Super Wng Commander Summer Winter Challenge CD 525 Bate of Anetem $15 Way of the Warrio Theme Pak 0035 542 Bates of Napoleon $15 ATARI Third Rech $36 Conliet Mode Eas! 515 gr System Tie Fighter 547 Geysburg: Tuning Point $15 A vs Predaty Torrado $25 Kampoe $15 Bua Sorsfooral Uima 1-6-CD 530 Mech Brigade $15 Doom Uima 7 Complete CD 512 Read Carge Cockmaga 515 Kumi na Utina 8: Pagan Speech Acces CD 547 Red Lighting $15 Wolinsan 3D Uima Underworld 1 & 2 CD $30 Second Front $15 WE ALSO SELL: Under a Kiing Moon CD $55 Shiloh: Grants Tral S15 SEGASES AC, AAC &acidea Warlords 2. Scenario Bilder $29 Sons of Uberty sis about Books, CD ROM DVE Modems Wne Commande 12Deure CD $33 Sar Connad $15 Hard Dive Josios Vdeo Cards et... PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE, DEFECTIVES REPLACED WITH SAME PRODUCT 20% RESTOCKING FEE ON RETURNED & REFUSED ITEMS PAYMENT: CHECKS (ORDERS SHIPPED WHEN CHECK CLEARS) VETTE MONEY ORDERS (TREATED AS CASH) CA residents add 7.25% sales tax / HANDLING $2 PER ORDER SHIPPING: SOFTWARE ORDERS OVER $75 TAKE $4 OFF SHIPPING 2.DAY PRIORITY MAIL S4, UPS 3-DAY $5, UPS 2-DAY $7, OVERNIGHT $8, C.O.D. ONLY $4 SOFTWARE ORDERS OVER $75 TAKE S4 OFF SHIPPING   Circle Reader Service #258 98 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 Circle Reader Service #115 "


"Mom, why is the video on the computer so TINY ? An' how come it's so weird and JERKY? That's what they used to call \"multimedia\" Melvin. OLD MULTIMEDIA REALMAGIC RealMagicis multimedia now! Add the RealMagic card to your system for the incredible realism of smooth screen-filling, full-motion video and 16-bit audio. MPEG is the powerful new digital video and audio standard that puts the «real» in RealMagic. Enter the exciting new world of interactive MPEG CD-ROMs including movies, games, educational titles, music videos and more. RealMagic is available as an MPEG playback card or a complete multimedia upgrade kit. Anything less is history. Get RealMagic and get real multimedia. \"Old\" Video Image Full Motion Full Screen  Full Sound For the store near you or more information on RealMagic, call logo 1-800-845-8086 Circle Reader Service #128 1994 Sigma Designs, Inc. The Sigma Designs' logo is a registered trademark, and RealMagic and ReelMagic are trademarks of Sigma Designs, Inc. All other brand and product names are property of their respective owners. REALmagic SIGMA DESIGNS As Big As It Gets "


"REVIEW REVIEW : AWolf In Mac othing CIO Reality Bytes Sinks Its Teeth Into 3D Action For The Mac by Christopher Breen F YOU WERE TO HAPPEN BY THE HOME dimly aware of the WOLFENSTEIN concept, what seems at times like an endless numOF A MACINTOSH GAME DEVELOPER LATE here's the idea: ber of tiny rooms for ammo, MedKits, AT NIGHT, YOU'D BE LIKELY TO HEAR The player views a three-dimensional and weapons; annihilate innumerable these words spoken during a preworld from the perspective of an on ruflians; disable deadly security systems; slumber prayer: screen alter-ego. There is some bad mojo and finally expose and defuse the dan\"Dear Lord, please allow us to release in the air and, to discover its source, one gerous plot of the craven Dr. Craven. our fine, first-person-perspective 3-D must travel through a maze-like environshoot-'em-up before those rascals at id ment and quickly dispatch anything that FACE THE FACE Software come up with a way to port moves. To aid in this bloody work, a variSENSORY OVERLOAD's interface and conDOOM to the Mac and make our game ety of progressively more-deadly trols are laid out logically. Gun-like look less wonderful in comparison. Oh, weapons are strewn about along with amweapons are displayed on the left side of and please consider SENSORY OVERLOAD munition, healing the screen and held with the left hand. an eternity of hellkits, body armor, Lobbed weapons, flares, and the right list fire for the paperPrice: $69.99 and such tech SENSORY OVERLOAD are relegated to the screen's upper-right boy if he misses System toys as radar and border. To choose any of these weapons, Requirements: the porch again. communication either click on it with the mouse or use a Macintosh Amen.\" 68030-20MHZ devices. keyboard shortcut. To get an overview of So far, the or better, 2.5MB SENSORY OVERthe action, apply a single keystroke to Almighty seems to RAM (2.8 for LOAD's spin on toggle the Automap window on or off. be paying attention: music), 8MB this popular conPlayers who prefer to fling their charMacDOOM is still hard drive cept finds the acter about via the mouse are likely to be space, System in development and 6.07 (System 7 player awakening disappointed. The mouse is used solely is rumored to be for music), 13-inch color monitor and 256 in the hospital of to select items in the inventory and to slated only for the colors. the Biotex Reclick such objects in the main viewing Power Macintosh. Protection: None search Labs to a screen as switches and buttons. All moveThat leaves the Designers: David Chait, Jon Chait, Jason room-full of dead ment is controlled via the keyboard or Wolfenstein-HasDavis guys who, inexwith one of the supported game conBeen-Done-ToPublisher: Reality Bytes, Inc. Cambridge, MA plicably, all wear trollers. Because I generally prefer to use Death-In-The-PC(617) 621-1555 white shirts, the keyboard or a joystick rather than the Fresh-On-Thebrown pants, and mouse for games, I didn't find this to be Mac-Because-The-User-Base-Is-Solarge red blood stains across their midbothersome. And it was a pleasure to find Comparatively-Tiny-That-Most-Gamesections. The sound of gunfire is heard in that, although the boys at Reality Bytes Developers-Won't-Waste-Their-Time-Onthe distance, and there is the most goshdon't allow one to customize their keyIt market to Bungie Software's 1993 awful stench about the place. Fortunately, board controls directly, they do provide release, PATHWAYS INTO DARKNESS, this particular alter-ego is an undercover five keyboard layouts that should cover and the premiere product from RealiCIA agent who is investigating Biotex's just about every player's requirements. ty Bytes Software, SENSORY AlphaChannel project and who possesses OVERLOAD. many of the instincts and skills necessary REALITY DOES BITE to wantonly obliterate unfriendly human As Mac users are all too aware, in the past HE'S GOT A GUN! life. This expendable life takes the form few years Apple has released a plethora If a) you've been overly busy catching up of the nefarious Dr. Craven and his band of CPUs that range in power from the on your correspondence during the past of buffed henchmen. modest LC series to the monstrously rofive years or b) you're a Macintosh user The game requires the player to run bust Power PC-based Power Macintosh. who shuns all things PC and are only around various levels of the lab; search This situation has caused more than a 100 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"COMING: 12-1-94 II!!!!! ! and then CYBERIAS Titaplar CO-AOM MULTIMUM 0 1994 XATRIX INTILIACTIVE DESIGN. INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED PUBLISITED AND DISTRIBUTED BY INTERPLAY PRODUCTIONS, Inc Circle Reader Service 76 "


"More Players. More Levels. More Weapons. More Enemies. The Invasion Begins On CD-ROM. Technology licensed from ID SOFTWARE, creators of WOLFENSTEINT 3D CORRIDOR TM Alien Invasion With Modem & Network Play Capstone THE MINNACLE OF ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE Now available on disk and August 7 on IBM CD-ROM. To order call: (305) 591-5900 (800) 468-7226 BBS (305) 471-8962 Software Creations BBS (508) 365-2359, 2400 Baud  (508) 368-7139, U.S. Robotics  (508) 365-9352, 14.4-28.8K Wolfenstein is a trademark of ID Software. All Rights Reserved. Corridor 7: Alien Invasion and Capstone are trademarks of IntraCorp, Inc. All other trademarks acknowledged Circle Reader Service #51 "


"few problems for game developers. Natuacceptable level. Lastly, SENrally, these developers want to take adSORY OVERLOAD is among the vantage of the power of the new first games to include code processors and add complex texture specifically written for the mapping and 3-D environments to their Power Macs. Running on a products, but they can't afford to leave Power Mac 8100, the game users with less-zippy computers out in the operates very smoothly on a cold. Somewhere compromises must be large monitor with the Viewmade. port expanded to full screen Reality Bytes has addressed this situain high-resolution mode. tion admirably. To begin with, SENSORY OVERLOAD allows one to turn off certain BUT IS IT DOOMED? elements of the game that require more I'm sorry to dash Mac processing power and therefore can gamers' hopes as well as paracause choppy movement when the phrase a failed Vice Presidenprocessor is overloaded. These elements tial candidate in such a trite UZE IT OR LOSE IT If your Mac can run the software, the game include game sounds and background way but, \"I know DOOM, and will deliver the hardware, like this Uzi used to terminate a music as well as the display of floor and SENSORY OVERLOAD is no mutant muscleman. ceiling textures. For Macs that are conDOOM.\" Then again, as farsidered dinosaurs by today's standards, as Mac folks are concerned, DOOM math correctly-it would take four times such as the Ilci and IIsi, there is even an doesn't yet exist in a usable form and the processing power for a Mac to run Emergency Speed Option that temporarwhen it does, it may be available only to DOOM at a pace comparable to that of a ily turns off all texture mapping when the the Mac elite who can afford the highPC. What does this have to do with SENaction gets particularly fast and furious. priced spread. Even then it may not run SORY OVERLOAD? Just this: Producing a In addition, the game provides nine difas well on a PC. Here's why: game featuring 3-D environments and ferent screen sizes and three levels of resDOOM runs under DOS in VGA texture mapping that runs acceptably at olution. Sure, on slow Macs the view mode, which sports a screen resolution of 640 x 480, using a variety of processors, window will have to be mighty tiny and 320 x 240. Mac games run at 640 x 480, isn't easy. Here's where the ragged edges the graphics jagged, but at least overall which is four times the resolution of show. movement is maintained at a somewhat DOOM. Therefore-if I've done the The graphics are not up to the quality PET FRITERS SERIES SERIES INCLUDES: STREET FIGHTER AND STREET FIGHTER II 4 HEROIC HITS ON ONE ACTION-PACKED CD! . BONUS: MEGA MAN MEGA MAN 3 Think you're tough? Then think again, 'cause this hot title features four times the action... four times the excitement... four times the intensity of anything you've ever experienced! It's the incredible STREET FIGHTER SERIES four of the hardest-hitting competitions ever assembled on one CD Street Fighter,\" Street Fighter 11 plus two bonus games, Mega Man and Mega Man 3!! So kick back and get ready to rumble! For your nearest store location, or to order, call 1-800-447-6543. CAPCOM PCOM I BINUS 3 BONUS BATTLES! MEGA MANO MEGA MAN 31 AND HI TECH 1991 CAPCOM CO. Lid. All Rights Reserved. Street Fighter, Street Fighter Il are Iraderiarks al CAPCOM CO. Lid CAPCOM and MEGA MAN are registered trademarks of CAPCOM CO., LTD. Manufactured and dis tributed under license from CAPCOM CO. Lid. by Hi Tech Entertainment Circle Reader Service #257 OCTOBER 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 103 "


"HARVESTER DNA'S DINER Open 24 Hours coming fall '94 for PC CD ROM Merit Software DALLAS, TX 1-800-238-4274 UURE ISION  Merit Software, Dallas, Texas.  Future Visionary, Inc. Harvester is a registered trademark of Future Visionary. Inc. All Rights Reserved Circle Reader Service #74 "


"are uninteresting and tend to Weapons Lab B. I would be remiss if I be monotonous over a numdidn't report that I spent several more ber of levels. hours playing the game than necessary Even on Power Macs, the for the purposes of this review. movement of the bad guys is Reality Bytes has made a decent start jerky and robotic. This can be with SENSORY OVERLOAD. Mac purists will a problem not only aesthetijustifiably gripe about the graphics and cally but also strategically. For motion, mouse-fiends will mourn the loss example, when one waits at of their favorite controller, and folks exan angle to plug a baddie aspecting DOOM will be underwhelmed. he emerges from a room, the However, players willing to overlook evil one appears to turn from these foibles in exchange for an exciting the side-to full-frontal view in game that can be played reasonably well an instant rather than graduon nearly every Mac-and extremely well ally. This allows the enemy to on the most Powerful Macs—will have a SMOKING IN THE BOARDROOM This adventure will lead you squeeze off a shot long before bloody good time. through the halls and offices of the BioTex Research Lab. Here, he should be able to. THE EDITORS SPEAK we've caught Dr. Craven with his evil henchwoman. Yet despite these obvious SENSORY OVERLOAD blemishes, there are things to of most Macintosh games. Even in highlike about SENSORY OVERLOAD. Although RATING  resolution mode, telltale jaggies are evithe game relies heavily on quick rellexes, dent everywhere. When one shifts to there are a few puzzles to chew on, some PROS A decent, first-person-perlow-resolution mode, the graphics are secret passageways to discover, and an elspective shoot-'em-up in a market nearly as jagged and blocky as-shudement of strategic planning required to where few of these games exist. If you der-older PC games. In addition, the survive the unrelenting firepower of the own a PowerMac, you're loving life. enemy terrorists look a lot like strangelyenemy. And of course, there's the fun facCONS It ain't Doom. Jagged graphout-of-focus characters from that holiertor-regardless of how often I prayed ics, clunky movement, and an overthan-thou animated show, \"Davey and that the enemy was a little more in focus, abundance of exploration may have Goliath.\" And although the furniture and I couldn't quite manage to suppress my Mac gamers going back to Myst. bodies are rendered in 3-D, their shapes heart rate while I prepared to storm Prepare for KOMBAT on your PC... and Take Control with the Advanced Gravis PC GamePad! NOW FOR THE PC! ADVANCED GRAVIS PC GAME PAD INSIDE! Execute all the bone-shattering combos and ferocious finishing moves of the #1 arcade smash right on your PC... and enhance the martial arts mayhem of Sub-Zero, Rayden and the rest of the kombatants with the awesome Advanced Gravis PC GamePad! MORTAL KUMBAT Aclaim For your nearest store location, or to order call 1-800-447-6543. GRAVIS ARCADE ACTION ON YOUR PC! B2 HI TECH entertainment Inc. ENTERTAINREDIT Distributed by Hi Tech Entertainment MORTAL KOMBAT ba Trademark of and licensed from Midway Manufacturing Company, 1992. All Rights Reserved Used by Permission. D 1993 Acclam Entertainment Inc. Distributed under license from Accalm Entertainment Inc. by Hi Tech Entertainment Aclaim Circle Reader Service #61 OCTOBER 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 105 "


"REVIEW #cu British Racing Genes Wizard Games' GOOD To Firm Presents British Flat Racing by Johnny L. Wilson ONCASTER, NEWCASTLE, AND EPPlace bet, but when the field is large ing your stable in season alter season as SOM-THE NAMES MAY NOT BE AS enough, it can pay off like a Show bet. In the horses grow older. FAMILIAR TO NORTH AMERICAN the British Isles, parlay bets are labeled You begin the game by purchasing ears as Churchill Downs, Belaccording to the number of races in horses at auction. British racing ranks mont Park and Santa Anita, but which you are continuing to \"let it ride\" cach horse in one of three performance the former are just as important to fans by selecting a horse to win in each race. groups. So, observing the ranking and of English thoroughbred That is, a treble is a threepast performance of both sire and dam racing as the latter are to GOOD TO FIRM race parlay, a fourfold is should enable you to have an idea where U.S. aficionados of the Price: $39.00 four all the way up to an the horse currently up for bid is going to Sport of Kings. I first heard System Requirements: eightfold. There is even perform. The auction is largely abstractthe magic names of English IBM compatible 286 or one bet called a Goliath ed, since you only have the current top racetracks when I began to better, VGA graphics that includes one eightbid on the screen and don't know who Protection: None read the best-selling mystery fold, eight sevenfolds, 28 you're bidding against, but if the auction Designer: new era novels by the Queen's forsoftware sixfolds, 56 fivefolds, 70 were the main interest, you'd be playing mer jockey, Dick Francis. As Publisher: Wizard fourfolds, 56 trebles, and MILLENNIUM AUCTION instead of Good a result, I soon became en Games 28 doubles. Whew! TO FIRM, wouldn't you? amored with the differences Wilmington, MA Speaking of betting, I'll Then, you determine the intensity between our system and (508) 658-2209 bet you wonder how a perand distance of each horse's training. theirs. son who has never attendThis is also fairly abstract, but very imed a British racing event in his life knows portant. Your goal is to build your horsTHE BRITISH ARE RUNNING anything about this. In addition to the es up to peak fitness (100%). You use a The British have two types of horse racaforementioned Dick Francis novels, I spreadsheet-like screen to adjust intensiing: flat racing and steeplechase. Flat raclearned a lot about British flat racing by ty level (50% is the default maintenance ing is similar to the U.S. style, but each playing Good To FIRM, a sports strategy level, with less representing rest and course is laid out to take advantage of its game where you become an owner/trainmore representing training for improvenatural terrain. So, where most U.S. er for a stable of British flat racing thorment), to determine the number of courses are elliptical ovals which all look oughbreds. Wizard Games, that hours of training per week (0-6 with 3 very similar to each other, each British purveyor of delightful little sports being the maintenance setting), and the course is quite distinctive. games, has created a menu-driven text distance which you are preparing the The British do not have pari-mutuel interface with lively animated racing sehorse to run. betting system where the odds are the quences. In many ways, it is closest to the Next, you enter your horses in the same at every betting window. Instead, Stable Owner's Module that was pubweek's races. This is a very fast and usercach bookie has a stand and they set their lished as an add-on to Ed Ringler's outfriendly screen. When a horse's name is own odds for each horse. So, one can do of-print OMNI-PLAY HORSE RACING. highlighted, all of the races in which that a little comparative shopping here. Fortunately, however, Good To FIRM of horse is eligible to run during the turn (a British racing provides an abundance offers you more control of the training/racweek in game time) are highlighted as exotic betting schemes. Instead of Wining process than you had in the well. You merely choose the ones where Place-Show, they have Win and Each out-of-print game. Also, GOOD TO FIRM you think your horse can win and move Way. The latter is often equivalent to a allows you to continue training and racon. Finally, you're off to the races. 106 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"stealth 6L. ALL MUSCLE. No fat. CANAANILA 32.7 Dinond ATI MATROY Introducing ripping fast graphics acceleration. Diamond Stealth 64 graphics accelerators, available in VRAM and DRAM versions, combine streamlined graphics with high-performance 64-bit processing power. Our lean, clean and incredibly mean approach has paid off with flying colors. Pumped-Up Graphics Curve-smashing benchmark scores: 43.0 in WinBench 4.0 for Stealth 64 VRAM; 39.4 in WinBench 4.0 for Stealth 64 DRAM WinBench 4.0 Up to 1280x1024 8-Bit Color high-resolution graphics 38.4 Flicker-free, 120 Hz refresh rates PCI and VESA local bus compatible Drivers for Windows, DOS, OS/2 and more List prices starting at only $229 Powerful Productivity Diamond's powerful menu-driven software utility, InControl Tools, offers maximum flexibility and control under Windows. This easy-to-use tool provides:  Virtual desktop Real-time pan and zoom Energy Star\" power saving features Custom monitor setup Single key application start-up \"Stealth 64 'VRAM' blazes in every Windows and DOS application... two thumbs up for excellence in every category...\" Greg Loveria, BYTE Stealth64 Magazine, July 1994. So, don't be ruled by weak-kneed performance. Get Stealth 64 from Diamond. Call 1-800-4-MULTIMEDIA or our 24-hour FAX-Back service at 1-800-380-0030 for a dealer near you. D oelens DIAMOND MULTIMEDIA 1130 East Arques Avenue, Sunnyvale, CA 94086 Circle Reader Service #229 Windows 3.1 PCI periarnance tests performed by Diamond Computer Systems, Inc., using Zifi-Davis WinBencho Version 1.0 on an Intel Pentium PCI 90MHz motherboard with 256k cache, 16MB RAM ZUMB hard disk SmarDrive 2048, and DOS 6.2. The Stealth 64 VRAM was configured with 2 MB VRAMap24x768x256/72 H2 Large Font using driver reloase v1.06. The Matrox Ultima Plus (MGA II) was configured with 2MB VRAM in the same mode using driver release 1.42. The ATI Graphics Pro TUDO IMach 6) WAS configured with 2MB VRAM in the same mode using driver release 1.30. A trade names referenced are the service mark, trademark, or registered trademarks of their resnactive manufacturers. Diamond reserves the right to change specifications without notice. 1994 Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc. 408-736-2000, Fax: 408-730-5750. "


"S-sayojirgo 3-Silver Hawk apewe HD Indicap over Inila 3 furlongs Crop COTS A FILIES cod 20 Going UV Mizunonoy 12:10 & RUDENS CONTINUA Concu Mo Ali Sur I Ulue Velvet NIME Comanche Run C1321 TRAINING TOR 1 mile 2 ACE 2.90 old SeX coll  29 in 21 CROUP 3 HORSERATINO 109 11:20 G L HEALTH good 200ticaje TRAINER  H1 là 3 BUCTIEY 2:20 Sailing stone 2 Kogunit this season C ut 2n . This year STARTS STRIRE ROTE UININCS of 2.7K 2 2000 11670 The other reason I'm game was actually a design decision. Wizso addicted to Good To ard Games wanted you to observe the FIRM over both OMNIoverall performances of your horses in PLAY HORSE RACING's Staorder to determine their relative ble Owners' Module and strengths and weaknesses, while the oldQUARTER POLE is that the er games provided fractions (statistics British game seems much showing how fast horses were running at more open-ended. It isn't various points on the track) that helped simply about making the me know at which distance to train each most money or winning horse. Good To FIRM opts for training one particular sweepby the seat of one's pants rather than usstakes race; it is about being the hard statistics of racing fractions coming the most and workout fractions. You have to DOWN THE STRETCH! Your horses always have the post position at successful trainer by using watch when horses fade back and when the front of the screen so that you can see them easily. your entire stable to its they make their move in order to deterfullest potential. For exmine how well-suited they are for each AND THEY'RE OFF! ample, since the seasons are connected, distance. The racing is most like Micro-League I have had seasons where I Sports' QUARTER POLE, except that you was the last-place trainer in by GOOD TO PIRM navigate via text menus, and the actual the standings followed by animation for the race is much faster. seasons where my stable GOOD TO FIRM gives you lots of choices came into their own and I on how to view the races. You can simply entered the exotic world of get the final results, watch the finishing the Top 5 trainers. If I had post, observe the last furlong, or enjoy been playing one of the CWU in the complete race. QUARTER POLE's racearlier games, I would have J Wilson ing sequences are only superior to GOOD quit and started over. Since TO FIRM in one regard: It allows you to I had a lot of time invested use function keys to toggle back and in my stables, I kept workwatch your horses as they trail the pack. ing toward the right mix of The \"camera\" in Good To FIRM only folhorses, distances, and trainlows the lead horse. ing so that I could keep imF avo F10 quit As for betting, Good To FIRM offers proving. I haven't won the more variety than QUARTER POLE, both on championship yet, but I'm RACING FORM All decisions are made via text input on screens and off-track. It's conceivable that only having a wonderful time like this one. Highlighting the horse and the action puts your the wildest gambler will actually place a trying. jockey in the saddle and you in the winner's circle before you Goliath, for instance. The best news is I also liked the way it hanknow it. that all of the betting is handled via a dled claiming races. If you spreadsheet-looking screen where numeropt to run your horse in a claiming race, GOOD To Firm is one of those games ous bets can be placed at one time with you are likely to receive an offer from eithat serves its audience well. It doesn't out taking as much time as the U.S. game. ther an independent stable or one of your spend so much on production values that computer-controlled comthe program runs too slowly. Indeed, if petitors. If one of your you only watch the races in which you closest competitors is tryhave runners, you can play through a ing to buy one of your topseason in less than two hours. I highly Prize pony 11230 Croup 3 COLIS & FILLIES ugou 3 yra performing horses, you recommend this game to anyone who will most likely choose not loves horse racing and prefers good to sell at any price. Offers game play to chrome. will also come at the end of each simulated season. THE EDITORS SPEAK Sometimes, this is a great GOOD TO FIRM time to unload an aging performer. At other times, RATING*** 1/2 you might want to pay atEntry fees PROS Fast animation and an unclutJockey's basic ride fee tention to how well your Jockey prize noocy chore TOTAL IN rival fared in the last seatered interface bring GTF's unusual son before you sell a posubject matter to life. tential moneymaker to CONS Limited viewing angles on AT THE FINISH Even if you don't want to watch an entire race, you can catch the exciting climax. It's like watching the highlights on races and sparse statistical informahim or her. tion often leave the stable owner in the telly. What I consider the biggest weakness in the the dark 2ND 380 CROUP LA WINS TOWN taal.ce Connonchen in this roca c e move 1:00-ot NEUMAT Handicap over 1 nila Coing :ICTIVY 7 KUNNERS CAM --0110 Uinnings2990 2810 FINISHING ORDER llorse1st Sonto Crous 2nd 2 Three SLOC 3rd 6 fiduci ALI 1 Enstone Spork 5th 5 Hill Royal 6th 3 The Hertford 2th 2 Nikson --JockeyRoberto U Neuelt P Eddery C Richarde I LOA 3 Coulhen U Core -Trainer P Cole F Bullers M Horchi HCécil E Butlers Dorling 930 st I Puoluun 12/1 OUN IMOConbling Caabling returns Prize noney TOTAL OUT 108 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"Me Sabre Team 45% 99% 23 Wed 0 SELECT NUMBER OF ROUNDS TO FZRE 0 49 xd (100) SEX V5 challenging missions with multiple difficulty levels. Four hostages are being held at the American Embassy in London's West End. You are in control of the smallest and most secretive fighting unit in the British Army The Sabre Team. It is your duty to infiltrate the embassy, rescue the hostages, and treat the terrorists with extreme prejudice. Complete this mission successfully, then proceed on to four more scenarios: rescue British prisoners from a jungle POW camp, destroy a subversive underground nuclear installation, rescue a hijacked ocean liner, and destroy a hostile nuclear weapons center deep in the desert. Detailed blue prints of each mission. Beautifully crafted isometric game landscapes. Digitized speech Available for IBM Compatibles on 3.5\" disk and CD-ROM U.O.P., MICROLEAGUE 201 BELLEVUE BUILDING, NEWARK, DE 19702 internete software Tomore intitommation and availability call Circle Reader Service #213 ton amici avattability call: 1-800-334-6572 N 1994 MicroLeague Interactive Software. Krisalis Software Ltd. All rights reserved "


"REVIEW It's All In The Follow-Through Micro Sports Makes A Pitch For The Big Time With Pro LEAGUE BASEBALL Batet Fastball Change Patou Curve Fastball Slider Change Knuckle Curve Slider Knuckle by Jim Gindin Strategy Play Ball THE ADVERTISEMENTS AND BACKbases loaded and none out, I've been Worse, fielders chasing high fly balls OF-THE-BOX TEXT ON COMPUTER able to smack live bunt singles with a pair closely resemble a frog springing vertiGAMES ARE ALWAYS BOASTFUL. A of walks on my way to a seven-run rally, cally, longue extended to snatch an ergame is always the best,\" a all off the same pitcher! If this were the rant insect. \"benchmark,\" or \"the most acexception, it would be merely irritating, PRO LEAGUE also includes an arcade opcurate ever.\" As savvy consumers, but realism takes a comprehensive beattion for those who wish to time mouse when we read such ing in nearly clicks with the swing of the bat or the things we reach PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL every aspect of curve of a pitch. The problem is, you don't for that special Price: this game. control bat or pitch location and you don't grain of salt we $49.95 PRO LEAGUE is control fielding, throwing or running keep on hand for System primarily a textAside from seriously reducing the number such marketing Requirements: based baseball of strikeouts and walks in a game, arcade IBM hype and White simulation overaction adds little to game play. compatible House press releas286 (386 laid with a graphEven in strategic-level play, I watched es. We've come to recommended), ic environment. a double roll through the right-field wall. expect it, and we 4MB RAM (8 Included are sevThen, the fleet-footed Mickey Tettleton ignore it. But when recommended), eral nicely drawn raced to a triple on a one-hop line-drive you buy a game, rip VGA graphics, 15.5 MB hard drive space, ballparks, each to the left fielder. I longed for a nonopen the shrinkDOS 5.0 or higher, mouse supported. about one graphic strategic play mode, or maybe Protection: Documentation check wrap, get into the megabyte in size. just a long, thundering rain delay. Players: 1 or 2 (modem support) guts of the game, Designers: David Holt, Alan Stephenson, When the batter and find big talk in Brent Johnson, Paul Immekus hits a ball, PRO THROWING CURVES the manual, the Publisher: Micro Sports Inc. LEAGUE scrolls Despite the animation difficulties, I game had better Chattanooga, TN smoothly thought that I could at least settle down deliver (800) 937-7737 through the seto a challenging game, and in one early The manual of lected stadium contest, the computer led 9-1 in the sevMicro Sports' PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL backdrop to follow its flight. enth inning. Comebacks are enjoyable, makes some huge claims. The first senSadly, the same care that went into but when I scored seven runs in the sevtence reads: \"You've played the competiproviding pretty playing fields failed to enth, the starting pitcher for the comtion; now it's time to move to the majors! make it into the animation. Regardless puter remained in the game! In another Welcome to Pro League Baseball-the of position, players have just a handful matchup, the computer refused to pinch most comprehensive simulation of major of poses. With only a couple of animahit for a middle reliever late in a tie league baseball ever created!\" tions depicting the ball in flight, it's ofgame with a runner on second base. Hmm....that's big talk. Does it have the ten difficult to tell a fly ball from a The AI had not a clue of how to try the goods to back it up? Well, let's just say grounder. While you can consult the famed \"double-switch\" when changing that PRO LEAGUE is the first baseball simtext description of each play, what purpitchers-if you're lucky, you'll figure ulation I've encountered where, with the pose then does the animation serve? out how to do this yourself without 110 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"THINK YOU CAN DO BETTER? Telex Ultimate NFL Coaches Club Football is the only PC game that lets you play, coach or own your own NFL team. ULTIMATE FOOTBALL puts you into the action with awesome graphics, real NFL coaches' playbooks, and 1994 player rosters you can update weekly with Franchise Football League stats. Think it's easy getting to the Super Bowl? PLAY THE GAME. ANYTHING IS POSSIBLE. ULTIMATE FOOTBALL 77V  Didad Real NA State Weekly lides farkay Fortal League Seheer des 1994 leon Rashur 1994 MicroProse All Rights Reserved. MICROPROSE Anything is possible. For IBM-PC & Compatibles on CD-ROM NFL Coaches Clb ca trademark of the Nation Footbal League, MO 1994 NFLP Franchise Football League and FFL are frodemarks of Fantasy Sports Properties Inc, NFUPA is a registered trademark of the National Football League Players Assocation. Circle Reader Service #171 "


"PILCHE PEU Throw NA Jeff Fasero COLBALTUS IMON ENA HRA 133 SB G/EX 1119 RAVO File Edit Help crashing the game. plemented. In one test game, Dennis The lack of a decent Jeff Fassero Martinez and John Wetteland completed computer opponent is a victory throwing exclusively sliders and a tremendous flaw. knuckle balls. According to their profiles, Human managers neither pitcher is proficient with either are hardly so limited. 1229 156 pitch, yet between them, they didn't alOn offense, a managlow an earned run. er may select from several options, inDAL NR DAVG A LEAGUE OF ITS OWN 183 225 1239 40 cluding some not ofPRO LEAGUE supports league play, PS AVIAGEM PREPUST HISCH MISCS KISCH ten found in baseball though setting up anything other than a simulations. You can standard league is a tedious process. The try to hit behind the game produces realistic statistics to a cerrunner moving to sectain extent, but has a real dislike for cerond base, or even loft Montreal 93 JB tain players. Montreal averaged 78 a sacrifice fly to advictories in test leagues, producing an vance a runner at FASSERO'S BLUES Real-life league leaders such as Jeff Fassero often ERA of one point higher than its real-life third base. The hit have trouble recreating their achievements in PROLEAGUE BASEBALL. counterpart. The Expos had 94 victories and run is possible, in 1993. Cincinnati Reds outfielder though the runners Kevin Mitchell averaged just eight home don't head to the next base when they invariably fielding the ball properly. runs per 600 at bats, posting a .424 slugshould. Runners from third base will rarely try to ging percentage. His 1993 numbers were Defensive options allow you to select score no matter where the infield is posi19 homers in 323 at bats and a .601 slugthe pitch type and position each fielder tioned. ging percentage. separately, but these options appear to Pitch selection revealed even less forePRO LEAGUE ERA's are consistently.40 have little correlation with actual play thought. The game's READ.ME file higher than real life. World Series chamresolution. Even when infielders are states that each pitcher's profile contains pion Toronto won 104 games with a 4.77 placed literally on top of each other, they a code indicating which pitches he can ERA in one simulation, Jose Guzman spring back to normal positions as soon successfully throw. A nice idea, except leading the way with 20 wins and a 5.54 as the batter makes contact with the ball, that it doesn't appear to have been immark. In 1993, the Blue Jays won 95 IHUNDERSEAS \"A DOUBLE MUST-HAVE. Anyone who plays computer games will want this AMAZING CHAIR!\" Marc Spiwak POPULAR ELECTRONICS Feedback System Used in Real F16 Simulators Now Available to the Public \"VIRTUAL UTOPIA!\" Marc Dultz, STRATEGY PLUS \"I could actually FEEL the punch of the afterburner!\" Ed Dille, ELECTRONIC GAMES HOW IT WORKS A 100 watt subwoofer built into the base generates low frequency sound that resonates through the wave chamber hidden inside the chair. Thus you not only hear but FEEL your simulation. Paired with your amplifier, the ThunderSeat makes your favorite flight sim as realistic as it can be without a motion simulator! OPTIONAL SIDE CONSOLES put your favorite joystick controls and mouse at a convenient position. Add a keyboard holder and you have the perfect setup for both flight simulation and office work. Shake Rattle and Roll for as little as $159.95! For a FREE CATALOGUE CALL 1  800 8-THUNDER Whether its the whine of your Formula 1 Race Car the clang of Sword against Sword, or the rumble or four Jet Engines at full after-burner ile ThunderSeat lets you take off to a new lerre of realism! Compatible wit all sound cards and CD-ROM'S ThunderSeat Technologies 6330 Arizona Circle  Los Angeles, CA 90045 310 410-0022 FAX: 310 410-1569 Circle Reader Service #185 112 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"RE-Coming This Fall on IBM CD-ROM. Capstone THE PINNACLE OF ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE To order call: (305) 591-5900 (800) 468-7226. BBS (305) 471-8962 Software Creations BBS (508) 365-2359, 2400 Baud . (508) 368-7139, U.S. Robotics. (508) 365-9352, 14.4-28.8K Zorro and  Zorro Productions, Inc. Licensed by The Imagination Factory Circle Reader Service #207 "


"1. Valenzuela Starting Pilchors Right Fielders CRA IR RBI BAVG None Cory Snyder Narut Der McDonald f. Valenzuela Rick Sutcliffe Janie Mayer Hike Hussina Artur Rules 8 10 12 10 4.94 10 5.75 93.43 64.46 6 6.51 5 Fie Team 1 Team 2 Status Help 6.10 ERA. Teamings at every defensive position and Team 17 Team 21 mate Kirk Rueter watched their win total decline from 75 likewise ballooned to 73. I gave the Chicago White Sox Dallinore '93 Los Angeles (N) 93 from 8-0, 2.73 to Dave Kingman-like ratings at every poTrade or Release Trade or Release 6-4, 5.10. sition, and their win total dropped from Col Ripken The game does81 to 80. n't necessarily increase offense, as THE DRAFT BOARD batting averages PRO LEAGUE also provides a draft modare about the same ule. Since it can't be used competitively, as in real-life. Slughowever, it looks to be basically an afterging percentages, thought. The first time I tried to run it, it Darryl Strauber 5 12 .140 however, are about hung the machine in the 20th round tryten points too low, ing to access an empty list of designated while on-base perbitters. I got through 25 rounds on my Trade Release Clear centages are about second attempt, disgusted to find All-Star five points too low. caliber players still available in the 18th More singles occur round. When I tried to run a season usTRADE DEADLINE Feel free to swap Strawberry for Ripken, but remember that defense has little effect in this game. in the average ing these teams, fully expecting the team game, whereas exI drafted to win the pennant by 40 tra-base hits, pargames, the autoplay module repeatedly times, posting a 4.21 ERA. Guzman won ticularly home runs, are much less hung the computer three games into the 14 times and had a 3.99 ERA. frequent. The only hypothesis I can deseason. Some players weren't even close to vise to explain how this results in .40 exPRO LEAGUE represents an attempt to their 1993 performances. A scan of Montra runs per game is that base runner provide as much function as any baseball treal's statistics revealed PRO LEAGUE's advancement in the autoplay module simulation previously released. It fails, dislike for Jeff Fassero. In 1993, he was may be too frequent. however, to perform any of these func12-5 with a 2.29 ERA, which would have Players are numerically rated for detions anywhere near the level its competiled the league had Fassero thrown a few fensive abilities, but once again, this tion has reached. The game is more innings. In PRO LEAGUE seasons, he seems to have little effect on gameplay. unfinished, the number of serious bugs was 5-6 with a 4.43 mark and 6-10 with a I gave the Indians top-notch range ratspotted increasing every time I reboot my computer. It is, quite simply, a piece NOTHING BUT NET! of software that should never have reached the marketplace. Pro League Basketball I think Micro SPORTS knows this. No program with this many errors could The only statistically accurate graphics ever have passed beta-testing. Still, for a based basketball simulation. game in such a competitive market, it is a most difficult and frustrating experience Simulates the game of professional from the moment you attempt to install basketball from the coach's perspective. the program. Even with all the effort expended, it seems that Pro LEAGUE is Create leagues. headed back to the minors, at least until Draft teams. Develop coaching playbooks. they pitch their games with a bit more And much more... control. THE EDITORS SPEAK Players rated in 11 categories.  Each pass is taken into account.  Tracks each player's court location.  Players actually make decisions. Watch their thought processes.  Computer and user controlled teams.  Play-by-play with shot-action graphics. Statistics: game, season, standings, league leaders, and records. Graphical User Interface.. SoundBlaster support. Includes the following modules:  Pro Personnel  Pro League Setup  Pro Draft . Pro Playbook  Pro Basketball . Pro Stats ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $49.95 ea. to: Strategic Gaming Designs 659 Cary Towne Blvd. #176, Cary, NC 27511 Specify 3.5\" HD or 5.25\" HD media, PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL RATING* PROS Beautiful ball yard graphics and a nice selection of offensive options. CONS The statistical model produces unrealistic results. The action mode play has limited value. The game as a whole is buggier that a hot summer night. We installed this game long enough to do the review, but now it's going, going...gone! STRATEGIC OAMINO DESIONS For the IBM and compatibles, 640 KB RAM. 386 or above recommended. Requires mouse, high-density disk drive, hard disk, and VGA. Or call 1-919-552-1807 for VISA MasterCard orders. Circle Reader Service #259 114 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"Soccer's Your Game? Learn The Real Thing From Meola, Harkes, Hamm & Zachery Ty Bryan. \"The key to scoring is opening the field up. Getting space.\" Transition Stance Channeling Cover Balance ESTIT SOCCER SOCCER MACINTOSH COMPUTERS Soccer Build real soccer skills with live-action, multimedia coaching from America's greatest players. All on CD-ROM for your Multimedia PC, 300 or Macintosh system. Get ESPN's Let's Play Soccer and learn offensive, defensive and team skills from John Harkes, U.S. World Cup Team star. Mia Hamm, all-time points leader in women's soccer. Plus \"Home Improvement's\" Zachery Ty Bryan, Official World Cup Youth Ambassador. Or choose ESPN Soccer: Skills & Strategy and team up with Harkes, Hamm and U.S. World Cup Goalie Play Tony Meola. You'll get interactive, personal coaching from three top champions. Covering everything from basic skills to advanced game strategy—all at your own pace. Either way, you're a winner. Call 1-800-831-2469 now for complete information. And start playing for real. 3DO CD-ROM o PC Multimedia PC M ars and IntelliPlay Published by Intelinedo Sports, Inc. Two Piedmont Center, Suite 300, Atlanta, Georgia 30305. Phone (404) 262-0000. Fox (404) 261-2282, Inteltploy is a registered trademark of Intellimedia Sports, Inc. ESPN is a registered trademark of ESPN, Inc. The Multimedia PC logo is o certification mark of the Multimedia PC Marketing Course, Inc. 300 and the 300 logos are trademarks of the 3D Company. Macintosh is a registered trademark of Apple Corouter, Inc. Total Sports Instruction Circle Reader Service #79 "


"CHIPS & BITS are Call 800-500-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'I 802-767-3033 Source 10119 PO Box 234 Dept 10119 Rochester, VT 05767 BATUMO Panche 23 SON SEGA CD MIDNIGHT RAIDERS' Get ready for the ride of your life in an AH64 Apache Attack helicopter! Fly under the cover of night to rescue a kidnapped govem ment official. Features Tru Video of the cockpit, urban warfare, and terrorist hideouts that change with every game! $52 'JAGUAR SYSTEM' The new Jaguar interactive multimedia system has a mind blowing 64 bits of power. Olfers 16 million colors in a 3D world, breakneck speeds, cat-like control and movie-like special effects. $249 \"WORLD HEROES 2' This super hot sequel raises the energy level to nuclear heights while introducing a cool new moveMORPHING. Play one of 16 characters and zoom through the action at one of 3 speed settings. $59 FREE SHIPPING! 0 SEGA CD 3 Place an order for an out of stock item and recieve FREE overnight shipping when product becomes available. Handling $2 per shipment. \"VAY' It came from space a millennium ago, two tons of technology programmed for destruction. Wizards joined forces to drain its power. Now the Danek Empire has partially duplicated it and your only hope is to restore power to technology that nearly destroyed the planet. CD 549 «BRAIN LORD' is truly an adventure into the future. On another planet, Brain Lord pits the player against many challenging puzzles. Brain Lord combines incredible graphics and music! $59 GENESIS HARDWARE GENESIS ADVENUTRE GENESIS ROLE PLAYING GENESIS SHOOTERS GENESIS SIMULATIONS GENESIS SPORTS $49 4 Way Play Adaptor $29 6 Bttn Arcad Pwr Stk $39 6 Button Control Pad $19 F-16 Wireless Pad $39 Gen Menacer Term 2 $46 Genesis Activator $59 GEN CD 2 Sports Pk $229 GEN CD Bkup Cart $44 GEN 2 CD Sys CD $229 Genesis CDX Sys $399 Genesis Menacer $36 GEN RF Antnn Switch $9 Genesis Systm 2 core $99 GEN Systm Sonic 2 $129 Genesis Team Plyr 2 $36 Mega Mouse $32 SG Program Pad 2 $32 Battletech $54 Cybercop $44 Dark Wizard CD MA13 $43 Heimdall CD GA $44 Land Stalker GA $54 Lufia $56 Might & Magic 3 $59 Phantasy Star 4 $79 Popful Mail CD $49 Romance 3 Kgdoms 2 $49 Shadow Run MA-13 $49 Shining Force 2 $64 Technoclash $39 Unchrld Wirs Nw Horz $62 Vay CD MA-13 $48 Outrunners GA $56 Road Rash 2 $42 Rock & Roll Racing $49 SeaQuest DSV $56 Super Bike Challenge $49 Super Off Road:Baja $52 Tomcat Alley CD $49 Virtua Racing GA $76 Wing Commander 2 $56 Black Hole Assault CD $39 Commando Raid $49 Contra Hard Corps Crime Patrol CD $49 Death Duel $49 Exo Squad S52 Gauntlet 4 $42 Lethal Enforcers 2 $56 Lode Runner CD $46 Mad Dg McCree 2 CD $49 NovaStorm CD $54 Rapid Deployment CD $44 Rebel Assault CD GA $44 Silpheed CD GA $43 Soul Star CD $44 Star Strike 2000 CD $56 Stellar Fire CD 542 View Point $56 Zero Tolerance $49 RBI 94 GA $52 Slam Masters $56 Tecmo Baseball GA $56 Tecmo Super Bowl GA $54 Tiny Toon Ad: All Stars $44 Tony LR UIt Bsball 95 $54 Troy Aikman Football $59 Vitale Basketball $52 WWF:Raw $58 World Cup USA CD $46 Flashback CD Flintstones Movie $56 Frankenstein CD $52 Goofy $42 High Seas Havoc $46 Incredible Hulk GA $54 Itchy & Scratchy $43 Jungle Book GA $56 Jurassic Park CD GA $49 Mega Man:Wily Wars $56 Mickey Mania CD S56 Out of this World CD $49 Penn & Teller CD $46 Pirates of Dark Water $54 Power Rangers $52 Prince Persia MA-13 $49 Ren & Stimpy Show $46 Robocop Vs Termintor $56 Shadow Blasters $19 Shadow of Atlantis CD $52 Shadow of Beast 2 CD $52 Shinobi 3 $42 Snatcher CD $44 Sonic the Hedgehog 4 $59 Spidy:Max Carnage $54 Star Trek:Dp Space 9 $54 GENESIS SPORTS GENESIS STRATEGY GENESIS KICK & PUNCH $44 GENESIS ADVENUTRE S54 GENESIS SIMULATIONS $52 3 Ninjas Kick Back CD $46 Ad Batmn & Robin CD $46 Akira CD $54 Baby Boom CD Beavis & Butt-Head $54 BlackThorne $49 Boogerman $49 Cadillc & Dinosrs CD $49 Chuck Rock 2 $29 Death of Superman $52 Demolition Man $56 DinoBlazer CD $56 Dolphin CD GA $42 Dracula CD $49 Dragons Lair 2 CD $52 EarthWarm Jim $62 Fahrenheit CD $52 Superman ATP Tennis GA $49 Barkley Basketball GA $49 Bill Walsh Coll FB 95 $54 Bill Walsh Coll FB CD $39 Brett Hull Hockey 95 $49 Championship Pool GA $46 ESPN Football GA $56 ESPN Hockey $56 ESPN NBA Hangtime $56 FIFA Int'l Soccer 95 $54 Golf Mag 36 Holes CD $52 Jack Nicklaus SE $54 Jammit! GA $56 King Salmon $42 Links Pro Golf CD $56 Madden Football 95 $54 Muhammad Ali Boxing $49 NBA Showtime 95 $54 NCAA Football $54 NFL Quarterback Club $62 NFL Sportstalk FB 95 $54 NHL All Star Hockey $54 NHL Hockey 95 PGA Tour 95 $54 Pebble Beach Golf GA $44 Art of Fighting MA-13 $52 Brutal CD MA-13 $49 Clayfighter $52 Cybernauts $54 Double Dragon 5 S52 Dragon $56 Eternal Champns CD $46 Fatal Fury Special CD $48 Fighting Master $42 Justice League $56 King of the Monstrs 2 $54 Mortal Kombt 2 MA17 566 Power Instinct $54 Rise of the Robots $52 Samurai Showdown $58 Shaq-Fu $59 Super Street Fighter 2 $66 Virtua Fighters $79 World Heroes 2 S56 Aero Biz $56 Animaniacs $46 BrainDead 13 CD $49 BreakThru Clue CD Dragons Fury 2 MA-13 $44 Dune:Battle for Arrakis $49 Generations Lost S49 Genghis Khan 2 $56 HUMANS $36 Jeopardy CD $49 Liberty or Death GA $59 NFL Trivia CD $49 Nobng Lord Darkness $56 Operation Europe $62 Pac Man 2 $52 Pinball Dreams Powermngr CD MA13 $43 Romance 3 kngdms 3 $59 Shanghaii 2 GA $39 SimCity 2000 CD $52 Trivial Pursuit CD $54 Wheel of Fortune CD $52 Wirehead CD AH-3 Firehawk CD GA $44 Al Unser Jr Racing $46 Championship Pro-Am $32 Choplifter 3 $52 Daytona USA $79 ESPN SpeedWorld CD 556 Flying Nightmares CD $44 Formula 1 GP CD $46 Ground Zero Texs CD $54 Lotus Turbo Chaling 2 $39 Mario Andrit Race GA $52 Megarace CD $44 Midnight Raiders CD S52 Monster Truck Wars $49 Nigel Mansil Indy Car $52 $54 Sylvester & Tweety $54 Tazmania:Esc Mars $52 The Punisher The Tick 554 Time Cop CD $46 Tinhead GA S52 Vikings 2 $46 Virlual Bart $52 Wolf Child CD $39 X MEN $44 Zero Kamikze Squirrel $52 $52 $54 $52 CGW OCTA "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR HI AK APO. FPO S4 per order Worldwide airmail $6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment Visa, MG and Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. Money Orders same as cash COD 58. Defectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Ship ping times may vary Price availability may change. All sales final Call for details FREE GAME OFFER* IR.R. Tolkien' T THE Avanced Dungeons & Dragons Ent oF me BEHOLDER JORD. RINGS LSISENE laron 1 'MORTAL KOMBAT 2' is more than a sequel ... its an amazing recreation of the original! Fight past 7 new characters with improved graphics. Offers 40 new special moves, 12 new finishing moves, more challenging game play. 12 \"Babalities\" and 2 new hidden characters. $66 SEG CD \"EYE OF THE BEHOLDER', Lead a band of adventurers through 13 levels of eerie passageways and echoing halls beneath the city of Watersdeep. Players detect critical clues to continue their journey. Offers a first person perspective, animated sequences and a special map function. $46 \"LORD OF THE RINGS' Embark on an epic adventure to destroy the ring that has the power to end Middle Earth. Characters move in thousands of frames of fluid animation with real-time combat. $54 Aklaim w NA-17 FCIES NYR SEG BREATHFIRE, *FREE GAME OFFER GENESIS COLLEGE FOOTBALL'S NATIONAL CHAMPIONSHIP The 32 finest college teams Michigan, USC, Notre Dame, Penn State, Texas A&M tear it up in league play. College playbooks, rules, fight songs and stadiums! All the excitement of college ball! $52 COLLEGE FOOTBALL Buy 3 in stock Super Nintendo games and choose a 4th game from the list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from September 1st through November 30th or while supplies last. Madden Football 93 (SNES), ABC Monday Nite Football (SNES).T2:Judgement Day (SNES), Run Saber (SNES), Battle Blaze (SNES), Aero the Acrobat (SNES). \"BREATH OF FIRE' An evil sorceress has brought competing dragon clans under her diabolical spell. A young hero and 7 warriors must awaken from an etemal slumber to battle the enemies. $59 O 0 GA SEGA MARS 32X SNES ADVENTURE SNES ADVENTURE SNES ROLE PLAYING SNES SIMULATIONS SNES KICK & PUNCH $59 $56 $44 $58 Genesis 32X System $149 College Football $56 CyberBrawl $56 Doom $59 Golf Mag 36 Grt Holes $56 Star Wars Arcade $59 Stellar Assault $59 Super AfterBurner $56 Super Space Harrier $56 Surgical Strike CD Tempo $56 Virtua Racing Deluxe $59 Wirehead CD $56 Sylvester & Tweety $58 Tales Spike McFang $54 Tarzan $52 The Mask $58 The Tick S54 Time Cop $56 Time Trax $39 Tom & Jerry:Chase $56 Vikings 2 $54 Wolf Child $46 X MEN Young Merlin $56 Zero Kamikze Squirrel $56 Aero Fighters $52 Air Strike Patrol $52 Carrier Aces $52 ESPN SpeedWorld $56 Full Throttle Racing $56 Mike Andrtt Indy Car $59 Monster Truck Wars $58 Pacific Theater Ops $59 Star Trk:Starfleet Acad $52 Super F1 2 $58 Turn & Burn:No Fly Zn $52 Wild Trax Stunt Racer $56 Wing Commander $53 $56 Brain Lord $59 Curse of Azure Bonds $64 DragonView $59 Eye of the Beholder 2 $69 Final Fantasy 3 $66 First Queen $56 Golden Empire $59 Illusion of Gaia $62 Lord of the Rings $54 Lulia 2 $56 Might & Magic 3 $59 Obitus $58 Paladin's Quest $52 Secret of Mana $59 Shadow Run $56 Ultima 7:Black Gate $64 Warrior of Rome 3 $52 Wizardry 5 $59 $56 Brutal $56 Claytighter 2 Double Dragon 5 Dragon $56 Fatal Fury 2 $59 Fighters History Final Fight 2 $49 Justice League $62 King of Dragons Kung Fu:Legend Cont $56 Mortal Kombat 2 $69 Ninja Warriors $56 Pit Fighter S29 Ranma 1/2:Hard Battle $54 Rise of the Robots S56 Shadow of the Ninja 2 $54 Super Street Fighter 2 $66 Survival Arts $56 WCW Super Brawl $52 $59 SNES HARDWARE $42 SNES SPORTS SNES STRATEGY Bugs Bny:Rbt Rmpg $56 Castle Wolfenstein 3D $52 Claymates $49 Cool SPOT Crazy Chase $52 Death of Superman $59 Dennis the Menace $42 Donkey Kong Country $62 EarthWorm Jim $62 Eek the Cat $54 Flintstones Movie $54 Goof Troop $49 Grt Circs Myst w/Mcky $59 Hurricanes $52 Incredible Hulk $54 Inspector Gadget Izzy's Olympic Quest $54 Jelly Boy $54 Jungle Book S56 Knights Round Table $56 Legend Mystcl Ninja 2 $56 Lion King Mega Man X 2 $59 Mickey Mania S56 Pirates of Dark Water $49 Popeye $49 Ren & Stimpy Show 2 $54 Rocky & Bullwinkle Scooby Doo 554 SeaQuest DSV $58 Shien's Revenge $54 Sink or Swim $49 Skuljaggers Revenge $59 Speedy Gonzales $52 Spidy:Max Carnage $62 Star Trek:Dp Space 9 $54 Sunset Riders $42 Super Return of Jedi $62 Championship Joystick $56 Power Plug $34 Pro Action Replay $59 Super Link 5 Plyr Link $29 Super Multitap $32 Super Nintendo Sys $149 Super Scope Wireless Control Pad $42 $59 $54 $56 S52 $52 SNES SHOOTERS $59 GAME GEAR $52 Aero Biz Supersonic Animaniacs Genghis Khan 2 Jeopardy 2 Dix Pachi Slot Risk Romance 3 kgdms 3 SimCity 2000 Super Pinball Super Tetris Utopia Wild Snake $52 $59 $56 $49 $49 $49 $32 $36 $34 $38 Barkley Basketball $49 Brelt Hull Hockey 95 $56 Champnship Wrestling $54 Diamond Challenge $52 ESPN Football $56 ESPN NBA Hangtime $56 GUTS $54 Hardball 3 $56 Looney Tunes Hoops $58 NBA Jam Session $59 NBA Showdown $46 NFL Quarterback Club $64 NFL Team Heroes $54 Pele Soccer $52 Power League Bsball $52 Soccer Shootout S56 Super Soccer Chmp 2 $52 Tecmo Hockey $56 WWF:Raw $64 World Cup USA $54 Zoo Ball $54 SNES ADVENTURE $36 Aladdin GA Baby Boom FIFA Int'l Soccer Lion King Mortal Kombat 2 Ren & Stimpy Show Shining Force 2 X MEN 2 $46 Bio Metal $29 Exo Squad $52 Fire Striker Fire Team Rogue S56 Galactic Defenders $56 Lethal Enfr w/gn MA17 $64 Metal Morphin $56 Operation Thunderbolt $54 Soldier of Fortune $56 Super Mega Force $39 Super Metroid $56 Super R-Type 3 $54 Super Sonic Bistmn 2 $54 Tin Star $48 Total Carnage $39 Wild Guns $54 3DO 3 Ninjas Kick Back $56 Addams Family Values $54 Adventures of Batman $59 Aero the Acrobat 2 $56 Akira $59 Beavis & Butt-Head Biker Mice from Mars $52 BlackThorne $52 Bonkers $58 HINT BOOKS $54 Air Warrior $52 BrainDead 13 $49 Jurassic Park $52 Microcosm $52 Star Trek Next Genrth $54 Genesis Secrt of Game S6 Sonic Strategy Guide $16 Turbo Grafx Secrets $10 CGW OCT B Circle Reader Service #200 "


"CUTTING EDGE Instantly, track your enemy and choose the weapon of his destruction. You pull hard right and fall in on his six. \"I have a lock!\" Squeezing the two stage trigger, a Sidewinder slices through the air to the kill. \"Bandit at three 0-clock!\" You shout to your wing man as the MiG slashes through the air. Instinctively, you grab the THRUSTMASTER F-16 FLCS stick, punch the afterburner and take your Falcon into battle. G-forces rip at your body as you tear through the sky in pursuit. Adrenaline causes your hand to tremble as you work the fully programmable hat switches and buttons. THRUSTMASTER F-16 FLCS * Unlimited Programmability * Unparalleled Performance * Uncompromising Reality WATCH THRUSTMASTER THE REALITY SPECIALISTS 10150 SW NIMBUS AVENUE PORTLAND, OR 97223 4337 PHONE (503) 639 3200 FAX (503) 620 8094 Circle Reader Service #161 "


"SIMULATION Can We See Clearly Now? ROHAY WHICH ASPECT OF flown a few mock engagements in T-34 trainer SEEING THE 3D MODERN FLIGHT aircraft, I've found the PC view systems lacking on SIMULATORS LEAST two counts: Resolution and Scope. accurately repreMonitor resolution, even at 1024x768, pales WORLD OF AIR sents real world compared to the human eye's visual acuity. Flight flight? In my simulators must portray aircraft as amorphous, BAR & GRILL opinion: the view multi-colored pixel conglomerations as range inCOMBAT systems. Flightcreases simply because the display technology is models often have inadequate. In PC simulations, you often cannot weaknesses, but many game publishers have adtell what the other airplane is doing or which way THROUGH A 2D mitted that flight model omissions and inaccurait's banking until it moves drastically across your cies result more from game play concerns for the screen or you move in very close. The real world, casual user than for actual technical reasons. The though, is significantly easier; a pilot can visually SCREEN CAN current generation of PCs can support fully realisidentify a target's flight attitude at much greater tic flight models, but the designers decide not to ranges, allowing quicker responses to the oppobuild them for cost, schedule and game play reanent's actions. This is an inherent limitation of toLEAVE YOU FLAT sons. While I might not agree with some of the day's hardware, and a limitation PC pilots must decisions they make regarding flight models, I learn to live with. can understand their reasoning. \"Scope\" is a broader category meaning \"how I see view systems in a different light. No flight well the view system works in general.» Assuming simulator currently available for home use rea sudden miracle breakthrough in monitor techmotely approaches real-world visibility. Having nology allowing eye-quality display resolutions, how well would the built-in view controls of current simulations work? Let's examine the techniques used Last month's Radar reported that a bogey named CARRIER WING was being testby various flight simulation ed in the air space around Electronic Arts. Intelligence sources now suggest publishers and analyze their respective advantages that the project has been renamed U.S. Navy FIGHTER. Our agents were also and disadvantages. We will able to attain positive visual identification (as seen in the provided screen not be discussing external shot) along with further performance specifications. U.S. NAVY FIGHTER will in views-the views which posicorporate a \"Track tion the player outside the View\" that will simuaircraft. Such views are of late a pilot's rotating ten useful in light of restricted cockpit views, but head, while still their inclusion and use do leaving control of the not promote realism. For craft in the pilot's our purposes here, we're hands. More informagoing to examine how the tion as our agent cockpit views work and how (code name: Air they could be made more realistic. Sickness Bag Guy) Dynamix begins the disuncovers it. cussion since the view conby Tom \"KC\" Basham ON THE RADAR OCTOBER 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 119 "


"Right trols in RED BARON, ACES OF THE PACIFIC, stages of the fight. Second, the padlock at the instrument panel\" key or by proand ACES OVER EUROPE are relatively simview lacks any usable information during viding critical flight information in the ple. Using the F1-F5 function keys, a fight, and it's quite easy to lose orientapadlock view. Padlock views must never Dynamix' sims allow five views: forward, tion. In the real-world, a pilot knows leave any doubt which way the head is left, right, back and up. These views do not where his head is pointed and can physiturned. A small 'L' for left, 'R' for right, overlap, and objects can become \"lost\" becally feel what his aircraft is doing. FLEET and 'U' for up scribbled on the virtual tween the front and side views or back and DEFENDER's padlocking system accounts canopy in virtual grease pencil at strateside views. The limited views and visible for neither of these factors. Look at the gic points would provide sufficient visual zones create a fairly restrictive view system three screen images on this page. Can cues without being overly distracting. which limits a player's situational awareyou tell which one is looking left, right, or 1942: THE PACIFIC AIR WAR shares most ness. The Dynamix system has one main up? Can you tell what the aircraft is doing of FLEET DEFENDER's flaws, but also takes a advantage: the \"up\" view. The \"up\" view is while looking at any of these views? The new approach to the view problem. First, probably the single most impor1942 also lacks the crucial \"up\" tant view during a dogfight. The Left and \"up+forward\" views. Since side and back views are for situathe F-14 doesn't emphasize dogtional awareness, the more you fighting, such omissions are can see around you, the better somewhat understandable. In a you understand the tactical situflight simulation focused on ation. The front view is for dogfighting, though, such omisshooting; put the gunsight on sions are unfathomable. Second, the badguy and pull the trigger. 1942's padlock view suffers the The «up» view, though, drives same problems, along with (or controls the fight. During FLEET DEFENDER and the F15 most of the fight, until the atSTRIKE EAGLE series before it. tacker reduces angles enough to Again, simple reference marks get a shot, the target is visible Up on the canopy would do wononly in the \"up\" view. The atders for the padlock's effectivetacker spends considerable time ness. looking through the top of the 1942 introduces some snazzy canopy at his prey as he maneunew technology: the virtual vers for the shot. In short, if you WHICH WAY MIDWAY? Without the notation, could you tell which view was cockpit. The virtual cockpit alain't using the «up» view, you ain't left, right, or up in 1942: PACIFIC AIR WAR? lows complete user-controlled driving the fight. view panning. You have comIn a one-on-one light, the \"up\" and typical argument is, «Real pilots get displete control over where the pilot's head \"forward» views are probably sufficient as oriented during combat so we're modellooks. The only «blind spots\" are those long as you remain in control of the fight. ing that.\" Real pilots do become caused by the airframe itself. The virtual Dynamix sims do not allow good situadisoriented, but they do know which way cockpit panning requires practice and cotional awareness, though. Dynamix their head is turned. It does the sim-jock ordination to use smoothly. It also signifineeds to expand the scope of their view little good to track the target when uncantly reduces frame rate, becoming control, broadening the areas visible able to determine which way the «simuunplayably slow on low-end machines. from the cockpit. lated head\" is pointed. A padlock view The virtual cockpit, however, presents a Next, let's look at MicroProse prodthat does not adequately describe the sitnew approach to an old problem. Despite ucts. The view systems in their sims varyuation is useless. interface and CPU limitations, the innovgreatly. F-14 FLEET DEFENDER includes FLEET DEFENDER is an excellent simulaative virtual cockpit is a step in the right standard front, left, right views as well as tion, but its view control needs some direction and opens the door to even betleft+back and right+back over-the-shoulmodification. The addition of an \"up\" ter solutions in the future. der views, and it inherited a rudimentary (and preferably an \"up+forward\") view Spectrum HoloByte introduced the padlock view from the STRIKE EAGLE series. would greatly improve close-in, knifefirst, and still the most functional, padThe standard and shoulder views offer fight dogfighting. Second, the padlock lock view system in FALCON 3.0. Outside wide view ranges and good situational view needs dressing up. Some minimal padlock-mode, FALCON 3.0 offers right, awareness. The simple padlock view flight instrumentation must be present. A left, back, forward, up+forward, and up keeps the pilot's eyes locked on a specific small artificial horizon with speed and alviews. The restrictive side and back views target during maneuvering, mimicking titude discretely tucked in the corner provide little combat or situational awarethe movements of a real-world pilot's would be enough. With peripheral vision, ness value, but the combinations of \"up,\" head during combat. FLEET DEFENDER a real-world pilot can flick his eyes and \"up+forward,\" and \"up\" provide the suffers from two omissions. First, the lack see the HUD or instrument panel with most critical views needed during a knife of an \"up\" or \"forward+up\" view is sorely little or no head movement. Padlock fight. missed while dogfighting. As stated views must somehow simulate the pilot's FALCON'S padlock view is often critiabove, if you're on the offense then the ability to \"feel\" the aircraft and quickly cized as \"not being realistic.\" Certainly, target will appear in the \"up\" or glance at the instruments without losing four \"windows\" splashed across the \"up+forward» view until the very final track of the target either by a \"fast glance screen are not a realistic view of the real interia 120 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"The Only Way to Bring These Four Generations of Jet Aircraft to Life. UDD BLUE FILTER KI T Episode 1: 50 Years of Gs and Jets High-performance jet aircraft as only multimedia can deliver. Discover 20 of the most celebrated aircraft of the past 50 years. Meet the aces and designers that made them history. Only Wild Blue Yonder brings this awe-inspiring family of modern jets to life for you. Become a part of the adventure through interviews, videos, official reports, combat photos and personal mementos! Illustrated stories chronicle the triumph and tragedy of flight, with 1,000 dazzling photographs, many recently declassified. re Yeager's trip through the sound barrier, hear an F-117 pilot's perilous mission over Baghdad and witness disastrous incidents in the quest for speed. Experience interactive cockpits plus period music ranging from Charlie Parker to Robert Cray to the Scorpions. Wild Blue Yonder brings it all to life. No collection is complete without it. It's the only place you can have this much fun without a G-suit. Visit your local retailer, or call 24 hours 1-800-695-GAME (USA and Canada). deo segments put you in a dogfight with a MiG, a stratospheric test flight and through wild aerobatics. | BLUE Macintosh CD-ROM Windows CD-ROM Windows CD-ROM Spectrum HoloByte 1994 Spectrum HoloByte, the Wild Blue Yonder is a trademark of Digital Ranch and Spectrum HoloByto, Inc. DIGITAL RANCH Circle Reader Service #224 "


"TARGETMEZ world; however, FALCON's padlock is the padlocking, Air WARRIOR uses a buildingwhich view you just selected, unlike padmost realistically functional padlock view block approach. The basic blocks-up, lock views that move around without user currently on the market. \"Realistically down, front, back, left, and right-may be input. As usual, though, the more flexible functional,\" you ask? The information combined to create many other views. AIR the interface, the more cumbersome it is provided by FALCON's padlock most accuWARRIOR includes a utility called to use. rately represents what a My perfect view system would include real pilot knows during a elements of all the publishers listed here. dogfight. Critical flight attiI'd start with Kesmai's \"constructor\" systude information is tucked tem to allow all possible discrete view anin the corners, only a gles. Then I'd add Spectrum HoloByte's glance away at all times. padlock system, but add various modifiThe upper-middle window cations to restrict the viewing angle, as graphically shows where the per MicroProse's system. In short, no pilot's head is pointed at all single game publisher offers a single, pertimes, and the lower \"3D\" lect viewing system. Each has advantages window displays what the and disadvantages. As users, we can only pilot's eyes are actually seehope that the next wave of light simulaing. Learning to read the tions will incorporate the various advanpadlock view takes time THE FALCON'S EYE VIEW The Padlock view in FALCON 3.0 still offers tages into a single system. and practice (see \"Mastering the best overall situational awareness. Where will the future take us? \"Virtual The Padlock View,\" Issue Reality\" has become a household phrase, #106, May, 1993), but once mastered keymap.exe which allows the user to edit but I'm a bit skeptical of the claims that provides unequaled visual feedback. (to some degree) how the view keys work it will transform entertainment technoloNearly three years after FALCON's initial and combine. Without any editing, the gy. At the summer Consumer Electronics user can always press two keys at once to Show several vendors had head-mounted ously challenged Spectrum HoloByte's generate new views. With keymap editing, displays. Looking Glass demonstrated a padlock view. the user can build 3-key sequences, such new non-combat flight simulator entitled FALCON's view system sullers from limas \"up+front+left\" allowing a total of 26 FLIGHT UNLIMITED with a VR helmet. ited side and back views as well as quirks view angles. The recent 1.16b upgrade to The stereophonic headset fully tracked in the padlock system. The padlock's AIR WARRIOR increases flexibility and head motion; FLIGHT UNLIMITED panned flight attitude information is split into a even allows user-defined macros that can smoothly to anywhere I moved my head. text window and a mini-HUD in two sepperform flight-oriented or view-oriented The concept and immersion into the arate corners. The padlock would be well tasks. product was quite interesting, but not served to combine these two into a single, without hitches. First, the video reasonably functional mini-HUD. A more resolution inside the display serious problem is that the padlock tracks was quite coarse, making the targets that the pilot shouldn't be able to instrumentation blurry and unsee. When the target passes below the airreadable. Second, you couldn't craft, the padlock view distorts itself and see the keyboard, making it continues tracking the target instead of difficult to control without a losing lock. In addition, the point of full Thrustmaster rig. Third, view\" moves in padlock view, roughly and most importantly, the akin to the pilot moving his head up and head-mounted displays were down. Although this effect may be realisslow. FLIGHT UNLIMITED ran tic, it causes problems with the HUD. smooth as glass without the The HUD is \"calibrated\" for a particular helmet, but using the helmet viewing angle, and must be viewed from brought a 90Mhz Pentium mathat specific angle. When padlock's \"vir CUSTOM KEYS The basic views in Air WARRIOR can be chine to a crawl. The flight tual head\" goes bobbing around, it mess combined to create new views as you desire. It's flexible but simulator itsell ran fine; the es this angle up. The result: targets difficult to use. helmet's display hardware was appear in the gunsight when they really the bottleneck. The immersion aren't. Most FALCON pilots fly in padlock Fully using this scheme is rather diffiwas certainly entertaining and the outuntil the final moments of a dogfight, cult unless you have a programmable inthe-window graphics were enjoyable. then switch back to the standard \"forterface like the Thrustmaster WEAPON The frame rate, the instrumentation's ward\" or \"up+forward\" views to get a CONTROL SYSTEM MARK II. You generally video resolution, and the inability to see clean shot. Padlock's viewing angles don't have time to type complex view sethe real-world controls made the system should be kept consistent with non-padquences while fighting, so most players unusable for intensive applications, such lock viewing angles. use the WCS Mark II and program the as dogfighting. Of course, this is the first Kesmai's SUPER VGA AIR WARRIOR apThrustmaster FLIGHT CONTROL SYSTEMS generation of home VR technology. We'll proaches the view problem very differenthat switch for view control. This view syssee what will follow on the first generaly. Rather than provide panning or tem works well because you always know tion's tail. Check Six. 122 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"FIGHTER 10000 It's combat no matter how you look at it! Fighter Wing is a new breed of flight FIGHT simulation game, offering the ultimate arcade flight combat experience with the world's top fighter aircraft, but without the steep learning curves. Armed with the high erformance Gemsoft'u 3-D engine with real time terrain generation sing real maps, a wide variety of challenging combat missions, and actual combat video footage, Fighter Wing packs an awesome arsenal that can outgun any flight combat simulator.  Fighter wing provides a \"sit and shoot\" experience in a matter of minutes  Featuring actual video footage from the award winning TV series FirePowerm  Choose from Training Missions; Multiple player Missions for up to 16 players playing over a Local Area Network; and Complex Missions for 1-3 players competing against the computer  Pilots can fly all of today's state-of-the-art aircraft from the world's most powerful nations, in the world's most dangerous hot spots. GEMSOFT CORP. Published by Despedy CD ROM. Edition Merit Software Dallas, Texas 800-238-4277 Circle Reader Service #252 1994 Merit Software Fighter Wing\" 1994 by Gomsoft Corporation All Rights Reserved Fighter Wing is a registered trademark of Comsol Corporation, FIREPOWER video sequences licensed from Video Ordinance, Inc. 1988-1993 Video Ordinance, Inc. All Rights Reserved. FIREPOWER is a trademark of Video Ordinance, Inc., NY. All other trade names are properties of their respective owners. Photos courtesy of Video Ordinance, Inc "


"HARDWARE CE Is This Some Kind Of Yoke> Suncom's G-FORCE Flight Yoke Takes Simulations Seriously E o by Gordon Goble UNCOM TECHNOLOGIES MAY NOT thumbscrews. While the former presents BE AS WELL KNOWN AS THRUSTa fractional problem with skidding (alMASTER OR CH PRODUCTS, BUT though as far as suction cups go, these litthey have been a major producer tle guys are pretty good), the latter offers of joysticks, game cards and othtotal stability on square-edged desks of er peripherals for the PC gaming world less than 1 5/8\" thickness. since 1983. Responsible for such note Four fire buttons (two per handle) alworthy offerings as FLIGHTMAX, MY JOYlow for both right and left-handed trigSTICK, and GAMEPORT 2000, Suncom's ger finger and thumbtip access to critical dozen years of experience have not been controls, and a column-mounted signal lost on their latest development, the Gselector instantly reverses the functions FORCE flight yoke. from thumb to index finger. A smooth The G-FORCE is a desk-mountable consliding throttle is also column-mounted, trol device that, although shaped in the and both Yand X-axis trimmers (elevamold of a flight yoke, serves virtually any tor/rudder control for flight games) are vehicle-oriented software. It combines present for \"on the fly\" adjustments. The precise guidance and a futuristic appearG-FORCE also offers a column lock-out ance in what appears to be a durable that prevents fore and aft pivoting durpackage. ing the operation of land-locked simulaFeaturing a swiveling column fore/aft tions, yet the rocking motion for analog axis and U-shaped yoke handle that pivthrottle and brakes feels quite natural in ots at the base and arcs from side to side, auto racing sims, and many drivers may the unique G-FORCE design may take a find they don't want the column move little acclimation, but begins to feel natment locked out at all. ural after just a few minutes in the air or Just like a joystick, the G-FORCE is on the track. A short and sweet turning plugged directly into the game port, with radius means the unit is perfectly suited no further connections necessary. The to exacting flight simulations, the most yoke is spring-loaded and self-centering, realistic auto racing software such as while its very design makes finding all WORLD CIRCUIT and INDYCAR RACING, four corners a snap, and all this transand perhaps even tank simulators. Glates into easy calibration. Made of ABS FORCE handle stems are comfortably conplastic with a steel shaft, the G-FORCE is toured to the hand, and the entire unit just short of one foot in height and nine makes a lot of ergonomic sense. inches deep, so prospective users may Depending on personal preference want to clear away some of their desktop and desk style, the G-FORCE may be alclutter before testing begins. fixed to the desktop via the four suction Speaking of testing, the G-FORCE was cups on its underside, or edge-clamped taken to the skies in FLIGHT SIMULATOR 5, by hand tightening the two built-in FALCON 3.0, and CHUCK YEAGER'S Air COMBAT (still a personal favorite), and driven vigorously through the simulated race tracks of WORLD CIRCUIT, INDYCAR RACING and Lorus. It didn't take long to discover just where the G-FORCE excelled. In all programs, the unit provided accurate response and functioned at least on par with the excellent CH Products VIRTUAL PILOT (albeit with very distinct differences in movement). But it became obvious that the more realistic a program was, the better G-FORCE worked. Although FLIGHT SIMULATOR 5 and FALCON felt superb, the fast action of CHUCK YEAGER (and most probably other yank-andcrank shoot-em-ups) might better suit a rough and tough joystick. In a like manner, G-FORCE took on both WORLD CIRCUIT and INDYCAR RACING with aplomb, but the wild left to right maneuvering involved in the more arcade-like LOTUS didn't translate quite as well. For gamers with a taste for realism, there is none better. Using the G-FORCE with INDYCAR, for instance, I found negotiating even the most trying of corners while mired in traffic casier than with any other non-joystick gadget I've had the pleasure to use. As a bonus, the darn thing actually stays in calibration! The best simulations require the best input devices. Suncom's G-FORCE is perfectly suited to high performance simulations, and I plan to keep it awfully busy well after this review has been published. For more information, contact Suncom Technologies, Inc., 6400 W. Gross Point Rd., Niles, Illinois 60648. Tel: (708) 647-4040. & 124 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"HOW DOES IT FEEL TO DRIVE THE FASTEST STOCK-CARS ON EARTH? COU PONT TAKE A TEST DRIVE! For a free demo, see below* EMDOG IT FEELS LIKE THIS! NASCAR DEZHACING It's pure No wonder NASCAR is the world's brute force. #1 motorsport. TMTBAGONG 700 horseAnd now Papyrus introduces power monsters--that can blast you past 200 NASCAR RACING. A simulation so MPH in a couple of heartbeats. Or put you r eal, you'll think you need a roll cage. against the wall in a careless instant. The officially licensed NASCAR simulation. You'll race on 9 different NASCAR-sanctioned tracks. Drive the world's hottest stock cars-against top NASCAR drivers. They may blow you off the track at first. But practice, practice, practice. You'll start moving up. PAPYRUS Watkins Glen International Fuel Tires KASSAR RODRI Spollers Suspension Gears Options Done PRODUKTE B OOK \"Knock-down gorgeous.» on CD-ROM. That's what PC Gamer said about our crisp, clear SVGA graphics. (Sept. '94) Looks so real you can almost smell burning rubber. The real look. Papyrus' excluThe real feel. We've duplicated sive 3-D Super Texture technology real-car behavior-everything from gives you TV-like realism-on speed to engine setup, tire condition, everything from cars to terrain to fuel load, and more. track-side billboards. Even the paint Plus, you control spoiler angles, jobs and decals are authentic tire types, camber, gear ratios, plus, you can custom-paint your car suspension stiffness, you name it. your way The combinations are endless. And so is the fascination. Realistic danger. Hit a wall and you'll know it. Sparks shower, parts fly off, wham! You may be able to go on, or it may mean back to the garage. By the way, It's one thing running solo-but racing in a crowded field, you need eyes on the front, sides and back of your head. PAPYRUS *For a free demo disk: Call 1-800-836-1802 ($5.95 for shipping and handling). Or, download a demo from Papyrus' BBS (617-576-7472), from CompuServe (GO PAPYRUS), or from Internet (ftp.std.com). From the perfectionists who brought you IndyCar Racing. Papyrus' \"phenomenal\" IndyCar Racing has won almost every major award in the business. Guess what will win this year. Visit your local retailer. Or call 1-800-836-7802 System Requirements: CD-ROM Version: Disk Version: Double-spin CD-ROM drive 386 33MHz or greater 4MB RAM. MS-DOS VGA: 386 33MHz or greater, 4MB RAM, MS-DOS 5.0 or 50 or later, VGA, hard drive with 15MB free. tater, VGA, hard drive with BMB free SVGA: 486 66MHz or greater, 8MB RAM, MS-DOS 5.0 ** Most major sound cards supported ar later, VGA hard drive with 8MB free IBM PC screens shown. Actual screens may vary NASCAR is a registered trademark of the National Association for Stock Car Auto hark of the National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing, Inc. NASCAR Racing is officially licensed by NASCAR. Papyrus is a registered trademark of Papyrus Design Group, Inc. Distributed exclusively worldwide by Virgin Interactive Entertainment Inc. INTERACTIVE 18061 Fitch Avenue entertainment Irvine, CA 92714 Available in stores in November-just in time for Christinas! Circle Reader Service #153 "


"REVIEW World War II Domark and FLIGHT SIM TOOLKIT Travel Back To The Big One by Tom \"KC\" Basham AVING DESIGNED A FLEXIBLE, OPENmore you-versus-the-world suicide miseffects, induced yaw from aileron deflecENDED ARCHITECTURE FOR SVGA sions. There are limitations, including tion (requiring the use of rudders for coHARRIER AND FLIGHT SIM the fact that units cannot inadvertently ordinated turns), induced roll from Toolkit, Domark adds another damage friendly units, there are no wingrudder inputs, and \"ground effect\" (an branch to their flight sim family man communications, and red units only increase in lift at extremely low altitude). tree with a new simulation, the succinctly attack blue units and vice versa, but opThe manual mentions that Domark entitled WORLD WAR II. WORLD WAR II posing teams are a welcome addition, wrote WORLD WAR II entirely using the consists of two components, an upgrade WORLD WAR II introduces torpedoes, a upgraded version of FST. FST was a conto FLIGHT SIM TOOLKIT (FST) that innecessity for the WWII Pacific scenarios. ceptual breakthrough, opening a new cludes numerous World War II objects, Designed to simulate their historical arena-world design to flight sim enand a stand-alone game designed entire counterparts, the torpedoes are not very thusiasts. FST does many things wonderly using the upgraded FST. You don't accurate, not very reliable, and must be fully, but interfacing with the player in a need FST to play gently dropped friendly way is not one of them. WORLD the stand-alone WORLD WAR II from under 100 War II's interface is a very rough, very game, but you must Price: $25.00 Fuador feet and below simple menu system that looks much like already own FST to System 100 knots. Also a design afterthought, something akin to use the upgrade. Requirements: necessary for a graphical version of a DOS batch file. IBM compatible naval aviation, FST lets you create worlds, aircraft, and 386-33 (486FST UPGRADE 33 U.S. and Japanbattles, but not campaigns. As such, the For owners of FST, recommended), ese aircraft carriinterface has no pre-flight briefings, no there's both good 2MB RAM, er's roam the post-flight debriefings, and no VCR and bad news in SVGA/VGA digital seas. Airmode. WORLD WAR II is an upgrade to store. First, the bad graphics, 11 MB craft can begin FST, first and foremost, and a standhard drive news. The upgraded missions in the alone flight sim with limited options and space, joystick; supports Sound Blaster FST engine is not sound cards; supports Thrustmaster and air, you can edit rapid action, second. exactly backwards CH flight equipment. aircraft generatThe package includes two scenarios, compatible with the Protection: None ed automatically Midway and D-Day. The Midway scefirst version. Be Producers: Darren Anderson and Matt by hangars, and nario offers five missions; D-Day offers cause revised obMiller hangars now cresix. You may play missions for either Axis Publisher: Domark jects, such as ate three classes or Allied forces in any order. Most misDistributor: Spectrum Holo Byte hangars which genAlameda, CA of aircraft: Fightsions include multiple aircraft types, and erate new aircraft (800) 695-GAME er, Transport you choose which type you wish to fly. types, required defiand Bomber. Across both scenarios, WORLD WAR II innition structures, the old FST cannot unYou have control over bomb loads, and cludes four countries (the USA, Britain, derstand files created with the new IST. can create both carpet bombing and tac Germany and Japan) with three aircraft Thankfully, Domark provides instructical bombing sorties. types for each country. For example, the tions on editing old FST files to make D-Day scenario includes the Spitfire, them compatible with new technology. FLIGHT IMPROVEMENTS Mustang, or Typhoon for the Allies and Now, the good news. The new FST enNumerous references in WORLD WAR II's the Ju-188, Fw-190 or BF-109 for the gine includes many features requested by manual indicate that the flight model has Axis. The \"Invasion Strike\" mission in players. First, there are two new object seen significant improvement over its the Midway scenario includes the Zero, properties, \"red team\" and \"blue team.\" predecessors, though the thin manual Val, or Kate for Axis forces and only the Units marked as \"blue\" are your allies fails to mention the specific improveWildcat for the USA. The manual gives a and work with you to achieve mission obments. A quick call to Domark helped me concise briefing for each aircraft type for jectives, \"red\" units conspire against you get to the meat of the matter. The new each mission, such as \"Fly a heading of and your holy forces, while units marked simulation engine differentiates between 090 and watch out for enemy fighters. as neither red nor blue are \"neutral.\" No wing-tip and wing-root stalls, prop wash Midway Islands should be in visual range 126 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"NOMORE NEX You're finished with training... Had your fun and games. Now TACTICAL FIGHTER EXPERIMENT it's time to face reality. in the most sophisticated aerial combat simulation ever created for your PC-TFX: Tactical Fighter Experiment. Equipped with ASRAAMS, Mavericks, M61s, laser-guided GBUS...you're fully loaded to tackle more than 200 «realworld\" campaigns, based on today's geopolitical realities. And to keep you sweating bullets, from Somalia to Sarajevo, the skies are swarming with Al-programmed bogeys that'll make you pay for your mistakes...with your life. Log on and engage in TFX. This time, you're not just playing games. Grab the controls of any of three USAF-spec flight models and spread democracy over five million square miles of topographically accurate landscape. Ocean of America 1855 O'Toole Avenue, Suite D-102 San Jose, CA 95131 (408) 954-0201 Contest. TFX 1993 Ocean of America. All rights reserved. Ocean is a registered trademark of Ocean Software Limited. WIN the TFX «Be A Real Fighter Pilot» Circle Reader Service #97 See Package for Details. "


"in 5 minutes.\" Although I feel the advice of my instructors. I many aspects of the interface and found all the advice about when manual were too vague, I liked this to reduce power, when to apply touch. WWII pilots didn't have power, and how to gently stir the radar and AWACS to direct them stick to provide extremely realistic around the sky, or Global Position results. I believe this indicates a Satellites to guide them to their very stable, very accurate underlytargets. I found the briefing's ing flight model. economy to add a touch of authenAs with all simulations, the ticity to the mission orders. The flight model isn't perfect. The briefings give only general orders, real A6M Zero, for example, besuch as \"do as much damage as came exceedingly stiff at high possible.\" The D-Day scenarios are speeds, but WORLD WAR II's Zero gigantic; at maximum detail setremains as nimble at 320kts as at tings, D-Day missions track over 200kts. Stall bullet and spins are 2,000 objects spread across all of disappointingly absent. The airnorthern France. Because of their TAGGED, AND THAT'S IT No more you-verses-the-world in FST. A craft does stop turning as speed new feature of FST allows you to fly with wingmen and create size, some users may experience reduces and eventually departs, competitive team scenarios. memory problems. but the progression into a stall is WORLD WAR II excels at flight. too smooth, providing no physical Like SVGA HARRIER before it, it includes sions I began to practice formation flying. indication of the approaching stall. The the best inertial and momentum effects Having flown formation in prop-engined result: the aircraft can conform quite well in any flight sim today. Its improved aircraft, I find WORLD WAR II provides, to its real-world performance specificaflight model includes analog rudder supwithout question, the most accurate sentions, but because of the lack of buffet port, analog throttle support, torque ef sation of formation light of any prop-driyou have almost no indication that you've ects, and additional llap settings. It ven aircraft simulation currently reached the edge of the performance ensimulates the basic angle-of-attack (AOA) available. I found myself making identical velope. What's more, because of the lack ellects, including the ability for realistic, mistakes as during my real-world pracof spins you have no motivation to avoid nose-high landings. Wingmen fly a very tice, as well as reaping identical benefits the edge of the performance envelope. smooth ingress, and during longer misof smooth formation flight when heeding These limitations are inherited from the No More Hassle. Tired of fumbling with joystick cables behind your computer? Are you spending more time changing joysticks than playing your favorite games? You need a hassle-free alternative: the Joyswitch\". At last you JOYSWITCH controllers (rudder or gas / brake pedals) to your computer. Maximize your performance by switching to the \"right\" joystick for each game, instead of using whichever one happens to be connected to your computer. Get greater value from your expensive, FOOT CONTAOLLER specialized controllers. The MULTIPORTJOYSTICK DATA SWITCH OFF va can jump from joystick to maiN JOYSTICK joystick, game to game, with the speed and ease of turning a switch. Connect up to four devices (flight sticks, yokes, Joyswitch works with most IBM PC compatible controllers. Joystick extension cable included for FREE! Order TODAY! Only $59.95. Se steering wheels, game pads, etc.) and two sets of foot VISA To order call: (714) 362-8698 og OR op Order on Check Six BBS (714) 362-8299 (8-N-1 1200-28.8kb)  1994 Lead Pursuit, Inc. Joyswitch is a trademark of Lead Pursuit, Inc. For more information call or write to Lead Pursuit, Inc., 27068 La Paz Rd. #466, Laguna Niguel, CA 92658 Phone: (714)362-8698 FAX: (714)831-4334 128 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 ER 19 Circle Reader Service #211 "


"SURE YOU COULD DIE. BUT THAT'S LIFE. ) $ * The Gorene Empire is at war with the Alien Alliance. The ally you choose and the battle strategy you devise will determine who controls the Ascalon Rift. * Choose your ally from either of opposing sides. Fly eleven different ships loaded with weaponry. Depart for over 100 varying missions. Then switch sides for unparalleled replayability. * Plot strategies, orchestrate battles, fly stealth missions, and conquer territories, with full combat inside nebulas and asteroid fields. * Riveting hyper-realistic 3-D graphics, with fully texture-mapped ships, on-the-fly translucency. Gouraud and Phong shading, and.cinematic multimedia videos. Driving music, searing sound effects and, on the CD-ROM version, fully digitized speech delivered by professional actors. STAR CRUSADER Distributed by CARNETEK TAKES FOR IBM PC AND IBM PC CD-ROM INTERACTIVE SOFTWARE Circle Reader Service #183 "


"original SVGA HARRIER flight engine. Domark has considered these factors and is already planning a followup sim, DOGFIGHT, which advances the technology further by introducing modem play, more accurate stall symptoms, and a more accurate flight model editor. no indication where your head is turned, making it impossible to fly using this type of padlock view. In summary, WORLD WAR II is a significantly improved descendant of SVGA Harrier designed primarily for FLIGHT Sim TOOLKIT users. At a list price of $25.00, the stand-alone game provides quick action and a realistic sensation of flight without requiring a large outlay of cash or months of training flights. Most importantly, WORLD WAR II's improved performance lays a foundation for even more realistic flight modeling in the near future. THE EDITORS SPEAK WORLD WAR II IN THE Coc Graphics are the same, incredibly crisp, 640x480 graphics inherited from SVGA HARRIER. I usually THE LONG SHADOW OF VENGEANCE A US medium bomber takes prefer such clean, crisp, easoff for targets in Germany. The detail in its design is apparent ily distinguishable graphics even in the shadow it casts below. over the style used in STRIKE COMMANDER. During a dogfight, it's more over the ocean and in tropical islands. important to distinguish how the bandit's Without seriously limiting view, as does wings are banked and when the bandit the hazing effect in STRIKE COMMANDER, commits his nose than to read the numWORLD WAR II still creates a wonderful ber on his tail fin. Ground detail is still \"horizon at sea.\" The sim also includes very sparse, but the aircraft are very the same basic views found in its predesharply displayed, more accurately porcessors, in addition to introducing a padtraying the image one sees during reallock view. Unfortunately, this padlock world flying than many current, \"flashy\" view conforms to the current standard of graphics engines. WORLD WAR II also ina cueless display of your target. In other cludes the same wonderful hazing effect words, you see the aircraft, but you have RATING**** 1/2 PROS A nice, well-priced package for the FST nut and the WWII flight sim fan. Improved flight modeling over previous releases. Crisp, clean graphics. CONS Still suffers from limitation of the FST package: poor interface and sound, with a few flight model omissions. Congratulations, your orders came in. The Joint Chicfs have finally come to their senses and promoted you to theater commander. You now have control over ALL aspects of Falcon 3.0's campaign theaters. Introducing a new wargaming experience... ONLY Cool, new 'Sim products from Keyboard Commander Corps... ONLY $19.95 Strategic $24.95 $24.95 ACE MAKER* FALCON TOE By Aces Aim, Inc. Campaign Enhancement for Spectrum HoloByte's Falcon 3.0 TACTICAL FEATURES: Add, remove or alter any F-16, Allied or Enemy North American Top-Coun flight, including aircraft type, weapons, waypoints and actions. Add, remove or alter ALL ground forces including types, strength, and paths. Set the temperament\" level of all forces and the skill of Allied or Enemy pilots. Watch as the \"Synchronized Timing Thrilling instructional video tape illustrating Trace' feature retraces all flight routes to verify timing and coordination!! And more! actual WWII aerial combat maneuvers!* STRATEGIC FEATURES: Change the occupation, strength, capacity and Each maneuver demonstrated by pilots of the rate of growth of any site. Alter the quantity and type of specific units at any site. Alter North American Top-Gun flight school flying the site 'structure of the theater and how sites re-supply each other. Move vintage WWII aircraft!! your home airbase. Set the victory and \"defeat\" sites to break through Includes simulation footage from MicroProse's Falcon's basic scenario limitations to 1942: The Pacific Air War\" highlighting how achieve endless variety of campaigns!! each maneuver appears in PC simulator flight! OTHER FEATURES: Place 0 Step-by-step detailed lessons make you the ace! an ILS at any base. Set the weather & VHS format The Ace Makers a trademark of Ace Am, Inc Distributed by Keyboard Commander Corp. ft Lauderdale, FL ceiling. Set the current day & time. 1942: The Pacific Air War is a trademark of Microrrose, Ine North American Top-Gun is a trademark of North American Top Gun, Inc Reschedule the resupply & replacement dates and times. Set the campaign EUDE Why \"Hurry up and Wait\"? Mon-Fri. VISA macro and micro 'momentum. Includes 9:00-5:00 70 page manual! And much, more!! Call: 1-800-262-6066 EST Strategic Falconis abrademark of B White Distributed by Keyboard Commander Corp. Falcon is a registered trademark of Spectrum Holyte All written inquiries to Keyboard Commander Corp. 4839 SW 148 Ave. 1504. Davle, FL 33330-2129 130 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 Circle Reader Service 480 Strutes FALCON "


"FLY THE BEST! THE BEST GAME CONTROLLERS FOR YOUR SYSTEM CH Products offers gamers quality joysticks, flight yokes, gamecards, and trackballs for all games and simulations. We've taken our line of IBM peripherals and expanded into Macintosh and 3DO.\" From advanced computer pilots and auto racers to those just taking off. .. CH Products has the right controller for you, all Made-in-the U.S.A. PRODUCTS CH Products lets you fly higher, move faster, reach farther! CH Products/970 Park Center Drive / Vista, CA 92083 Phone: 619.598.2518 Fax: 619.598.2524 Circle Reader Service #190 "


"REVIEW L-CE OnA Wing And Spectrum HoloByte Delivers The Entire FALCON Strike Package On One CD by Tom \"KC\" Basham CON N THE THREE YEARS SINCE ITS RELEASE, mand a squadron of 30 pilots fighting in probably asking, \"What does FALCON FALCON 3.0 AND ITS VARIOUS ADD-ON places like Iraq, Israel and Panama. You GOLD offer me?\" In a nutshell, FALCON PRODUCTS, OPERATION: FIGHTING are in charge of mission planning, pilot GOLD distributes the latest and probably TIGER, MIG-29: DEADLY ADVERSARY, allocation, and weapons management as final) versions of FALCON 3.0 (version and HORNET: NAVAL STRIKE FIGHTER, well as flying combat missions. FALCON 3.05), MIG-29 (version 1.04), and HORhave developed an enormous following. 3.0's world is one of the most dynamic NET (version 1.02) along with all docuNearing cult-like fervor, the FALCON 3.0 virtual worlds available on the PC. Even mentation, technical notes and maps. family has spawned numerous \"electronic after flying daily Additionally, lighter squadrons around the country, for months I still FALCON GOLD the CD-ROM increated a niche market of after-market encountered surPrice: $60.00 cludes the ART OF books and software utilities, and providprises: new aircraft, System THE KILL instruced the cornerstone for at least three naEaster eggs, moun Requirements: tional video feational conventions. Now, as its tain climbers in the IBM compatible turing combat technology begins to show its age, SpecGrand Canyon, 386 (486 pilots Pete Bonantrum HoloByte offers what will probably and more. The recommended), ni and Phil Hand2MB RAM, VGA be the final chapter in the FALCON 3.0 simulation introley. This video is a graphics, CDstory: FALCON GOLD on CD-ROM. duced a new level ROM; supports thorough, detailed If you haven't met the FALCON 3.0 famof avionics sophistiAdLib, Roland instructional ily, FALCON 3.0 is an F-16 flight simulator cation which only and Sound Blaster sound cards. course that disbased on Spectrum HoloByte's prior Micro Prose and Protection: None cusses air combat products, FALCON and FALCON-AT. Using Digital Integration Publisher: Spectrum Holo Byte basics, all illustrat320x240 graphics at 256 colors, FALCON have matched. Alameda, CA (510) 522-1164 ed using FALCON 3.0 offers instant, shoot 'em up situations. As for the many 3.0 footage. In this a complex and flexible mission editing add-on products: 70-minute video, system, and an incredibly detailed camOPERATION: FIGHTING TIGER added new Pete Bonanni, who teaches air combat paign mode. In the last case, you comtheaters, weapons, and aircraft to the batactics for the U.S. Air Force, describes sic world; MIG-29 reversed the basic ACM geometry and tactical conpolarities, putting the siderations. By illustrating maneuvers player in command of a with \"planes on a stick\" and FALCON 3.0 Russian MiG-29 squadron footage, Bonanni provides excellent inin any of the theaters, and sight and training. Although discussed in HORNET added a third serthe jet-age context, the bulk of the video vice, the US Navy, to the applies equally well to historical air comwar, adding carrier-based bat arenas. F/A-18s and even more But wait, there's more! Thrustmaster theaters. includes a version of their popular utili$338 30.09. 32. ty, \"tmstick,\" which edits FALCON 3.0 joyPLAY STOP FRAMEFT IT SLICES, IT DICES... stick response to user-defined values. Those of you who have Unfortunately, the version of \"imstick\" HURLED INTO THE WILD BLUE YONDER Players new to the FALCON held out for three years shipped on the CD-ROM is incompatiworld will find that there is nothing quite like the first time you and those of you that relible with the software also on the CDcatapult off a carrier deck in an F-18. giously followed every ROM. The correct version is available at patch and upgrade are all no cost from Thrustmaster and is also TACTS 200M ROTATE 20CUIT EXTERNAL COUNTCE LORD TIMER SCORE 123 INDEX NO. TOTAL 00 COUNTER 132 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"TARGET MIG29 RANGE 00.0 MM [101 E O 02.0L, available in CompuServe's GAMEDPUB Spectrum Holo Byte for forum and other BBS sites. details. As usual, the new software versions What about those loyal make all of the existing utilities and customers that already patches obsolete, including the KCC utilown all the products, have ities (F3 MAPS, etc), Ken Richardson's V.42 all the current updates, communication and padlock TSRs, and and/or don't have a CDjust about any other user-made add-on ROM drive? Spectrum product. Richardson has released upHoloByte plans to release graded versions of his patches on Coma patch that will upgrade puServe's FSFORUM which are any prior versions of the spreading through the BBS circuit. KCC games to the CD-ROM has a free upgrade in the works for their versions. Over the past utilities which should be available by the three years, the FALCON SNAP THE PADLOCK SHUT Falcon's heralded padlock view allows time this article sees print. 3.0 family has supported pilots to track bogeys--like this Soviet Mig-29. 16 different software verIT HOLDS MORE CHICKEN sions; writing and verifying THAN A HEN HOUSE upgrades for each of these versions has pears that some Red Flag missions pitHow much disk space will this monstrosiproven quite time consuming. Spectrum ting a MiG against an F/A-18 create invisty require? If you install everything to the HoloByte hasn't set a lirm release date for ible aircraft. You can't see them, but they hard drive, you'll need roughly 35 the patch other than in a few weeks.\" can see you.... megabytes of free space. Fortunately, all Sound Blaster 16 users be advised: static data files can be accessed on the THE CATCH? simply selecting sound options from FALCD, and using the \"partial\" installation FALCON GOLD doesn't contain much in con's configuration menu will not propstill gives full access to all features, but rethe way of bug fixes. Although FALCON erly initialize game sounds. You must set quires under 10MBs for the whole pack3.0 has been immensely popular, users the sound options, exit the game, reboot age. Using a double speed Toshiba 3401 have written volumes of complaints and the PC, then re-enter the game. After CD-ROM, I noticed no significant delays bug reports. The program's stability has that, sounds function normally. always been questionable at best, working flawlessly DOES THIS GOLD GLITTER? on some machines and reIn the end, FALCON GOLD is more a final quiring hours of installapackaging of the FALCON family for those tion tweaking on others, who prefer the CD-ROM format than an Although I didn't suffer advancement of the product line. FALCON any serious setbacks durGOLD offers a convenient storage mediing FALCON GOLD installaum for CD-ROM equipped enthusiasts tion, quite a few other and an opportunity to complete the user's have. whole series at a bargain price. The only significant Perhaps the best news for air combat change in the CD version fans is that Spectrum HoloByte is finally is in thrust levels. The F. turning their attention to the next gener16 in FALCON 3.0 is signifiation of light simulation. FALCON GOLD ERASE THOSE UGLY WARTS A MiG-29 uses its superior speed and cantly more powerful than probably represents the caboose of the maneuverability to close in on a disadvantaged A-10 Warthog. the real world F-16, resulthighly successful FALCON 3.0 train. The ing in an unfair advantage FALCON family still holds adventures gaduring flight when using the partial induring modem-play sessions against the lore, but its fans will now start turning stallation, but menus appeared noticeMiG-29 or the F/A-18. FALCON GOLD entheir eyes to the skies to see where Specably slower. gine thrust levels have been adjusted to trum HoloByte will fly next. & How much would you expect to pay for balance modem-play. all of this? The four floppy-based softMany users have had problems viewing THE EDITORS SPEAK ware packages, FALCON, FIGHTING TIGERS, the ART OF THE KILL. video. Spectrum has FALCON GOLD MIG-29, and HORNET will easily run bereleased a patch to the AOTK video playtween $75 and $100 retail, and the VHS er which solves most of the problems. I RATING  version of ART OF THE KILL retails at $29. encountered display errors during playFALCON GOLD retails around $60 at most back which caused one frame to display PROS For the FALCON newcomer, chain software stores. Spectrum outside the normal display box about this is a steal. You'll get months HoloByte recently announced an upevery 10 seconds or so. I was never able worth of hard-core flight combat acgrade price for previous customers which to resolve the error, but it didn't seriously tion for the price of one game. discounts the price of FALCON GOLD even impact the viewing of the video. Finally, CONS Doesn't offer much to the further based upon the number of Fatmany MiG users have reported invisible weathered FALCON fan beyond the convenience of CD-ROM storage. CON products you already own. Contact F/A-18s in some of the scenarios. It ap2.2 100 100 OCTOBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 133 "


"OPERATION JTM EUROPE PATH TO VICTORY 1939-45 TITGANGS ATT HERE! PRETEREST TO WASILI Hanna X LUCE PENAH PATTON, ROMMEL, MONTGOMERY AND ZHUCOV! It was hardened master-minds like these that devised the strategies and led the forces in the fight for Europe during WWII. Now it's your turn to play general, giving orders to your best commanders in KOEI's exciting new video game OPERATION EUROPE. Take charge of the Allies as they prepare to liberate Europe or lead the Veve ruthless Axis in its push for global domination. Victory can be yours in the War in Africa, the famous tank battles at Kursk, Battle of the Bulge, Battle AS COMMANDER, POSITION for Normandy and the Fight for Berlin. YOUR REGIMENTS FOR VICTO Along the way, assassinate enemy commanders using Special Forces, have engineers destroy bridges and lay mines, sabotage supply lines and drop OUTFLANK YOUR ENEMY paratroop units into occupied cities. ON THE BATTLEFIELD! OPERATION EUROPE FROM KOEI! With this gang, the world will never be the same again! Relive historical WWII battles in six separate scenarios Select your commanding officers from a list of historical ORDER YOUR TANKS TO OPE figures that include Patton, Rommel and Montgomery FIRE ON THE AXIS GUNS! Sabotage supply lines to enemy cities by bombing bridges Eliminate enemy commanders using Special Forces units AVAILABLE FOR SNES 8 SERA. One or two player excitement ALSO AVAILABLE FOR SUPER NES Koci Games are available for all systems in AND SEGA GENESIS, KOEI'S POPULAR retail outlets nationwide! If you can't find PACIFIC WAR TITLE, P.T.O. the Koei product you are looking for call us at 415-348-0500 (9am to 5pm PST). SEGA SUPER NINTENDO KOEI Corporation, 1350 Bayshore Hwy., Suite 540, Burlingame, CA 94010 Operation Europe is a trademark of KOEI Corporation Nintendo Nintendo Entertainment System, Sega. Sega Genesis and the official seals are trademarks of Nintendo of America and Sega of America. GENESIS Circle Reader Service #81 GENESIS Agam Al! Pacific Theater of Operntions KOEI FELKELTETTE "


"STRATEGY/WARGAMES History Repeat's Itself... ACCORDING TO OUR RECENT DEMOIn a recent email discussion I had ..BUT WHAT GRAPHIC SURVEY, THE AVERAGE with CGW reader Ed Morris READER OF COMPUTER GAMING [EMORRIS5@delphi.com), we ponWorld has been with the magazine dered why so many computer game ABOUT for about two years. I suspect that companies keep reinventing the much of our wargaming readerwheel all the time. After all, there are ship has been around much some good old games that could be HISTORICAL longer than that. My experience GRIPESHOT made better and brought before the in talking to you via e-mail and at new influx of computer gamers that gaming conventions is that most pour into this hobby every day. GAMES? wargamers have had a computer at least since the For example, tell me if I'm wrong, but I still mid-80's, and so names like MECH BRIGADE, EASTthink SSI's KAMPFGRUPPE is a great game. Sure, ERN FRONT, and the BATTLE FRONT system might there are other wargames out there on the same just ring a bell. Thinking back on these golden topic and scale, but they're different than KAMPFoldies, I can't help but think what a shame it is that GRUPPE. I dream of a cleaned up, polished \"90's many of the classic games that we \"grew up on\" version\" of this game. Ditto Chris Crawford's will never again leave their custy slot on the shelf EASTERN FRONT, a strategic level WWII game reand see action on the screen. leased in 1981. I remember keeping my Atari 800 around for years beyond its usefulness just to play this very carly classic. Gee, the miracles he did with that game and 32K of memory! Of course, any such wish Our own M. Evan Brooks has this tidbit about our tax dollars at list is limited only by personal taste and the amount of time work. He's been affiliated with the military's National Defense Univeryou've been in the hobby, sity/Wargaming & Simulation Center (NDU/WGSC) for the past six SSI'S BATTLES OF NAPOLEON months as an IMA (basically, an unpaid drilling Reservist). Apparentand the games in the GETTYSly, the military has been looking more and more into commercial BURG: THE TURNING POINT wargames, but they have little idea of what's really out there. series are classics that could Recently, Evan hooked up with the Defense Modeling & Simulations be republished with a face lift. Likewise, could ACTION Office (DMSO) as a proper and responsive agency. Interestingly, he STATIONS!, LORDS OF CONadds, that not even 20 minutes after he had talked with DMSO, he was QUEST or COLONIAL CONcalled by a \"Beltway Bandit» (a euphemism for military contractors in QUEST be revived. general because of the prices that some gouge out of the armed No doubt the publishers forces) interested in obtaining a copy of his anthologies of wargames holding these titles can cite published here in CGW. numerous reasons not to proWargamers \"Mo\" Morgan and Matt Caffrey at Maxwell Air Force ceed with projects like these. (Why spend money redoing Base have reminded us about their interest in anything to do with air old games when they could be (continued on page 136) making new games? Nobody by Alan Emrich OCTOBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 135 "


"wants those old titles any more!) However, for every SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD or PiRATES! GOLD update that fails to sizzle in the marketplace, a WARLORDS II or EMPIRE DELUXE is born. What I mean to say is that companies don't have to reinvent the wheel with every new strategy game they produce (although I certainly don't want to discourage innovation!). Many clever designs litter the vaults of our hobby's history awaiting a face lift and new life among a new generation of players. Besides, how is the next generation of computer wargamers ever to experience this hobby's great games when they drop out of print with every new technological standard? Glitz aside, their guts are still good. Old computerized soldiers should never die (at least, not the ones in the good wargames most of us remember from \"back when\"). Neither should they fade away. G-2 (continued from page 135) power. One place they recommend as a contact point for those of you with design ambitions is Airpower Journal. This publication can be reached at: Airpower Research Institute, 401 Chennault Circle, Maxwell AFB, Alabama 36117-8930. # Jim Dunnigan, who has recently been quoted as saying: \"I really believe we won the Cold War because the Soviets developed a larger and more incapacitating bureaucracy,\" often helps out the military with his expertise in military matters and game design. His HUNDRED YEARS WAR design, presently featured on the Genie network, is taking another leap forward. Presently, Jim is working on a book-length \"help\" based item for the game (the purely historical part of it will be over 70,000 words long!). This is all part of a new graphic front end for the game that, when distributed, is supposed to allow users to run it as a world-wide, multiplayer on-line simulation. Lack of ambition has never been one of Jim's problems.... Of course, many wargamers remember Jim Dunnigan for his tenure at SPI during the 1970s, but now that SPI is owned by Decision Games, they're seeking to license the SPI line for computer gaming. Taking them up on it is RAW Entertainment. RAW should be releasing RISE OF THE West (a computerized version of the popular SPI title EMPIRES OF THE MIDDLE Ages). Others interested in licensing the SPI line can contact Decision Games at (805) 9436832. That telephone number also works for those seeking AIDE DE CAMP files for SPI boardgames. These computerized PBEM kits using HPS Simulations' AIDE DE CAMP program include many recent Strategy & Tactics magazine games (at $5 each), and several old SPI«monster\" wargames, including WAR IN EUROPE ($40). Call for details. Speaking of AIDE DE CAMP, a quick glance at the features being considered for version 2.0 include geomorphic maps, hidden units with detection routines, on screen line-of-sight, \"cut and paste\" symbol editing, single key \"flip\" command for counters and a lot more. All this is tentative, but it looks like the revolution started by this product will move into high gear when v2.0 arrives. Another popular boardgame, CONQUEST from Donald Benge, is heading for computerization. This chess-like strategy game will be produced by QQP, certainly a publisher noted for their line of similar strategy games. The programming is being done by Puuao Software in Honolulu. The computer game will be based on the 2-player version of CONQUEST, with the 4-player version awaiting the first game's success. One boardgame slated for computer conversion is having a rough time. Avalon Hill has taken their plans for producing an IBM version of PATTON's Best off the front burner. The final fate of the project is not yet known. life in A more successful boardgame/computer game conversion is HARPOON. With Three-Sixty Pacific doing well with HARPOON Il and HARPOON ONLINE entering Alpha testing on GEnie (for up to 32 players!), we only await the future release of both HARPOON Classic and scenarios and editors for HARPOON II. of Speaking of Three-Sixty, what's the story on JIM DUNNIGAN'S VICTORY AT SEA? Apparently, the \"final patch\" (dubbed v1.5) is well into playtesting for the Macintosh version. Gary Osborn, the VAS Team Leader expects another interim patch out before the final one has finished testing in the Fall. The Al is rumored to be VAStly enhanced, too, and with virtually no \"cheating\" built in for the computer players. Although \"cheating\" rhymes with Keating, no one should feel cheated to hear that Roger Keating's next game from SSG will be entitled THE LAST BLITZKRIEG (i.e., the Battle of the Bulge, due out early next year) and features a new engine for operational level WWII era campaigning. While SSG is pretty mum on the details, games in this series won't be \"linked,\" thus freeing SSG up to play with the rules, scale and graphics a bit between future releases. Expect this game to, at the very least, feature 256 color, 640 X 480 SVGA graphics. in the \"Where Are They Now?\" Department, ultra-nice guys Gregg Carter and Joey Nonnast of CCC, the people who created HIGH COMMAND, are rumored to have had the rights to that game revert back to them after Three-Sixty's recent reorganization. Once Joey is back to 100% (he'll be off to the Mayo Clinic to solve a chronic ailmentwell-wishers should drop him an e-mail via CompuServe at 71231,1327), the dynamic duo will consider their options. Of course, they'd like to continue supporting HIGH COMMAND, but they are seeking another publisher for several new projects. open Dispatches from this department's Rumor Bag Guy (The Body Bag Guy?) indicate that a scenario editor for GARY GRIGSBY'S PACIFic War is currently in testing. Designed by Dave Yeager, this is likely to be an unofficial \"shareware\" style release. MULTI-PLAYER CIVILIZATION continues at MicroProse with a Spring release slated. Apparently, in addition to head-to-head and network play, various on-line services are being considered as \"hosts.\" Finally, players who enjoyed the miniatures feel of Spectrum HoloByte's FIELDS OF GLORY will be glad to hear that the game's engine is being adapted to the Civil War era with a product ready for the first half of 1995, or so our Body Bag Guy reports. We'll have more from the digital trenches of computer wargaming next issue.... 136 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  OCTOBER 1994 "


"TIGERS N THE PROWL ON THE HPS Simulations, the WARGAMER'S Computer Company and designer Scott Hamilium, bring you the ULTIMATE WWII tactical combat simulation. (408) 554-8381 overing the ENTIRE Eastern Front from 1939-45, Tigers On The Prowl includes a detailed database of hundreds of fighting vehicles, weapons, and force structures for the Axis, Allied and Soviet forces. Likewise, combat is resolved by precise calculations of armor thickness and round penetration at the instant of impact. It also features morale, hidden movement, communications, airstrikes, night fighting, forest fires, and much more. Designed for all levels of wargamers, Tigers On The Prowl includes 5 scenarios, a VISA/MC: CALL flexible scenario builder, and three levels of complexity. Orders are given to platoons or sections, with a maximum of a supported combat brigade on each side. Can be played Dealer Inquiries solitaire against the computer, or by Welcome two players either face to face or by mail/e-mail. Tigers On The Requires VGA, Prowl can use maps and sym570KB free RAM bols created with Aide De and 2 MB hard disk Camp. Tigers On The SULT space. Mouse optional. Prowl is as real as HPS Simulations For IBM and compatibles. you can get without P.O. Box 3245 being there. GE Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 Copyright 1994 by Scott Hamilton HPS Simulations. All rights reserved. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. "


"PREVIEW : CIC Is The Life For Me Avalon Hill's 5TH FLEET Offers Naval Warfare Minus The Complexity by Terry Lee Coleman Ters a Game Still In Development OR THE MICRO-MANAGING ARMThe opening bridge screen is quite tion. In addition to being realistic, this elCHAIR ADMIRAL, HARPOON AND reminiscent of HARPOON. Moving to the egant system relieves players of tedious HARPOON II WERE THE ONLY FISH strategic overview is a bit of a shock, howmicro-management, allowing them to in the computer gaming sea. ever. Modeled after satellite photos, the concentrate on maneuver and tactics. Now, with Joe Balkoski's awardview shows known friendly and enemy winning 5TH FLEET board game freshly forces in the Indian Ocean region. This MY AIM IS TRUE converted to silicon, its fluid movement satellite's-eye view is central to the game when in the attack portion of each mechanics, sound logistical model, and design, which has as its basis the timephase, a mere click on the unit you wish accurate combat results intact, naval enworn naval adage of \"find the enemy beto pummel immediately highlights all elithusiasts can enjoy all the flavor with hall fore he finds you.\" Thus, when moving to gible weapon systems. For instance, if a the fat. This is not to mislead—5TH the main operations map, units are hidtask force of destroyers and cruisers were FLEET is not your typical diet wargame. den until discovered through radar, attacking a sub, only their ASW would be Mike Innella and Stanley Associates bring sonar or other means. used. If they were attacking an years of experience in software design for Unlike the stark minimal PREVIEW airbase, each ship would use the military, and worked closely with ism of the strategic screen, the (SNI Harpoons, Tomahawks or guns, Avalon Hill on the computer version. In main operations map offers a with you deciding how many of addition to the expected AH graphic and crisp VGA palette. The expecteach to fire, and the kill and damproduction touches, the best news for ed blue seas are nicely contrasted by age ratios displayed clearly as you add gamers is that Balkoski was heavily in the crisp green and brown hues of the each weapon to the attack. Damage is volved in the computer game design. richly detailed land areas, and are dividbased on the destructive load of the The end result is shaping up as a classic ed into movement areas, with the hexweapon, angle of impact, critical system example of how to properly convert a grid on or off as individual taste decrees. hits, and flotation value of the target (bigboard wargame to the computer. The units look exactly like cardboard ger ships are harder to bring down). Miswargame pieces, but actusiles are animated on the way to their WCOMBATANTS ally work well against the target, with small graphic explosions on graphic backgroundtop of the enemy ship counter upon imthose gamers seeking units pact. Following is a rather tame screen rendered in 3D STUDIO which gives details on hits, misses, kills may apply elsewhere. Durand units aborted. ing each turn, the player Unlike the board game, the computer moves and attacks with eiversion of 5TH FLEET also employs a tacther air, surface ships or tical map. An individual task force is laid submarines in a given out on the tactical map in concentric cirphase, followed in later cles, each comprising a defensive fire phases with one of the othzone, with the most important ship, er types, until all forces such as an aircraft carrier, located in the have moved. While subs center. Incoming aircraft or missiles operate individually, surhave to brave the collective fire of the face vessels are moved in escorts in order to reach the most critiCHOOSE YOUR OWN ADVERSARY The 5th Fleet is matched against a task forces and air units in cal targets. This provides the attacker variety of enemies in over a dozen scenarios. described in detail. This screen also allows you to tweak the Al's aggressiveness and squadrons, hex-by-hex, or with another dilemma-does he go for difficulty level. with a simple drag of the the prize, or try taking out the escorts mouse to their final locafor riper harvesting later? PLAYER LUN PLAYER HUBEAN A SSION ENOMA MISSION PARAMETERS    LMIY L2 Turn DURATION car là 1 + 1 + 11, H , 14l to || Và 1 tà t Ma 7 SYATION DOSTLUS 138 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  OCTOBER 1994 "


"Car  da SIMULATION VALUES SIMULATION LOGISTICS Tuvo Primary Holes AIK HAM Speed Unlike naval vessels, air missions are since their position is always assigned to areas rather than specific known, but pack a lot of firehex paths, simulating their operational power. Those players baffled radius. Not so abstract as it may sound, by the number of strategic and Sumatra this works well in the game, as air units tactical options, or who simply have the most mobility and the most wish to play a waiting game, Nicobar Islands flexibility in the game. They may permay even pass the initiative to form combat air patrol, recon, intercept the opponent in place of movmissions, even lay mines (although asing a unit type. As with most expected, the US is pretty poor at good wargames, 5TH FLEET deminelaying), provided the particular mands a sense of timing and a unit has that capability. Although Elecwillingness to take risks. Those tronic Warfare planes are sitting ducks players who understand the when flying solo, when assigned to infundamental nature of modern tercept missions, they really add to the naval conflict will fare better TRAPPING THE RAT OF SUMATRA US surface and sub forces intimidation factor of F14s. Overall, anthan the gamer who is accusmove to missile-launching positions off the coast of Car other simple system for the player tomed to counting combat facNicobar. tors for a 3-to-1 TACTICAL attack. llounder at sea? On a tactical level, the REFERENCE Al has little difficulty deciding which BELLS AND AI weapons to use, and it defends well in WHISTLES the task force setup, being a veritable In addition to providing a mother hen to its carriers. The three fun, challenging game, levels of AI are very different, with the 5TH FLEET has a good onhighest setting most likely to give a vetline database. It features eran gamer a good fight. The option to digitized photos of dozens set the Al to aggressive is welcome, of ships, aircraft and subsince it generally sends the computer marines, along with data player on missile-firing extravaganzas on armament, speed and sure to deplete its stockpiles—and send just about anything else a a few of your ships to the bottom of the naval hardware junkie Indian Ocean. In the final version of could desire. It can be acthe game, the ships are to be placed HOW MUCH IS THAT BIRDIE IN THE WINDOW? The Tactical cessed from the opening randomly each new time you play a sceReference Module provides detailed information and digitized screen, or merely by clicknario, which adds a lot to replayability. photos of ships, subs and aircraft from around the world-even ing on an individual unit. Since the Al is already competent, the the elusive Stealth Fighter. Other nice touches intweaks between now and the release clude e-mail play, and date should only enhance the product. which nonetheless offers a lot of strate(unlike KINGMAKER) hot-seating two Those who worship at the hallowed algic and tactical choices. players is allowed. ter of HARPOON-offering handfuls of Much of the game's tension comes But the real question is, does the AI niggling details to the gods of Microfrom assigning recon flights, positionManagement-may not ing subs in sea lanes, etc., all the while find 5TH FLEET particularattempting to close within attack range. ly appealing. All it offers is In some scenarios, unidentified ships a good simulation of opermay even be civilian vessels, with particational-level naval warfare ularly nasty victory point deductions for with design elegance and those admirals who shoot first and plenty of player decisions, count bodies later. Once the enemy is minus the excess of minufound, using units in the proper setiae. Plus, it's playable in a quence is essential. If subs detect an enfew hours, despite all the emy out of their effective attack range, data wrapped up in the air units which have already been comdesign. For those who mitted are useless. Successful torpedo have limited gaming time, or gunfire attacks (hardly recommend5TH FLEET is like riding ed) require creeping up stealthily to the crest of a wave: you Ore OLAY within one hex of the target. Air strikes may not stay up for long, and vessels armed with cruise missiles CIRCLE THE WAGONS, BOYS! Incoming Tomahawks will have a but it's exciting enough to may rain death on enemies from farther tough time reaching this flattop, secure in the center of the keep you coming back away, but risk giving away their positactical display. time after time for the tion. Land-based air are vulnerable, thrill of the quick ride. 0011 GDQ FOR MORE OCTOBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 139 "


"The New World lies before you with all its peril, promise and infinite possibility. Make the right political, military and economic moves and you can build a great new nation, leading your colonists to independence. Make the wrong moves and it's game over. Introducing Sid Meier's COLONIZATION THE TRADITION OF CIVILIZATION CONTINUES  1994 Microprose Al Rights Reserved. The Landing of the Pilgrims at Plymouth, Mass. Dec. 22nd 1620, Curier & Ives, 1876; Museum of the City of New York, The Harry T. Peters Collection. "


"and the off -Sid Meier's COLONIZATION Create a new nation :   MICROPROSE Anything is possible. 1-800-879-PLAY. For IBM-PC & Compatibles. Circle Reader Service #150 "


"Tu TORNYAK '94 How To Wage War Through Your E-Mailbox by Robert Gurske an't stand to see your opThe downside is that it obviously requires the game. ponent cry? Humiliate all parties to be available for play at the To war by e-mail, armchair generals him by mail!\" This call to same time, and unless played in a local will need not only modems to transmit battle from long distance, phone area, can be costly, since the mothe saved files, but compatible computers issued by boardgaming pidem is used constantly during play. Fiand identical versions of the game to be oneer Avalon Hill, is nearly as old as nally, direct connections are just as played to avoid a nightmare of compatiwargaming itself. It offered players the subject to disaster as boardgames in your bility problems. Although not strictly necopportunity to combat against opponents family room or study, as periodic lineessary, also recommended are a from all over the country and the world. crashes can cause games to go \"belly up\" compression program, such as PKZIP, The joys of gaming by mail came with just when they're getting interesting, and a neutral bulletin board or ontheir share of disadvantages, however. line service where files can be sent Moves had to be painstakingly logged by TURN, and \"parked\" so opponents can downhand, with game boards and cardboard TURN, TURN load at their convenience. panzers reduced to dust magnets, subject E-mail gaming, Because it is turn-based, the basic steps to the pedestrian pace of the Postal Seron the other hand, h to playing an e-mail game are fairly favice. As games dragged on for months or uses a turn based system, miliar to wargamers. First, a turn is years, the chances increased that the batwhich minimizes the played and saved after inputting tlefield would fall prey to a curious todamount of time spent onorders. For instance, a V FOR VICdler, a sleepy cat, or an errant soft drink. line. Ever-resourceful TORY game saved under the Electronic mail has breathed new life computer gamers discovname IKE would have the file into this noble concept, allowing ered that saved game files IKE.V4V created in the wargamers to test their strategies against could be transmitted to an game directory. If the opponents from all over the globe. The opponent, who would load game allows, it's helpful powerful combination of modem and the saves into his game dito save it under the playtelephone lines transmits turns in a fracrectory and pick the game er's side and date. Thus, tion of the time taken by the letter carrier up from that point. From the opening June and almost as cheaply. this humble beginning, 22,1941 turn of SECEven though it uses the same transmise-mail gaming has OND FRONT could be sion device, modem gaming differs evolved to the point labeled GE62241 by the sharply from e-mail gaming. Modem where companies now inGerman player, making gaming offers real-time competition for clude \"ready for e-mail\" opit easy for the opponent gamers separated by time and distance. tions as an incentive to purchase to know which turn it is 142 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"PANZER GENERAL Fast, Fun & Good-looking! As a strategy game, PANZER GENERAL will stimulate your mind. But your eyes and ears won't believe how great it looks and sounds: stunning Super VGA graphics, authentic World War II combat photography and film footage plus CD-quality music and dynamite sound effects. You'll love the way it plays: PANZER GENERAL is one blazingly fast and fun game! The year is 1939; you are a German General with a fresh command in Poland. Anything can happen, and every game you play will be different. Win and advance to the next front of your choice. Lead well On CD-ROM and 3.5\" disks for IBM & Compatibles. and your increasingly battle-hardened core group of units could be plowing across Europe, North Africa and the Eastern Front. You could even end up in England by 1940 — or in America by 1945! Besides the campaign game, there are 35 progressive scenarios which you can play as either the Allied or Axis side. Choose from 350 unit types, from Tiger tanks to B-17 Flying Fortresses. PANZER GENERAL. Setting a new standard in strategy gaming. in D. IBM 256.color SVGA Dicas 12201300000 CENERAL PANZER GENERAL To order, visit your retailer or call SSI Direct Sales at (408) 737-6800 with VISA or MASTERCARD in U.S. and Canada.  Strategie Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. SRL "


"very handy if you have multiple E-mail an idea of how the battles will turn out. be it battling a wily Texas lawyer on the games going PACIFIC WAR and the V FOR VICTORY steppes of Russia or a midwestern There may be cases where you have to series use a different approach, where school teacher in carrier battles out in deal with more than one save game file. each side inputs orders and one joint the Pacific Ocean. It allows people of (Gary Grigsby's PACIFIC WAR, when combat resolution ensues. The most completely different backgrounds and saved under option A, creates the files common practice here is to take turns geographical locations to come together SaveA, SaveA.MD and SaveA.CD in the resolving combat. Some games, such as not only to share the common joy of game directory.) Multiple files having PACIFIC WAR, include battle or action rewargaming, but to get to know one anthe same name but different extensions ports which may be reviewed by the other as well. Games that became borcan easily be \"zipped\" together into one player who did not see the actual coming against an AI easily tamed, now take file for transmission. A zip program bat resolution. Essentially anything that on a whole new level of play value. Give merely takes a file and compresses it the participants can agree to is a valid it a try, you won't be disappointed. into a smaller amount of space. Most way to play, so feel free to experiment. I finding opponents for e-mail wargaming is wargames have save files of between once had a terrific time in an 8-player the first step in becoming an e-mail warrior. 75k-140k and will zip to around 30k. game of SECOND FRONT, which hooked The best place to find players in on-line. NearSmaller file sizes can be transmitted me forever on multi-player e-mail ly every large network (CompuServe, GEnie, more quickly, which in turn will save games. The larger the group, the more Internet, etc.) has a bulletin board dedicated to money. Zip programs are available on simple courtesies, such as logging comlinking up gamers. If you are not connected to all major on-line services and most pribat results or informing players of aca network, try running an ad in the CGW vate bulletin boards, with the most comtions that cannot be seen on the other opponents Wanted page. monly used being PKZIP 2.04G, a end, will be appreciated. shareware program. It matters little S ince most computer games weren't what program is used, so long as all specifically designed to be played by eplayers in a game use the same version. mail, there are some idiosyncrasies Although it is possible for two players to which must be dealt with. The Grigsby transmit their files directly to each othSF/WF/ WIR system has a supply recaler, the most efficient way is to transmit culation every time the game is saved the zipped files to a third party location. and reloaded, which tends to change The opponent can then be notified the unit strengths a bit. The effect is more turn is ready for pickup by phone or pronounced in large multi-player electronic mail. Zipped files may be games where during one turn the game named and dated just as any other saved is saved and reloaded multiple times. game file. The V4V series has a battle report funcRegardless of zipped file contents, tion, but unlike the information in PAwhen downloaded and unzipped into CIFIC WAR, the V4V report is a specific the opponent's current game directory, phase which cannot be reviewed later it reconstitutes into a full-blown game in on. High COMMAND has a different progress. In this manner, the game is problem-multiple phases for each transmitted back and forth, using the turn. It is e-mail playable, but players speed and convenience of electronic will have to come up with a number of mail to contest a game much more ground rules on game play. quickly than is possible via «snail mail.\" If a game is turn based, has separate THE E-DITORS' E-MAIL PICKS Typically, transmitting by e-mail takes save game files, and saving the game You can play just about any turn-based live minutes or less even at 2400 baud. and restarting it retains orders put in game by e-mail, but there are some During off-peak hours, this comes to previously, odds are it can be played via games more suited to the task. Here less than 60 cents a transfer, making e e-mail. The keys to successful e-mail are ten titles that either have built in mail wargaming very economical as well. wargaming are creativity and flexibility. e-mail features, or have save game Above all, e-mail wargaming is a true files that are easy to transmit over the BATTLEFIELD ETIQUETTE \"gentleman's game.\" Anyone who wishwire. So pick one up, find a foe, and In games like SECOND FRONT and WAR es to violate the honor system may very start trading blows! IN RUSSIA, each player moves and has easily circumvent the few safeguards. combat sequentially, resulting in two Indeed, with many games (such as PAAide de Camp games (HPS) movement and two combat rounds per CIFIC WAR) it's very hard not to load eEmpire Deluxe (New World) turn. Generally the procedure is to inmail games and get an inadvertent Gary Grigsby's Pacific War (SSI) put orders, save the game, and then glimpse of enemy ship and sub deployMerchant Prince (QQP) transmit, allowing your opponent to rements. Fortunately most players are inOperation Crusader (Avalon Hill) solve the combat phase. You can still terested in a challenging game brought Race Into Space CD (Interplay) run through the combat on your end afon by a human opponent and not the Tigers On The Prowl (HPS) ter sending the saved turn to your oppothrill of victory at any price. V For Victory Series (Three-Sixty) nent, realizing that these \"pseudoI've found e-mail wargaming to be a VGA Planets (Tim Wisseman) results\" don't count. At least, you'll have fascinating and rewarding experience, Warlords II (SSG) 144 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"\"An incredibly realistic tactical warfare simulator.\" BH 1 Hi to lifi I. IRON  Real-time game play Historically accurate scenarios SVGA Graphics Over 80 different unit types Intense Sound Effects Command the Allied or Axis powers as you reconstruct 12 pivotal battles of WWII Available at your local software retailer or order direct from New World Computing at 1-800-325-8898 (818-889-6070 outside the US), or by mail: PO BOX 4302 Hollywood, CA 90078-4302.  1994 New World Computing, Inc. Iron Cross is a trademark of New World Computing. New World Computing and its distinctive logo are registered trademarks of New World Computing, Inc. All rights reserved. NEW WORLD COMPUTING Circle Reader Service #152 "


"REVIEW New Bids On The Block MILLENNIUM AUCTION Hosts The Unholy Marriage Of Money And Art by Allen L. Greenberg ONG BEFORE ROBIN LEACH TOOK UP world's economic system has begun to controlled opponents than when choosVOCATIONAL YACHT HOPPING IN collapse, as has much of its ozone layer. ing your own character. The sensuous LIFESTYLES OF THE RICH & FANOUS, Earthquakes, disease and other natural tones of Nuria the narrator guide you the leisure activities of the world's disasters have robbed humanity of many through each step of the selection and Iwealthy were a rich source of comof its cultural and historic treasures. To registration process. She also provides a mentary and fascination. It is the rich, of the cold blooded, well-to-do who collect generous quantity of on-line audio help course, who make it a point never to ask various objets d'art, these are not actually throughout the game on request. Up to the price when purchasing their yachts. It crises. Each incident simply serves as a four live players may participate in Aucis the rich who have the unique ability to dramatic background against which the TION, provided they are able to crowd evoke laughter from a treasures of around a single keyboard. joke despite how badly MILLENNIUM AUCTION the world eiAUCTION's goal may be slightly amthey might butcher the Price: $59.95 ther increase biguous the first time around, and some punch line. When it System: IBM MILLENNIUM or decrease players may be confused whether it is art comes to art, the rich compatible in value. The or money they seek. The answer is that 386SX or have always stood as better, 4MB tragic loss of you are playing to increase your \"net proof that beauty resides RAM, SVGA a large perworth.\" To begin, you will be allowed within the wallet of the graphics, 10MB centage of a only $8.5 million of your character's beholder. In Eidolon's hard drive particular holdings, but this is enough to buy and MILLENNIUM AUCTION, space, mouse, artist's work sell art throughout the game. Each art you have the chance to be CD-ROM, may cause object is assigned an appraised value, Windows 3.1; counted among these the value of and the sum total of each of these values, supports MPC compatible sound cards privileged few. Joining a Protection: None his or her re in addition to your remaining cash, rephandful of eccentric and Publisher: Eidolon maining creresents your net worth. very wealthy collectors, Riverdale, NY ations to you will gather in the (718) 884-7095 skyrocket. LET'S START THE BIDDING world's most exclusive Likewise, the AT ONE MILLION DOLLARS auction facility to try to become Earth's discovery that a certain type of work has The game opens in what is apparently a most highly praised art collector and been illegally forged casts cloubt on all posh portion of cyberspace set aside for dealer. creations of its type, thus dellating their the exclusive use of AUCTION's particiAUCTION is a light-hearted strategy exvalue. pants. Here, each item available in the ercise whose play is very nearly eclipsed To participate in this circus, you must upcoming auction is listed, along with its by its multimedia presentation. The profirst choose a character from a multiappraised value and some offers for it gram features extensive use of video racial, international group of strongly from the outside world. Although they clips, three dimensional animated modmotivated and highly successful entrepremay not participate in the auction themeling, still photos, digitized voices, and neurs. Each character is accompanied by selves, various institutions and collectors classical and neoclassical music. The a brief description and a dossier with inwill have offers posted for each item on game takes place in a hypothetical 21st terviews, newspaper and magazine clipthe auction block. Often, particularly century in which many of the catastropings. As far as game play is concerned, high offers are made for certain items phes we had fervently hoped would go this material becomes more valuable provided they are secured as a group. If away have actually happened. The when you wish to study your computerit is cash you are looking for, it will often 146 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"POWER GRAPHICS VMATI matrox MGA STOM Models created by 47.Tek, Inc. are actual, real-time 3D characters found in Games Pack THE FASTEST WINDOWS ACCELERATOR NOW CIVES YOU THE MOST POWERFUL 3D GAMES Earth-Shattering Game Performance Give your PC games a shot of adrenaline with MGA Impression Plus. MGA's 64bit graphics engine is the fastest in the industry with over 25 international awards to prove it. MGA Impression Plus takes graphics performance to a whole, new level by adding hardware accelerated 3D for smoother animations, photo-realistic colors and real-time, real-life game play. This means you get more bad guys and harder interactive punches! Free! 3D Games Pack MGA Impression Plus is bundled with arcade-quality, interactive 3D DOS games designed specifically to take advantage of MGA's advanced 3D polygon engine and powerful, real-time capabilities. MGA Impression Plus is the first accelerator to give you full screen, real-time 3D animations at 640 x 400 resolution in 65,000 colors at a price that you can afford. The All-Purpose Graphics Accelerator Not only will your Windows games play the fastest on earth, you'll also speed up your desktop publishing, video playback and CAD applications. With resolution support up to 1600 x 1200, 120Hz flicker-free displays, 24bit color acceleration, and support for all VGA games, MGA Impression Plus is the allpurpose graphics accelerator for both business and home use. 1-800-361-1408 MATFAX: (514) 685-0174 MAGAZINE MAGAZINE WIERZINE MAGZINE EDITORS EDITORS EDITORS EDITORS CHOICE CHOICE CHOICE CHOICE MGA MGA MGA MGA Impressiom Impression Ultima Plus Ultima Plus VL-Bus VL-Bus PCI MAGAZINE EDITORS: CHOICE MGA Ultima Plus 200 PCI Matrox Graphics, Inc. Tel. 514.685.2630 Fax. 514.685.2853 C1934 Alights Teserved. Matra Matrox MGA Matro CEP, Matrostat Modeswatch are tered trademarks of Metro Llectronic Systems Ltd      MGA en nuestras recomendas e CDW 1-800-800-4CDW MA ISE PC Connection JR COLOMER 1-800-660-3222 1-800-800-9478 1-800-221-8180 MX10940 m POWER GRAPHICS a trox Circle Reader Service #248 "


"6.5 Takeshi Mori Randall P. Smith Chanteena Rasheed Ahmad PEWS Current Bid: Cat Pano Walth BULLS ka the cms Www tabel w be to your advantage to make sure you to one particular item. Or, some earthThree Graces\" is, by itself, enough to obtain each of the items listed in that shaking event may have just taken place arouse decency censors in more consergroup. Since there are a total of 12 items which will affect the value of another. vative communities. Even when she is being auctioned in each game, it is imDown the hall is yet another television describing more modern and less perative that you write these offers down, set, along with a newspaper and radio. graceful pieces of art, this woman deand the AUCTION package includes a Each source may contain news events that serves high praises for her cunning notebook just for this purpose. Appraised Value:24 salesmanship. The bidding The package also includes two CDs, proceeds in a natural, stopHigh Bidder: only one of which is used to play the and-go fashion. The auctiongame. The other disk contains a short eer, a friendly, upper scale history lesson so that players in the 1990s Bob Barker type, respectfully may catch up on events from the next urges his patrons on to highcentury. There is also a non-interactive er offers. Players bid in demo which gives the novice player an $100,000 increments using idea of how the game flows. either the mouse or a pre-seThe game's instruction book alludes to lected key, and are allowed certain moral questions regarding some some small extension of credoffers you will receive. Museums and init should they bid beyond stitutions are trying to take items out of their on-hand cash. An audithe hands of private collectors, thus ruinence breaks into polite aping some of the \"fun\" for those who like THE PRICE ISN'T ALWAYS RIGHT The Bob Barker-esque plause each time a bidder to collect 'em and trade 'em. One collecauctioneer takes bids from four players in the auction room. offers more for an object than tor is noted for his love of torching his Make sure you've done your research before his gavel falls its appraised value. Meanprivately acquired masterpieces in public, lic, and you're stuck with a turkey. while, the screen displays thus depriving the world of their beauty shifting views of the auction forever. However, that same collector will will affect an item on the auction block. It room and lists the item's appraised valfrequently offer you far more money for is important to check out the conversaue along with the current high bid. certain works than any other source. tion amongst the bidders, who may very Only four items are auctioned at a time, Strangely enough, there are no repercuswell be reacting to the news you have just after which you are returned to the sions for selling anything to this person, heard. gallery. After you've finished gathering news Back in the gallery, net worths are you have done so. and gossip in the gallery, it's time to proreevaluated based on local and world Away from cyberspace, you enter the ceed into the auction room. Nuria will events. The painting you just purchased gallery where you will be confronted by warn you if there is anything you might may have plummeted in value due to a your fellow bidders. Holding paint-eating virus that was tossed on it drinks which are doubtlessly earlier by some bio-technical vandals. both expensive and intoxicatOr, the government may have taken a ing, participants share their sudden interest in the information thoughts and artistic opinions. stored in an antique computer you purIt is also here that the game's chased, thus greatly increasing its value. designers have obviously had This is the time to once again check out the most fun in creating AUCthe news sources, listen in on conversaTION. Each conversation is emtions, or reenter cyberspace in order to bellished with nightmarish cash in any of your acquisitions. Each imagery and grotesque animagame includes three rounds of bidding, tion. Watching each speaker's after which a winner is declared. figure oscillate between norComputer-controlled players treat mal and bizarre, one can only their human-controlled adversaries as wonder exactly what was in equals. The same information that you those drinks, or at the very MUSEUM MAINTENANCE MAN In addition to a cush job, Zeke, uncover through television, radio and least, what the programmers the janitor, has a newspaper, radio and TV to find out what in newspaper becomes available to commight have ingested at the the world might impact art prices tomorrow. puter players as well. You will also note time they assembled this porthat these artificial opponents will be tion of the game. Above the heads of the have missed in the gallery before you responding to outside offers, and will bidders is a television set which, when seproceed. attempt to assemble those groupings of lected with the mouse, displays a cheery, objects that are worth so much extra well-fed newscaster. He will be reporting SENSUOUS SALESWOMAN cash. Fortunately, they also seem happy one or more stories which may or may in the auction room, Nuria's lush voice to bid well beyond an item's appraised not have something to do with one of the describes each item with unabashed value, so that it is often possible to objects for sale at the auction. World inbias. The fervent passion in her voice as watch the poor creatures load themterest, for some reason, may have shifted she describes Raphael's painting \"The selves up with objects at inflated prices. 148 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"When You Were Just A Child They Abandoned You On A Hillside, Stole Your Kingdom & Kidnapped Your Mom! Now, Are You Hero Enough To Face The... Torched Again! WRATH. OF THE The Wrath Of Zeus GODS One Way Ticket To Crete Don't Be Shy, Dive In A Graphic Adventure Based On The Greek Myths For MPC and Macintosh CD-ROM onin INVISION PC Gamer \"...its multitude of puzzles, well-written script, and fine acting offers CD-ROM gamers an absorbing and satisfying gaming experience Mre Eome ournal \"The graphics are, in a word, awesome. / Computer Gaming Warid \"Luminaria has blended a fine mix of hip history challenging game play, and quality presentation... Distributed By Electronic Entertainment \"...Wrath feels like a graphic adventure but looks like an interactive movie.' New Media Magazine \"...hooks the player with humor, effortless lessons in mythology beautifully rendered graphics and an interesting challenge Circle Reader BRONZE MEDAL Lumina See Your Favorite Dealer or Call 1-800-33-MAXIS "


"8.5 Takeshi Mori Randall P. Smith Chanteena Rasheed Ahmad Player Appraised Value:24 Current Bid:24 High Bidder. Takeshi Mori BOLLS 8.5 0.0 Cal Portfolio 8.5 Worth The news stories that appear on television are usually the most significant, and merit more attention than those appearing elsewhere. Unfortunately, the most tempting strategy is simply to cheat. By saving the game early, then waiting to discover which items have changed most dramatically in value, you may simply replay the game with your new, insider knowledge. yond replay, hard-core strategists will ind AUCTION much too simple, but beginners and less serious players will probably have some good times with the game. In fact, MILLENNIUM AUCTION might be good bait to lure family and friends who have been unimpressed with gaming thus far. The great graphics, charming writing, light weight strategy, and the allure of playing global bigshot with an unlimited credit line may pull some away from the TV and its tired reruns of Robin Leach. aractsonen kunt uw c CATALONE THE EDITORS SPEAK MILLENNIUM AUCTION RATING *** GOING, GOING... A BULL MARKET The player's character throws his two-millionAUCTION's intuitive, mousedollar bidding spear at a cave painting from Lascaux. oriented interface is well designed. The game uses icons for game with several people gathered control, and a number of short-cut comaround one keyboard is an awkward sitmands are also available. As is the case uation, and some players may wish to with any of the new breed of \"multimecontemplate their art sales in private, dia\" programs, loads of free memory, in Although the program deserves some addition to the most powerful proces praise for its originality, AUCTION'S sors, work wonders for keeping the progreatest problem may be its lack of regram flowing happily. The instruction play value. After a dozen or more sesmanual also insists that your sound and sions, its videos and news items become video drivers are up to date. repetitive, and even its catalog of 135 It is unfortunate that AUCTION lacks a treasures may be too small to keep the network or modem option. Playing the game vital for many more sessions. BePROS An imaginative multimedia presentation with impressive art, amusing stories, and sensuous art descriptions. Very easy to learn. A terrific buy for a new or casual gamer. CONS Players who value deep strategy and extensive replay over graphic \"chrome\" might let this piece of multimedia art go to another bidder. NEW PRODUCT BASIC PACKAGE Includes Gamos Mastor Consola & Keyboard Normal QWERT Matt Only $69.95 TOP GUN PACKAGE Games Master consolo & 6 Matts Included 1. Falcon 3.0 2. Comancho Maximum Overkin 3. Acos of the Pacific 4. Flight Sim. 4.0 5. Strike Commander 6. Koyboard Normal QWERT Only $99.95 KATT GAMES MASTER TOTAL CONTROL SYSTEM! Simply! The best way to Play your enjoyment and performance b ou the Game Maderendial keyboard contuon and trust on once and boil the exclusive Colored Icon Kans moet cally to locale The Hor kews of a gronco exclusive One Touch features No more SIAC A and colored one ogged in an intuitive and logical lotion your en erford performance from game to gomel begon riproved Gomes Master a on intelligent control panel that will change way pocole learn and play computer games by odd ngawd monon into controle troplaces to standard keyboard. The keyboard becomes a not just Somlour art control panel concitting of the console and mon the exclusive side in and out ove of the Monts mores Game Moster easy usa Simply plug into Games Master in your PC and press me appropriate code NUTE trom the game Mont. No house with installaton sotwore and continuations Morocit our memory kotures con be upgraded with p r om chips and therefore, you Gomes Master will b ody when the citing games on tolaind leg Privateer Aces over Curopa Flight Sim 50 Wing Commander Academy Fleet Donde elal We are sure that with the Games Master you will wonder how You Ove got long playing to comes without it F ORSTER MATTS $14.95 Each Easy Slide in slide out Matt 10.02 The solution to simulation computer games enjoyment Yes I want to take control of my games and My Gomes Master ister mo weeks Paytle Keyboard and Terminal Technology (USA) Inc. 10 17.1 Lincola Place, North Heuwid, NI 802, USA Nome County Connects to Kabood port Lock Mechanism to hold the Matt securely Come on the more Corte de cordoningait Conandi bred No need for accessories Itho Mat rocurely th operation Address We godine ko of commands -Plug and play Co product GAMES MASTER Durobil Laminador 323202282 Method of former Please check on Check Money Order ourder will be stad within soy Amount Bosc cage Top Gun PC og Mom Soles con p es 6.00%) SAH CO0 Ad 5400 2 Doy Al Delry ked 57 LED ROODOU 11 Price Be Peo. Ben bouncing 90005 os coch Shipping & Handing   2 SS Hervice od 5700 Conoda, od 9.00 In add 35.00 for in and orden Colour Coded JOGI Kay code Prown commanda for popor 30 Two weeks is the money back guarantee One fuchs COM Moringa Erong to  |  BA No more Qup 2000 Tres Dan Vortent on bockade or upgodily batu pentive chip witte wilable about every monta x Muro popular games ondopplications Top Oun rockoge includes Gomes Master and Corpo Moncluded fotoon). Commoder het of the Pacife fighting 40 Comanche Monum Kayboard Nom CWT) Basic Package include Como che Cyclic Bed to 22. Measommang 23 Secret We t 24 Service et Alosaryone hom 1990 oyan lo Simplicity of the B2EECE Just press code tomat ENTER and you one of to play KONOMINERT MOR Matt Land Nor ANCO 2 Kaboord Normal We 2. GOD 14 ond 27 Soforte 24 U nderworld 29 Wing Commande world out Almennt B 15 in KITANCHITA TANIMAMO RAZ ! Hondtoernor na trotondolo Corang Viel para normation for Sildenando No Battery or S u red on the Most Splendor Moth o Run Comel Master Keyboard coord to allow this on the doo incomforga Soveso corro Touch membrane underneath Mats 35 Light Weight 5th) sector portable comptes 2 Orion ! DAR A Corbet fight of the intruder VIGO yngre 36 .Com em queants IBM AL 284, 384,406,32, fondy AT or 100% Corponble restoran derworld ton KATTE 1. Tur 150 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 Circle Reader Service #169 "


"HOPASTORM scerlo001061190 sca C000227920 AW 7 348R00000577829 chic231 10 Abenta THE FORECAST FOR OCTOBER LOOKS SUPER! \"... Has Rebel Assault well and truly licked.\" Edge Magazine ATUA  Psygnosis, Limited NOVASTORM and all other related trademarks, likenesses, and art are trademarks of Psygnosis, Limited. Rebel Assault is a registered trademark of LucasArts Entertainment Company. Psygnosis 675 Massachusetts Ave. Cambridge, MA 02139 (617) 497-7794 Circle Reader Service #177 "


"REVIEW False Dawn Humanity Has No Tomorrow In Sierra's OUTPOST by Martin E. Cirulis NLIKE MOST COMPUTER decision of their own, and so I shall hold of cool looking spaceships and buildings GAMES, OUTPOST WAS forth on OUTPOST, regardless how much from the generic SF backlot; instead you DESIGNED TO EXPAND AND it may pain me. are graced with actual designs and plans, grow. To make this stratbeautiful renditions straight from NASA egy possible, there came CHICKEN LITTLE'S REVENGE think tanks to your CD-ROM. None of a time when we had to stop adding feaThe premise for OUTPOST is both sound those dubious faster-than-light drives or tures to the current installment and reand fascinating, especially in light of transporters for you; this quest is underlease it into the world, much as any other Jupiter's recent cosmic fender-bender taken with engineering governed by the parents (game developers) who must rewith a broken-up comet. In the near fustrictest of scientific laws, a tribute to hulease their offspring (digital children) to ture of OUTPOST, just as Carl Sagan has manity's ingenuity and achievements inlead their own lives when they reach ma been warning us, a large comet makes an stead of a simple flight of fancy. turity (when they're ready to kick them illegal lane change and heads straight for out the door). With this approach in Earth. This multi-kilometer wrecking ball \"LET'S PUT THE MALL mind, the following items mentioned in promises to ruin an entire afternoon with OVER THERE\" the Outpost manual did NOT make it a gigaton explosion that causes enough If you've managed to pack well and into the final version environmental choose the right destination, you'll be of the game...\" OUTPOST fallout to make lucky enough to make planetfall on some The preceding Price: $69.95 our planet look hard little rock pile that will probably reparagraph is a direct System: 386 like a Union semble one of the more inhospitable quote from the 25MHz or better Carbide train real-estate locations in our own Solar SysREAD.ME file that ac(486-33MHz ing film. But tem. (Oh yes, you had to go far away to strongly companies OUTPOST before it does, a be as miserable as you could have been recommended). and your first big clue 4MB RAM, 5MB few industrialon some planet in our own system. Some that all is not what it hard drive ists who still clever scientist pointed out that the same seems in this much space, mouse, OUTPOST have faith in event that had dragged the earth-killer awaited strategy CD-ROM, the space pro into our lives was going to cause an eon's game. Perhaps the Windows 3.1; supports most major sound gram and have hard rain of comets all throughout the cards. Floppy version also available. powers that be at obviously been Sol System, and therefore nothing mereProtection: None Sierra should have Designer: Bruce Balfour watching ly interplanetary was going to be much made sure that their Publisher: Sierra On-Line \"When Worlds safer than poor doomed Terra Firma. A child was fully clothed Coarsegold, CA Collide\" on the somewhat questionable rationale, but if it before they kicked the (800) 757-7707 Late Show de were the only logical shorthand in the poor thing out the cide to build a game it could be easily overlooked.) Undoor, a tribute to the proverb, \"Haste giant colonization ship to save a handful fortunately, given the state of Slowermakes waste.\" In this case, the haste of humans and, hopefully, a heck of a lot Than-Light travel, you and your crew turned a game that should have been a of frozen genetic material. Oddly were frozen for the long relativistic trip, milestone into a very pretty wreck. To be enough, they pick you to captain this and a nasty surprise awaits you upon honest, the READ.ME quote, a slick com enormous back-door clause, save humanawakening bination of rationalizations and omisity from its own short-sightedness, and In a dubious triumph of dysfunctional sions, sums up the OUTPOST experience re-establish the species on some other personalities over common sense, (warnand the forces behind it with such eloworld orbiting a strange and distant star. ing: another logic shorthand event apquence and irony that it could stand Now what distinguishes this game from proaches) you discover that some bozo alone as a review. On the other hand, the others that have worked the \"ragtag fleet and half your crew have buggered off editors at CGW insist that details are imof humans\" theme is the background. with half your precious equipment, havportant to allow the reader to make a fair OUTPOST doesn't just hand you a bunch ing decided that seeding humanity again 152 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"256-color VGA displays 0933 you've ever seen. Plus an advanced smooth scrolling, head-on perspective. Incredible cinematics. And state-of-the-art digitized voices, sizzling sound effects and breath-taking music. Cyclones No, we're not talking about twisters that wipe out trailer parks in the Midwest. We're referring to Cybernetic Clones, deadly creations of an alien race bent on Earth's conquest. To add insult to injury, these CyClones are actually captured humans transformed into fleshsteel monstrosities! As Earth's defender armed with hi-tech weaponry, you're dying to jump into action. Especially when this futuristic adventure promises some of the most spectacular full-motion video ** MEET CYCLONESS HEAD-ON Catapulting you into a total multimedia experience! TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call 1-800245-4525 with Visa or MasterCard (U.S. & Canada only, please) On CD-ROM and 3.5' disks for IBM & Compatibles This ad uses actual images from the game, a preview of Cyclones' awesome graphics. 1994 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. Sie "


"Step Cunguration Satu Cara f'olunda Find Latin Tirztut L ast Landet C . Sunday To foto Star Solar The BIVSI ATE Tigrafie We start Intusse Cupt on well 11 Grbic GIVE Ube = NNN-===== ti Het 7 Timary at 127 Alpha Centauri Rabumine could reasonably hope to be ly, as is the case with most other good well-informed of his options ideas in this game, it has either been and capabilities, at least for shafted or just not given the chance to be his initial state. Your explorefined to an acceptable level. Without ration, colonization, and question this is one of the worst Windows conquest of an alien world is applications I have ever seen. OUTPOST supposed to be full of mysseems almost deliberately to be wallowing teries and surprises, but one in all that is bad about the interface while of them shouldn't be trying scrupulously avoiding any of the advanto figure out how your own tages. equipment and facilities Before you think I am being terribly work. This is what a clear, unforgiving about this, please consider concise and large rule book the following: OUTPOST runs dreadfully should be for. Unfortunateslow on most 486-66s with 4MBs of memly, Sierra decided that this ory: literally five seconds to execute the GALACTIC GAVIN'S USED STARSHIPS The ship configuration was an unnecessary luxury average command or update the graphic setup allows you to select a variety of accessories, from for a colony manager. The window, and this is with 30MBs of info Tokamak reactors to geological probes-racing trim not OUTPOST manual is barely dumped onto a fast hard drive; some included. bigger than the CD case and 16MBs machines barely run faster. The is actually thinner, making various graphic and information windows with 200 or less people on a hostile world for 90-odd pages of large type and even are non-scaleable and cannot be reduced isn't quite difficult enough to make us all larger margins, with 20 pages given over to icons to speed things up. The whole forget our petty differences and show to chrome or marketing information and simulation hogs so much processing powsome solidarity. Although this suspicious another ten pages dedicated Site plot twist does provide you with your to features not even supportcompetition-a \"rebel\" colony-some ed by this version of the other premise, such as a second colony game. This leaves the player ship, could have provided the same dewith a very thin wafer of invelopment without straining the player's formation indeed. credulity. This manual is so incomFrom this point on, OUTPOST is inplete and unhelpful that the tended to run as a hard-edged, complex, fact that there is a very large SURFACE open-ended developmental simulation strategy guide available on in the tradition of Maxis' classic, SIMCIthe market for another 20 TY. The player places tiles on the terrain bucks might just make OUTthat represent various high-tech facilities POST owners very angry and and habitats, along with mines to supply paranoid. They will gladly UN P > your colony with raw materials and labs pay money to find out the to supply you with discoveries that will hidden workings and subtle ALIEN METROPOLIS The colony on Beta Hydri 1 may not make your life easier and perhaps some strategies of a game, but they resemble Hometown U.S.A, but its domes provide an Earth-like of your decisions harder. There is no should not have to add to the environment for the Terran expatriates who dwell on this free lunch here: resources are vitally imcost of a $50 piece of softfaraway planet. portant. Without resources, life-sustainware just to find out how it ing facilities can grind to a halt, and with actually is used. Given the reaction to this er that running the game without rethem, your life. Development always has tactic, which is used by both OUTPOST membering to close all background to be balanced against survival, research and Electronic Art's SEAWOLF, this is a applications such as the AFTER DARK against day-to-day needs. And all the trend best left at the feet of the marketscreen saver is a guarantee of some kind while, you live in fear of the meteoring whiz who dreamed it up so he/she will of fatal crash. Unless it has all of your sysstrike, solar flare or some other unprebe in the perfect position to be booted tem to itself, OUTPOST will violate system dictable disaster that could spell the end out the door when he/she bends over to integrity more often than a busload of for what's left of humanity. pick it up. Senators at a Gullible Young Thing ConSounds great, doesn't it? Unfortunatevention. This kind of sloppy utilization ly, in the tradition of the quote that \"WHAT BUG THROUGH should only be found in a program unopened this review, this description, YON WINDOWS BREAKS?\" der development, not a marketable prowhile truthful, leaves out much of what Designing OUTPOST as a Windows appligram. Even if all else in OUTPOST was up could be considered the truth. cation from the ground up seemed like a to specs, this interface would make the great idea in a game that wanted to imsim unplayable to many consumers, unREADING BETWEEN THE LINES merse you in the data stream of a simulaless there is a big market of people who OUTPOST is supposed to be, according to tion, giving you the feel that you actually enjoy staring at the screen while their drithe marketing pitch, a game of details are in control of a vast facility through a ves access for an hour and a half out of a and decisions, and as such the player computer control desktop. Unfortunatetwo hour session. Ce 4 Tando MUNE 154 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"Q.Q.P's Strategies of the Month The Fleet By:Steve Cohen There are many strategies for defense. One of the most popular methods is to put a submarine in the harbor and anchor it there. This works quite well in many cases, but remember there are many other defensive methods. One of my favorites is to use damaged ships to defend ports that have shipyards. This way the damaged ship, repairs itself, and the city is defended as well. Another method is, having a string of carriers anchored at a crucial passage, thus sighting the incoming ships won't be too much of a problem. Be cautious, the ruthless computer opponent can overcome these strategies ! QUOTES FROM THE EXPERTS \"The Grandest Fleet is a fun game, and one that should live a good long life on many | gamer's hard drives.\" -M. Evan Brooks, Computer Gaming World \"This game [The Grandest Fleet] is hot and QQP deserves to reap what it has sown\" -Ted, Computer Game Review This is what great gaming is all about. -M. Evan Brooks, Computer Gaming World And once ...it's relatively easy to get into, thanks to a well-designed interface. you are into it, you'll have a hard time stopping. -William R. Trotter, PC Gamer Bridge | Olympiad concerne les \"Bridge Olympiad\" is receiving rave reviews from customers across the world as one of the best new bridge games on the market. I could not begin to give strategies on bridge, for this would take volumes. There are many fantastic books that teach the nuances of this \"Easy to play, tough to master\" card game. e QQP's reputation for producing top-notch strategy games gets another boost with Bridge Olympiadanother winner. -Joe Novicki, PC Gamer entration for producing top-notch strategy games are on Great graphics, and smooth interface makes for quick play against strong opponents. -PC Gamer In the soon to be released Perfect General II wait until you see the Elephant Tanks. They are moving fortresses and we're having a lot of fun with them. The Pure \"The Pure Wargame\" has many subtleties. When moving pieces, it is an excellent idea to move in smaller steps. This enables you to keep an eye on the fatigue level of your troops and their remaining movement points. We encourage people to post their strategies and comments in the various forums on the computer networks. There are many great strategies on the networks. Quantum Quality Productions 495 Highway 202 Flemington, N.J. 08822 (908) 788-2799 Compuserve 75300, 3223 Genie OOP Delphi QQP Circle Reader Service #179 computer ha r "


"Betallydri 1 1 THE THREE FACES OF OUTPOST were making a plausibility error by a facbeen billed for months as a tough, heartApart from these technical problems, the tor of ten or more, but can you possibly less simulation of just how hard it would game itself seems to have suffered from imagine people living on the edge of surbe to survive in the cold universe is not resome sort of identity crisis since the last vival all leaving their relatively safe underally very hard at all. Oh, there are bad time I saw it. (Martin Cirulis wrote a Sneak ground living areas to crowd into the mistakes in game play bordering on bugs Preview of Outpost for the December 1993 issue barely livable command center on the surthat make it almost impossible to win (for of CGW. For a discussion of that preview and face merely because there were some bad instance, mines burn out at a ridiculous our preview policy in general, see the rate given how small your manpower is), Interface column in this issue-Ed.) but as far as toughing it out against the elInstead of being a straightforward, ements goes, life ain't so bad. Even at the no-nonsense simulation of life on hardest level, disasters are not even close your own in the great void, OUTto being as tense as they should be, espePOST seems to start to waffle at cially in the first 200 turns of your colony's every turn. Be it from either techlife. It's tedious and frustrating, not a nailnical problems or some desire to biting thrill. \"lighten\" the game up to make it more accessible, this game is sufPREMATURE BIRTH fering from a multiple personality I will make no qualms about it. I had some syndrome that would make Freud high hopes for OUTPOST, shared by others, weep. that were not ridiculously high, but repreIn a game intended to get you sented an optimism that the game would to care about the outcome of the WHO NEEDS A BULLET TRAIN? Cargo lander #4 is ready to be something deeper and more involving mission, you are suddenly presentroll, strengthening the economy of this budding colony. than what had been seen so far. Instead, ed with \"wacky\" bits of humor that the word \"OUTPOST\" and the phrase seem misplaced and tend to pull you out girls living next door? Ridiculous, no? Yet \"What went wrong?\" are conversational of the simulation for a quick, \"Well that totally normal for the citizens of OUTPOST, Siamese twins. What did go wrong? Anywas stupid\" chuckle. Some of these events who are obviously from the radical fundabody who might know is refusing to acare merely questionable, such as the mentalist division of NASA. Humor is knowledge anything is wrong at the time choice of reply for your Al assistant or good, but this kind of poorly thought out of this review. Stuff happens, I guess, and news reports that are sillier and far less game play is worse than useless. the world isn't a fair place. Puppies continE NTER Another critical contradiction in ue to get run over, \"Full House\" is still a OUTPOST is how it handles informapopular TV show, and publishers continue tion. Specifically there is a lot of into wreck good games by sending them to formation, but none of the things market far too soon. you really need to know are there. Personally a part of me still has hopes Six months ago, this game was sold for this game, and maybe a year or more to me as an intricate dance of needs, from now we may find ourselves laughing wants and disasters where resource about the rocky start of a truly exceptional management would be the key to simulation. But for today, I can't recomsuccess and information would be mend this game to even the most die-hard the player's best ally, better than in space game enthusiasts for anything but any sim of this kind seen so far. the idea and the quality of the artwork. Guess what? Even though the ads Otherwise, all we can do is keep our ear to HEAVENLY BODIES While the gameplay in OUTPOST is halfand documentation for this game the ground, our money in our wallets, and baked at best, the same cannot be said of the art. This give you the idea this might still be wait to see what the inevitable tide of exquisitely detailed probe was lovingly rendered in 3D true, it isn't. Imagine running the patches and add-on disks will bring, STUDIO last hope of mankind with the help of an advanced AI and still you have useful than the SimCry 2K Daily News no idea of the following: what your total THE EDITORS SPEAK (i.e. when my colony is suffering resource consumption in critical minerals OUTPOST brownouts, I need to know what facilities is versus what your resource production is; are being allected and how bad, not that where your supply trucks full of these minRATING the citizens are putting together an assassierals are or what their status is; what exactnation committee to remove me from ofly is killing your citizens and where they PROS Great graphics, great confice.) Even worse are the times when the are dying (i.e. during construction work or cept, great promise, but.... CONS ....its great ideas were humor actually disrupts the sim itself, for peacefully in their sleep, or from lack of botched in the execution phase. Bugexample, when your colony breaches 400 air during lunch); or even what the exact gy, incomplete, and with grossly incitizens or so and, if you have not created implications of your scientific discoveries sufficient documentation, this game a police station, a Red Light District sudare, other than what you can infer from is to Sierra what the Challenger disdenly pops up. Now it is bad enough that the name of the discovery. aster was to NASA. nobody on the design team realized they But most ironically, this game that has 156 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"OUTSTANDING DESIGN WINTER CES 1994 GAME BYTES MAGAZINE GRANDESTE FLEET A CONCEUX zowe 4 00P Quantum Quality Productions, loc Only one fleet will be left afloat in this thrilling masterpiece from QQP. Experience the grueling campaigns, the agony of defeat and the exhilaration of VICTORY!!! Develop cultural resources and manage the growth of your population. Allocate natural resources to build missile sites, radar stations, shipbuilding facilities and SUPERSHIPS. It is up to you to destroy your nemesis... or end up in Davy Jones' Locker.  MODEM PLAY (A QQP Hallmark)  City Economics-Cultural and Industrial aspects  Campaign Play  Player History  A wide selection of ship types Random Maps-unlimited variation  A truly challenging Al Battles Include: Falkland Campaign, Battle of Northcape, The Bismark-Tirpitz Connection, Surigao Straight, Yamamoto's Trap, etc. Plus some \"What if\" Battles  A tactician's and strategist's delight!!! \"The Grandest Fleet\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: 1-908-788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1994 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #180 "


"REVIEW : On Target, More Or Less Sierra's ALIEN LEGACY Quests For A Place To Hang Humanity's Hat by Martin E. Cirulis OCCIDG THE FATE HEN A HOUSE IS BEING BUILT, yet. ALIEN LEGACY is a solid game that rethe UNS Tantalus, takes another 16 years THE CARPENTERS INVOLVED flects the adventure and danger of trying to be built, but thanks to better engine AGREE AHEAD OF TIME HOW to colonize an alien star system...give or technology the second ship will arrive 21 accurate their measurements take a little. odd years ahead of your vessel. So in remust be in terms of what is ality, your job should be pretty cushy as sometimes referred to as the Fudge FacIF IT AIN'T ONE THING, you will be functioning more as a re-suptor. This factor is expressed as how close IT'S ANOTHER ply vessel than a colonization ship. Unto perfect a measurement has to be, as in, Once again the poor old Earth has been fortunately for you, things are even worse \"This hall is twenty feet, give or take half closed for renovations, but this time it isthan you could have imagined. When you an inch.» Trump n't a cosmic wanderer are awakened from suspended animaTowers is proba ALIEN LEGACY that does the job; intion, it may as well be a Monday mornbly \"give or take a stead, it's a bunch of ing, because the first two pieces of news Price: $45.95 sixteenth\" while a aliens from Alpha to greet your blurry eyes are the last System tree-house might Requirements: Centauri who decide transmission from a beaten Earth and a be built along the IBM compatible to simplify Galactic scanner report stating that not only is lines of \"give or 386-20MHz or diplomacy by making there no sign of your sister-ship in the take a couple of better, 4MB sure they are the only Beta Caeli system, but there's no trace of inches\" dependRAM, VGA ones left to inherit the any human presence in the system at all. graphics, 24 MB ing how tired the stars. Humanity's reYes, it's going to be one of those cenhard drive adult in charge is. space, mouse; sponse is to build a turies. As it turns out, supports AdLib, massive war fleet to Sierra's runner PAS, Gravis Ultrasound, and Sound grind out towards AlSIMSPACE WITH A TWIST up SF coloniza Blaster sound cards. pha C in order to exIn ALIEN LEGACY you are faced with two tion game, ALIEN Protection: None plain our wants and things: an open-ended game of colony Designer: Joe Ybarra LEGACY, epitoPublisher: Sierra On-Line needs. At the same creation and a mystery that directly afmizes the same Coarsegold, CA time the UN decides fects your survival. Whatever happened idea in software (800) 757-7707 to hedge its bets and to the UNS Tantalus could just as easily design and storybuilds two huge, slowhappen to you unless you get some anline. Interestingly enough, it carries offer-than-light colony vessels to send in the swers in a hurry. Even if you solve this its intentions much more successfully opposite direction just in case these Cenenigma, there are other plot threads than its close company relative, OUTPOST, taurians are tougher than they look. The hardwired into this game that will keep which was meant to have a much higher Beta Caeli System looks the most promisyou on your toes until you achieve the degree of accuracy. Sometimes it's better ing to the collected minds of the UN, goal of faster-than-light travel. At this to have a tree house you can have fun in, and the plan is to create a bolt hole for point the game grades your performance rather than a gleaming office tower the species just in case. by how many colonies you have founded, where somebody forgot to put in the You are chosen to captain the first veshow prosperous they have been, and how plumbing and the elevators don't work sel, the UNS Calypso. A second vessel, many new discoveries you have made. 158 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"WARNING Contains Mature Subject Matter TM VOYEUR DON'T GET CAUGHT! YOU'LL GET AN EYE-FULL OF EROTIC EXCITEMENT AS YOU PEER INTO YOUR NEIGHBORS' SORDID LIVES IN THE INTERACTIVE AND WICKEDLY SENSUAL WHODUNNIT, VOYEUR. POLITICAL BLACKMAIL...MURDER...SEDUCTIVE INTRIGUE... YOU'LL SEE IT ALL. BUT WILL YOU ONLY WATCH—HIDDEN LIKE A TRUE VOYEUR-OR WILL YOU STEP INTO THE DRAMA TO VIDEOTAPE THE ACTION AND RECORD THE EVIDENCE? THIS PHILLIPS CD-I HIT IS NOW AVAILABLE ON CD-ROM FOR IBM COMPUTERS AND IS COMING SOON FOR THE MACINTOSH. VOYEUR HAS THE CRITICS RAVING: \"VOYEUR IS A SENSUAL THRILLER THAT REALLY PUTS YOU INTO THE GAME.\" ELECTRONIC GAMING MONTHLY \"VOYEUR IS A MARVELOUS CREATIVE ACCOMPLISHMENT.\" COMPUTER GAME REVIEW \"THIS GAME BRINGS OUT THE VOYEUR IN ALL OF US...AND TRULY SHOWS HOW MUCH FUN A MURDER-MYSTERY/INTERACTIVE MOVIE CAN BE. HIGHLY RECOMMENDED.\" COMPUTER PLAYER OREC REED REC CEO CD-ROM CINEMATIC MULTIMEDIA PHILIPS Tatapang INTERACTIVE     OREC SE R AM Convention 90. leroy Predom 1993 Milier interactive Media Ma For more information, call 1-800-969-GAME. Or see your local retailer. Circle Reader Service #174 "


"w 81100 ana Advisva Hoe? nan You are free to continue playing after uning areas for the presence covering the final secret of FTL travel, of resources or anomalies, but without a goal, the colony simulation or click on the same quadisn't detailed enough in itself to keep rant again to send your most gamers interested. ship even lower and the To help you run the salvation of huscreen will switch to a manity, you can fall back on the advice skewed 3-D detailed view and observations of the department of the surface. From here heads of your crew. There are five deyou can pick up scientific partments, Navigation, Engineering, Sciinsights or find clues to ence, Military and Computing, and they the fate of the Tantalus, are available anytime to give their spin or even retrieve individual CONSULT NAVIGATOR on the current crisis. As an aid to the chunks of minerals or enplayer they are more or less effective. ergy. COMMAND CENTRAL Once the Calypso has made planetfall, it Their advice is a little obvious and someAlthough you do travel becomes the headquarters and warehouse of your new colony. times bad calls are pretty easy to spot over the surface of a world, (i.e., your Military commander seems to and some of the terrain and backdrops sumable needs of a thriving colony: Minhave studied diplomacy and race relaare interesting, don't be expecting any erals, Power and Life Support. While extions at Klingon U.), but this aspect of kind of flight sim experience. Your intertra power plants and habitats can be built the game helps to give you a better sense action with the world at this level is highto provide the latter two resources, minof being in charge, as operals can only be found on worlds, and posed to simply doing Gaeal you will need ground based mines to proeverything yourself. Bea vide raw materials to the Calypso and any other orbital platform you might build. TOTING THEM Ferrying supplies, people, and robots BALES around your system is the most involving Regardless of the deand possibly tedious part of your job, but mands of the plot line, Revation: luckily, ALIEN LEGACY provides a pipeline your real job is the explomission for shuttles to run the same route ration and colonization of carrying the same set of supplies for multhe Beta Caeli system, and tiple runs. your single tool for this job ** HIS Mad is your shuttle craft. Your COLONIES SIM-PLY SIM-PLE SIMS shuttles will comb the surThe model you work with for the colony face of worlds and asterMAYORS IN SPACE You design your colony like you would in map is a very simple \"pick your tile, place oids looking for raw SIMCITY, but urban planning is much less a concern in ALIEN LEGACY your tile\" system. Power plants, habitats, materials and clues, erasthan in Maxis' city simulator. labs and factories are your main strucing annoying life forms, tures, while defense lasers and shields can and building new colonies. And once these ly abstract. All items of interest on the be built if the necessary technologies are colonies are built, it is the shuttle craft that surface are represented by icons, and you researched. Transport lines and starports will transport supplies from the haves to can either pick them up or blow them up are provided automatically. Even though the have-nots. In fact, much of the game with the touch of a mouse button; they factories are able either to mine raw matehinges on the construction, maintenance exist purely as targets and nothing on the rials or build items, not much time will be and improvement of your shuttle fleet. surface will shoot back When your Science advisor suggests any at you or run away. It's STATUS kind of research that may help to improve not the most exciting your shuttle design, jump right on it. The thing in the world, but manual states that your fleet should only this interface will still be as big as you need it to be; it fails to serve to give you a sense mention that you will always need it to be of exploration and as large as possible. sight-seeing. Your interface between worlds and The Calypso's job is your shuttles is a form of Mercator map done just getting you to ENERGY divided into a simple grid system. To get this choice vacation area there, you simply order a ship into orbit and now it has become around a planetary body; once it's there, a living-platform and you will be given a view of the Mercator warehouse, the center man for that world. Pick a square and of your new home but in KICKING UP MOON DUST Your shuttles can go in low, scanning a your ship will drop from orbit like IBM need of raw resources to planet's surface for resources and signs of the Tantalus, your stock and hover above that area. From keep going. The game missing sister ship. there you can either scan the surround recognizes three conLEAVE LOAD 160 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"It's 1999 and the Russian bear is Back! Zhirinovsky has seized the reins of power in the Kremlin, and he's got his eye on warm-water ports and rich oil deposits in the Persian Gulf and Indian Oceans. While the Kirov cruises toward Bahrain, and Typhoons prowl the Gulf, where is the United States? The 5th FLEET has arrived! Your're in command of a U.S. Navy task force, with a full range of hardware at your command. Nimitz class carriers, with their Tomcats and Hornets. Ticonderoga-class cruisers, searching the seas and skies with powerful radar. F-117A Stealth Fighters and P-3 Orions support you from airbases. Proper use of air cover is essential to victory Tilauan Satellite's-eye view SL EFLEET TE LIO Hi-res graphics give you crisp, Vivio paps. Actual screens may vary. As a fleet commander you've got better things to worry about than the endless details of running a ship. Don't worry-your computer will handle the non-essential work, leaving you to focus on strategy and command. If you're good enough, the sea lanes remain open, the Russians don't get their client states, and America's interests are served. Fail, and your ships are sunk, along with the future of the free world. 5th FLEET gives you a new engine-a new design-and a new standard for Modern Naval warfare. Play against a wily computer opponent, at variable levels of aggression and difficulty, \"hot-seat\" a friend on the same computer, or play via E-Mail. Whichever way you play the game, you'll agree—5th FLEET splashes the competition! The Avalon Hill Game Company Available on IBM PC or compatible, 386 or better processor, 2MB RAM, HD 3.5\" Floppy, Hard Drive, 4517 Harford Rd Baltimore, MD 21214 VGA Graphics Card & Monitor, Mouse, Soundblaster or compatible sound cards. CD-ROM coming soon! Voice: (410) 254-9200; Fax: (410) 254-0991 If 5th Fleet cannot be found locally, please CALL TOLL FREE (800) 999-3222 Circle Reader Service #44 "


"COM Clues OUS regular pilots and certainlu Our robots might miss. spent sweating the fine points of urban decisions about planning. Your primary concern will be what to research supply and demand as each new structure and what to let lie. you build requires resources for its initial Discover them all construction and then a yearly supply and let Einstein amount to maintain it. As technology imsort them out. proves you will be able to increase the 1 power and efficiency of your facilities, but EYEBALLING IT their increasing resource demands and ALIEN LEGACY's relimited building space will drive you to inliance on the \"close Bridge Advice crease the number of your colonies and enough\" philosoLet me lead an exploration teat. Captain. I'm sure I'll be able to find specialize their function in your grand phy is both its plan to save humanity. strength and weak Something on hea and Gaea is controlling the attacks of the diota, sir We must find out who or what is leading the life Forms and destroy it With labs hard at work generating reness. It keeps a search points in various disciplines, your high level of playaDONT CALL US... As high commander of the colony, you must rifle through advisors will come to you from time to bility, but someresumes to decide which crew members will be assigned the crucial time with inventions they think should be times the simplicity missions. researched. Again, the model here is very robs the game of simple; if you have enough research satisfaction. Nailpoints in the right areas you can order biting interplanetary combat is a matter of This is a space game that delivers althem spent on a certain technology. After ordering a shuttle with a missile on board most all of what it promises. That alone a set number of turns, the technology will to go to a planet and wait; if an alien ship marks it as a superior product to the far be yours. The only nice touch here is that arrives, one of them will blow up with a more technically advanced OUTPOST, sometimes there will be no practical apbang sound and no graphic except for a which in a better world would have been plication for the resulting technology or pull of smoke. Being a combination of relto ALIEN LEGACY as The Abyss was to it may require another breakthrough to atively simple elements might be a drawLeviathan. The documentation is clear become useful. Just don't bother trying to back, but the story is interesting enough, and expansive, the game runs quickly, figure out which is which, as the game especially for the first half, to drive away and I only had one crash throughout the rarely will stress your research budget to any sense of boredom in all but the more entire 100 plus hours I put into it. The the point where you have to make hard jaded of space-gamers. story entertains and, while the level of \"hard\" SF is only a little higher than your average Next Generation episode, it does manage to instill a sense of reality to the proceedings in spite of some of the rationalizations that are provided. If you are looking for an action-packed and graphically stunning extravaganza that will leave you grasping for your heart medicine, or a highly technical descent into the trials and tribulations of humanity's future in space, then perhaps $40 Aces of the Deep this game isn't for you. On the other Send us $2 $47 Across the Rhine hand, if you are interested in an enjoyfor our color $43 Armored Fist able game and a mystery that stretches catalog containing $46 Battlecruiser 3000 full descriptions and $46 Colonization across an alien solar system that will take up-to-date pricing on $40 Della V the average gamer better than 40 hours the latest and greatest $45 Doom 2 CD to get through, then this could be the titles for IBM and the $40 Heroes of Might & Magic $40 Master of Magic next on your play list. Mac. Also comes with $45 Out of this World 2 a $2 off coupon. $48 Perfect General 2 THE EDITORS SPEAK $52 Phantasmagoria CD We accept advance S58 Star Trek: TNG CD ALIEN LEGACY purchases and game $47 System Shock reservations. Same$43 Victory at Sea RATING ****1/2 day shipping for orders Call Wing Commander 3 received before 4 pm ET. $47 Wings of Glory PROS An entertaining, straight-for$42 Zephyr ward, easy to learn strategic adven1-800-247-5447 lure. CONS Due to its linear storyline (the DUCOVER second half of which is a bit weak), this is probably not a game that will One W. Seminary St., Brandon, VT 05733 7am-12pm Eastern Time, Monday-Saturday get more than one play-through. Only a Titan can provide colossal Ati mail-order service. GAMES DUQUR VISA VISA EEPEROL Circle Reader Service #117 162 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"PICK-UP THE PHONE AND PICK TWO GAMES FREE! LARRY ACES EUROPE Crawl Inside the mond of al Killer A fun fillet Mienture where y OPEN SEASON DARYL E GATES POLTE QUEST GABRIEL KNIGHT SHADOWS OF DARKNESS SINS OF THE EATHERS. SERVED SIERRA 1-800-795-5979 Choose Any Two Sierra Games FREE When You Switch to Sprint!* directory assistance, customer service, even instant credit for wrong numbers. And we do it 24 hours a day! Sprint\" long-distance service just became more valuable up to $159.90** more! Now, when you switch your home long-distance service to Sprint, you can select any Sierra game, free! After enjoying six months of highquality long-distance, you may qualify for a second free Sierra game.*** Only Sprint can offer you a nationwide 100% digital, fiber optic network that provides the long-distance quality and reliability you need. Experience for yourself Sprint's \"fiber-optic\" clarity that makes both your long-distance calls and PC data transmissions crystal clear and virtually error free. Unsurpassed call and data clarity is Just one of the many benefits you will enjoy as a Sprint customer. the most, including international calls-even if the called person is with a competitive long-distance carrier. The Most will also provide an automatic 20 percent discount off all calls to Sprint's millions of dial 1 customers, anytime and anywhere. When the person you talk to the most in a given month is a Sprint Customer, Sprint will combine both discounts for an effective overall savings of 36 percent on calls to that number.**** No Risk Guarantee Your satisfaction is guaranteed: we'll pick up the cost of switching your long distance to Sprint, and will even pay to switch you back if you are not completely satisfied. (Some restrictions apply.) So why not sign up for Sprint and receive the clarity, savings and service you want while getting two Sierra games you enjoy? Sprint Save on Long Distance When You're away from home too! Sprint's FONCARDSM lets you continue to take advantage of long-distance, calling and savings even when you're away from home. The FONCARD is free, with cards available for every member of your family. SIERRA The Most A Unique Calling Plan Sprint offers an unprecedented longdistance calling plan called The Most available now for all customers. The Most will save Sprint Customers 20 percent off already low rates on calls each month to whomever you talk to The Service You Deserve At Sprint, we make no compromises when it comes to dependable, personal service we do it all; operator services, Offer valid only in the U.S. and for new Sprint customers, Not valid for FONCARD-only orders. One offer per household. Certain restrictions apply. Retail value of Sierra Games. Offer valid on any current Sierra product with a retail value of $79.95 or below To qualify for a second game, the customer must bill 520 per month in 3 of the first 6 months. THE MOST discounts apply to in-state/intraLATA calls only where authorized Circle Reader Service #164 "


"REVIEW RUEREP Winning OLIMPIAD OLYMPIAD NBC Hearts In Spades QQP's BRIDGE OLYMPIAD Turns Bridge Into A Team Event by Terry Lee Coleman unaM hen I first started playing for its strategy game line, should attempt your partners in every aspect of the Bridge, Charles Goren was to outbid its competitors with BRIDGE game, and it is on their shoulders you King and Omar Sharif was OLYMPIAD. will ride to victory or fall in disgrace. still a leading man on the silEach of these nicely drawn computer ver screen. More difficult OFF TO THE CONVENTION players are rated for how well they bid than Spades, less natural a game than When Will Shakespeare coined the and play-fair enough. But two other ratRummy, the cerebral aspects of Bridge phrase \"The play's the thing,\" he obviings are a bit strange. \"Aggressiveness\" is appealed to me in ously wasn't thinka reasonable rating, as it measures how a manner similar BRIDGE OLYMPIAD ing of Bridge. often your computer partner will attempt to chess. After all, While the world's to outbid the opposing team when they Price: $49.95 here was a game best can do much BRIDGE System are \"vulnerable\" (a bridge term for being with a history, and Requirements: more with a given a game ahead in a rubber match). Then one that required IBM compatible hand than the averthere is a separate rating for cheating,\" teamwork filled 386 or better, age weekend playwhich pertains not to their ability to see with nuance and VGA graphics, er, in Bridge, the opponents' cards-as one would expect 2MB hard drive subtlety galore. bidding is really an Al to cheat—but how often the comspace, mouse; Of course, like the thing. It often puter personality will bluff during bidsupports Ad Lib many games and Sound seems that WWII ding. which require pa Blaster sound cryptologists had Admittedly, bidding is all-important, tience and have a cards less difficulty but wouldn't it have made the game fairly steep learn # Of Players: 1 breaking the Ultra more exciting if the cheat rating was an ing curve, Bridge Protection: Documentation check code than a novice attempt by your partner to deliberately Designers: T-Time lost popularity in has with learning play the \"wrong\" card, thereby deceiving Publisher: QQP, Inc. the hectic 70s and Flemington, NJ new bidding conthe opposition? The occasional finesse 80s, its decline (908) 788-2799 ventions. which is not there, the partner who plays helped by bizarre BRIDGE OLYMPIAD the last trump too soon, is a part of products like Goren's Bridge for Two card does attempt to smooth the transition for Bridge in the real world. While these game. The first Bridge products for the new players. On the opening interface ploys do occasionally surface in PC were similar to early chess programs, screen, just to the right of the prim, OLYMPIAD, they seem serendipitous fairly easy to beat, often confusing, and proper, lovely and totally non-interactive rather than planned, and are generally even obviously cheating at times. The last National Bridge Club receptionist, too little, too late to affect the outcome of couple of years, however, have brought a OLYMPIAD offers a practice mode. As the a given hand. new generation of Bridge games, with cards sporting the official OLYMPIAD logo Finding a reasonable partner proved much stronger Al and enhanced features. are dealt, you can acquaint yourself with most difficult, because most of the NBC It is only fitting that QQP, long known the 12 members of the NBC. They will be team were loose cannon in the bidding op 164 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"The Dark Sun Rises Again! Advazced Dungeons & Dragons COMPUTELZO DARK SUN SORT SUOT CO WOUCH repare for the dawn of a new day in AD&De role-playing: The sequel to SSI's mega-hit SHATTERED LANDS is here! WAKE OF THE RAVAGER hurls you back to the scorching DARK SUN\" game world to battle the minions of the mighty Dragon of Ur Draxa! The sensory extravaganza of sights and sounds will overwhelm you: ever more spectacular full-screen graphics and cinematics plus digitized character voices and sound effects. It's going to be one hot summer when the Dark Sun rises again! On CD-ROM and 3.5\" disks for IBM & Compatibles TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call: 1-800-245-4525 with Visa or MasterCard (U.S. & Canada only, please). WHOSE DE UNOS Soest We Ceedby III $10 ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D. DARK SUN, the TSR logo and all TSR characters, character names, and the distinctive likenesses thereof are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR, Inc., Lake Geneva, WI. U.S.A. 1994 TSA, Inc. 1994 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. 256-color VGA displays "


"32 A 65J98746 Mon 1997 Contract: WOWO Declarer: MONTI Page play to be the most sober of gives only the most cursory explanation the lot, despite his disheveled of how to play and bid. The scant useful appearance. After a few pracinformation available is so terribly disortice rounds, we were off to the ganized that even veteran Bridge players rubber matches where I had a can get confused. Pity the poor novice rollicking time whipping up exposed to the American, Natural and on the pasty-faced Dave, the Precision bidding conventions on pages businesslike Janis and the 8-9, when the point system for evaluating free-wheeling John, with Stan a hand is not explained until page 38, afand I finishing in a dead heat ter a rambling discourse on the history of for first. Bridge! A sample rubber game does AK89892 A10A 927 The rubber matches inhelp, but by then the damage is done. volve playing a series of OLYMPIAD is no where near the Bridge games, switching partners at regular NO TRUMP IS A GOOD TRUMP Once you and your partner are intervals, so that on the same betting page, you can hone your finesse and one player ends up power play skills. with the single highest score. wars. I cannot begin to recall the number OLYMPIAD captures this essenof times we followed one convention or tial Bridge competition very another, only to have my partner bid a well, and learning to adapt to hand which simply wasn't there. The the different styles of your game proved this to me beyond any partners and opponents will doubt, due to the ability in practice mode sharpen anyone's play. This to replay the hand with all the cards facetakes much longer than it up. Eventually, I teamed with Stan, the should, however, due to the practice room tutor, who looks like somedismal documentation. Using on. Using STAN'S THE MAN This lineup is OK for a rubber match, but one nabbed Ben Franklin, fresh from a the excuse that there are hunare nunmake sure you leave Eric on the bench when you go mining night on the town, and crossed him with dreds of good Bridge books for Olympic Gold. a card shark. Ironically, I found Stan's on the market, the manual CA Eric Labin Bid Level Mornal Play Level:Hornal Aggressive:Less Cheating Feu Aserica John Anerlea Rachel Oplayer CA Triad Campaign System SIDELINE SOFTWARE ORDERS 1-800-888-9273 ONLY YOUR PC IMPORT & CLOSEOUT CONNECTION NEW PC TITLES TYPE New Gamemaster's Version 1.1 Total computer management of your role playing sessions. Use our characters and world or design your own. Complete integration of all FRP game functions. Tutorial included. Amazon Adventure Arcade Pool Sports Simulation Battle Isle 2 Floppy or CD ROM War Simulation Canon Fodder Arcade Strategy Central Intelligence (CD ROM) Strategy Chaos Engine Action Arcade Heimdall 2 Role Playing Game In Extremis Like \"Doom' Micro Machines Racing Arcade Overlord Flight Simulator Project X Arcade Rise of the Robots Fighting Game Robinson's Requiem Role Playing Game Universe Adventure World Cup USA (floppy or CD ROM) Sports Simulation Test Drive 3, Star Control, Hoverforce all THREE for only Corporation, F-14 Tomcal, Supremacy -all THREE for only PC MAGAZINES Get the latest news on the best PC titles from the U.S. & Europe! These high plass, full color magazines also feature demo-packed PLAYABLE cover DISKS OR CD ROMS with each issve! Titles include: PC Formal, PC Rorlew, PC Zone, PC Plus, PC Power, and PC Gamar! Your choice! Only $10 each! Features Realistic play. Context-sensitive help file. Prompts for each menu option and control. Easily set routes, targets, spell effect areas using the toolbar. All scenario playing commands accessible directly from the map display. Encounter generator weighted by location, terrain, population and environment. Example adventure included. COMP999 S2GOOGO Hook 9.95 Ishar, Legend of the Fortress 18.95 Il Came From the Desert 14.95 Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 9.95 Joe and Mac Caveman Ninja 9.95 King's Quest 6 21.95 Legacy (Microprose) 24.95 Legend of Kyrandia 21.95 Lemmings 2 28.95 Lil Davil 24.95 Mantis 24.95 Mavis Beacon Typing Tutor 9.95 Mike Ditka Football 18.95 Mig 29 Fulcrum 18.95 Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix 21.95 Obitus (Psyonasis) 9.95 Out of This World 21.95 Pacific Islands 21.95 Patriot 24.95 Populous & Data Disk 24.95 Power Monger 19.95 Premier Manager 2 21.95 Pushover 18.95 RBI Baseball 9.95 Rex Nebular 24.95 RoboCop 3 9.95 Sargon 59.95 Seal Team 24.95 Secret of Monkey Island 2 21.95 Seven Cities of Gold New Ed. 24.95 Shadowcaster 26.95 Shadowland's 18.95 Sim Ant 21.95 Sim Earth 21.95 Sim Life 18.95 Sleepwalker 18.95 Space Crusade 18.95 Spacewrecked 9.95 Special Forces 21.95 Spoils of War (RAW) 18.95 Star Lepians 21.95 Super Space Invaders 14.95 Super Tetris 14.95 Task Force 1942 (Microprose) 24.95 Team Yankee 21.95 The Immortal 19.95 The Lost Admiral 14.95 TV Sports Baseball 21.95 TV Sports Boxing 21.95 Trump Casino 2 14.95 Twilight 2000 16.95 Ultima 6 21.95 Utopia 18.95 V For Victory 21.95 W.W.F. 2 Wrestling 18.95 Waxworks 14.95 White Death (Raw) 18.95 Wing Commander Academy 24.95 Wizkid 18.95 World Class Leaderboard 9.95 Wrath of the Demon 16.95 Zool 21.95 SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Mastercard & Visa $5.00.C.O.D. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping. Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to change! No refunds of exchanges. Oefective products exchanped with same item. Products warrantied through Sideline. FAX ORDEAS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Info Call (305) 491.9519 DEALER INQUIRIES INVITED! 840 N.W. 57th Court, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33309 Maps Open multiple maps. Move characters from map to map. Calculate speed, ranges, line of sight and cover. Display creature and location markers. Combat Place encounters on map with one command. Set targets, execute automatic combat. Optional pursuit of targets and return fire. Results reported. Sneaking, hiding and searching. Set timers. Log events with game time. Characters Over 30 species templates. Integrated skills, movement, weapons, armor and inventory. Professions and backgrounds. Spellcasting System calculates spell level, area, range and other parameters. Set target point and display spell area using the Spell Tool. System Requirements IBM/Comp with Window 3.1 Minimum 5 megs hard drive space 4 megs of RAM. VISA MASTER CARD ORDERS (800) 784-1420 or (904) 494-3165 OR SEND CHECK/MONEY ORDER FOR S69.00 + $5.00 S&H TO Nawu Triad Institute PO Box 11246 Pensacola, FL 32524-1246 Circle Reader Service #253 DON'T MISS THESE DISCOUNT PC DEALS! A-320 Airbus 24.95 Contraptions 18.95 4-D Sports Boxing 18.95 Creepers (Psypnosis) 18.95 A-Train 26.95 Cyber Race 24.95 Action Stations 18.95 Dave Ledbetter Golf (Groens) 26.95 Ancient Art af War In Skies 24.95 Deluxe Strip Poker 2 18.95 Armageddon 18.95 Dracula 21.95 Arctic Barons 21.95 Dune 18.95 ATAC (Microprose) 24,95 Elvira 2 14.95 8-17 Bambar (Microprose) 24.95 Epic 21.95 Bard's Tale 3 18.95 Eternam (Drakhan 2) 18.95 BAT 2 21.95 F16 Falcon 9.95 Battlechess 18.95 First Samurai 9.95 Battle Isle 18.95 Flashback 24.95 Birds of Prey 21.95 Fool's Errand 16.95 Brutal Sports Football 18.95 Four Crystals of Trazar 21.95 Carmen USA Deluxe 21.95 Global Conquest (Micropose) 21.95 Castles 16.95 Hardball 3 21.95 Centurion Defender of Rome 18.95 Harpoon & Battle Set 2 18.95 Command HQ 18.95 Hero Quest 18.95 Circle Reader Service #107 "


"THE FIRST WONDER OF THECYBERWORLD, VIRTUAL VEGAS INC. CD-ROM WELCOMES YOU TO THE FOR MORE Availab INFO CALL THE FUTURE OF CASINO VIRTUAL VECAS HOTLh. 800-95-VEGAS PC&MAC GAMING ENTERTAINMENT. COME TO VIRTUAL VEGAS AND TM WANDER THROUGH A STUNNING CYBERCASINO WHILE BEAUTIFUL BLACKJACK DEALERS BECKON YOU DEALS TO THE TABLES. YOUR vo Lu MEONE GOAL: WIN BIG. HER GOAL: STEAL YOUR HEART AND EMPTY YOUR WALLET! THE MORE YOU PLAY THE MORE PLAYFUL IT GETS! WRITTEN BY THE EDITORS OF NATIONAL LAMPOON MAGAZINE AND PACKED WITH 600 MEGS OF STUNNING 3DRENDERED GRAPHICS, QUICKTIME VIDEO AND VOICE RECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY, VIRTUAL VEGAS IS THE FUTURE OF CASINO GAMING, AND THE FUTURE OF ENTERTAINMENT.  VIRTUAL VEGAS INC. DISTRIBUTED BY ELECTROMEDIA INC: (310) 315-3606 0 NL $29.95 AVAILABLE AT YOUR LOCAL RETAILER OR CALL: COMPUTER EXPRESS (800) 228-7449 MISSION CONTROL (800) 999-7995 Circle Reader Service #227 RETAIL "


"NEC BANK111 STARLITE ELECTRONIC teacher that Alfred SheinTEL: 800-552-9880 wold's Bridge Baron is. On FAX: 415-548-1639 the other hand, this game CD ROM DRIVE/SOUND CARDS was designed with stiff PANASONIC 562,2X,320MS 5159 competition as its goal. So, OLYMPIAD PANASONIC 562 EXTERNAL 5190 as soon as you're tired of MITSUMI FX 001,2X, 250MS 5135      IPH  n SONY CUD33A, 2X, 290MS SISO bouncing around fellow PLEXTOR 3028.2X 240MS SCSI IL $255 club members in rubber NEC CDR-510 3X,195MS SCSI II $355 AXT SOUND BLASTER PRO VALUE $75 matches, it's off to the big Cih SOUND BLASTER PRO 16 VALUE $95 SOUND BLASTER 16 SCSI II show-the Olympiad. $155 SOUND BLASTER 16 ASP 5160 CD SOFTWARE THE SPIRIT OF THE 3-D DINOSAUR GAMES 7TH GUEST 101 BEST GAMES The real Olympiad is often CONTINUE A HARD DAY'S AND NIGHT held in Palma de Mallorca, ARTHER'S TEACHER TROUBLE AMERICAN HERITAGE DICTIONARY Baguio, and other exotic PILLARS OF STONE, HOUSES OF CARDS Reaching the pinnacle of AUTOMOBILE REGISTRY locales, but the entrance BLUJE FORCE Bridgedom requires timing, teamwork, and a little luck at this CARMEN SAN DIEGO for this competition shows level of competition. CD DELUXE PACK CHAOS CONTINUM a virtual Parthenon (artistic — COMIC BOOK CONFIDENTIAL license knows no boundaries). The commentation lacks is made up for in some COMPTON'S INTERACTIVE ENCYCLOPEDIA COOKBOOK HEAVEN petition is all-world, with teams from degree by the tremendous strength of CONAN THE CIMMERIAN China, Canada and other Bridge beheplay by the AI. Much stronger than CRITERION TO THE MOVIES CRITICAL PATH moths. The graphics of the actual gamePOSITRONIC BRIDGE, OLYMPIAD is more CRUISE FOR A CORPSE play are as clean as the rest of the game, varied in style of opponents than OMAR CYBERRACE DARK SPEED but it would have been nice to see digiSHARIF, and is harder to pin down than DRACULA UNLEASHED tized pictures of the opponents, along even BRIDGE BARON. DUNE FAMILY DOCTOR III with their traits. A scouting report on Would that I could recommend FATTY BEAR'S BIRTHDAY SURPRISE Crocodile Kelly from Australia would no OLYMPIAD whole-heartedly. Beginning FOREVER GROWING GARDEN GROLIERS ENCYCLOPEDIA doubt lean towards maniacal risks, as he players will be lost, and veteran Bridge GUNSHIP2000 GUS GOES TO CYBERTOWN wrestled opponents to their knees. enthusiasts will scoff at the documentaINDIANA JONES The format is simple, a refreshing tion, which seems to exist more for irriTRON HELIX INCA change from the rest of the game. Each tating copy protection than insights into SPORT ILLUSTRATED 94 team plays every other team in a round play. Until the bizarre amalgamation of JUST GRANDMA AND ME KING QUESTIV $25 robin, with the top team emerging as the bidding conventions used by your comKID 700 S25 World Champs. After you and your partputer partners is puzzled out, expect to LEGEND OF KYRANDIA VII $23/45 LITTLE MONSFER AT SCHOOL $38 ner have played a hand, your other team play the game system as much as the LOOM members play the third and fourth memcards. Once these difficulties are surMAN ENOUGH $19 MAYO CLINIC FAMILY BOOK bers of the opposing team, using the exact mounted, however, BRIDGE OLYMPIAD beMICROCOSM MICROSOFT BOOKSHELF94 hand you just played, but playing opposite comes a typical QQP game—strong on MICROSOFT CINEMANIA94 W/VIDEO sides from that of you and your partner. strategy, with a refreshing and unusual MICROSOFT ENCARTA94 MICROSOFT WORKS MPC Since the only effect you have on the outangle. MEGA RACE $25 come of the duplicate hand is which team MAGIC DEATH(VIRTUAL) 523 MONKEY ISLAND 520 members represent the NBC during the THE EDITORS SPEAK MADDOXG MCCREE II $25/45 Olympiad, you must choose wisely. MYST $45 BRIDGE OLYMPIAD NEW KID ON THE BLOCK $38 The International Match Point (IMP) NIGHT HAWK F-17A 2.0 $27 scoring system OCEANS BELOW RATING *** 1/2 is used, with total points, PHARMASSIST rather than just wins, counting toward PHONE DISK USA BUSINESS94 victory. The chance is always there to PHONEDICK USA RESIDENTIAL94 PROS Best-looking Bridge game QUANTUM GATE come back, as my team once went from out there. A lot of play value for the RETURN TO ZORK PUTT PUTT PARADE near-last to fourth in one round, defeatintermediate to veteran Bridge enREBEL ASSAULT ing the Spanish team by 42 points. Simi thusiast, with solid and varied comSIM CITY 2000 SPACE QUEST I-IV larly, a huge defeat will almost always puter opponents. Like SOLITAIRE'S STAR TREK 25TH ANNIVERSARY knock you to the lower rung of the comTHE CHESSMACTER 4000 JOURNEY, it takes an age-old game THE DOGGER OF AMONRA petition. Overall, it's fairly realistic, tense and adds new spin. THE LAWNMOWER MAN THE TORTOIS AND THE HARE and very exciting CONS Lacks some bidding conTHE VAMPIRE'S COFFIN The computer teams are quite differ ventions, and fails to adequately exWHALES & DOLPHINS ent from each other, making OLYMPIAD WIGGINS STORY LANDS plain those it does include. WILDPLACES $19 eminently replayable. I never did beat Documentation is very poor, which WOODSTOCK WORLDVIEW $20 the English in five tries-must be all might cause this bridge to collapse CALL FOR LARGE SELECTION CDS those centuries of Whist experience they on the novice player. MANYADULT TITLES CALL!!! enjoy. In the end, whatever the docuCircle Reader Service #230 168 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994  $17 825883 2288823 525 $70 $27 $25 $22 "


"PINBALL ARCADE CD-ROM PC MULTI-MEDIA ENTERTAINMENT ENTER THE PINBALL ARCADE You already know how to play pinball! Just how good are you? Step up to the arcade, make your selection from any one of the eight great tables, set up your game, pull down that plunger and get some glass. This is the award winning technology that made 21st Century first in computer pinball. INCLUDES 8 GREAT TABLES WITH... ZH Terrific table designs with all the features of a real table flippers, ramps, passages, tunnels, mushroom bumpers, ball traps, drop targets, roll overs, lights, switches, bonuses and jackpots. CENTURY Totally realistic ball movement 256 color graphics 21st CENTURY ENTERTAINMENT INC. Stunning ray traced animations High scores saved to hard disk A full hour of music and sound effects P.O. BOX 415. WEBSTER, NY 14580 TEL: (716) 872-1200  FAX: 872-1675 Bonus: Illustrated history of Pinball Circle Reader Service #35 "


"REVIEW SimCity GOES Hollywood Interplay's SimCity CD Brings The Big Screen To The Little Monitor by Neil Harris Archive Photos IBM ORDES OF HOLLYWOOD TYPES DESIMCITY CD conception of the ideal city. The proSCEND ON THE COMPUTER GAME INgram was non-judgmental. All it did was DUSTRY. THEY COME BRINGING Price: $59.96 provide the tools and handle the modelSystem money, a certain arrogance, an ing based on the actions taken. Requirements: unparalleled publicity machine, a For those who wanted more detail in discipline toward the development compatible the simulation, Maxis eventually providprocess, and a world-class sense of pro 386 or better, ed SimCry 2000. It was much more comduction values. They come seeking an es 4MB RAM plex than the original, with many more cape from the problems they've made in 2MB hard factors to concern the city designer, right the movie business thanks to inflated drive space, down to the city's plumbing. There was a SVGA budgets and the stringent demands of graphics, CD certain sacrifice in design elegance that the unions. With revenues projected to ROM; supports most major sound cards. went along with the additional detail, soon exceed the movie business, enter Protection: None made up for by a great improvement in tainment software is fertile ground for Designer: Will Wright the graphics. If the player could handle Hollywood sharpies. The promise is a Publisher: Interplay the fine details, there was a real sense of a new wave of multimedia entertainment Irvine, CA city growing (714) 553-6678 combining the best elements of software with Hollywood productions. dia convergence. It's easy to imagine a SIMBUREAUCRACY SIMCry CD is one of the vanguard of scene right out of The Player: \"It can't Now for the CD version. The folks at the new software resulting from this memiss, C.B. We take one of the most popInterplay took the original game with ular computer games ever the original graphics and went to the and take it back to the stustudio to add video and audio sections dio. We add video, audio, using real actors. When the city needs real actors and even some more police stations, the police chief writers. We put it on a CD pops onto the screen to have a little and make millions.\" chat with the mayor. In fact, the player gets to meet with a gaggle of babbling SIMHISTORY city bureaucrats, all pushing their own SIMCITY is a classic. Hunagendas. This must really be what being dreds of thousands of playa mayor feels like, with demands comer's loved the challenge of ing from all sides. building and managing At first, it's interesting. The videos cities. As much a toy as a are well done as a whole, and several JOHN P. FERGUSON game, there was no prede(especially some of the disaster scenes) CHIEF OF POLICE termined objective. Some are quite funny. The bureaucrats are people tried to get the city probably scripted a bit snottier than SCPD BLUES Had to cut the police funding to finance new to grow as much as possible, their real-life counterparts, but this is in development? Bad move, says the Police Chief. Now you'll need some self defense training to walk your own simulated streets. others liad more specific keeping with the slightly campy spirit of goals based on their own the entire production. As the game goes 170 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"«I Wish My Parents Had ImagiNation.\" Call it PC envy, call me crazy... but they're having fun across the street and I want in! See, my buddy's parents got The ImagiNation Network\" and they're all playing and talking with new friends clear across the country — live, in real time. No kidding, I was over there last night and James (my friend) was dogfighting in this WWI flight simulator game called Red Baron. His cousins live 2,000 miles away, but that didn't stop them from sending James down in flames. After that, his mom got on and played speed chess with TRISH, her on-line sister. And then, at midnight, his dad got on as ZORK2, dungeon master of The Shadow of Yserbius.\" But don't bring it up, James is kind of sensitive about it. And talk about cool. The interface is full color and easy to understand. Go to You just point and click and you're there. Even James can do it. Hey, I just figured out how to get mom and dad ImagiNation! The first month's basic membership is free! Call and we'll send a free membership kit with 5 FREE HOURS* to explore The ImagiNation Network. You pay just $5.95 for shipping & handling. 1-800-462-4461/ext. 746 IMAGINATION! The ImagiNation Network requires at least a 386 IBM PC compatible computer, a 2400 baud modem, a mouse and keyboard, and about 600 kb of available memory. Red Baron is a registered trademark of Dynamix, Inc. The Shadow of Yserbits is a trademark of The ImagiNation Network. *Free hours must be used within 30 days. For details on membership options and rates, call 1-800-IMAGIN-1 between 8 a.m. and 10 p.m. P.D.T. Offer expires 3/31/95 and is available to first time members only.  The ImagiNation Network. All Rights Reserved Circle Reader Service #243 "


"on, though, it starts to get repetitive. puter software, for that matter to be interrupt the flow of the game and their The same audio and video clips start to repetitive is normal. The type of interrepetitive nature takes a dynamic envireappear. After all, while a CD has lots active experience in a computer reronment and makes it irritating. There of room, it's still limited, especially by quires the player to choose from a were some audio clips that just wouldn't the demands of multimedia. Audio and limited list of options under constantly go away; they kept asking me to build video clips take many megabytes of disk changing circumstances. It's the context more roads, for instance, but I was usspace. that makes things interesting. As the ing the trains-only strategy to minimize game progresses, the choices constantly pollution). The obvious solution is to WE REPEAT: THIS IS THE lead to new and not-altogether-preuse the options provided by the proDEPARTMENT OF REDUNDANCY dictable outcomes. grammers and turn off the video. DEPARTMENT For Hollywood productions, though, What's left at that point is-you For elements of a game—or any comrepetition is death. Movies are great but guessed it, the original SimCity. A good TEM A TIONES DIERTER VINMU not over and over product, tried and true, but not quite again. Film directors what was expected. Let's hope the next EE are constantly seeking wave of multimedia entertainment finds that new stunt, to put a better use for Hollywood's skills. something up on the THE EDITORS SPEAK screen that's never beSIMCITY CD fore been seen. That's one reason why there RATING  are so many movies out there. Most are seen PROS The original game was a clasonly once per customer. sic. If you haven't played SimCriy yet, Very few hold up well to this would be the version to buy. repeated viewing. They CONS The video clips are nice the get boring first few times; after that, you turn In SimCITY CD, the them them off. If you've played the SAME OLD CITY Aside from a few graphic and game play tweaks, smug bureaucrats are in original, there's little reason to buy SIMCITY CD looks and plays the same as the original. your face altogether too this version. much. The video clips EIBELLEH 35 Lii    As E TUIN YOUR DI A COCKPITA The UNIVERSAL Game Cheater! CONTROL munumSTANI SPECIAL OFFER U LLIN NBBB UREDI Cheat death with... $2495 theinfinity V MACHINE infiniti Supports:  THRUSTMASTER CH FLIGHTSTICKS Most flight control-type Joysticks VE BASED The Infinity Machine works with virtually ANY game. Our easy to use interface allows you to edit or freeze almost any game feature such as lives, gold, or energy in real time. Our slow-motion mode lets you breeze through the tough spots like no tomorrow! What are you waiting for? Start living today! FROM Matercard SEM $34.95.5._ Its patented pivoting tray keeps your joystick from sliding and allows you to adjust its angle for maximum comfort. With your flight controls positioned low and close, you'll be able to rest back comfortably into your seat for a TRUE COCKPIT FEEL. The PCS turns your keyboard into a cockpit control panel allowing you to easily access the keys without having to take your eyes off the action. Clamps to any desk or tabletop. VISA ORDER TOLL FREE Or send check or money order for $24.95 + $5.00 156.00 (ww.) for shipping and handling to: HOME BASE PRODUCTS 3025 Timberline Dr. outside the U.S. call (5037686-1809 Eugene, OR 97405 REM Software wall? 1359 FRANK DRIVE  MONROE, MICHIGAN 48161 TO ORDER, CALL 800-457-1161 1-800-686-2523 Circle Reader Service #119 172 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 Circle Reader Service #242 "


"MITSUMI $129! Double Speed FX001D Multimedia Specialists 1-800-233-0010 The 250ms. 350KB/sec Mitsumi double-speed blows away other CD-ROM drives costing twice as much! The Mitsumi comes complete with a 16-bit interface card, installation software and cables to connect! HOT PRICE Tech Support: (608) 836-8001 P.O. Box 55164 Madison, WI 53705-8964 Visa/M.C. / AMEX welcomed! Hours: M-F 9am 6pm Sat. 9am -1pm CST CHINON CDS535 Double Speed CDROM drive NEC CREATIVE MultiSpin 3Xi PLEXTOR 4PLEX Quad Speed CREATIVE LABS, INC. Game Blaster CD 16 With an access time of 250ms. and a double speed data transfer rate of 300KB/sec and a 256KB buffer, the CDS-535 is one of the fastest double-speeds around! PC Magazine Editor's Choice! This NEC triple speed CD-ROM drive features a lightning fast 195ms access time, 450KB/sec transfer rate, and a continuousflow 256KB cache. Exceeds MPC level 2 specifications and is PhotoCD Multisession and QuickTime compliant. Switchable SCSI-1/SCSI-2 interface. Plextor's new 4PLEX quad speed CD-ROM brings a stunning new level of multimedia performance to your computer. The drive features a 600KB/sec transfer rate. 150ms seek time (220ms access). and a l megabyte buffer! Includes a 2-year manufacturer's warranty The Game Blaster CD 16 multimedia upgrade kit features a Sound Blaster 16. a double speed CD-ROM drive, pair of speakers, high performance joystick, and an incredible software bundle including Rebel Assault. Return to Zork. Iron Helix. Sim City 2000. Civilization, New Grolier's Multimedia Encyclopedia. Lemmings. Indianapolis. The Simulation. Silent Service II, FIICA Stealth Fighter, Railroad Tycoon and more! New Low Price! $249 Hot! $414 Quad Speed! $465 Best Price! $365 MULTIMEDIA HARDWARE MM UPGRADE KITS Reveal DC260 Edut. Kil 249 NEC Multispin 4X Pro 909 Gravis Ultrasound 145 Sony Media Magic kit Plextor DM3028 Internal Game Blaster CD 16 365 255 Gravis Ultrasound MAX Plextor DM3028 int. W/kit 395 CD-ROM DRIVES 319 MV Pro Audio Studio 16 Edutainment CD 16 Plextor DM5028 external 379 MV Pro Audio Spectrum 16 Discovery CD 16 Plextor DM5018 ext. w/kit 655 Aztech CDA268-01A W/kit Digital Edge 3X 429 MV Pro Audio Spect 16 basic 129 465 MV Pro Audio Power Pak Plextor QUAD Speed 195 Chinon CDS 535 internal Creative Omni CD int 415 Chinon CDS 535 int. w/kit Toshiba 3401B internal Creative Omni CD 3X 319 MV Pro 3-D Korg 275 Chinon CDX 535 external Toshiba 3401 E external Media Vision Reno 355 448 MV Premium 3-D SCSI-2 Sony CDU-33A bare drive 145 MV Premium 3-D MultiCD 389 MV 2000 Family kit 332 Chinon CDX 535 ext. w/kit Sony CDU 33A w/kit & 2 CDs 145 MV Deluxe MultiCD MV 3000 Super kit 195 395 Creative Omni CD Int. 259 MV 4000 Premium kit Sony CDU-561-01 int. MV Pro Wavetable Upgd 495 Creative Omni CD 3X (New!) 415 Sony CDU-7811-10 ext. 489 Sound Blaster Deluxe MV 5000 Pro kit 695 Mitsumi FXOO1D dbl spd w/kit 120 Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe 414 SOUND CARDS Reveal DC230 Hm Ofc kit 239 NEC Multispin 3XI Internal Sound Blaster Pro Value Ed. Reveal DC240 Educ, kit 239 NEC Multispln 3Xe external 439 Audio Magician Plus 49 Reveal DC250 Ent. kit 249 NEC Multispin 3xp portable 379 Gravis Ultrasound Sound Blaster 16 Basic 117 Sound Blaster 16 Value Ed. Soon 249 117 Sound Blaster 16 MultiCD 169 Sound Blaster 16 MultiCD/ASP 119 Sound Blaster SCSI-2 97 Sound Blaster SCSI-2/ASP 77 Sound Blaster AWE-32 65 ASP upgrade chip 259 Wave Blaster Option 145 145 VIDEO CAPTURE/OUTPUT call ADS Game Zapper 144 Video Blaster SE 239 55 Video Spigot for Windows 199 79 Pro Movie Spectrum 79 Sigma Designs ReelMagic 99 Reel Magic Lite (NEW) 259 105 Call for speakers, SCSI controllers, more! 280 CD-ROM TITLES We only sell CD-ROM! 1942: Pacific Air War 47 Daemonsgate 32 Heroes of Might & Mag 44 Metaltech II 47 SimCity Enhanced 45 Wing1/ Wing Il Dix 5ft 10 Pack 30 Dark Forces 47 Horde. The 21 Microcosm 45 Skyrealms of Jorune 41 Wing Comm Armada 7th Guest 43 Dark Legion 35 Horde, The MPEG 34 Microsoft Golf 39 Sliver MPEG 21 Wing Comm I Deluxe 7th Guest 2:11th Hour 53 Dark Seed 37 How to Create Mltimda 22 Mighty Meph P. Rngr 26 Space Ace MPEG 39 Wing Comm II Deluxe 7th Guest/Dune 34 Darksun 47 Humans. The 23 Millenium Auction 46 Space Pirates 41 Wing Comm II/UIT UW Absolute Zero 39 Day of the Tentacle 37 Hunt for Red Oct MPEG 21 Morphology 101 29 Spear of Destiny 39 Wing Comm III Aces of the Deep 44 Dead Zone 51 Hunters of Ralk Call MPC Wizard 2.0 12 Spirit of Excalibur 21 Wing Comm/Ultima VI Aces of the Pacific 38 Doom 11 44 Inca 2 24 MPC Wiz 2.0 MPEG 32 Sporting News MPEG Call Wings Glry 1917-1918 Aces over Europe 38 Dracula Unleashed 45 Indy Jones Fate Atlant 37 Multimedia Start Pak 23 Star Crusader 47 Wolfpack Aegis: Guardian of Fleet 48 Dragons Lair 33 Inherit the Earth 33 Myst MPC 46 Star Trek 25th Anniv 51 World Circuit Al-Qadim 38 Dragons Lair MPEG 39 Interplay's 10 Yr Anth 46 Naked Gun 2.5 MPEG 21 Star Trek Deep Spc 9 41 World Circuit II Alone in the Dark 44 Dragons Lair 11 Call Iron Helix 54 Nascar Racing 39 Star Trek Next Gen 54 World Cup 1930-94 Animals!. San Diego Zoo 19 Dragonsphere 24 Jagged Alliance 47 Nat Geo Pic. Atlas 56 Star Trek Str. Fit Acad 51 World of Xeen Armored Fist 41 Dungeon Hack 37 Jef Pack 41 New Kid on the Blck 35 Star Trek VI MPEG 21 World View MPEG Armored Fist 46 Empire Dix: Masters 26 Joe Montana Football 54 NHL Hockey '95 38 Star Trek: Jdgmnt Rte 53 World War II Arthur's Teach Troub 36 Encarta '94 59 Jones in the Fast Lane 36 Noctropolis 47 Star Wars Chess MPC 39 Worldview Babylon 5 Call ESPN BB Tonite 43 Journeyman Proj. The 42 Out of the Sun 47 Starship Rogarian 42 Wrath of the Gods Battle Isle II 39 ESPN Soccer 33 Jump Raven 41 Outpost 39 Strike Comm/Tactical 52 X-COM Beneath a Steel Sky 39 ESPN Sun Nite FB 39 Jurassic Park 35 Pacific Strike 48 Stronghold 35 Zephyr Betrayal at Krondor 23 Evasive Action Call Just Grandma & Me 32 Pagemaster Call Subwar Plus 47 Zillion Sounds Bioforge Call F14 Fleet Defender 47 Jutland 44 Patrician 34 Superhero: Lge Hob. 34 ADULT INTERACTIVE Bloodnet 41 F15 Strike Eagle 3 46 King's Quest Comp. 53 PGA Tour Golf 47 Syndicate Plus 39 101 Sex Positions Buzz Aldrin Rce Spc 42 Falcon Gold 49 King's Quest VI 39 Phantasmagoria 48 System Shock 47 CD Brothel C.I.TY. 2000 31 Family Doctor 3rd 16 King's Quest VI Upgd 22 Phoenix Fighter 47 T2 Chesswars 26 Dream Machine Capitol Punishment 39 Fantasy Empires 36 Kings Quest VII 48 Photo CD Access 12 Terminator Ramp 44 Neurodancer Castles 11 46 Fantasy Fiefdom 48 Lands of Lore 39 Photo CD Workshop 22 Test Pilot 43 Nightwatch Cat Came Back. The 32 Fast Attack 47 Laura Bow 2 23 Police Quest 4 39 Tetris Gold 32 Penthouse Interactive CD Challenge Pack 26 Firm, The MPEG 21 Lawnmower Man 37 Police Quest 4 MPEG Call TFX 44 Sevmore Butts CD-ROMIX! Freex 14 Flight Sim Toolkit 52 Leg of Kyrandia BK ! 33 Prehistoria, Groller's 19 Theme Park ADULT MOVIES CD-ROMIX! Hardcase 14 Forgotten Castle 54 Leg of Kyrandia Bk II 36 Privateer 46 Tony Larussa BB 2 Asian Invasion CD-ROMIX! Prime 14 Fortress of Dr. Rad. 47 Lemmings 2. Tribes 27 Privateer/Strike Com 42 Top Gun MPEG 21 Cafe Flesh CHAOS Continuum 40 Front Page Baseball 46 Lesuire Suit Larry 6 39 Psychotron 39 Total Baseball 1994 California Daydreamer Chessmstr 4000/L.D.2 24 Front Page FB '95 46 Links 19 Quantum Gate Total Distortion Call Curse of the Catwoman Cinemania '94 36 Frontier Elite II 34 Links Pro 486 Call Raiden Call U.S. Atlas 4.0 32 Doors of Passion Colonization 46 Gabriel Knight 43 Lord of Rings MPEG Call Ravenloft 46 Ultimal VI 29 Dungeon of Dominance Commanche w/Mis. 52 Gettysburg 39 Lords of Midnight Rebel Assault 42 Ultima Under. 1 & 2 29 Hidden Obsessions Companions of Xanth 33 Goblins Quest lll 19 Lost Treas Infocom II 35 Red Baron/A10 TK. 38 Ultima VII Complete 39 Married Women Conspiracy 41 Grandest Fleet 35 Lost Treas Infocom 31 Return to Ringworld 42 Ultima Vill w/Spch New Wave Hookers 1 or 2 Corridor 7 Call Great Nyl Battles 49 Lunicus 39 Return to Zork 42 Ultimate Domain Call Superstars of Porn Cowboy Casino 34 Great Nvi Battles 11 39 Mad Dog Il 33 Return to Zrk MPEG 43 Ultimate Football 47 Weekend at Ernies Creature Shock 47 Grollers Encyc v6.0 29 Mad Dog McCree 28 Robinson's Reg 31 Under Killing Moon 51 ADULT PHOTOS Crime Patrol 40 Guiness Disc of Rec. 34 Man Enough 34 Sam & Max Hit the Rd 37 Under Kill Mn MPEG Call American Girls 1 or 2 Crime Patrol 2 40 Gunship 2000 w/Scen. 35 Man Enough MPEG Call Seawolf 43 Video Cube: Space 21 Busty Babes 2 Critical Path 44 Harpoon Il Call Master of Magic 45 Secret of Monk Isl II 39 Vid Cube: Spc MPEG 32 Eurotica Curse of Enchantia 21 Hartier Assault SVGA 37 Matinee MPEG 27 Secret Weap of Luft 44 Video Cube: Sports 21 FAO 1 Cyberia 45 Harvester LE46 Mech Commander 43 Shadowcaster 42 Video Game Soln CD 22 Lingerie & Lace CyberRace 36 Hell Cab v1.1. 46 Mech Warrior II 45 Sim Town Call Who Shot Johnny Rck 33 T&A 2 the MAXX Cyclones 47 Hell: Cyberpunk Thrill Call MegaRace 32 SimCity 2000 34 Wild Blue Yonder 38 Women on Wheels No surcharge on credit cards. CODs accepted with $6 charge. Software shipping $5/order. Canada $8/order, hardware shipping is 5%. Canada is 6%. Personal and company checks allow 14 days. Returns must have an RMA#, call. Software sales final unless defective. Returns subject to 15% restocking fee. Pricing and availability subject to change. Circle Reader Service #94 37 Prenistoria, Gronen 46 Top Gun MPEG 1004 "


"STRATEGY Master The Harpoon Giving Orders That Get Results In HARPOON II, Part One of Three by Tom \"KC\" Basham Hans Halberstadt, ARMS Communications HAT'S THE DIFFERENCE BEsearch pattern, plotting courses, and firfor any mission you want repeatedly exeTWEEN A MISSION EDITOR AND A ing weapons. The key is repeatability. cuted, or any task you want repeatedly FORMATION EDITOR? WHY ARE How many times will you need to order executed such as Combat Air Patrols there four categories of threat this particular unit? Will you give it identi(CAPS), Airborne Early Warning patrols, zones? How come aircraft cal orders over and over again? Will you and (under certain conditions) some leave the mission zone? How come airgive identical orders to multiple units? Is types of strikes. craft sometimes disappear? If you've this order a one-shot deal? First, outline a patrol zone with referbeen playing HARPOON II from Three. If the order is going to be a one-shot, ence points. Keep in mind that patrol Sixty, these questions have probably then specifically ordering that unit or zones are not overly restrictive; in most crossed your mind, along with how do group is probably the most efficient. If cases, units will cheerfully abandon the you use TALDs, where did my submarine you need to dispatch a single tanker to patrol zone to execute their assigned go, and why didn't this @#^%& thing assist a fuel-starved fighter, order the task. For example, CAPs will leave a pado what I wanted? S tanker manually; creating a mission for a trol zone without hesitation to investigate Winning HARPOON II scenarios boils single rendezvous is overkill and generair contacts within weapons or detection down to two things: 1) Developing sound ates unnecessary work. As Commanderrange. Using the AWG-9, an F-14 Tomtactics and strategies and 2) successfully in-Chief, you have more than enough cat may leave its station and investigate executing those strategies. The best-laid, work to do. Don't complicate matters umcontacts 80 or 90nm away. When an air most-detailed plans will fail every time if necessarily. contact approaches within the Tomcat's you are unable to effectively communiA target of opportunity may require detection range, it forgets about the miscate your intentions to your field units.unit micro-management. Say you launch sion patrol zone and heads for the conTherefore, before we discuss how to win, an A-6E strike package with F/A-18 estact. After completing the intercept, the let's examine how to give orders that get corts. Two-thirds of the way to the target F-14 will return to the patrol zone. If you the job done. you detect an enemy unarmed recon want to make absolutely certain the asThere are three ways to order units plane. You don't want to disrupt the signed units remain in the patrol zone, and groups: 1) Give units and groups distrike, but such an opportunity should place appropriate threat zones along the rect orders, 2) assign units and groups to not be ignored. Using the \"intercept\" patrol zone's borders, leaving the border missions, and 3) deploy units in the forfunction, dispatch a single F/A-18 from closest to your base or aircraft carrier mation editor. the flight group to prosecute the enemy \"unfenced.\" This will prevent units from aircraft. Perhaps you stumble on an enestraying, but you can manually order ASSIGNING ORDERS DIRECTLY my transport transiting unescorted a little units to ignore the threat zone and leave Some tasks require micro-management, later? Dispatch a single A-6E, assuming it the patrol zone if the need arises. that is, the tactical situation demands your carries appropriate weapons and disA mission is only as good as you design full attention and control. The computer's patching it does not jeopardize the priit, and good mission design begins with artificial intelligence is either inadequate mary mission, and attack the tanker. the mission type. From the mission creor incapable of performing the required ation screen, you choose various options task in the necessary time frame with the USING THE MISSION EDITOR which define the mission's parameters, available resources. Such tasks include orUse the mission editor to give groups or primarily flight behavior and sensor usdering evasive maneuvers, optimizing a units repeatable, standing orders. Do this age. A \"recon ship\" patrol, for example, 174 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"«Sum it up in three words: GO GET ARENA.»—Zach Meston, Computer Player -Zach Meston, Computer Player TheRates The Elder Scrolls Every few years a landmark game revolutionizes an entire genre...TES:Arena is that game. No other game has captured the feel and essence of role playing like this one. You must play this game: it has no equal.\"-Kevin Perry, Computer Game Review ...it may well be the game that establishes the new formula in RPG's.—Johnny Wilson, Computer Gaming World ES:Arena surpasses all other role playing games in depth and realism! A must buy for RPG fans!»-Russ Ceccola, Electronic Games \"Graphics, sound, playability...Arena has it all!\" Prodigy TES:Arena and Arena Hint Book now available. Visit your local retailer or order direct (1-800-677-0700) Dept. C7 BECHESDA SOFTWORKS Copyright  1994 Bethesda Softworks. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #47 "


"executes a specific flight pattern and utiindividual attack. When attacking a heavon station while the other refuels. If you lizes only surface-search radars. AEW paily defended force, like a Russian battle assign three or more aircraft to the mistrols, on the other hand, execute a group, most of these attacks will fail sion, the mission editor will keep onedifferent flight pattern while utilizing all because of the lack of coordination. third the assigned units on station at all available sensor suites. It is crucial, thereStrike units will always follow the shortest times. When an aircraft runs low on fuel fore, to choose the appropriate mission path they can find to the target, even if or runs out of weapons, the mission editypes. Here's a brief summary of each that path presents a clear threat. tor sends it back to base and launches a mission type: replacement. Please note, the mission AAW Patrols: Anti-Air PPAFEVEGKO editor does not utilize aerial refueling; patrols engage only airwhen an aircraft reaches bingo fuel, the borne contacts. mission editor sends it back to base. ASU W Patrols: Anti-SurHowever, if you manually order the airface patrols will engage any craft to refuel before the mission editor hostile contact, but engage sends it home, it will return to duty and ships first. remain on station until exhausting the ASW Patrols: Anti-Subnew fuel load. marine patrols will engage any hostile contact, but enTHE FORMATION EDITOR gage subs first. The formation editor is designed to poRecon Missions: Recon sition units within a battlegroup. You units \"hang out\" in the miscreate patrol zones within the formation sion zone, leaving it every so and assign individual units to those paoften to search for the specitrols. All patrol zones are tied to one of fied target type. Recon units FENCE THEM BOGIES If your patrol craft are straying from their three Threat Axes: AAW, ASW and will shadow a contact long patrol zones, use threat zones to fence them in. ASW. You start by choosing the desired enough to positively identify threat axis, drawing a patrol zone, speciit, then return to the \"hang out\" zone. Next, you assign units to the mission. fying patrol parameters (similar to using They loiter there until the contact ages. Whenever you assign a mission to an airthe mission editor), then assigning units. then repeat the procedure. As such, these craft carrier or plot a course, all aircraft rePatrol zones are always relative to the \"hang out» zones must be well protected. ceive the same orders. Before you can specified threat axis. If the threat axis Transit Missions: Transit missions bare-assign them, you must manually remove moves, either because you move it, the sically tell units to move to a specific them from the first mission. Therefore, it's formation changes course, or the threat point and remain on station there. Units usually best to assign aircraft to various duaxis is tracking a target and the target will engage any hostile contacts within ties before ordering their host ship. moves, then the patrol zone moves with range. The mission editor lives by one simple it to retain the same relative positioning. Strike Missions: Strike missions are rule: Keep units, preferably 1/3 of the In accordance with standard U.S. Navy not the most effective way of executing total assigned units, on station at all doctrine, the ASW threat axis is always combat. Generally, players are better tied to the formation's served by hand-running the attack rather PEPEDIE course. than using a strike mission. If a strike se DateES The formation editor almission is created with a target, associatways tries to keep a patrol ed units will only attack that target. When staffed regardless of the that target dies, the mission ends. If the number of units you asstrike mission is created with a mission signed. If you assign a single zone, units will proceed to that zone and S-3 to an ASW patrol, when look for something to attack that is not that aircraft lands the formaalready being attacked by a different tion editor looks for other strike mission. The mission lasts indefiunassigned S-3s. If it finds nitely; if a detected target is destroyed, one, it immediately launches units continue looking for more targets it to cover the vacant patrol in the area. zone. Otherwise, the patrol Aircraft assigned to strike missions remains unstaffed until the launch whenever they are in range of the NAVAL CHOREOGRAPHY Use the formation editor to position original S-3 has refueled and target or patrol zone. Thus, different airunits within a battlegroup. rearmed. This automatic craft types with different ranges will unit assignment sometimes launch at different times. After acquiring times. Ships and submarines, naturally, appears as if aircraft have disappeared. If a target, the strike units will lob all of remain on station continually, but airyou seem to have lost a few aircraft sometheir capable weapons at the target and craft must land to rearm and refuel ocwhere, try checking the formation editor. go home. Unfortunately, strike missions casionally. If you assign one aircraft to a Tom Basham and Ed Dille co-authored do not coordinate individual units, so mission, it launches as soon as possible. Harpoon II: The Official Strategy from Prima each unit within the mission conducts an If you assign two aircraft, one remains Publishing TIPE EN WIR CZEGO de Tine 12  Corpress scared DATADASE 23985 itude: Como EEEE Los 176 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"STRATEGY Lessons In Naval Life First Class Strategy P's THE GRANDEST FLEET by Tim Carter 3/ 3 O Archive Photos, with Grandest Fleet screen inset OOD MORNING CLASS, WELDecide early which cities need shipof building before a convoy is constructCOME TO STRATEGY 101. Toyards and airfields to mitigate the time ed; if you can afford it, build the city to DAY'S TOPIC: GRAND FLEET lag in construction. When building shipsize 30, then put in a convoy. operations. If you will open yards keep in mind that the more open your notebooks, we will begin ocean squares there are adjacent to the THE LAWS OF ZONING with the basic concepts...\" port, the greater the shipyard's building \"To refer back to an earlier lecture: For everyTHE GRANDEST FLEET from QQP is the capacity will be. Try to keep shipyards in thing there is a seazone; a seazone to attack, a latest in a lengthening line of strategy ports that can handle three or more ships seazone to defend, a seazone to build, a seagames that are fun, replayable, and chalper turn. zone to ignore.\" lenging both as one player and two play. The most powerful and often over One way to make city planning easier er games. One of the main reasons for looked city improvement is the flight is to divide the map into zones: attacking the success of QQP products such as The deck. When supported by a light deck, zones, defending zones, building zones, LOST ADMIRAL and CONQUERED KINGaircraft carriers become the queens of the and zones that can be ignored. Once you DOMS is the demands they put on players. know what you need to acTo win, it is necessary to think; planning complish in cach zone, deand strategy are vital. vising a strategy becomes In THE GRANDEST FLEET, strategy goes easier. 5/ ? beyond combat operations, as players Attacking and defendmust consider the development of their ing zones are where the cities, as well as their military forces. The action is, the difference benefits of a well planned building cambetween them being that paign can be as great as a well planned an attacking zone is curmilitary campaign. rently held by the enemy, while a defending zone is SIM-ADMIRAL? held by you. \"Points win games. Everybody got it? Good. Building zones are arNow that the obvious is out of the way, why eas where it is difficult for else should admirals care about cities? The anA CORNERED TIGER Hotly pursued by a British flotilla, the Superthe enemy to reach, and swer is power. Cily construction is an exercise Battleship Tirpitz cripples one of its antagonists. which therefore require in power projection; for anyone interested in less defensive effort. The building for building's sake, the class on Simsea. A carrier (range 5) based in a city goal here, as the name suggests, is to Sandcastle is down the hall.\" with a flight deck (replenishment range build cities as much as possible, increasWhen playing a long scenario, build 6) can bomb enemy cities or units 11 ing their points output. \"Ignore zones\" universities early. While they will cost you spaces away with impunity. are simply out of reach, either because points, the extra \"culture\" plus the ability Convoys are a wise long term investthey are too strongly held or are too far to build missile bases is well worth it. The ment, as they assure growth and increase away. extra building power universities provide the city class. However, keep in mind that Zones guide the development of cities can be used in later turns to construct opincreasing the class of a city also increases by giving priority to both the type of coneras, downtowns and hospitals, thereby the resources and technology necessary struction and the order in which it should regaining lost points. to build it. It is wise to consider the cost be implemented. Defending zones ** * OCTOBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 177 "


"280 c04 nilit should get priority in city building, unless est type of scout). The purpose of the talked to, the consensus out there seems an attacking zone holds such a high po first rank is to identify the location and to be that the strongest ship in The tential yield that losing a defending zone disposition of the enemy, particularly GRANDEST FLEET is the battleship. While will not matter. submarines. The second rank should be battleships are both durable and versaCities in defensive zones should conmade up of submarines, followed by tile, they are not always the rulers of the centrate on construction which builds battleships and cruisers and finally airwaves. If you know that your fleet will size, airfields, missile bases and early be operating in range warning systems. A big city is a safe city, of a flight deck (and or at least as safe as it is possible to get. you should try to make No city is impregnable, but a well guardthis happen as often as ed one can force attackers to pay a high possible), aircraft carriprice for conquest. ers and submarines beNext, cities bordering on attacking come the most cost zones require attention. Shipyards, aireffective units in the fields and flight decks are needed to supgame. port major offensive efforts. Finally, cities (49) clr Ah, veterans of THE in protected areas ought to build operas, CherLOST ADMIRAL will say, downtowns and other point building feabourg use those subs to take tures. The key is to put the points where out enemy battleships. they are not in danger, while putting No, no, no, no, no, no, combat facilities where they will do the no and no. Battleships most good. are too durable for subDEFENSE FROM THE DEPTHS Submarines make excellent point marines to effectively FLEET OPERATIONS defenses for cities, as this flaming wreck of a transport can attest. neutralize, unless they \"The teaching assistants tell me that some of are on their own and you are complaining that your opponents are craft carriers. If time allows, it can be one has an abundance of time. Instead, cheating by starting off with more forces than useful to move submarines and scouts use your subs against the enemy's airyou have. Some students have even gone so far 3-4 squares in front of the main fleet. craft carriers, then use your carriers to as to suggest that your opponents even get betThe layered approach not only maxiattack everything else. ter starting positions as well. Hmm, let's permizes anti-aircraft defense, it allows the This tactic is a direct spin-off of the form a small exercise... Everyone who agrees fleet to attack as a single entity, as most only truly ironclad (he he) rule in THE with these complaints, put up your hands. units should be in range at the same GRANDEST FLEET: never use carrier airRight, thank you. Nou, everyone who insists time. A smaller but well organized fleet craft to attack aircraft carriers. This rule on playing the Gercan be generalized to read: never use mans in W.W.IT carrier aircraft to attack targets with games put up your heavy anti-air coverage. hands. I thought so.\" Consider the following common situTo win THE ation. You have a fleet of battleships, GRANDEST FLEET it destroyers and carriers with submarines is necessary to destrategically placed 4 or 5 squares in feat enemy forces front of your main force. The enemy is stronger in numapproaching with a similar fleet. If carbers than your own. rier aircraft are sent to attack enemy In some random carriers, while submarines target battlescenarios it may be ships, at the end of the turn you will possible to gain a have scratched the paint on a few batquick numerical adtlewagons, sunk a few carriers, and lost vantage, but you your entire naval air arm in the process. can usually expect On the other hand, if submarines are to be fighting larger operating far enough in front of your forces for at least main fleet, they may be able to dispatch the first 10 to 20 HOLY BATTLEGROUP! Two destroyers on scout duty find more than they a carrier or two before they come within turns. anticipated, as they sail up to a huge enemy task force. range. If not, then at least they will be The key to tactiable to sink carriers while the naval air cal success under these conditions is can defeat a much larger force if the force attacks more lightly defended batcombined operations. Whether attacklarger force is committed piecemeal. tleships, cruisers and destroyers. In this ing or defending, a layered deployment This is the greatest weakness in the articase far more damage will be done to of forces is usually the best way to begin ficial intelligence: it rarely waits for a the enemy's heavy ships, while your cara battle. When attacking, the first rank complete fleet to develop before comriers will still have aircraft left for round ought to be made up of PT boats or mitting itself to battle. two. transports (transports being the cheapAccording to several players I have It is possible, and very desirable, to Deutron DHC HVOR 1389UP 16 BEUP 178 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"My son and I love this game!!! Great work!! Reader Stros, Burbank 100 new landscapes New objects and come elements to explore. Robert Strauss, Burbank Oxyd magnum is on entirely new and riveting challenge for Oxyd experts and beginners-alike. DI Oxyd, magnum! for PC, Mac & Amiga Sequel of the award winning Oxyd game! Mac: TMB RAM, color or monochrome! PC: 386 or above, 2.5 MB RAM, EGA or VGA monitor, Soundblo. or Adl. optional. G2 I Circle Reader Service # 64 Circle Reader Service # 63 ORA My daughter (11 years old) and I have become \"Oxyd\" addicts. We Oxyd Credits: Some fine comments about Oxyd magnum! cannot wait to begin exploring the many other levels. Thanks for creating Game of the Year 1993 I like Oxyd magnum because it's different in every landscape, such an excellent product. R. S., Germantown Australian MacWorld surprising, challenging, compelling and fun! Every landscape is like a This is, without question, the most impressive game I have ever seen. I new game. It's so fricky! It drives my wife crazy. More levels and just Best Brain Game 1993 as good as Oxyd. You have challenged me! Thanks. My wife and I am amazed at the audio, visual and action. George L. Tanty MacWorld Game Hall of Fame like to play puzzles together. It's unique. Great puzzles. It's aesthetically pleasing and exercises the mind. It makes me and my Wow! That's all I can say about Oxyd. What an incredible game! Game of the Year 1992 kids think and we don't have to punch or kill anything. One of the nicest games I have seen in a long time. Computer & Fodagogi 06/93 Thanks for creating such a challenging piece of software. Game of the Year 1992 I'm completely hooked! The game is really slick, well designed. Display Compuer Cr e V, Germany Arcade Action Those first 10 levels alone were worth paying for! The variety of play is It is rare to find such a visually appealing addictive and playable game. literally, incredible. for PC, Mac & Amiga! Score this game a solid 10 Download Shareware Episode One One of the most elegant games I've played. Jeffrey Jondahl, San Diego Current Notes 06/93 \"A\" rating Wow! Exquisite. Tenjoy this game a great deal and so do my children and their friends. It is just what I have been looking for !! Jerome Wescott, Minneapolis A must for your games library. AmigaWorld 06/93 Oxyd has to be the most artistically superb piece of programming that Game of the Month. MorWet 02/93 I have seen. From my position of having completed about one third of Top of the Charts the single-player levels, the landscapes have been continuously varied with a marvelous attention to graphic and audible detail that makes Brain Teoser Category, PC Games German edition, Treat of the Month each new one a continuing delight. I especially appreciate how the Circle Reader Service # 66 Atvi Roundtable in Genie, 12/92 marble interacts in seemingly realistic but different ways when rolling Editor's Choice  **24 82 20 001 W08239820 over or bouncing against different \"natural\" (or unnatural) substances PC Games German edirior, 12/92 fa RAR like stone, wood, swamp, freefall etc. At this point, I'm already worrying that I'll run out of levels. Jeffrey R. Harrow Download free appetizers from SWC BBS at (508) 368-7036 @ 2400-14.4k Even our 3yr old enjoys the game. baud or send a check to Dongleware: gere I just had to write to tell you how much fun I've had playing Oxyd. The 10 levels of the Oxyd game $ 1.00 ottention to detail-the sounds, the textures of the surfaces really adds PC, Mac, Amiga, ST or NeXT. to the fun of the game. It invites the imagination for a ride. The Oxyd Code Book $39.00 Thanks also for making all of the landscapes challenging but not Take 5 demo of magnum! $ 1.00 impossible. Tom Phoenix, Portland for PC or Macintosh. Tubular Worlds episode one $ 1.00 I'm really impressed with your game, Oxyd. Congratulations on a for PC or Macintosh. unique and fun product, and best luck to you all. John M. Dodd Shipping & Handling $ 3.00 If your dealer does not carry Oxyd, Oxyd magnum! or Tubular Worlds, call 1-800-228-6993 to order Checks, Visa & MasterCard accepted MA residents add 5% sales tax Dongleware Publishing 35 Howard Street Cambridge, MA 02139 (617) 497-1130 US   "


"reverse this situation and strip an onnearby enemy cities. When many cities back; these guns are then free to bash coming force of all of its aircraft at the are close together, a few emplacements the city at will. cost of one or two battleships. This is in the right place can give opponents a final consideration regarding tacideal, as you are then left with your car. real headache. Tricky players will even tics is maneuvering. If the enemy can be riers pummeling enemy capital ships place guns around friendly cities they lured or positioned so that on his turn while your remaining battlewagons have expect to fall or which they don't intend the combat favors your fleet, a signifithe enemy's defenseless cant advantage may be obtained. Concarriers for breakfast. BER sider again the example of two fleets on A final note on suba collision course with battleships in the marines: because they are fore supported by aircraft carriers. If so vulnerable, they work you are able to determine exactly where best in packs of four or the enemy will move, it is possible to set more. A sure fire way to an ambush for his forward elements. eliminate those awesome Simply place your carriers on squares super BBs and CVs is to that will put the enemy's front rank meet each one with about within range, while keeping his carriers six subs long before they out of range. This can provide carriers get into range of anyone with a free shot, although it is imporelse. tant to keep your carriers within range Shore emplacements Reyk of a flight deck to ensure that they don't 5/18 and missile bases are a lot run out of aircraft. of fun, under the right WRIGGLING ON A HOOK Caught in a pincers between a submarine In conclusion, THE GRANDEST FLEET conditions. A key factor is wolfpack and a high-powered battleship, this carrier will be easy rewards players who take an holistic apusually geography. Ranprey once it runs out of planes. proach to planning. Combined operadom maps with a lot of tions are crucial to attaining tactical narrow straits are perfect for shore emto defend. Unlike airfields, guns do not success, while grand strategy, tactics placements. One or two can slow up a change owners when the city falls. In a and city planning must all be integrated major enemy advance. few situations it is even possible to posito defeat that level 21 computer or a Both missile bases and shore emtion shore emplacements so far inland wily human opponent. placements can also be used to bash that the conquering navy cannot shoot Class dismissed. FREEFREEFREEFREEFREE THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID GREETINGS BY COMPUTER Greetings by Computer The first Computerized Greeting Card With Animation And True Sound!!! Now you BIRTHDAY DISK can send a unique greeting card to your friends and loved ones. Greetings by Computer allows you to send o personalized message which will be displayed along with the animated computer graphics. Music and actual voices will play and sing through your computer's standard speaker or Soundblaster card. No special equipment is needed.  SAVE MONEY!! REUSABLE CARD!!  You may send personalized greeting cards to as many friends and loved ones as you wish. Use it over and over again and you will save money over printed cards PERSONALIZED MESSAGES This disk contains an EASY TO USE message writer. You may enter up to an 8 line message that will display on the screen.  UNIQUE ANIMATED GRAPHICS AND TRUE SOUND!!! A new dimension in computer technology allows you to hear the animals talk and sing while on animated scene plays. Not computer generated sounds but TRUE SOUND as on a recording .plays through the standard speaker on your computer, or through a SoundBlaster card. People of all ages will enjoy this cord.  AUTOMATICALLY ADJUSTS TO ANY COMPUTER There is no need to be concerned with the type of computer your recipient has the program will automatically adjust to display at the resolution of the computer it is used with.  WHY WE ARE OFFERING GREETINGS BY COMPUTER FREE Our tests have shown that over 70% of the people who received a FREE copy of Greetings By Computer were so thriled with it that they ordered the other 2 disks in the series and recommended it to their friends. You will receive the BIRTHDAY DISK free. The other disks are an ANNIVERSARY DISK, and a GENERAL MESSAGE DISK. BE THE FIRST TO SEND THE MOST UNIQUE GREETING CARD OF THE 90'S... GREETINGS BY COMPUTER PERFECT FOR CHILDREN OF ALL AGES Send $5.00 for shipping and handling to: S Software 2880 Bergey Dept 600GY Hatfield, PA 19440 Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit the 42 games listed below in boldface type. The price for this editor is $59.95. That's under $1.50 per editor. Upgrades will be available for new games as they are released for only $9.95 per game. CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1,2,3,4,5), Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3), Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3). Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasures of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I, Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Drakkhen, Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller |(1 or 2), Keef the Thief, Escape from Hell, Ultima Underworld (1 or 2), Twilight 2000, Gateway to the Savage Frontier, Planet's Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, Prophecy of the Shadow, Dark Sun, Martian Dreams, Realms of Arkania, Challenge of the 5 Realms, Bloodstone, Betrayal at Krondor, Lands of Lore, Dungeon Hack, Disciples of Steel. HINT BOOKS $9.95 each except where noted Might and Magic 1, Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or Crusaders ($12.95)), Eye of the Beholder 2, Might and Magic 3 ($12.95). IBM listed. Apple and C64 versions also available. Marocard Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. VISA Open from 9 AM 9PM every day for your convenience. GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS P.O. Box 1083 Brighton, MI 48116 (313) 229-2453 Circle Reader Service #69 180 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"WARDA MARIONNAUDOVAVIVAVADWUNDAM ADVANCED WAVE TABLE BY SOUND BLASTER. ACCEPT NO IMITATIONS. The New Sound Blaster AWE32.5\" Introducing the wave of the future: the new Sound Blaster AWE32. It combines advanced wave table Sound BLASTER synthesis, a powerful digital signal processor, and the hottest audio effects all on the same sound card. That's why it's the next generation PC sound standard. The Sound Blaster AWE32 puts the world's purest music synthesis technology (from E-mu Systems) inside your PC. It also includes effects like chorus and reverb for increased depth and richness. And QSound so you can position sounds in 3D. It even comes with downloadable SOUND BLASTER AWE32 INCLUDES: SOUND BLASTER AWE32 GENERAL MIDI INTERFACE HSC INTERACTIVE SE TRUE 16-BIT CD SOUND THREE CD-ROM INTERFACES CREATIVE WAVESTUDIO 2.0 ADVANCED WAVEFFECTS MICROPHONE QSOUND CONTROL PANEL SYNTHESIS SOFTWARE INCLUDES: CREATIVE ENSEMBLE 32-VOICE POLYPHONY CAKEWALK APPRENTICE CREATIVE SOUNDO'LE\" SAMPUNG SUBSYSTEM FOR WINDOWS CREATIVE MOSAIC SoundFont technology, so you can add to the library of sampled sound effects and instruments. And the latest speech technology, so you can navigate through all the major Windows\" applications using voice commands. Of course, it's a Sound Blaster. So it makes all your favorite games and software sound more outrageous than you ever imagined. All this sound technology could cost you thousands. But the new Sound Blaster AWE32 is only $399.* No other sound card comes close. Sound interesting? Visit your local Creative Labs dealer. Or call 1-800-998-5227. BLASTER AWE32 CREATIVE CREATIVE LABS. INC. WAKE UP THE REST OF YOUR BRAIN.\" \"Suggested retail price. 1994 Creative Technology Ltd. Sound Blaster. Sound Blaster AWE:32. Advanced Wavliffects, Creative Voice Assist, Creative TextAssist, Creative Ensemble. Creative WaveStudio, Creative Soundo'LE and the Sound Blaster and Creative logos are trademarks of Creative Technology Ltd. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. U.S. inquitics: Creative Labs 1-800-998-5227 or 108-428-6600. International inquiries: Creative Technology Ltd., Singapore. TEL 65-773-0233 FAX 65-773-0353. Circle Reader Service #131 "


"guishing buyer. CYBER CORPS, a fast-paced team sport On-Line (continued from page 33) Novalink's flagship game is LEGENDS OF that plays on the Capture the Flag theme, FUTURE PAST, a multi-user role-playing uniis Novalink's latest addition. Two teams of quires would-be rail tycoons to build verse that won a special award from CGW \"borgs\" go head to head, running through transcontinental (or trans-island) rail netin 1993 for excellence in game mastering. labyrinthine hallways in search of crystals works that will enable them to pick up and It is a text-based system, similar in apto tag. The graphics are slick, the sound deliver the most profitable of the nine proach to many text-based games, but the even slicker, and the pace can be frantic, possible loads available at one time. It uses difference comes from its people. Novalink with very little in the way of system delay. a Windows-based front-end and allows employs two full-time game masters, in adThe system can support 10 games with 10 gamers to be planning their players each, though they're hardly hitting moves while other players are Game Map R uimte max capacity at this time. executing their own turns. Novalink's second most popular pastKINGDOM OF DRAKKAR is the time is similar to LEGENDS, though much showcase game of MPGN. KINGmore free-form. The VIRTUAL CAFE is a DOM OF DRAKKAR is a fully graphMUD-like environment that serves as a ic fantasy RPG with a colorful playpen in which people can talk, role-play, setting, interesting human-conand have some yuks on-line. The area is trolled citizens, and an easy-tomodeled after the Atlantic City boardwalk, use interface. Just to encourage with the usual casino sights and unusual adhuman interaction, the world of ditions (like a \"Holodeck\"). Here, users can Drakkar has existing guilds for play trivia games, stage an event they call those gamers who want to coop\"Virtual Talk\" (a sort of telecommunicated erate on various quests. When Oprah Winfrey show), and they've even characters build up enough exhad \"slumber parties» until the wee hours perience, they can create their Defend Arnhem in MPG-Net's Operation Market-Garden of the morning. own guilds. A new version is now Access Fees: $9.95 per month for five in place that offers new scenarhours access, and $3.60 for each subseios. dition to several part-timers, whose sole job quent hour ($1.80 per hour if accessed OPERATION MARKET-GARDEN is the comis to plan special events, create new feathrough the Internet). For more informaputer version of GDW's boardgame of the tures, host nightly quests, and bring the tion, call Novalink at (800) 274-2814. same name, and the graphic presentation LEGENDS world to life. You can play a charlooks just like that of the boardgame's colacter from one of several races and live out orful map. Since the original game used a full role-played career of swords, sorcery, PRODIGIOUS relatively intricate rules to handle fog of politics and intrigue. Your character can PRESENCE war, the computer is the ideal referee. Respecialize in a number of different skills for (PRODIGY) viewed in CGW #119, p. 164. combat, magic, and trade, and can join one Prodigy, like its IBM and Sears Roebuck STAR CRUSADER is a space combat game of the many Guilds in the land. The game predecessors, offers a forceful presence. It where you fly through a polygon-filled masters have recently added such nonquotes the largest base of users and is heavuniverse. It is now being overhauled from combat skills as weaving, weaponsmithing, ily e-mail oriented. Though its interface is its current 16-bit status into a new 32-bit woodslore, and alchemy, all of which have graphically presented, it has always had the engine. MPGN's plan is to keep this special functions in the game. As an examreputation of being slow. For gamers, CGW product in testing until they are ready to provides review coverage unveil the new, improved version. and hint files for Prodigy's Access Fees: MPGN charges $4.00 per Game Center, but there are hour, but some surcharges may apply relatively few multi-player when you connect through telecommunigames available on the netcations carriers. Call (800) GET-GAME for work more information. BASEBALL MANAGER is the ultimate fantasy/rotisserie style baseball game. You CONNECTIONS OF draft players and set rosters FUTURE PAST for both left and right(INOVALINK) handedness. Then, as the If America On-Line, CompuServe and actual players perform in Prodigy were large, full-service departCapture the crystals in Novalink's Cyber Corps real life baseball (assuming ment stores on virtual Main Street, the they aren't on strike, of Novalink network would be a boutique off course), they are factored a small side street. Novalink may not have ple of personal service provided by the into your custom team's performance. all of the services and support that the game masters, if you've been on the system Each day, you receive a customized sports large systems ofler, but the goods it does for a year, you can design and build your page screen with your team's results and sell are handmade crafts for the distinown house to your specifications. statistics from the previous day's game. As Ficado Lichd Just t9990 30 illition for TEON Fiendly. Taken. (ITEM JIH BordPr84) Snord est captur&d some i t TUN for Teen Sherg Hoiynitsi Akade kon c ertas come iltiVM for Team Fiendiyo Lov pestort into the distance, Round 1 Whitsi 182 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  OCTOBER 1994 "


"sim citu Are SETTINGS FEEDBACK SIMCITY Chat are About Sim CITU KOVS LEVEL Come Sign-up Oames in Progress Ranings Nassa90 File Library RACK Further Reading Dept. \"...to do for the on-line world TEN wil promote community through what MTV and Fox have done virtual hangouts that will function much for the TV world: cater to our like an Internet MUD, but will be more audience's specific interests powerful. They hope to implement a metaand break the rules.\" programming language that will enable What rules do they plan to people to create virtual objects, like chair's smash? Visual and interface and motorcycles, that have interesting rules, for a start. The graphic properties. environment of TEN will be The biggest news, though, is that TEN very customizable, with a halfwill be the home of SimCITY ON-LINE. dozen graphic templates that Maxis classic city simulator has been can be swapped like Swatch adapted to a multi-player-vironment, watches to fit your mood, and resulting in what TEN describes as a mix the system itself will change its between MONOPOLY and SimCriy. Games graphic look regularly. You of SimCrry ONLINE will be played with sevThe ground has been broken on TEN's SimCity Online will also be able to create a eral players involved with one city. As the graphic representation of game begins, players will bid for land your on-line persona much which they can then de clop as they a \"Custom Choice\" on the service, BASElike in INN, but the tools will be more funky please. As their plots of lane grow, players BALL MANAGER costs $100 beyond the basic and flexible. They describe the interface as will earn rental income and take a chunk pricing for a full season. \"gestural,\" which simply means that they've of taxes. So, rather than playing a city GOLF Tour allows you to participate in tried to avoid a menued interface in favor of mayor, players will be more like land owna golf tournament using Accolade's JACK ers and developers. NICKLAUS UNLIMITED GOLF product. SpeLike the system itself, all of the specifics cial tournament courses can be downfor SIMCITY ON-LINE have yet to be worked loaded for off-line play. You have one out. TEN will let things evolve, relving opportunity to get a good score on the Cyberspace is big. Very big. Al heavily on user input to shape the final course before you upload your results to though this article has walked down the state of the game. They may eventually inthe service and find out if you've made the well-lit streets of Cyburbia, there are troduce politics to the game, either basing leader board. many other gaming hangouts and hap mayoral elections upon the sheer number GUTS puts you in a nerve-wracking penings tucked away in dark corners of of SimCitizens you \"control\" or weighting trivia challenge where you try to answer the net. If you'd like to sniff out the the votes based upon your constituents' seven questions in seven minutes and more obscure gaming fare, we'd recom opinion of you as a landlord. every question is an \"all or nothing\" risk. mend netgames, a new book on on-line In addition to SimCITY ONLINE, TEN Weekly competitions are held for brag gaming from the author of the popular will launch with several other games. W12ging rights across the network. nelguide. Crammed between its fluores WAR is a computer version of a popular REBEL SPACE is a space conquest game cent covers you'll find a ton of board game of wizards where you control four ships which can be info on gaming and network and mazes. The eight A SUS customize according to tactical considera basics. Reach the MAGIC THE different wizard types tions. It is a very simple, turn-based PBEM GATHERING archives on the Innet games quest to capture treasure style game which can be played with daily, ternet. Find out where SHADusing 75 different spells weekly and bi-weekly turn schedules. OWRUN role-players thrash to mit Code to thin to aid them along. The Access Fees: the basic fee package is cyberpunk rock. Get involved Games People Play system will also offer $14.95 per month, plus $3.60 per hour. Call in AXIS AND ALLIES play-byw the Fleet CHESS (800) PRODIGY for more information. email games. Just about anyBACKGAMMON, and thing and everything that Optigon is currently trymatches the keywords \"gaming to license six other NETWORK MTV (TOTAL ing\" and \"on-line\" gets at least popular computer ENTERTAINMENT cursory mention in this handy games for on-line use. NETWORK) reference. Random House, $19.00. Aside from the games, TEN will feature Style, llair, attitude-adjectives that are the usual assortment of e-mail services, rarely used to describe on-line systems. Most chat groups, message areas, and software deserve words like functional, flat, busia 2-D layout. Commands are placed around libraries, in addition to limited Internet nesslike. While ImagiNation has managed a the periphery of the screen, making the opUsenet access. The Usenet area will be colorful motiff for its system, it gives one the tions more accessible and easy to memorize. unique in that it will organize and filter impression of skipping through a telecomTEN will go live in November, and they the Internet information to make it more municated Candy Land. Hardly hip. hope to start slowly, beginning with a core accessible and easy to use. Optigon Interactive's new Total Entertaingroup of users interested in helping them Access Fees: $10.95 a month for 5 hours ment Network (TEN) is out to inject some shape the environment. They also hope to of access, plus $3-4 for each subsequent attitude into the on-line world. The mission, provide their users with tools to do their own hour. For more information, contact in the words of founder Daniel Goldman, publishing on-line. Optigon at (800) 867-8446.6 Tx OCTOBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 183 "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL Art In The Third Dimension Take A Trip Inside 3D STUDIO, The Program That Is Truly Changing The Face Of Gaming by Paul C. Schuytema WA ITH THE RELEASE OF VERSION 3, AUTODESK'S 3D STUDIO SUITE OF modeling and animation programs have taken the world of PC game design by storm. Just wandering from booth to booth amid the mayhem of the Summer Consumer Electronic Show, I counted untold demos of games that all shared one common element: incredibly sexy, complicated 3D animation, all courtesy of 3D STUDIO. 3D STUDIO is only one of a growing regiment of sophisticated modeling and animation programs finding a home in the world of the game designer and game artist. While there have been 3D systems around for several years, most require DON'T RENDER THIS AT HOME! 3D STUDIO can be pretty dangerous in the hands of a professional, as this UNIX workstations as a minimum platmagnificent image from Sierra's OUTPOST can attest. Note the use of spotlights to create the \"hot form, and the cost for a single module of spots\" and reflectivity of the fuel \"bladders.\" a modeling program can easily run over $10K. 3D STUDIO, in its 2.0 incarnation, tions--to build a solid foundation—then be a literal cone, you can create a circle in was the first truly affordable, truly funcexpand by adding other procedures and the Shaper, then extrude it in the Lofter tional 3D modeling tool for game design. subroutines. This programming analogy with a cone restraint. If it is scalloped or It could run on a PC and generate animareflects very accurately the manner in ribbed, the artist may choose to create tions at nearly any imaginable resolution, which an artist creates images in 3D STUone half of a cross-section (imagine the Trilobyte's 7TH GUEST was the first major DIO. right half of a cross section of a wine gobhit that relied heavily on 3D STUDIO's While programming is fairly abstract let), then rotate and copy the shape to ability to build realistic sets that could be from the get-go, creating an image isn't create the ribs of the shape. seen on a PC. 3D STUDIO Version 3 is a necessarily so. For Jonathan Bock, the art To create something as complex as the significant improvement, and nearly director for the graphically stunning Mothership in OUTPOST, this process is every major design house now boasts at OUTPOST, the initial stages of the OUTused to create the basic shapes (or primileast one 3D STUDIO guru. POST art design involved drawing storytives). These shapes can then be assemboards to nail down the initial image bled and grouped into an object 3D THINK ideas. These drawings were even further hierarchy in the 3D Editor. The Mother3D Studio is not just a single program, refined before the artists even booted up ship 3D STUDIO model took the entire but a bundle of five core programs: 2D 3D STUDIO. Then things got tricky. The OUTPOST art team over two months to creShaper, Lofter, 3D Editor, Keyframer and 3D modelers had to turn a very intuitive ate. \"We went nuts on that one,\" rethe Materials Editor. But before a game 2D drawing into a virtual three-dimenmarked Bock. artist reaches into this powerful toolbox, sional object. While this may seem This grouping is one of the most interhe or she needs to learn how to think in straightforward, it requires rather obtuse esting aspects of model design in 3D STUcompartmentalized, discrete steps. When and non-commonsensical thinking. DIO. Basically, shapes are attached learning to program a computer, one To create the exhaust cone for a startogether to create larger and more comneeds to learn how to break a project ship's engine, for example, 3D STUDIO alplex groups which are then linked togethdown into individual steps and operalows several approaches. If the cone will er. Picture a wire-frame model of a 184 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"AH DIMENSION * ENTERTAINMENT For the Best Times on CD-ROM! ORDERS ONLY USA & CANADA 1.800.258.0533 9-9 Weekdays, 10-8 Saturday, 12-5 Sunday Your Complete source for all CD-ROM entertainment softwarel GET A OUTPOST VISA VISA Mastercard Checimento Free C3 PCplus. THEME PARK Think you can design and build the greatest amusement park in the world? You can select the site, you layout the rides. In fact, You control every aspect of running a highly profitable amusement park; from hiring employees, to developing new rides, to maintaining an adequate supply of soft drinks. Any mistakes and the bustling hordes of funseekers will let you know! PC Plus PORTADLA. POWER with Each Exciting issue of Our Imported PC PLUS MAGAZINE or many of the other Botish publications You get Working Software, Dozens of Shareware applications and Utilities, Games and playable Demos, Kids COI Books and Applications. Plus Reviews of whars out there and what's to come... all on CD! Start with a Single Issue or keep Your FREE CDs coming every Month with a subscription Now! SEE BELOW. BOOM. Earth is destroyed by a catastrophic event, and you're responsible for rebuilding civilization on another planet. Lucky you. Where you go and if you survive is up to you there's a galaxy of possibilities. DUTPO $45 REELMAGIC LITE HARVESTER HARVESTER LA FULTIMATE FOOTBALL Harvester is a graphically violent experience in terror, combining role playing action and arcade style combat with an intense, cinematic story line. Play an action-oriented simulation of the NFL or setup, run, and manage fantasy football leagues and teams using the real National Football League Players Association player roster. MPEG audio and video playback from a standard CD-ROM. Fullscreen, full-motion video in full color. CD-quality MPEG audio. Easy connection to sound cards. Look for ReelMagic-compatible story line. SAL Rec game game. $299 UNDER A KILLING MOON GEOSURG GETTYSBURG $43 I MULTIMEDIA Syste Under a Killing Moon takes you to the streets of post World War III San Francisco, into a Virtual World full of people and places so richly detailed, you'll feel like you're actually there. Experience The Battle of Gettysburg or Assume Command and Change the Course of History. Featuring over twenty minutes of scene from Turner Pictures' acclaimed epic Gettysburg with special narration by Civil War authority Shelby Foote. MULTIMEDIA System has real value! Sony doublespeed internal CD-ROM Drive. Sonic 16 Sound Card. LABTEC Amplified Speaker System. Deluxe Microphone. Includes 4 CD ROMS: Voyetra Sound Software, David Leadbetter Greens, Strike Eagle III. Compton's Family Encyclopedia $299 FAMILY ENTERTAINMENT ON IBM CD-ROM Cal 389 8 $33 $47 92888 $41 SA8 $41 $46 $48 X.com Zorro Call $37 $32 5 Foot 10 Pak Volume 1 $30 7th Guest 7th Guest Widune 7th Guest 2. The 11th Hour $55 Aegis. Guardian Of Fleet $50 Alien Legacy $42 Alien Logic $42 Al-qadin $42 Alone In The Dark Alone In The Dark 2 Animal Kingdom Armored Fist $50 B17/Silent Service 2 Battle Isle 2 $40 Battles Of Time $35 Beneath A Steel Sky Blood Bowl $34 Campaign $35 Chessmaster 3000 Coloring Book Comanche Maximum Overkill $60 Coral Reel Corridor 7 Cal Cowboy Casino Creature Shock Crime Patrol $39 Crime Patrol II $39 Cyber Race $39 Cycloners $47 D-day: Operation Overlord $28 Daring To Fly S43 Dark Sun Shattered Land $53 Dark Sun. Wake of the Ravager Call Darkseed $41 Day Of The Tentacle $42 Deathstar Arcade $14 Deep Voyage Delta v $44 Dennis Miller News To Me Dragon Lore $37 Dragons Lair $39 Dragonsphere $50 Dune $50 533338523533823338333333333333 Electric Sci-fi Anthology Escape From The Dead Zone Eye Of The Beholder 1,2,3 F-117a WIF1511 Falcon Gold Fantasy Fieldom Fast Attack Fighter Wing Firefighter Games Platinum Gateway 2 Gellysburg Giga Games Aug 93 Great Naval Battles 2 H.A.W.C. Harvester Hell Cab Horde, The Interactive Game Madness Iron Helix Jagged Alliance Jump Raven Jurassic Park Jutland Knight Of Zentar Lands Of Lore Lands Of Lore 2 Lawnmower Man Legend Of Kyrandia Legend Of Kyrandia Bk 2 Lemmings 3 Lode Runner-The Legend Returns Call Lost Eden Lost Treasures Of Infocom Lunicus Mad Dog II Mad Dog McCree Man Enough Mech Commander Megarace Menzoberranzan-Ad&d Microcosm S48 Movies On Tv & Video $28 Under A Killing Moon Murmurs Of Earth $32 Viper FAMILY LEARNING Myst $49 Virtual Vegas Nascar Racing EARLY LEARNING Bibles And Religion Who Shot Johnny Rock Call Novastorm Advanced Spelling Tricks Body Works $33 Out Of The Sun Call Wild Blue Yonder Best Neighborhood Ever Buzz Aldrin Space Out Of This World 2 Windoware Busiest Neighborhood Ever $33 Dictionary & Language Outpost $45 Wing Comm 2 Ultima Undrwrid $31 Busy Town $35 ESPN Baseball Hitting Panzer General ESPN Golf Tom Kite Call Wings of Glory Gus Goes To Cybertown $29 Phantasmagoria Kidworks 2 Wolipack Great Literature Plus $39 Police Quest 4 $51 History Of The World Liv.bk. Just Grandma & Me World Circuit $41 Quarantine History Line Liv.bk. New Kid On Block World View Rampage In The Company Of Whales Liv.bk. Ruff's Bone Ravenloft $53 World War II JFK Assassination Liv.bk. Tortoise & Hare Realms Ol Arkania: Star Trail Call Wrath Of The Gods Learn To Speak Eng/Engl $32 $56 Nigels World Rebel Assault Learn To Speak Eng French $56 Redshift $26 FAMILY LEARNING Learn To Speak Eng/German $56 Renegade Learn To Speak Eng/Spanish $56 Audubon Birds ADULT (18 & OVER) Return To Zork Berlitz Think, Talk French Mavis Beacon Tches Typing 2 $35 ENTERTAINMENT CALL $109 Sabre Team Berlitz Think, Talk German Mayo Clinic Health Bk OR CIRCLE READER SERVICE # 203 $109 Sam And Max Monarch Notes Berlitz Think, Talk Italian PORAUSTO ADULY TITLES Silly Noisy House $109 Beyond Planet Earth Nat Geo. Mammals Ency Sim Ant Nat. Geo. Presidents Sim City Nat. Geo. World Pict, Atlas Slayer Ad&d National Parks Amer Soft Kill PC CD-ROM MAGAZINES New Family Bible Space Pirates FREE CD-ROM ON MOST ISSUES Normandy Great Crusade Star Crusader SUBSCRIPT MAGAZINE SINGLE BILLED Ocean Life Vol 2 Star Trek 25th Aniversary $54 NAME ISSUE MONTHLY Ocean Life Vol 3 Star Trek Deep Space 9 come CD POWER PLAY $10 Prehistoria Star Trek Deep Space 9-the hunt $41 CD-ROM TODAY $10 Random House Dict 2nd Ed Star Trek Next Generation $59 CD-ROM USER Shakespeare Strike Commander Wilac-op $55 MULTIMEDIA & CD-ROM Sharks! Subwar 2050 PC FORMAT CD PC GAMER CD Solar System Super Space PC HOME CD Space Visual History Syndicate Plus PC PLUS CD Tropical Rainforest T2: Chess Wars PC POWER CD Woodstock 25th Anniv. PC TODAY CD TFX PC ZONE CO Zooguides 3 Africa Theme Park ISSUES MAC FORMAT CD $10 Zooguides 4 Rainforest Tie Fighter Subseronta Most Avalable with Disk(s) or CD. Call Tornado Desert Storm PRICE DOES NOT INCLUDE MAILING Treasure Hunters, Inc Trivial Pursuit Call 4th Dimension Ent., a Div. of Computer Basics, Inc., 1490 N. Hermitage Rd., Hermitage, PA 16148 UFO $36 Customer Service 412-962-0533. Orders normally shipped within 1 business day. Overnight shipping as low Ultima 1-6 $54 as $5.00. No hidden handling charges. Air Express Service: $0-99-7% minimum $5, $100 to $1995% Ultima 7 Complete $42 Minimum $7. $299-8499a4% minimum S10. Over $500 call. COD orders ok, add S5Prices subject to change Ultima 8 W/speech $50 ments gladly made within 10 days of purchase. Restocking charge may apply. Returns Ultimate Football Call not accepted without prior authorization. Customers responsible for return shipping CIRCLE READER SERVICE NO. 155 33333553885 EURO MAGAZINES CDROS $13 QB Call CDROME 383237888352888 $10 PC POWER 10 88.83 $42 $28 548 $27 8833833885 "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL Top <<<-> 3D Editor Create Select MOLIO Surface Hendapo Display do. Geometry.. Tape. Hackface Canecaz Edge Daly Vort Data Vert Ticks Pull Data BOX human hand. Each finger is constructed three allow for 3D maof a multitude of shapes: the nail, the tip nipulation: top, side of the finger, the knuckle, etc. All of these and front views of the parts can be grouped together to create, scene. The fourth winsay, an index finger. Then all of the fin dow can be assigned to gers, the thumb and the palm may be a camera to give you an grouped together as a hand. idea of how your rendered scene will look. 3D CRASH COURSE After placing my With a basic understanding of the wireframe models, I process, I decided to try my hand at crethen needed to assign ating an animated logo for this column. them a surface texture. Fueled by delusions of becoming the next 3D STUDIO comes bungaming graphics star, I loaded up 3D dled with a large STUDIO to begin a crash course, for your palette of material texpleasure of course, in 3D design. I had tures, and the Materials SELECTED A DC HOLGTEICH high hopes of sending my final animaEditor allows you to tion, priority mail, straight to George Lucreate even more. All I GET WIRED Objects appear as wire frame structures in the 3D Editor. cas' front door. Instead, even the local had to do was select an The lower right viewport is the camera view of the Hex, Bugs & Rock public access cable channel would probaobject and assign one n' Roll logo. bly turn it down. of the materials to it, My project began where most 3D STUbe it oiled walnut or Dio designs begin-the Shaper. The bright orange plastic. Shaper is a vector-based drawing proEach material has a gram that allows you to create silhouettes distinctive color, texof the shape you are working on. After ture and reflectivity. drawing the initial shape in the Shaper An object's surface program, you transfer that outline into can be as simple as a the Lofter, where you can create a threesolid color, or very, dimensional object out of it. The basic exvery complex. Some of trude commands are very intuitive: you the surface textures incan make a cylinder by extruding a circle. cluded with 3D STUDIO You also have a multitude of other lofting are mapping surfaces options, such as lofting to a path or dis(such as the mottled torting or rotating the shape as it gets exand pitted surface of truded. This, for me, was the trickiest part granite). These surfaces of the whole deal. Using the Lofter reare actually highly dequires you to access some deep dark neurtailed bitmap images al circuits in your brain, those which allow which are then applied MY MASTERPIECE The final, rendered version of my \"cutting edge\" logo. you to visualize shapes as evolving out of to the surface of what. Note the highlights on the inside of the hex. This was created by placing other shapes (3D STUDIO may be adever object you choose a spotlight directly behind the image and shining it through the vanced, but it can't think for you). CreatTo give even more conopening. ing just the right shape takes quite a bit of trol, you may apply a trail and error. texture by planar, The 3D Editor is where artists spend cylindrical or spherical projection. could go out into the field, take a Komost of their time. It is here where you You can even apply several different dachrome of a nicely weathered board, rotate, place, join and adjust your shapes. textures to a single object. This technique scan the image into a TIFF or GIF file It is also here where you assign textures, was used by Trilobyte in constructing the format, and you're ready to create your place lights and cameras, and render an dilapidated version of the Stauf mansion texture. image. for the 7TH GUEST sequel, 11TH HOUR. To allow a designer to more accurately When creating my rather busy Hex, While an original object may have had a create a real world texture, the Material Bugs & Rock n' Roll logo, I created the hex wallpaper texture applied to it, the look Editor can be used to assign a lot of extra shape and the musical note in the Shaper, just wasn't \"dirty\" enough to give a sense information to a material, beyond just the and then gave them some 3D \"life\" in the of real age. By applying a \"grunge» texbitmap of weathered wood. You can asLofter. In the Editor, I imported those obture, dirt and grime could be accurately sign reflectivity, transparency, blur and jects, as well as the ant and the drum set, simulated. If only redecorating a living other material properties to most accuand copied, rotated and placed them to room could be this easy! rately recreate a surface texture. create the scene I wanted. The Materials Editor program allows a Being the wily, creative designer-to-be, Since we aren't working in virtual realidesigner to edit or create a unique surface I messed around with a wood texture and ly here, the Editor provided me with four for an object. If your design called for was able to give it quite an odd set of rewindows on my wireframe word. The first weathered barnboard for example, you flective properties. In fact, I was able to 186 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"THIS OPPONENT IS PROGRAMMED TO BE CHALLENGING. this one wants to rip your lungs out. If you think you're good at games, then let's have some real the prices are competitive. So put some new life into your fun. When you're online with GEnie Multi-Player Games, joystick, and sign on. We'll see just how good you are. Sign you're playing real people, in real time. Some of the best playup now: 1. Set your modem for half duplex (local echo) at ers around the world. Splash a bandit in Air Warrior, and 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free 1-800-638-8369. you've just taken out eight other guys, who'll be back gunning Upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U#= prompt, enter for you. Blast a MechWarrior in Multiplayer Battle Tech, and JOINGENIE then press RETURN 4. At the key code prompt who knows? Could be that jerk from the coast. Could be a enter AAJ428 5. Have a major credit card or your checking mercenary who's looking for a few good friends. o With GEnie, account number ready. For more information in the the possibilities are endless, the people are terrific, and even U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636, TDD 1-800-238-9172. CAPARI D PEGEnig GEnie es multi-player games 100% ORGANIC OPPONENTS AIR WARRIOR MULTIPLAYER BATTLETECH STELLAR EMPEROR\" WKESMAL U corporation Air Warrior is a registered trademark and Stellar Emperor is a trademark of Kesmal Corporation. Multiplayer BattleTech is a trademark and MechWarrior and BattleTech are registered trademarks of FASA Corporation Circle Reader Service #228 "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK'N ROLL MPG-NET's Answer Line What is a Multi-Player Game? create a wonderfully eroded metal look (I like to think of it as my «Apollo 11 reentry blast plate\" texture). After nailing down my surface textures, I returned to the 3D Editor to place a few dramatic spotlights. I then created a camera, placing it just like the spotlight. You have to use at least two of the view windows to get the camera placed just where you want it, and you can use the camera view to check your work. I could then select the field of view as well as the lens on the camera. A multi-player game may be as simple as a game of checkers or as advanced as a role-playing world. No matter what the game, you'll be playing with live people from all over the globe. From Florida to California, Kuwait to Hong Kong the Multi-Player Games Network connects players, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to our graphic games network. Battle strange creatures in our fantasy world the Kingdom of Drakkar while you and your friends try to solve the puzzles that have imprisoned the land! You can play a game with friends that have moved away or meet new people in one of our many conference rooms. Multi-Player Games mean online entertainment from anywhere in the world with anyone in the world on MPG-NET. MPG-NET can be accessed with a local phone call from most major cities. Call our 800 number now to receive our starter kit and plunge into the Kingdom of Drakkar. Join other live players and over 1000 computer-driven creatures and characters as you try to solve the mysteries of Drakkar. Railroad and War gamers can challenge each other to battles of wit and strategy in our on-line versions of Empire Builder and Operation Market-Garden Stay tuned for updates on our December Release! MPG-NET will soon become a complete graphic network from logon to logoff. No more text menus. No more headaches trying to connect. Our new Graphic Front-End will set the standard for on-line entertainment. Finally, a network that is easy and fun to use! Also to be released are three exciting new games! Fiefquest and Warlords of the Apocalypse\" and an on-line version of the Flying Buffalo classic, Starweb! THE PAYOFF Just like that, in only six weeks of hard work, I was ready to render my first image! I selected the render command, selected my view, and we were off! As I watched the red bar indicate the progress of my render, I came to the conclusion that this was a very time consuming process indeed. Just imagine sitting at your PC as you wait for the program to render some of the 22,000 frames of ultra-detailed animation in Virgin's 11TH Hour. Time enough to take a trip to the Cannes Film Festival and still have time for a two double-decaf lunch. When you consider what's going on as 3D STUDIO renders a scene, the time seems quite reasonable. 3D STUDIO performs true ray tracing, which is an algorithmic process that traces a light beam from its source to its conclusion. Ray tracing is necessary to create cast shadows and reflective surfaces, but brother does it push a computer to its limit. That is why 3D STUDIO allows a designer to use a \"rendering farm\" approach to speed up the process. Basically, 3D STUDIO will take control of a LAN (which can be PCs on a few desks or a rack of monitorless 486s) and distribute the frames to each computer. When one computer completes rendering a frame, it is passed another frame to render, thereby speeding up the entire process by many times. After heading out for a brisk, late-night constitutional, I returned to find my image waiting for me. The composition looked great, but the second spotlight was way off its mark. I guess I should have taken a lesson from the pros and rendered the image at low resolution first to make sure everything was in order. Ah well, you learn as you go.... Next month, we'll spend some time in the Keyframer program, exploring the ways in which game artists create animated images that \"shake, rattle and roll.\" MPG-NET, providing you with games that will take you out of this world! MPG-NET Your Multi-Player Games Network SM 800-245-0317 1994 MPG-Net, Inc. Multi-Player Games Network and MPG-Net are service marks of MPG.Net, Inc. The Kingdom of Drakkar is a trademark of Drakkar Corp. Empire Builder is a trademark of Mayfair Games, Inc. Operation Market-Garden and Star Cruiser are trademarks of GDW Games, Inc. Fiefquest and Warlords of the Apocalypse are trademarks of The Dreamer's Guild. All other brand and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders Circle Reader Service #250 188 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"LIVE ACTION CRIMES ::: PATROL CRIME PATROL This multi-level live-action thriller challenges the player to progress through police ranks. As a Rookie the player takes on gang members, armed robbers and other street criminals. Promotion to Detective will mean working undercover against drug dealers and car thief rings. Confront bank robbers and terrorists once you're selected for SWAT team assignment. The better player will reach Delta Force and tangle with a criminal element threatening national security. PC CD Available Mac CD November The Arcade Smash Hit by AMERICA RATES TES SPACE PIRATES\" MERICAN Planet-hopping pirates lead by the evil Captain Talon, have captured a ship of innocent space colonists. The player, a Star Ranger, must save the colonists and head off Talon's plans to rule the universe. The player will face hordes of pirates in an effort to collect energy crystals from a variety of worlds. The crystals power the star splitter cannon, the only weapon that can blast Talon and his misfits into another galaxy. PC CD Available Mac CD  MERICAN LASER GAMES, LIVE ACTION PC CD GAMES MAC CD GAMES FOR AVAILABILITY CALL 800-880-1718 Circle Reader Service #236 "


"OPRONENTS races... Ziff NET Seeking local opponents in The Grandest Fleet, Merthe Vancouver, BC area to chant Prince, World Circuit, do battle in playing Sea Operation Crusader, Mech wolf, Doom!. Command HQ. Warrior // or anything else 688 Attack Sub or any oth new and fun. Cail Allen at er games by modem. Call H-(713) 690-3226. or David in the lower mainland write to me on CompuServe area anytime at (604) 264 at 72460.2664 or on the 7998 and let's do battle! ImagiNation Network (INN) at: Box 94717. San Diego area gamer looking to connect with Indycar, Opponents wanted to get World Circuit. Seawolf and involved in play-by-mail DOOM. I have a Viva 14.4 type games, particularly modem. Call anytime after Merchant Prince, Empire 4pm or on weekends (which Deluxe and others. Call Looking for a Patton to play against your Rommel? Need some fresh meat for network are best). Ask for Gary in El Keven at H-(717) 645Doom-fests? On the hunt for a gamer's bulletin board system in your area? Well, you Cajon, CA at H-(619) 579. 9757 or write to Keven might find what you need on CGW's White Page. If you'd like to place your own ad, Page If you'd like to place your own ad 6575. See you at the Faenza, 54 West Miner St., Coaldale, PA 18218. send us a postcard, CGW Poll card, letter, FAX [714-283-3444) or email (Prodigy [EXPT40B), CompuServe [76703,622], The Sierra Network at [Box 1048], GEnie or Looking for a play-by-mail Seeking opponents for moAmerica On-Line at [CGW]). Generally, we run them only once, so send another each game of Front Page Sports dem play in the Colorado Football or modem games month you want your name listed. The ads themselves should serve as reasonable Springs, CO area. I would of Empire Deluxe or Falcon love to play The Perfect examples to write your own. However, 3.0. Call Mark at H-(703) General, Empire Deluxe,  Provide at least one telephone number. Do not forget the area code and mention 777-1749 after 6pm EST, Modem Wars or just about whether the number is Home, Work or Modem. I'm in the northern Virginia anything else you've got a area. hankering to lose at (hehe Include your city and state so that people who call you will know what time zone heh). Contact Steve Woodyou are in and recognize it when they see it on their phone bill. Seeking opponents in the cock at H-(719) 392-2975 Chicago area (708 or 312) or by email via the InterNet for Command HQ. Call Joe at: swoodcoc@oldcolo.com. Computer Gaming World magazine also appears as its own Forum on at (708) 782 6272. CompuServe's ZiffNet. To access our editors and writers on-line, just I'm seeking statewide oppoGO GAME WORLD. Topics include: Hey Editor!, Opponents Wanted, The I am looking for people in nents for the following the Illinois area for a round games: DOOM, F-15 III and Hardware Zone, Online Gaming and many more. Join us, won't you? or two of The Perfect Gen Falcon 3.0. Please, call eral. I'll call you if you are Gladden at H-(803) 283. afraid of high phone bills. 1082 or 283-1092 if you BULLETIN BOARD SYSTEMS Brazen's Hell! BBS is the invite all those interested ford, CT area. Call me at H. You can reach me at home are in South Carolina or place to be for both on-line in gaming and related top (203) 322-7472 at (708) 438 2073 (be southern North Carolina. The Enterprise BBS is look gaming and contacting oth ics to give us a call at sure to leave a message on Other modem games possiing for new members to join er for modem game play. (206) 721-0462. We have Opponents wanted for VGA the answering machine) or ble. I am in Lancaster, SC. our nationwide Thokker We are DOOM Headquarters a good variety of door Planets in the Los Angeles email me on the GEnie net On Prodigy: [MDBD43F1 or Players Conference, with East with special message games such as VGA Planets area. Also willing to host work at J.Goldbogen. the InterNet IMDBD43F guest SysOp Jay Coleman! areas just for meeting other v3.15, Solar Realms Elite, the game, if need be. @prodigy.com]. We are the originators of players to establish modem Yankee Trader, Usurper. have a registered copy and Local opponents sought in the Worldwide ThokkerNet. games. Also, being an offi Legend of the Red Dragon can play either regular or the Chicago/Peoria are for I'm looking for a local We have over 2 gigs of files cial distribution site for and others. We also con. registered. If I host. I will any modem gaming, espe gamer that would like an and more than 35 on-line companies such as Apogee, nect callers with like mind play and employ the pass cially The Grandest Fleet, opponent for flight sims games. This is one of the Id. Epic, etc., we always ed individuals from modem word option to insure that Conquered Kingdoms. Em such as Falcon 3.0 and F. only BBS' where you can have the latest creations playable games such as am not cheating. I am uspire Deluxe and any that 16 Fighter Pilot. Also, find the famous .WAV file the day that they are re. Falcon 3.04, DOOM, Sea ing VGA Planets 3.0. Call you think you can win at Doom! players wishing to of Bab Gage and his leased. We specialize in woll, Conquered Kingdoms, Mike between 6pm and (hehehe). Call Bill at H. find a good opponent have \"Okaaaaaaaay!\" speech. DOOM external levels, too. Indycar Racing, World Cir. 9pm Pacific Time at H. (708) 599-6558. Be sure one here. Call Sean in Simi Speeds up to 57,600 BPS, with 200+ available. 5 CD cuit and many others. We (213) 222-6011. (Please to leave a message. Valley, CA at (805) 527with Sys Op Spock, ROMS and over 2.8 gigs of support 1200 to 19,200 don't call at any other 2031. or write to me on CoSysops Howling Frog and files, 28800 BPS access baud speeds on one line. time!) Julius Caesar seeks noble Prodigy at XJTR11C Zephyrus, and ThokkerNet 24 hours, 7 days, 2 nodes 24 hours, 7 days, year ghost-testers for play-byCoordinator Thokker Mas and over 50 on-line games. round. Your SysOp is SAV I'm seeking local opponents transom gaming of a new Opponents wanted for netter, Call (405) 364-2536. We're in Laurel, MD at IOR, and I hope to \"see\" in the Clarksburg, WV area product based on the hit work DeathMatch gaming in It's free! (301) 776-8259. Your you around. who are up for just about song, 1 Only Have Ides for Goldsboro, NC for DOOM. SysOp is Brazen. any type of modem game. You. Call him at 555-40BC. Show up every Sunday at Call Defend Psychosis BBS Call Jason at H-(304) 783 No Gauls! ipm at MCS Computer, at (614) 328-6886. We're The Mr. Blotto BBS is 5228 309 N. Spence Avenue, or located in Marion, Ohio. Chicago's home of great onGAME WANTED Opponents sought for mo call (919) 751-5777. New users Access Code is line battle and war games. Wanted: a modem opponent dem (up to 14.4K baud) PSYCHO, please mention Come check us out! Con Wanted: Cartels & Cut in Northeast Maryland for and PBEM gaming. I enjoy CGW in email to the SysOp. quer the universe with VGA throats. I am seeking an The Perfect General, ComWeird Al. We're running Planets or lead your empire IBM version of this 1981 mand HQ, Empire Deluxe or VBBS software up to THE NETWORKS to glory in Imperium. Can SSI game. I will pay a rea other PBM games. Call Josh 14.400 baud. We have you take over the world in sonable price for a new or in Hanford county, MD at The following are voice contact numbers for many SoundWare CD-ROM on Global War or would you used copy. Thanks in ad H-(410) 939-1021. of the various on-line network services that connect line, plus the latest version rather indulge in tome vance! Contact Stephen gamers. Call them for more information. of Trade Wars 2002 (5,000 head-to-head combat in Bell, 417 W. 21st Street. I'm looking for some in. America On-Line: (800) 827-6364 sectors!), Operation Overkill The Pit. Loyal game players New York, NY 10011 or tense competition in the loCompuServe Information Service: (800) 848-8990 2. Mealtime Melee. Murder receive extended access. call me at home (212) cal Pittsburgh, PA area for Motel, Blackjack, Lemon 2400 to 14.4 BAUD, with 691-5424 Doom! death matches. ConNovalink (formally Digital Dreams) Network: (800) ade Stand and more! Free 2 lines. Call (312) 725tact Jim at H.(412) 884. 274-2814 downloads, free member 6628 or (312) 725-7474. 7197 Genie: (800) 638-9636 ship. 24 hours, 7 days. Leave a message for verifiThe ImagiNation Network: (800) IMAGIN-1 Note that this BBS is a cation to SysOp Brian WadOPPONENTS WANTED DOOM death match players Multi-Player Games Network: (800) GET-GAME haven for people who want dick. BY AREA CODE wanted in the New Orleans, National Videotex (NVtel): (800) 336-9096 to let it all go and be themLA area. A 14,400 V42BIS Prodigy: (800) 822-6922 x556 selves, no matter how sick The 14th Chapter BBS is Doom!, anyone? I'm seeking modem is required. Call me USA Today Sports Network: (800) 826-9688 or demented. Be prepared! Seattle, WA would like to local players in the Stam at H-(504) 838-6129. 190 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"THE MARKETPLACE Call your Account Representative, Marci Yamaguchi, at (714) 283-3000 x37 for information on how you can advertise your game, product or service in the economical MARKETPLACE section. TOALDATDATIO Games Too Expensive? Consider Pre-owned Software Save big $S$ over new Original disks and manuals IBM AMIGA C64  Hard-to-find classics plus all the latest releases Call or write for free catalog (specify computer) Bare Bones Software 940 4th Ave #222 Huntington WV 25701 1-800-638-1123 Customer Service: 304-529-0461 BBS for complete list: 304-529-7050 Reader Service #45 DSZEREED \"Powerful programs of growth and adventure\" MAGIC MIRROR I... a toolbox for your mind. E. Kinnie, PhD., Clinical Psychologist, $39.95. MAGIC MIRROR II ... experiences for your mind, $39.95. THREE GATES ... skryeing, awareness shifting, I Ching and runes, $39.95. MERLIN ... an apprenticeship. $29.95. PHOENIX FIRE... high-tech Ouija Board, $39.95. MAGIC MOUNTAIN ... weird adventure, male and female versions, not for children, $39.95. Blue Valley, 29 Shepard St., Walton, NY 13856 ZASLANMASI MasterCard/Visa 1-800-545-6172 (after 5 p.m.) SABABISAN BARABARA FATA Reader Service #48 PAPER MAYHEM The NEW CAPE COD CONNECTION ELECTRONIC SHOPPING MALL \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" Sometimes you just need a GameFix The Forum of Ideas Do you know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 10 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies, PBM game & company ratings and more fill each issue. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news. So why delay and miss out on all the fun? PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG, 1518 Adams St. Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: Please inquire for ratos. Our BBS is back 24 HOUR Electronic On-Line Shopping is available. . Download our complete new & used Software, Tabletop & Sports Apparel Catalogs, updated daily with new products. OnLine Ordering 24 Hours . One of the largest used software listing available today. Have us sell your used software on consignment. Robert Berry, Proprietor 21 PLEASANT VIEW AVENUE FALMOUTH, MA 02540 BBS 508-548-2908. HELP 508-457-0738 24 HOUR FAX 508-457-4558 Reader Service #50 Announcing a new monthly magazine that is more than about games it includes one! If you don't have the time to learn and play games like you used to, consider GameFix, a monthly, 32 page color magazine with: A complete board or card game inside every issue, featuring: Reader Service #101 an 11\" x 17\" map 100 color cards of die cut counters low complexity, high replay value SSI's Out of Print Wargames Are Back For Only $15!!! B-24 Mech Brigade Star Command Battle of Antietam Rebel Charge Stellar Crusade Battles of Napoleon Red Lightning Storm Across Europe Conflict: Middle East Second Front Wargame Construction Set Gettysburg Shiloh: Grant's Trial Warship Kampfgruppe Sons of Liberty Western Front A feature article on the game's subject Dave Wood's Armchair Gamer review column Game variants and scenarios A low $6.95 cover price Scenario Disks for SSI's Battles of Napoleon for $10 Scenario Disks for SSI's Wargame Construction Set II: Tanks! for $15 For more information, call (916) 362-0875, or for a 4-issue trial sibsription, send $19.00 to: Our hours are 8:00 am to 5:00 pm PST M-F We accept Visa, M/C, Checks, Money Orders To order or request a free catalog contact: Novastar Game Co.  P.O. Box 1813. Rocklin, CA 95677 . (916) 624-7113 Game Publications Group 8795 La Riviera Dr. Suite 182 Sacramento, CA 95825 Reader Service #219 Reader Service #67 OCTOBER 1994 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 191 "


"company ana Phone Index FREE FREE INFO. # COMPANY PHONE PAGE INFO. # COMPANY PHONE PAGE 35 81 211 155 82 244 245 33 256 114 236 246 25 45 149 247 248 86 147 74 50 191 88 51 207 237 190 54 249 252 89 213 214 150 171 93, 96 216 250 94 253 151 152 217 218 219 200 209 56 131 238 229 132 63, 64, 66 255 181 254 111 222 55 51 145 15 85 13 20 97 223 239 11 227 240 167 21st Century (716) 8721200 169 Entertainment, Inc. 4th Dimension (800) 2580533 185 Entertainment Accolade (800) 245-7744 63 Accolade (800) 245-7744 205 Advanced Gravis (800) 6638558 Cover 3 American Laser (800) 8801718 189 Games Apogee Software (800) GAM-E123 Avalon Hill Game Co. (800) 9993222 161 Bare Bones Software (800) 638-1123 191 Bethesda (800) 6770700 4,5 Bethesda (800) 6770700 175 Blue Valley (800) 545-6172 191 Cape Cod Connection (800) 548-2908 Capstone Software (800) 468-7226 102 Capstone Software (800) 468-7226 113 Capstone Software (800) 468-7226 65 67 CH Products (619) 598-2518 131 Chips & Bits (800) 699-4263 72-81 Chips & Bits (800) 699-4263 116, 117 Chips & Bits (800) 699-4263 66 Computer Express (800) 228-7449 92-95 Creative Labs (800) 998-5227 181 Delphi (800) 6954005 Diamond Computers (800) 4-MULTIMEDIA 107 Domark (800) 695GAME Dongleware (617) 4971130 179 Dynamix, Inc (800) 757-7707 insert Dynamix, Inc. (800) 757-7707 41 Dynamix, Inc. (800) 757-7707 Dynamix, Inc. (800) 757-7707 Dynamix, Inc. (800) 757-7707 Dynamix, Inc. (800) 757-7707 Eidolon, Inc. Electromedia (800) 57CDROM Productions, Inc. Electromedia (800) 57CDROM Productions, Inc. Electronic Arts (800) 2454525 Empire Interactive (800) 216-9706 Entertainment Epic MegaGames (800) 972-7434 37 Falcon Northwest (800) 258-6778 39 FormGen, Inc. (800) 263-2390 Cover 2 G E Info. Systems (800) 638-9636 187 Game Publications (916) 362-0875 191 Group Gamer's Gold (800) 3778578 203 Gametek 86, 87 Gosselin Computer (313) 229-2453 180 Consultants GT Software (800) 3629400 48 Hi-Tech Expressions 105 Hi-Tech Expressions Home Base Products 172 HPS Simulations (408) 544-8381 137 Imagination Network (800) 4624461X746 171 Impressions (617) 225-0848 89 Impressions (617) 225-0848 91 Intellimedia (800) 831-2469 115 Interplay (714) 553-6678 101 Productions, Inc. Interplay (714) 553-6678 Productions, Inc. Interplay (714) 553-6678 Productions, Inc. Interplay (714) 553-6678 Productions, Inc. Keyboard & Terminal (908) 297-5399 Technology Keyboard Commander (800) 2626066 130 Corp. 220 99 101 153 102 195 KOEI (415) 348-0500 134 Lead Pursuit, Inc. (714) 3628698 Logitech (800) 889-0037 34, 35 Looking Glass Technologies Looking Glass Technologies Looking Glass Technologies LucasArts (800) STAWARS Entertainment, Co. Luminaria Matrox Graphics (800) 361 1408 Megatech (800) 258-MEGA 201 Merit Software (800) 238-4277 104 Merit Software (800) 238-4277 195 Merit Software (800) 238-4277 53 Merit Software (800) 238-4277 123 Microforum (800) 465CDCD 215 MicroLeague (800) 334-6572 109 MicroLeague (800) 334-6572 57 MicroProse (800) 879-play 140, 141 MicroProse (800) 879-play 111 Mission Control (800) 9997995 198, 199 Momby, Inc. (800) 636-6629 197 MPG NET 188 Multimedia Specialists (800) 233-0010 173 Nawu Triad 166 New World Computing (800) 325-8898 New World Computing (800) 325-8898 New World Computing (800) 325-8898 NovaLogic, Inc (818) 7740812 Novastar Game Co. (916) 624-7113 191 Ocean of America (408) 954-0201 127 Origin Systems (800) 2454525 Cover 4 Origin Systems (800) 2454525 Paper Mayhem (815) 433-2047 191 Papyrus (800) 836-1802 125 Paramount Interactive (415) 8138040 Philips CD60, 61 Psygnosis (617) 497-7794 151 Quantum Quality (908) 788-2799 155 Products Quantum Quality (908) 788-2799 157 Products REM Software (313) 4571161 172 S Software (800) 243-1515 180 Sideline Software (800) 888-9273 Sierra Direct (800) 795-5979 163 Sierra On-Line (800) 757-7707 Sierra On-Line (800) 757-7707 Sigma Design (800) 845-8086 Software Support (800) 356-1179 International Spectrum Electronics (800) 983-4321 Spectrum Holobyte (800) 695GAME 121 Starlite Electronic (800) 552-9880 168 StarPlay Productions, (800) 447-9562 209 Incorporated Strategic Gaming Design (919) 5521807 114 Strategic (800) 2454525 153 Simulations, Inc. Strategic (800) 2454525 165 Simulations, Inc. Strategic (800) 2454525 143 Simulations, Inc. Take 2 Interactive Sw. 129 Take 2 Interactive Sw. Thrustmaster, Inc. (503) 6393200 ThunderSeat (800) 8THUNDER Technologies Titan Games (800) 247-5447 162 . Please see advertisement for contact information 138 177 ALE 136 179 180 141 143 119 228 67 107 166 164 120 2,3 98 128 251 194 61 257 242 103 115 224 230 225 243 77 259 ... 943 258 183 184 161 185 112 169 150 117 80 192 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"ADVERTISER Product index Game and Product Index FREE FREE INFO. # PRODUCT COMPANY PAGE INFO, # PRODUCT COMPANY PAGE 44 69 255 131 181 94 107 251 230 218 223 241 33 111 239 195 20 207 .9 28 214 258 250 Tag 153 190 150 115 138 259 51 3 177 237 236 225 81 63, 64, 66 76 249 256 53 120 114 242 136 r 238 101 40 194 50 45 68 179 161 80 213 109 79 141 252 244 245 246 5th Fleet Avalon Hill Game Co. 161 Aces of the Deep Dynamix, Inc insert Advanced Wave Creative Labs Table by Soundblaster Arena CD-ROM Bethesda Armored Fist NovaLogic, Inc Battle Bugs Dynamix, Inc. Battle Isle 2000 Accolade \"Best of Philips Philips CD-I CD-I Blood Bowl MicroLeague By Gamers For Interplay Productions, Inc.7 9 8 Gamers Colonization MicroProse 140, 141 Computer and Video Spectrum Electronics Hardware and Software Corridor 7 Capstone Software CD-ROM Crime Patrol American Laser Games 189 Crystal Caliburn StarPlay Productions, Inc. 209 Pinball Cyberia CD-ROM Interplay Productions, Inc. 101 CyberJudas Merit Software Cyclemania Accolade 205 Cyclones Strategic Simulations, Inc. 153 DarkSun 2 Strategic Simulations, Inc. 165 Dawn Patrol empire Interactive 210 Entertainment Delphi Internet Delphi 55 Delta V Bethesda 4,5 Doom 11 GT Software 48 Electronic Shopping Cape Cod Connection 191 Mall BBS F 16 Thrustmaster, Inc. 118 Falcon & MIG Keyboard Commander Corp. Commander Falcon MACH V Falcon Northwest Fighter Wing Merit Software Flight Unlimited Looking Glass Technologies Flight Unlimited Looking Glass Technologies Flight Unlimited Looking Glass Technologies Fortress of Dr. Merit Software Radiaki FPS Football Dynamix, Inc. Front Lines Impressions GameFix Game Publications Group Games Master Keyboard & Terminal Technology GEnie Multi-player GE Information Systems Games Greetings By S Software Computer Growth and Blue Valley Adventure Sw. Hammer of The New World Computing Gods Harvester Merit Software Hell Take 2 Interactive Software High Seas Trader Impressions Imagination ImagiNation Network Network Impression Plus Matrox Graphics Interactive Chips & Bits Entertainment Iron Cross New World Computing Jazz Jackrabbit Epic MegaGames Joyswitch Lead Pursuit, Inc. King's Quest Sierra On-Line Knights of Xentar Megatech LODE RUNNER Dynamix, Inc. LODE RUNNER Dynamix, Inc. Lords of Midnight Domark Mail Order Mission Control 198, 199 Mail Order Momby, Inc. 197 Mail Order Titan Games 162 Mail Order Products 4th Dimension Entertainment 185 Mail Order Products Chips & Bits 72 81 240 143 Mail Order Products Computer Express 92 95 Mail Order Products Gosselin Computer Consultants 180 Mail Order Products Multimedia Specialists 173 Mail Order Products Sideline Software 166 Mail Order Products Software Support International Mail Order Products Starlite Electronic 168 Mail Order Sw Gamer's Gold 203 METALTECH Dynamix, Inc. Millenium Auction Eidolon, Inc. Mortal Kombat Hi-Tech Expressions 105 MPG-NET'S MPG NET Answer Line NASCAR RACING Papyrus New Family Ad CH Products Noctropolis Electronic Arts Nothing But Net Strategic Gaming Design 114 Novastorm Psygnosis 151 Operation Body Capstone Software 65 67 Count Operation Europe KOEI 134 Oxyd, Oxyd Dongleware 179 Magnum! Tubular Worlds Panzer General Strategic Simulations, Inc. 143 Phantasmagoria Sierra On-Line 2,3 Phoenix Advanced Gravis Cover 3 Pilot Control Stand Home Base Products 172 Pinball Arcade 21st Century 169 CD-ROM Entertainment, Inc. Play By Mail Paper Mayhem 191 Magazine Pre-Owned Sw. Bare Bones Software 191 Quarantine Gametek 86, 87 Quoting the Quotes Quantum Quality Products 155 Real Magic Sigma Design Sabre Team MicroLeague Soccer's Your Intellimedia 115 Game Sorority House Electromedia Productions, Inc. 71 Spear of Destiny FormGen, Inc. Cover 2 Mission Disks Sprint Sierra Direct Star Crusader Take 2 Interactive Software Star Trek: Deep Paramount Interactive Space 9 Star Wars Screen LucasArts Entertainment Co. Entertainment Stealth 64 Diamond Computers Stonekeep CD-ROM Interplay Productions, Inc. Street Fighter Hi-Tech Expressions Series I & II TEX Ocean of America The Grandest Quantum Quality Products Fleet The Infinity REM Software Machine The New Video Microforum Game Solution CD ThunderSeat ThunderSeat Technologies Technologies Tigers on the Prowl HPS Simulations Triad Campaign Nawu Triad System Ultimate Football MicroProse Video Games Chips & Bits 116, 117 Virtual Vegas Electromedia Productions, Inc. 167 Voyeur CD-ROM Interplay Productions, Inc. Wacky Wheels Apogee Software 25 Wargames Novastar Game Company Wild Blue Yonder Spectrum Holobyte 121 Wing Commander III Origin Systems Cover 4 Wing Man Extreme Logitech 34, 35 Wings of Glory Origin Systems Wrath of The Gods Luminaria 149 Zephyr New World Computing 64 Zorro Capstone Software 113 88 164 183 102 222 78 RO 67 169 9 228 . z 89 184 77 185 243 253 166 248 209 111 171 200 152 227 174 159 211 219 191 201 85 51 99 11 98 86 181 254 132 93 216 117 155 54 247 151 207 Please see advertisement for contact information. OCTOBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 193 "


"SHAREWARE SHOWCASE The Ancient Art Of Wari by Chuck Miller Game Options Quit Battlefield Berm Busting End Turn Qeder frala History N SHAREWARE, UNLIKE COMMERCIAL and The Al Zibavir Road—are available Sound effects are minimal but not wholly SOFTWARE, ACTION GAMES FAR OUTto registered users. insufficient. The graphics aren't bad, but WEIGH THOSE OF OTHER GENRES. In this first campaign, your company, a some color combinations make identificaWhether this is due to the dynamics Coalition force, is charged with securing a tion of friendly and opposing forces diffiof the gaming market, the amount of sector of Iraq comprised of numerous cult. Hopefully a different color scheme work necessary to create titles that ofberms or bunkers while waiting for oncomwill be adopted for future releases. fer more than twitch-and-shoot activiing forces to arrive. At your disposal are All in all, BATILES IN A DISTANT DESERT ty, or both, it is nonetheless true that Apache assault helicopters, MIAI tanks, offers the military strategist some quality arcade games dominate the shareware M2 IFVs, HMMWVs and several rifle tactical exposure. Play is challenging, yet scene. So, when occasional strategic squads. With these you must meet elenot overbearing. Still, by nature of the games emerge, they don't capture much ments of several Iraqi divisions, plus some scenarios presented, this title is better of the spotlight. That's why when I come mechanized reinforcements due to arrive suited to staunch wargamers than genreacross good strategy games, I like to give during the scenario. The action lasts for 50 crossover players. For armchair generals, them a run for their money. Two titles turns. this game definitely merits a download. that ran and are worth the money are Of course, should you choose, you can BATTLES IN A DISTANT DESERT (Release BATTLES IN A DISTANT DESERT and Wari: take the Iraqi side. To meet victory condi1.8, May 1, 1994) requires a 386 or betTHE ANCIENT GAME OF AFRICA from Imagtions for Iraq, you must destroy 12 Coaliter PC with VGA graphics, Windows 3.0 iSOFT.     or higher and a minimum of 4MB RAM. Sound support is DESERT BEFORE DINNER? provided for sound boards offerStrategists who enjoyed playing BATTLES W AWESOME ing Windows audio compatibility ON DISTANT PLANETS (reviewed in CGW and the PC speaker. Registration #103, February 1993), Glacier Technoloof $15 gains you scenario two, gy's previous offering, will feel right at while $25 provides you with both home tackling BATTLES IN A DISTANT additional scenarios (include $3 DESERT. Game play and design are identishipping for USA destinations cal in this new release, with the exception and $5 outside the US). Orders that the action takes place on the should be sent to: Glacier Edge Kuwait/Saudi border rather than on some Technology, 4820 East Kentucky distant world. As such, robots and transAve. Suite E, Glendale CO ports are exchanged for rifle squads and a 80222. Please indicate a 3.5 or mixture of tanks and choppers. BERM BUSTING Apache choppers support ground units 5.25-inch disk preference when Like most strategic wargames, the batattacking Iraqi bunkers in BATTLES IN A DISTANT DESERT ordering tle action is turn-based. The battlefield, comprised of a series of defensive earthtion units, leaving them insufficient forces THE WARI GAMER en works, barbed wire, oil pits and tank to secure all the bunkers along the line of You need not approach WARI: THE ANtraps, was constructed by the Iraqi army advance. Iraqi forces consist of T72-T55 CIENT GAME OF AFRICA with undue trepicommanded by Saddam Hussein. In the Tanks, BMP-2s and thousands of troops. dation. For, while it's a deceptively simple context of this game, and based upon the Though game play is relatively straightgame, it's also a user-and system-friendly actual conflict, the air war has taken its forward, the documentation is a bit sparse one. WARI, often called Mancala, is up toll on Iraqi forces, though reinforcefor a tactical title. A more thorough deand running without a hitch. Though no ments are expected to arrive in the form scription of the conflict and an expanded specifics were given as to system requireof Republican Guard divisions. The overhelp file, with additional play instructions ments, it should run on most 286 or betwhelming firepower of the Coalition in and strategic tips, would have rounded out ter systems with minimal RAM (it only this conflict gives them the decided adthe package well. Still, veteran wargamers uses 16-color graphics). AdLib and vantage if they act quickly. This is the will have no problem slipping into their Sound Blaster compatible sound cards background for Scenario One, Berm role as tactical commander for either the are supported. Busting, the shareware scenario that acCoalition or Iraqi military. Like chess in Europe, Wari is Africa's companies the game engine. Two addiInstallation was a breeze, and I expericentury-old game of choice, a pastime that tional scenarios--The Streets of Khaljienced no technical problems during play. was popular with the pharaohs of Egypt 11 Adnan 2/1 Adnan 3/ Adnan 12 Adnan 12. Adnan 23 Adnan 33 Adnan 21 Al Fawr zit Al Fan 31 Al Faw ZZA EN 22 Alfaw ALEM 2/3 Al Fawel 194 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. OCTOBER 1994 "


"«A Graphically Stunning First Person Shooting Game.\" STRATEGY PLUS A COMPUTER GAME EET! The Fortress of Dr. Radiaki is a thrilling adventure, mixing car nage with a biting sense of humor. You will confront scores of different adversaries including sword wielding samurai, stealthy ninja warriors, robots with toasters for heads, mutated alligators and many more. You must use all your wits to find your way through the cavernous fortress and defeat the Machiavellian designs of the horribly deformed Dr. Radiaki. The Fortress of Dr. Radiaki is a landmark in computer games. You are free to move in any direction and blast anything that tries to do the same in this virtual reality, 3-D world. Backgrounds are rendered on the fly and unbelievably detailed characters move smoothly through the labyrinth. Enter at your own risk... you may never be the same again! THE FORTRESS OF OR RAOTAKI PUBLISHED BY: DEVELOPED BY: A Merit Software AELSTROM Actual screens may vary. For more information, please call Merit Software 1-800-238-4277. Merit Software.  1994 Future Vision and The Fortress of Dr. Radiaki are registered trademarks of Futuro Visionary, Inc. All Rights Reserved. All other names or trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Circle Reader Service #88 "


"SHAREWARE SHOWCASE the actorlama nona ir FI 524 Hour Centro Urdario aut cari che ancieet name of a sea counter-clockwise direction. If shareware titles being released (16-color the last stone you drop is in one graphics look drab in a 256-color world), of the houses on your opponit is nonetheless a charming and challengent's side of the board, and it ing game. You'll soon forget about the has only two or three stones in game's modest look once you're hooked it, you capture all the stones in on the gameplay. Like many games I that house. The game continues have tried of a similar nature, WARI until you or your opponent has should be listed as an electronic narcotic 25 or more stones, or until no due to the digital dependency it spawns. moves remain and a stalemate is To register Wart and play The EleNILE-ISTIC TENDENCIES \"Thing\" does the Giraffe's bidding in reached. Of course, these are phant, the toughest Al opponent offered, WARI, an ancient African game (with LED counters?). just the fundamentals, and there send a registration fee of $16.95 (plus $4 are more rules involved in playshipping and handling) to: ImagiSOFT and ancient African royalty. A two-playering the game successfully. Inc., Computer Games Division, P.O. Box game of logic and skill, WARI allows you to While WARI is easy to learn, developing 13208, Albuquerque NM 87192. Credit compete against another human player or winning strategies takes some real effort. Card orders can be placed at (800) 767against the computer (with varying levels Players may turn up the difficulty level of 1978. of Al competence). The goal is to be the opponents, represented by animalsfirst to capture 25 or more stones. Surprisnovice (The Giraffe), intermediate (The To locate these games Ziff.NET ingly, though a game of Wari only takes a Lion and Zebra) and expert (The Eleon-line, tune in to the few minutes to play, there are some very phant, only available in the registered verCGW headquarters on sophisticated strategies you can try once sion). In addition to basic moves, multiple ZillNet. These games can be downloaded you get the hang of it. moves are possible. You can reinforce your from ZiflNet both on CompuServe and WARI takes place on a board containing own houses, take \"flight\" to avoid impendon Prodigy. On CompuServe, go to Com12 bowls called houses. Each side of the ing capture, and employ several additional puter Gaming World's own forum (GO board has six bowls filled with four stones twists on play. All these contribute to makGAMEWORLD), Library 7, Shareware apiece for a total of 48 stones. After seing this game a rigorous exercise for the Sizzle. On Prodigy, jump ZiffNet and lecting a house (bowl), the player picks mind. Search by Title for the games listed here, up the stones in it and drops them into Though WARI is «primitive\" in appearor Search by Category to browse the enother houses one at a time, moving in a ance compared to many of the newer tire Games Library. SOFTWARE SUPPORT INTERNATIONAL Your Reliable Source of IBM/PC CD-ROM Software At Rock-Bottom Prices! ..................$20.95 ..........$12.95 $9.95 4........... $19.95 ..... $11.95 ENTERTAINMENT Stellar 7... Cookbook Heaven .. ..... S14.95 WINDOWS 7th Guest........... $22.95 Who Killed Sam Rupert....... S16.95 Desert Storm ... ................. $18.95 CICA Microsoft Windows ..... $13.95 Best of Microprose ......... $21.95 Who Shot Johnny Rock ........ $39.95 Dictionaries & Languages ...... $9.95 Championship Wrestling $11.95 Windows 1994....... Willy Beamish Direct Phone ... $15.95 $75.95 Windows Master ... $17.95 ........... Choas Continuum ........... $20.95 Wiz-Pak 6-Pak ...... Encarta, Microsoft ................ $51.95 Winplatinum $12.95 111111111111111111 Conspiracy ....... $24.95 Family Doctor ... $19.95 Windowware .......... Critical Path ..... ..$23.95 EDUCATIONAL Gardening............... $9.95 Cyberrace .......... Arthur's Teacher Trouble ........ $19.95 . $22.95 Guinness Records 1991 RELIGION .......... $14.95 Audubons Mammels or Birds .... $17.95 Magic Chef Cookbook .......... $9.95 Bible Library. .... Dagger of Amon/Laura Bow 2 .. $22.95 ......$19.95 Carmen World Deluxe .........$24.95 Mayo Clinic ..................... $18.95 Bibles & Religion .................... $9.95 Deathstar Arcade Battles ........ $9.95 Sci-Fi Fantasy ........ Dinosaur/Space Adventure ..... $23.95 ... $20.95 Holy Bible & Christian SW ....$16.95 Dune ................... ..... S26.95 Select Phone... Dinosaurs! Multimedia Enc.... $18.95 ... $144.95 Eric the Unready ...... $24.95 Time Almanac / 1990 ............. $14.95 MUSIC Gabriel Knight ...... $26.95 Dinosaur Safari .....................$18.95 Midi & Wave Workshop ....... $11.95 Games 1994 ........ $24.95 Total Baseball 1994 Ecoquest........... ... $25.95 Midi Music Shop Pro ................$16.95 World of Trains Games Galore Family Zoo ....... $25.95 $11.95 .. $19.95 Music Box 1994 $11.95 Golden Immortal ... $14.95 Family Education Collection ..... $22.95 PUBLISHING Music Toolbox ... Hugo's House of Horrors ........ $9.95 Fatty Bear's Fun Pack ............$17.95 Clipart Heaven 2 $23.95 Indy Jones/Fate of Atlantis ..... S26.95 Interactive Storytime v1.......... $14.95 MISCELLANEOUS Clipart Warehouse......... $9.95 Iron Helix $23.95 Just Grandma and Me..............$18.95 Corel Draw 3.0 ... $5.95 $49.95 CD Caddies ....... Jutland ....... $22.95 Languages of the World.......... $19.95 CD Jewell Cases ..... ... S0.95 ..... GIFs Galore ............... $18.95 .... King's Quest 6 ................ S21.95 Leam DOS For Fun ................ $11.95 Action!... $11.95 Home Designer ........................ S31.95 Mad Dog McCree $23.95 Kids Zoo/Undersea Adven ..... $22.95 Coffee Break Collection ... $14.95 Printshop Ensemble $79.95 Ham Radio .. Mad Dog McCree 2. $37.95 Microsoft Dinosaurs ............ $32.95 . Publishers Paradise Pro.......... $22.95 Hot Women Hot Cars ..$11.95 Mantis .......... $15.95 MacMillan Dictionary/Kids ....S22.95 Too Many Typefonts .............. $9.95 Kodak Photo Access ... ............ $15.95 Magic Death Mammals (Nat Geo.) ...........$21.95 $16.95 Maniac Mansion 2 ................. Lotus 1-2-3 v1.1 ....................$41.95 Mother Goose, Mixed Up ....... $14.95 $27.95 PROGRAMMING Multimedia Mania ...... MVP's Game Jamboree ....... $9.95 Encyclopedia of Sound vi or v2 ... $9.95 $9.95 Our Solar System ................... $9.95 Myst ... .. Putt Putt Joins Parade ............$18.95 Multimedia Platinum .... $49.95 Sound Library 2 ................ $11.95 Sound Sensations ... Return to Zork ....... Night Owl V12 $26.95 .. $23.95 $9.95 REFERENCE PC Sig Library V13 ......... $21.95 Secret Monkey Island ..... $15.95 Amer Business Phone 6/92 ..... S12.95 TRAVEL Shareware Explorer (4 CD's) $34.95 Secret Weapons Luftwaffe ..... $15.95 Colossal Cookbook $9.95 Precision Mapping ................ $69.95 Shareware Overload Trio $19.95 Sirius 5 Foot 10 Pack ...... ....... $33.95 Complete Bookshop... $9.95 World Traveller ..... $9.95 Software Vault 2..... $12.95 Space Quest 4 .......................... $17.95 Complete Legal Guide .. $9.95 So Much Shareware 4 .... $19.95 Star Wars/Rebel Assault ......... $46.95 Computer Reference Library $9.95 Wild Places ...... $17.95 USA & CANADA U.S. residents of 48 States add $5.50 per order for ground USA & CANADA 1-800-356-1179 U.S. residents CALL TOLL shipping. All others may call forshipping costs. Callorwrite Major Credit Cards Accepted for our latest free catalog. Software Support International FREE TODAY! Adult Titles Available 2700 N.E. Andresen Rd. #A-10 Vancouver Wa. 98661 Circle Reader Service #251 196 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 $9.95 $9.95 "


"CD ROM TITLES OUTLET STORE-YOU PAY LESS ALWAYS! 10 21 21 18 19 21 19 13 16 19 26 25 35 14 19 19 19 19 19 19 19 19 19 19 19 19 19 19 19 19 19 19 49 49 19 24 17 18 29 19 19 19 17 13 87 19 19 13 51 20 29 19 19 15 25 27 97 55 1001 UGlities 20th Centry Vido Almanc 3D Dinosaur Adventure 7th Guest 9 Digit Zip Code Directry 9000 Sounds/Sound File A Hard Day's Night Adventures in Heaven Adven of Willy Beamish Aesop's Fables Aircraft Encyclopedia All Music Guide Amazing Universe America Alive American Vista Atlas Animals! San Diego Zoo Apogee Game Compan Arctic Baron Art Appeal 1: Business Art Appeal 2: Gov't Inds. Art Appeal 3: Educ. Leisr Arthur's Teacher Trouble Audubon Birds Audubon Mammals Auto Map Auto Registry 94 Backroad Racers Bamey Bear Goes Schol Barney Bear Go Space Battle Chess Enhanced Beauty and the Beast Berlitz ThinkTalk French Berlitz Think Talk Grman Berlitz Think&Talk Halian Berlitz ThinkTalk Spanish Best Business Best of C. I. C. A. Beyond the Planet Earth Beyond the Wall of Stars Bibles and Religion Blue Force Body Works 3.0 Brain Drain Bugs Bunny Business 500 Business Assistant Business Library Vol. 1 Business Master Busy Town CUsers Group Library Caricaturas Carmen San Diego Dlux Chaos Continum Chessmaster 3000 Chessmaster 4000 CICA Microsoft Windows Cinemania City 2000 Classic Cartoons Clip Art Cornucopia Clip Art Extravaganza Clip Art Heaven Clip Art Heaven 2 Clip Art Warehouse Color Magic Colossal Cookbook Companion OS/2 Complete Bookshop Comptn's Family Choice Compton's Inter Ency 94 Cmptn's NewCntry Ency. Computer Rfrnce Library Computer Tutor Computer Works 97 97 97 25 18 36 19 9 19 47 11 Conan the Cimmerian Conspiracy Consumer Information Cookbook Heaven Corel Auto racing Corel Aviation Corel Birds Corel Bridges Corel California Park Corel Carribean Corel Coast Corel-Deserts Corel Fields Corel Fireworks Corel Flight Jet Corel Flowers Corel Foods Corel Fruits & Vegetabls Corel Japan Corel N. Amer. Wildlife Corel People Corel Residential Interior Corel Rural Africa Corel Sunrise, Sunset Corel Swimming Corel The Artic Corel Underwater Reefs Corel Waterfalls Corel Wild Animals Corel Wildlife Babies Corel WW II Aircraft Corel Art Show 4 Corel Draw 3.0 Critical Path Current Shareware Jan 94 Cyberrace Dark Seed Database Made Easy Day of The Tentacle Deathstar Arcade Battles Desktop Bookshop Dsktop Pblishers Drm Dsk Destination Mars Dictionaries & Languages Digital & USA Tours Dinosarsi Multimed Ency. Dinosaur Adventure Dinosaur Safari Dinosaur/Space Adv Direct Phone Doom Companion Dracula Unleashed Dragons Lair Dr. Fonts for Windows Dr. Games Dos Dr. Games II Dos Dr. Games 1 Exprt Wind Dr. Music Lab Dr. O/S 2 Gold! Dr. Shareware 2 Dr. Ts Sing-A-Long Dr. Windows 2 Dune Ecoquest Education Master Education Platinum Educ' Sftwr Cooprtive PC Electronic Home Library Encyclopedia of Sound 2 Encyclopedia of Sound Eric the Unready Evrywhr USA Travl Guide Explorer Vietnam Eye of the Beholder III F-15 Strike Eagle III Kid's Zoo&Undersea Actv 25 Putt Putt Joins Parade Family Doctor 3rd Edition 18 King's Quest V 10 QRZ Ham Radio Family Education Coll 2 19 King's Quest VI 19 Quantum Gate Fantasia Fonts & Sounds 19 Kodak Photo Access CD 14 Return to the Moon Fatty Bear's Bthday srprs 19 Languages of the World 24 Return to Zork Fatty Bear's Fun Pack 18 Lawnmower Man Scooters Magic Castle Flight Simulator Tool Kit 58 Leam to Speak English 3 59 Secrt Weaponof Lftwafe Font Elegance 12 Leam to Speak French 3 59 Select Phone Font Heaven 19 Learn to Speak Spanish 3 59 Shareware Explorer Fonts Platinum 12 Learning Adventure 9 Shareware Heaven Food Analyst Leaming Heaven 14 Shareware Heaven 2 Forever Growing Garden 19 Legend of Kyrandia 30 Shareware Heaven 3 Fractal Exstasy 33 Library of the Future 29 Shareware Overload Trio Free Phone 24 Listyle of Rich&Fms ckbk 29 Shareware Studio 3 Full Bloom 24 Loom 14 Shrlock Hims Detec 2 Futura Games 12 Lord of The Rings 27 Slilent Service II Gabriel Knight/SinsFathe 24 MacMillian Dict. for Child 19 Simtel 2.0 Game Master 3rd Edition 15 Mad Dog McCree 19 Sleeping Beauty Games 1994 29 Magic Death 15 Small Blue Planet Games Expert For Win 14 Mantis 19 So Mch Modem Madnes Games Platinum Wins 12 Mario Is Missing Deluxe 19 So Much Shareware 4 Gardening Mario Is Missing & D/Gnrl 19 Softwre Vault Game Coll Gifs Galaxy 24 Mario's Misingil Atlas 19 Softwre Vault Gold Coll Global Explorer Mario's Erly Yrsi CD Coll. 19 Software Vault Windows Godzilla 9 Mayo Clinic(Fmily Health) 18 Solar Heaven Graphic Textures 19 Megarace 25 Sound Sensations Groilers Ency. 93 V. 6 39 Microsoft Bookshelf 93 38 Space Quest4:Roger Wil Guinnes Disc of Records 93 19 Microsoft Bookshelf 94 Space Shuttle Gunship 2000 Microsoft Dinosaurs Sports Best Gus Goes to Cybertown 14 Microsoft Encarta 94 Sports llius Almanac 94 Hacker Chronicles 27 Microsoft Golf Star Trek 25th Annivrsry Microsoft works 2.0 29 Star War Chess Mixed Up Mother Goose Stellar 7 Monarch Notes 45 Straight from Heaven Monkey Island 17 Street Atas USA V. 2 Call Morphman 29 Strike Commander Mother of All Clipart 12 Super Arcade Collection For MPC Wizard 12 Super Programmer Multimedia Mania 9 Supergames for Wins 2 Adult MYST 45 Technotools Nat'l Gegrphic Mammals 19 Three Stooges Titles Nat'l Parks of America 38 Time Almanac New View of Space 18 Timelapse Newsweek Interactive 26 Too Many Typefonts Night Owl 11 29 Toolwork Refmce Libary Night Owl 12 24 Tortoise & The Hare Ham Radio Night Owl 13 24 Total Baseball 1994 Hamcall Oct 1993 Nomad 35 Undersea Adventure Hobbes OS12 Archives N. American Fax Book US Atas V. 4 Home Medical Advisor Pro 45 North American Indians US Civic Fd Ctznshp Txt Home Remedies 18 Oceans Below 19 US History Home & Office Platinum 12 Our Solar System 9 USA State Factbook Horde, The 48 Parenting 19 USA Tours House of Games 11 PC Karaoke 18 USA Wars: Civil War House of Games 2 14 PC usary 19 USA Wars: Korea Humans 29 PC SIG 13 19 USA Wars: Vietnam Images of NASA Collection 20 Peter and the Wolf 15 USA Wars: World War II In Company of Whales 38 Phoenix 4.0 17 Utilities Platinum INCA 19 Phoenix 5.0 19 Video Cube: Space Indiana Jones 25 Porky Pig 9 Wave Pool, The Information USA 45 Precision Mapping 78 Where Wild Carmn S.D. Interactive Storytime V. 1 19 Print Shop Ensemble CD 75 Who Killed Sam Rupert? Interactive Storytime V.2 19 Privateer 56 Who Shot Johnny Rock? Interactive Storytime V.3 19 Programmer's ROM 29 Win Platinum Iron Helix 25 Project Guttenburg Ckbk 29 Windoware JFK Assassination 43 Protostar 24 Windows 1994 Jokes & Pranks 9 Publish Il Dos Vol. 2.0 14 Wing Commndr/ Ultima Jones in the Fast Lane 14 Publisher's Dream Disk 34 Wolfnstin 3D/Allens Gold Journeyman Project 25 Publisher's Paradise 34 World Atas V. 4 Jurasic Park (Game) 44 Publishers Platinum V.1 14 World of Flight Jurasic Park Screen Saver 15 Publisher's Power House 19 World Traveler Just Grandma & Me 18 Putt Putt Fun Pack 16 World Vista Atas Jutland 25 Putt Putt Goes to Moon 18 Wrath of the Demon 19 10 20 14 36 15 45 25 29 23 27 10 Dod 14 18 17 29 41 15 15 19 13 15 15 15 19 39 15 16 15 23 25 14 14 18 21 9 9 39 39 33 25 12 23 25 19 9 19 18 Toll Free Order Line: 1-800-636-6629 Ext. 101 Download Detail Description with Picture or Placing Order via our BBS 24 Hours Everyday! BBS Line: (909) 464-2750 Free UPS Ground shipping in U.S. on purchase 3 or more titles. UPS Ground shipping $5 per order. Express shipping available upon request. Additional shipping charge will apply. Please call for detail. Price and availability subject to change without notice. All return titles subject to 20% restocking charges. Defective title exchanges with same title only. Money order same as cash. California residents add 7.75% sales tax. Personal checks held 2 weeks. All retum checks will assess a $25 service charge. Visa and Mastercard accepted. Business Hours: Mon Fri 8-6 PST After hours, please place order by fax or call our BBS. MOMBY INC. DBA/ CompuShopping Net Info: 909-613-1815 Fax: 909-613-1817 3811 Schacfer Ave., Suite C, Chino, CA 91710 Circle Reader Service #216 "


"It ain't kid stuff. Covering interactive & Multimedia Entertainment Subscribe to America's #1 Computer Game Magazine... and Score Up to 47% Savings! COMPUTER CAMING WORLD DOOM II SAMESE EXCLUSIVE COVERAGE! Feature Reviews Pagan Ultima l Dragonsphere Great Naval Battle: Il AEGIS In-Depih Get serious about playing and winning computer games with Computer Gaming World. In every monthly issue, you'll —  Discover special \"winning secrets\" for your favorite games  Get \"first looks\" and in-depth reviews of new computer games  Explore the latest in multimedia, CD-ROM and interactive game environments  Leap into virtual reality with online gaming  Turbocharge your system for faster action... and much more! Whether you're into fantasy, action, sports or strategy. Whether you use DOS, Windows or a Mac...now you can start racking up the points with Computer Gaming World. Subscribe now and save! One year/12 issues — $27.94 — YOU SAVE 41% Two years/24 issues — $49.97 — YOU SAVE 47% Strategies F-14 Fleet Defender Aces Over Europe Merchant Prince Sneak Preview Aces of the Deep Secrets of the Computer Game Developers Savings based on annual cover price of $47.40. CALL NOW TOLL FREE 1-800-827-4450 To guarantee your savings, please mention this special 4-digit code to the operator when placing your order: 4794 LO4294 "


"MISSION (800) 999-7995 FREE SHIPPING! #1? CONTROL On All US Orders over $50 via UPS Ground IN CUSTOMER SATISFACTION! THE LATEST & GREATEST! New Machine Rules! DREAM MACHINE The Most Popular Stop on The Information Ke Super Highway. The First. In a series of ARMORED FIST ALIEN LOGIC $39 $47 UNDER THE KILLING MOON S53 The most innovative (D ever! Navigate through a 3D world where your ultimate fantasies come alive. the only (D that adapts to your choices. As seen on Donahue, Joan Rivers and CNN. $59. UROTSUKIDOJI Is there any hope for humanity? Will the Legend of the Overfiend become reality? From the animation geniuses who created Space Cruiser Yamato, this is the astounding and controversial theatrical masterpiece which singlehandedly launched a whole new genre of Japanese animation. Definetely not for children. CD $49. Virtual Adventurescapes. theme F-16 FLCS 3119 METAL & LACE $34 THEME PARK $39. DATSUN THE PEOPLE AT VIRTUAL VEGAS HAVE CREATED A ONE-STOP, SPURCE FOR INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT. FEATURING BD RENDERED VIRTUAL WORLDS, FULLMOTION VIDEO, AND VOICERECOGNITION TECHNOLOGY. CD ROM ONLY $29. PIXIS INTERACTIVE VIRTUAL VIXENS VIRTUAL VIXEN NIGHTS KENTAR DARK SUN II $49. DELTAV $39 KNIGHTS OF XENTAR $43. Features 3D animation and graphics combined with high quality live motion video and a virtual realistic interface. CD $59. NEW!! VZ SPACE SIRENS $59. NEURODANCER NEURODANCER Roam the NeuroNET by hacking into the forbidden worlds of dark mysteries, danger, and sexuality. Featuring 3D animation, interactive game-play, TFUI Interface and live motion video. (D $39. Get the facts via FaxBack... Call 201.783.3374 from your fax machine. Receive information on new releases, Adult CD rom, specials, and more. 24 HOURS A DAY 7 DAYS A WEEK IBM DISK GAMES ! Inherit the Earth 42 Timeout Sports Baseball27 Isle of the Dead Ultima VIII Lost Vale Aces of the Deep 43 ! Kingdoms of Germany 38 i Ultima VIII Pagan Across the Rhine Knights Xentar Upgrade 5 Ultima VIII Speech Pack 22 7th Guest AD & D Menzoberranzan49 ! AD & Mengobernanzan49 Lands of Lore 37 Unlimited Adventures 37 101 Games Al Qadim Genle's Curse 45 Links 386 Pro 42 V 4: Gold Juno Sword ADGD AI Qadim Curse AD&D Fantasy Empire 401 Links Pebble Beach 29 Victory at Sea Arthur's Teach Trouble AD&D Ravenloft 50 Master of Orion 45 1 Victory Pak Betrayal at Krondor Air Warrior 37 Mech Warrior 2 D1 22 Warlords 2 Compton's Interact 94 Beneath A Steel Sky 40 i MechWarrior 2 Warlords II Scen Builder 37 Gitical Path BioForge Metal and Lace Upgrade 6 IWC 2 & Speech Pak WC 2 & Speech Pak 27 Dark Legions Carriers at War 2 43 Microsoft Flight Sim 5.0 49 Wing Commanr Armada 48 Dark Seed Cobra Mission Operation Crusader 47 Wings of Glory Dragonsphere Comanche Bundle | Pacific Strike 50 WW II Battles S. Pacific Dune Comanche MD 2 35 i Pacific Strike Speech Pk 22 X Com Empire Deluxe CyClones Power Poker Windows 40 X-Wing Encarta 94 D-Day Privateer X-Wing MD 1 Pursuit F-15 Strike Eagle Dark Legions Privateer Righteous Fire25 X-Wing MD 2 B Wing Flight Sim Toolkit Dark Sun Privateer Speech Pack 22 Gabriel Knight Delta V Pro League Baseball JOYSTICKS Great Naval Battles 2 Detroit Rally Grolier's 6,0 Disciples of Steel Serf City Life is Feudal ACM Game Card Gunship 2000 Empire Deluxe Windows 37 Shadowcaster F-16 Flight Control Iron Helix Falcon 3.0 50 Sim City 2000 Flight Control Pro Just Grandma & Me Falcon 3.0 Mig 29 SSN-21 Seawolf Flight Control System Kings Quest 6 Fields of Glory Star Reach Flight Stick i Lands of Lore FIFA Internl Soccer Star Trek Judge Rights Flight Stick Pro Lawnmower Man Fleet Defender F-14 Star Trek Next Gen. Formula T 1 Leisure Suit Larry 6 Flight Light Strip Poker Pro Joyswitch For Mechamander Flight Sim Toolkit i Strip Poker disks 1-13ea 20 Thrustmaster Myst Forgotten Castle Stronghold Rudder Pedals Outpost Formula One Sub Wars 2050 Virtual Pilot Pacific Strike Frontier Elite 2 40 Syndicate Weapons Control Mk 2 95 Quantum Gate Gabriel Knight Syndicate Amer Revolt Return To Zork Grandest Fleet System Shock SOUNDCARDS Sam Max Great Naval Battles 2 Tanks Shadowcaster Hannibal Terminator Rampage Sound Blaster 16 Basic 119 Space Hulk Harpoon 2 The Blue and The Gray Sound Blaster 16 MCS 124 SSN-21Seawolf Harpoon 2 #2 WESTPAC The Dig Sound Blaster SCSI 135 The Horde Inca 2 | The Merchant Prince 40 Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16 129 Theme Park Indy Car Racing Pk1 Theme Park 40 Sound Machine 69 i i Undera Killing Moon Indy Car Racing Pk 2 Third Reich 37 1 Ultrasound 129 Wings of Glory IndyCar Racing 42 Tie Fighter 49 ! Voice Blaster Circle Reader Service #93 BRA  RASAUSANS92 ASARAN For Our Adult CD Catalog Rosa a Simply Circle Reader Service #96 & We'll Rush One Out To You! Sign card stating you are over 21. & Phone (201) 783-3600 Fax (201) 783-3686 Faxback (201) 783-3374 Send Orders To: Mission Control 70ak Place CGW1094 Montclair, NJ 07042. MC, Visa, Discover, Checks & Money Orders. Checks held 14 days. Please Include Phone # /Shipping $5 UPS/37Two Day/ Int'l Shipping $20 Minimum. Over 21 To Order Adult "


"UNDER THE HOOD What We Go Through For Sound S HIKAYAK 94 How to Handle a Sound Card That Just Won't Behave by Mike Weksler f all the hardware complaints Configuring the AWE32 with MS-DOS tected mode games (like Doom or other we get, the majority deal with should be taught as a graduate course in games where you see a DOS/4G when runtwo topics: sound card configucomputer science. I feel your pain. I too ning them). Logitech, Ensonig and Mediration, and getting a game to spent an evening configuring AWE32 driaVision have all figured out how to use a run when there's not enough vers, and while I was able to get the card hardware implementation of the MPUconventional memory. How running with various games, well, let's just 401 to avoid this problem, and I'm convenient, then, when a single say I've had more fun at the dentist. amazed that Creative Labs didn't follow product can generate frustration in both This is a monster of a sound product suit on this product. areas! No matter which sound card you with some amazing utilities and really use. Anyway, maybe I can help you out. Let's own, you're sure to lind some great mem ful software. For the musician, you can check out the deal with the drivers. The ory management tips in this discussion of add up to 32MB of RAM and upload install program placed a number of drithe Creative Labs AWE32. MIDI patches to the card (like the IMB vers into my CONFIG.SYS (see Figure 1). Gravis ULTRASOUND). It even emulates a The first line is for the CD-ROM. The BOOT THREE TIMES AND Roland MT-32, a Roland SOUND CANVAS, rest is all AWE32 stuff. As if this weren't CALL ME IN THE MORNING and does on-the-fly sound; however, it's enough, the installation added several What's the deal with Creative Labs? You would a nightmare for the gamer. Specifically, lines into my AUTOEXEC.BAT file (see think that as an industry standard, they'd have a there are a ton of drivers, little info reFigure 2). clue as to the requirements of their core margarding what they do, and the most imThe first three lines are environment ket-GAMERS! I heard a General MIDI music portant feature—the General MIDI stuff and don't take up any precious lower demo and wanted to upgrade from the lame FM MPU-401 interface (for selecting General 640K. The first executable is the Microsoft synthesis of my Sound Blaster Pro. I had a Midi in your music setup)-is implementCD-ROM extension, and it's pretty huge. choice of getting a Sound Blaster 16 and a ed in software. What's the big deal about DIAGNOSE and SB16SET are not Wave Blaster, but I was told that Creative's new that? Well, this MPU-401 driver, AWEUloaded into memory. They make adjustAWE32 has both Sound Blaster sound and Wave \"TIL.EXE, is a huge TSR taking up 44K!ments to the card and then unload. Blaster music built in. I checked out the AWE32 Combine that with your CD-ROM drivers AWEUTIL however, is the big one. If you and it looked like a good value with lots of softand you've got no memory left for games. set the /EM flag to General MIDI, then it ware, so I sprung for it. Now, after installation, Additionally, the biggest flaw is that takes 44K. You need this TSR to select beDoom crashes and there's not enough memory to AWEUTIL.EXE will not work with protween the MT-32, General MIDI, and run my other games-this thing installed a ton of TSRs and my CONFIG.SYS is all screwed up. FIGURE ONE It took me the whole weekend to get it figured out. I must admit, when it works, it sounds DEVICE=C:\\AWE32\\DRV SBCD.SYS /D:MSCD001 /P:220 (116) great, but that's in WindowsI want something DEVICE-C:\\AWE32\\DRV\\CSP.SYS /UNIT=0 /BLASTER=A: 220 (76) that will run with my MS-DOS games!! DEVICE=C:\\AWE32\\DRV\\CTSB16.SYS /UNIT=0 /BLASTER=A: 220 I:5 D:1 H:5 (266) Lee McCarter DEVICE=C:\\AWE32\\DRV\\CTMMSYS.SYS (105) Corinth, MS 200 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"NR 13 WARNING! NOT RECOMMENDED FOR PLAYERS UNDER 13 For centuries, war has raged among the demons and fairies, devastating this mystical land. Two young knights, separated at birth and raised by mortals, chosen for the ultimate battle that will decide the fate of heaven and earth. Never knowing their true relation or their own dark destiny they are fated to meet and duel each other to the death. As Desmond, the Knight of Xentar, you will be striving with many a winsome enchantress to overcome menacing foes and perhaps in victory, become the ruler of all. MEGATECA System requirements IBM-DE386-SX compatible ABG recommended), VGA graphics, no extended memory required, Sound BlasterTM and Pro Audio Spectrum compatible. CD-ROM or disketre version available So the challenge is on! An incomparable role playing fantasy game for your PC, with stunning, hand sculpted graphics throughout, humorous script and thrilling plots. But be warned — with its romance and intense action, Knights of Xentar is not for kids nor the faint hearted. Available at finer software dealers everywhere or call 1 800_258 MEGA. Visa/Mastercard accepted. Download the FREE demo by calling our 24 hour BBS 310 539 7739 (8 data bits, no parity, 1 stop bit, filename kxdemo.exe) or send $5 for the demo on diskette to Megatech, PO Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510. ENTER THE WORLD OF DEMONS ECSTASY OR EXTINCTION AWAITS Based on the akmicu Japanese hit The Rock movie and 3 .ch the be #1 game, Playing Game the Dragon Pill thrill you with in Japanese Anime ! Knight III KNIGHTS of XENTAR Circle Reader Service #86 "


"UNDER THE HOOD Roland Sound Canvas GS patches. You FIGURE TWO can also use the /R and /C commands to add Reverb and Chorus effects, which are SET BLASTER=A220 15 D1 15 P330 T6 pretty cool but not worth the hassle. SET SOUND=C:\\AWE32 So, what we have is 87K of AWE32 dri SET MIDI=SYNTH:1 MAP:E MODE: 0 vers added to 56K of CD-ROM drivers for a grand total of 143K! Add to that. C:\\AWE32\\DRV\\MSCDEX.EXE /D:MSCD001 / /M:15 (ASE) disk cache and mouse drivers at 28K and C:\\AWE32\\DIAGNOSE /S 17K respectively for a grand total of C:\\AWE32\\AWEUTIL /R:50 /C:50 /EM: GM (4470 188K worth of stuff to somehow load C:\\AWE32\\SB16SET / /Q high, tweak, and otherwise sweep under the rug to get your games to run. Quite a tach to the feature connector on your If any of you out there want the easy out, daunting task considering that loading a AWE32. While slinging on a daughter and your sound card can handle it, the mouse driver high will bring most users card is one way to get the board to work daughter cards are looking mighty fine. to their knees! In other words, installing with protected mode games, this apAt press time, according to a Creative the AWE32 with a CD-ROM and your exproach defeats the purpose of having the Labs spokesperson, there wasn't a proisting MS-DOS configuration makes inAWE32 in the first place. (You'd be best tected mode MPU-401 TSR available. I stalling a standard Multimedia Upgrade off with the SOUND BLASTER 16, MediaVican't imagine that Creative would ignore Kit look as easy as swapping a spark plug. sion PREMIUM 3D, or Aztech PRO-16L for this problem and I hope they get one So, if you want to stick it out with the use with daughter cards). The other opout soon. One tip they suggested was to AWE32, first you have to reconfigure your tion is to boot your computer without comment out i.e., type \"REM in front of system and you have three choices. First, AWEUTIL.EXE and hope your game the line that you want to remove) the you could start by loading MSCDEX.EXE runs with sound and music drivers from CPS.SYS driver out of the CONFIG.SYS high and fiddling with MS-DOS's MEMJohn Miles. He has written drivers that file. Weighing in at a mere 7K, CSP.SYS MAKER utility, but it probably won't should work with the AWE32 in protected drives the on-board DSP chip which has make a dent in this configuration scemode. By the way, the Doom 1.5 update yet to be utilized by an MS-DOS game. nario, and unless you're a good DOS hack supports the AWE32, but it still won't This could make the difference between or want to become one (the subject of luwork with AWEUTIL.EXE loaded. getting a game to run or getting that all ture articles and many a book), you can Of course, you could have just added a too familiar \"You Do Not Have Enough skip to choices two and three. stand-alone wave table synthesis card to Memory To Run This Game\" message. Third party memory managers like your SOUND BLASTER PRO (like the Turtle So while the AWE32 is one helluva Quarterdeck's QEMM, Qualitas' Beach MONTEREY, Roland SCCI SOUND sound card, expect to go to hell and 386MAX, and Helix's NETROOM all have CANVAS, or the Ensonig SOUNDSCAPE), but back to get it installed for MS-DOS features that will optimize your configurathat's assuming that you had an extra bus games. tion. QEMM's OPTIMIZE will give you slot available and that you can handle the Finally, for all you seasoned DOS hacks around 580K on the first try. If you just extra wiring of multiple sound and music out there who think I caved in and was had CD-ROM drivers, you can get that outputs. too quick in reaching for the QEMM figure up to around 634K with a few deft Is there hope for the AWE32? More disk, send me your best CONFIG.SYS keystrokes, but 188K worth of drivers will games are beginning to support it in its and AUTOEXEC.BAT (preferably rigged just about choke anything out there. native mode and there are Miles drivers for the AWE32) and I'll run the pair that As an innovative approach to the above available. It's the first product from Crefrees up the most conventional memory problem, Helix has released \"cloaked\" ative Labs with great utilities and, when it as an example of how to do it right in a drivers for your disk cache, mouse and runs with a game, it's OK; but, it's doubtforthcoming memory management artiCD-ROM. The normal drivers for the ful that a game will really exploit all the clemand as an enduring monument to above take up 86K. The cloaked versions features of the AWE32 in the future. The your genius! take up a mere 10K (loading the remain-main reason to purchase an AWE32 is the der into extended memory, thus freeing ability to store MIDI patches in up to For memory managers, contact: up 76K of lower RAM and the Upper 32MB of onboard RAM. However, with Memory blocks for the AWE32 drivers). the price of RAM being what it is, and the Helix: Netroom, Multimedia Cloaking These cloaked drivers are a great way to card coming stock with only 512K of (718) 392-3735 configure your rig for games, period. RAM, don't expect ( many game develop Qualitas: 386MAX (301) 907-6700 Unfortunately, if you want General ers to support the AWE32 for onboard Quarterdeck: QEMM (310) 392-9851 MIDI music out of your AWE32 with a configurations exceeding 512K of RAM. protected mode game like Doom, you It's a shame because this is what the prod Why don't you share your technical advenneed to boot your machine without uct was designed to do from the start. tures with your fellow CGW readers who may AWEUTIL.EXE resident (it can be disAlas, gamers are probably better oll with have the same problems? Send your questions, abled by typing \"REM\" in front of it in a sound card and wave table daughter cool hacks, and tips to Under The Hood, c/o your AUTOEXEC.BAT file). Then, you card combo, their old SOUND BLASTER Computer Gaming World, 130 Chaparral C. need to use a daughtercard like Creative Pro and a stand-alone wave table card, or Suite 260, Anaheim Hills, CA 92808, or at Lab's WAVEBLASTER or Media Vision's an all-inclusive card such as the GRAVIS any of our e-mail addresses (Internet: PROFESSIONAL WAVETABLE UPGRADE to atULTRASOUND or the LOGITECH SOUNDMAN. 76703.622@compuserve.com). 202 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"WAVE 38 ov 2,000ms HORDE-CD HOUND OF SHADOW HOVERFORCE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER HYPERSPEED IMMORTAL INCA 35 tall for more! 25 15 USED IBM GAMES COMPLETE & VIRUS FREE: WITH THE ORIGINAL BOX. DOCUMENTATION AND DISKS 15 14 15 && MANTIS EXP SPEECH PA MANTIS-CD MARIO ANORETTI RACIN MARTIAN DREAMS MASTER OF ORION MAXIMUM OVERKILL MISSION MAXIMUM OVERKILL MAXIMUM OVERKILL-CO MEAN STREETS MECHWARRIOR MEGALO MANIA MEGA RACE-CO MEGATRAVELLER 1 ZHOO MEGATRAVELLER 2 MERCHANT PRINCE MICHAEL JORDON FLIGHTS MICROSOFT ARCADE WIN MIDWINTER MIG-29 FULCRUM MIGHT & MAGIC 1 MIGHT & MAGIC 2 MIGHT & MAGIC 3 MIGHT & MAJIC 4 CLOUDS MIGHT & MAJIC 5 DARK MIGHT& MAJIC: WORLD CD MIKE DITKA FOOTBALL MILLENIUM MIXED UP FAIRY TALES ML FOOTBALL 2 ML FOOTBALL DELUXE MONKEY ISLAND 2 MONOPOLY MORPHMAN-CD MORTAL KOMBAT MYST.CO NASCAR CHALLENGE NFL 94 FOOTBALL NFL FOOTBALL INCA-CU INDY CAR RACING INDY JONES FATE ATLA INDY JONES FATE-CD INTERPLAYS 10 YR ANTHOL 38 IRON HELIX-CO ISLAND OF DR BRAIN ISLE OF DEAD JACK NICKLAUS UNL GOLF JACK NICKLAUS COURSE DISKS 5 JACK NICKLAUS GREATEST JAMES BOND STEALTH JIMMY CONNORS PRO TENNIS 9 JOE MONTANA FOOTBALL JONES IN FAST LANE-CO JONES IN THE FAST LANE 14 JOURNEYMAN PRO-8 MEGA CD 26 JUMP JET KASPAROVS GAMBIT KEYS TO MARAMON KGB KILLING CLOUD KINGDOMS OF GERMANY 24 KING MAKER KINGS QUEST 1 ENHAN KINGS QUEST 1-EGA KINGS QUEST 2-EGA KINGS QUEST 4-EGA KINGS QUEST 5-CO KINGS QUEST 5-VGA KINGS QUEST 6-CD 12 RAILROAD TYCOON RAVENLOFT RAVENLOFT.CO REALMS REALMS OF ARKANIA RED BARON MISSION BU RED BARON VGA RED CRYSTAL RED STORM RISING RETURN OF PHANTOM-CD RETURN OF THE PHANTOM RETURN TO ZORK RETURN TO ZOAK-CD REX NEBULAR COS GEN RINGWORLD RISE OF THE DRAGON RISK RISK WIN ROAD & TRACK GRAN PRIX ROAD TO THE FINAL FO ROBOSPORT WIN ROCKATEER ROMANCE OF 3 KINGDOMS ROME PATHWAY TO POW ROTOX RULES OF ENGAGEMENT SAM & MAX: HIT THE ROAD SARGON 4 SAVAGE EMPIRE SEA ROGUE SEA WOLF-CO SEAL TEAM SECRET OF SILVER BLA SECRET WEAPONS EXP P38 SECRET WEAPONS LUFT SEIGE & SWORD SENTINEL WORLDS 1 SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD DRACULA BRAM STROKE DRACULA UNLEASHED-CD DRAGON WARS DRAKKHEN DUNE DUNE 2 DUNE-CD DUNGEON HACK EARTHRISE ECOQUEST-VGA EIGHT BALL DELUXE ELVIRA 2 EMPIRE DELUXE EMPIRE DELUXE WIN ERIC THE UNREADY ERIC THE UNREADY-CD ETERNAM EUROPEAN RACERS-CD EYE OF THE BEHOLDER EYE OF THE BEHOLDER 2 F-117A STEALTH FIGHT F15 STRIKE EAGLE FIS STRIKE EAGLE 2 F15 STRIKE EAGLE 3 F16 COMBAT F19 STEALTH FIGHTER 31 & 21 21 14 &Nona 15 15 18 NOURSES GAMER'S GOLD WE PAY CASH FOR USED GAMES 1-800-377-8578 We want your current used games WE NEED GAMES, IBM GAMES Got Something To Sell? Follow these Easy Steps 1. Prepare a list of the games you are selling. Call, fax, or mail your list to GAMER'S GOLD. 2. GAMER'S GOLD will quale the current buying prices & issue an authorization number for your shipment. Games will not be accepted without an authorization no. Price quotes are good for 14 days 3. Pack games in box. Write outhorization no. clearly on outside of box. Mail to GAMER'S GOLD. Save your authorization no. We can't answer questions about your shipment without your number! STELLAR 7-CD STORMOVIK STRATEGO STREET FIGHTER 2 STRIKE COMMANDER STRONGHOLD STUNT ISLAND STUNTS SUBWAR 2050 SUMMONING SWORD OF THE SAMURAI SYNDICATE TAKE A BREAK PINBALL TANGLED TALES TASK FORCE 1942 TEAM YANKEE TEGELS MERCENARIES TENNIS CUP TERMINATOR TERMINATOR 2: ARCADE TERMINATOR 2029 TERMINATOR: RAMPAGE TEST DRIVE 1 TEST DRIVE2 TEST DRIVE 3 THE PROPHECY THEATRE OF WAR THEIR FINEST HOUR THEME PARK MYSTERY THEXDER 1 THEXDER 2-FIREHAWK THIRD COURIER THUNDERHAWK THUNDERSTRIKE TIGERS ON THE PROWL TOM LANDRY FOOTBALL TONY LARUSSA 2 FANT TONY LARUSSA BB 2 TONY LARUSSA BASEBALL TONY LARUSSA ULTIMATE BB TORNADO TREASURE TRAP TREASURES SAVAGE FRO TUNNELS & TROLLS TWILIGHT 2000-VGA ULTIMA 5 WARRIORSD ULTIMA 6 FALSE PROPH ULTIMA 7 BLACK GATE ULTIMA 7,5 SERPENT ISLAND ULTIMA 7.5 SILVER SEED ULTIMA 8: PAGAN ULTIMA 8: SPEECH PACK ULTIMA & PAGAN-CO ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 1 ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 2 UNCHARTERED WATERS UNNATURAL SELECTION UNNECESSARY ROUGHNESS V VICTORY: VELIKIYEL V VICTORY: MARKET GAR V VICTORY: UTAH BEACH VAXINE VEIL OF DARKNESS VENGEANCE OF EXCALIB VETTE VIKINGS 2 VIRTUAL REALITY STUDIO VISIONS OF AFTERMATH WAR IN THE GULF WAR OF THE LANCE WARLORDS WARLORDS 2 WARRIORS OF LEGEND WASTELAND WAXWORKS WEAVER COMM DISK VER WHEN TWO WORLDS WAR WHERE IN EUROPE CARMEN WHERE IN SPACE CARMEN WHERE IN TIME CARMEN WHERE IN USA CARMEN WHERE IN WORLD CARMEN WING COM 2 SPEC OPERATIONS 15 WING COM ULTIMA 6-CD 19 WING COM ULTIMA UNDWRLD 26 WING COMMANDER 1 WING COMMANDER 1 DLX WING COMMANDER 2 OLX WING COMMANDER ACADEMY WIZARDRY 4 WIZARDRY 5 WIZARDRY 7 CRUSADERS WIZARDRY TAILOGY 2 WOLFENSTEIN 30 WOLFPACK-CD WONDERLAND WORLD TOUR TENNIS WORLDS AT WAR WW2 AIR FORCE COMMAND X-COM UFO DEFENSE X-WING X-WING IMPERIAL PURS YEAGERS AFT X-WING B-WING CORRIDOR 7 call for authorization before shipping or FAX list for current quotes to 605-334-8766 In Canada, call 605-339-2060 R 14 ona WE SELL USED GAMES R 1942 PACIFIC AIR WAR 2400 AD 7TH GUEST-CO A-TRAIN A-TRAIN CONST SET ATAC A10 TANK KILLER 1.5 ACES OF PACIFIC MISSION ACES OF THE PACIFIC ACES OVER EUROPE AD& D COLLECTED: FORGE ADV OF WILLY BEAMISH ADV OF WILLY BEAMISH-CD AIR BUCK VER 1.2 AIR DUEL AIR WARRIOR SVGA AIRBORNE RANGER ALL AMERICAN COLLEGE ALLIED FORCES ALONE IN THE DARK ALTERED DESTINY AMAZON APBA BASEBALL APBA BASEBALL-WIN ARCHON ULTRA ARCTIC BARON ARENA ELDER SCROLLS ASHES OF THE EMPIRE BAT 817 FLYING FORTRESS BAD BLOOD BARD'S TALE 1 BARDS TALE 2 BARDS TALE 3 BARDS TALE CONST SET BATMAN CAPED CRUSADE BATMAN RETURNS BATTLE CHESS 2: CHIN BATTLE CHESS 4000 BATTLE CHESS-WIN BATTLE COMMAND BATTLES OF DESTINY BATTLETECH 1 BATTLETECH 2 BICYCLE BRIDGE-WIN BICYCLE POKER BIRDS OF PREY BLOODNET BLOODSTONE BLOOOWYCH BLUE AND GRAY BLUE FORCE: NEXT OF KIN BLUE MAX ACES GREAT BODY BLOWS BUDOKAN BUZZ ALDRIN RACE INT CAHMBER SCI MUTANT P CAMPAIGN 2 CAR & DRIVER CARRIER STRIKE CASTLES CASTLES 2 CHALLANGE OF 5 REALM CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN CHAOS CONTINUUM CHESSMASTER 3000 CIVILIZATION CIVILIZATION WIN COASTER CODE NAME: ICEMAN COLONEL'S BEQUEST COMMAND HO COMPANION OF XANTH CONAN CONFLICT CONFLICT: KOREA CONFLICT: MIDDLE EAST CONQUERED KINGDOMS CONQUEST OF JAPAN CONQUESTS OF CAMELOT CONQUESTS OF LONGBOW CONSPIRACY-CD CONTRAPTION ZAK CONVERT ACTION CORPORATION COUNTDOWN CRACK DOWN CRIME CITY CRIME WAVE CRISIS IN THE KREMLIN CRITICAL PATH-CD CURSE OF AZURE BONDS CURSE OF ENCHANTIA CYBER EMPIRES CYBER PACE CYBER RACE-CO D-DAY BEGINNING OF END D-GENERATION DAEMONSGATE-CO DAGGER OF AMMON RA DARK CENTURY DARK SUN DARKLANDS UAAKSEED DARKSPYRE DAS BOOT SUBMARINE DAUGHTER OF SERPENTS DAVID WOLP: SECRET AGENT DAY OF THE TENTACLE DAY OF THE VIPER DEALERS CHOICE POKER 12 DEATH KNIGHTS OF KRYNN DETROIT DISCOVERY STEPS OF COLUMB 19 All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked games are in original box with original documentation Call for current title availibility AMER WE ACCEPT ONLY OD VISA/MasterCard/Discover Money Orders/Cashiers Check GAME Most items shipped same day. S5 UPS/59 2nd Day Air col for information on Canodion shipments GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakota 57105 4. If you would like to use your money or credit to purchase games, include a \"wish list of tiles you are interested in 5. Your check will usually be mailed within 10-14 working days of receiving your games. Some 'wish list game credits may take slightly longer to fill. Games will be checked for viruses & completeness. Gomes must be complete with all disks, printed materials, & in original box. Incompleto games will be returned at your experise. &R 29 10 19 Namnao-&-San 32 FACES: TRIS 3 FALCON 3.0 FALCON 3.0 SCEN 1 FIGHTING FALCON AT FANTASY EMPIRES FIGHTING FOR ROME FINAL CONFLICT FLAMES OF FREEDOM FLASHBACK FLIGHT OF THE INTRUDER FLIGHT SIM 4.0 FLIGHT SIM 5.0 FOUR CRYSTALS PF TRA FREDDY PHARKAS FRTR FRONT PAGE FOOTBALL FRONTIER ELITE 2 FUTURE WARS GABRIEL KINGHT-CD GATEWAY 2: HOMEWORLD GATEWAY SAVAGE FRONT GEMFIRE GENGHIS KAHN GLOBAL CONQUEST GOBLINS 1 VGA GOBLINGS 2 VGA GODFATHER GODS GRANDEST FLEET GREAT NAVEL BATTLES GREENS GUNBOAT GUNSHIP GUNSHIP 2000 VGA GUY SPY HARO NOVA HARDBALL 3 HARDBALL 3 PLAYERS DISK HARPOON HARPOON 2 HARPOON BATTLESET 2 HARPOON BATTLESET 4 HARPOON CHALLGA PAK HARPOON DESIGN SERIES HARRIER ASSAULT HEART OF CHINA-VGA HEIMEDALL HEIRS TO THE THRONE HELL CAB-WIN CD HEROES OF THE LANCE HIGH COMMAND HORDE un KINGS GUEST -VGA KNIGHTS OF THE SKY KOSHAN CONSPIRACY KRONOLOG: NAZI PARADO L'EMPEREUR LABYRINTH OF TIME-CO LAFFER UTILITIES LAND.SEA, AIR TRILOGY 1\" LANDS OF LORE LASER SQUAD LEATHER GODDESSES 2 LEGACY: REALM OF TERROR LEGEND OF FAERGHAIL LEGEND OF KYRANDIA LEGEND OF KYRANDIA-CD LEGENDS OF VALOR LEISURE SUIT LARRY 1 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 3 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 5 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 5 LEMMINGS LETHAL TENDER LHX ATTACK CHOPPER LIFE & DEATH LIGHTSPEED LINKS COURSE DISKS LINKS GOLF LOOM LOOM.CO LORD OF THE RINGS 1 LORD OF THE RINGS 2 LOST ADMIRAL LOST FILES SHERLOCK LOST IN LA LOST IN TIME-CO LOST SECRET OF RAINFOREST LUCAS ARTS AIR COMBAT LUNAR COMMAND LURE OF THE TEMPIRES MAD DOG MCGREE-CD MADDEN FOOTBALL 1 MADDEN FOOTBALL 2 MAELSTROM MAGIC CANDLE 1 MAGIC CANDLE 2 MAGIC CANDLE 3 MAGNETIC SCROLLS BUN MAN ENOUGH-CO MANHUNTER 1 NY MANHUNTER 2 SF MANTIS EXP FIGHTER NEL PRO LEAGUE FB 92 NFL VIDEO FOOTBALL NHL HOCKEY NIGHTBREED NIGHTSHIFT NOVA 9-VGA OBITUS OBLITERATOR OIL'S WELL OMEGA OPERATION COMBAT OUT OF THIS WORLD OVERLORD PACIFIC ISLANDS CD PATRIOT PATTON STRIKES BACK PEPPERS ADV IN TIME PERFECT GENERAL PERFECT GENERAL SCEN PERFECT GENERAL TRILOGY PGA GOLF PIRATES PIRATES GOLD PLANET'S EDGE PLAYMAKER FOOTBALL POLICE QUEST 1VGA POLICE QUEST 2 POLICE QUEST 3-VGA POLICE OUEST 4 POOL OF RADIANCE POOLS OF DARKNESS POPOLOUS POPULOUS 2 POWER HITS: BATTLETE POWER HITS: SCI-FI POWERMONGER PRINCE OF PERSIA PRINCE OF PERSIA 2 PRIVATEER PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL PRO LEAGUE FB 94' PRO TENNIS PROPHECY OF THE SHADOW PROTOSTAR PUNISHER QUANTUM GATE-WIN-CD QUARTER POLE QUEST FOR GLORY 1 EGA QUEST FOR GLORY 1 VGA QUEST FOR GLORY 2 EGA QUEST FOR GLORY 3 SHADOW CASTER SHADOW OF YSERBIUS SHADOW SORCERER SHADOWGATE-WIN SHADOWLANDS SHUTTLE SID & AL'S INCRED TO SIEGE SIEGE EXP DOGS OF WAR SIERRA ADV STARTER KIT SIERRA ARCADE BUNDLE SILPHEED SIM CITY SIM CITY 2000 SIM CITY 2000 GREAT DIS SIM CITY GRAPHICS SETS SIMEARTH SIMEARTH WINDOWS SIMFARM SIMLIFE SIMLIFE WIN SKATE OR DIE SLEEPING GOOS LIE SORCERIAN SPACE 1889 SPACE HULK SPACE QUEST 1-VGA SPACE QUEST 2-EGA SPACE QUEST 3 SPACE QUEST 4-CD SPACE QUEST 4-VGA SPACE QUEST 5-VGA SPACE WRECKED SPEAR OF DESTINY SPECIAL FORCES SPEED RACER SPEED-CD SPELLCASTING 101 SPELLCASTING 201 SPELLCASTING 301 SPELLCASTING PRTY PK SPELLCRAFT: ASPECT OF STAR CONTROL STAR CONTROL 2 STAR TREK 25TH ANNIV STAR TREK: JUDGEMENT STAR WARS CHESS STARFLIGHTI STARFLIGHT 2 SPECTRE VR STELLAR 7 16 13 15 19 Prices & availability subject to change. Call Toll Free for current titles and those not listed-we've got lots more! All Used Games are complete & virus free with original box, documentation & disks. System compatibility is not guaranteed. All sales are final-defective games replaced with same title. Free shipping (Regular Ground) in the continental USA on orders over $150. 20 24 34 MORNAR weBuy& 32 16 12 Circle Reader Service #241 "


"NOW PLAYING These Just In Here are our quick takes on games that arrived just before press time. You can be sure that the more prominent titles will be given a full review in the next issue. EROCRAONG KAROORTHOTLOOS VEUREESIDENCES AVIS APBA FOOTBALL BATTLE OF BRITAIN II Seelowe, and the Swastika will fly over the For over three decades, APBA has simWe shall fight them on the beaches. We Thames! IBM, $59.95. Circle Reader Serulated the mighty contests of the gridiron shall fight them in Macintosh-generated vice # 2 through player stat cards and rolling dice. skies, and in the Windows format. We DEADLY GAMES, 38 WAYAAWI AVE, This version of APBA FOOTBALL is the latshall never surrender! Then again, we BAYVILLE, NY 11709, (516) 628-1039 est attempt to transfer the savvy and aumight, since Rene Vidmer and the folks at thenticity of the venerable boardgame to Deadly Games have the tendency to creFALCON GOLD the world of silicon sports simulations. As ate addictive games with more than a Flight Sim fanatics confused by the with most stat-based text games of late, touch of historicity. Unlike other Deadly plethora of FALCON 3.0 disks, scenarios, some graphic life has been injected, with titles such as U-BOAT and M4, BATTLE OF patches and other add-ons, may rest easia \"football\" cursor moving up and down a BRITAIN II is less a simulator than a er now, as Spectrum HoloByte has packGreen Bay-green field. The textual destraight-up wargame. Boardgame enthuaged the entire series on a single CD. TIHTIRIB siasts will recognize the influence of John Included are the latest versions of FALCON Butterfield's classic RAF design, which 3.0, MIG-29, HORNET: NAVAL STRIKE Vidmer thoughtfully lists in the bibliograFIGHTER, and OPERATION FLYING TIGER, phy to BOB II. By kecping tactical detail complete with new flight models for both to a minimum, the operational aspects of the crucial WWII air campaign are eflectively simulated with a minimum of complexity. In your role as Air Chief Marshal . . unter Sir Hugh Dowding, you must commit the scriptions of play scroll by on a colored meager resources of the Royal Air Force background, and have a degree of variety, against the massive forces of the Luftwaffe although it's doubtful they'll ever replace who outnumber you by 5-to-1. Your only Pat Summerall. Box scores and statistics information comes from observers in the galore are compiled, and may be viewed field and RDF reports, an early form of on a game-by-game basis as the season radar. Although this newest version fails progresses, with such details as length of to fill up the entire screen in Windows, the MiG-29 and the F/A-18 Hornet. The scoring drives included for the fanatic. there are plenty of blips on the RDF to Art of the Kill video enclosed will be a boon Scheduling is fairly flexible, as is the opKUU TO 1210 for those intimidated by the program's tion to save in the middle of a game (for The Battle of Britain complexity, offering a short course in the those coaches who really hate to lose). basics of air combat maneuvering. InSome oddities are also included, such as stalling the entire CD takes up 29 MB on the computer making substitutions for the hard drive, and even playing \"directyou unasked, and the AI opponents being ly\" from the CD-ROM still uses some called \"robots\" (will the next version be TIMB of space. Still, newcomers to FALcalled Isaac Asimov's Gridiron Fantasy?); CON will appreciate having all of the upbut overall, this recreation of the board grades and bug fixes in one place. Add in game looks ready to break from training the network, modem and enhanced AI camp. The 1994 schedule and players are keep even veteran air commanders biting for solitaire play, and you have as close to on a separate disk, which should be availtheir nails, making the difficult decisions the ultimate flight package as is possiable by the time you read this. IBM, of where and when to risk your over-ble-at least until FALCON 4.0. IBM, $39.95. Circle Reader Service # 1 worked pilots. Have the Observer Corps $69.95. Circle Reader Service # 3 APBA GAME COMPANY, INC., 1001 keep a sharp eye, and keep those Spitfire SPECTRUM HOLOBYTE, 2490 MARINER MILLERSVILLE ROAD, LANCASTER, PA 17603, squadrons on standby, because failure SQUARE LOOP, ALAMEDA, CA, (510) 522(800) 334-2722 means that Hitler will launch Operation 1164 ABS DERGART  204 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"Ever get the urge to take out a cow at 3 160 mph? 5 ROADS. 4 cows. AND 400 MEGABYTES OF REAL, LIFE-THREATENING ROAD FOOTAGE ON CD-ROM. THROW YOUR LEG OVER. IT'S TIME TO GRIND SOME BEEF. CYCLEMANIA A RACING GAME BY SPORT ACCOLADE Circle Reader Service #256 "


"NOW PLAYING I.31.... OS X : hex 115: 20 . 1:120 B 2008 FAROS. O UEFA HP Cros DU EN FLIGHT 10:33 INTELLIPLAY COWBOY front. The program may be run in \"Auto CASINO Pilot\" mode, taking you through the enThis CD-ROM product is steeped in tire story, or jumped into and out of at nouveau Hollywood Western traditions, the user's preference. Hitler's nightmare complete with saloon, multi-ethnic cast, of a second European front comes alive, and of course, a poker game. One tradias you cruise through this accurate and tional touch which would have been betwell presented look at the greatest amter left out is the attempt to make the phibious operation in history. IBM CDmultimedia views look old-fashioned and ROM, $49.95. Circle Reader Service # 7 \"grainy,\" which is something the medium DISCOVERY COMMUNICATIONS, INC., 7700 rarely needs help with. Here, the results WISCONSIN AVE., BETHESDA, MD, 20814are gray pixels which stick out like a sore 3579, (301) 986-1999 dealer's thumb. The various computer a mountain. Greens are often small and opponents run the gamut from badly hidden in natural coves, making the apNOTHING BUT NET overacted to genuinely amusing, but none proach much more dependent on touch Clock ticking...he moves inside...goes of them will threaten Bret Maverick on a and accuracy than sheer power. Chipping up for the jump hook...the ball rattles good day—at least as far as playing from the rough desert terrain means that around...it must be another text basketyou'll never be quite so afraid of normal ball game! But wait-there's more to this X TIS: BRDY ! traps again. What a shame that on the Sim 10:32 1266 course famous for hosting the PGA's Skins Game, we can't have a proper Al opponent. Nonetheless, a fine rendition of a great course by Artlur Ilills, BIGHORN is right up with PEBBLE BEACH as the best course released to date for LINKS. IBM and Windows $24.99. Circle Reader Service # 6 Ed ACCESS SOFTWARE, INC., 4910 WEST one than statistics on a screen. From per10:33 WAIT AMELIA EARHART DR., SALT LAKE CITY, UT Sonnel screens to shot selection zones, the strength is concerned. The minimal help 84116, (800) 800-4880 players are actually graphically depicted from the bartender and a poker \"book\" on a brown parquet floor background. on-screen, tells only what to do-fold, NORMANDY: And even though the animations will nevraise, etc.--without any reason why, THE GREAT CRUSADE er win a Most Fluid Movement award, the though this is ameliorated somewhat by Even though it lacks a game, this is one intent here is to provide some visual inthe inclusion of a beginner's poker book of those rare CD-ROMs that does justice terest in this simulation of professional The Basics of Winning Poker. Worst of all, to both the subject and the medium. Probasketball. Unlike many of this game's the manual implies that these crusty old duced by The Discovery Channel, this competitors, you may not select shots for Al bushwhackers may even be cheatin'. package lives up to TDCs fine standards individual players, as the focus is strictly It's enough to send an honest poker play in writing, editing, use of footage and the on coaching and developing a team. The er back to AMARILLO SLIM'S. MPC CDability to weave all the pieces into a meandepth is impressive, with a pro playbook ROM, $49.95. Circle Reader Service # 4 for designing your own plays, a draft INTELLIMEDIA SPORTS, INC, Tiro PIED 1944 module, even algorithms for how well MONT CENTER, ATLANTA, GA, 30305, (800) players interact with one another. So make Home Front 269-2101 the pass, sports fans, pick & roll, and Hollywood Canteen move it inside with this engaging, easy-toLINKS BIGHORN GOLF play and thorough game. IBM $49.95. Gorgeous though all the LINKS 386 Circle Reader Service # 8 courses might be, this deserves the subtiSTRATEGIC GAMING DESIGNS, 659 CARY tle of \"Delightful Desert SVGA Vistas,\" so TOWNE BLID #176, CARY, NC, 27511, Stunningly has the beauty of the course (919) 552-1807 been captured. The towering Santa Rosa Mountains form a backdrop for the variPREHISTORIK 2 ety of flora found in this surprisinglyingful whole. There are 13 major subjects Those who fondly remember Caveman green arid climate. The back nine is fairly here, covering everything from the home with Ringo Starr may don their leopard typical of courses found on the pro tour, front to Operation Fortitude to the liberaskins and leap right into this silly prehiswith perhaps fewer water hazards (as one tion of Paris, with video clips, detailed toric arcade title. \"Hungerland\" looks would expect in the land of cactus). The narration, and photographs to help tell every bit as much the prehistoric fast-food first few holes offer a set of unusual chalthe story. In addition, each subject is strip as it did in the first game of the selenges for the LINKS golfer. Missing the fleshed out through articles, original raries, offering plenty of action as you try to fairway often puts you in the rough, as dio broadcasts, maps and personal letters fill your ever-grumbling caveman belly. In you hit your second shot from the side of from soldiers and commanders at the addition to scrolling and jumping from 206 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"DO YOU HAVE THE GUTS TO PLAY TH THE BIB BOS? Enter The Future... And Outsmart The World's Most Wily Collectors THE YEAR MILLENNIUM IS 2011. YOU'RE ABOUT TO OUTBID THREE Windows CD-ROM FOREIGN INVESTORS FOR A VAN GOGH BEAUCTIONS AND MAKE A MILLION DOLLAR KILLING... Husu AVAILABLE THE PRIVATE COLLECTIBLES EDITION. ENRICH THE EXPERIENCE WITH 60 ADDITIONAL INTIMATE OBJETS D'ART MILLENNIUM Panda Colledible TOO BAD IT'S JUST A GAME. Experience the Thrill of Interactive Bidding. Bluffing. Buying and Selling! Eidolon ST 2 CD'S FOR WINDOWS 10? \"WHERE SOHO MEETS WALL STREET MEETS STAR TREH\" Eidolon THE VILLAGE VOICE NOW AVAILABLE AT A SOFTWARE DEALER NEAR YOU. Millennium Auction is a trademark of Eidolon Ine. 1994 All Rights Reserved Windows is a trademark of Microsok Corp. Mana Lisa: Stala: An Resource, NY Circle Reader Service #239 "


"NOW PLAYING NUN la O SOLITAIRE ANTICS industry, or merely shows that the designJust when you thought it was safe to ers have a good sense of humor. Even if shuffle the old virtual deck, another veryour fictional world-within-worlds is only sion of Solitaire crawls out of the woodvirtually a virtual reality, it still manages work. Using their expertise garnered to throw a lot of action at you in the usual from developing screen savers, Ant Softscrolling and shooting fashion, complete ware (and Masque Publishing) unleashes with expected boss starships at the end of insects on your well-laid tableau, fleshed each level. Very European in style, it reout in over 50 animations. Other than the sembles an Amiga shooter from about parade of crawling, flying and otherwise 1990. Amiga 1200, IBM, Mac, $59.95. 29 0022000 animated ants, however, the card-flipping Circle Reader Service # 12 one screen to another, you may employ is much the same as any other solitaire DONGLEWARE PUBLISHING, INC., 35 that wondrous invention of the Mesozoic product-although the games do have HOWARD STREET, CAMBRIDGE MA, 02139, era, the hang-glider (obviously invented three modes of difficulty, a bit strange for (617) 497-1130 by a distant ancestor of Leonardo da Vinthis genre. Realizing that solitaire is a reci), to speed you on your way through the laxing pastime, the designers have WOODSTOCK 25TH various levels. While it's obvious that the ANNIVERSARY CD-ROM Solitaire Antics Klondike dinosaurs who oppose you are a bit out of The festival that brought together so their time period, anyone who is worried many people for music, drugs and mud, about that won't pick up this game in the has now been re-rolled onto a CD-ROM first place. IBM, $44.99. Circle Reader that by its very nature can't really do jusService #9 tice to the event. But it's the 25th anniverTitus SOFTWARE, 20432 CORISCO ST., sary of the ultimate love-in, with Woodstock CHATSWORTH, CA, 91311. (818)709-3692 II hype still ringing in our ears, and Time-Warner knows a good marketing REBEL ASSAULT angle when they see it. Basically a collecIn a galaxy not so far away, digitized tion of video clips, photos and eight songs video and state-of-the art computer from the original concert, the CD also ingraphics were combined to create a viscludes back-stage interviews, \"raps\" with ceral Star Wars feast on the IBM computsome laid back cats, news clippings, perer. Now, the mysterious powers of The thoughtfully included a control to play former bios and album anthologies. Force have made this experience availaudio CDs at the same time you are There is also an amusing trivia game that able for Macintosh star-pilots as well. searching for that three of diamonds. All relates little gems like the lan who loated Screaming down canyons, being chased in all, amusing enough, with the main COUNTRY JOE MEDONALD question being how long solo entomologists will be enthralled by the relatively ALBUMS scant number of games-21 in all. IBM Windows, Mac, $24.99. Circle Reader Service # 11 GAMETEK, INC., 2999 N.E. 1915T STREET, SUITE 500, NORTH MIAMI BEACH, FL, 33180 (305) 935-3995 SCORE 000060 TUBULAR WORLDS PLAYER by TIE Fighters and ambushed by Storm T he fiction used to justify most arcade Troopers never sounded or looked so games is largely rubbish, but the story for away one night on an air mattress and wonderful. The John Williams sound-this Amiga/IBM/Mac shooter wins this woke up lodged under a truck, and a track, along with the film footage from month's Silly Setup crown. Your final test \"Groovy Paint Feature» where you can the Star Wars trilogy of films, are almost as a space cadet is described as a tour spiral trippy 60s clipart over strobing seamlessly integrated, to the point where through four virtual cyber-worlds. It's hard backgrounds until your corneas supernothis game has a very cinematic feel to decide if this is a sly comment on the va. Far out! We had trouble getting the throughout. The only problem is that IBM version to run Quicktime movies, would-be Luke Skywalkers don't have any but the Mac version ran well. A cool promore freedom to move around in this gram for the countless millions of fans richly-generated Mac world than their PC who thought they were there, but for the counterparts enjoyed. If you like computrest of us, probably not worth the trip. er cinematics and enjoy repetitive and Mac and IBM CD-ROM, $59.99. Circle limited arcade action, you might want to Reader Service # 13 take a ride on this X-WING with training TIME WARNER INTERACTIVE, 2210 W. wheels. IBM, $63.95. Circle Reader SerOLIVE AVENUE, BURBANK, CA 91506, (800) vice # 10 OLARAMENARISSA 482-3766 % DARASE K ICH PILOTS 208 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"Never Lose Sight Of How Pinball Should Be Played. A truly great pinball game is more than great graphics and spectacular sounds, more than the latest arcade features like 3D ramps and three multi-ball play, more than fast ball movement and precise flipper control, and it's more than being able to see the whole playfield at once so you can aim your shots. A great pinball game has that unique quality of playability and neverending challenge that keeps you coming back for...just one more game and a shot at your new high score! Washington Post-\"Crystal Caliburn perfectly captures the essence of a great pinball machine.\" New York Times -\"The realism is striking... [Crystal Caliburn) will be at the top of Silicon Santa's gift list this year.\" Inside Mac Games \"ARCADE GAME OF THE YEAR\" SO CALDUS >CUFLASHIMCANARD ST ID ESIALISUK DOSTOP ETBATALL Computer Game Review\"Crystal Caliburn sets a new standard. For realistic pinball on a computer, there's nothing like this game.\" tamo 18 Electronic Entertainment-\"Crystal Caliburn is simply the best, most realistic, most challenging pinball simulation for the Macintosh yet.\" (Rating: 9 out of 10) SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS: MACINTOSH: 13\" or larger monitor, 256 colors, and 4MB RAM WINDOWS: 386 or faster processor, Windows 3.1, 256 SVGA monitor, 4MB RAM. Supports SoundBlasters and other Windows compatible sound cards. GAMES Magazine-\"You'll forget you're playing on a two-dimensional computer screen... the realism is astonishing.\" MacUser-\"Electronic pinball's Holy Grail.\" (Rating: 4 1/2 out of 5) Solid State PINBALL CrystalCaliburn WINDOWS Crystal Caliburn From the creative genius of Little WingTM, developer of TRISTANTM and Eight Ball DeluxeTM for Macintosh. Available from your favorite retailer or mail-order catalog. Interactive DEMO on AOL and CompuServe NOW AVAILABLE FOR WINDOWS! OPINBALL Crystal Caliburn StarPlay Productions, Inc.  PO Box 217  Greeley, Colorado 80632-0217  Tel 303.447.9562  Fax 303.447.2739 TM Crystal Caliburn and Tristan are trademarks of LittleWing CO. LTD. Other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Circle Reader Service #225 "


"DAWN PATROL the visible llar State of the art Flight Simulation in World War 1 action TRE SOM Most modern aerial balles don't compare with the skill and atmosphere generated by the dogfights over Northern Europe. No modern flight sims compare with Dawn Patrol. Dawn patrol takes a detailed look at dozens of actual situations from WW1. Background information on real-life Aces and planes provide a fascinating insight. Superb digitized photographs and animated action sequences add to the experience. 32 And then suddenly you are in the aircrafts Each event can be played out in superb 3D with full control of 15 aircraft taken from both sides each with their own aerodynamic model. With a resolution of 640 x 400, texture mapping, Gouraud shading, light sourcing and depth shading the screen looks more realistic than anything seen on PC so far, the beauty of these aircraft is that, unlike modern equivalents, they fly slowly enough for you to appreciate the detail unless you happen to be being attacked by 3 Fokkers that is! Not only can these individual missions be adjusted to tilt the balance for you or against you, but there are also specific pilots for you to become through a series of missions, attempting to emulate or even outshine the achievements of Von Richthofen! Circle Reader Service 1136 No guided missiles,no laser range-finders, Just Pure Aerodynamic Skill. empire Phy EMPIRE INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT Inc. 13220 Wisteria D2., Bay N-2, Gemantown MD. 20874 For more information visit your software reseller or call Empire on 800-216-9 "


"TI SCORE Welcome to the Cooperstown of Computer Games. Here, raised upon pedestals, you'll find the games that broke the records, established the benchmarks, and held gamers in delighted trances for hours untold. CGW H.O.F. HIGHLIGHTS HALL OF FAME INDUCTION CEREMONY! THE BARD'S TALE (Electronic Arts, 1985) BATTLE CHESS (Interplay Productions, Inc., 1988) CHESSMASTER (The Software Toolworks, 1986) CIVILIZATION (MicroProse, Inc., 1991) DUNGEON MASTER (FTL Software, 1987) EARL WEAVER BASEBALL (Electronic Arts, 1986) EMPIRE (Interstel, 1978) F-19 STEALTH FIGHTER (MicroProse, Inc., 1988) GETTYSBURG: THE TURNING POINT (SSI, 1986) GUNSHIP (MicroProse, Inc., 1989) HARPOON (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) KAMPFGRUPPE (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) KING'S QUEST V (Sierra On-Line, Inc., 1990) LEMMINGS (Psygnosis, 1991) M-1 TANK PLATOON (MicroProse, Inc., 1989) MECH BRIGADE (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) MIGHT & MAGIC (New World Computing, 1986) M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) PIRATES (MicroProse, Inc., 1987) RAILROAD TYCOON (MicroProse, Inc., 1990) RED BARON (Dynamix, 1990) SIMCITY (Maxis, 1987) STARFLIGHT (Electronic Arts, 1986) THE SECRET OF MONKEY ISLAND (LucasArts, 1990) THEIR FINEST HOUR (LucasArts, 1989) ULTIMA III (Origin Systems, Inc., 1983) ULTIMA IV (Origin Systems, Inc., 1985) ULTIMA VI (Origin Systems, Inc., 1990) WAR IN RUSSIA (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) WASTELAND (Interplay Productions, Inc., 1986) WING COMMANDER (Origin Systems, Inc., 1991) WIZARDRY (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) ZORK (Infocom, 1981) LEMMINGS PSYGNOSIS, 1991 Ever since Walt Disney promulgated the romanticized image of lemmings as a species that would blindly follow the crowd over a cliff edge and to their watery deaths, the species has become a well-worn metaphor for the mindless followers of any leader. In its initial release over three years ago, LEMMINGS placed gamers in the role of such a leader, but added an intriguing twist. Instead of leading the cute little creatures to their demise, the gamer was expected to save them from their peregrinating selves. While much of the game's appeal is due to the endemic cuteness of these little furry creatures, it is also apparent that LEMMINGS is a \"god game,\" at least in a broad sense. Cast in the role of the LEMMINGS' savior, the player must remove barriers, yank the lovable Lilliputians from dangerous precipices, and save them from all sorts of aquatic, fiery and otherwise calamitous ends, primarily by assigning various lemmings to certain tasks. Much like TETRIS, this game gave a new twist to the puzzle game genre. Successful on many levels, LEMMINGS transcended the gender barrier and appealed to women as much as it appealed to men. For most of us, the bottom line is that there always scemed to be time for just one more level of this insidiously addicting game. Now that LEMMINGS has migrated to the hard drives of every major platform, we'll probably never know how many hours have been and are being spent watching LEMMINGS shimmy up clills, bash through mountains, or float to safety with umbrellas. And we'll probably never know how many more hours will be spent with the planned string of sequels. Look for LEMMINGS 3 to fall helplessly down your chimney this Christmas. NEXT MONTH: Wing Commander II OCTOBER 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 211 "


"TOP ADVENTURE GAMES SCORE | TOP 100 GAMES READER POLL #121 SCORE 9.92 9.83 9.79 9.56 GAME 1 2 3 4 5 po 6 7 A8 1 9 10 Day of the Tentacle Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis Quest for Glory III Sherlock Holmes CDI Gabriel Knight Star Control II The Seventh Guest Sam & Max Hit The Road Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes COMPANY LucasArts LucasArts LucasArts Sierra Viacom Sierra Accolade Virgin LucasArts Electronic Arts 9.42 9.33 9.32 9.30 9.20 2224434425233 SCORE 10.44 10.33 10.32 10.22 10.00 10.00 9.97 9.92 9.88 9.83 9.83 9.82 9.79 9.73 9.68 GAME Ultima 9.42 Underworld The SEUSITE WG TOP ROLE PLAYING GAMES COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.22 Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix 9.50 Ultima Underworld Il Origin Might & Magic III New World Computing 9.41 Lands of Lore Virgin 9.38 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing Eye of the Beholder II SSI 9.34 Ultima VII Origin 9.25 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle Origin 9.08 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 9.65 9.37 WG 8.97 22 WG 9.65 9.63 9.59 9.58 9.56 9.55 9.55 9.55 9.53 9.50 COMPANY Id Software Access MicroProse Origin SSG MicroProse QQP LucasArts QQP Maxis LucasArts Virgin LucasArts Three-Sixty Pacific SSG Dynamix LucasArts Three-Sixty Pacific Spectrum HoloByte Three-Sixty Pacific Sierra Viacom SSI Id Software QQP Dynamix Electronic Arts MicroProse SSI Origin Sierra New World Computing QQP Virgin/Papyrus Virgin Dynamix New World Computing SSI SSI Accolade MicroProse Virgin Software Toolworks LucasArts Novalogic Accolade Origin Three-Sixty Pacific Electronic Arts Origin * 1 Doom * 2 Links 386 Pro 3 Master of Orion 4 Ultima Underworld 5 Warlords 11 X-COM 7 Solitaire's Journey * 8 Day of the Tentacle 9 The Grandest Fleet 10 Sim City 2000 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge 12 Dune II 13 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis 14 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki 15 Carriers at War Construction Kit 16 Front Page Sports Football Pro X-Wing 18 V for Victory: Utah Beach *19 Falcon 3.0 20 V for Victory: Market Garden 21 Quest for Glory III 22 Sherlock Holmes CDI Tanks Wolfenstein 3-D 25 Conquered Kingdoms 26 Betrayal at Krondor NHLPA Hockey 28 World Circuit War in Russia 30 Ultima Underworld II Gabriel Knight 32 Might & Magic III 33 Merchant Prince Indy Car Racing 35 Lands of Lore Aces of the Pacific 37 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen 38 Pacific War Eye of the Beholder 11 40 Star Control II Fleet Defender 42 The Seventh Guest Chessmaster 3000 44 Sam & Max Hit The Road 45 Comanche: Maximum Overkill Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf 47 Ultima VII 48 V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword 49 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes 50 Privateer TOP SIMULATION GAMES GAME COMPANY Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte World Circuit MicroProse Indy Car Racing Virgin/Papyrus Aces of the Pacific Dynamix Fleet Defender MicroProse Comanche: Maximum Overkill Novalogic Hornet Spectrum HoloByte Stunt Island Disney Aces Over Europe Dynamix F-15 Strike Eagle III MicroProse 9.50 SCORE 9.59 9.44 9.40 9.38 9.33 1 2 FALCON 3 4 5 6 7 La guate 8 I NTERESTER 9 10 9.27 9.12 9.00 8.78 8.65 9.44 9.44 9.42 9.42 9.41 9.40 9.40 9.38 9.38 9.37 9.34 9.34 9.33 9.33 9.32 9.32 9.30 9.27 9.27 AD.AC 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 TOP STRATEGY GAMES GANE COMPANY Master of Orion MicroProse X-COM MicroProse Warlords II SSG Solitaire's Journey QQP The Grandest Fleet QOP Sim City 2000 Maxis Dune II Virgin Conquered Kingdoms QOP Merchant Prince QOP Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks SCORE 10.32 10.00 10.00 9.97 9.88 9.83 9.82 9.53 9.40 Be B Bootleg FORION ia52a2 9.25 MICROPROSE 9.24 9.20 9.19 9.32 "


"GAME COMPANY ta Sierra AD RP SSI 9.19 8.57 tata5a555&agasts to t&aac SSG TOP WARGAMES 51 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra 9.17 52 Hardball III Accolade 9.16 SCORE 53 Tetris Classic Spectrum HoloByte 9.14 1 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty Pacific 9.73 54 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electronic Arts 9.13 2 Carriers at War Construction Kit SSG 9.68 TOP VIRIGY 3 55 V for Victory: Utah Beach Hornet 9.12 Spectrum Holobyte Three-Sixty Pacific 9.63 56 The Castle of Dr. Brain 9.11 4 V for Victory: Market Garden Three-Sixty Pacific 9.58 57 The Dagger of Amon Ra Sierra 9.09 5 Tanks SSI 9.55 58 Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle Origin 9.08 6 War in Russia SSI 9.44 Electronic Arts 59 STAC 7 9.07 Syndicate Pacific War 9.34 Accolade 60 AD 8 9.06 Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword Three-Sixty Pacific 9.24 61 9 Quest for Glory I (VGA) Sierra AD, RP 9.05 Clash of Steel SSI 9.01 62 Eric the Unready Legend AD 9.04 10 Carriers At War SSG 8.97 Empire Deluxe New World Computing 9.04 Conquests of the Longbow Sierra 9.04 65 TOP ACTION GAMES Clash of Steel 9.01 SSI 66 Stunt Island Disney 9.00 GAME COMPANY SCORE Battles of Destiny QQP 9.00 1 Doom Id Software 10.44 68 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 8.97 2 X-Wing LucasArts 9.65 Carriers At War SSG 8.97 3 Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 9.55 70 Freddy Pharkas Frontier Pharmacist Sierra 8.96 4 Privateer Origin 71 VGA Planets Tim Wisseman 8.95 5 Tetris Classic Spectrum HoloByte 9.14 Alone in the Dark 1Motion 8.95 6 Out of this World Interplay 73 The Incredible Machine Dynamix 8.92 7 The Horde Crystal Dynamics 8.50 74 The Island of Dr. Brain Sierra 8.91 8 Prince of Persia 2 Broderbund 8.49 Sim City CD-ROM Interplay 8.91 9 The Lost Vikings Interplay 8.46 76 Arena: The Elder Scrolls Bethesda 8.88 10 Rebel Assault LucasArts 8.44 77 Carriers at War II 8.82 78 Spellcasting 301: Spring Break Legend 8.81 79 Rex Nebular MicroProse 8.80 TOP SPORTS GAMES 80 Tony La Russa Baseball Il SSI 8.78 GAME SCORE COMPr Aces over Europe 8.78 Dynamix Links 3B6 Pro Access 10.33 Populous II Electronic Arts 8.78 2 Front Page Sports Football Pro Dynamix 9.65 Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 Sierra 8.78 NHLPA Hockey Electronic Arts 9.50 84 Kasparov's Gambit Electronic Arts 8.75 Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade 9.27 85 Veil of Darkness SSI 8.74 5 Hardball III Accolade 9.16 Dracula Unleashed Viacom 8.74 6 Tony La Russa Baseball Il 8.78 87 Gateway Legend 8.72 7 Wayne Gretzky Hockey III Bethesda 8.30 88 Harpoon II Three-Sixty 8.69 8 MicroLeague Baseball 4 MicroLeague 89 1942 Pacific Air War MicroProse 8.65 9 All American College Football Micro Sports F-15 Strike Eagle III MicroProse 8.65 10 Mike Ditka Ultimate Football Accolade 7.97 91 Star Trek: Judgment Rites Interplay 8.64 MiG-29 Spectrum HoloByte 8.64 Great Naval Battles 8.64 Vote! 94 Amazon Access AD 95 Space Quest V: Mutation Sierra 8.60 You've read our take on the latest games, now here's a chance to see what your fellow 96 High Command Three-Sixty Pacific WG 8.58 97 Koei Genghis Khan II WG gamers think. The CGW Top 100 is a monthly tally of game ratings provided by our 8.57 Carrier Strike SSI WG 8.57 readers via the CGW Poll ballot found in each issue. Approximately 50 games are ratOut of this World Interplay AC 8.57 ed each month, and the results are added to the aggregate results from past months. 100 Hand Of Fate Westwood Studios 8.56 This historical database serves as a terrific reference for what you, the gamers, feel are Games on un numbered lines have scores equal to the line above. = Top game of type. Dark Teal = New Game, the best plays in gaming AD = Adventure, RP = Role Playing, SI = Simulation, ST = Strategy. WG = Wargame. AC = Action, SP = Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A MONTHLY SURVEY OF THE READERS OF COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 8.23 7.98 SSY WG,ST 8.62 AD AD "


"SCORE PATCHES AEGIS Patch: Eliminates the Electronic Book crash. 4/28/94. Pacific Strike V1.19: Contains 9 fixes for Origin's new flight sim. 5/27/94 Zilf NET. Aide de Camp V1.15: Police Quest 4 Patch: Fixes Newest version uses 70 Computer game programs have grown so massive and the number of hardall known problems and KB less RAM and has sevspeeds up restoration of eral interface modificaware configurations has become so huge that incompatibilities and glitches saved games. Disk vertions. 7/25/94 are frustratingly common. Patches for buggy programs have become a necsion only. 4/5/94 essary evil until we reach the golden age of standardized platforms and bugArchon Ultra V1.1 Update: free programs (\"Close your eyes, Dorothy...) Prophecy Patch: Solves Latest version of SSI's action/strategy game. 7/14/94 These patches can usually be downloaded from most major graphics problems with ! faster systems. 6/15/94 networks (CompuServe GEnie, Ziffnet), but can also be obBane of the Cosmic Forge tained from individual software publisher's own BBSs or direct from the pubRavenloft 1.1 Upgrade: LatPatch: Replacement file lisher with proof of purchase. We continue to urge publishers to keep us est version from SSI, flopfor players who get a diinformed of the latest patches for their games. py and CD-ROM. 4/29/94 vide overflow when startRed indicates new files. ing the game. 3/23/94 Red Baron Patch: Configuration fix for IBM only. Battles of the South Pacific clude cleaning up PBM Jutland V1.1 Upgrade: Al 3/29/94 Upgrade: Latest patch for play. 6/1/94 lows non-penetrating QOP's WWII naval strateshells, adds more graphics, Sierra Sound Patches: A vagy qame. 5/24/94 Fleet Defender V1.2 Up runs smoother, and most riety of fixes and driver's grade: Latest version of significantly, includes time for Sound Blaster, Gravis Cactus League Pro Baskel MicroProse flight sim, with compression. 3/30/94. Ultra Sound and General ball Update: Corrects stats 41 new features. 5/17/94 Midi users, for a number of 70-71 season disk. Jutland Patch: The game of older Sierra games. 6/23/94 Global Domination Update: will now recognize differ5/19/94 Fixes modem play bugs. ent sound card addresses, Chessmaster 4000 Turbo 6/23/94 rather than just the de Subwar 2050 V2.02 Update: v1.04: Newest upgrade Cault 220 address. 5/3/94 Corrects cursor drift, time for Software Toolworks' Gohliins CD-ROM Patch: and date problem. 4/28/94 chess program. 6/28/94 Fixes sound card and Kingmaker V1.51 Upgrade: CD-ROM driver prob Latest version of Avalon Tigers on the Prowl V1.3: Comanche Joystick Drivers: lems. 3/1/94 Hill's strategy game with New features include AI Adds Flightstick Pro supmany fixes. 5/25/94 tweaks and combat routine port. 5/24/94 Great Naval Battles v1.1 enhancements. 7/25/94 Upgrade: Several correc Lands of Lore Floppy V1.23 Command Adventures Star tions listed in readme Upgrade: Fixes \"Dawn's Tony La Russa Baseball 2 ship Patch: The latest fix file. 6/24/94 Key\" problem and Pen Patch: Fixes stadium lockes for Merit Software's tium lockups when choosups. 5/3/94 sci-fi game. 5/19/94 The Horde V1.1 Revision: ing a character. 4/28/94 Now supports Media Vision Tony La Russa Baseball 2 Companions of Xanth Points Pro Audio sound cards. Fix Lucky's Casino Update: Lat CD-ROM V1.3: Latest verList: Complete point to es lockups on some Sony est version of OOP game. sion with numerous fixes. tals for Legend's adven drives, dead knights noi 5/19/94 7/21/94 ture game. 5/25/94 disappearing after snowball hits, and also slows down M4 for Windows V1.04: Ultima 8 Patch: Fixes D-Day Patch: Includes the end credits. 4/28/94 Latest upgrade lixes AdLib prblem with some missing text from game sound problems, espe machines. 4/15/94 manual. 7/8/94 IndyCar Racing V1.04 In cially with Media Vision ternational: Different cards. 7/15/94 Warlords II Update: LatDetroit Upgrade: Fixes in patches for owners of INest version, for those who clude finances, the De DYCAR Spanish, Italian. Megarace v1.1 Upgrade: don't have the construccember crash and the German or French lan Solves Sound Blaster dil tion kit. 6/17/94. 255-worker bug. 5/31/94 guage versions. 5/19/94 ficulties. 6/28/94 Warlords II Copy Utility: Diamond Dreams Upgrade: IndyCar Racing Patch: Im MicroProse Sound Drivers: Allows you to copy armies Fixes all known bugs, and proves AI and cleans up New AdLib sound drivers and cities between WARfeatures greatly improved tracks. 6/23/94. for many older games LORDS II scenarios. InAl for computer manager which had problems run cludes documentation. strategies, 3/29/94 IndyCar Racing Modem ning with 486 and Pen 7/4/94 Patch: Cleans up difficultium machines. 4/7/94 Empire Deluxe V1.1 Mac: ties with modem play, X-Wing Enhancement: Latest version of New and fixes scrolling menus 1942 Pacific Air War: Lal This TSR allows use of World's strategy game for for steering devices with est fixes, including joystick extra Thrustmaster butMac gamers, fixes in no y-axis. 4/7/94 enhancements. 7/8/94 tons. 6/2/94 214 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


"BEHULD ** THE SOLUTION Microforum CD-ROM PRODUCTIONS MICROFORUM Presents The Most Complete Game Solution Collection In The Market! Would you like to be invincible, have unlimited lives or grand scores? How about discover hints and tips (not provided in manuals or help-lines) that solve the most popular PC games in the market? NOW YOU CAN! With The Video Game SOLUTION CD! Also break hundreds of annoying password checks and view some of the graphics and concepts of the games before purchasing it! This CD includes solutions, hints, tips and editors for popular games such as: 7th Guest Alone in the Dark Bio Menace  Black Cauldron. Blue Force Borrowed Time Castle of Dr.Brian Caesar Circuits Edge  Day of the Tentacle. Dare to Dream . Deadline Demon's Forge Doom  Dracula. Dune Ecoquest. Epic Pinball Eric the Unready. Fascination. Flashback Freddy Pharkas . Future Wars. Grand Prix  Heart of China. Hero's Quest Hitchhiker's Guide  Hollywood Hijinx. Hugo's House of Horrors 1 to 3. Inca 2. Iceman Indiana Jones 3 / Fate of Atlantis . Iron Helix Jurrassic Park  Karateka. Ken's Labyrinth  King Quest 1 to 5. Lands of Lore Leather Goddess 1 & 2 Leisure Suit Larry 1 to 5. Lemmings 2 / The Tribes Master of Orion  Manhunter NY & SanFrancisco Monster Bash. Maximum Overkill Mortal Kombat. Myst Outrun  Predator 2. Ultima VIII Privateer  Rebel Assault. Raptor Star Trek 25th Anniversary/Judgement Rights. Wolfenstein 3D AND HUNDREDS MORE! Also Included in RELEASE 2.0  Tips and secrets for the most popular SEGA and NINTENDO games!  Doom Extras Cheats, tricks, extra episodes, new sounds and much more! SOLUTION Miczejrozum RELEASE 2.0 SOLD AT BETTER COMPUTER STORES! or to ORDER DIRECT Call TOLL-FREE 1-800-465-CDCD DEALER INQUIRIES WELCOME! Call (416)656-6406 Circle Reader Service #89 1994 Mcroforum be Al Rights Roserved Woodborough Avenue, Toronto, Ontario CANADA MOM 541 "


"The Rumor Bag Beating Rumors Into Plowshares by Cyrus Ferguson Deere THE SKY WAS THE BLUE OF WEDGWOOD and that the 3-D action/adventure where canning from the cellar.\" After that, I didn't STONEWARE WITH THE CLOUDS PROVIDING THE you escape from an insane asylum in order bother telling him about Apogee's SHADOW CREAMY WHITE TRIM. I WAS CROSSING THE to rescue your true love looked like it was WARRIOR, the 3D ninja game where the Al is country, trying to find out about Crystal Dygoing to have a lot of puzzles. The only othsmart enough to know when to ambush you namics' unannounced baseball game and er 3-D game I'd recently seen that would and when to run away. It just seemed superhad ended up in my dad's hometown in Okuse that many puzzles was the one Apogee fluous. So, the table talk returned to the idea lahoma. As we stopped beside the high was going to call RUINS. RUINS has an Egyptof how I make my living. \"You mean they school baseball diamond to watch the locals ian theme, but follows the premise that the pay you to go to parties?\" asked one grizzled play, I remembered hearing that Crystal was Egyptian civilization was inspired by aliens. tiller of red clay. I explained that I needed to going to be using lots of digitized video in orThe game uses the Doom engine, but has be where people in the industry were in order to create a realistic-looking action game. added translucent special effects, parallaxder to find out what was happening. As the game finished, my dad wanted me ing skies and floors, round walls, revolving \"For example,\" I told them, «I might go to join him at his small Oklahoma town's doors and moving vehicles. to the Mesquite Rodeo with the folks from version of \"Cheers\"—the local coffee shop. One of the good ole boys at the table sugMerit Studios.\" For the first time, they Now, you have to realize that my dad makes gested that I belonged in an insane asylum seemed interested in the conversation. fun of me for being such a city boy, and I for actually writing about stuff like that\" \"They might tell me in between the calf ropdidn't help as I made my entrance into his and another got up to leave, saying that he ing and the Brahma bull riding that they're hangout. It seems that one of the farmers intended to burn the brush off his field that working on an ice hockey game.\" had placed a pitchfork beside his truck and day. Since his field was right next to one of \"Really?\" asked the farmer, meaning that someone had knocked it to the ground. my uncle's places, I listened with interest as he wanted to know what I thought about the Naturally, I managed to step on the tines of the other farmers tried to convince him that calf roping and bull riding the fork and propel the handle up toward the wind was too strong to burn anything \"Really!\" I wrongly assured him. «They my head. It didn't hit me, but I sure looked safely. He left, anyway. What we didn't know have a U.K. team working on the project stupid. I tried to save face by telling everyat that time was that the fire would get so and, since it's based on Olympic ice hockey, one at my dad's table that a pitchfork is one out of control that it would have taken most they have a former Olympic coach consultof the weapons of choice in Bloon, a 3-D of the liquid in Interplay's future WATER ing on it.\" first-person action game from Apogee SoftWORLD game to put it out. Even if I'd told About that time, a fellow came in and told ware which uses the Doom engine and puts them that Water World was the title of an upus that a fire was out of control at my uncle's the player in a horrific world like Stephen coming Universal film starring Kevin Costplace. We all rushed out and drove over just King might create. The engine has been adner and Dennis Hopper, I'm not sure that in time to see the fire consume the last of vanced to the point where entire rooms can they would have been impressed. So, I did my uncle's fence posts. \"morph\" and platforms can move as though n't even tell them that the game could beI realized I could be quickly drafted to dig the player was traveling on them. come the foundation of an entire series of post holes for replacement fence posts, so I As we sat down in the coffee shop, one of role-playing games. mumbled something about Merit's TUNNEL the men asked my dad if this was the son Another fellow said he didn't know much RAT. For the first time that day, the locals who went to parties and played games for a about computer games, but his oldest son disinterest in my profession had worked to living. Being close to the land, they couldn't played a shareware program called DUKE my advantage. I meant I was going to my imagine anyone getting paid to find out ruNUKEM. I told him that Apogee had a firstdad's house to play an early version of the mors and write them down once a month. person version coming out called DUKE first-person 3-D shooter from the ISLE OF THE They asked about my latest rumor and I NUKEM 3D that was built off the Doom enDEAD team, and they thought I was going to showed them my September column with gine. I told him about the great special effect sit out in my dad's garden and shoot rats and the info about Delphine's project with Elecin the game where you can shatter glass, and rabbits. Instead, I was shooting two-legged tronic Arts. I had since found out that the he just laughed derisively. \"Why, my son can rats, the imaginary kind. Somehow, I didn't game was going to be called RELENTLESS, shatter glass just trying to carry up his mom's think they would approve. Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Ziff. Davis Publishing Co., One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016. Subscription rate is $28.00 for at one year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $11.00 for postage. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167.Canadian GST registration number is R123669673. Second-class postage paid at New York, NY 10016 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Printed in the U.S.A. 216 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD OCTOBER 1994 "


" E | IX FLIGHT & WEAPONS CONTROL SYSTEM Take control of your elevators, ailerons, throttle, rudder, and flight and weapon commands with this unique two-handed joystick the Phoenix Flight & Weapons Control System. Each of the 24 buttons can be programmed using a graphical interface, designed for simplicity. The Phoenix is compatible with all games and flight simulators that support a standard joystick and keyboard controls. No special support is required. PUBLIN Advanced GRAVIS Available now for IBM/PCS & compatibles Macintosh model avaliable Spring 95. Advanced Gravis Computer Technology Ltd. 1790 Midway Lane, Bellingham, WA 98226 For information calli 1-800-663-8558, 604-431-5020 or fax 604-431-5155 Circle Reader Service #114 "


"ORIGIN Presents ... WING COMMANDER II THE INTERACTIVE MOVIE AN ORIGIN PRODUCTION IN ASSOCIATION WITH ELECTRONIC ARTS \"WING COMMANDER III: HEART OF THE TIGER\" COOP STARRING MARK HAMILL, JOHN RHYS-DAVIES, GINGER LYNN ALLEN AND MALCOLM MCDOWELL POSUES A CHRIS ROBERTS AND FRANK SAVAGE ASSOCIATE PREM KRISHNAN Urinin 3DO MUSICAL SCORE GEORGE OLOZIEY IRLANI CHRIS DOUGLAS POST PappuciSON ADAM FOSHKO martir 1990. Ang Saless, but Heart of the light and dupalateottie Wnie me matematika 3! ORIGIN Spalina, las Origis und Witz Lennart at 1430tent Statements of CAN Systens, let lletranie. Dit is a greatened trademark of lecting kr. 30 is teatrazil 11: 300 bespit Circle Reader Service #220 IMP-13 VOLUNTARILY RATED FOR MATURE PLAYERS COMPOSED BY ULUN Warie. "

