Vol. 5 No. 2

April-May 1985
Features
LODE RUNNER

9

Contest Results

CARRIERS AT WAR
Pacific Theatre WWII Game

WAR IN RUSSIA

16
Bill Nichols
18

Replay of Case Blue (Part 2)

KAMPFGRUPPE
Tactical Armor in WWII Russia

ROBOT SIMULATIONS
Robot Odyssey I and Chipwits
IBM GOES TO WAR
The Ancient Art of War and Gato

THE WORLD OF THE PLAYTESTER
Special Game Design Coverage

21
Mark Bausman
22
Gregg Williams
24
Russell Sipe
28
Tom Cheche

Departments
TAKING A PEEK

10

Screen Photos & Brief Comments

LETTERS

15

STRATEGICALLY SPEAKING

20

Strategy Game Tips

COMMODORE KEY
Hardware & Software Reviews

DISPATCHES
Special Game Design Coverage

COME CAST A SPELL WITH ME
Adventure Games

SILICON CEREBRUM
Special Game Design Coverage

ATARI PLAYFIELD
The New Atari Computers

NAME OF THE GAME
Special Game Design Coverage

SCORPION'S TALE
Suspect Hints

READER INPUT DEVICE

26
Roy Wagner
27
Dan Bunten
30
Roe R. Adams III
31
Bruce Webster
33
David Stone
34
Jon Freeman
35
Scorpia
40

Rate The Games

GAME RATINGS

46

LODE RUNNER CONTEST WINNERS
Last August we announced our Lode Runner Contest. Over fifty screens were submitted by talented
CGW readers. Most were excellent according to our
two judges, Bob Proctor and Dan Stalcup. Playing
all those entries was a challenge and a lot of hard
work for Bob and Dan. Thanks guys!
Prizes were awarded in four categories: Best Overall; Best Appearance; Most Challenging to Solve; and
Most Challenging to Play.
Messieurs Proctor and Stalcup, the envelope
please:
The award for the Most Artistic screen goes to. .
John Berry of Houston Texas for his Sailing Ship
Screen. Congratulations John. Please keep your acceptance speech within time limits.
And next: the award for the Most Challenging to
Solve. The envelope, gentlemen, if you please... And
the winner is... Terry Schulz of Murrysville Pennsylvania. Congratulations Terry.
Our next award goes to the screen that was the
Most Challenging to Play. And the winner is... Robin Cox of Houston Texas. Come on up here to the podium, Robin, and thank all the little people that have

Let us forward your request for further information you'd (Ike to receive on any
number of products or services mentioned or advertised in this issue of Computer Gaming World.
Clearly print/type your name/company address on one of the attached
reply cards.

1

Circle the number(s) on that card
correspond to the number(s) you'll
find at the bottom of the ad(s)/articles(s)
about which you'd like to learn more.
(You'll also find these key numbers on
advertised products in this issue's Advertiser's Index.)

2

Stamp and mail the card. The
sooner it's sent, the quicker you'll
get the literature you're after.

3

Why not take this opportunity to subscribe to Computer Gaming World? A
subscription card can be found facing
page 40.

made your victory possible.
And finally (drum roll in the background), the moment you've all been waiting for. . . The Overall
Winner!
This year's winner of the Best Overall Design hails
from the Houston Load Setter's Group (a wild and
crazy bunch of Lode Runner players). . . And his
name is. . . STEVE VOSS for his "Friday" screen.
Congratulations Steve! (Cut to commercial).
Commercial: Would you like to be able to play the
CGW Lode Runner Contest in your very own home?
Well, now you can! Just look for the CGW Lode Runner Data Disk offer elsewhere in this magazine. You
to can play the champions. Be the first one on your
block to get one. But wait... there's more! If you play
Robotwar or Cosmic Balance, there are Data disks
for you too! (End commercial, back to program).
Well, folks, that's about it for this year. But before
we go, we would like to extend our thanks to Broderbund Software who provided the prizes for the contest. Steve will receive $50.00 for the best overall
design. Our other three winners will receive games
from Broderbund. Good night, and God Bless!

Avalon Hill Game Co.
4517 Harford Rd.
Baltimore, MD 21214

Circle 07 on Reader Service Card
BY FIRE & SWORD: A multi-player game set in
a mythical European kingdom in the early 10th
century. One to six players begin as local barons,
controlling a small area, and seeking to expand
it through acquiring vassals and battling the other
lords. The computer can play any of the positions
in this game designed for up to six players.
IBMpc and PCjr. 128K.
INCUNABULA: Nothing less than the growth
of civilization is the subject matter of this game.
If you have ever played Avalon Hill's board game
Civilization, you know what Incunabula is like.
You begin as a small tribe facing an unexplored
land. As your tribe increases you become a clan,
build cities, and grow towards eventual nationhood, attaining a "basis of law" for your society.
Warfare plays a role in the game, but not as much
as trade and economics (just as in real life).
IBMpc and PCjr. 128K.
LEGIONNAIRE: The C-64 version of Chris
Crawford's real time wargame of ancient warfare
is now available. Legionnaire uses the same basic game system as Crawford's Eastern Front to
produce a highly playable and realistic feeling
game. You are Caesar as you lead your Legions

PRO MANAGER: A statistics-based baseball
simulation. You can play with last year's teams,
great teams of the past, or key in your own teams.
The program supports league play by keeping
track of standings and displaying league stats. A
powerful data base manager reports league leaders in just about any format you want (e.g. top
3, top 10, top 10 with at least 50 at-bats, and so
forth, individual "real" and computer league
stats, etc.). Look for more coverage in our next
issue. IBMpc and PCjr.
Earthware Computer Services
P.O. Box 30039
Eugene, OR 97403

Circle 08 on Reader Service Card
BLACK BELT: A taekwondo
simulation/arcade style game. A player moves up in rank as he increases his skill and wins matches. Two player
or one player versus computer. Twenty different
actions are available. Joystick or keyboard. Apple, C-64. $29.95.
Game Designer's Workshop
P.O. Box 1646
Bloomington, IL 61702-1646

Circle 09 on Reader Service Card
THE BATTLE OF CHICKAMAUGA: The blurb
on the box claims that Chickamauga is "the most
accurate and realistic battle game available for
any computer." While that remains to be seen,
one thing is certain: this game is a strong first re-

lease from a company who has gained a good
reputation from their board and role-playing
products. A total of 45 pages of excellent
documentation and a four color paper map accompany the disk. There is a lot of detail in the
game but play is easy. Review coming. Atari. $35.
Lewis Lee Corp.
P.O. Box 51831
Palo Alto, CA 94303

Circle 10 on Reader Service Card
BANK PRESIDENT: This is not a game! This is
a simulation in the real sense. We understand
some banks have used this program to train personnel. We believe it. If you really want to experience a financial simulation, this one is the
ultimate. As the bank president you choose product lines, deal with employee salaries, issue and
redeem stocks and bonds, manage your investment portfolio, speculate, hedge, borrow, loan,
and set loan rates. The only option missing is the
option to give away place settings with each new
account opened at your bank. IBMpc. 128K.
Muse Software
347 N. Charles St.
Baltimore, MD 21201

Circle 11 on Reader Service Card
BEYOND CASTLE WOLFENSTEIN: The sequel to the popular Castle Wolfenstein. The game
is similar to the original. In this one you must
make your way through Hitler's bunker, find the

pre-planted briefcase/bomb, take it to the Fuhrer's conference room, set the timer, and escape.
New twists in this game are the ability to bribe
guards, the use of a dagger to kill silently (guns
tend to alert guards nearby). Good luck, you'll
need it! Apple, Atari, C-64.
Gamestar
1302 State St.
Santa Barbara, CA 93101

Circle 12 on Reader Service Card
ON-FIELD FOOTBALL: Another excellent arcade style sports game from Gamestar. As expected, OFF has great graphics. Play selection and
player movement is done from the joystick. Each
side has four players. A good beer-and-pretzels
game. C-64 reviewed.
Simulations Canada
P.O. Box 452
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia
Canada B4V 2X6

Circle 13 on Reader Service Card
BATTLE OF THE ATLANTIC: An area movement game that simulates the struggle for con-

trol of the sea lanes from North America from
North America to England and Russia during
WWII. The Allied player must keep the shipping
lands open, while the Axis player must deploy
air, surface and submarine forces in attempt to
strangle the Allies. Computer can play either
side, or play it as a two player game. Review coming. Apple II. $60.00.
Strategic Simulations
883 Stierlin Rd., A-200
Mountain View, CA 94043-1983

Circle 14 on Reader Service Card
COMPUTER AMBUSH: The second edition of
CA is now available on both the Apple and Atari.
Man-to-man combat in WWII. The original Apple
version required centuries to play, this new version is faster, much faster.

CGW has a new phone
number:

714-535-4435

FROM THE EDITOR:
STOP THE PRESSES!

Welcome to our Game Design Issue. Scattered
throughout this issue are several articles dealing with
various aspects of computer game design. Dan Bunten discusses some basic elements about the human
need to play in his Dispatches column. Jon Freeman,
in Name of the Game talks about the process of deciding what to design. Bruce Webster is back with more
artificial intelligence information in his column, Silicon Cerebrum. Tom Cheche tells us what it is like to
be a playtester, and finally, Roe Adams discusses adventure game designing in Come Cast a Spell With
Me. Whether you are a designer or a player, we think
you will learn much from these articles. Have fun!
The other special note in this issue is CGW's announcement that we will be adding the IBMpc and
PCjr to our product line (see IBM Goes To War). Now
we know what it's like to yell "stop the presses". We
were literally moments away from putting this issue
to bed and going on the presses when the news broke
about IBM's decision to drop the PCjr.
The facts are not all in; but one thing is clear: With
the PCjr out of the picture, the software publishers
are going to have to reevaluate their IBM strategy.
It will be interesting to see what they decide. It may
turn out that the loss of the PCjr will not have as great
an impact as one might think. On a projected sale of
one million units last year, IBM only sold 240,000
Juniors. We will be keeping a close eye on the IBM
situation.
For now, there are some exciting new IBM designs
coming out. Read about two of them in IBM Goes to
War.

Dear Editor:
Upon reading you review of our Dreadnoughts game (4.6, page 37),
I noticed that there were one or two minor points that needed clearing up:
"Like its companion game, Under Southern Skies ...." Lest there
be a misunderstanding, there are few similarities between the two
games. They were designed by two different people using two different game systems.
"The player attempts to elude the famous Swordfish Squadron ...."
Partly correct. Assisting the planes in a minor supporting role is
the entire Royal Navy, including the Hood, Prince of Wales, King
George V and others. They're all on the map, but hidden from the
player. To resolve each turn, the computer moves the 20-odd ships,
their direction depending upon where the Bismarck was last spotted.
"There are no graphics for the tactical display ...." The accuracy
of the statement depends upon your definition of "graphics". The
tactical screen shows a field of dots upon which the ships (represented by numbered squares) move. Each ship also has a damage screen
in which the placement and condition of each main and secondary
gun are shown graphically. Austere, simple, but a long way from our
text wargames like B-1 Bomber.
"There is no real reason to give a visual display after every minor
contact ...." A debatable point. The displays tell the German commander what he sees. A display with minor ships tells him what
the ships are and where they're coming from. This is vital in choosing
a course for evasive action. Since the ship that spots the Bismarck
also radios its speed and heading to the rest of the Royal Navy, it
becomes even more imperative to see the display.
"The artificial intelligence doesn't allow the allies to fight unless
they have numerical superiority." This is an intentional design,
simulating the orders the Royal Navy had. Only the capital ships may
close and engage, because they were the only ships with the armaments and armor to withstand an attack. If you want to see the proof,
play just the tactical battle pitting the Bismarck against the cruisers
Norfolk, Suffolk and Dorsetshire. Sending these ships to attack is suicide and bad tactics.
"If the player follows the historical route, he will often avoid battling
the 'Swordfish Patrol' until later in the game." Since the Bismarck
can put into one of four ports to end the game (Bergen, Brest, Naziere
and Ferrol, Spain),it is possible to avoid encountering the patrol
entirely.
It was a pleasure to read the Dreadnoughts review While it is
presently available for the Apple II family, we will be coming out
with a Commodore 64 version within the next two months.
William E. Peschel
Avalon Hill Games
Ed.Note: The article also referred to the fact that there is a bug in the
program by which the game occasionally deletes superstructure damage. In Mr. Peschel's original letter he contested this observation by
our reviewer. However, later he informed us that we were correct and
that the defect does indeed exist (our reviewer had simply been the
first to find the bug). Mr. Peschel indicated that in months of playtesting, the bug was never reported and that, co-incidentally, Avalon Hill
is getting ready to revamp their playtesting procedures. Good for them!

NEXT ISSUE:
SPORTS

In our last issue we reported on a replay of President Elect which
was reported in CGW 1.1 (November 1981). We were amazed at how
accurate our replay of the then-future 1984 election turned out. We
pitted Ronald Reagan against Walter Mondale and the results of the
state and electoral votes were perfect. The popular vote was off by
4%. The following letter comes from the designer of President Elect.
Dear Editor:
I wish to thank you for the short observation on President Elect's
predictive abilities (at least with respect to the election just past).
Of course, I had made the same observation myself and gotten quite
a bit of sympathy telling people that I had shown myself to be the
best forecaster in the country and hadn't been interviewed by any
of the networks, major (or even minor) newspapers, or even the National Enquirer (which is into crystal ball stuff in a big way).
Needless to say, your blurb will now be attached to my resume,
and the more keen employers may conclude that I may be some sort
of genius, which of course plays right into my hands... Maybe I could
go to work for the Republican National Committee, or better yet, Rep.
Kemp's campaign staff (I could wind up in the White House, and
use that as a stepping stone to elective office. . . oh, excuse me, my
latent megalomania got the best of me).
If you'd like to make concrete suggestions on my revision, I'd be
happy to contemplate them. . . I do have a lot of ideas I'd like to incorporate, including:
• Vastly improved graphics, in speed and variety. Included would
be blow-ups of each region, with text summaries of the situation in
Continued on page 37

by Bill Nichols

Name:
Type:
System:
Price:
Publisher:

Carriers at War
Wargame
Apple, C-64
$50.00
Strategic Studies Group
1747 Orleans Ct.
Walnut Creek, CA 94598

Note: Carriers at War is available for both
the Apple II (64K) and Commodore 64. This
review is based on the Apple version of the
game.
The Japanese raid on Pearl Harbor
brought America into WWII. That raid destroyed a large part of the U.S. Pacific Fleet.
However, the American carriers were not
present and thus avoided damage. In the
four years that followed, the war in the Pacific was largely decided by five carrier battles. Carriers at War is a new game from
Australia which covers fleet carrier operations in the Pacific between 1941 and 1945.
DESCRIPTION
In Carriers at War (CAW), players control
naval forces and land-based aircraft in one
of six historical scenarios. The first scenario, "Pearl Harbor", is actually a tutorial exercise for the new player. The other five
scenarios are "Coral Sea", "Midway", "Eastern Solomons", "Santa Cruz", and "Philippine Sea". The game is played on a map of
84 by 72 hexes with each hex being 20 nautical miles across. Unlike most computer
wargames, CAW is not played in turns but
instead uses accelerated real time resolution
of movement, search, and combat. The player can interrupt the clock at any time to status his forces, review search and combat
results, and give or change orders to his
forces. The player's role is that of the commander in charge of a naval task group or

land airbase. Because a side may include
more than one task group or airbase, team
play is possible with each member controlling a single task group or airbase. The computer can even be assigned forces on the
player's side, thus teaming up with the human to defeat itself.
The physical components of the game are
impressive. CAW comes in an unusual "box"
which is actually more similar to a record
album. When closed, the folder is only a
quarter of an inch thick. Don't let that fool
you, though. Inside is a double-sided disk,
a player's manual, a design manual, and
three player aid cards. Two of these cards are
battle maps for the scenarios, while the other
card shows the game menus and information on configuring the game to the specific
computer system being used. The doublesided disk contains, on one side, the game
program (which can be backed-up once) and,
on the other side, a scenario disk (which can
be copied as needed).
MECHANICS
CAW is a completely menu-driven program. When the player is not accessing the
menu, the game situation changes in a realtime manner. Movement, combat, and
search all occur simultaneously. The player
can enter the menu at any time. It is through
the menu that the player obtains status of
his forces, reviews battle results, gives orders
to his task groups and air squadrons, and
receives sighting reports. This can be an intimidating procedure, as there are more than
thirty menus available. The menu levels are
in places up to six deep, and it is not difficult to get lost. Fortunately, a lot of thought
went into how the menus are structured.
With practice, the player quickly learns how
to move from item to item.
The meat of the game lies in three "action"
menus which allow the player to give task
group orders, squadron orders, and airstrike
orders. Task groups can be ordered onto a
particular heading and speed, or they can be

assigned a destination objective. The objective can be either an enemy base or task
group. Once the task group has been given
its orders, it will move under computer control until it is given new orders, or it reaches
its destination. Task groups can also be assigned specific missions. These include
strike, support, escort, transport, and refueling missions. A task group with an escort
mission, for example, will move with the
command task group and provide anti-air
and anti-submarine protection.
Air squadrons can also be ordered to
ready themselves for a strike mission, with
a squadron in ready mode being able to prepare and launch a strike more quickly than
a squadron which is unready. A squadron
in ready mode will however, quickly become
fatigued. And, when fatigued, a squadron
takes more time to prepare a strike. Fatigue
can only be reduced by allowing the squadron to rest. Squadrons can also be ordered
to transfer to a land base. Transfer is an
emergency measure only and should only
be used to evacuate aircraft from hopeless
situations.
The third "action" menu is the Set Strike
Routine, which allows the player to order
airstrikes. Airstrikes can be launched against
port facilities, airbases, and enemy task
groups. To launch an airstrike, the participating squadrons must first be readied. The
length of time required to ready a squadron
depends on the squadron's fatigue status
and whether or not it is prepared. As soon
as the squadron becomes readied, it will
launch and proceed to the target. It can take
from twenty minutes to three hours to prepare and launch a squadron.
Squadrons will proceed independently to
their targets unless the airstrike has been assigned as cohesive. A cohesive strike is
necessary for the participating squadrons
to provide support to one another, but it
takes more time for a cohesive strike to form.
Once an airstrike has been ordered, the

squadrons will ready, launch, fly to the target, conduct their attacks, return and land
without the player's intervention. While
nothing prevents the player from launching
an airstrike which will return to base after
dark, it is not a good idea to do so.
On occasion, when setting up an airstrike,
the player will be given the option of conducting a strike-transfer mission. This is a
special airstrike mission which allows the
participating squadrons to recover at a
friendly airbase, rest overnight there, and return to their home base the next morning.
A strike-transfer mission essentially allows
squadrons to conduct strikes at beyond normal range.
Fighter squadrons which are not assigned
to airstrikes and are not in a ready mode will
be assigned automatically to combat air patrol (CAP). CAP is assigned entirely by the
computer. The player must be careful to
leave sufficient unassigned fighter squadrons to defend his task group.
Combat occurs whenever opposing task
groups are in the same location and when
airstrikes reach their targets. Airstrikes may
also attack targets-of-opportunity that they
sight on their way to their designated target.
The player is advised that combat is
ocuringbyaflsh otemapdisly
and a beeping from the speaker. Although
faithful to the point of view of the game, the
combat resolution display lacks flash and
will be a disappointment to the player who
wants to "see" his bombs exploding on the
flightdeck of the enemy carriers. The only
way the player can determine how much
damage he had done to the enemy is to examine his sighting reports. There he will be
told the approximate composition of the
enemy forces and how many ships have been
damaged or sunk. The sighting reports are,
however, unreliable and frequently overstate
the amount of damage done.
COMPARISONS WITH "CARRIER
FORCE"
Carriers at War invites comparison with
SSI's Carrier Force. The two games cover
the same topic at essentially the same scale.
The two games are, however, quite different.
Carrier Force is structured with one hour
game-turns and definite phases of activity
giving the player more control over the details of the game activities. For example, in
Carrier Force the player can change the
composition of his task groups. In CAW, the
task group's composition is established for
each scenario and cannot be changed during
the game by the player. Carrier Force re-

quires the player to manage the details of
arming aircraft, flying them to their destination, landing them, etc. The player is
relieved of this bookkeeping responsibility
in CAW but, on the other hand, is at the mercy of his computer controlled "air operations officer':
Combat is flashier in Carrier Force. On
the other hand, Carriers at War includes a
bonus feature completely absent in the SSI
game; the ability to create customized
scenarios. CAW features a Game Design Kit
which allows one to custom design ships
and aircraft, create maps, and setup a scenario situation. The Designer Manual includes instructions for creating a "Raid on
Ceylon" scenario, pitting the IJN against the
Royal Navy in the Indian Ocean.
WEAKNESSES
Carriers at War is not, however, without
its weaknesses. I have already mentioned
that the player who likes flashy combat resolution will be disappointed. The complexity
of the menu system, even though well designed, can result in the player getting lost
in it. The documentation, although quite
good, should have provided more information on the relationship between fatigue and
aircrew efficiency. Because of this lack, the
player will often not know how long it will
take to prepare an airstrike. More than once
I have found it necessary to abort strike
preparation because the ready process
dragged on so long that the aircraft would
have found themselves landing in the dark.
The need to give airstrike orders to each
squadron individually can make for a lot of
work in the larger scenarios. It would have
been nice to have a feature where the player
could simply assign a target, and the computer set up the entire airstrike from available resources. Finally, CAW uses
high-resolution screens for both its maps
and text, making a good quality monitor essential. The displays will be unreadable if
an old television set is used as a monitor.
SUMMARY
Carriers at War is the best game available
on World War II carrier operations. It is, perhaps, the best wargame of 1984 on any topic. Any gamer with even a passing interest
in the Pacific War will want to add it to his
collection.
Ed. Note: Ultimately the question of "best"
in this situation becomes a question of taste.
The differences between CAW and CF are, as
Mr. Nichols points out, significant. Our mail
is split as to the relative merits of the two

games. Some of our readers are disappointed
that CAW does not display on-going combat
resolution (a basic feature in CF). Others are
delighted with CAW, especially with its scenario design option.
While the true hard-core wargamer will end
up buying both; for many, the question becomes which one? Our answer?. . . If you
want to play the role of Operations Commander but still want to feel like "you are
there", then CF will be more to your liking.
If, on the other hand, you really want to experience the challenge of directing the course
of Pacific carrier battles the way the Operations Commander actually would have experienced them (i.e. in a situation room
dozens or even hundreds of miles from the
action; getting reports and issuing orders
based on those reports) and can live without
actually seeing the action as it occurs, then
CAW will strike your fancy (and you also get
the exciting scenario design option).

WAR IN RUSSIA:

Case Blue Replay (PART 2)

In our last issue we began a replay of the
Case Blue Scenario of WAR IN RUSSIA.
Here is the second half of that replay. The
German player is Jay Selover, a contributing
editor to CGW and well known wargame
writer. The Russian player is Kirk Robinson,
assistant editor of CGW and a veteran of
numerous wargame campaigns.

THE RUSSIAN — KIRK ROBINSON
Sweat pours off my brow as I rise from the
keyboard of our Apple II with quivering but
as yet unbent knees. My ordeal has been
declared officially over and the threatened
relocation to Burbank has been avoided. A
series of very fortunate choices and the
limited effects of some very poor ones have
happily led to my survival. To accomplish
this result has demanded the use of every
trick and stratagem which I could devise or
borrow (read as steal).
This being the final report on the cruel
and vicious attempt by the Nazi forces to
bring about the destruction of Mother Russia, I am free to report the methods and
specific techniques used to slow the German
juggernaught. In general, these consisted in
simply trying to insure that the Germans
took only those hexes which I could afford
to loose, and did so at as high a cost as possible. To accomplish this often required new
variations each turn, but some remained
constant or nearly so. Chief amongst these
was the maintenance of a defense-in-depth,
so as to limit the possibility of a major breakthrough and all of the potential danger
which such would present. As the specifics
of this have already been covered to some extent and are mentioned in detail by Jay, I will
go on to other tactics.
The most important task was one of determining the probable direction of German
drives and strengthening the target hexes as
much as possible. The key to this is, of
course, knowing which hexes are to be attacked and in which order. And, while this

is often obvious from the strategic positions
of certain units, you will hopefully recall that
these are the very hexes that the Russians do
not want to fall. This leads to some rather obvious problems; such as who cares how expensive you made a hex that you could not
afford to lose.
By far, the easiest way to defend a hex is
to manipulate your opponent into leaving it
alone. Anyone can defend a hex that is not
attacked. To do this, there are two standard
methods: provoking your opponent into attacking another hex, or in some way to give
him mis-information (a time honored Russian tradition) which leads him into other,
less damaging directions. Towards this latter
end, I began the game with a very open and
informative demeanor; telling Jay the obvious mixed with small bits of "important" information. As time went on, however, I
gradually increased another time honored
behavior (this time of writers and politicians)—I lied.
Feint attacks, another and more acceptable form of military deception, proved to be
of some utility. When attacking a unit, all of
those attacking are disclosed to the enemy,
so that a feint can serve a double purpose.
Not only can you cause you opponent's attention (and hopefully some of his limited
resources) to be misdirected, but you can exchange the nasty group of guards with
which you attacked with an average or weak
unit by strategic movement, which is not executed when your opponent can see it. This
give you the threat of the units in one hex,
and the use of them somewhere else. While
this was done several times in our game, the
overall effect was uncertain.
Not a valid military tactic, but rather a
function of the game mechanics was taking
advantage of the fact that units with experience level under 50 could gain five
points of experience per turn to determine
which units would be reinforced and how
many reinforcements they should receive. I
would, ideally, add just enough to a unit's
strength to sent its experience to 49 points

and, while this may seem a minor thing, it
must be remembered that experience is as
important as strength for determining a
unit's level of performance. Indeed, this scenario can be seen largely as the pitting of
Russian numbers against the German's
much greater experience levels. The one other possible way open to the Russians, is to
build Mech units (which, like the German
units, have an initial experience level of 70).
This is, however, difficult to do as they demand half again as many resource points to
build, with each point of reinforcement often being needed to reinforce endangered
front line units.
One rule that the Russian player should always keep in mind is to never totally abandon an entrenched position. If it has been
out-flanked and rendered untenable, leave
sufficient strength to so as not to fall in one
turn. You have more manpower than the
Germans have time!
Another rule is to concentrate your airpower. In this game I had all of my air points
in one airbase for most of the game, with one
other in the north having about a quarter of
the planes for those turns in which I would
actively bomb the hex outside of Leningrad.
As an added bonus to this policy, the unused
airbase units can be used to make a part of
your line look better defended without having to withdraw defensive points from entrenched positions. This is because there is
no way for your opponent to identify airbases when they are stacked with other
units. They will also come back in one or two
turns if destroyed. A quality which makes
them the perfect buffer unit.
It may have occurred to some readers that
I seem to have gone to extremes trying to
find or develop methods of thwarting Jay's
plans. Not so, I respond. It was Jay's ability
to plan and execute devastating attacks
which demanded that I misdirect these attacks when possible, and when not possible
to make them as costly as I could.
These tactics, however, only worked when
I was on the defensive. There was one place

on the map where Jay could always, for some
no doubt diabolical reason, out-guess my intentions. This was the hex southeast of
Leningrad, between the city and the Russian
lines. I would sit back bombing and bombarding the unit in this hex as I mentioned
that I would in the first installment of this article. Then, on the very turn in which I had
ordered an assault across the Volkhov river,
the worn unit would be moved out and a
fresh one moved into its place. This would,
of course, leave my assaulting unit to make
a poor-odds attack across the river, getting
itself thrashed in the process. While this did
demand that he pull in fresh units, it further
emphasized to me the importance of timing
in WIR.
The final result, according to the computer, was a marginal Russian victory. This,
though, could be misleading as it was only
thirteen turns into the scenario, making the
Russian handicap of 150 points that much
more effective. Also, Jay's more deliberate,
a-historical attack may have given the Germans the staying power needed to survive
the coming winter. It must, however, be
pointed out that the Germans have a more
and more difficult time of it, starting in January of 1943. Those objectives not obtained by
that time may well prove beyond their abilities if the Russians have not been sufficiently
ground-up or denied needed resources. It is
unclear whether Jay would have been able to
have done so in the time remaining to him,

due to the increasingly deteriorating weather conditions.
Facing the Nazi war machine in this scenario has proven to be a great learning experience and can be recommended to those
who would like practice in defensive positions. After playing the Russians, my only regret is that it is impossible to do so in the
solitaire version. But, for the hermits and
recluses out there, its worth making a friend,
if only to be able to the Russians in WAR IN
RUSSIA.
THE GERMAN — JAY SELOVER
In our last episode, we played the opening
month (four turns) of the summer, 1942
offensive. We have managed another two
months of play (nine turns actually) before
the constraints of scheduling have forced us
to stop. This was none too soon, as far as I'm
concerned, since October marks the beginning of the end for the German war machine. At this point, I can proudly claim a
non-victory. Whether or not I avoided defeat
(in a strategic sense) is, I hope, open to
debate.
With this being the last installment of our
story, it does not matter that my opponent
has a connection to Computer Gaming
World, I can bare all. My goals as we started
the game were to make the German advance
more broad-based and balanced than the
historical thrust south into the Caucasus.
My plan was to advance the front as a whole

by two to three hexes, or by as many hexes as
I could. As far as geographic objectives, I expected by turn ten to have captured Rostov;
I hoped for Voronezh and Rzhev; and I
thought about but didn't really expect
Moscow. In my two practice games against
the computer, I stopped at turn ten and had
captured Rostov easily in both games, captured Rzhev and Voronezh each in one
game; and captured Moscow in neither one.
In the thirteen turns that Kirk and I played,
I took only Rostov and failed to take either
Voronezh or Rzhev (let's just forget about
Moscow). From this point of view, I either
lost or I proved that Kirk is more worthy an
opponent than the computer.
Based on historical considerations, my
performance also does not look very impressive. In October of 1942, the Wehrmacht had
culminated their breakthrough with tremendous territorial advances in the south, and
were poised to strike at Stalingrad. However,
in my defense, what did all of that gain them?
My feeling is that the position of my German
forces in the game is better for prolonging
the war than were the historical positions.
The only way to answer this contention is to
finish out our game to see if I really have
avoided the vulnerability which the Germans created for themselves.
With this kind of prelude by way of rationalization, I'm sure that you are wondering
Continued on page 38

punch, protection, and speed to fend for themselves
for several turns. The NATO player will be forced to
pull units out of his line of arriving reinforcements
to deal with their presence. Even if never dropped, the
threat of their use should serve to keep strong NATO
contingents tied up in rear area security.
Doug Dery, Denver, CO

STRATEGICALLY
SPEAKING

FIFTH ESKADRA
A programming anomaly in FIFTH ESKADRA can
be taken advantage of by the clever player. A taskforce
or submarine with orders to Shadow will attempt to
maintain contact with enemy taskforces in the same
area. If two such taskforces exist, then the shadowing
unit will choose the one with the lower taskforce ID
number. The game begins with the Kittyhawk taskforce being shadowed by both surface ships and submarines. Using the Divide Taskforce command, these
tattle-tails can easily be shaken off. With a little luck,
the inevitable destruction of the Kittyhawk can be
delayed long enough for the American player to make
its loss worthwhile.
Bill Nichols, Newark, CA (Designer of Fifth Eskadra)

SUNDOG 2.0

Strategically Speaking covers strategy game tips, including tips on wargames, sports games, economic
and other "real life" simulations, and classic style
games.
DISCLAIMER: The tips printed in SS are those of
the authors. We try to avoid printing tips the don't
work, but we cannot playtest all, or even most of them.
So, let the player beware.
We encourage you to share your strategy game tips
with others. Tips can be mailed to Strategically
Speaking, c/o Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box
4566, Anaheim, CA 92803-4566. 'Try to keep tips under 250 words if possible.
REFORGER '88: Warsaw Pact Player
Drop your parachute regiments with an eye to interdicting NATO supply units. Careful positioning of
air drops in Worms, the hex southwest of Mainz, and
along the northern autobahn to Seigen will create
ZOC's that will eliminate supply units due to arrive
in those areas on the subsequent turn.
A drop in the evening of May 9th (turn 4) will dramatically effect NATO units hoping to restore supply
after the disruptive effects of refugees upon forward
units. The effects of such a drop can be maximized if
employed in conjunction with the declaration of
Chemical Warfare. In the planned turn of the air drop,
you should commit all available aircraft to air superiority in order to eliminate or at least minimize the
presence of NATO interceptors in the drop zones.
Given the mechanization of these airborne regiments with BMD fighting vehicles, they have the

they work on a maelstrom square. So, don't assume
too much. Print a map at the end of the turn. The map
shows all storms, fogs, etc.; you can save a spell by
checking this first. This is especially true if there are
other humans playing, as you will not be the only one
"fishing" for castles.
Most other spells in LOY have similar "reverse"
uses, so try them out. Every clue you receive in this
game is important, so make notes and print lots of
maps."
Jon F. Baxley, Softlore Corp.

Since the space pirates will not attack unless cargo
is being transported sublight between planets, the following steps will give you an enhanced ship for fighting, all the money you will need to fulfill your contract
(500,000 credits), the locations of cryogens, and the
best buys of goods needed to fulfill the contract — all
within four hours of starting a new game. Slip code
hides the specific locations for those wanting general
tips only.
1. Completely repair the ship at home port and locate the colony.
2. Fly to DMKHZG system. Buy at least 15 scatterguns, a concentrator and and autoslew.
3. Fly to FKNPX system and sell scatterguns for
4000 credits per gun.
4. Fly to VNQDLDC system and buy a ground
scanner. This lets you land directly from orbit or
travel between any of a planet's cities.
5. Fly to several planets with multiple cities
(FKNPX I, MDV RGNNS, orEDQQ). Visit city exchanges, carefully noting prices for common
goods so that you can buy low and sell high.
6. Use the system, planetary, and city teleportation devices to visit all 50-plus city exchanges.
Ronald Wartow, Chevy Chase, MD

LORDLINGS OF YORE
One of the most important techniques in LOY is the
use of the Necromancer's spells. Most of your time in
this game is spent "in the dark" concerning enemy
troops and terrain. You must therefore glean as much
information as possible from the effects of the spells
you have cast.
In the early stages of the game, the Necromancer
seems of little use since you are not too concerned
with where the enemy is at that point. But, wouldn't
it be great if you could discover where an enemy castle is located, without having to mow any of your units
or spend any gold? Sounds impossible, right? Think
again! The rules tell you that a fog spell won't work on
castle squares. So, what happens if you try it? You're
told by the Necromancer that his magic won't work
there. Bingo... you now know where one enemy castle is located and can plan your strategy accordingly.
Now, with average luck, you should be able to find
at least one enemy castle in the first five turns by concentrating upon the center nine squares of each shire.
Beware, though, of the one fault in this strategy: fogs
won't work where other fogs already exist, nor will

FIGHTER COMMAND: Luftwaffe Player
Concentration of forces, intelligent raid routing and
timing, and patience are all essential ingredients of
a successful Luftwaffe strategy. Raids in the
Southampton area, for example, should use Cherbourg and Le Havre as their assembly areas, so that
11 Group squadrons based around London will have
less chance of catching them before they return to
base. When conditions are favorable (good weather),
concentrate all available forces in one area by scheduling a series of raids, starting with one or two medium
sized, high altitude "bait" bombing raids which are
heavily fighter escorted. These leading raids will certainly be intercepted, but the intercepts may be ineffective and costly to the RAE They should draw
most or all of the fighters and patrols based in their
area. The second wave raids (unescorted or lightly escorted) then come in at minimum altitude and bomb
the airfields, hopefully catching a number of squadrons refueling. This tactic can be devastating to the
RAF when radar early warning is lacking, and equally so for the Luftwaffe when it isn't.
Harry D. Blaker, Mason, OH

OBJECTIVE: KURSK
The German must take full advantage of his first
turn since the Russian can only sit there and take it.
Infiltrate! Attack his artillery. Keep his retreated units
from being resupplied. I have seen as many as five
Russian units destroyed on this turn alone.
Hold the ground at the edge of gullies. Let the computer attack you at half strength out of the gullies.
Block Russian entry hexes C and D before the reinforcements on turns six and seven arrive. It takes only
a weak battalion-sized unit to keep an entire Russian
Guards tank corps from entering into play. If you so
desire and the spare units present themselves, let the
Russian units enter one at a time and ambush them.
Keep in mind that the Russians will still get full victory points for those units which never enter play.
The computer will often bring reinforcements right
into the battle area in road mode, making them very
vulnerable. Hit them with an air strike. This should
disrupt them sufficiently so that they can not retreat.
Then attack and destroy them.
Experiment with splitting up German units. It often pays to take out the artillery and form separate
units with it.
William J. VandenBrook, Chicago, IL

FIGHTER COMMAND BUG
There is a bug in FC that allows the German player to create zero-plane raids. Taking advantage of this bug, the German
player can create a raid with no planes, direct it into England, and thus have the ultimate decoy. To the English, the raid will be
listed as containing about 100 planes.
SSI has corrected the problem, also having made modifications to the radar bombing rules. You can return your old FC disk
to SSI for a free update.

A Review

by Mark Bausman

Name:
Type:

Kampfgruppe
Tactical level
Wargame
System:
Apple, Atari, C-64
Price:
$59.95
Publisher: Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

Every now and then a truly superior game
will appear. One that provides the player
with a tool to exercise his imagination without having to follow a complicated game
structure. Kampfgruppe (KG) is just such a
game.

Kampfgruppe is a simulation of tacticallevel combat on the Eastern Front from the
years 1941 to 1945. You will have available to
you over 45 different armored vehicles with
each rated for range, shell size, shell penetration, gun accuracy, front and back armor,
and speed, plus, non-armored weapons and
infantry forces. It is played on a 60 X 60
scrolling map with each square representing
200 yards of terrain. Orders for both sides
are given in an Orders Phase; movement and
combat occurs in a Combat Phase. The combat phase is divided into four sub-phases
which SSI refers to as pulses. Each pulse
represents 30 seconds of time and, during
each pulse, both sides will search, select targets, fire weapons and/or move. Since the
Combat Phase is handled completely by the
computer, the players may sit back and ob-

serve the results of their various engagements. A games normal length is 20 or 30
turns, which requires about 2 to 6 hours, but
you may elect to play beyond that limit and
you may quit any time. You accumulate victory points by destroying your opponents
units. At the end of the game, if you have
more victory points than your opponent, you
win.
SET-UP
The game comes with four pre-designed
scenarios or you may build your own. There
are enough features under your control to
allow an infinite number of conditions in
which to exercise your tactical abilities. As
a learning scenario, I would suggest that you
take the German side with the computer as
Soviet, using a meeting type engagement in
late 1942 with a German Panzer force. Let
the computer auto-select weapons and autodeploy the forces. When selecting map options, go with no river and a level three terrain covering. Huh... what did I just say?
First, the computer may play either or both
sides. Second, you may chose from six

different types of battles including a meeting engagement, an assault, and a pursuit.
Third, you may chose any one of eight time
frames and have the weapons available during that time frame. Fourth, the German
player may chose from a Panzer, Motorized,
or Infantry type force while the Russian may
chose from a Tank or Infantry type force.
Fifth, you may select the weapons you want
to use by spending points or you may allow
the computer to select the weapons. Sixth,
you may deploy the forces behind your
"Start Line" or the computer will deploy for
you. Finally, you may elect to have a river
on the map and you may specify a level of
terrain covering. A level five terrain will
give you some forests, some broken ground,
a few hills, and a city or two to play with.
If you prefer more open ground then select
a level two or three covering.

WEAPONS SELECTION
After you have become more familiar with
KG, you will want to design scenarios that
match particular types of weapons. If you
option not to use the games weapons autoselect feature then you will be allowed to
chose from a list of weapons selected according to the type of battle, the time period,
and the type of forces you want. Each type
of battle is allocated a certain number of
selection points which you may spend on
weapons. A meeting engagement will give
the fewest points while an assault engagement will give the most points. When you
"spend" selection points, the computer will
allocate a combat formation letter, a unit
number for each unit, and a specific
weapon.
Continued on page 38

ROBOT SIMULATIONS
Tinkerer's Playgrounds

Robot Odyssey I
Robot Simulation
Apple H
$49.95
The Learning Co.
545 Middlefield Rd.,
Suite 170
Menlo Park, CA 94025
Circle 48 on Reader Service Card

Name:
Type:
System:
Price:
Publisher:

Chipwits
Robot Simulation
Macintosh, Apple II
$59.95
Brainpower
24009 Ventura Blvd.
Calabasas, CA 91302
Circle 49 on Reader Service Card

Name:
Type:
System:
Price:
Publisher:

Two recent products, Robot Odyssey I (for
the Apple II) and Chipwits (for the Macintosh), have merged two gaming genres—the
construction kit and the adventure—to create two incredibly vivid simulation experiences, the first simulating robots
constructed from (digital) hardware, the second, from software. In Odyssey, you go "inside" a robot and connect AND, OR, XOR,
and NOT gates to its sensors—you actually
see the circuit work because wires with no
signal in them are white, but electricity

by Gregg Williams

makes them glow orange. In Chipwits, you
program a Macintosh-shaped robot by
stringing together grids of domino-shaped
pieces that represent individual statements
in the robot's program; as the robot moves
through a maze of rooms and obstacles, you
can see each program step as it is executed.
Both games are fun to play with, and both
will keep you busy for many hours while you
solve the "adventures" they place you
against; however, Chipwits has some limitations that make it more suitable for people
new to programming.

Robot Odyssey I
Robot Odyssey I (sequels are planned by
its distributor) was designed for tinkerers
age 13 and up. It purpose is to teach both
specific skills (principles of digital logic and
simulation) and general ones (problemsolving techniques). It does this by giving
you a "robot construction kit and testing
grounds," called the Innovation Lab, and an
adventure for you to get through, Robotropolis. An additional three robot "worlds" interactively teach you the entire game
without any reference to the printed manual.
Odyssey is a world of squarish, twodimensional robots that have a thruster and

a bumper on each of their four sides (for
moving and detecting walls), a periscope (for
seeing out of while inside the robot), an antenna (for transmitting signals to other
robots), and a claw (for grabbing objects).
Your on-screen character (controlled by the
keyboard or, better, a joystick or mouse) can
go "inside" the robot and connect inputs
and outputs using simple logic (AND, OR,
XOR, NOT) gates and integrated-circuit
"chips." For example, if you hook the antenna to the left thruster through a NOT gate,
you get a robot that moves right until it
"hears" a signal. You can even design new
chips that have both chips and gates inside
them, then "burn" a copy of the finished
chip and install it in a robot (or save it for
later use)—wow!
The premise of Robotropolis is that, in
your dreams, you fall into Robotropolis and
must find your way out. By the time you get
out, you will have solved over a dozen problems, expended much creativity, and learned a lot about circuit design—and all this
through experimentation and discovery, not
(yawn) conventional teaching. The problems
usually require you to get some object or
move to some location past a sentry robot
that won't let your character past; you have
three robots and must use one or more of
them to do the work for you (the sentry will
let them past, sometimes with you inside,
Trojan-horse style).
The problems in the five-leveled
Robotropolis start easy and end hard. For example, in level 1, the City Sewer, you get past
a sentry robot by riding inside one of the
three preprogrammed robots provided at the
start of the game. In level 5, the Skyways, you
have to "....search for a key to open the gate,
sneak by a sentry robot, ride a giant disk
drive to retrieve a new key, open a sonar lock
by sending a pattern of antenna beeps, travel
through an invisible maze, and .... push a series of eight buttons to reach the transport
room. ...." Good luck—I'm nowhere near
that yet, but I'm cursing as much as I do with
an Infocom adventure!
Chipwits
What Odyssey is for hardware, Chipwits
is for software. This game is for the Macintosh, but its distributor, Brainworks, should
have an Apple II version finished by the time
you read this; its creators, Discourse, Inc.,
have licensed a C-64 version to Epyx. Chipwits is very similar to Odyssey in several
ways. You have a "robot construction" area
called the Workshop. Once you have finished
a robot, you put it in one of eight adventures
(called Missions) and see how it does; the
game keeps the average and maximum
scores for each robot/mission combination,
and much of the fun of Chipwits is improving a robot and seeing your score increase.
A robot stays on its mission until it runs
out of fuel (supplied by "good" objects like
a cup of coffee or a slice of pie), sustains
heavy damage from "bad" objects (ElectroCrabs, Bouncers, and Bombs), or dies of old
age. The game awards points based on the
mission. For example, in the mission named
Greedville, all the obstacles are "good" ob-

jects, but only two add points to the robot's
score; Doom Rooms has only "bad" objects
that you get points for destroying, but Peace
Paths gives you points for eating certain
"good" things and decreases your score if
you destroy (rather than just avoid) the "bad"
things. When the robot is on a mission, the
screen shows a three-dimensional drawing
of the robot moving through the room it's in,
a status panel, and the section of the robot's
program currently executing. The status panel shows the values of four system variables
(damage, fuel, distance-to-sighted-object,
and current-key-being-pressed) and three
"stacks" of user values (one each for storing
move sequences, lists of objects, and numbers). The program panel also allows you to
single- or slow-step the robot through its
program.
In the Workshop, the screen shows one of
eight 6-by-10 panel of instructions and "operator" and "argument" panels. To program
your robot, you select a domino-shaped instruction from its panel, an operator (or
verb) for it, and sometimes an argument (or
object); you can then move the panel to another position or rearrange the true/false arrows that lead to the next instruction.
Everything is done with the mouse, and you
program in pictures. For example, a panel
with an eye above a door means, "look for a
door (in the direction you are facing) and execute an adjacent instruction based on what

you see and the positions of the arrows
marked 'T' and 'F'." The robot's instructions
are contained on one main-program panel
and seven subroutine panels that can be
called from the main panel. Each instruction
has 23 possible operators and up to 12 different arguments.
Chipwits is fun, but it has some moderately serious problems you need to know about.
You can save up to 16 robots on the Chipwits
disk, but you cannot create additional data
disks. Since you also cannot copy the disk,
you can never have more than 16 designs
saved. A more serious problem has to do
with the awkward way in which designs are
saved: the changes you make can only be
saved to the current robot, not to a different
"slot" on the robot menu. Copying a robot
to a new "slot" is a tedious, error-prone process that can take up to 64 steps. Also, the
"Stats" menu item does not always work,
and any trip to the Workshop erases its performance statistics, even if you don't change
anything in the robot.
(In another arena, ignore the unattractive
packaging and the overinflated claims that
Chipwits is "an introduction to the principles of artificial intelligence." It is a much
finer product than its exterior promises.)
The philosophical differences I have with
Chipwits are more a cry for a more complex
Chipwits II game than condemnation of the
current product. At first, I thought Chipwits

would be a great idea for a yearly contest
(like CGW does with Muse's Robotwar
game)—it could still be done, but my
programming experiences with Chipwits
leave me less than enthusiastic. In a word,
the robots' programs are too simple to implement truly interesting survival strategies.
For example, the single number stack limits
the complexity of ideas the robot can
"remember," and the subroutine panels can
be called only from the main panel (thus
making them less useful). An expanded
Chipwits game with larger robot-programs,
more operators and argument types, and
more stacks (or some provision for user variables) would be a dynamite product. (Let me
add that I speak as an advanced programmer; the product, as is, is quite appropriate
for the beginning programmer.

Conclusion
Just as there are many kinds of adventures,
there can be many kinds of robot simulations, of which—I hope—Robot Odyssey I
and Chipwits are just the first.
Both games are innovative, are easy to use,
and give good value for the money, though
Chipwits may be too simple for people familiar with programming. I can recommend
both of them highly.
Ed. Note: The publishers of Chipwits have
recently changed their name from Brainworks to Brainpower.

IBM GOES TO WAR
by Russell Sipe

Then, in a dramatic move, IBM reacted
to the underwhelming response from the
public by revamping the Jr. into one of the
best buys in computerdom. IBM took their
turkey, replace the keyboard with a real one,
expanded to a basic 128K configuration
and, presto... their turkey became the Phoenix rising from the ashes. The response
from the public was positive.

Name:
Type:
System:
Price:
Publisher:

The Ancient Art of War
Wargame
IBM, PCjr
$44.95
Broderbund Software
17 Paul Dr.
San Rafael, CA
94903-2101
Circle 46 on Reader Service Card

A combination of events including the rebirth of the Jr., the move of the computer
game player into more sophisticated games,
and the general domination of the pc market
by IBM has all come together to create a
growing and significant entertainment market for IBM. The third party vendors have
taken note.

Gato
Name:
Type:
Submarine Simulation
System: IBM(128K),
Apple(64K),
Mac, Data Gen.
Price:
$39.95 to $49.95
Publisher: Spectrum Holobyte
2006 Broadway
Suite 301
Boulder, CO 80302
Circle 47 on Reader Service Card

Computer Gaming World has been committed to coverage of the three most popular
personal/home computers: the Apple, Atari,
and Commodore 64. We have always said
that if a significant game market developed
on any other computer, we would add it to
our "stable" of machines-covered. Since its
release in late 1982 we have kept our eye on
the IBMpc. However, the development of
a significant entertainment market for it has

been slow.
In late 1983 (a year after the release of the
IBMpc) we were somewhat disappointed
that the PC entertainment market fell far
short of the predictions of prognosticators.
We hoped the release of the PCjr would
change that. But, alas, after seeing the machine, (especially with its "chiclets" type
keyboard) we were disappointed; and so
was the public.

And that's where we come in. As long as
the significant IBM game titles were relatively few in number (and then almost always a translation of a game from one of the
other three machines we cover), we did not
feel the need to add a fourth machine to our
coverage. However in late 1984 that began
to change. The third party vendors were
translating more and more of their titles to
the IBM and we began to see significant
computer games that were exclusively IBM
or were being released first on the IBM (this
being the real test of a computer's strength
in the marketplace).
In the period of just a few months we have
seen the release of several significant IBM-

only (or first) titles. A sampling of these include Gato from Spectrum HoloByte; The
Ancient Art of War from Broderbund; Computer Diplomacy, Pro Manager, Barn!, Incunabula, and By Fire and Sword, all from
Avalon Hill. In short, the era of IBM computer gaming has arrived. And we are here
to cover it. So, IBM, we welcome you to the
CGW line-up.

The Ancient Art of War and Gato have
been getting a lot of play time at CGW recently. (Incunabula and By Fire and Sword
arrived just before press time, but are getting
some attention as well).
THE ANCIENT ART OF WAR
Broderbund has said that The Ancient Art
of War (TAAW) is not a wargame. That's being picky, for it is indeed an excellent wargame IBM wargamers will want to buy.
According to Dave Murry (who, along with
brother Barry, designed TAAW), "we wanted to make a game that would appeal to the
general public, not just hard-core war
gamers"; hence Broderbund's hesitation to
call TAAW a wargame (they call it a strategy
game). Dave goes on to say, "we wanted to
combine action and strategy, with the emphasis on creative strategy over brute
force." They have succeeded.
The game is based on Sun Tzu's The Art
of War (a title familiar to the wargamer, not
so familiar to the general public). The rulebook provides a good overview of Sun Tzu's
precepts as well as a useful brief history of
war through the ages. The packaging is
beautiful, and gives one the feeling that this
product is a computerized version of Sun
Tzu's work.
There are eleven campaigns (read battles)
preprogrammed; including such encounters as the Battle of Pharsalus, a Sherwood
Forest scenario with you as Robin's band
of merry men, and Custer's Last Stand
where you are the bad guys (the U.S. Cavalry). But the really exciting thing about
TAAW is that it is also a powerful game
generator that allows you to set up any battle
you chose, historical or otherwise. However, as we will see, there are some frustrations here.
There are three types of troops available:
archers, knights, and barbarians. In something of a rock-scissors-paper fashion, each
of these types has strengths or weaknesses
depending upon which opponent type they
are facing. Knights (with their armor) are
great against unprotected barbarians, but
fall easily to the arrows of the archers (the
knight not being agile enough to avoid the
missile attacks). While the archers can put
a devastating attack on the knights, they are
much less effective against the barbarians
who have the ability to "sidestep" arrows
much more readily than knights. So if you
have uniform squads try to match your
knights up against enemy barbarian squads,

your archers against enemy knights, and
your barbarians against enemy archers.
However, don't think that the tactics are
that easy. Mixed squads are possible and a
variety of tactical formations are available
(again, you can design your own tactical
formations).
There are nine terrain types (forts, villages, hills, bridges, rivers, shorelines,
forests, flatlands, and mountains). The program also recognizes status of terrain (such
as home ground, near frontier, contentious,
etc.). Squads are monitored for fatigue and
food. Marching and fighting increase fatigue, being too far from your supply
sources reduce food.
The most exciting aspect of TAAW is the
ability to create your own scenarios. You
build the terrain, form the armies, set the
goals, and even write an introduction to the
scenario to be read by the player prior to
play.
There is a problem with creating scenarios that are based on battles which occurred
after the age of sword and shield (i.e. in the
age of gunpowder. All three troop types are
capable of simulating normal unit types in
pre-gunpower warfare (barbarians are "sort
of" cavalry types). And archers can even do
a fair job of simulating musketry fire. However there is no adequate means to simulate
cannon fire. I tried creating a Battle of
Waterloo scenario but was frustrated by the
fact that nothing could be done to simulate
artillery. Therefore a major aspect of that
battle (i.e. Wellington's use of reverse slopes
to avoid the withering effect of Napoleon's
artillery) could not be simulated. For pregunpowder warfare, however, TAAW
should allow you to recreate most
engagements.
TAAW is a one player game. You will play
against one of eight computer opponents
(Athena, Alexander The Great, Geronimo,
Julius Caesar, Genghis Khan, Napoleon,
Sun Tzu, or Crazy Ivan). Each opponent has
certain tactical and strategic patterns of behavior that are outlined in the rulebook. Crazy Ivan is the beginner's opponent (he does
everything randomly and somewhat inefficiently). One wishes that the game would
have made provision for two humans to play
against each other.
Wargamers are constantly seeking the ultimate wargame. But, if they really admit it,
what they demand from such a wargame is
impossible to deliver. As for me, TAAW
meets a lot of my expectations of an ultimate
wargame and if it doesn't meet them all, it
certainly comes closer than most. Great
game!
GATO
Here is another winner. Gato is a real-time
simulation of a WWII attack submarine.
More than anything else, Gato seems to be
a "Flight Simulator" for a submarine. Originally designed for the IBM, Gato is now or
will soon be available for the Apple, Macintosh, and Data General.

Three-dimensional object perspective
provides depth of field and realistic offensive and evasive ship movement. You play
the role of submarine commander. At the
beginning of each game you are assigned
a mission from COMSUBPAC. Missions include, among others: convoy raiding, rescue missions, coast watcher resupply, seek
and destroy operations.
Once a task is assigned you use a strategic map to plot your location and that of
your assigned mission location. In higher
difficulty levels you only see yourself on this
strategic map. In lower difficulty levels you
also see enemy ships and your own subtender. The subtender is important for
resupplying and repair. A Captain's Log
keeps track of your progress, ships sunk,
and their tonnage.
In game play you must make a variety of
decisions that involve trade offs. For example, if you proceed on the surface you risk
detection if you get too close to enemy ships.
On the other hand, you travel much faster
and use less fuel. Traveling submerged
reverses the effects.
When you find your target(s) you must develop a plan of attack. Do you drive straight
in for a close shot or do you position yourself for a longer, less accurate, but safer attack? You must also think about the angle
of your attack. With the correct angle one
spread of four torpedoes can hit more than
one ship. Get the angle of attack wrong and
you could find yourself facing a charging
destroyer with only a bow shot between
yourself and the deep blue sea.
If the enemy does detect your presence,
either before you attack (because some fool
junior officer messed up, no doubt) or after
three freighters spout unaccustomed
columns of flame, you will have to dive deep
and avoid their sonar searches and depth
charge attacks. Here, again, you have a variety of options: do you play dead on the bottom; or try to maneuver away, trying to
escape the three dimensional depth charge
patterns the enemy is using? Or do you get
even more bold and attack the escorts?
As much as I like the game, I always look
for more. An important aspect of submarine
warfare was the potential for detection by
enemy aircraft (which could bomb the submarine or relay information on its location).
This aspect is completely ignored in Gato.
Another minor point ignored by the designers is the fact that WWII submarines rarely
made a direct forward "shot" (the only kind
possible in Gato). Torpedoes were most often fired at an angle from the submarine.
In fairness to the designers, however, to
have included these two features would
have greatly altered the basic design and
scale of the game without adding much to
playability.
Gato has happily married two normally
opposing game qualities: ease of play and
detailed strategy. Gato is a superb game that
I will play again and again. CLEAR THE
BRIDGE. . . DIVE! DIVE! DIVE!

package LOGO (better than any other version for a computer priced under $1500).
Priced at about $50, it's worth twice the
price.

THE
COMMODORE
KEY
Roy Wagner
COMMODORE is very serious about
making the new C128 totally compatible
with the C64. The C64 mode will include
ALL things we might not like about the C64,
but it will be all the good things the C64 is,
and more. The 128K mode will make available 122K of BASIC programming RAM. It
will add nearly every conceivable command
that is currently missing to handle disk access (five times faster), sprites, colors, sound,
and structured coding. It will include a cartridge slot that can detect a C64 cartridge
and will use the standard Atari type
joysticks. For anyone serious about business
use, the CPM mode will accept the standard
CPM 3.0 (IBM/34, Osborne, and KayPro
disks) at a disk access rate 11 times faster
than in C64 mode which will remain at it's
current slow rate. I have seen the machine
and it is GREAT!
COMMODORE — USER FRIENDLY
Now that Jack Tramiel has left Commodore to help (?) Atari, Commodore has expressed serious intention to support it's
users. This has resulted in several favorable
changes of attitude. The new C128 is such
an example. Another is their dedicated support of user groups. This is just beginning
with a special newsletter, buying services,
and telecommunications network. There is
also a $5 disk replacement policy in which
they acknowledge that a "diskette may become damaged or worn out through continued use". They will replace the
Commodore diskette for $5 and return it
within 10 days. Not many companies offer
such a deal as that. Thanks Commodore, for
finally being good to your users.
COMMODORE SOFTWARE
In previous issues of this magazine, I have
not said very much about Commodore software, as in the past there has been too much
to say. Their early games were not much better than those available for the Atari (Sears)
2600 cartridge game units (some even
worse). The only really great software item
that had come directly from Commodore
was not a game, but rather the educational

A new program just released is equally
sensational. It is called SKY TRAVEL and
costs about $25. It is subtitled "A Window
to Our Galaxy", and is a home computer
planetarium dynamically showing the location of over 1200 stars, 88 constellations (major ones, with connective lines), eight other
planets, deep sky objects, and Halley's comet. The sky can be displayed for a specified
latitude, longitude, time and date (plus or minus 10,000 years from January 1, 1985). The
display can then be automatically set to
change in realtime or up to 64 times realtime,
giving you a changing display of one hour
in one minute. You can view the sky from
any location on earth. The program will also
identify any object displayed with a brief
description of names and facts pertaining
to that object. You can, finally, print any
screen display, including special star charts.
While, this is not a game, it is a lot of fun
and is educational. The program comes with
a 138 page, easy to read (and understand)
manual. I highly recommend this program
if you're into astronomy.
There are several new games and educational programs being released from Commodore. I will have more to say about them
in future issues. I would surmise that the reason we see few good games from Commodore is that major game companies pay high
royalties for good games and companies in
general pay low royalties for educational
games. Commodore is probably able to pay
greater royalties for educational software,
because good educational software sells
hardware to schools which is good for Commodore and for us.
APPLES AND ORANGES - THE SAME?
I recently attended the West Coast Commodore Association conference in San
Francisco. The two day conference covered
all applications for the C64 and was very
well organized. Two more major conventions are scheduled for Toronto and Valley
Forge, PA, with one being planned for the
Los Angeles area. I attended a presentation
from MIMIC, the company that plans to
soon release SPARTAN, a hardware box that
plugs into the back of the C64 and lets one
use existing Commodore hardware (disk,
monitor, and keyboard unit) to run either
Commodore or Apple software/hardware.
It is quite impressive and well thought out
as to the functioning of the hardware, and
is said to be totally Apple II ( 5 and E) compatible. The price of $600 seems high, but
there is a limited market. How many of us
need both computers? If anything good is
released first on the Apple, it is certain to
be eventually made available for the C64.
There are the few exceptions of companies
that will not convert. (Why... we all still wait
for Wizardry for the C64).
I think the unit is well designed and offers
some good possibilities. It takes up less room
than two computers, extends the range of

hardware and software available, and as a
total package costs less than a new Apple
IIE. The product would be ideal for schools,
making available educational software
released for either machine.
(Disclaimer. This product has not yet been
released from production, as of this writing.
How well the production model performs
will be determined in the next six months.
My thoughts on this product should not be
taken as a recommendation to buy, but rather some observations of it and it's potential.)
IT'S TRIVIA
TRIVIA games of all sorts are now available for the C64. Everyone claims to be the
best, and each has some variation on play.
The first is FAX from Epyx. Had FAX used
joysticks, it could have been good. As it is,
it is a key pressing contest between two players to provide the answer to a multiple
choice question. You basically play one category, selecting from several available. The
next is FACT TACTICS from Day Star. This
one puts two teams against one another with
each taking turns answering questions and
moving around a board displayed on the
screen. You enter your answer by keyboard.
This game very cleverly accepts an answer
that is misspelled or nearly right.
The most recent trivia game which I have
played is TRIVIA FEVER from ProLine.
This game is very well thought out and captures the best of the original Trivia Pursuit
board game and expands on the idea to make
a very enjoyable game. It has seven different
categories with each team (up to 10) choosing five categories from which to answer
questions. (You can handicap the super player teams by letting the computer choose the
five categories). The teams play for a point
total in each category. Questions are worth
from one to three points, based on difficulty.
After achieving the required total points in
a category, the team is required to answer
a two point category completion question.
Until the completion question is answered
correctly, you are given another one on each
turn. After having completed all five categories, the team must answer a final two
point question selected randomly from any
one of the five categories. Questions are all
answered verbally and matched with a
screen displayed answer. The players decide
whether point credit will be awarded. The
many Play and Handicapping options make
this game very enjoyable. An additional disk
of more questions from the basic seven categories and an all sports disk are also
available.
There are several other Trivia type games
available, including one that uses special answer selecting controllers. There is a fine
line that makes a question a trivia question
rather than just a hard/impossible question.
The thought that goes into selecting the
questions for each game can make the game
a winner or a loser.
JUMPMAN MEETS THE WIZARD
Every so often a good "new" idea for a
game comes along. Following quickly on it's
Continued on page 43

DISPATCHES
Insights From the
Strategy Game
Design Front

WHY PEOPLE PLAY

Dan Bunten
of Ozark Softscape

Every now and then it's useful to go all the
way back to the beginning. No matter what
field you're in you have some basic assumptions. In computer game design, you assume
that people like to play games. Your problem
is how to make them like your games better
than your competitors'. Recently, however,
I got interested in what made people like to
play in the first place. I read a book by
Michael J. Ellis (Prentice-Hall, 1973) titled
Why People Play that impressed me so much
I want to share some insights from that book
with you.
The popular view of play is that it is an
activity which has no real value. We play
when our work (an activity that has a value)
is done. We play to pass the time between
work and more work. We entertain ourselves
with things that have no useful function in
our everyday lives. Play is often viewed as
an escape from the mundane aspects of life.
A few astute observers have allowed that play
is a useful element in the development of
children. Some educators have found play
to be a necessary ingredient in learning, at
least for children. But overall, the common
view of play relegates it to the status of a nonfunctional behavior.

However, biologists, sociologists, and psychologists are not satisfied with such a simplistic definition. Play is too pervasive
among humans and other species to be dismissed as a useless activity. Current scientific views hold that al behavior is motivated
by some system or thing. A behavior that has
no value to a species will eventually disappear. Evolution will encourage only those
behavioral traits that are beneficial to the
survival of the individual. Traits that are no
longer useful require some energy to maintain and are thus a penalty to the species that
keep them. Therefore, play must have a function or it would not have survived.
The factors that motivate behavior are
called drives. These are usually divided into
primary and secondary drives. Primary
drives are those that work to insure an organism's survival from day to day. Secondary
drives are those that are not needed for survival today but are useful for success tomorrow. Recent neurologic research has
uncovered in all "higher" organisms a
secondary drive to maintain optimal arousal
of sensory and cognitive systems. By its very
design, the brain will attempt to maintain
a balance of awareness. If there are too many
stimuli coming in, the brain will filter some
out. If there are too few stimuli, the brain
will listen more intently or even "invent"
stimuli. However, the brain will also register the various levels of stimuli as pleasant
or unpleasant and encourage the organism
to seek more or less stimulation as needed.
Higher animals can generate cognitive
events and adjust sensory input levels to create arousal. They can also act to reduce their
exposure to arousing events. These capabilities allow the individual organism to maintain an optimal arousal level.
This optimal arousal level is considerably
higher than the quiescent state. Even when
the organism has satisfied all of its primary
needs it will still require more stimulation.
As a survival tool, this drive to maintain an
optimal level of arousal enables a species to
adapt directly to conditions that require it
to be flexible. To maintain optimal arousal,
the animal is continuously pushed into engagements with its environment. Since only
novel, complex or dissonant interactions
produce arousal, the animal is in constant
contact with the changing and changeable
elements of its surroundings. This behavior,
since it is not motivated by any immediate
survival need, is defined as play.
Play behavior has adaptive significance for
the individual. It broadens the base of experience the individual has available to draw
upon in meeting the challenge of new situations. The animals that survive their changing world tend to pass on their
predisposition to play. Thus, play becomes
an inherited trait that influences the playfulness of the species. This drive to play
thereby becomes the fundamental learning
mechanism of the species and the individual. Most inherited traits are automatic response patterns to specific circumstances.

The truly amazing aspect of play is that it
is not an automatic response but rather a
drive to learn from the environment. What
the organism inherits through its genes is
not a solution to the problems it will face but
rather a desire to look for solutions before
the problems actually occur. Thus, the genes,
do not specify how a kitten should catch a
mouse. The genes provide a "drive to play"
as a learning mechanism so that it is "the
mouse which teaches the kitten the finer
points of how to catch mice."
Play, therefore, is not a silly non-functional
activity but rather the way evolution has
produced an organism adapted for change.
Humans are by far the most flexible and neophilic (new loving) animals on earth and
thereby require the most play. We derive
pleasure from novel and complex interactions with our environment throughout our
lifetimes. So when you play you are not wasting time on a useless activity. You are repeating the history of evolution and training
yourself to maintain a flexible response to
your environment! I hope this reassures you
as much as it did me!
Dan Bunten is the author of Computer
Quarterback, Cartels & Cutthroats, and
Cytron Masters; all available from Strategic
Simulations. He is the lead designer of the
Ozark Softscape group that wrote M.U.L.E.
and SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD; both available from Electronic Arts.

The World of the

PLAYTESTER

by Tom Cheche

OK, I'll admit it. After twenty-three years of wargaming I've never
been more involved in the hobby, never enjoyed it more, and never
felt more excited about what I do. For the past several years I have
been continuously busy as a playtester, enjoying the excitement and
challenge of being on the cutting edge of the hobby.
But don't be mislead. Playtesting is work.
At first glance, the role of a playtester would appear to be pretty
clear cut—to test a piece of software to see if it works, to find the
bugs, and make sure it does what is is supposed to do. However, it
is not that simple. The role of a playtester can vary dramatically depending on the amount and kind of input sought by the designer
and his developer, and by the knowledge and experience the playtester brings to the product that is being developed.
There are all kinds of garners. Some play wargames for the sake
of the game. Others are interested in the accuracy of the game as
a simulation of the historical event. Still others see a wargame, if
it is well researched and executed, as a sort of living history lesson;
an opportunity to learn about a campaign or battle. And, just as
garners bring different points of view to a game, so do playtesters.
On the most basic level, a playtester's job is to find bugs and obvious
defects in the program, and in the initial stages of development this
is the first priority. In fact, I am told there are some playtesters who
are masters at making programs crash. They get a new program and
attack it with a vengeance, trying to find errors that aren't properly
trapped. Once the program has largely been debugged, they move
on to other projects and the more subtle playtesting begins. This is
the most obvious aspect of playtesting. It is, to me, also the least interesting and rewarding. Happily, this phase is usually over very
quickly, in one or two versions.
Every time a new version of the game is sent to the playtester it
includes a new set of rules, and each time the rules must be read
carefully to uncover ambiguities and contradictions. An important
part of the job is to make sure the rules are clear and accurate, and
if not, to suggest changes.
Once a program is running relatively bug free, a more subtle kind
of playtesting begins. The emphasis then shifts to several other priorities; historical accuracy, playability, play balance, and the quality
of the artificial intelligence. It is once this phase begins that a playtester tends to go in the direction that his particular strengths take
him. If I know what I will be playtesting for enough ahead of time,
I try to read as much as possible about the subject before the playtesting begins. If not, I do the reading while the playtesting is going
on. I also try to restrict my reading to views of the battle that approximate the scale of the game, be it tactical, operational, or strategic.
The manufacturer may have a different assessment, but I tend to
view myself as being a sort of creative conscious, the voice of the
gamer. I am looking out for the gamer, airing his concerns. And it

can be very gratifying to push long and hard for something in a game,
see it in the final production version, and know that you were instrumental in having it included.
Usually you can anticipate what the crucial actions in a game will
be, based upon your background reading. But, occasionally, you will
encounter something that isn't represented in the game which you
believe should be or conversely, something included you think
shouldn't be. Then the fun begins.
The closer to the source a playtester works the more likely he is
to see his suggestions show up in the game. If he only communicates
through a person who administers the playtesting assignments, he
can sometimes feel as though no one really cares what he has to say.
If he deals with the person in charge of developing the game for the
designer and has a good one-on-one relationship with the developer,
he may be more successful when he argues for a change.
The best case, but the most rare, is for the playtester to have a oneon-one relationship with the game designer and the developer. This
allows the playtester to input the "gamer's view" right from the outset.
But it doesn't always happen. There have been times when I have
playtested a game from start to finish and never once spoke or communicated with the designer directly.
The playtest disks that are sent out by the manufacturer are never
accompanied by the same kind of documentation that is released in
the final version. Playtest documentation often includes nothing
more elaborate than a photocopy of a hand-drawn map. Sometimes
entire sections of the rules are omitted and sent to you later. And
those wonderful players' aids that we love to use are almost never
included. In fact, many of those aids are created during the playtesting process. For example, during testing of Fighter Command,
by SSI, I told the developer that in order to keep track of the status
of the squadrons I thought a chart would be in order, and I casually
mentioned that I had made one of my own. I was told to send it in
so they could see what I had in mind. Well, apparently some of the
other testers had the same suggestion, because when the final version
came out it included a chart like the one I suggested, but it didn't
look very much like the one I had designed. Actually, it was better.
Sometimes a suggestion can mean the addition of a simple screen
display. In one instance, I booted up the first version I received, the
drive went to work, and then apparently stopped cold. I thought I
had a bad disk. I rebooted the disk a half-dozen times, and each time
it stopped and just sat there for a couple of minutes. Turns out the
program was reading in a very big batch of data, which took several
minutes. The result was the addition of a message that told the player
to hang in thee, this is going to take a minute. This sort of input from
the tester to the developer results in the kind of changes and additions that can mean the difference between a good game and a very
enjoyable one.

There is no dismissing the fact that being involved in this type of
development can be very exciting. A special kind of excitement is
created when receiving the first version of a new game. And when
it is clear that you are working on a game that obviously is going
to be a hit when it is finally released, it's like being in on a secret.
You find yourself thinking thoughts like, "Boy, they're gonna LOVE
this one." Of course, it makes it all a lot more worth while to be working on quality products. And it isn't all fun and games.
A playtester must stay in touch with the developer. He must communicate regularly, and the written word is preferred. Telephone
messages have a way of not getting to the right person, and often
no matter what transpires over the phone, unless you put in writing
you can't be certain your input got through.
A playtester must remember that he is playtesting and not playing.
There is a difference. Keeping pad and pencil close at hand you must
take copious notes. Notes about anything that crosses your mind;
a strange quirk in a screen display, a strange combat result, anything
the program does that conflicts with what the rules say it is supposed to do. Write it all down and send it on to the developer, along
with your comments.
You can't let yourself get too involved in playing the game early
on, or you may be very frustrated. On more than one occasion, I have
gotten very involved in playing a game, only to have a fatal bug surface
and trash the game. And don't expect a lot of sympathy. "That's the
breaks", the developer said, "you're playtesting."
And then, there are all the times when you would rather be out
shagging fly balls, or maybe just playing something different for a
change. You have already played the game more times than you care
to count, you're getting worn thin, and you really don't feel like hitting
it again. But the push is on, the final release is only a couple of weeks
away, and the developer just contacted you and said he wants you
to do the campaign game one more time, at the highest level of difficulty. We're talking work here, Bud.

In fact, there are many times when I am convinced that I will never
play a game after it has been released because I have played it so
many times during development. Would you believe playtesting War
In Russia for nearly a year? And I wasn't involved on that one from
the outset.
And you cannot know the joy that was felt when I got a phone
call one day, months into the testing, informing me that errors had
been found in some of the algorithms, rendering all of the previous
results invalid. "We have to start all over again" I was told, right about
the time I was beginning to think about wrapping it up.
Only when the time has come to start polishing the program for
final release can you really play it with the notion of beating the computer opponent as thoroughly as possible. At this stage you are trying
to find out if there are any serious problems with the artificial intelligence, and exactly how well the artificial intelligence performs. In
fact, most of the time the final stages of the playtesting process are
devoted to tuning up the artificial intelligence.
Human nature being what it is, I wouldn't hazard a guess as to
the feelings of other playtesters about what they do. But for me, there
is a great deal of satisfaction in completing a project on which I know
I've done a good, conscientious job. And there is something else.
There comes the time when you are told the game is ready for release and you know the project is just about over. You start to get
a little itchy, because already you are wondering, "What's next?"
Tom Cheche is a playtester for SSI.
Most computer game publishers are interested in quality playtesters.
If you think you have what it takes, contact some of the companies.
In your letter of introduction be sure to detail your gaming experience
(both computer and non-computer). Consider contacting the smaller
companies as well (some of the larger companies may have a waiting
list of potential playtesters).
We would like to hear about your experiences in being or becoming
a playtester.

COME CAST A
SPELL WITH ME

People flock to buy the latest Infocom
game knowing they will be delighted with
some unexpected new nuance or adventure
concept. No other software house can boast
a staff like Mark Blanc, Dave Lebling, Steve
Meretzky, Mike Berlyn, or Stu Galley. Thus
the core of a good game is talent and creativity. The superior Infocom parser is only a minor advantage to their success. If only clods
used that parser, no one would buy the
games. Actually, several companies have
marketed games with parsers that were almost as sophisticated as Infocom's, but the
games were so boring that no one cared. But
there is hope yet for most people to use these
new adventure design programs.

Go to the library and spend some time
researching the period or local. It is the attention to realistic details that is one of the
main factors that separate top games from
the usual morass of boring programs. Dave
Lebling of Infocom has always described
himself as the Master of the Purple Prose.
Anyone who doubts this has only to read the
text in his new game SUSPECT. A person
can close their eyes and feel one of Dave's
rooms. The richness of his words paint ornate pictures of a room and flesh out the
playing characters. Most new designers fail
here utterly. They toss off brief, boring room
descriptions and say "Isn't that interesting!?"

Synapse's new game, MINDWHEEL, has
just such a parser, but is lightyears ahead of
its competition. The program, while still just
a text adventure, blazes a whole new frontier
in computer game design. Synapse refers to
this program as an Electronic Novel ® .

Likewise, a common trap that novice designs fall into is one of creating an obscure
puzzle. TIMESHIP, Five Star's first offering,
has many good elements to the adventure,
but it also has a puzzle that falls into the obscure category. At a late point in the game,
an item must be bought with a nickel, but
there is no apparent money available in the
game. There is, however, a change machine
available. So where to find some other form
of currency to put into the change machine?
The answer lies in an ordinary book of all
places. The player is somehow supposed to
divine that he must "tear page out of book",
"fold page", and then "insert the page into
the machine." Out rolls the nickel. Now the
author apparently intended this to be a difficult puzzle, but in fact it is logically absurd.
Puzzles of that sort alienate players. Avoid
this pitfall at all cost. Do not let your desire
to be clever lead to unfairness for players!

Innovative Adventure
Designers
Apply Here!

ROE R. ADAMS III

A flood of new products have been introduced recently into the market place that
will allow the anyone to create his or her very
own computer adventure game. Some of
these programs have graphic capabilities,
but most are strictly text generated. That fact
is not necessarily a drawback, as Infocom
has been notably successful in this genre.
However, it is very difficult to design an interesting text adventure.
Almost every other text adventure game in
the last three years has been a complete failure. Why is that? Infocom claims that text adventures are more intellectual and alluring
to the player than graphic ones. Yet surveys
have shown that the public really prefers
colorful animated graphics to text screens
for entertainment. How does one explain the
phenomenal success of Infocom, and the
abysmal failure of every would be competitor?
The real secret to Infocom's vast popularity, which has never been told before, is that
their programs succeed IN SPITE of the fact
they have no graphics instead of because
they are only text! It is Infocom's
extraodinyphcvesnariodg
that makes the difference. Every Infocom
game breaks new ground in the art of game
design. The craft has reached the level of an
art form, primarily because of Infocom.

The game is actually in two different
mediums. One is the traditional computer
disk, while the other is a hard cover book
that accompanies the disk. The player is required to read the book first, study the marvelous graphic illustrations, and catch all the
tricky clues buried within the book. While
most of the game is standard adventure fare,
the program really focuses around novel
road blocks. The road blocks are strategically placed so that you must solve them to continue. Each roadblock involves a logic word
game: guess the meaning of a riddle, finish
the last line of a poem, or most amazingly,
divine a long series of fill-in-the-blank words
to complete a love sonnet. Each of these puzzles is new and fresh. While clues abound in
both the game and in the hard cover book.
The sonnet is, by far, one of the most difficult challenges seen in a long time. The
game structure is truly module, with the
road blocks serving as sentries baring entrance from module to module.
MINDWHEEL affords the player more intellectual challenge than the usual adventure
game. The blend of disk and book draws the
player deeper into an involvement with the
game, thus offering a greater sense of realism and participation. What a breath of
fresh air this game is!
Two important aspects stand in the way of
most would be designers: atmosphere and
puzzles. Do not settle for mediocracy when
you create a game. Carefully think out a
general storyline or setting for an adventure.

Many readers of magazines like GAMES
are puzzle freaks. They practically swim in
a sea of mental agility and challenge going
from word to picture to logic puzzles. If even
a fraction of those skills were applied to
designing a puzzle in an adventure game,
the level of design competency would rise
multifold.
The lesson to be learned is that innovation
and creative abilities account for almost
everything these days in game design. Years
ago, it was the programmers that mattered
most, as it was so technically difficult to produce one of these programs. Today, with the
automatic authoring systems, nonprogrammers are equally able to write a high level
computer adventure game. The opportunity
even exists to create adventure games which
might even be commercially saleable. The
important thing to remember is that creativity and originality are the yardsticks by which
your efforts will be judged, not the flash of
your programs.
Designing a game can be one of the most
rewarding things you have ever accomplished. The ohs and ahs of your friends will
give you an immense satisfaction. Who
knows you might be the next Steve Meretzky.

a hex map, with the Ogre entering on the south (narrow) end, marching north, destroying the CP, and heading south to escape off the
same end by which it entered.
The game's simplicity makes it an easy one with which to do artificial intelligence (AI) experiments, especially if you let the computer
control the Ogre. Let's look at a simple way in which the Ogre can
"learn" to play a better game.
The Ogre has to choose a path from the south end of the board
to some point within striking distance of the CP. Since it can only
move up to three hexes each turn, it must choose (each turn) the hex
on which it wants to stop. It needs a simple evaluation function, f(hex),
to choose which hex is best. The simplest evaluation function is:
f(hex) = kdist(hex,CP)
where

THE SILICON
CEREBRUM
HOW COMPUTERS LEARN

by Bruce Webster

My last "real" column was in issue 4.1, which should give you an
idea as to how badly I've been neglecting this column. Actually, it's
not all my fault — the editor has had to bump my column a few times
due to lack of space — but, by and large, I am responsible for the
column's infrequency.
That should change now. I've given up full-time software development for the time being and gone to full-time writing. It was not an
easy decision to make, but it was a necessary one. And it means that
I can now spend more time in software exploration, that is, in writing
programs to test out different ideas — such as those found in this
column.

Back in issue

4.1,

I was deep into a discussion on heuristic search

techniques, having looked at three breadth-first algorithms, each one
more informed than the last. I concluded that column with the promise that we would "take a harder look at the performance differences
between BFS (breadth-first search) and MIBFS (more informed BFS)
and see if smarter really is better." You see, I had stumbled across
problems with MIBFS which suggested that BFS, though less "intelligent", might really be faster and consume less memory. However, when I sat down to write this column, I ran into another problem.
You see, it's been over a year since I worked with those algorithms,
and, well, I've forgotten just what it was I discovered. When I figure
out what it was, I'll write about it. While I'm doing that, you can
track down issues 3.4, 3.5, and 4.1, so that you can remember (or learn)
what I was talking about.
In the meantime, let's talk about something else. What's a major
difference between a human opponent and a computer? Well, the
human learns from his/her mistakes or successes, while a computer
usually pushes ahead regardless of how things are going. However,
computers can "learn" in some simple (and not-so-simple) ways.
We're going to see how that can happen.
Let's look at a simple example, based loosely on OGRE, a very successful SF wargame from Steve Jackson Games (with a computer
version coming out from Origin Systems). In OGRE, one side defends a command post (CP) with many different units: GEV's (hovercraft), infantry, artillery, and several types of tanks. The attacking
side, whose mission is to destroy the CP, has only one unit: a massive
cybernetic tank known as an Ogre. The entire game takes place on

kdist(hex,CP) = 25 - distance(hex,CP)
In other words, for all the hexes within the movement limits, pick
the one with the highest value of f(hex). This will move you directly
to the command post...providing you're not blown up first. A good
defender can usually destroy an Ogre which is coming straight in,
so our computer needs to be a little more intelligent. Let's expand
our evaluation function:
f(hex) = kdist(hex,CP) - defend(hex) + attack(hex)
We've put two new terms into f(hex). The first, defend(hex), is simply the sum of the attack points (firepower) that the defender can
bring to bear on that hex. The second, attack(hex), is the sum of the
attack points of the defending units that the Ogre could attack from
that hex. As before, we pick the highest f(hex) for all the hexes within range (which is why we subtract the defend term).
O.K., we've expanded our evaluation function, but we need to make

one more adjustment. You see, we're not sure what comparative
ranges of values the three terms have, nor have we defined their relative importance. The answer: add a weighting value to each:
f(hex) = w1x dist + w2 x defend + w3 x attack
We can now set wl, w2, and w3 to reflect how much weight to give
to each term. (Note that w2 should be negative, since we're now adding all the terms together.) As before, we pick the hex with the highest
value as our destination for this turn. Choosing different values for
the weights will result in different strategies for the Ogre. A high
hi will cause the Ogre to go straight for the command post; a high
w2 will result in a very cautious Ogre; and a high w3 will lead the
Ogre to aggressively attack the defending units.
Starting School
Let's say that we've got the game working, using the evaluation
function developed above. We have some standard set of weights
(w1,w2,w3)that we use throughout each game. We find that the computer plays well at times but, because of its predictability and singlemindedness, can be maneuvered into some nasty situations. How
can we help it to learn to play better?
One way is to let the computer itself decide which weights are best.
At the end of each game turn, after both sides have moved and fired,
look at the relative success of that turn. Did the Ogre destroy the
CP? Did it take significant damage? Did it damage or eliminate other defending units? We can then use the answers to those questions
to modify the weights. If the Ogre is taking too much damage, then
increase (in magnitude) w2 so that the Ogre will shy away from heavily
defended hexes. If the Ogre successfully attacked one or more
defenders, increase w3. If the Ogre destroyed the CP, then increase
all the weights to reinforce their "correctness." If, instead, the Ogre

was destroyed, then decrease all the weights to make other adjustments more significant.
You'll notice a few things from this approach. First, the Ogre's
strategy will change during a game, depending upon how things are
going. Second, you can have the Ogre develop different sets of weights
for different opponents. How does the computer recognize different
opponents? Well, you could just have the human enter his/her name,
but the human can always lie, so that isn't completely reliable. A better
(and more general) approach is to see what units the defender selects
and how he/she deploys them. The Ogre can then pull out a set of
weights developed for that defense.
Enhancements
This approach is not, of course, perfect. One real problem is that
the set of weights you have by the end of the game is biased towards
the end of the game and may not work too well at the start of a new
game. What we really need is not a single set of weights, but several
sets, one for each phase of the game. For ExF1r1JsThis might be the
"feel the enemy out" set, with an emphasis on caution and attack
and little weight on heading for the CP The Ogre would continue
to use that set until some key event, such as the passage of so many
turns, or after some amount of damage is inflicted or taken. Then
another set would be chosen, depending upon the circumstances,
such as an "edge your way around" set, a "push for the CP" set, and
so on. Again, different sets of weights can be developed for different
defenses.
A yet-more-complex method involves what we'll call scripts. Let's
say we're starting a new game. The Ogre selects its starting weights
(w1,w2,w3) and a starting script. The script is simply a list of adjustments; each adjustment contains three values to be added to the three
weights. After each turn, we add the next set of adjustments to the
weights. The result is that the weights (and, as a result, the Ogre's
strategy) change during the script.
How do we create the scripts? Well, since this column is about
learning, we'll let the Ogre create them for us. Start a script as all
O's, which means that the weights would not change at all. Then,
instead of directly adjusting the weights to reflect success or failure, we go back and adjust the script. If the success/failure is a minor one, we can just change the script entry for the previous move.
If it's a major one, we can propagate the changes back several moves.
By connecting scripts with different situations (such as "opening
game where defender has lots of GEV's"), we can, indeed, have our
computer opponent "learn".
Conclusions and Warnings
We've talked about some very simple learning techniques applied
in some very simple ways. We need to recognize that learning takes
time and practice. Your computer program is not going to become
a top-notch OGRE player overnight (if, indeed, ever). There are, of
course, short cuts. For example, you can give the computer a head
start by directly creating weights and scripts yourself. And, if you're
the computer's main opponent, you are going to be learning as well,
so that the computer's improvement may be hard to notice.

Whenever I predict what I will talk about in the next column, I
am usually wrong, so I am making no promises as to what you will
see next. I would like some feedback on my column: what you like,
what you don't, and what you most want to see. I've gotten some
nice comments over the years, but generally you've been a quiet lot,
which makes me wonder if this column is being read by anyone. If
it is — and if you want to continue —please let me know! Feel free
to contact me directly: Bruce F. Webster, 6215 Thorn St. San Diego,
CA 92115. By bulletin board: (619)286-7838 at 300/1200 baud. By Compuserve: 75166,1717. By MCI Mail: 138-5892.
Bruce is the author of Sundog from FTL.

deliver, that too will be incredible. But,
Tramiel (as founder of Commodore International) has done the incredible before, so all
Atari-philes have their fingers and joysticks
crossed.

Atari
Playfield
THE NEW ATARI COMPUTERS
Fantasy Comes True?

David Stone

A few issues back (August 1984, Vol. 4.4),
I used the Atari Playfield to lament and
writhe in public at trade paper speculation
that Jack Tramiel, Atari's new owner, was
planning on coming out with an Atari IBM
clone. In that column, I scowled at companies whose contribution to computer gaming was to go with the pack, applauded
Apple for making an exciting computer like
the Macintosh NOT IBM compatible, and
fantasized that it would be wonderful to hear
that Atari had announced a computer with
advanced gaming capabilities that no other computer on the market today could
touch.
Well, if you have been reading the papers,
you may already know that at the Winter
Consumer Electronics Show, Atari revealed
my fantasy computer and promised delivery
in mid-April of this year. CGW staff was in
attendance for the unveiling of new Atari
line of computers that includes incredible
features, incredible prices, and an incredible
promised-delivery date. And, if Tramiel can

Gaming and The New Atari ST's
The new Atari computers are the Atari
130ST and 520ST. The specs on these
machines are impressive. And, the most important question to us is, "Is the ST line going to be good for gaming?"
All features of the machines indicate a resounding "YES!"
First, at the heart of the ST's is the same
16/32 bit microprocessor used in the Apple
Macintosh (the Motorola 68000). One of the
big differences though between the ST and
Mac is that the ST delivers color. For gaming
applications, this powerful processor can
mean high-speed, smooth-moving multicolored (512 colors) graphics and animation.
Atari has built onto the ST operating system (modestly named the MS, for Tramiel
Operating System) two major features for
display and memory control: the GEM
(Graphics Environment Manager) user interface developed by Digital Research and
something called a GSX graphics kernel.
The GEM is basically a memory management system that will enable game programmers to design and manipulate display
features such as pop-up menus (like the
Mac's pull-down menus), windows, icons,
a real-time clock, and a mouse controller
with two buttons. To game players these features will hopefully mean that games on the
ST will be easier to learn and play.
Instead of an ANTIC chip (the one that
enables player-missile graphics in the
400/600/800/1200's), the ST's will use a GSX
graphics kernel. This feature will allow game
programmers to design and manipulate
complex multicolored screens in a variety
of ways. Games produced on the ST system
could easily contain the most visually exciting graphics and animation ever produced
on a personal computer.
The 130ST comes with 128K RAM while
the 520ST has 512K. When you consider that
your favorite Atari game takes up less than
64K, you'll realize that memory will not be
a problem. If anything, programming code
may get sloppy as programmers wallow
around in all that RAM.
On-board ROM in both ST's is 192K. This
is massive when you compare it to the 800's
10K ROM. The ST's also have a side slot for
add-on ROM cartridges. This will be an important consideration for third-party game
manufacturers seeking the higher degree of
copy protection that a ROM cartridge offers.
Other important features of the ST's that
indicate that they are designed for gaming
are the two joystick ports. One of the ports
is being specially configured to accept a
mouse.
The ST's have three graphics and text display modes and a built in drawing software.
As with the all computer graphic modes, the
finer the resolution, the fewer the colors
available. The Intense Color Display (ICD)

mode offers resolution similar to the current
(i)Graphics 8 mode, except the ICD offers 16
colors instead of just one and a screen area
of 320 by 200 pixels. The High Resolution
Color Display mode gives you four colors on
a 640 by 200 pixels. And, get this, the Monochrome Hi-Res Display produces 640 by 400
pixels. These modes, combined with the
speed of the 68000 microprocessor, should
lead to the most impressive game graphics
ever produced on a personal computer
system.
In the sound department, things look
(sound?) pretty good, too. First, the ST's have
a three-voice sound generator (the current
Atari's have a four-voice generator). However, the ST sound chip allows control of the
"attack, sustain, delay, and release" (these
characteristics help us tell the difference between an oboe and a piano just by listening).
The range on the sound chip is from 30 hz
(like an earthquake rumble) to higher than
the human ear can hear. This will mean
games with both life-like music and realistic
sounds.
Another interesting feature is a built-in
MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface). The MIDI is like a special modem port
that lets a computer control electronic musical instruments. The MIDI is constructed
to an industry standard so there already exists a variety of synthesizers ready to plug
into the ST's. The ST machines have a builtin RS232C port for connecting modems (or
Continued on page 39

The Name of the Game
Stalking the Wild Concept

Jon Freeman
Good games rarely happen by accident; they are planned—
designed. Many games never reach the design or blueprint stage because they lack a clear concept: a preliminary floor plan, as it were.
Nearly all good games — and even most bad ones — start with an
idea. Sometimes it's no more than a visual gimmick — a rotating
planet, say, or an odd way of changing colors — but few games are
actually designed around so simple a device. The normal starting
point is the subject of the game: taxes, the stock market, pirates,
planetary colonization, pinball, war in space, war on the Eastern Front
in WW II, war in the Age of Sail, dungeon exploration, fantasy chess,
a repeatable murder mystery.
Nowadays, publishers are looking for a high concept: an idea that
is both simple and intriguing. Like a good ad, it should, in a few words,
communicate its essence and immediately interest a game player
— and buyer. "Computer pinball" is a high concept (at least if you're
a pinball fan). Alien Garden and Yar's Revenge were not.
A good topic (or high concept) is not guarantee of a good game;
nor is it absolutely essential. Perfectly good games have been made
of perfectly awful ideas, but why start with a handicap? It's easier
to do an interesting game about pirates than about a pencil factory.
The Habitat of the Species
Contrary to popular belief, good game ideas are not hard to come
by. Aspiring writers are forever being urged to "write about what
you know." Similarly, game concepts are readily drawn from subjects you know or like. Eric Hammond turned his enthusiasm for
basketball in general — and two of the sport's premiere practitioners,
in particular — into One on One. Bill Budge produced two successful
computer games out of his fondness for pinball. Elements in games
as disparate as Archon and Ultima were inspired by experiences in
the Society for Creative Anachronism.
Books and movies are, of course, a gold mine of ideas. It's a short
step from old monster movies to the basic idea behind Crush, Crumble & Chomp!. Consider using your favorite genre — mysteries,
science fiction, historical romance, soap opera, whatever — as game
material. On the other hand, if you can't tell Robert A. Heinlein from
Robert E. Howard, Glory Road from Damnation Alley, or Forbidden
Planet from Planet of Horrors, your notion of a "sci-fi" game will
probably make me gag. (Head for Hollywood, instead, where ignorance of the field is not considered a liability, and turn your idea
into a TV script.)
Nor are you limited to generalities. You can't very well steal your
favorite novel, lock, stock, and denouement (since authors are picky
about things like that), and haven't you ever thought about transplanting a favorite character from one book into the setting of another
(e.g., Robinson Crusoe on Mars or A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court)? Rewriting the ending? (Aren't the best, most involving
games rather like books with an infinite number of possible endings?) Writers have been making hay of this kind of thing for centuries; there's no reason you can't do the same.
A primary source of good game ideas is an obvious — in most cases,
too obvious — one: other games. No, I'm not suggesting cloning; I'm
talking about inspiration, not plagiarism.
Pick a few games at random, and play around with them in your
head. If you spot a flow, "fix" it, and see what happens; if you find
a feature or technique you really like, try to imagine it in a different
game. Change the characters or setting; add features or expand the

context; reverse roles or goals; interchange parts from different
games; add a computer element (not just an opponent) to a board
game. Instead of picking up dots, put them (or something else: pipes,
tracks, stripes) down, or have them change color or shape when you
pass over them; instead of dying, have something else happen when
you are caught by the computer's icons, or chase them, for a change.
These are elementary examples, commonly used, but most games
stem from just such simple roots. Ka-Boom is obviously just Avalanche with personality, but what is Missile Command if not an
elaborate version of the same basic principle with a change in plot
and scene? Isn't Defender (et al.) basically Space Invaders rotated 90
degrees with the roles reversed?
The principles are obvious, and with a little imagination you can
certainly come up with something more novel and interesting. In
fact, you must: many of the "easy" ideas are taken, and the market
is more demanding than it used to be.
The Observer Observed
Fortunately, your game concept has to satisfy only two judges: (1)
you and (2) everybody else.
Designing games should be as much fun as playing them, but nursing one from concept to finished product is no easier than taking
care of a newborn. If you're not sold on the idea to start with, it will
end up being worse than operating a drill press day after day. (According to Dune, fear is the mindkiller; but so is drudgery.) If you
don't like what you're doing, construction pays better (generally),
and you can let the contractor worry about selling the finished
product.
Knowing whether anyone else will like your idea does not require
consulting Jeanne Dixon. Except for gimmicks, which are almost
impossible to evaluate (since nobody knows in advance whether hula
hoops or pet rocks — or videogames with flying hamburgers — will
sell), all that's required is honesty and common sense.
Bring Your Binoculars
An amazing number of people who don't know one end of a joystick
from the other are convinced they can come up with the next arcade
hit. This is unlikely. You are not going to come up with a good arcade
game if you have no feel for what makes an arcade game good. On
the other hand, if you play nothing but arcade games, text adventure
fans will probably sneer at your first foray into "their" territory. If
you don't know the difference between a mongoose and a mangonel,
or mustard greens ad mustard gas, you should not put much faith
in that half-baked idea you had for an historical simulation.
Popular taste is not all that difficult to gauge. When in doubt, measure your latest brainstorm against such handy yardsticks as movies,
TV, bookstores, magazine racks, and your last fifteen conversations.
People are interested in sports and soap operas, cars and money,
robots and flying saucers, fantasy and suspense; and the proverbial
sex, drugs, and rock and roll are as popular as ever. The 30 Years'
War (the announced subject of SPI's first computer game a few years
back) is not a hot topic. As entertainment, most "educational games"
rank just ahead of hunting whales, clubbing baby seals, and anorexia
nervosa. If you can't come up with any better ideas, get yourself a
partner who can.
Games are meant to be enjoyed. By people —lots of people, if you
want to make lots of money. Remember, you don't have to sell out,
but you do have to sell. It's the name of the game.

neck, you really shouldn't remove it.
Talking to people is another good way to
pass the time. Ask everyone you meet about
everyone else; some interesting information
can be picked up in this fashion. Of course,
you'll have to make some allowances for personal prejudices, but generally, most of the
people will be fairly honest with you.

SUSPECT

As told by Scorpia
Come in, come in! My, you're looking a bit
tired today. It must be from all that hitchhiking you've been doing. Settle in, and Fred
will pour out something refreshing for you.
However, don't get too comfortable; I'm
afraid that you're going to be busy again very
soon. It seems you're on the verge of being
arrested for murder.
It's a little bit unpleasant being a Suspect,
isn't it? The police are busily collecting evidence against you, and you don't have much
time to prove your innocence. Ah, but let's
go back to the beginning here, and take
things one step at a time.
It starts at a costume ball being held by
Veronica Ashcroft on Halloween evening in
the luxurious Ashcroft mansion. Maryland's high society has gathered for an evening of fun and frolic, dressed in outlandish
costumes, and seemingly without a care in
the world. Of course, there are all sorts of
things going on under the surface, and you,
as a journalist, hope to pick up some choice
bits for your paper. Murder is the last thing
you'd expect here, so naturally one is committed. . . and the killer has thoughtfully
framed you for the deed.
However, don't panic (oops, wrong adventure!). With a little bit of help, and some careful evidence-gathering on your part, we
might get you out of this jam. For instance,
have you noticed the weather? It's a stormy
night out there, with heavy rain falling (a perfect night for murder). You might want to
keep an eye on the weather from time to time
during the evening; it could be useful later.
Certainly, you will want to make a VERY
thorough examination of the scene of the
crime. Don't overlook anything in the office;
although an item might seem to be trivial, it
may have an important bearing on the case.
However, while Veronica may not look too
pretty with your lariat wrapped around her

Speaking of the people in the game, you'll
notice they move around a great deal. This
adventure has the most activity of any game,
and you may get side-tracked into following
harmless people to and from the bathroom.
You have better things to do, so don't waste
time shadowing everyone; choose with care.
One nice thing about being inside is that
you can unlock doors and windows (no need
to go hunting around for keys). Use this ability to your advantage, and make sure you
map the entire layout of the ground floor.
Don't worry about the upstairs; that's not
open to the public, and there is nothing important up there. The outside is not important, either; the barn, while enticing, is
locked up, and you can't get in.
Make sure you go into all the rooms. Some
of them are empty, some have red herrings,
but others contain important evidence (even
if it doesn't look important). You can't afford
to overlook anything; you MUST have all the
evidence, or you won't be able to get a conviction. Also, from time to time, you might
want to drop into the Ballroom for a few
minutes, to see what's going on there. Events
are happening in this game, and timing is
crucial. Being in the right place at the right
time can open up new areas of investigation
for you.
Sooner or later, the body will be discovered (you may want to be on hand when
Veronica is found), and the police summoned. Once this happens, you have to move
quickly. The detective assigned to the case
is not especially bright, but Sergeant Duffy
is no fool. However, all your communications with the police must be done through
the detective, and he can be useful to you in
having various objects analyzed (it's amazing how little interest he shows in your requests). That's about all he's good for, really,
until the time comes to make the arrest.
You will also need to present some evidence to him after he arrives (if you can find
him; he moves around a lot, too). If you don't
give him some other things to think about,
Sgt. Duffy will be after you with the handcuffs, and that will be the end of the game.
While you're at it, you might want to show
some of the items you've found to several
other people, too (before showing them to
the detective, or you'll never see them again);
you may get some interesting reactions from
them.
Once the detective has some material that
incriminates someone else, you can breathe
a sigh of relief and continue collecting more
evidence. At one point, it will be necessary
to do a little breaking and entering, but don't
let that worry you; no one ever asks where
or how you got your evidence (which is just
as well).

The end will come in the Ballroom. Eventually the detective will make his way there,
and just hang out, "weighing the evidence".
It's up to you to tell him who to arrest; if you
don't, the game will simply go on and on indefinitely. Even though you have given him
all the evidence necessary, he won't take the
initiative (some detective!). Remember he
has to have ALL the evidence, or you won't
get a conviction.
Now, for a final word (or several): the entire game hinges on a critical point. Until
you have figured out what that is, you won't
get very far, because you probably won't
recognize evidence when you come across
it. I'm not, of course, going to say what the
critical point is; I'll just tell you that seeing
is not always believing. Strange things can
happen on All Hallows Eve! Especially with
a devious murderer running around! But
I'm sure that, in spite of it all, you'll come
through in the end (besides, I know you've
always wanted a Pulitzer Prize!).
Before closing up the Tale for this month,
I'd like to answer some questions that keep
popping up in the letters I get. These questions are not related to solving adventures;
rather, they are personal questions that some
of the more curious among you ask from
time to time. There are three of them that are
asked the most, and they are:
"Do you really play all these games yourself?" Yes! Each and every one of them, and
others besides. Every game that has been
covered in the Tale, I've played through to the
end. And I don't use hint books of any kind.
"I'm embarrassed to ask this but, err, are
you male or female?" Amazing how often
this one gets asked. So, for all of you who are
wondering, I am very definitely female!
(And those of you who sent letters with a
heading of "Dear Sir" or "Dear Mr. Scorpia", don't let it worry you! It's happened before, and I've learned to live with it).
"How about doing a column on the (insert
title) adventure game?" Well, I'd like to oblige,
but I have to keep in mind the adventures
that are popular, and have the widest distribution. From the letters alone, Infocom
games are asked about the most, followed by
the Ultimas. All other adventure games
come in a very distant third. That's why I
concentrate on the Infocom games. However, if another adventure gets really popular,
I'll do a write-up on it.
If you have an adventure game question or
three (it's perfectly all right to ask more than
one question at a time!), you can reach me in
the following ways:
On CompuServe: GO GAM-310
On the Source: SMAIL to ST1030
US Mail (enclose a self-addressed stamped
envelope):
Scorpia
PO Box 338
Gracie Station
New York, NY 10028
That's it for this issue; see you next time,
and happy adventuring!
Copyright 1985 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

LETTERS (cont.)

CROWTHERS & WOODS

each state, and much more color variety (right now I have 25 colors-6
shades for up to four candidates, plus the white undecided).
• Overhauling of the entire campaign process, completely deemphasizing campaign finances, which are almost irrelevant anyway
in a national race, and concentrating more on which issues to stress,
how positive or negative the campaign rhetoric will be, and voter
blocs (abstractly). Additionally, incentives will be added to states
which are pretty much decided one way or another, thus preempting
(I hope) Verdun-like struggles for key states (it's unrealistic as hell
to visit California ten times each week for several straight weeks,
yet, this type of thing happens, often in the industrial Midwest). I
am going to try to include, albeit abstractly, the indirect effect of congressional races ...
• Scrapping the debate routine and starting over, adding graphics
for immediate feedback on points scored or opponent's points neutralized, elapsed time, and a large variety of attacking or defensive
debating strategies (with a running clock, so you'll need to think fast).
Further, a variety of debating formats.
• A multitude of available data, so you can take as long as you like
to craft an "ideal" (no such thing) strategy. . . including primarily
a host of polls on who's ahead and how people feel about various
things (candidate credibility, strength on particular issues, opinions
on who won recent debates, etc).
• Scenarios from 1900 -1988, with an improved way of determining conservative vs. liberal ratings (again, using graphics), and issues
pertinent to the election being recreated. By the way, debate questions
will also be pertinent, though there will be no debates prior to 1960
scenarios.
• Layered rules; in other words, the option to add or delete timeconsuming chrome features.
• Slightly improved election night routine. Obviously, faster. Also,
one where you don't need to press any keys unless you want to key
in on a particular state...the whole thing will run until someone wins
(which won't take so long unless the players choose the slowest
option).
• Better documentation. . . this is key. The original rules were
slapped together in about two nights, believe it or not, and my "rough
draft" was printed with almost no editorial changes or comment!
I'll be more careful next time! And less coy about how things work.
• Optional printouts of virtually everything except graphics. I
received several requests for this.. .
So as you can see, I've got a pretty nice package in mind, certainly
a two-sided disk and possibly requiring 64K and (maybe as an option)
two disks, one for game data—polls and stuff eat up RAM and SSI's
disks are, due to write-protection, read-only, so the data has to go
somewhere.
Thanks again for your remarks in the January issue; it may make
me a few bucks and, more importantly, build up my prestige. . . do
you think I should send your comments to Jesse Helms?
Nelson G. Hernandez
Ed.: You would not want to forward any comments we might have
for Jesse Helms.
Seriously, we DO have a suggestion for PE that we feel strongly about.
We would like to be able to play PE without the onus of incumbency.
If you added an option that would disenable the formulas that figure
the advantage/disadvantage of the incumbent party or candidate, players could compete directly with each other. They set themselves up
as the candidates (through your political rating routine) and each stand
a more equal chance of winning (since the question of incumbent party
would not be in the way). We realize this would not be as historically
accurate, but then again, how many of our readers will actually run
for president?

Dear Editor:
The "Commodore Key" column in your December issue made the
mistake of most chronicles of adventure's history—the assumption
that Crowther's inspiration for the first adventure game was Dungeons & Dragons. While researching a book on the subject last summer, I spoke with Crowther and Woods. Crowther said he wrote the
original version in 1967 or '68 (he didn't remember exactly), which
predated Gary Gygax's role-playing game by several years.
Interestingly, Crowther says he did previously play a game with
a similar theme, Mirkwood (named for a locale in J.R.R. Tolkien's
Lord of the Rings. It was devised by a friend and never available commercially. An amateur spelunker, Crowther was also influenced by
his experiences mapping Kentucky's Mammoth Cavern for the National Parks Service. (Now you know why caves and the need for
map-making are so common to adventuring.) He wrote the game "to
entertain my children" while working at a research firm in
Cambridge.
Don Woods says he never played Dungeons and Dragons until after
rewriting and expanding Crowther's game around 1975. He's now
at Xerox's Palo Alto Research Center.
The book — From Apshai to Zork: The Legend and Lure of Computer
Adventure Games — will be published by Simon & Schuster this
spring. I've also enclosed a copy of QuestBusters, my monthly newsletter devoted to adventures and role-playing games.
Shay Addams

Ed. Note: "QuestBusters, The Adventurer's Newsletter" is a 12 page
monthly newsletter apparently produced on a Macintosh. At $15.00
for twelve monthly issues, the price is a bit steep. However, Addams
seems to know his subject and a lot of information is contained in each
issue. For information on QuestBusters, contact The Addams Expedition, 202 Elgin Court, Wayne, PA 19087.

I happen to like the German Panther and
Tiger Tank. If I wished to play a game which
used both the Tiger and Panther tank I
would set up a scenario in which I was the
German player, in a German assault, in
Late-43, with a Panzer force. From the
weapons list I would then chose the Panzer
to get the Panther tank and the Heavy Panzer
to get the Tiger tank. Additionally, I might
add some tank destroyers or recon units. A
little hint here. If you chose an Engineer
company the troops will be armed with
Flamethrowers, which make an excellent
anti-tank weapon. The variety of combinations is endless and if you get tired of German forces then you can let the computer be
the Germany and you take the Soviet side.
DEPLOYMENT
After selecting the parameters, the game
will move into a one-time Deployment
Phase. I usually start this phase by scrolling
around the map and getting a general idea
of the terrain. If I don't like the terrain, then
I may change it by replacing existing terrain
with what I want. If I had used the autodeploy feature then my units would already
be deployed on the map and trucks would be
loaded with infantry and weapons. By not
using auto-deploy then I would determine
the starting locations and load the trucks
myself. When completely satisfied with map
and forces, I then exit the Deployment Phase
and the game begins by setting a visibility
level and moving to the first players Orders
Phase.
ORDERS
In KG, orders may be given from the "Map
Mode" or the "Units Mode". There are 22
unit mode orders available. Some of the orders are only for individual units while others
may apply to the entire combat formation.
COMBAT
To give you an idea of Combat in KG I
would like to do a short re-play of a scenario in which I played the German and the
computer was the Soviet. The battle was a
meeting engagement, in late-43, with a Panzer force. I chose the late-43 time frame because the Germans had the Panther medium
tank which the Russians had not yet countered. .8 (Ed. note to author: You bully!) I
chose a force consisting of two Panzer companies, one tank destroyer company, and one
recon company. I saved 6 selection points
which gave me some victory points. The objective of the meeting engagement was a
road, flanked by woods, with some hills
nearby.
The computer gave me the usual "A" combat formation with headquarters, trucks,
Hummel artillery, Wespe artillery, 88Flak
anti-tank guns, and a SIG33 assault gun. My
"B" formation was a Panzer company of PZIVG Tanks, with 0 as the Headquarters and

1 thru 3 as the individual units. I had a total
of 16 PZ-IVG Tanks. I had chosen to play a
small battle. If I had chosen a large battle I
would have had twice as many Tanks. My
"C" formation turned out to be the Panther
Tanks. My "D" Formation was the tankdestroyers and the computer gave me Marders. I changed those for Nashorns with their
longer range and higher penetration rating.
My final unit was "E" with my SK231 armored cars. They represented my recon
ability.
I was later to find out that the Russians
had chosen the KV-IC as their heavy tank
and the T34/76C as their medium tank. They
also had some T-70 tanks, some heavy machine guns, some 76 anti-tank guns, some
82mm mortars, and some infantry. After
deployment, the battle was on.
My initial move orders required three
turns to achieve and I encountered no enemy units during the movement. My initial
placement involved putting the artillery and
headquarters units on the top of a hill just
Northwest of the objective square with the
remainder of the force on lower levels of the
hill. The soviet forces became visible on turn
four as they emerged from the woods and attacked my hill positions. The computer had
made a mistake in bringing its forces out of
the woods too far from my position. My artillery opened up and I had set the Panthers
to maximum range so they started firing
also. By the time the T34's had closed to
range, they were already hurt. My artillery
and Nashorns were able to suppress the larger
Russian tank forces thereby reducing there
search and hit capability. At one point a
company of 10 T-70's rushed my 88Flak
guns. My guns took their toll but the tanks
were able to get all 8 of my 88's. By turn 20,
I had reduced the Russian force to one heavy
machine gun, a few 76's, and an 83 millimeter mortar. I had lost the last of my PV-IVG
tanks to an ambush by the Russian 76's. The
armored cars, and most of the Panthers were
also smoldering wrecks but I inflicted more
damage than I took and the computer
declared me to be the winner.

SUMMARY
At $59.95, KG is on the expensive side, but
it is well worth the cost. The computer intelligence seems good when on defense or
pursuit but it's single minded desire to destroy the enemy makes it easy prey in a computer assault scenario.
SSI tells us that they are currently testing
a new game based on the KG system which
would involve combat on the Western
Front. I will be watching for that one.
Ed. Note: Feedback from some of our readers indicate that this could become SSI's most
popular game to date. Beyond the Western
Front game to which Mr. Bausman refers, SSI
is also working on a modern armor game
based on the Kampfgruppe system. It looks
like Gary Grigsby has given us another
winner!

WAR IN RUSSIA (cont.)
what (if anything) I accomplished in the second half of our game. Well perhaps a few
excerpts from my official War Diary will give
you an idea: "attack from Bryansk gets six to
one odds but doesn't force a retreat." "northeast of Bryansk, a 5:1 does nothing." "North
of Stalino, I get 10:1 odds but the defenders
are just one cavalry division." "Near Rzhev,
a 3:1 gets nothing." "Two 5:1 attacks, but neither takes a hex." It goes on and on like that.
It was perhaps not all that bad, and we did
manage a few interesting things, but most of
my attacks did not capture hexes. A prime
reason for this was the "entrenchment technique" which Kirk used; the other reason
was Kirk's able generalship and his ability
to predict from turn to turn where the
weight of my attacks would fall. The "entrenchment technique", as Kirk explains it
to me, involves using a very weak unit behind
your front line. As this unit just sits there in
supply from turn to turn, it will be able to entrench to higher and higher levels. When the
front line is pressed, a good unit can move
in with the skeleton unit. Then, when all of
the good divisions are transferred into the
skeleton unit, they automatically have the entrenchment level of the unit into which they
moved. Kirk basically keeps a small fraction
of his army constantly busy digging enough
trenches for all the rest of his army. I never
seem to attack a hex that is not well entrenched. And you don't know frustration
until you've tried to knock the Russian army
out of their trenches!
Trenches and initiative; these are the two
concepts of WIR which have made lasting
impressions. You may remember that the
first installment of our story ended with a
German advance of two hexes by an armored unit to a spot northwest of Voronezh.
I also had an infantry unit advance one hex
so that the armor was in contact with the rest
of my forces. Well, on Turn Five, the computer made Kirk the "first player" in the tactical movement segment. (Each turn, there
is a 5-10% chance that the Russians will
move first in the turn, with the chance increasing as the war progresses). Turn Five
just happened to be one which was selected,
and so Kirk's forces were moved first. He attacked the infantry unit behind my armor
and forced it to retreat; this put my armor out
of supply and isolated. Further, I had plotted
a one hex retreat for my armor to join the infantry unit, as I felt that the armor was too
exposed and wanted to reinforce the infantry behind it. Instead of joining my infantry,
my armor unit found itself attacking the Russians which had just cut it off. The attach
was resolved at one-to-one odds and, of
course, did not move the Russians; this was
not at all how I had planned for things to go
on this turn! I am not sure what can be done
about the initiative question, I guess that the
moral is just that the Russians will be given
the first move only whenever it can do you
the most harm (this was the only turn in our
game for which they received the first move).

ATARI (cont.)

Turn Six was spent getting my cut off armor back in touch with my forces. They
came through the ordeal at about 70%
strength and about a 40% fatigue level. That
was better than I had feared they might suffer, and this was because we got them back
in supply quickly. Turn Seven marked the assault on Rostov which captured the city. Kirk
had put hardly anything there, and we took
it easily at 8:1 odds on our first assault. Kirk
obviously hoped that I would pursue a
southern strategy, and presented a very weak
front down there while building reinforcements north of the Donets between
Voronezh and Stalingrad (poised to cut off
my advance). Actually, I consider it a major
accomplishment that I resisted the temptation and maintained my force almost completely in supply throughout the game. It
would have been very easy to follow the
historical path of easy initial victories and
advances into that southern wasteland.
Within the time frame of thirteen turns, my
position might have looked very good, but
mortgaging the future of the Third Reich to
look good in October did not seem like the
right way to play it.

other special device). This feature has been
standard on business micros for several
years. For on-line gamers, this means oneless interface device to purchase. There's
also a built-in parallel interface port for output to a printer.
Now, how much would you pay for a computer with all of these features? But wait,
there's more.. .
A disk drive port for plugging in 3.5 inch
disk drives for disks that can store up to
500K.
A hard disk interface port (to connect to
the new Atari 10 megabyte hard disk drive).
A TV modulator and monitor jack.
A color, high-resolution monitor jack
(R.G.B. Analog)
A monochrome high-resolution monitor
jack
A keyboard that features an eighteen key
numeric keypad, editing keys and ten function keys.
Built-in BASIC or Logo.
The announced price for the 130ST is less
than $399 and for the 512K less than $599.
Even though these prices do not include a
monitor or disk drives, they do seem so incredibly low that one must ask if Atari can
deliver the ST's at anywhere near the price.
After that, the question that faces every
new computer announcement must be
raised: will third party developers create
software for the new line? Perhaps, since the
ST's and the Mac use the same central
microprocessor (the Motorola 68000), developers will try to serve both markets at
once (just as many create Atari, Commodore,
and Apple versions of the same program
since all three use a version of the 6502 chip).
What About The One I Just Bought?
If you have recently invested in one of the
Atari XL computers, you may be disappointed to learn that the new ST line is NOT compatible with the 400/800 or the XL's.
However, if you are familiar with the questionable "success" of the Apple III, which
has an emulation mode to allow it to run Apple II software, you might reach the same
conclusion that I have that "maintaining
compatibility" is a good way of hamstringing the new computer's design and of telling
third party software developers that there
is no need to design software for the new
machine.
Just because the new line is not compatible
with the old one does not mean that Atari
is abandoning those of us with heave investments in our Atari computers. Atari will
continue its family of 6502-based 8-bitters
with the new 65XE and 130XE personal
computers. Atari says the XE's are

Turns Eight through Twelve had quite a
bit in common. They all had three to five
German attacks at various points from the
north-center (Rzhev) to the south-center (between Voronezh and Rostov). We averaged
one or two hexes captured each turn, but all
of the Russian positions had been backed up
by units on entrenchment duty, and therefore the Russian line was never in danger of
any large scale breach. A few of our attacks
were not well considered and resulted in low
odds, but the majority achieved between 2:1
and 7:1 odds. Unfortunately, entrenchments
reduced not only the chance of a retreat, but
also the defender's casualties, so that I cannot be certain as to how the balance of the
losses were going.

I did get one breakthrough, but it occurred
on the last turn that we played. After the
game, Kirk explained why he wasn't too concerned about it, and I am inclined to agree
that it did not amount to much of a threat.
Still, it was nice to see an attack north of
Kursk get 7:5:1 odds and take a hex. Then,
both of my attacking armor units advanced
and made second round attacks to the north.
They attacked one of the few hexes which
had yet to be "pre-entrenched", and got a
16:1 attack which cleared a second hex into
which they both advanced. This put them
only two hexes south of Moscow, without
any entrenched hexes in front of them. Unfortunately, they were not connected to the
rest of my line, and they had sliced between
two very strongly held Russian hexes. That
left two strong forces on the flanks of my advanced, all set to close around me. What
would have happened is anyone's guess, but
somehow I doubt that I was suddenly on the
way to a quick and easy victory!

10%compatiblewh40/8,12XLand
600/800XL computers. (This is an interesting
claim since these computers are not even 100%
compatible with each other). However, a
great degree of compatibility is likely, since
first analysis indicates that the 65XE is essentially an 800XL in a new case.
The 65XE will reportedly sell for about
$120 — the same low price as the 800XL.

And, the 130XE, which is basically an 800XL
with 128K RAM, will sell at an especially attractive price —under $200.
In addition to 65XE and the 130XE, Atari
has announced the 65XEM and a 65XEP
personal computers, plus a variety of
printers (dot matrix, color, and daisy wheel)
and an 80 column color monitor that will
be compatible with all Atari 8-bit computers.
The M in the 65XEM stands for Music.
The machine is billed as a super music maker that you will be able to hook-up to your
audio system. This machine will have 64K
RAM, eight independent voices, and
changeable music features. The output from
the special chip in the XEM is supposed to
be virtually indistinguishable for music
made by acoustical musical instruments.
Whether games will be created to take special advantage of this machine will probably
depend a lot upon third party developers.
The 65XEP portable is designed with a
shoulder strap, a built-in 3 1/2 inch disk
drive, and a built-in 5 inch monochrome
monitor. The suitability of the XEP for
"games on the go" is questionable, given the
tiny size of the monitor and its lack of color.
Finally, to help us keep everything straight
when it comes to buying peripherals and
software, Atari is color-coding everything
and supplying wallet-sized reference cards
for in-store shopping. The XE line will be
red; the ST will be blue. This strategy is undoubtedly aimed both at aiding consumers
and at convincing retailers that consumers
will be able to come in and accurately select
appropriate hardware and software without
the need to talk with a knowledgeable
salesperson. This is important, as many
general merchandise and discount department stores (like Penneys and K-Mart) have
been stung by their inability to move computer goods which require a knowledgeable
sales staff. These retailers are now shy (or
at least, a little bit wiser) when it comes to
carrying a new line of personal computers.
The Future
As for the XE's: Atari's announcement to
stick with us is perhaps the best news of all.
In case you haven't noticed, lately more and
more third party manufacturers have slowed
development of software for the Atari computer, fearing that it was about to take a cottage by the sea with the Texas Instrument's
99/4A and Coleco's Adam. News that Atari
is fully supporting its old line may give some
of the wary game developers the impetus to
jump back into Atari's software market. Let's
hope so.
As for the ST's, if the Atari can produce
the ST's with all the features that they announced, and if the new machines aren't
plagued with hardware bugs and glitches,
and if retailers carry the line, and if the price
is as low as Atari says it will be, and if thirdparty manufacturers develop software for it,
and if we consumers (garners and nongarners) buy the ST's, then Atari may survive. And, maybe, just maybe, Atari will regain its position as the leader in the world
of computer gaming.

There were 336 RIDs turned in by press
time for this issue.
Newly rated games and updated game ratings are listed with bold type in the table
on page 46. The breakdown buy machines
was: Apple — 40%; Atari — 37%; C-64 —
20%; IBM— 3%.
GAME RATINGS
The Game Ratings Table includes games
evaluated by our readers. For a game to be
included in this listing it must first have
been offered for rating in our regular R.I.D.
rating system. Games offered for evaluation
are those covered in the magazine, those
having a good sales record during the time
of evaluation, or those which were previously rated and we think need updating. Once
offered for evaluation, the game must have
been evaluated by a sufficient number of
readers to be included in the results. Any
game not evaluated by at least 10% of the
respondents was not included in the results.
Games were rated on a scale of I (terrible)
to 9 (outstanding). Respondents were asked
to consider such things as PRESENTATION (graphics, sound, packaging,
documentation); GAME DESIGN (design,
playability, interesting?); LIFE (does the
game wear well?)
MAJOR OVERHAUL OF R.I.D. IN
PROGRESS
A major overhaul of our R.I.D. rating system begins with this issue. Some of the
games on the R.I.D. chart are old and out
of date. Others have not been rerated for a
long time. So the first step in our renovation
is to re-rate a lot of the old games and drop
a lot of others from the list altogether. The
R.I.D. results on page 46 are the last ones
to appear under our old system.
The renovation will be in two phases.
R.I.D. #19 institutes phase one. We are asking you to re-rate a large number of games
that are already on the list but need updating. At the same time we will delete a number of old games from the next listing of
R.I.D. in June-July.
In phase two, we will be creating a database of all past R.I.D. scores that will be updated each time a game is re-rated. The
resulting score will be a composite of that
game's performance over all R.I.D. ratings,
not just the current rating. We feel forced
to do this in light of recent wide fluctuations

in scores of several re-rated games. We feel
this composite score will give you a more
accurate appraisal of the game's value (larger samples make for more accurate results).
RID #19 (Use card provided)
On this page a number of games are listed
for evaluation. Use the guidelines above for
game evaluation (i.e. PRESENTATION,
DESIGN, LIFE). For each game you rate,
place a 1 through a 9 next to the appropriate
number. Leave blank any game which you
have not played enough to have formed an
opinion.

A

COMMODORE KEY (cont.)
profitable success are clones of the original
game which are usually less of game, less
of a success, and certainly of less value to
the buyer who thinks he is getting just as
good (or better) according to this new game's
advertising, but for a lower price. Buyer
beware!
However, sometimes there comes a game
that truly expands on the originality of the
first and adds a significant number of additional new features that make this game,
though similar to the first, worthy of consideration and buying. A recent example of
this game is WIZARD, from Progressive
Peripherals and Software. (It's a small company, so you will not see the game in many
large mass-marketing stores.)
WIZARD has great similarity to one of my
all time favorites. .. JUMPMAN. It has ladders and ropes and moving objects to avoid.
The wizard runs, jumps, claims and falls.
You have 40 screens at different selectable
or random levels of play. And now for the
extras... the wizard has two possible objectives on each screen. He can gather three
types of treasure items (like the Jumpman
bombs) for points or get a key and take it to
a lock, allowing you to go to the next screen.
This latter action will give you bonus points
for early completion of the screen. Once you
get the key, the wizard is given a certain number of spells (FREEZE, FIREBALL, INVISIBILITY, TRANSPORTABILITY, etc.) These
can be used against the various things that
keep you from easily gathering the treasure
items. In addition to jumping, the wizard
can also duck to avoid moving objects. Play
action is enjoyable and very similar to that
of Jumpman.
The big extra feature is that this game has
a construction option that lets you very easily create your own screens. My nine year
old son was playing the game and I left the
room. When I came back, I found that he had
found the construction option and had built
a very involved and good looking screen
without reading the very extensively written
manual. That was impressive!
In addition to Wizard, there is a WIZARD
EXPANSION program that has 40 more
screens. Half of these were created by users.
Additional screen building capabilities have
also been added. If you liked JUMPMAN,
this one will keep you jumping too.
COMING UP NEXT ISSUE
Next issue I will be discussing the "tools"
used by game programers. The software and
hardware items available to help design,
write, and debug programs. I will also discuss some of the game construction software that is available. If you have any
questions, comments, or suggestions pertaining to this column, send them to me using the mailing address for this magazine.
I am also available as ROY W on PLAYNET
(the National home computer network for
Commodore 64 owners).

R.I.D. was prepared with the help of SPEED STAT by SoftCorp International, Westerville, OH 800-543-1350

See page 40 for details on the Reader Input Device

