May 1991

Features
In Search of Depth

Baseball Manager Connects
10

Three-Sixty's Das Boot / Paul Nielsen

Air of Superiority

12
16

Sneak Preview of Might & Magic III / Johnny L. Wilson

Worlds of Ultima for Everyone!

19

Beating the One-Saved-Game Blues / Aaron Allston

Putting the Bite on JAWS

22

With II You Get Eggroll
Tanks for the Modem

24
28
34

More Than Two Good Things / Leah Wesolowski

Another Stab at Chaos

38

FTL's Dungeon Master II / Derek Godat

Knightmare in Middlemere
Psygnosis' Obitus / Allen L. Greenberg

Electronic Arts' The Immortal / Matt Laurence

Pac-Man of the 90s

62

Freakin' Funky Fuzzballs / G. Marc Clupper

64

Sierra's Spirit of Excalibur / Todd Threadgill

76

Sid Meier's Covert Action Takes Aim / Charles Ardai

Departments

SimSystems' FireTeam 2200 / Jesse W. Cheng

Accolade's Elvira

60

Mortal Scene

Move Over, Mr. Bond

Battle Chess II: Chinese Chess / Ken St. Andre

53

Edward 0. Thorp's Tutor in a Box / Michael S. Lasky

What You Sheath Is What You Get

Just Another War in Space / Hosea Battles, Jr.

48

A New Game on the PRODIGY® Service

Real Garners, Meet Real Blackjack

Tactical Tips for Their Finest Hour/James Lowerre, Jr.

Third Time and Charmed

Number 82

43

Taking A Peek
6
Rumor Bag
14
Scorpion's Tale (Bane of the Cosmic Forge)
36
Game Ratings Chart (Top 100 Games Rated)
40
Opponents Wanted
52
Conversions Received
52
Over There (European Games Report)
56
Inside the Industry
58
Letters from Paradise
70
Reader Input Device
74
Editorial (Color Coding Through Rose-Tinted Glasses) 80

Taking a Peek

Accolade
San Jose, CA

Cinemaware
Westlake Village, CA

JACK NICKLAUS PRESENTS THE
GREAT COURSES OF THE U.S. OPEN:
There's a title that says it all. This is the
fourth in the popular series of add-on
disks for those who enjoy puttering
around with Jack Nicklaus Golf. This
one adds the courses of Pebble Beach,
Oakmont and Springfield, New Jersey.
IBM ($21.95). Circle Reader Service #1.

AIR STRIKE USA: In this British arcade
game with a modicum of realism,
players fly an Advanced Tactical Fighter
II (ATF II) and experience the entire
globe as their "combat arena." Each side
has the same number of land units, factories, etc. to attack and to defend, with
the balance of power hinging on the
player's successes in offensive and defensive arcade missions. Highly diverting.
IBM, Amiga ($39.95). Circle Reader Service //3.

TEST DRIVE III ADD-ON DISK
ROAD & CAR: The showroom is filling
up with new exotics and the road outside
is winding toward new locales. The addition of two new cars, the Acura NSX and
the Dodge Stealth R/T Turbo, expands
on the "feel" of driving the ultimate in
hot new cars. Now, there is more to
being king of the road than cruising the
California coast. This disk offers five New
England segments, with lots of eastern architecture and scenery. IBM ($24.95).
Circle Reader Service 112.

Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA
NIGHTBREED: The British always have
had a certain flair for horror, and
Nightbreed is no exception. A gruesome
story of an undead Shangri-La, the hero
must find this retreat, without bringing
the police there or being devoured or
otherwise subdued in the process.
Several clever (yet nasty) arcade sequences punctuate this interactive movie/ac-

Taking a Peek

tion adventure game. IBM ($24.95);
Amiga, ST ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #4.
THE UNTOUCHABLES: This arcadestyle game features more attractive action sequences. This time, they are loosely based on the hit movie. Scroll around
six different locations, switching between
movie characters, in an attempt to
avenge Malone's death by throwing Nitti
(ahistorically) from the courthouse rooftop. Another fine American legend as
retold by British programmers. C-64,
Amiga, ST ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #5.
MicroAce
P.O. Box 5223
Englewood, CO 80155
MICROACE BLACKJACK: This game is
to blackjack what a Ford pickup is to
farmwork; it's not glitzy but really gets
the job done. Although limited by only allowing one player versus the house, the
game-aid templates and fantastic
documentation makes for a package that
is a sure winner. Based on the strategies
of renowned blackjack expert Julian H.
Braun, M.S., the clear graphics display
and instructional methods will benefit the
owner of this software where it matters
most (at the real blackjack tables). Great
statistical analysis and winning strategies.
IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #6.
Microprose
Hunt Valley, MD
LIGHTSPEED: Designed to be a hybrid
between a combat flight simulation and
science fiction role-playing game,
Lightspeed blends several diverse game
elements together. Players must succeed
in combat, diplomacy and trade in order
to accomplish the overall task of the
game, finding a planet fit for colonization
Different weapons must be selected in
order to defeat a variety of aliens, since

some weapons are not effective against
some aliens. Diplomacy and trade are
handled via menu-driven conversations,
but purist role-players will note that the interaction is limited. Diplomacy is very important in the game, however, since
one's success is dependent on a wise
selection of allies. IBM ($54.95). Circle
Reader Service #7.
ReadySoft, Inc.
30 Wertheim Court #2
Richmond Hill, Ontario, CANADA
SPACE ACE: Like its predecessor,
Dragon's Lair, this game originally ap-

peared in arcades and gobbled up
quarters while featuring laser-disk technology. The original is faithfully represented
as Earth's greatest hero, Ace, must combat the nasty Commander Borf and his Infanto Ray. Naturally, Borf has also made
off with space-babe Kimberly in order to

set up the requisite rescue sequence. As
in the original, quick reflexes are required
to meet the challenges of this beautifully
illustrated arcade game. IBM. Circle
Reader Service #8.
Three Sixty Pacific
Campbell, CA
HARPOON BATTLESET #3, THE MED
CONFLICT: A departure from the other
"Harpoon Battlesets" (don't start singing
"Anchors Aweigh," please), this time it's
down and dirty in the restricted waters of
the Mediterranean. Most of the scenarios
concentrate on the navies of smaller
countries, as opposed to the superpower
fleets presented in earlier products.
Another interesting fact is that this
product features a lot of emphasis on
"what ifs." Sixty new platforms are added
to the hardware inventory for good
measure. The timing on this one couldn't
be much better for Harpoon players. IBM
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #9.
Virgin Mastertronic
Irvine, CA
OVERLORD: Like space, this one is big
(really big). The player confronts the
computer for galactic control at the
strategic level, colonizing planets, mining,
farming and raising troops for defense
and assault. Beautiful British graphics
punctuate what is a fairly easy to learn
(yet a challenge to master) strategy
game. With no spaceship battles or arcade sequences, this real-time game is
like an ideal human companion: pretty
and deep. Amiga ($49.99). Circle Reader
Service #10.

Review

Long Ride Into Night
p
: ing the Depths of Das Boot
by Paul Nielsen
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Das Boot
IBM
$49.95
Paul Butler and Rick Banks
Three-Sixty Pacific, Inc.
Campbell, CA

W

Paul Nielsen is a former Data Systems Technician Petty Officer with the U.S. Navy Submarine Service.
hile attending the Submarine Track of Data Systems "C"
School at Mare Island Naval Base, we were offered the
opportunity to view the film Das Boot. Later, the epic
film of a sub crew's struggle for survival had a near-cult following
at Sub School, New London, Connecticut which this author also
attended. So, given an opportunity to review Three-Sixty's Das
Boot, I didn't hesitate. While awaiting delivery, I re-read the
English translation of an actual German U-Boot commander's tactical handbook.

Initial Inspection, Sir
The hefty Das Boot box shows a WWII German sub stealthily
leaving the scene of a freighter's demise. Key words jump from
the features list: 256 VGA color, Enigma coding machine, 3-D
views, historical realism! Not only that, it includes a copy of the
book The Boat by Lother-Gunther Buchheim. Within a
minute, this baby was installed.
A very impressive opening
score was soon resounding
through the Sound Blaster
board and stereo. Unfortunately, the opening's full animation
proved to be incompatible with
this reviewer's Orchid ProDesigner II VGA board. Instead,
a 256-color sub appeared with
the main menu, the usual options of Preferences, War Diary
(read "high scores"), Demo
and Action.

Maiden Voyage
Opting for the Baltic training
before undertaking a full mission, a menu of four surface
and four submerged training
sessions appears. Manning the
anti-aircraft gun, several
fighters and light bombers
make runs at the sub. The joystick is not supported and the
mouse is strictly used for menu
selections. So, aiming the gun
is accomplished solely by the
arrow keys on the keyboard.
Scoring is based on the num-

ber of planes hit (they always crash) minus the
number of bombs
dropped on the sub. Hint:
To score high, go for the
fighters; they come in
close and the large silhouette can't help but be hit. Also, the game is over when the
AA shells are used up, so waste a few rounds to shorten the
game and avoid extra bombs.
Then, a bad feeling about this game sets in: No sub commander in his right mind would take on a dozen planes. In the
slim event that his sub would survive, he would lose his command for breaking orders. Yet, this is only the first part of the Baltic training — maybe it gets better.
Unfortunately, the other training sessions are more of the same.
The torpedo runs are turkey shoots reminiscent of an early '80s
arcade sub game. The sub versus sub "simulation" (this technology isn't exactly WWII
vintage) is an underwater outside view of two subs — giving
a new definition to the computer jargon "point and shoot."
During WWII, subs only attacked other subs which were on
the surface.
An initial try at the depth
charge training saw this commander able to dodge the falling charges and completely
avoid taking any damage.
When the game locked up (on
an genuine Intel OEM PC, mind
you), it was time to take a
closer look at the manual....

Manual Labors
Page one has a disclaimer
stating that the software is not
intended to recreate the book.
The name Das Boot is "for
promotional purposes only."
Hmm.... Then there's a statement that Das Boot brings
some innovations to sub
simulators, such as outside 3-D
views, improved torpedo set-up
and realistic digitized graphics.

Review

Something Rotten Sailing Past Denmark

Gremlins

Das Boot excels as an arcade game involving individual sailors'
duty stations on a submarine at general quarters (much like
Epyx' Destroyer, Microplay's Destroyer Escort or Accolade's
Gunboat). However, it fails (sinks?) as the serious submarine
simulation it is positioned to be because it doesn't permit the
player to take on the combined role of the captain and his crew.

To wit, the sub changes heading at a constant rate, regardless
of the amount of rudder desired or the speed of the sub. Compounding this, at a dead stop the sub freely pivots! When looking
at the outside surface view, one never sees another surfacing
sub. Likewise, an underwater view will never show a surfaced sub
after it submerges. There are more "features" like these, plus the
occasional divide error or lock-up.

Submarine simulators, more so than fighter plane or tank
simulators, must provide a balance of strategic and tactical information at all times, letting the sole player assume the roles of
the sub captain and duty station officers simultaneously. Das
Boot permits control of the sub at several stations, but limits the
information available to the player. For example, it is possible
from several stations to order a down bubble (increase angle of
descent). Unfortunately, the current angle of the dive planes may
only be ascertained at the Control Station.

Limited Intelligence on Board
Each station has only a limited view. The anti-aircraft gunner
only sees planes directly in front and will often be surprised by a
plane attacking from the side. The conn permits viewing in one
direction — straight ahead. Now, 688 Attack Sub solves this
problem by making the player go to different stations but providing certain key information at all of them. WolfPack, another
256-color U-boat arcade game, puts the player in the command
seat of an entire squadron of subs with the player moving from
one sub to the next by selecting it on the map. Das Boot suffers
by comparison and from several odd program features as well.

There are more serious design flaws at the duty stations. For instance, there is no way to range the deck gun, which fires at a
rapid rate and never needs reloading (since it never runs out of
ammunition). There is no way to command the sub to come to a
specific bearing, either. The player must stay at the helm holding
down the arrow key to perform this task.
Also, while Das Boot's user interface involves the mouse for
duty station selection, all the sub commands are executed via
the keyboard. To add to the frustration, several of the commands
include shift and alt sequences when simple single keystrokes
would have sufficed. The situation is made worse by the fact that
several of the keys change their function from duty station to
duty station, so consistency is lost and the learning curve is
made needlessly long.
As an arcade shoot-'em-up, Das Boot might cut the mustard.
Be warned, however, that those who liked the movie might want
to torpedo the game.

Strategy

How the Luftwaffe Can Have Hugh Dowding's
Drawers or the RAF Can Get Goering's Goat
by James M. Lowerre, Jr.
ince I was twelve years old and
saw the movie 'The Battle of
Britain" I've fantasized about
being a pilot in that battle. With the
release of Lucasfilm Games' Their Finest
Hour, that fantasy has come to life.
Repeatedly savoring the Joy of flying my
computer in the autumn skies of
Southern England in 1940 has inevitably
given me a deal of experience with the
game that I'd like to share. In the explanation of these "lessons learned," I
will refer to, but not repeat, the hints and
tips previously published in CGW by
Roger White (#75 and #77) and Russell
Sipe (#67).

S

Campaigning in Their Finest
Hour
Before conducting any campaign, a commander must know not only the campaign
objectives but also the general circumstances that will apply to all battles in the campaign. In this light, it is important to bear in
mind that the computer opponents in any
campaign scenario will be Top Ace quality
with scores of around 2,000 points. The
player's Non-Player Characters (NPCs) will
only perform better than novices if their
scores are equal to or greater than 1,000
points. When commanding the Luftwaffe, it
is important to understand that aircraft
(along with their NPC pilots) will be lost to
operational hazards as well as enemy opposition. Escorting fighters may crash on
take-off and bombers may be brought
down by the exploding ordnance of preceding planes.
When playing either side, clone the top
two or three scoring pilots in each category
by using the DOS copy command and different character names. Then, save all the
original characters in a single sub-subdirectory in the BOB1940 subdirectory. For
those who consider this cheating, go ahead
and assign NPCs to fly supporting missions
and watch as hundreds of player hours go
down in flames or crash into the channel
very early in the campaign. Suddenly, there
is nothing left but novice pilots to continue
the campaign!
For those who want to protect the player
time invested in each character's score, fly
Original Top Pilot Characters (OTPCs),
saving their files to the sub-subdirectory
every two or three missions. Use these files
to replace losses in the campaign by copying them out of the sub-subdirectory and
back into the BOB1940 subdirectory.

The Luftwaffe
1. Target the RAF airfields. The game
accurately mirrors history and this is the
fastest means of attriting the RAF's fighter
strength. Initially, when only the Ju-87s are

available as bombers, hit the cross-channel
coastal satellite airfields. That way, if any
OTPCs are shot down, it will be over the
channel, most likely, and they can be rescued. Once the Bf.110C-4B and the
medium bombers become available, go
after the deeper airfields.
2. Try the solo bomber alternative. Differing from White's "clear the skies ahead
of the bombers" method of campaigning
(which works very well), the player should
personally fly one bomber and assign all
other aircraft as fighters flying close level escort in schwarm formation (don't assign
more than two NPCs to this formation because the last one frequently crashes into
the channel shortly after take-off).
Choose the fastest bomber with the
heaviest bomb load available. Then, take
off from an airfield inland from the fighter
airfield and fly under the radar at four to
five hundred feet in altitude. Follow the escorts to the target (the computer-controlled
pilots navigate very well). Bomb the target
using the straight-low-slow method
(described in "Bomber Operations" below).
With the relatively heavy bomb loads carried in the medium bombers, two or three
airfields can be reduced in this manner.
Concentrate on the primary airfield first and
try to totally destroy it since the results on
that target will be reflected in the
Luftwaffe's other targets for that day. Secondary targets hit will be reflected in the overall strategic situation. The RAF's airfield
operability rating will drop quickly toward
the victory objective of 35%.
3. Try the multiple bomber alternative. If one desires to employ more than
one bomber, it is only possible to fly as a
wingman in a bomber formation. In this
case, one cannot get the other aircraft to
adopt the straight-low-slow bombing
method. So, one stands a good chance of
losing these other aircraft during the mission (particularly with the vulnerable Ju87s). Nothing, however, precludes the
player from running his own bombing attack separate from his bomber group. Of
course, such a lone wolf must beware of
the group dropping its bombs from altitude
while making one's own straight-low-slow attack! What's worse than being bombed by
one's own planes? Remember, even three effective NPC pilots are nowhere near as efficient as a single player-controlled bomber
using the straight-low-slow technique.

The RAF
1. Use all available aircraft. Every mission, organize them into two or three
groups using the schwarm formation. Start
all groups on the corner of the target
closest to the enemy airfields. Separate
each group by altitude (i.e., one at 12, one
at 9 and one at 6,000 feet). From each

group's initial point, use a single additional
way point in different directions of likely attack at the same altitude as the initial point,
but close to the initial point (so that the
symbols partially overlap). This way, other
groups can be more responsive to the actual threat if a wrong guess is made on the
direction of attack. All groups should have
a CAP priority with one's personal group
taking the senior position at the highest altitude.
2. Expect to be attacked. At least two
groups of enemy bombers escorted by
fighters, one group around medium altitude
(10,000 feet) and one group around low altitude (3,000 feet), will do so. Both groups
will come from approximately the same
direction (rarely the one anticipated). When
flying Hurricanes, the bombers will most
likely be Do-17s. When flying Spitfires, the
player is likely to be facing Ju-88s.

3. Attack the enemy at the highest altitude. Interception angles need to be calculated so that one engages the enemy as far
away from the target as possible. Once
finished with the high-altitude group, go
after the lower one(s), but beware of leftover escorts from the earlier group.
4. Protect the RDF system as long as
possible. The Luftwaffe will continue to attack it until they are convinced they have
put it out of action. Hence, they do not turn
to the much more critical airfields until this
is accomplished.
5. Maintain RAF fighter strength.
Never needlessly risk pilots or aircraft.
Protect the airfields by getting the bombers
before they get to the airfields.

Some Tactical Tips for Campaign Bomber Operations
1. There are three basics: bomb on a
straight line, bomb at low altitude and
bomb at slow speed.
2. Be sure to select the single bomb
release option.
3. When approaching the target area,
before the individual buildings of the target
become visible, reduce altitude to 50 feet.
Do this at engine power sufficient to quickly correct mistakes without stalling. "Trim"
the aircraft for perfectly level flight since at
reduced speed even the slightest climb will
result in a most undesirable stall and crash
combination.
When the individual buildings of the target
become visible, get on an approach that
puts two of the buildings lined up one behind the other. Slowing air speed at this
point offers more time to get this delicate
approach correct.
If a slower air speed is desired, using
flaps, landing gear (not as crazy as it

Strategy

sounds considering your altitude), throttle
and especially dive brakes is more efficient
than simply using the throttle.

into one's plane, a single burst fired in front
of him will frequently turn him away,
presenting a very vulnerable six o' clock.

Release each bomb as the base of the target building reaches the center-bottom of
the cockpit window (use the camera replay
until this is mastered). As soon as the
bombing run is complete, retract flaps, landing gear and dive brakes and go to full
throttle. Come back around at fifty feet to
repeat the process as necessary.

4. When coming head-on against an opposing fighter, one should go into a steep
dive as soon as the enemy begins to fire.
When the opponent's firing is no longer
audible, one can stop the dive and loop up
behind him.

Once the bombing is completed, retract
all surfaces and climb back to five hundred
feet (thus, if shot down, there will be
enough altitude to bail out), head for home,
turn on the autopilot and man the guns to
defend your aircraft on the long journey to
safety.

Some Tactical Tips for Campaign Fighters Operations
1. Again, there are thee basics that should
be adhered to whenever possible: dive from
superior altitude, get on the enemy's tail
fast and get close when firing.
2. When approaching enemy fighters
while possessing an altitude advantage, use
the scan view to watch the enemy climb.
They tend to turn onto the player's heading
as they gain altitude, enabling one to dive
easily onto their tails.
3. If an enemy fighter attempts to turn

5. Use designer Larry Holland's technique
of attacking bombers from above and in
front. Then, loop onto their rear, firing continuously while rolling and pitching, side to
side, up and down, and keeping the bomber in the gun sights. This puts all available
fire into the bomber and keeps the player a
moving target for the bomber's gunners.
6. Long-range gunnery can be very effective against both fighters and bombers.

Straight-Low-Slow Table
Engine
Landing
Aircraft Power Flaps Gear
Ju-87B 100% Down N/A
Bf-110C 56%
Down Down
Do-17Z 75%
Down Down
Ju-88A 100% Down Down
He-111H 68%
Down Down

Dive
Brakes
Down
N/A
N/A
Down
N/A

Airspeed should be 150 and altitude should be
50 feet for all planes shown above.

British fighters have an edge in this
category as they can successfully engage
Ju-87s, Bf-109s, Bf-110s and even the Do17s as soon as the target wing span
reaches the edges of the gunsight ring.
7. When flying RAF fighters, remember to
roll upside down before an unopposed
steep dive. This uses the centrifugal force
to feed the carburetor to avoid the embarrassing hesitation and engine cough of performing a steep dive in the upright position.
8. It is possible to regain altitude quickly
by doing a series of half-loops, each time
rolling upright and diving from the top of
the half-loop just enough to get airspeed up
for the next loop.
9. When attacking from the rear and
being in jeopardy of overshooting your opponent, drop flaps and landing gear to
quickly bleed off excess airspeed. Alternatively, go into a steep climb and, just before
stalling, dive back onto the target.

Conclusions
Once this author had mastered the
straight-low-slow bombing technique, it was
clear that fighting a successful RAF Campaign was much more difficult than a
Luftwaffe Campaign. Playing either side still
yields a tremendous amount of enjoyment,
however, which is a testament to the quality
of Their Finest Hour's lasting value. "Gut'
bomben" or "Tally ho."

Industry News

The Rumor Bag
by Rex Kael

t was definitely the "A" party.
Luminaries in software design added
more soft refractions of light than the
"Monet At Givenchy" print on the wall.
The conversational palette had been premixed with a gouache of California chardonnay and Coca-Cola Classic, singlemalt scotch and Seven-Up. Lord British
held court as he recounted the history
and philosophy of Ultima with a circle of
a half-dozen less experienced designers
surrounding him like a bard around a
tavern fire. "Iron Dan" Bunten anchored
a group that framed the doorway and
regaled them with stories of earlier days,
punctuated with his folksy mountain
humor. It was, after all, a secret conclave
of CGW's "informed sources."

I

Against one wall, Sid Ember lamented
the impracticality of his research expedition to the Tigris-Euphrates Valley in
preparation for his Civilization game. Participants in the group chuckled nervously, knowing Sid's penchant for doing exacting research on a project and not
being sure if he was taking an opportunity for topical humor or was genuinely
disappointed. I stood behind a tall designer and hoped they wouldn't notice the
bag I wear over my head for all formal occasions.
Bingo
A Lucasfilm designer answered Sid's
complaint about not being able to research an ancient location prior to designing a game by noting that he was working on the most famous location since

Plato wrote the Timaeus. Corey Cole had
a similar problem with regard to Quest
For Glory III. They have a story that
could potentially take place in either a
legendary Transylvania or darkest Africa.
Both plot lines have something to commend them, but both locales are famous
enough that it would be difficult to maintain the suspension of disbelief. Maybe
that's why Lori is currently working on a
game based on the Mixed-Up Fairy Tale
concept (and designed for primary grade
children) and Corey is working on a puzzle-based learning game, tentatively
called The Mad Scientist's Assistant
(and designed for junior high school and
up).
Steve Meretzky broke away from the
group and wandered toward the bar. I followed him as inconspicuously as possible in hopes that I might hear him
describe the contemporary adobe and
seafoam green furnishings of the
hospitality suite in his inimitable prose.
He is, after all, a master at room descriptions. I think he said the "vomit and
vegetable" color combination might be
the right effect for the color scheme in
the fraternity house for Spellcasting 201:
The Sorcerer's Appliance. Maybe I was
wrong. One thing is for sure, you won't
see that color scheme adorning any
CGW covers.
Before I could hear the end of that conversation, I overheard one of Beyond
Software's programmers insist that their
baseball game (originally designed to be
TV Sports: Baseball for Cinemaware)

was definitely going to be shipped by
SSI before the summer is too far along.
Since the game has not been officially
named, as yet, I jokingly asked her if the
game was going to be Jim Palmer
Baseball. Her fiery glare almost burned
my bag as if to say that was about as
likely as Palmer being the starter for the
first game of this year's World Series.
Two successful sports programmers
were sitting at the table in the corner and
perked up when the conversation shifted
to baseball. They said the guys at Park
Place Software are producing a sports
game on a new platform for Electronic
Arts. I could only find out that it wasn't a
football game (Park Place has nearly
cornered the market on football games
by doing so much work on so many different games). I suggested it might be on
the 16-bit Nintendo and couldn't get a
response. Still, I told them that if it was
another baseball game, they would have
to contend with a new entry from Virgin
Mastertronic. Virgin is about to complete 3-D Simulation Baseball in
cooperation with Ed Ringler of SportTime Ice Hockey and Omni-Play Horse
Racing fame.
Unfortunately I had to leave the party
rather abruptly. It seems that someone
wanted to have some fun at my expense.
They told Brian Moriarty and Dave Albert
that I was really Scorpia in disguise. My
entire career flashed before my eyes as
every designer in the room began to converge upon me. To be continued?

Review

Once,
Might & Magic meant massive maps,

detailed dungeon drawings,
and catastrophic combat.

Now, New World Computing's

Might & Magic III:
Isles of Terra Makes
Gamers Face the Music
by Johnny L. Wilson

A

ctually, Might & Magic III: Isles of

Terra (M&M3) puts faces on characters and monsters alike with
dynamic graphics that colorfully depict
the progress of the battle or condition of
the player's characters. M&M3 also features wild sound effects and audible
clues amidst an atmospherically effective
soundtrack.
Indeed, the game thrusts even the most
novice role-playing character straight into
the thick of the game's fictional atmosphere. This is because the initial stages
of the game do not force the player to
fool around with such mundane activities
as creating a party of player characters.
M&M3 is large enough and challenging
enough that there will be time to accomplish such tasks later in the adventure. Instead, the player finds his/her
characters dropped into a mini-scenario
where it is possible to familiarize oneself
with what is important in combat, how to
use the interface and where to discover
on-screen help features. The opening
scenario is fairly short, features very low
level monsters (rabid mice, beetles that
cannot play '60s hits, etc.) and is
designed to be non-lethal.

Visual Cues
In M&M3, players do not have to
decipher long (or even short) lists of
numbers to determine how their onscreen personas are faring. Reminiscent
of a birthstone, each character has an onscreen gem (lifestone?) that flashes one
of three colors to indicate how the character is surviving. Analogous to a traffic
light, green means there is no problem
while yellow means the character is experiencing significant damage and red
means that the situation is reaching
potentially fatal dimensions. Since the
label given to a type of monster will be
presented on the screen in the same
changing colors (with the same meanings), this visual cue will be readily perceived.
At the same time, one is likely to see
his characters' faces transformed from
normal through sick and on to death.
This, combined with facial expressions
which indicate being asleep, sad, insane,
turned to stone and even obliterated,
gives a texture to the game which emphasizes the character as a person rather
than as a primitive military unit.

DAC and Roland) is planned and CGW
was certainly impressed with the full
range of Roland sound support.

Tradition
Of course, the Might & Magic series already has tens of thousands of dedicated
fans who expect to see the same types
of detailed statistics and character data
that was available in the earlier games,
as well as others in the genre. For those
players in particular, New World has
provided a background screen which
provides masses of data, including a list
of all the awards and honors the character may have won. In addition, there is a
choice of ten relatively standard character classes with no surprises, five traditional fantasy races, three obvious moral
alignments and, of course, the biologically requisite two sexes.

Deus Ex Machina

During combat, each attack is resolved
with a visual cue. Different representations appear for physical, magical,
electrical, poisonous, energy, cold and
fire damage and the size of the representation indicates how effective the attack was. This seems much more expressive of actual combat than messages
which indicate points allotted.
The visual cues for non-combat activities offer an exponential increase in
verisimilitude, as well. Instead of text messages that pop up and tell the party that
a hidden door or passageway has been
detected, the stone lizard on one side of
the action window waves his arm. Players
may or may not spot the action, just as
adventurers and explorers might or
might not spot the tell-tale hints of a
secret door. In the same way, the bat at
the top of the action window shrieks and
animates its mouth to magically warn the
party when danger is imminent. Of
course, the warning may not always be
in time to allow the party the luxury of
avoiding the combat, but it sure can help
if a monster is sneaking up behind them.
Finally, a gargoyle hugs the "door facing"

on the left side of the action window so
that players who need to make a quick
escape can click on him as though he
were a magical artifact. In this way, the
party makes use of a handy "levitate"
spell that can get many a character out
of mortal danger.
To round out the visual assistance options, the screen always offers an automapping option (de rigeur in today's
role-playing market), an icon to display
mini-quests which have been revealed to
the party (a fait not complete?) but not
acted upon and a quick reference icon to
display only the most succinct and
salient statistical data.

Sound Bytes
Atmospheric sound is one of the important design points of Might & Magic III:
Isles of Terra. Weapons make distinctive
sounds reflective of their motion and effect, magical explosions offer percussive
punctuation to battle sequences and
digitized voices shout occasional battle
cries and, more frequently, groan after
telling blows. A full range of sound card
support (AdLib, Sound Blaster, Tandy

One user-friendly feature intentionally
designed to help new computer gamers
really caught this reporter's fancy.
Anyone old enough to remember "Tudor
Turtle" on the old "Crusader Rabbit"
television cartoon series will love the
warm fuzzy feeling that comes from this
feature. In the cartoon series, the turtle
kept wanting to experience the glory of
earlier times (as a musketeer, knight, outlaw, etc.). A lizard named Mr. Wizard
would send him back in time and Tudor
would adventure until he got in trouble.
Then, the turtle would yell, "Help me, Mr.
Wizard!" and the lizard would call the
prodigal adventurer home.
In M&M3, there is a "Help me, Mr.
Wizard" button that allows players to accomplish the exact same thing. Pressing
the button teleports the entire party back
to the safety of the first inn where they
can start all over again. It costs them
one level per character, but it works nonetheless.

Crystal Ball
Early looks at Might & Magic III: Isles
of Terra indicate that the company has
stuck with the formula that has made
them successful in the past. There is plenty of exploration, an abundance of combat, a plethora of treasure and dozens of
mini-quests. The designers have taken
care of their loyalist customers and tried
to open up the computer role-playing experience to people who've never played
one before. With programming might
and artistic magic, M&M3 seems certain
to further expand the New World of computing that Jon van Caneghem and company have been building.

Designer's Notes

Step Four: Write Your
Batch Files

by Aaron Allston
While co-writing and playtesting
The Savage Empire, a game
driven by the same "engine" as
Ultima VI, I ran into a problem common
to both games. That is, each can only
support one saved game at a time.
This is probably fine for players who
live alone, bite at anyone who comes
near their computers and play their
games straight through from start to
finish, but that isn't the way things work
in my household or in many others. In
my place, for instance, the game is installed on one computer and as many as
six different people may want to play it.
When one roommate or friend staggers,
exhausted, away from the machine, the
next slides in to take his place. Each,
reasonably, wants his own saved game.
There is, fortunately, a way around the
one-saved-game restriction. It's a little
convoluted, but by picking up the proper
utility and writing a series of simple
batch files, you can set up Ultima VI and
The Savage Empire to accommodate as
many different players and saved games
as the available room on your hard drive
will permit.

Step One: Find a DirectoryRenaming Utility
DOS doesn't allow you to rename directories. You can create them, fill them,
empty them and delete them, but you
can't rename them under DOS. Fortunately, several programmers have
provided us with helpful utilities that
rename directories.
The first step, then, is to find one of
these programs — and to find one that
can be run from the command line (so it
will be suitable for inclusion in batch
files).

I use RENDIR.COM, which is available
in many bulletin boards' file areas. If
you're on Compuserve, GO PCMAGNET
and download RENDIR.COM and RENDIR.DOC. Any similar directory renamer
will do. Put the utility in any directory on
your PATH statement, then proceed. In
all the subsequent examples in this article, I presume you are using RENDIR.COM. If you're using some other
directory renamer, substitute the correct
command in place of RENDIR in all
these examples.

Likewise, I will assume in all future examples that you're installing Ultima VI. If
you're installing The Savage Empire instead, substitute the subdirectory
\SAVAGE wherever \ULTIMA6 is mentioned, and the command "savage"
wherever the command "ultima6" is indicated.

Step Two: Install the Game
Now, install the game on your hard
drive. You may already have the game installed, but if you've played it even once,
you'll need to re-install it (trust me). You
don't need to destroy your saved game,
though. You can copy everything that's
in your current \SAVEGAME subdirectory into another, empty, directory first.
Once you've installed or re-installed the
game, you'll have the main game files in
the \ULTIMA6 game directory and the
pristine saved-game in the \SAVEGAME
subdirectory.

Step Three: Copy the Fresh
Savegame Files
First, rename the \SAVEGAME subdirectory as \MASTER. Issue this command:
"rendir savegame master [ENTER]". This
renames the subdirectory containing the
pristine saved-game files as \ULTIMA6\MASTER. Next, make a new subdirectory for every different saved game
you want to have. These have to be in
the same directory where your \MASTER
subdirectory is. For instance, if you want
to start out with saved games for people
named Tom, Dick and Harry, issue these
commands:
"md tom [ENTER]
md dick [ENTER]
md harry [ENTER]"
Finally, copy everything in the
\MASTER subdirectory to each of the
new directories, and then return to your
\ULTIMA6 directory. To continue our example above, type:
"cd master [ENTER]
copy *.* c:\ultima6\tom [ENTER]
copy *.* c:\ultima6\dick [ENTER]
copy *.* c:\ultima6\harry [ENTER]
cd [ENTER]"
This assumes that c: is your hard drive
and that your game directory is named
\ULTIMA6. If either assumption is incorrect, substitute the correct information.

Now, you need to write a series
of small, simple batch files and
place them within your \ULTIMA6
or \SAVAGE directory. If you
don't have a word processor (it
needs to be able to save in ASCII format)
or a text editor to write the batch files,
familiarize yourself with the COPY CON
command in the chapter on Batch
Processing in your DOS manual.
The batch files follow this format:
"Rendir (dirname) savegame [ENTER]
ultima6 [ENTER]
rendir savegame (dirname) [ENTER]"
...where "(dirname)" is the name of one
of the saved-game directories.
Since each batch file corresponds to
one directory, you name each after one
directory: (dirname).bat. If one savedgame subdirectory is named TOM, the
corresponding batch file would be named
TOM.BAT.
Example: You've created three directories named \TOM, \DICK and \HARRY
for your Ultima VI game. You'd write the
three batch files in this manner:

Batch File #1, Saved as TOM.BAT
"rendir tom savegame [ENTER]
ultima6 [ENTER]
rendir savegame tom [ENTER]"
Then repeat this procedure for Batch
Files #2 and 3, saved as DICK.BAT and
HARRY.BAT, respectively.

Step Five: Ready to Play
You're now ready to play.
When Tom wants to play his saved
game, he'll move to the \ULTIMA6 direc
tory and just type his name:
"tom [ENTER]"
The batch file changes the name of the
\TOM directory to \SAVEGAME and
launches the game. When Tom quits, the
batch file finishes by changing the name
of the \SAVEGAME directory back to
\TOM. The process works the same for
all the other players.
Unfortunately, this approach won't let
you change from one saved game to
another in the course of a single playersession; it's not that sophisticated. You'll
have to exit the game and start it again
by invoking a different batch file.
You can always add new saved games.
For instance, if Tom wants to start a
second game, you can make a new subdirectory (call it \ULTIMA6\TOM2). Copy
everything from \ULTIMA6\MASTER into

Designer's Notes

it. (The files in \MASTER, since they're
never called up as a saved game, always
remain pristine.) Write a new batch file
(called TOM2.BAT) which looks like this:
"rendir tom2 savegame
ultima6
rendir savegame tom2"
In a matter of minutes, you have a new
saved game.

Batch Files and
Troubleshooting
There is one problem, though not a
major one, with this approach. If your
computer crashes during the course of a
game, then the next time you reboot you
will find that you already have an existing
\SAVEGAME subdirectory.
For instance, if Tom were playing when
the game crashed and Harry happens to
be the next one to play, the batch files
won't work quite right. Instead, the RENDIR program will abort and Harry will
find himself playing Tom's game. (Other
directory renamers might have other
results, but this is what will happen with
most of them.)

You can get around this difficulty by
making your batch files a little more
sophisticated. Instead of the very simple
batch files described earlier, you can
write slightly more complex ones. Using
TOM.BAT above as an example, we instead write the following:
"ECHO OFF
IF EXIST C:\ULTIMA6\SAVEGAME\*.*
GOTO PROBLEM
RENDIR TOM SAVEGAME
ULTIMA6
RENDIR SAVEGAME TOM
GOTO END
:PROBLEM
ECHO Problem! \SAVEGAME Directory
Already Exists!
ECHO Return to DOS, find out which
saved-game directory is
ECHO still called \SAVEGAME, and
return it to its proper
ECHO name. Then you can try again.
GOTO END
:END
With this new approach, the batch file
checks for the presence of any files in
the \SAVEGAME directory. If files exist in
a \SAVEGAME directory, it means that
the \SAVEGAME subdirectory was not
changed back to its proper name, and

that something has gone a little wrong...
and that's when the batch file notifies
you of the problem.
(Unfortunately, DOS's "if exist" batch
programming command — at least in the
DOS 3.2 I use — can check for files in
directories, but not for the directories
themselves. If there's a \SAVEGAME
directory with nothing in it, things can
still be fouled up, but that eventuality is
not likely to occur.)
Naturally, if your game resides in some
directory other than C:\ULTIMA6, you'd
have to edit the command shown above.
For example, if you installed your Ultima
VI game in C:\GAMES\ULTIMA, the
second line of the batch file above would
need to read:
"IF EXIST C:GAMES\ULTIMA\SAVEGAME\*.* GOTO PROBLEM"
So, if you use this sort of batch file, the
next time you have a system crash
during play, regardless of who next
launches the game, the error message
will come up and you'll know to fix your
directory.
If you have some batch programming

Designer's Notes

experience, you can instead write your
batch files to correct such problems automatically. (You don't have to have much
batch programming experience. / don't.)
For instance, in a setup where Tom, Dick
and Harry have saved games, each
would have a batch file like the following,
which is written for Tom:
"ECHO OFF
IF EXIST C:\ULTIMA6\SAVEGAME\*.*
GOTO PROBLEM
RENDIR TOM SAVEGAME
ULTIMA6
RENDIR SAVEGAME TOM
GOTO END
:PROBLEM
ECHO One moment, correcting directory
problem...
GOTO TOM
:TOM
IF EXIST C:\ULTIMA6\TOM\*.* GO TO
DICK
ULTIMA6
RENDIR SAVEGAME TOM
GO TO END
:DICK
IF EXISTS C:\ULTIMA6\DICK\*.* GOTO
HARRY
RENDIR SAVEGAME DICK
RENDIR TOM SAVEGAME
ULTIMA6

RENDIR SAVEGAME TOM
GOTO END
:HARRY
IF EXIST C: \ULTIMA6 \HARRY\*.*
GOTO WHOA
RENDIR SAVEGAME HARRY
RENDIR TOM SAVEGAME
ULTIMA6
RENDIR SAVEGAME TOM
GOTO END
:WHOA
ECHO
ECHO — We have a slight problem here.
ECHO
ECHO All three saved games (\TOM,
\DICK and \HARRY) exist
ECHO in this directory, and so does the
\SAVEGAME
ECHO subdirectory. Something has gone
wrong, and it's
ECHO beyond the abilities of this batch
file to fix things.
ECHO You'll need to figure it out yourself. Best of luck....
ECHO
****** ********** ******* **********
GOTO END
:END
This approach would fix most problems
resulting from a \SAVEGAME\ directory

existing where it shouldn't. It would have
to be edited for each new saved game
added to your setup, however.
As with the last batch file, this file
would still fail if an empty \SAVEGAME
subdirectory were inserted in your Ultima VI directory. However, the opening
screen would come up without the "Journey Onward" option, just as when you
first started playing and hadn't yet
created a character. So, you would
never find yourself playing someone
else's game — you would know right
away something had gone wrong.

Last Note
There is such a thing as being too successful. Remember that the saved game
files of Ultima VI and The Savage Empire start off comparatively small but get
larger as the games progress. Just keep
an eye on the amount of room they're
taking up (that amount will gradually increase) and you should have no problems. But if you pay no attention to this,
you may find the games eating all your
available disk space at the same rate
they eat up all your available time.

Review

A Different Set of "Jaws"
Azeroth's Just Another War in Space
by Hosea Battles, Jr.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

T

Just Another War In Space
Atari ST, 1 Meg required
$49.95
Robert Parkins
Azeroth Publishing
Issaquah, WA 98027

he Imperial ship Avenger warped out of space

near Lovigir, ready for battle. Scouting reports
' indicated only an Orion class Federation ship
in the area, easy prey for an Epsilon class from a superior civilization. When the inevitable fog of war
cleared and the Avenger crawled at a pace slower
than light, her commander discovered that he
faced, not one, but three Orions! As missiles exploded around his ship, the Imperial Commander
wondered about his empress' claim that this would
be "Just Another War in Space!"

Newton Kids On The Block
Just Another War in Space (JAWS) is a strategicand tactical-level space combat game for one player,
in which one can owe allegiance to either the Empire or the
Federation. It is not an arcade game by any means. One must
think out strategic and tactical operations in order to successfully
complete a scenario. Spacecraft and missiles strictly follow Newtonian laws of physics. For example, if one accelerates to 17,000
meters per second (m/s) on a heading of 90 degrees, then opposite force must be applied by accelerating to 17,000 (m/s) on
a heading of 270 degrees in order to come to a complete stop.
Planetary bodies also exert gravitational pull on ships and missiles, so the risk of crashing into one when passing too close is
emphatically real. These spacecraft are not equipped for atmospheric operations.

Meaty Rules
The documentation is excellent and thoroughly covers all
aspects of gameplay in 136 pages. It not only includes the requisite index and charts, but even the mathematical equations used
for specific functions (such as fuel consumption and missile hit
probability). Spiral-bound with a blue cover displaying the Imperial crest, the manual also includes an insert with a detailed
(Continued on page 46)

Review

Battle Chess II: Chinese Chess
by Ken St. Andre

Battle Chess II: Chinese Chess
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
IBM
# OF PLAYERS: 1 or 2 (modem play)
$49.95
PRICE:
Greg Christensen
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:
Interplay Productions
Santa Ana, CA

C

hinese chess is to chess as Chinese checkers is to checkers — more complicated. The mind-set needed for success
simply isn't the same. No matter how good one might be
in our own, western chess variant — the chess of the "Mad
Queen" — he is often reduced to the novice level when trying to
play Chinese chess. The two games are very different.

Honorable Ancestor
Interplay had a well-deserved hit in 1988 and 1989 with Battle
Chess, a strong chess program featuring detailed and humorous
animation of the chess pieces in action. Now, there is Battle
Chess II: Chinese Chess, featuring even more beautiful and
humorous animations of chess armies in action.
First, the chess board itself is not the familiar grid of black and
white squares. Instead it is a green field divided vertically by nine
straight lines and horizontally by ten. In the center is a river dividing the two "kingdoms." The pieces are not placed inside the
squares, but on the points where lines intersect.
Second, the pieces are different. Instead of King, Queen,
Bishop, Knight, Rook and Pawn, Chinese chess uses King, Counsellor, Minister, Knight, Rook, Cannon and Pawn. Both chess
variants have 16 pieces per side, but there the similarity ends.

The only piece in the lot that moves exactly the same as in
western chess is the Rook. There are strange differences, too,
such as the Cannon. The Cannon can move like a Rook, but
must use a screening piece in between to enable the Cannon to
jump and land on the other unit. Ministers and Counsellors move
diagonally like weak Bishops. Ministers move two spaces and
cannot cross the river. Counsellors only move one, and must
remain within the Palace.
Then there are the "Palace" areas of the board, areas centered
upon the King and including one point to both left and right of
him and two points in front (forming its own little square).
Chinese Kings and Counsellors have to stay inside the Palace.
There are several other key differences in movement and placement of the pieces, but all that can be obtained from the manual.
The important point is that because the pieces move more slowly, and the board is actually larger, the game is slower than
chess. To master the fine points requires patience.
Players can play against the program from either side of the
board, play face-to-face by taking turns or play long-distance via
modem. So, there should never be a shortage of opponents.
Like Battle Chess, the real fun of this game comes in watching

Review

the animated combat when one piece takes another. There is
swordplay, spearplay, fisticuffs and magic aplenty. Rooks usually
look like warriors in chariots, but transform into fire-breathing
dragons for combat. Portly Ministers deflate amusingly when
pricked by the spear of a Pawn. King vs. Cannon is a real
surprise package. Scott Bieser, Greg Christensen and Bryan Carson tried to follow one basic rule in designing all these animations: K.I.F.S. (Keep It Funny, Scott). The animations always
made this reviewer smile and sometimes made him laugh.

Pictographic Notation?
The chess notation was a problem. I don't know if the designers adapted an original Chinese notation or made up their own,
but it is a difficult notation to follow. It works okay as a copy
protection scheme (input red move 3 from game 4), but as a
way of describing how pieces move on the board, it is too confusing. (This reviewer tried to play out the sample games. Even the
shortest one, Morphy vs. Ching Ti, did not
work properly.) It would have helped if they
had limited themselves to a single orientation
and used a simple algebraic notation such as
(piece on) e3-e4 instead of P3F1 (i.e. pawn on
line 3 from the right moves forward 1).
In keeping with the general slowness of the
Chinese game, the animations on a Tandy
take a long time to load. One finds himself
waiting around a lot while disk drives whir. It

will no doubt work better with faster machines or on a hard drive.
BattleChess II: Chinese Chess supports EGA, CGA, and Tandy
graphics along with Tandy sound. The player can use mouse,
keyboard, or joystick to indicate moves. All legal moves are
shown as ghost images of the cursor box onscreen. Some very
nice musical riffs also accompany the movement of each piece.

Checkered Observations
After stating all this, this reviewer must admit that he did not
like Battle Chess ll as much as Battle Chess I. The animations
on the first game were funnier overall than those on the second,
and nothing in the second game even remotely approaches the
slinky sex appeal of the queens in the original. The chess notation did not work as well for transcribing games and the nature
of play is such that only a few pieces, such as the Cannons and
the Rooks, get most of the action, and many amusing faceups
will never occur. The slow pace of the game
gives the game a "draggy" feeling. The
manual, while fairly clear, isn't quite as easy to
grasp as the first one was (probably because
most people already have a little background in western chess, but none in
Chinese chess — Ed). These are all little
things, but they work together to decrease
satisfaction with the game. Technically excellent in many ways, Battle Chess ll simply isn't
as much fun as its predecessor. Of course,
someone in China might totally disagree.

Review

F

ireTeam 2200 is a

game of ground
combat...23rd century style. FireTeam
2200 can be played as
a solo game versus the
computer, as a twoplayer game via null
modem cable or
head-to-head via modem play.
The scenarios chart the
campaigns of a mercenary FireTeam under the
employment of the
Lumina Faction through
three different planets:
Hubble's World, Valvana
and Akilios. Each campaign is composed of
three to six missions
where one's "FireTeam"
battles those of rival corporations for control of
planetary resources. The
game takes place at the
tactical level where forces consist of platoonto squad-sized infantry
units and individual, premade vehicles. The
scale of the game is
equally tactical at 15
seconds per turn and
100 meters per square.
Although a square grid
delineates movement,
there is a penalty for
diagonal moves so that
the distortions inherent
in so many other square
movement systems are
not present. Role-playing
wargamers (if that's not
an oxymoron) will want
to take a careful look at
this game, as it plays
similarly to the board
games Car Wars and
the old SPI game Tank!.

Gather the
Forces
The heart of FireTeam
2200 is the concept of
the FireTeam. One assembles up to eight
"units" to make a FireTeam, of which one unit
(the command vehicle)
represents the player.
Depending on the mission, up to eight additional units may be attached
to the FireTeam. One
has 300 kilocredits to

purchase a wide array of
land, air and infantry
units as well as recruit
mercenary officers to
command them.

A Different Breed of
Starship Troopers
FireTeam 2200
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

FireTeam 2200
IBM
$49.95
Dave Nielsen
SimSystems
1311 Castro Street
San Francisco, CA 94114-3620
(415) 824-3112

by Jesse W. Cheng

To assist in deciding
which units to purchase,
there is a nice unit summary review where one
can pull up the specs on
each type of unit a la
Jane's Fighting
Vehicles. Information includes a silhouette of
the vehicle; data on
primary, secondary, and
tertiary armament;
armor protection for
front, rear, and sides of
the vehicle; and a summary of vehicle performance. There is a large
variety of units to
choose from, including
heavy, medium, light,
laser and missile tanks;
attack or recon choppers; hovercraft; armored personnel carriers; trucks; jeeps and
self-propelled artillery, to
name a few. Infantry
squads/sections/platoons with varying levels of experience
ranging from militia to
elite status are also available.

Looking for a
Few Good
Leaders
In the 23rd century, battle technology has
evolved to the point that
all vehicular combat
functions are controlled
by a single pilot (like
MechWarrior in the
BattleTech universe).
So, as one purchases
vehicles, one must also
carefully hire pilots to
command them. Higherranking pilots will have
better driving and gunnery skills but will
charge more for their services per mission. Conversely, lower-ranking
pilots won't be as adept
in combat but will
charge very little to join
your FireTeam.

Review

FireTeam members who distinguish themselves may receive
commendations and advances in rank for successful completion
of missions. Advances in rank are based on: 1) glory points for
destroying units; 2) honor for performing a mission successfully;
3) wealth points for performing the mission successfully and
recovering various artifacts/resources; and 4) an efficiency rating
based on winning percentage. As rank advances so does combat
skill. It is also possible to change the composition of the FireTeam by adding units (up to eight) or by scrapping units for
money (after depreciation, of course) to buy new units.

The Planning Stages
The missions are quite varied and include all types of combat
situations, including meeting engagements between two opposing FireTeams; garrison duty to protect valuable company assets; convoy escort of company vehicles through hostile territory;
patrol/recon missions to disrupt enemy positions; rear guard actions; kidnapping missions and city combat. Different missions
will pay the mercenaries based on the degree of difficulty and
destroyed enemy units.
Each mission starts with a pre-mission briefing that includes a
satellite uplink which displays the strategic situation map of eight
by twelve kilometers. For additional information on the mission,
one can pull up the Mission Objectives Report which outlines via
blinking dots the objectives to fulfill and the Intelligence Report
that provides information on enemy intentions and suspected
positions. After a mission is completed, the element of surprise is
lost when replayed, so there is plenty of incentive to "do it right

the first time." It is disappointing that FireTeam 2200 doesn't
have a scenario builder, as many tools seem to be provided for
just such a feature.

Boot Camp, Keyboard Style
FireTeam 2200 is a complicated game. It is not the type of
game one can just fire up and start playing without reading
through the first part of the manual. There is no mouse interface
and all movement and fire commands are input via the keyboard, which can be cumbersome at times. Fortunately, the
documentation is excellent, with a nice manual/tip sheet, and the
first few missions are tutorials to help familiarize players with
basic commands/keystrokes to move units, fire weapons, scan
enemy units, etc. Moreover, most commands can be accessed
within three keystrokes.

What You See Is What You Shoot
As the FireTeam embarks on a mission, the vehicle system display (where all of the command control and tactical monitoring
occurs) is activated. The main battle display takes up most of
the left two-thirds of the screen and shows all the local terrain
within a 1.5-kilometer-square grid surrounding the currently controlled vehicle. Vehicles are represented by icons and the direction of the turret indicates facing. Areas not within the line of
sight of the controlled unit are blacked out, giving a nice
fog-of-war feel reminiscent of the game Empire.
The hi-res EGA graphics are fair with a wide assortment of terrain including woods, urban, water, road and hills that affect

Review

movement and cover. However, the vehicle icons are disappointing and appear as small blips on the screen. The right one-third
of the screen (from top to bottom) has: 1) Target Tracking display which gives a list of all the vehicles that are within line of
sight of the command vehicle; 2) System Status display where
one can toggle between a top-down view of the remaining armor
and ammo of a vehicle, critical systems status report and a FireTeam status roll call of remaining members still available to fight;
and 3) running summary of battlefield events like destroyed units
and target hit chance.
FireTeam 2200 uses simultaneous movement/fire and can be
set to automatic updates every 3, 6, 9 or 12 seconds for a realtime game or updates only when the player selects the F9 key
for a more leisurely strategy game. Unit tasks that can be assigned include assault, probe, defend, convoy and cover, to
name a few. Players can also data-link to another vehicle in order
to see what the other vehicle is seeing and reassign targeting
priority. Unfortunately, there is no provision for a composite view
of what all units see and one cannot data-link directly from
vehicle to vehicle but must always go back to the command
vehicle, which wastes two turns where no orders can be given.

Armor and Hammer
The armor system is handled nicely with specialized sheaths of
composite armor that must be blown away piece by piece to
penetrate the critical systems in the interior (the power plant,
computer, propulsion systems, pilot, etc.) of the vehicle. In this
respect, the game plays a lot like Car Wars with armor damage

from weapons fire accruing as "hit points" on the sides of the
vehicle. The ordnance is also impressive with powerful particle
beam weapons; self-propelled artillery (SPA) with either high explosive (HE), armor piercing (AP) or smoke shells; machine
guns; missiles and mortars, to name a few. However, the game
goes one step further in sophistication, with different types of
ordnance having a characteristic damage pattern based on
penetration, hit points and anti-personnel effectiveness. So an HE
shell fired from a 105mm autocannon may have a higher hit
point damage rating than a pulse laser, but only peels the
vehicular armor away layer by layer while the laser beam
penetrates the armor more deeply in a straight line. The AdLib
sound effects of the ordnance firing are superb, from the whoosh
of a wire-guided missile to the staccato rounds of machine gun
fire. One may wonder how any person could survive such an environment for long. In actuality, very few of the officers perish,
but are able to eject out of their vehicles to fight another day.
Thus, a battle frequently resembles a rerun of the A-Team where
a lot of damage is done but no one is actually killed. A nice
touch for the pacifists in the audience.

Parting Shots, Future Missions
In summary, FireTeam 2200 was able to combine wargaming
"realism," role-playing, solid EGA graphics and excellent AdLib
sounds into a nice package. Despite the game's weaknesses (no
scenario builder, lack of mouse support and a bit of complexity),
this game would be a worthy addition to any wargame
grognard's collection. Plus, Simsystems plans a release of a
scenario builder later this year. Stay tuned....

More
Review

Than a Game,
It's a Double Feature!
Elvira — Mistress of the Dark
by Leah Wesolowski
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Elvira: Mistress of the Dark
IBM, Amiga
$59.95
Mike Woodroffe, Alan Bridgman,
Keith Wadhams, Simon Woodroffe
Accolade
San Jose, CA 95128

sumed, turn into spell scrolls;
one for lightning bolts and
one for fireballs), the game
really begins. (Hint: if not consumed immediately, those potions will not turn into spells
and will not become usable!).

Isn't It Magic?
In Elvira, magic can be
used to create light, heal the
old "aching body," and fight the hordes of monsters which will be
encountered (there are even one or two that must be defeated
solely with magic). Unlike the average fantasy adventure, the
character does not cast his own spells. Instead, gathering certain
ingredients, bringing them to Elvira and having her "mix" the
spells so they can be used is the player's task. These spells take
the form of potions, cakes, balls and scrolls. In a way, this is a
nice twist on magic using, but if one can't figure out how to get
the "Lard Ass" (yes, that's correct) out of the kitchen the game
might never be finished (Hint: she hates salt). There are very
limited resources as far as ingredients go, so players will have to
use foresight to ensure that they will have enough to create
much needed spells later on in the game. This reviewer spent a
lot of time in Elvira's kitchen (not unlike at her own home, but
thank goodness she didn't have Elvira's dishes to do).
fired by the "Hostess With The Mostest" to prevent her
great-great grandmother's return from the grave, the
player's task in Elvira: Mistress of the Dark is to locate
six keys hidden on the grounds of Castle Killbragant. Keys in
hand, one goes after what is really being advertised here,
Elvira's chest (ahem) which contains the "scroll of spiritual
mastery" which is used on Emelda to ensure her destruction.

H

With that goal in mind, enter Killbragant. Oops, first meet the
gate keeper (who promptly throws the player in the dungeon).
Never fear, however, Elvira's here! The "Leg Night Hostess"
comes to the rescue by way of a delightful animated sequence
and, after chastising the player for incompetence and making
remarks about tying your weenie(!) into a granny knot, she indicates that she will be in the kitchen waiting. For what? Why, for
the player to locate her cookbook so that she can whip up a few
useful spells for the quest.
At that point, just outside the castle and armed with a "little
knife," an empty knapsack and two potions (which, when con-

Elvira is copy-protected by its spell book. Normally, this might
not even garner a mention, but this really works as a "theme" of
the game, and teaches players the exact ingredients and their
amounts needed to create a spell during the game. If you give Elvira the wrong ingredients, or you don't have the correct
amounts, she will get hostile and shut down the game, saying
"You must not have the spell book. I'm not going to play with
you anymore." This can become very frustrating, especially when
the correct items are easy to distinguish, but not always the correct amounts.

"Hack" and "Slash"
The combat in Elvira is very similar to the combat in Dungeon
Master in that there are gadgets which are used to designate one
of two choices, block/parry for defense or lunge/hack for offense. One can also click on the screen to accomplish the same
maneuvers (which is somewhat easier during the defensive portions of combat). For offense, one is seemingly able to strike

Review

more often when alternating choices of "lunge" and "hack." While
hacking away at foes, their sustained damage appears in a window just below the combat gadgets and, as they hack back, the
player's sustained damage is displayed in a window above the
combat gadgets. This is an excellent little feature and worth mentioning since players don't have to keep checking their stats on
the status line, away from combat.

Elvira's "Looks"
The graphics and animations in this game are excellent,
provided one enjoys blood and guts galore. When first playing Elvira, this reviewer was shocked at how detailed these gory
graphics were. As play progressed the thought of seeing one's
character's head surface in a bubbling cauldron for the
umpteenth time could cause some queasiness.
In some circumstances, actively participating with some very
disturbing images cannot be avoided. For instance, to have Elvira cook up certain spells, one must have a maggot or two in
the inventory (yecch!). Of course, to get the maggots, one must
click on the gardener's corpse and pick up the maggots that are
writhing within his decaying husk (this is pretty gross stuff!).
There are other unavoidable animated gorefests which one is
forced to watch. These include having the player's eyes
scratched out by a falcon, pounding a wooden stake into a vampire and the all-too-common decapitations. These cannot be
avoided as they involve either a victory or, worse, the player's
demise (in which case, while waiting for the game to reload from
the last save, the gruesome image remains on screen). For this

reason, it was impossible to play Elvira while the children were
awake, as these images are simply not acceptable for two-yearolds!
While there are lots of sick sequences in Elvira, there are also
some very funny animations, too. One favorite is watching Elvira
squeeze down a small dumbwaiter and then crawl back out.
(This reviewer wanted to tell her that she shouldn't be doing that
sort of thing in such a skimpy dress...).
Another outstanding feature about Elvira is the music. The
music serves well to tighten nerves and cause skin to crawl, in
the best horror traditions. There is even a different, somehow appropriate tune for each area of the castle.

Rounding Out Elvira
Overall, Elvira: Mistress of the Dark is a noteworthy game.
While this reviewer would like to have seen more useful spell ingredients (especially dogwood bark) or more spells which increase lifepoints, the puzzles are, at least, logical in that no grasping at straws is required to solve them. Also, while the combat requires some skill (one must get the timing just right to do well in
this area), it is a surmountable problem and a learnable skill.
However, the weak points of the scavenger-hunt spells, the
limited availability of ingredients and the subject matter of the
graphics (good art, bad taste) could make this one for the vaults
of some adventure game players. Still, with strong points like
detailed graphics (five disks full of them), genuine "mood" music
and, of course, Elvira's beautiful body, this game is, like its
namesake, something to notice for many of us.

Game Hints

W

ell, spring is here. The
days are getting longer
and Fred, as usual, is
grumbling again. You can hardly
blame him, though. After all,
he's part Grue, and we all know
that light is the bane of any
Grue's existence. And speaking
of banes...

resistance, and spells may not
work against them in any case.
Quite a few have no resistance,
however, and you don't want
your spells fizzling in those instances. Consequently, add points to
Oratory whenever possible.
One of the nicer features of the
game is that characters' weapon
abilities increase with use, apart
from any points you put into
them at level gain. This means
you can use your precious
points (spellcasters tend not to
get many) to increase spell-related skills most of the time, and
have the spellcasters increase
weapon ability mainly from combat.

Bane Of The Cosmic Forge
was reviewed in a previous issue,
so this article is devoted mainly
to tips and hints to help you get
through the game with a minimum of fuss and frustration.
Your first consideration, and a
very important one, is the team
you put together. Naturally, you
want a solid group that can survive the rigors of the dungeons,
and believe me, it does get
rigorous. This is especially true
in the latter stages of the game,
where combat tends to become
rather unbalanced and you need
really powerful characters to
stand up to the critters waiting
for you.

Scorpion's Tate
Scorpia Forges

For that reason, you should
concentrate on having "specials"
in your party: samurai, ninja, bishops,
lords, etc. It is better to have these from
the start, rather than convert characters
to another class later. Examine the chart
in the manual to see which races have
the best chances to become specials and
keep trying during roll-up until you get
what you want. Patience is necessary
here, but eventually your efforts will be
rewarded.
My own party consisted of two samurai,
a ninja, two bishops and a mage, and it
was a very successful group. None of
them, by the way, was human. Two were
Dracon (a samurai and ninja) one Felpurr (samurai), one Gnome (bishop),
one Rawulf (bishop) and one Faerie
(mage).
That doesn't mean your own should be
exactly the same, of course; a different
mix might work better for you. However,
I do recommend the samurai and ninja in
particular, for these reasons: they receive
multiple attacks sooner than other fighting classes, they have the ability to do an
"instant kill," and they learn magic spells
as they increase in level. Ninja also have
thieving abilities, making them handy
when it comes to disarming traps on
chests.
The one drawback to having samurai is
that it won't be until fairly late in the
game that they can obtain really decent

Cosmic

armor; most of the equipment is more
for the fighters, lords, and valkyries (who
can wear/use most anything). The ninja
get no special armor at all (outside of the
ninja garb they begin with), but as their
armor class goes down "naturally" as
they achieve higher levels, that is not too
much of a problem, and ninja can wear a
number of miscellaneous items that
lower armor class, as well.
Veteran Wizardry players know that
bishops learn both mage and priest
spells, and that still holds true here, even
though the magic system is quite different from previous Wizardries. Also as
before, bishops will advance slower in
spells, but their ability to have both sets
outweighs that disadvantage.
The most important thing with any spell
caster is raising his/her magic skill and
Oratory as quickly as possible. Experimentation showed me that the spells
offered on level gain were not tied to the
level of the mage, but rather to how high
the relevant magic skill was: Thaumaturgy for mages, Theology for priests, and
so on. The higher these skills, the better
the spells offered when a spellcaster went
up a level.
Oratory should not be overlooked; the
higher this skill, the less chance there is
of a spell failing, or worse, backfiring
onto the party (usually with very nasty
results). Some monsters have magic

Of course, with actual fighting
types such as samurai or lords,
you would be putting most of
the points into a weapon skill.
Don't disperse points here;
choose a particular weapon class
and stick with it until maxxed
out, unless you come across a
really neat weapon (say, the
Spear of Death) in which case,
go ahead and start adding points
to that weapon type. Ninja, by the way,
do really well bare-handed; my boy Yoshi
went through the entire game using just
his hands and feet, and was quite devastating by the end of the scenario.
Save often! I cannot stress that too
much. There is no way to replace a dead
party member, short of resurrection potions or amulets, so one or more deaths
means restoring the game — unless you
want to run around short-handed, a practice I do not recommend. Furthermore,
there is no truly safe place to camp out,
and your rest is subject to interruptions
at any time. Hostile critters can really do
a number on a weakened party (or a
weekend party), so always save before
camping out.
There are a lot of doors and grates in
the dungeons. All doors can be opened
sooner or later, using keys, special objects, spells or lockpicking. Grates are a
different matter, however. The pesky
thing about grates is that you can never
be sure what, if anything, will open one.
This is especially annoying as some
grates can't be opened at all, and there's
no way to tell which is which. You just
have to go with trial and error, using
keys or inventory items on various grates
to see what will work.
Save before going through a door or
grate, because you can expect some-

Game Hints

thing hostile is waiting for you on the
other side. Then make certain you walk
all over the room and examine each wall
carefully. Sometimes there are buttons
you can push that will open up secret
passageways or reveal a treasure chest,
but if you don't check the walls, you
won't find the buttons. A high skill in
scouting or having the Detect Secret
spell active can alert you to something
special (usually a nearby button), but
early in the game you must often rely on
doing a thorough look-see on your own.
In particular, make note of any writing or
graffiti on the walls.
Always keep a couple of inventory slots
open so you can pick up vital items. Fortunately, the game won't let you leave
one behind, but if you don't have room
for it, you'll be forced to re-boot since
you can't get out of the treasure screen
until you've taken the necessary object.
Unfortunately, many of these special
items stick around in your inventory long
after they've served their purpose, leading to inventory clutter. You can't drop
them (even when they are no longer
needed), so try to carry around with you
only what you really need. Sell excess
equipment, armor and the like to keep
some room open in the backpacks.
There's no auto-mapping, alas, so you'll
have to do your own cartography. Fortunately, most areas are simple to map
out; the only places likely to give you
any trouble are the pyramid and the
River Styx. The pyramid is a problem because there is much up and down, along
with a lot of walking around the edges,
not to mention hostile Amazons (and
other critters) popping up here and there.
All you can do is take your time, go slowly and map with extreme care.
The Styx is another matter. It is overflowing (heh heh) with set encounters,
and you'll have to do a lot of fighting to
clear the place out. Once you've done
that, however, you can move along the
river with very few random encounters
and do a thorough job of mapping. The
river, while long, wraps around itself, so
you can't really get lost (confused,
maybe, but not lost).
Speaking of combat, one thing to be
careful of is the lingering spell. Conditions such as madness, silence, nausea
and so on do not end when the fighting
stops. They can hang on for a long time,
making subsequent encounters rather unpleasant for your party.
Some of them can be cured by the appropriate spell, if you have it. If not, you
can always try camping out. Usually, a

"full night's rest" will take care of these
conditions. However, resting won't do any
thing for petrified members, and sleeping
while poisoned is a good way to die.
Bane has several sections and is not
especially linear. Expect to do some running around back and forth between different areas for much of the game. Here
are some things to keep in mind.
Castle: There are a lot of grates here,
and not all can be opened. The iron,
chrome, copper and spade keys work
only on doors. The RAMM key will open
two particular grates. A couple of other
grates can be opened only much later in
the game, when you've been out to other
places and obtained the necessary objects.
What you especially need to do in the
castle is find your way under the altar of
RAMM, as well as picking up several
RAMM articles. This will help with the top
level of the belfry, as well as getting into

Keep in mind Indy Jones and the Lost
Ark.... By the way, if you give the Queen
a present on your first visit, you can talk
to her second in command who has
some interesting items for sale.
River Styx (beyond the Skull door):
Do the Island of Minos completely before
leaving it. You particularly want to find
the Book of Sirens before taking the raft
ride. Locate the sunken treasure, which
has an important key. Make sure you collect three cylinders of ashes. Visit the Isle
of the Dead last, as it a very tough
place. The bottom level holds four special crypts that contain the very best
armor and weapons, and the combats
will be hard. Make sure the first person
in the party is wearing the silver cross.
Finally, be careful down there; beyond a
certain point, there is no going back.
Forest: Talk with the Faerie Queen and
the Oracle (absolute musts). Check out
the abandoned ship thoroughly. The rock
of reflection is also important. When
you've finished the forest, it's time to
bluff your way past the grate into the
RAMM temple for the end game.
RAMM Temple: Very nasty place. You
will have to endure a series of tough encounters as you make your way through
the rooms to the final showdown. What
path you choose does not seem to matter too much (at least not in my experience). Have as many protective
spells up as possible when you take your
little tour, and be ready with Silence and
Anti-magic; most of what you face in
here will have spellcasting abilities.

the Captain's Den (an absolute must).
Don't overlook L'Montes, who has something you need. Beware of the Northwest
tower; don't go up the stairs until your
party has gone up a few levels in experience.
Mines (across the chasm): The impor
tant things here are defeating the rubber
beasts, freeing the face in the crystal
(note: four entries to the crystal), repairing the catapult and obtaining a certain
gem. Make sure "Detect Secret" is up
when you walk through dark areas (not
many of these and they are simple, really). Special note: even if you get the
drawbridge down, you will not be able to
take the pirate's treasure (this is an optional part of the game and you can skip
it).
Pyramid (home of the Amazon
women): Your main object is to obtain
the second gem. To do this, you will
have to find a bone key and an idol.

You may find the ending a bit of a
downer, since you don't, after all, get
what you came for. However, you can at
least go roaming around to check out
anything you skipped the first time
through the game. Which, I suppose, is
better than nothing.
Well, I see by the invisible clock on the
wall it's that time again to depart.
Remember, if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the
following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu).
On GEnie: Stop by the Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia to reach the Games
RT).
By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed,
stamped envelope if you live in the
United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1991 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Review

TITLE:
Dungeon Master II: Chaos Strikes Back
SYSTEM:
Amiga, Atari ST, IBM
PRICE:
$39.95
DESIGNERS:
Doug Bell, Joe Linhoff, Mike Newton
ILLUSTRATORS: Andy Jaros, David Simon
PUBLISHER:
FTL Software
San Diego, CA

Chaos Strikes Back

Another Brick in the Wall
by Derek Godat

W

ith

a hand that was the veteran of a thousand duels,
the warrior loosed his blade in its scabbard and surveyed the dim interior of the software shop. A full
two score of battle-hardened computer nerds glared unblinking from their positions across a bleak expanse of carpet. Ignoring the menace of their bespectacled eyes, the stalwart
warrior marched onward, a myriad of weapons, ornaments
and trophies jangling with each forward stride.

Wordlessly, the sea of brigands, cutthroats and swaggering
joystick-wagglers parted, allowing the warrior to confront a
diminutive figure cowering in their midst. As the shadow of
the warrior fell across him, the dwarfish salesman jittered in
fear. The precise instant the warrior's fiery eyes fell upon
him, the shopkeeper raised a battered cardboard box to ward
off the impending confrontation.
"D-D-Dungeon Master T-Two?" the dwarf whined. "Last ccopy, oh great and honored m-m-master. S-Special discount tt-t-today..."
With unnerving swiftness, a gloved fist shot out and tore the
box from the shopkeeper, sending shreds of cellophane wrapper into the air. Breathless minutes passed as the warrior
sounded out the words embossed upon the package, using a
tiny stiletto to point out each letter.

The warrior had crossed vast oceans, battled ghouls innumerable and trekked for leagues overland to reach this
spot and to open this very box. His nigh-impossible quest
was tantalizingly close to completion. A rumbling voice of
steel spoke the title with grave finality.
"Expansion Set Number One?"
A gale of foul air was released as the congregated nerds
gasped for breath. The dwarven software salesman strained
out a smile and, with a trembling demeanor, was about to
recommend a hint booklet when, without warning, the warrior exploded in a blood-mad whirlwind of fury!
"By Grak the Heavy-Handed! By Yurt the Demonic Scourge!!
By N'rgka and Xitl and Tst'K'Mo'Cad'Lth the Unpronounceable!!! This cannot be! I have crossed vast oceans! Battled
ghouls innumerable! Trekked leagues overland! And for
what? A mere expansion disk! By Ballab the Unreasonably
Upset, heads will roll for this!"

"Heads Will Roll!"-Playing
While this reviewer's reaction was slightly less wrathful than the
fictional warrior's, the trials undergone were greater, by far.
Likewise, to the seasoned adventurer, Dungeon Master 11

Review

provides more in the same vein. Chaos Strikes Back is no bet
ter and no worse than the original game, so there will be few
surprises in store for Dungeon Master veterans.
After nearly three years of production, Chaos Strikes Back, the
heralded sequel to the original Dungeon Master, is but an Expansion Set (i.e., more of the same repackaged). Although not a totally disappointing product, Chaos Strikes Back fails to inject
any improvement or innovation into the Dungeon Master system. It is indeed a continuation of the tale spun in the original
Dungeon Master, though much is similar to the first game. One
of these similarities, the title character, Chaos, is once again
responsible for the gamer's dungeoneering trials and tribulations.

Chaos and the Ultimate Bad Guy
It seems that this malicious magician was farsighted enough to
have predicted his own demise at the conclusion of the first adventure. He has taken steps to ensure his revivification, however,
by means of four nasty pieces of Corbum Ore. Unstopped, these
Corbum brickettes will drain enough magical Manna from the
universe to free old Chaos and his not-very-nice cronies. If the
heroes of Dungeon Master are unable to prevent this
catastrophe, their lives, the universe... and everything are all forfeit. To paraphrase, it is the well-worn tale of the really, really
bad wizard versus the really, really good adventurers, with the entire world hanging in the balance, as always.
This finely crafted original scenario aside, Chaos Strikes Back
is naught but another set of mazes, monsters, and magical items
coupled with some nifty utilities. Chief among these utilities is the
portrait editor, which allows any player to repaint his or her
champion's portraits. While it is certainly not DeluxePaint III, the
portrait editor gets the job done swiftly and painlessly, and features convenient fill and undo options.

Get A Clue!
Another handy utility comes in the form of a Hint Oracle.
Should the situation arise, and it undoubtedly will, when the
gamer has exhausted all options and is hopelessly beating his or
her overtaxed skull against the dungeon walls, help is close at
hand. The Hint Oracle provides salvation in the form of helpful
verses, carefully sculpted to give the gamer a shove in the right
direction while salvaging the intimate secrets of the dungeon.
Rounding out the Utility Disk included in Dungeon Master II is
a lengthy animated introduction. While this graphic preface is perfectly lovely where it sits, this gamer wonders why it does not
reside on the actual game disk itself, as part of the opening
credits. Psygnosis Software has proven in their games that an
animated opening sequence can be quite effective in establishing
mood. The same effect could have easily been brought about
with this game. Similarly, the Hint Oracle and portrait editor
would be less out of place if it were possible to access these
tools from within the dungeon, thus eliminating the need to reboot if the party becomes trapped or if graphic touch-ups are in
order. The removal of the Dungeon Master utilities to a separate
disk does nothing to stifle enjoyment on the adventure, but one
wonders why these common-sense changes were not made.

First Level Characters Need Not Apply
This adventurer does not recommend Chaos Strikes Back to inexperienced or amateur role-playing gamers. Indeed, the game itself gives little assistance to the first-time dungeon explorer.
Though the packaging states that the original Dungeon Master
is required, this is untrue. What Chaos lacks which the original
provides is a reprinting of the first game's storyline and magical

runes, along with a few easy labyrinth levels for
dungeon-masters-in-training. Unfortunately, the monsters, traps, and puzzles
presented within are all of the most heinous, unforgiving sort,
and will surely crush the bones and spirits of all but the dungeoneering elite. Chaos Strikes Back is a game which allows for
only two types of players, the "quick" and the "dead."

M.O.T.S. (More of the Same)
For the beginner, this reviewer wholeheartedly recommends the
first Dungeon Master, a game which has won acclaim from
legions of fans and is still taking all corners to this day. Once
Chaos has been crushed and the original game has ended,
Chaos Strikes Back will be ready to sate any further bloodlust.
Unfortunately, despite the optimism which this viewpoint affords, this gamer cannot help but to chastise Software Heaven
and FTL Games for this long awaited rehash of the original Dungeon Master. The "living dungeon" approach to RPGs is fast becoming commonplace, with titles like Bane of the Cosmic
Forge, Captive, Bloodwych and Eye of the Beholder improving
upon the Dungeon Master system, or at least presenting the
same concept with new trappings (forgive the pun). One
wonders how long Dungeon Master and its chaotic sequel will
survive before sinking into the mists of software history.
With the release of Chaos Strikes Back, FTL still has one foot
resting in the winner's circle. Sadly, the other is resting on its
laurels.

Computer Gaming World's
See Reader Input Device on page 74

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem-solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first-person perspectives of
real-world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take an alter ego
through a storyline or series of
events.
Role-Playing Adventure (RP):
Adventure games that are
based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.
Games are often listed in more
than one category. In this
case, the first listed category is
considered primary. In order
to be recognized as the 'Top
Game" in a given category, a
game must be listed as being
primarily of that specific type.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games in
CGW's Hall of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated by
our Readers
over Time.
They are Worthy
of Play by All.

Review

If Every Cliche Were Reality
Psygnosis' Obitus
by Allen L. Greenberg

he

cosmic rules that
govern our reality insist that death be a
part of life. The rules that
govern computer-simulated reality are even harsher, inflicting death over
and over again as necessary stumbling blocks on
the way to victory and
honor in "life." The strictest enforcement of this
edict is handed down by
Psygnosis, a company
whose action games
often place such maniacal demands on players
that death frequently occurs within several
seconds of the opening
credits. With Obitus, an
action-oriented Fantasy
Role-Playing game
(FRPG), that company
has finally seen fit to offer mere (simulated) mortals
a fighting chance at survival.

T

Troll Roads

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:

Obitus
Amiga, Atari ST
IBM
DESIGNERS: Giulio Zicchi,
Nik Wild and
Michael Haigh
PRICE:
$59.99
PUBLISHER:
Psygnosis
Liverpool. England

Obitus challenges the player to escape from a
colorful medieval kingdom. There are mazes in the
form of forests and underground mines. There are
also castles and churches to be explored, as well as treacherous
open roads filled with rogues from the
shot-nwakqueilrschofbandty.Teislrgcaofhtesin
game, some of whom have objects to offer the player and most
of whom are more than willing to offer advice. Other characters
are busy aiming their weapons at one's hero, even as they come
into view. It is up to the player to decide which characters merit
a conversation. Some are better left alone while others clearly
deserve perforation via arrows.

Success in the game will depend, in part, on the player's ability
to map and thoroughly explore the mazes and various buildings.
The mazes are beautifully depicted in three dimensions and
scroll in whichever direction the player moves. Objects, characters and passages shrouded in shadows become visible gradually
as the player moves toward them. In dim lighting, arrows from
hidden foes may unnervingly pour from the shadows.
The interiors of various buildings also appear in intricate detail.
These are filled with more strange objects and populated by
another variety of personalities. Neither the buildings nor the
mazes are particularly difficult to map, and the presence of an onscreen compass makes the process even easier.

Ubiquitous Arcade Action

Separating many of the locations in the game are
what the package notes call "parallax sections."
These are more traditional arcade sequences in
which the player must move from one side of the
screen to the other, and survive. This type of action,
which has come to be known in some circles as the
"Psygnosis Shuffle" or, perhaps, the "Barbarian Two-Step," is
greatly simplified in Obitus. Villains can be seen hiding before
they spring up to attack, and it is actually possible for the hero
to leap out of the path of flying weapons. Mercifully, one need
not be an arcade wizard to complete these action sequences.
The interface used in Obitus is simple and requires no typing.
The player points to and clicks on icons, objects held in inventory and pieces of the surrounding graphics. In this way, two and
three word commands may be constructed such as "Eat apple"
or "Use dagger on distasteful person." Windows are used to
deliver messages from other characters, display the hero's health
status and provide general information. Movement about the
screen is performed easily, either with the joystick or by clicking
on a compass direction with the mouse pointer.

Purple Prose
One sure way to succeed in Obitus is to avoid reading the directions. Most of the space in this confusing documentation is taken
up by a story which may or may not have anything to do with
the program it accompanies. Perhaps it describes some other
game which this reviewer has yet to come across. Fortunately,

Review

the game's interface is easy to decipher without instruction and
no intelligent player should have trouble doing so. But for those
looking for an even greater challenge, go ahead — read the directions!

The Looks and Sounds of Psygnosis
It is difficult not to be impressed by the
sounds and graphics programmed into almost any release from Psygnosis, and
Obitus is no exception. The realistic
sound effects are well distributed
throughout its various encounters. Graphically, the game is rich in detail, imaginative in its scope of settings and makes
good use of shading to enhance the
game's already suspenseful atmosphere.
The backgrounds, which flow and scroll
in three dimensions, are particularly well
executed.
Obitus' major flaw is that it lacks
depth. The game would be far more satisfying were there a few mysteries or
surprises lying beneath its glittering exterior. A bit of intrigue or some deeper interaction with the nonplayer characters (preferably at the expense of some arcade-style
combat) would go a long way toward making Obitus first-rate
entertainment (consider this a voice from the American market,
crying out in the wilderness).

Inside the "Goodie Basket"
Obitus is another Psygnosis release which comes packaged
with a T-shirt. Considering the purchase price of most quality
computer games, this is a welcome gesture on the part of that
company. In this spirit of charity, perhaps there will one day be
other items of clothing included with
such games. Food would also be appreciated, or perhaps a small scholarship
to help the kids prepare for their education. Thanks, Psygnosis!
Obitus is provided on three copyprotected disks. A fourth, blank disk is required to save games in progress. The
program allows the use of two disk
drives during play, but disk swapping is
required far too often. The use of a hard
drive is really what the program needs
but, unfortunately, does not allow.

Still and All...
Even with its lack of depth and without
an adequate (or even useful) instruction
manual, Obitus can be a satisfying experience. The fact that the
arcade sections are relatively low-pressure enhances the game's
playability as well as the chances that the player will survive. The
program offers many hours of exploration and danger, and plenty to see.

Review

A Different Set of "Jaws"
(Continued from page 22)
screen layout, hull designs of the spacecraft, a star sector guide,
abbreviations and an explanation of the copy protection (
look-up-the-word type).

Colorful Battles In Black & White
The graphics are 3-D in an overhead or side view. The battle
area is shown on the left half of the screen, a ship control panel
on the right. One can select any object to be center of the battle
and zoom into or out of the area. The friendly ship is white in
color and enemy ships are black, with missiles the same color as
the firing ship. Neutral objects, such as space stations, star bases
and planets are orange. On the right side of the screen is all the
information pertaining to the spacecraft controlled and the control menus.

Into JAWS' Teeth
JAWS is strictly mouse-controlled and menu-driven. This works
very well in actual game play. There are four command menus
available to the player: Command, Displays, Control and Objects.
There are over 29 commands available and each is explained in
detail in the manual. Commands are also available for individual
control of guided missiles and battlecraft (drones). Some of the
many commands available include electronic warfare, force
shields, automatic fire and tractor beams.
There are seven scenarios in the game. Five use pre-designed
ships and all have time limits. In scenarios six and seven, one
can customize the number of credits available to each side for
the purchase of an initial fleet, as well as for the total campaign.
The computer outfits the other side using the credits available.
Other than this option (basically two campaign-style games),
there is no provision for designing your own scenarios. Fortunately, this does not seem to detract from the game.

Dockyard Blueprint Blues
Ship design begins with the empty hulls. Equipment pods are
added to complete the ship, using two detailed charts of hull
types and pods which effectively describe equipment and fuel
capacity. All pods contain various weapons and defensive systems, including electronic warfare equipment. There are three
types of jump pods. These are necessary to move from system
to system. They differ in cost and in time necessary to charge up
prior to a jump. Charging time is particularly critical when trying
to escape a battle, so the longer the charge time, the greater the
exposure to danger.

Armed To The Teeth
A variety of weapons is available: laser guns; plasma guns;
guided, intelligent, unguided and cluster missiles; battlecraft and
tractor beams. Laser guns are effective from long range, while
plasma guns are effective close in. Unguided missiles will seek
the nearest object including planets, starbases and other missiles,
but will not target friendly vessels. Cluster missiles are standard
unguided missiles which include three MIRV warheads that can
be manually released by players at a certain range. Battlecraft
are essentially drones with laser guns, which can be controlled
by the player or set on automatic fire at a specific target.
Any neutral object that is hit by a missile will immediately open
fire on that side's ships. This can turn the tide of battle to the
enemy's advantage at a critical moment, so one must be selec-

tive in opening up on targets of opportunity that may, in reality,
be neutral. If one can maneuver so that the enemy opens up and
accidentally hits a neutral starbase, however, one can have the
joy of observing that starbase spending the remainder of the battle firing on all enemy ships.

A.I. — The Computer Bites Back
The computer opponent is highly intelligent, even in scenarios
where officers are not included. The computer accurately keeps
track of all missiles it has fired and will effectively use objects as
shields. If the engagement is near a planet, the computer will
take advantage of the cover offered by the planet, circling
around and firing at the player's ship, then retreating again behind the planet.
The player has the option of controlling all or just one of the
ships in a multi-ship engagement. The computer will control the
others and uses "artificial" officers, taking into account their skill
levels when executing tactics. Officers are only available in
scenarios five and seven. Their skill level and rank determines
their efficiency in battle. The officer file can be edited so you can
add your favorite heroes from science-fiction ("Analysis, Spock?").
In any engagement, one also has the option of giving individual
orders or general orders. If opting for general orders, ships can
only be told to attack, defend, withdraw and disengage. The individual ship commanders decide what targets to attack, how
fast to maneuver and other pertinent battle tactics.

Worse Than Its Bite
There are a few minor problems in JAWS. First, the Quit command can be accidentally chosen. Obviously, in the heat of battle, such an experience can be most annoying. Second, it is possible to accidentally hit the return key during ship construction
and commission that ship, ready or not. One has little chance for
reconsideration of ship construction aspects while "at the old
drawing board." This temperamental feature has been a
promised "fix" in an upcoming revision. [ Ed. We're informed
that this revision is currently available from the manufacturer.]
Overall, however, this is an excellent tactical level combat
game with a few strategic decisions (sort of an "opposite twin
brother" to Star Control). It will appeal to those who like
strategic wargaming with plenty of on-screen action.

Sneak Preview

Hotter Than Rotisserie Leagues
PRODIGY®'s Baseball Manager

f one believes the bad publicity
generated by the censorship issue
with regard to electronic mail on the
PRODIGY® Interactive Personal Service, users of the service may often feel
as frustrated as the late Billy Martin kicking dirt on an umpire or Pete Rose shoving an official after allegedly being poked
in the face. In vivid contrast, however,
gamers need to take note of a scouting
report on a particularly bright new talent
for the PRODIGY® service.

I

Billed as a "custom choice," handled as
an additional charge and licensed by the
Major League Baseball Player's Association, PRODIGY® has created what appears to be the most ambitious fantasy
baseball system in existence. Gamers will
not only simulate general managers via
drafting, balancing salaries and trading,
but will be able to take on the role of
manager on a daily basis by setting lineups, pitching rotations and relief
priorities. Other fantasy (or "rotisserie")
leagues offer weekly updates based on
rankings in various statistical categories.
Baseball Manager, on the other hand, allows actual games to be played. Each
day you set your lineups. That night your
game is played against one of the other
nine teams in your league. Your game on

PRODIGY is played using the actual stats
from that day in baseball. If Alan Trammel got two hits the night before, those
two hits would be factored into his
PRODIGY team's performance.
When PRODIGY first told us about
Baseball Manager, we were perplexed.

How can you play actual games using
last night's stats? How do you resolve a
game in which Dwight Gooden, pitching
for the Tehachapi Steamers, throws a
shutout against the Diablo Canyon Reactors (but Darryl Strawberry hit two home
runs for the Reactors)? The designers of
Baseball Manager have developed an
elegant set of algorithms that resolves
such seeming conundrums. Simply put,
the program factors the various performances to get an averaged result. In the
Gooden versus Strawberry example,
Gooden would not end up getting a
shutout as he did in real life but Strawberry would not get both home runs either.
Probably Gooden would be charged with
one home run (and an accompanying
earned run) and Strawberry would get
credit for one home run, not two. If
Gooden had given up two or more
earned runs in real baseball, Strawberry
might well have gotten credit for two
homers on his PRODIGY team.
Garners can reserve a league for themselves and nine of their friends so that
everyone can participate in the league
and no one gets stuck with all the bookkeeping.

Sneak Preview

access the details on the complete draft
for both the league and his team.

Fun in the Sum (Spring
Training)

Winner Meeting (Getting
Started)

selected the pitcher in the second round
and so forth.

The Baseball Manager experience
begins, naturally enough, with pre-season
maneuvering. Gamers can choose to
manage in either an American or National League simulation. There will be a
separate league for every ten players enrolled. If one has other "PRODIG"ies
ready to sign up for a league, one can
"reserve" a league. If one is soloing, it is
possible to opt for the first opening in the
big league of your choice, American or
National. In any case, the pre-season
only begins when all ten players are
signed on.

Since there is a salary cap, one cannot
simply go for the best players for every
position. Compromises enter into the
planning stage during this period of
"scouting" the talent. Many gamers will
want to consider the fan proclivity of
their competitors during this phase. If
one is playing against Silicon Valley
garners, for example, one may want to ig
nore San Francisco Giant players. Since
SF Giant players would, presumably, go
for a premium in a San Francisco Bay
area league, you might want to avoid the
artificially inflated salaries such players
might get. In such a case, it might be
cogent to select a comparable player
from the eastern division rather than truly
emulating major league owners by joining the "bidding war" on the majority's
favorite. At other times, one may be willing enough to pay the high price that it
is worth rating a player high enough that
any manager who gets the player will
have to pay a high salary.

The real action begins with the pre-draft
phase. Over the course of four days in accelerated mode or eight days in a more
leisurely mode, gamers will find complete
lists of players by position and must rate
them in order of draft preference. This is
not a pro forma proposition where one
simply lists the best players in one-twothree order. One must also consider the
fact that the number of other general
managers who select the same firstround draft choice could cause the salary
to skyrocket.
Salaries are determined by multiplying
the dollar value established for a position
times the number of managers who
select the players in the first draft position with dollar values descending with
each draft position. For example, a starting pitcher is worth $250,000 times the
number of managers who selected the
pitcher in the first round plus $240,000
times the number of managers who

Of course, the most exciting part of this
phase is logging onto the PRODIGY® network every day and getting the draft
results. Unlike many network games,
Baseball Manager presents the daily
draft results with a little extra showbiz. As
soon as the player gets past the introductory screen, he is rewarded with a
newspaper mock-up featuring a headline
highlighting a major draft pick from his
league and a dynamic headline selected
especially to reflect his team's most impressive draft pick. From there, he can

There is one more period of activity
before the season starts. In the "PreSeason" phase, garners not only get the
chance to standardize line-ups (versus
right-handed and left-handed pitchers),
starting rotations and relief priorities, but
initiate trades, as well. The trading procedure works off an on-screen worksheet
and requires no third party intervention.
After, presumably, discussing the potential trade by electronic mail, one
manager initiates the trade by filling out
a trade offer worksheet. Next, the person
who is receiving the trade offer has up to
three days to access the trade offer. If
the recipient of the trade offer wishes to
deal, the program handles an acceptance, decline or counteroffer. Of course,
since the trade offer only lasts three
days, the recipient of the offer can simply "pocket veto" the deal by ignoring it.
Once the deal is accepted by both parties, the program handles the roster adjustments overnight.
Naturally, once the season starts,
gamers will be anxious to get involved
with the day-to-day management of their
team. However, it is still a good idea to
standardize the line-ups and rotation
during the pre-season. If the gamer has
taken the time to set standardized lineups, the computer program will follow
the gamer's instructions on those rare occasions when the gamer cannot access
PRODIGY®. If there is no standardized
line-up or rotation, the computer selects
its own idea of a good line-up. Anyone
who has ever had the computer take
over his company in a game of CEO
knows how traumatic that can be.

Opening Play
When play begins, players continue to
update line-ups and pitching rotation and
handle trade offers. However, the exciting
aspect is logging onto the service and
getting that updated newspaper screen
with the "hometown" bias toward the
gamer's team. Then, each manager can
check his team's overnight performance
just like the box scores in a real daily
paper. It's pretty heady stuff for statistics
fanatics and baseball is the right game
for statistics buffs.
Once the league is underway, it only
takes a few minutes a day to handle all
the managerial decision-making, check
the latest box score and make a couple
of trade offers. Then, if the gamer is still

Sneak Preview

ready to talk baseball, there is a special
bulletin board specifically for Baseball
Manager leagues (that can only be accessed by PRODIGY® users signed up
for the leagues). This should build community among the managers and provide a nice forum for intraleague
propaganda.

Line Score
PRODIGY®'s Baseball Manager may
be a fantasy manager's dream come

true. It allows gamers to create their own
leagues without having to worry about all
that paperwork; it offers the ultimate advantage of a daily update; and it
provides for individual games in a full
season of "simulated" games. Baseball
Manager is available only to PRODIGY
service customers. It will cost $119 per
person per year.
CGW's editorial staff is anxious for the
new season to begin. Throw out the first
ball, Mr. President!

Reach Out and Crush Someone

Review

R

eal Blackjack is deceptively simple to play, but equally
complex to master. Therein lies its brilliance. For all its
clunky programming, Real Blackjack truly mirrors the '21'
game as played in casinos around the world and actually
teaches players how to master the game for the day when real
money is bet, not just easy-to-spend "computer bucks."

page manual. Once the print process is started, however, there is
no turning back short of rebooting the system.) The manual,
whether read on-line or printed, is a virtual textbook study for
beginners and experienced players alike. It makes it clear that
blackjack is more than just a card game — it is a math puzzle
and a psychological strategy.

Private Lessons
For beginners who are thinking
of eventually playing blackjack in
Las Vegas or Atlantic City, this
has to be one of the most informative and least expensive tutors
available. It doesn't hurt that the
way Real Blackjack has been
designed, it is also extremely fun,
even addicting, to play.
The default settings for Real
Blackjack are based on the standard Las Vegas game rules. The
best hand is a two-card 21 or
"Blackjack." Players may continue
to draw cards without going over
the score of 21, as doing that is
an automatic loss. That's where
the gambling comes in: one has
to figure out what are the odds
TITLE:
Edward 0. Thorp's Real Blackjack
that asking for another card that
SYSTEM:
IBM
will bring you to or close to 21
PRICE:
$49.95
without going over. Alternately, a
PUBLISHER:
Villa Crespo Software
1725 McGovern St
player must consider not taking
Highland Park, IL 60035
another card because it looks like
the dealer will be forced to go
over 21 and, therefore, 'bust.' Standard casino rules are that the
dealer must hit with 16 points showing and stand when 17 points
are showing. If the dealer has the same score as the player, it's
called a 'push' and nobody wins or loses.

Now Deal Makes Cut at 21

The dealer or 'house' gives two cards to each computer-set or
player-set bettor at the table. The dealer always takes one card
down and one card showing. If the up card is an ace, then "insurance" is offered to players. The insurance offer is another bet
entirely.

Your Own "House Rules"
What sets this package apart from other computer blackjack
games is that it allows the user to customize playing strategies
for all players and create tables of player actions that encompass
all gambling circumstances. These include such decisions as
when the player does or does not ask for another card or increase the bet. With blackjack expert Edward 0. Thorp as the
guide (the man who later went on to invent stock market
"programmed trading") and the statistics for each hand tallied by
the computer, Real Blackjack gives the serious gambler and
novice alike a computer game that is also a potentially profitable
educator.

Money Management 101
Setting up the individual styles and dollar management profiles
of each player is a bit mind-boggling at first. The manual offers little immediate assistance, but the powerful on-line help facility
provides clear information to handle all the preliminary
housekeeping before play. (For those users who want to have an
actual manual, a print option in the help menu reproduces the 61-

by Michael S. Lasky

Review

Virtually every aspect of blackjack has been covered by Real
Blackjack. For those players who want to learn how to count
cards, something casinos discourage by using more than one
deck or reshuffling often, there is a count system that will maintain individual tallies of cards.

Tutor Dynasty
By far, one of the most enjoyable features is the Tutor key.
Push the Tutor key and the player will be told (based on the
computer's or player's pre-set style tables) whether to take
another card, to stand, to double down or to split the hand. Sometimes, the advice will seem positively ridiculous based on the
eventual outcome. Of course, advice is based on statistical probabilities and not on definites. There are no definites in a game of
chance except, perhaps, that the odds favor the house.
Real Blackjack is menu-driven and uses the ten function keys
exclusively. While this makes the user interface extremely
simple, it remains fairly unsophisticated. The game cries out for
mouse control or mnemonic key controls such as S for stand
and H for hit. Actual programming was done, amazingly enough,
in BASIC. Colors are vivid no matter what the graphics capability
of the computer — CGA, EGA or VGA. That's because the game
was designed in IBM text mode, according to publisher Dan Sejzer.
Sound features basic IBM toots and whistles (which might be
the reason that silence is the default). The speed of deals can be
adjusted from a stupefyingly slow pace to a "
now-you-see-it-now-you-don't" card shark's blur. The default setting is in the middle.

A bug in the program turns off the tutor key when speed is set at
maximum.

Blackjack in the Information Age
Since it takes some effort to set up player styles, games can be
saved for replay with favorite settings. Be warned, however, that
they do take up considerable disk space and are slow to load
when recalled. Once loaded, they provide an information screen
with player setups and the time and date of the saved version.
That is typical for Real Blackjack. This is truly a game for the information age. Screen after screen documents player actions and
designs. Any screen can be dumped to the printer for more
deliberate study.
Edward 0. Thorp's Real Blackjack is not perfect, however. It
does come with a seemingly clever (albeit user-unfriendly) copy
protection scheme. The disk can be copied but the game only
begins after a random five-digit password code is input. The
codes are listed in the documentation but are printed on the infamous non-reproducible dark red paper. The paper color
prevents photocopying but also defeats most users, even the
ones with good eyesight. One must tilt the code sheet in bright
light to get the number. Villa Crespo publisher, Dan Sejzer, says
he has not received any complaints about this protection
scheme. Well, he has now. Fortunately, he also receives enough
praise for the game that it turns out to be worth the eyestrain to
move past the protection. It is singularly one of the best casino
game/tutorials available today.

I

Foreign Correspondence

stronghold. Explore the tunnels and
rooms while on the look-out for nasties.
Every completed adventure takes you
one step nearer to becoming a Hero.
There are four adventurers: Barbarian,
Elf, Wizard and Dwarf. Release is expected around Easter of this year for all
major formats.

Over There
So You Want To Be a Gremlin?
by Paul Rigby

Cortizone is a text/graphic adventure
currently available on the ST from British
publisher Zenobi Software. Created
using the STOS adventure utility from Incentive Software, the plot surrounds a
building called the Zone, a hospital which
was converted after The Great War to
hold both human and robotic criminals at
little expense to the weakened government. Conditions are barbaric as the
inner building is mainly unguarded, leaving prisoners to fight over the limited
resources that are periodically dropped
into the building via a supply chute. Your
aim is to gain entry into the Zone by any
means and find the mad doctor thought
to be responsible for the creation of the
Adrenal Bomb (containing bacterial
poisons), while obtaining information to
find and defuse this lethal weapon.
The adventure arrives on two disks,
with one whole disk given over to the introduction. This is a novel method of offering the player the plot in an interesting
format. Created with STOS, it informs the
player on all aspects of the background
story via a continuous printout. On occasion small, digitized graphics illustrate
the text. Once this is finished the game is
loaded from disk two. The game itself is
divided into two windows. The upper window displays color digitized pictures.
Below this graphic window is the text
area. Priced at £4.99 from Zenobi
Software, 26 Spotland Tops, Cutgate,
Rochdale, Lancashire, England, 0112
7NX.

A

s a board game it was voted "Best

Selling New Game of 1989"
(source: Neilson Retail Audit, by
value). It was also the reason Sierra had
to change the name of one of their top
selling titles to Quest for Glory. HeroQuest: The Computer Game by UK
software house, Gremlin Graphics, is
based upon the successful fantasy roleplaying board game.
Enter the underground realm of Morcar,
the (all together now) evil wizard, where
treasures lie in wait — along with the
rather dangerous guardians. The dark
caverns contain many dangers and traps.
Taking an isometric viewpoint, each
game level is, apparently, a new, unique
adventure set in a different underground

Remember the
Dungeon-Master-in-space type game, Corporation? The
game was mentioned in these pages and
is subject to imminent release in the
USA. Well, Corporation is back. In the
original mission, as a top agent for
Zodiac, you infiltrated the headquarters
of the Universal Cybernetic Corporation
and destroyed their laboratories and the
vile mutants within them. Now, a new
threat has risen. The Government's sources on the street have sent word that
strange things are going down at UCC's
North American headquarters. With your
valuable experience, you're the obvious
man for the job. There are 16 complete
new levels to penetrate in your search for
UCC's secret laboratory. On this mission
you will encounter even stranger and

Foreign Correspondence

more dangerous creations. Amiga and
ST owners, who will need the original Corporation game disk to play the mission
disk, can obtain the data disk for £14.99.

cultural perspectives, so each mission
will require different aspects of your
chosen physical, mental and psychological skills.

Will it never lay down and die? That
space combat and trading game, Elite, is
back. Via the Microprose UK label, Rainbird, and renamed Elite Plus, the
gameplay is promised to remain the
same. However, there have been many
updates and bolted-on features. The
most noticeable feature is the solid 3-D
graphics in VGA (and other, lesser,
modes). A re-designed, icon-driven interface speeds the game along. Rainbird
promises new "information gathering"
and "map reading" sequences plus sound
board support (Roland and AdLib). Elite
Plus is a PC release retailing at £34.99.

The plot goes something like this.
Maestro? Music please.... "In the more
temperate equatorial reaches of the Atlantic, only one of forty-two islands held out
a hand, welcoming the survivors into the
Atlantic Federation, a force for peace,
prosperity and democracy. But the new
home is threatened by the evil Saharan
Empire, a mighty military dictatorship
based on the African mainland, already
enslaving the other island communities,
and ultimately intent on conflict with the
Federation." So you must help aid the individual island's indigenous freedom
fighters, and thus encourage the liberation of as many islands as possible
before the big push by the evil empire.

By the same development team that
produced Microprose's Midwinter is
Midwinter 2: Flames of Freedom, to be
published on PC, Amiga and ST. As the
best field agent the Atlantic Federation
has, you are charged with the execution
of highly dangerous clandestine missions
on each of the 41 islands. Each island
has its own political, administrative and

Features of Midwinter ll include a
sophisticated character profile generator
allowing you to choose your own looks,
sex, psychology and physical characteristics; different games modes including
training to practice any aspect of the
game before the campaign section is

tackled; a 250,000-square-mile, 3-D, lightsourced terrain area; auto route options
allowing you to plan and execute within
the 3-D environment immediately; and interaction with around 4,000 characters,
each with his or her own personal profile.
Note: The above games, and any of
the other games mentioned in "Over
There" in past issues, can be obtained
from:
Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY.
Telephone: 01144-51-263-6306.
Miles Better Software, 219/221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffordshire, England, WS11 2DD.
Telephone: 01144-543-466-577/8/80;
Fax: 01144-543-466-579.
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins Square, Burnt Mills, Basildon,
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ. Telephone:
01144-268-590-766; Fax: 01144-268-590076.
All of the above telephone numbers
assume you can dial direct. If you
have any trouble contact the international operator.

Inside the Industry
O

Sierra/Broderbund Merger Intent Announced
n

March 8, 1991, publicly-held
Sierra On-Line and privatelyheld Broderbund Software announced the signing of a letter of intent
to merge. The new company formed is
expected to be called Sierra-Broderbund, Inc.. Under this arrangement, Sier
ra CEO Ken Williams would become the
CEO of the consolidated company, while
Broderbund CEO Doug Carlston will take
over the reins as Broderbund President.
Broderbund's current president, Ed Auer,
will serve as president of a newly-formed
manufacturing and sales unit.

Sierra stock jumped more than two
points on the next day of trading after
the announcement that it would acquire
Broderbund in a stock swap estimated
by the Wall Street Journal at a value of
over $88 million. Though the letter of intent indicates that Broderbund would, in
effect, become a wholly-owned subsidiary
of Sierra, the primary impact of the
merger can be summarized in CEO
Williams' observation that, "This really is

a 'merger of equals' in that, post-consolidation, Broderbund and Sierra will
exist as sister companies sharing a common distribution mechanism." Those
who have observed the relationships in
the rapidly expanding Sierra family since
the Dynamix acquisition can affirm the
desire of Sierra's leadership to allow its
subsidiary companies to continue in their
creative and technological expertise while
establishing more solid financial and
marketing foundations.
I he joint statements of the two company executives indicated their mutual
belief that the consolidated company had
a beneficial impact in both product lines
and fiscal resources. No specific details
were provided, but Carlston's expectation
that "...we should enjoy substantial synergies in our publishing efforts, primarily
through technology sharing and marketing efficiencies" delineates the initial
cooperation to be seen under the new
agreement.

Finally, the financial stability gained
from the merger poises the consolidated
corporation to exploit its fiscal and technological resources so as to compete on
a worldwide basis. This not only provides
for expansion, but also creates a de
facto defense against potentially hostile
maneuvers by firms which specialize in
takeovers and liquidation.
The merger agreement sends positive
signals of a "coming of age" of the larger
publicly-held entertainment software publishers, but underlines the doubt and confusion surrounding Mediagenic's current
status as producer of disk-based software. The merger decision testifies to the
entertainment software industry's greater
awareness of a need for increased capital
in order to publish continually more
sophisticated projects in the future and
the knowledge that other entertainment
industries may want a future stake in interactive entertainment.

Review

Do You Want to Live Forever?
Will Harvey's The Immortal
by Matt Laurence

F

antasy games have come a

techniques usable throughout the
game. It even includes a guide
that takes players step-by-step
through the first level (which is a
good thing, since even the first
level contains some tricks that
might take players days to figure
out on their own).

very long way over the last
ten years. From the textual
charm and linearity of Zork to the
massive graphic worlds presented
in the Ultima series, gamers have
been exposed to ever more breathtaking graphics and interactive
storylines. Some of the most
recent offerings are so fluid and
flexible that one easily forgets the
interface and gets sucked right in
to the alternate universe in question. The best of the breed allow
users to see the world in graphic
detail while still keeping the imagination alive and involved, blending action with strategy, brawn
with brain. Electronic Arts is making a bid at this ultimate action/adventure game market with their
newest offering, The Immortal.

Tome It May Concern
Donning a wizard's robes is no
easy task, but the excellent
manual includes very complete
directions on how to move, fight
and vanquish foes with (relative)
ease. It also includes excerpts
from Mordamir's personal journal
of his exploits in the caverns, with
tips on combat, biographies of
characters that will be encountered, hints and clues for later
levels and a very welcome off-disk
copy protection scheme.

Pass the Torch. Please

Regardless of the somewhat timeworn plot (which is conveyed with
a sense of somber firmness that
pushes it just over the edge into

With very little pomp or circumstance, players find their onscreen persona standing in the
dark, damp corner of a small
stone antechamber above the
seething depths of the dungeon of
Erinoch. Seething is the right
word, too, as it is filled with such
obstacles as giant worms, invisible
shades, trolls, pit traps, slimes, rooms of
death, goblins, irritable dwarves, massive
puzzles and unconventional locking systems that would give the best thieves
pause. The player's mission, should he
choose to accept it (although buying the
game usually entails acceptance), is to
send his on-screen character in search of
the player's wizardly mentor, Mordamir,
by following the trail said wizard had left
behind on his final expedition in search
of the great dragon. His journal and one's
own keen wits are all there are to go on
and it is a long and harrowing journey to
the bottom of the pits.
While some adventure games hurl characters right
into the story, leaving them entirely on their own to
discover the mysteries and dangers that await, The
Immortal comes with a fairly detailed manual that
lends guidance through some of the strategies and

taking-itself-just-a-hair-too-seriously-land), the game's selling point
must be its graphics. They are
quite impressive and lavish in
detail, while not breaking any truly
new ground. The most miniscule
renderings are marvelous, from the swishing of wizardly robes as the character
saunters down the evil corridors-o'-doom,
to the extraordinarily natural way in
which the torches and candles flicker
and flare.

Eight Million Ways to Die?

TITLE:
SYSTEM:

The Immortal
Amiga, Apple IIGS
Atari ST, Nintendo
REVIEWED:
Atari ST
PRICE:
549.95
DESIGNER:
Will Harvey
DISTRIBUTOR: Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

There are, of course, lots of lovely,
graphic ways to die. Players can have
the flesh stripped from their bones by
sentient pools of creeping, acidic slime;
they can be hacked to ribbons by
goblins or trolls, dissolving into a bloody
puddle of organic muck; they can be
blown to bits by having hundreds of explosive
spores driven into their character's quivering body
(a personal favorite); they can be skewered, roasted,
smashed, dropped, poisoned or executed by any of
a large number of other exciting methods that will
aid players in shuffling off this immortal coil.

Review

Though The Immortal tries to position itself as a computer roleplaying game, it is not completely successful. The action sequences, particularly combat scenarios, are fairly well-executed and
the puzzles/traps are clever enough to require a good bit of brain
twisting to solve. However, the big problem with The Immortal is
in the very structure of the game. While trying to be actionoriented, the game manages to keep an adventuring flavor but
tends to be excessively linear in its approach. There is little room
for creative experimentation in the game, since one's path is
more or less clear, and attributes/skills are not improved. The Immortal is basically an intensely graphic action-adventure
masquerading as a CRPG. While one can move his wizard
wherever he likes within a level, almost all tasks must be completed in a specific order to move on. Most CRPGs allow room
for error, but one misplaced fire button in The Immortal can
send characters whimpering back to the very beginning.

Wishing You Could Save Yourself
Another problem with The Immortal's linear setup is the fact
that one can only begin games from certain specific points. The
player is given a certificate number at the end of each level,
which can later be used to begin the game from that level rather
than starting at the top of the dungeon every time. Some of the
levels, however, are quite large and time-consuming; thus, if the
last remaining fireball is accidently lobbed into a wall or misses
the target, it will be time to begin the level over. Don't miss any
vital objects along the way, either, or there may be an exceptionally sticky situation several levels later on.

If games could be saved from any point within a level, it would
be far less annoying to have to restart. But when confronted with
sudden death within inches of the goal, it is frustrating (and not a
little tedious) to have to retrace steps covered fifty times before.
Finding oneself quickly mangled is extremely easy even for veteran players, given the tricky nature of some of the maneuvers.

Losing Controls
The controls are another place where The Immortal falls a bit
flat. The joystick control is somewhat spotty, not always responding smoothly or accurately to commands (this reviewer tried the
game with two different brands of joystick and both suffered
from the same difficulties). This control problem, combined with
the three-dimensional perspective, makes it difficult to move deftly as is required in certain circumstances. It is far too easy, for example, to move the wizard right back out a door he just entered,
often exposing him to the ravages of some slathering creature he
was trying to escape. Choosing items and spells is also accomplished with the joystick, and this arrangement can lead to
some unfortunate mishaps, such as using a vital or dangerous
item at the wrong time, inadvertently blowing one's on-screen incarnation to smithereens.
The Immortal, while "gamely" attempting to forge to the front
of the CRPG market, misses the target. The game is stylish and
atmospheric with superb audiovisual frills, but in spite of its
positioning, it is better suited to clever adventurers with an accurate wrist and a lot of patience than the traditional CRPG
market.

Review

boards. Enemies challenge you on each
board. Later worlds include Modern Day, Future Space and Darkness. Players receive
bonus scores for completely searching
every space on each
level.

What's In a Name?
Freakin' Funky Fuzzballs
by G. Marc Clupper

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Freakin' Funky Fuzzballs
MS/PC-DOS
$29.95
Ian Currie and Robert Koller
Sir-Tech Software, Inc.
Ogdensburg, NY

The player's enemy moves on a oneto-one basis so that a quick finger may
successfully bypass its dangerous bite.
Another method to circumvent the
presence of these pests is to lead them
onto an island made by the disappearing floors and using magic wands to
cross the gaps created. Remember, the
enemy can use wands as well, and will
do its best to turn the player's fuzzball
into a snack.

n a world of ever-increasing
numbers of arcade games,
one must wonder if the concepts behind these products will
ever become stale. As game
designers pawn off new versions
of old products, the appeal of
such games dwindles. However,
on rare occasions, a publisher
will earnestly submit an original
twist on old arcade inspirations.
Sir-Tech Software has done
just that in their latest release,
Freakin' Funky Fuzzballs.

I

What a Fuzzball Might
Call "Home"
As the fuzzball searches an area,
food, armor or special items will randomly appear. Food is a necessary element to survival as it replaces lost
vitality caused by the enemy. Keys
may also be found in these worlds and
are required to enter the next level.
Other items include rings (which increase the fuzzball's vitality), scrolls
and potions. Potions restore a fuzzball's
vitality to or near its maximum. Scrolls
are another story. Once a scroll is
evoked, one of six events will occur,
only two of which are useful. Other
than invisibility and enlightenment, a
fuzzball will usually be better off not
making use of scrolls.

Shake The Dust Off
Your Shoes
Fuzzballs is based upon the adventures of fictional creatures
known as "Fuzzballs." These
diminutive creatures bear a
strong resemblance to
household dust bunnies. Hiding
behind those hard-to-reach
places, they appear only occasionally and, when one does
make a public appearance, they
are unjustly swept away or
trampled under foot. Now, in Freakin' Funky Fuzzballs, the
player commands one of these little guys in a bid to end the eternal prospects of future mistreatment.
The player moves, via numeric keypad, throughout a series of
fifteen levels of floors and mazes in an effort to gain access to a
subsequent level. Each of the five "worlds" is unique in the items
that can be found. As a fuzzball progresses, it is constantly
chased by a single, ill-mannered beast with an intent to kill. Fuzzballs have their own defenses to use against such dangerous
enemies, however. As a fuzzball crosses the screen(s) in either
diagonal or straight lines of movement, the floor gives way and
changes colors. A normal floor can be passed twice before disappearing. In the "maze worlds," the floor remains, although points
still may be scored by crossing over each space.

It's a Fuzzy Life
Each of the five worlds in Freakin' Funky Fuzzballs has its
own theme. The first is Ancient Times, in which fuzzballs must
navigate over a single board that changes in design every level.
The Funky Gardens (level two) are spread over several map

Freakin' Funky Fuzzballs has two difficulty levels, one- or two-player modes allowing up to ten individuals to compete for the highest score and level, and a high
score screen. The colorful screens are pleasant to watch and are
clearly designed. The accompanying manual is concise and
provides many useful tips and strategies to players. The only
minus would have to be the separate black-on-red number check
used for copy protection. The color combination is tricky enough
on the eyes without the print being so small.

Call the Fuzz
Overall, the concept of the game is fascinatingly simple, but the
true nature of strategy quickly becomes evident as the player
must learn to maneuver around the enemy and avoid being
stranded on an island of his own creation. While some may find
Fuzzballs only mildly amusing, it does provide for some intriguing facets of arcade action combined with a bit of the strategy
planning of adventure games. Freakin' Funky Fuzzballs is an
addictive pursuit reminiscent of Tetris and other arcade adventures and provides a sometime distraction from the seriousness
of daily life. Why, there's even an infamous "Boss Key" {F4}.

Review

Virgin Mastertronic's Spirit of Excalibur
by Todd Threadgill
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
REVIEWED:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

A

Spirit of Excalibur
IBM, Macintosh, Amiga,
Atari ST, Apple IIGS
IBM
$49.95
Synergistic Software
Virgin Mastertronic
Irvine, CA

rthur, regal leader of the

Knights of the Round
Table, is dead and his
realm is rapidly falling into disarray. Sir Lancelot du Lac, the
Round Table's most valiant
knight, has retreated to parts unknown, taking many of Arthur's
best fighters with him. Hostile forces threaten what remains of the
realm and, as Lord Constantine,
Arthur's successor to the throne,
the player must stand firm
against the invaders and
preserve the realm's integrity and
glory. To fail would bring about a
Dark Age that would last a
thousand years. What's a new
king to do?
Spirit of Excalibur represents
Virgin Mastertronic's most impressive foray yet into what it
terms a "new genre in interactive
computer entertainment" — the
"Fantasy Epic." Combining lush
graphics and strategic decisionmaking with elements of role-playing, Spirit of Excalibur picks
up where War in Middle Earth left off in presenting an attractive
mix of gaming elements. However, it also features some flaws
that may subdue a player's overall enjoyment.

Entering the Court of Camelot
The game's 256-color VGA mode offers such colorful, visually
delectable screens that many players will feel they have chanced
upon an open window to the glory of Camelot. This reviewer was
absolutely bowled over by the festive beauty of scenes depicting
the various locations visited by one's character throughout the
course of the game. The artists responsible for the graphics
deserve special recognition for their work. Would that this
reviewer were king in order to "k night" Rob Landeros, Robert
Stein III, Jonathan Sposato and Curt Toumanian.
Unfortunately, the second observation that new players will
make is that the documentation seems appropriate in terms of
recreating an era when most of the population was illiterate. It utterly fails to adequately provide a sense of "what to do" (i.e.,
what is expected of the player in order to complete the game).
There is a thorough description of how to do things (via the
game's icon-driven interface), as well as an interesting historical

background and account of the
myths of King Arthur. Once one
has mastered the simplest
mechanics of the game, all this
material proves of little use in enlightening a player as to what to
do.

Game Play
The manual divides the plot of
the game into five "episodes,"
starting with Constantine's journey from York to Camelot to
claim the throne as Arthur's successor and ending with the final
confrontation between
Constantine's forces and the evil
sorceress Morgan le Fay. This
first episode is virtually automatic, requiring a bare minimum of
player input. It provides a useful
tutorial for new users, allowing
them to familiarize themselves
with the mechanics of conversation and combat.
As the player makes his or her
way to Camelot, viewing Constantine's progress on a gorgeous
map of the English countryside, one will encounter various villages and towns, as well as travellers on the roads. It is a good
idea to have Constantine speak with everyone he encounters,
since many of the people he meets may offer important information. Treating people well is encouraged, since Constantine and
the rest of the party members have Nobility levels which rise and
fall depending on the fair and just behavior of the characters.
While each town and village features a guard, priest or villager
to talk to, many of them allow Constantine to delve deeper into
the town itself by entering a building, such as an abbey or keep.
These buildings also feature characters who are more than willing to aid Constantine, and wise players will enter every building
they find and entertain all offers of help.
When the player's party encounters a town, village or traveller
along their journey, the player is offered a choice of entering the
location/speaking with the traveller or continuing on without stopping. Entering a location switches the screen to a magnificent
close-up view of the town or road. The player's party enters the
screen from the left, and conversation (or, in some instances,
combat) will ensue. The close-up scenes are rendered in wonder-

Review

ful 3-D detail and, although the on-screen characters cannot
move any "deeper" into the scene, the effect is impressive. Additionally, many of the scenes have "hot zones" (for example, the
sturdy wooden door in Camelot) that will move the party to other
locations simply by clicking on them with the cursor.
Before arriving at Camelot, Constantine will encounter some
hostile individuals who can only be dealt with via combat. When
a battle begins, the screen switches into a "combat mode" that allows the player several options, such as "Attack," "Defend" and
"Withdraw." Combat is of the real-time variety, so players will initially find themselves scrambling to issue commands as the computer hacks away at its own intrepid pace. The battles during the
first episode aren't difficult at all, so the player may easily defeat
his or her adversaries simply by clicking on "Attack" over and
over. Using these easy battles to familiarize oneself with the commands is definitely recommended.
The real-time aspect of combat adds a degree of difficulty that
this reviewer found displeasing. Until one becomes familiar with
the various commands on the menu (which appears above the
screen showing the battle), considerable time is spent searching
through the menus for the appropriate commands. Meanwhile,
the computer-controlled opponent is slashing and/or casting
spells with great abandon and the character all too often suffers

Review

serious damage in the meantime. While many enjoy the challenge of this type of combat scheme, this reviewer found it needlessly frustrating in Spirit of Excalibur.
Once Constantine reaches Camelot and presides over the
Round Table, the easy part is over and events are dropped into
the player's hands. From the manual and from conversations
with the local populace, the player will discover that a Scottish
army, led by one of the late Sir Mordred's sons, is threatening
the realm to the north. Thus, the player is encouraged to send
some men northward in order to obtain information about the
hostile force. Yet, the computer does not display the Scottish
army on the map. Worse, the player has no idea how far north to
venture, nor how many men to send.
A more pressing (and local) threat after Constantine arrives in
Camelot is the army of Saxons who are attacking London. Constantine must defeat them; he has enough forces in the area to
do so, if only he can join together with the London garrison. How
to do this, however, is a mystery and the player must figure this
one out on his or her own (if it is indeed possible). There is no
logical reason that Constantine's forces cannot join with the London garrison, but for some inexplicable reason the computer forbids such an alliance. Thus, Constantine must face the opposing
forces alone and he will be killed. Of course, the death of Constantine ends the game.
This kind of information should have been included somewhere
in the documentation, but its absence simply adds confusion to
an already complex game. The information provided for the
search for Lancelot is equally vague and ultimately frustrating.
Another general problem with the game is that the computer
does not inform the player when one episode has been completed and the next begins. This leads to more ambiguity in the
sense that the player is never really notified when he or she has
completed all of the given tasks for a specific episode. At the
very least, a message informing players of their progress would
have been extremely helpful.
So the activities in Spirit of Excalibur basically revolve around
wandering the countryside, talking to anyone and everyone,
making attempts at achieving the goals laid down by the
storyline and battling hostile factions in order to muster support
for the realm. Eventually, Constantine will need to call upon the
services of magic-users, especially when battling dragons,
demons and the dreaded Morgan Le Fay herself.

Final Words
While many of the comments above may seem negative, they
should be taken as observations with regard to Spirit of
Excalibur's style of gameplay. The designers have taken a
relaxed, "let the players figure things out for themselves" approach, which is commendable (as this reviewer is sure that
there are many gamers out there who would appreciate this
product). There is a good deal of play value here for gamers
who are willing to struggle past the game's considerable hurdles.
However, this reviewer found Spirit of Excalibur to be far too
vague. This is unfortunate, since the game is a technical wonder
and has great potential for success in both action and storytelling. Perhaps improved documentation (both in printed form and
from the game itself) would help propel Spirit of Excalibur into
the ranks of today's greatest fantasy games. As it stands at the
present, however, Spirit of Excalibur will be considered as confusing to most players as Merlin's lessons (whereby he caused Arthur to metamorphose into common animals) must have been to
the boy king.

Letters

presumption of guilt placed upon the
legal owners. I will therefore continue to
limit my buying decisions to those
games which are both amusing to play
as well as unobtrusive to get started. I
find your omission as to the type of copy
protection scheme employed in a game
to be a serious flaw in an otherwise excellent review. Since my buying decisions
are influenced by the protection scheme
employed, I find I am unable to make an
informed decision based solely on your
review. To this extent, you have failed in
your efforts to fully inform me, in an
otherwise excellent publication.
Charles Silbergleith
(No city given)
I maintain that computer companies
have the responsibility to find a balance
in their use of copy protection. If they
don't, they'll alienate the honest majority
of supporters.

Copy Infection
As a first-time reader of your magazine,
I was pleased by the quality of your publication and the depth of your articles. You
have obviously spent a great deal of time
thinking out the format of the publication
as well as playing the games and listening to the readers.

Some documentation checks pose more
of a challenge than the game itself.

I must say that I find your reviews informative but lacking. There's no question
you've spent time playing the games and
talking to the creators, but to ignore the
issues of copy protection and, specifically, the type of copy protection, is completely negligent of your responsibility to
your readers.

Also, high on my list of not-to-buys are
those schemes which require identification of some pattern on a separate sheet
of paper. Worse yet, if that page cannot
be photocopied. While I understand the
distributors' desire not to have the key
page photocopied, I admit being able to
recall at least once or twice in my life
where I have lost a single sheet of paper
(especially when the kids play the game
too). I'm sure the distributors don't think
it is possible to lose a single sheet of
paper since they will duly ignore requests
for a new key page, even from registered
owners.

Since I am a first-time reader, I admit to
not knowing what your policy is regarding copy protection. However, as a consumer, I would like it known that there
are certain copy protection schemes I
can live with and there are others that
would negatively influence my decision
to buy the product. I will not, for example, buy any game that alters the formatting on the hard disk. Key disks
might be acceptable, but any scheme
which I feel may in any way interfere
with my hard disk backup or defragmentation routines has already imposed a
price that I am unwilling to pay.

This leads to the next problem with
documentation checks. It used to be you
had to back up your software so as not
to damage the master disk. This was and
is considered prudent behavior. Now one
must also back up the documentation as
well since the loss or destruction of any
portion of the manuals will also prevent
the usage of the software. What good is
the software if you can't get into it or use
it? Will the publisher replace the key
documentation to the registered users if
it's lost? If not, what good is registration?
Is registration useful for something other
than junk mail from the distributor?

I can live with documentation checks
where those checks are not too
obtrusive. Those that ask for the third
word in the fourth paragraph of the twenty-seventh page are really imposing a
penalty on legitimate owners. Why
should I have to go on a password quest
even before my game quest begins?

I understand the publishers' need to
protect their rights, but not everyone who
has a copy of their software is a pirate. It
is the height of arrogance to treat the
legitimate owners of the software as
though they have acquired the product illegally. While I respect the rights of the
authors and distributors, I resent the

An example, to me, of bad copy protection: I just bought the new game Midwinter from Microprobe. Even though
they removed (finally) their on-disk copy
protection, they still have a pretty
paranoid document check; you have to
search through a 200-page manual for
the name of the person whose picture
comes on the screen. That takes a long
time. So, okay, but here's the kicker...
Once you've done it, they ask you to do
it again! I mean, come on! You've already proven beyond a reasonable doubt
that you own the game—they just want to
hit you one more time for the hell of it!
Then, on top of that, they tell you that
you won't be able to play the game
without in-depth use and understanding
of the manual. So, why not just drop the
document check and consider anyone
playing the game without the manual a
demo player? If the game is good, they'll
get hooked and want to own it, right?
And the game is good. But, it's still
going back to where I bought it tomorrow because I will not be made to feel
so mistrusted in my own home.
To me it's really pretty simple. Be good
to people. Do good work. They'll show
you they appreciate it. If some rip you
off, you still have the support of the great
many. A lot of great software has been
sold this way and it's the way every other
entertainment medium operates.
Charles Carr
PRODIGY user
Thanks, Charles and Charles. We are
concerned about copy protection, as
well, but do not believe it should be a
major purchasing criterion. We do men-

Letters

tion copy protection when we find it
particularly offensive or particularly interesting in terms of how it blends into
the game. As noted in the April 1991
editorial (CGW #81), our readers
despise both "key disk" and "look up"
protection that uses "non-reproducible"
paper. We have urged the publishers
to move away from that type of copy
protection. If we can, at least, succeed
in this area, we believe that it will no
longer be necessary to mention the
protection in a review.

Long Time Passing
I enjoy reading your magazine a great
deal. The articles in it provide information on many computer games as well as
making interesting reading, even if I'll
never buy the product. There are a few
problems with the magazine, which is
why I'm writing.
The primary problem is the fact that
the articles don't always cover cuttingedge products. For example, in your
December issue, the game Final Fantasy was reviewed. This game was admitted to be several years out of date because it is from Japan. When at all possible, articles should be about products
that are liable to be extremely popular
and/or contain totally new concepts. Examples of this include Ultima VI, Summitry and Populous. There are probably
wargames and simulations that would be
examples of this, too. Obviously, not all
articles can be about cutting-edge
products and makers of games that
aren't perfect shouldn't be discouraged,
but out-of-date games like Final Fantasy
just don't need reviews.
My second problem is with the layout
of the pages that contain game ratings
by the readers. The games in the hall of
fame don't have any information about
them listed. This means that the games
that people are most likely to buy have
no information about them listed. Also, I
think some of the games listed may no
longer be produced. I don't think
M.U.L.E. is still made (if it is, I'd like to
know where to get a copy for the Atari
ST). Finally, I think the games rated
should be put in separate categories, like
they used to be. A flight simulator should
not be compared to a role-playing game.
With the current method it is possible for
the top game in a particular category to
not be in the top ten, just because the
sort of people who play that type of
game tend to give lower ratings. Game
players are going to be discouraged from
playing a particular category of game if
none of them were well-rated.

I hope you make some of the changes I
have suggested. If, due to cost, difficulty
or a decrease in the quality of the
magazine that would be caused by a
change, you don't make them, I will understand.
Paul Dickinson
Tucson, AZ
We try to be as topical as possible. If
companies get the games to us promptly, it still takes, logistically, two to
three months in order to get coverage
in the magazine. If companies get the
games to us before they are released,
we often write sneak previews that indicate what the games should be like
(they are not always finished when we
look at them in advance).
The "Hall of Fame" is placed on the
Top 100 Games page as a frame of reference for those who have been
around computer games for a time.
They reflect games which were/are
great and have been so rated by our
readers over a significant period of
time. Many of them cannot be purchased because they are out of print.
As for splitting the games into
categories, that is a "no win" proposition. We would have at least six dif
ferent categories and some games
would not really fit into any of the six.
Since so many games in the present
market are hybrids of two or more
categories, we feel such a separation
would be less, not more useful.

Kilobyte Was Here
I would like to suggest an M. Evan
Brooks-type rating article for WWII and
newer eras. Brooks' October 1990 article
was one that was/is the most useful to
me. Keep up the good work.
Bob Koestler
Hasbrouck Heights, NJ
I have bought your magazine off the
newsstand for years. The October 1990
issue of CGW was the issue that finally
convinced me to subscribe. I thought
that your "Hits and Misses for Strategy
Gamers" was an excellent article. One
question: have you, or will you in the future do the same for 20th-century
strategy games?
Also, the "Over There" report is well
done. I spent three years in the UK,
which has a large selection of good
software (it's just hard to get in the US).
The icing on the cake was Mr. Sipe's article on Red Baron. I've thought for

years that the WWI era has been
neglected for too long by the computer
strategy companies.
Keep up the excellent work!!!
Brent A DeBorbander
Scott AFB, IL
Although the World War Il paiktography, "Kilobyte Was Here" (CGW #37),
is slightly dated, it is still the best
resource for that era. Newer games
like SSI's Panzer Strike, Typhoon of
Steel and Second Front, as well as
SSG's Panzer Battles have added to the
mix, but there are many more older titles than there are new titles.

Good R.I.D.dance
Some of the best — no — the best arcade action games around are being
made by Psygnosis (specifically Shadow
of the Beast I & Il and Awesome). Yet, I
haven't even had a chance to rate them
on the R.I.D. cards. Might this have something to do with the fact that they make
games exclusively for the Amiga? Please
set me straight.
Weyland Walton
Draper, UT
When rated, games must reach a certain number of responses to be included in the Top 100 list. We have not
tried to rate any Psygnosis games
since May of 1990 because they were
not getting sufficient responses. However, now that they are no longer solely publishing Amiga and Atari ST
games, we are sure the responses will
increase and we expect to try again.

Gospel According To CGW
I read with interest the Bible reference
on your editorial page of your 2/91 issue
(Psalms 9:1-2).
Is this a Christian witness, a religious
mole in your organization or something
else entirely? Please satisfy my curiosity.
Larry P. Stieglitz
Medford, OR
Nothing as insidious as a religious
conspiracy is involved here. Basically,
the senior editorial staff places the
scripture reference in every issue as an
unobtrusive way to share our personal
goals of glorifying God in everything
that we do. The scripture is a poetic
song of praise in both the Judaic and
Christian tradition and suggests what
we believe is a very positive perspective on life. Readers should not worry,
however; we don't intend to sell shares
in a CGW theme park/resort.

Reader Input Device

Review

Ardai Admires Meier's Spies
Microprose's Covert Action
by Charles Ardai

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

spy would be fortunate to work for Sid Meier's CIA. Imagine: an almost endless stream of interesting assignments; an opportunity to work with the world's most
sophisticated espionage technology; bureau heads who are
cooperative and who willingly stay out of an agent's hair; a legal
system which convicts international criminals even when their arrests are tantamount to kidnaping (can you say 'Noriega'?); free
travel to fifty cities around the world; and, best of all, never
having to kill anyone. Who could ask for anything more?
Sid Meier's latest creation, Covert Action, is a complex and
detailed espionage simulation, encompassing many of the subtleties of cross-cultural criminology. It is remarkable that Meier
and his crew (notably co-designer Bruce Shelley) have managed
to cram so much onto four disks, since the game contains more
hidden facets than many six- or eight-disk games. Covert Action
is like a Ringling Brothers clown car: surprises keep coming out
and one wonders how so many could fit in such a small space.
Indeed, if the game has one flaw it is this, that so much comes
at the player so quickly. It is possible for one to overload on information at several points, not least of which is when one opens
the ninety-six page instruction manual. However, one can hardly

Covert Action
IBM
$59.95
Sid Meier
and Bruce Shelley
Microprose
Hunt Valley, MD

criticize a game for offering
players too much, especially at a
time when so many games offer
so little.

Covert Action is ambitious. Indeed, it is more than ambitious,
it is successful. It may not be to everyone's taste — gamers cut
from the 007 mold may prefer a more exotic, less fact-based spy
story — but for intelligent gamers looking for a real challenge,
Covert Action will be a treat.

Overt Action
Using words like "intelligent" and "challenge," one runs the risk
of scaring away garners who are primarily looking for action in a
spy game, especially from one whose name includes the word
'action.' Such gamers need not fear. Covert Action has as much
action as the average Clint Eastwood movie — it's just that it also
has plenty of mind-twisting brainwork for the player to do when
all the pulse-pounding legwork brings results.
So a player will go, within minutes, from a breakneck car chase
or shootout to infiltrating a terrorist's lair incognito. Then, move
swiftly to the very different (but no less vital) work of the CIA's
cryptography lab. Running around like a juggler with a dozen
balls in the air, the player has to deal with unforseen events and
changing variables under tight deadlines. It is this endless variety
that makes Covert Action so enjoyable. There is always something new to be done.

Review

Technically, there are only four elements to the game: breaking
and entering, wiretapping, cryptography and car chases. Each of
these, however, encompasses a wide range of activities, objectives and obstacles, and the four elements are combined in a
variety of ways. Adding complexity to the equation, assignments
are available at four difficulty levels ranging from "Local Disturbance" to "Global Crisis." Adding further variety to the equation,
one nice touch is that the player's character, Max Remington,
can be either "Maximilian" or "Maxine" and another is that the
character has player-adjusted skills in all four activities. Then,
too, there are twenty-six different criminal masterminds opposing
Max, each with dozens of distinct plots for the player to unravel.
It should be easy to see why the game never becomes boring.
Covert Action will probably outlast most players. Only a dedicated few will plug away at it until all its secrets are revealed. Yet
for all this complexity, gameplay within any one sequence is fairly simple. Car chases involve maneuvering on a pair of strategic
maps while maintaining line-of-sight contact in a first-person window. Breaking and entering involves suiting up with high-tech
weapons and surveillance devices and then exploring a building
in the manner of The Punisher. Function keys access Max's Uzi,
his camera, his grenades, his bugs and whatever else the player
has decided to carry.
The intelligence portions of the game are similarly welldesigned. Cryptography, for instance, consists of decoding substitution ciphers. The procedure, though difficult to describe, is
wonderfully compact: one keys in a letter in the cipher and then
the letter one thinks it represents. The computer does all the sub-

stitution and, bit by bit, a message in English is constructed out
of gibberish. This is much more entertaining than it sounds.
Planting wiretaps involves switching chips on a circuit board to
reroute the flow of current so that one gains access to telephone
lines without tripping any alarms. (Here, the gameplay most
closely resembles one of the last games ever released for the
Colecovison, Thomas Fulton's 2010, The Graphic Action
Game.) This is also more fun than it sounds.
Indeed, Sid Meier's genius lies in dreaming up stylized,
out-of-the-ordinary play mechanics which are hard to describe and are
more fun than they sound and combining them with fascinating
storytelling, as he does here. Covert Action is fun to play at first
just to get used to the odd gameplay and the complicated interplay of game elements; but it remains fun to play after one has
mastered the gameplay because the crimes one has to solve are
without exception, interesting.
It is indicative of the care put into the game that even in the
practice mode, the coded messages one decodes are interesting
messages. There are no two-bit capers for Max Remington. Each
plot is carefully conceived, involves at least half a dozen participants and centers around such important topics as assassination, theft of national secrets and world war. Meier and Shelley
keep players on their toes down to the wire; and when, at the
end of each case, they recount the plot in detail, even the best
players will often be caught by surprise.
Individual cases take at least half an hour to solve, but they are
addictive. Like potato chips, one session with Covert Action

Review

makes a player hungry for more. After a few dozen cases this effect may wear off, but if so, this reviewer hasn't found out yet.

Meier's Mires
For all this, however, the game does have problems, and it
would not be fair not to prepare players for them. None is substantial enough to interfere seriously with one's enjoyment of the
game, but all are irritating and should really have been fixed
before release.
First, the instruction manual is such a substantial tome that almost no one is likely to have the stamina to read it before starting play. Unfortunately, the text is so poorly organized and written that it is hard to find what one is looking for even when one
knows what that is, much less when one is not certain of what is
being sought. Compounding the problem is the fact that the text
has been inadequately proofread. Worst of all, the book is peppered with tiresome narrative passages in italics which purport to
tell Max's story as though in excerpts from a novel. These are
best skipped. Wading through this morass of prose to find
specific instructions on how to play the game is a chore. Happily,
the game's mechanics are natural enough that a little trial and
error (plus the game's self-explanatory menus and a handy reference card) pretty much solve the problem.
A more serious problem is that when information is acquired
during a break-in (generally through photographs of a desk's or
a safe's contents), the game stops short to display the information in clue-file form. The game's clue files are thoroughly crossreferenced, which is very useful when one needs to find a par-

ticular bit of information in a desperate moment; but the middle
of a break-in is no time for the game to interrupt itself with a
complete run-down. One might take a photo of a desk drawer
and then spend the next three minutes pressing 'Enter' as the
game cycles through all the permutations involved in cross-referencing the new clue with previously obtained information. Of
course, the player doesn't bother to read the torrent of information being displayed — he wants to get on with the break-in — but
he is still forced to sit through this entire display each time he
takes a photo or listens in on a conversation. A much better system would have been for the game to announce the content of
each clue in one or two sentences, and to save the cross-referencing for later.
Also under the heading of "Too Much All at Once" is the overabundance of choices. As noted above, this is an unusual complaint, but there is no denying that it can be frustrating to have
dozens of choices on a half-dozen menus and not know what to
do first. For the most part, one does the same things over and
over, and this leaves one gazing longingly at the many actions
one hasn't had a chance to perform: work with the Israeli Mossad, travel to Hungary, plant a car tracer and so forth. Until the
choices actually come into play in one or another of the cases,
one is left in the position of a hungry man at a buffet, not knowing what to take and what, regretfully, to leave untasted.
On an entirely different level, there is the dicey problem of
realism and topicality. Meier wants to make Covert Action both
realistic and topical, but he keeps pulling back, apparently as a
sop to the "Games Ruin Young Minds Brigade" and various AntiDefamation Leagues. On one hand, for instance, one gets to use
real-world weapons; but on the other one is told that "the rounds
[they] fire...are a recent, secret development that stun the target
rather than penetrate." Nonsense! Uzis kill people and spies kill
people. To dance around this fact (the graphics certainly seem
to indicate killing) is condescending and insulting.
Another example is that while the Mafia is called the Mafia in
the game (possible offense to Italian Americans being ignored),
the PLO is here known as the the "PFO" (Palestinian Freedom Organization) and the PIRA is known as the "PIFA" (Provisional
Irish Freedom Army). Who do the designers think they are fooling? Instead of this disingenuous game of peekaboo, Meier
should have given some attention to the fact that out of twentysix villains, eighteen are black, hispanic or Middle-Eastern. This
may correlate with real CIA "most wanted" profiles, but it may
also strengthen or lend credence to a player's own prejudicial
stereotypes. Normally, one wouldn't mention this in a review at
all, but it is strange to find a game that is hypersensitive on
some points and strikingly insensitive on others.

Covert Convert
None of the observations just cited alters the fact that Covert
Action is entertaining in the extreme. There are very few games
that offer as much as this one does or which so completely
cover their subject. Rarer still are games which do so without becoming crashing bores or requiring all sorts of specialized
knowledge. Covert Action belongs on a short list of games along
with such inspired work as The Fool's Errand and Starflight. In
each case the designers combined excellence with diversity to
create a top-notch game.
Covert Action could be better, but not much. It is no exaggeration to say that Microprose has released the richest treatment of
espionage ever put in a computer game. Only the real thing
could be more rigorous, and one imagines that it wouldn't be
nearly so much fun.

Editorial

S

Creating a Rainbow
Coalition

tate of the Industry: Many
software publishers have performed a positive service for
retailers, consumers and busy editors by
color-coding the appropriate system supported on their packages. IBM products
are easy to find on nearly any shelf because nearly 90% of the industry use
some form of sky-blue label on their MSDOS packages (presumably a tribute to
IBM's identity as "Big Blue"), even if it is
only a blue strip at the top of a
predominantly gray label. Other formats
are not identified with quite such a significant consensus.
There is also something of a de facto
standardization with Amiga products
among many publishers using a brown
or beige label or strip on those products.
Likewise, Macintosh products see a significant number of publishers using a
pure gray label. However, if the industry
were to standardize color-coding for all
consumer platforms, it could feasibly
lead to improved inventory handling in
the retail channel.
We readily admit that the larger chains
utilize electronic inventory programs to
check their stock, but we think there
would be a definite advantage for sales
personnel to be able to glance quickly at
a shelf and note whether all of the formats were available or not. It has been
our experience that once a product is
"out of sight" with many retailers, it is
"out of mind." Color-coding would serve
as a constant mnemonic device as to
stock on hand in each format, particularly in smaller stores where products are in
limited enough supply that they must be
displayed spine outward. This might even
help some retailers to understand that a
conversion is usually something new,
even though the title has been out on
another platform for a long time.
In the same way, consumers would be

able to ascertain the relative support for
their machines in a given store without
having to undergo a detailed perusal. For
example, an Amiga gamer drops into a
software store to pick up the new golf
game, Debased Fore. Waiting in line at
the check-out stand, he glances at an adjacent shelf where a flight simulator (C5A Transport Pilot) that went gold on
the MS-DOS format is displayed. This
time, however, he notes the brown label
that indicates the program has been converted to Amiga. Having already mentally "crossed the Rubicon" and committed
to spending some money on computer
games today, he immediately walks over
to the shelf and picks up the Amiga version of C-5A and purchases it along with
the golf program. This does happen, but
it is more likely to happen with standardized color-coding.
In fact, if we may be so bold, we even
have a suggested color scheme for the industry, based on labels already in use
(but not standardized). We would like to
see Apple II (8-bit) programs with red
labels (red is for apple), IIGS programs
with violet labels (think of it as off-red),
Amiga in light brown (tan, beige), Atari
ST in dark green, Commodore 64/128 in
orange, MS-DOS in blue and Macintosh
in gray (after all, they were originally
black and white).
We feel that the small amount of effort
and resources it would cost manufacturers in future products would help
everyone touched by computer games.
From the clerks in the warehouses,
through the distribution chain, across the
editorial plain and right down to the
eager clutches of consumers, system/color standardization is an idea
whose time is here. The question is, are
software publishers visionary marketers
or colorblind reactionaries? We're just
waiting for the light to turn green.

