June 1992

Number 95

Features
14
Laura Bow and Daggers, II
CGW discovers "The Colonel's Bequest" to be a sequel.

20

The Holy Grail of the Mass Market
Editorial reflections on the Spring Symposium of the SPA.

26
How I Spent My Working Vacation
CGWs editor finds out what he didn't know about Japanese and
Chinese computer games.

34
Electronic Arts' Populous II
Maxwell. Eden likes it even more Populous.

40
It Takes a Genus
The Genus Game System lets anyone be a designer.
by Mike Weksler

48
Seven CDs of Gold
The state of CD entertainment.
by Chris Lombardi

54
Paragon Software's Twilight: 2000
Role-playing in the era of the "post-Red" baron.
by Jerry D. Lambright

68
That's Edutainment
Sara Reeder's new column offers tips for parents.

72

Celtic Perceptions
Allen Greenberg investigates UbiSoft's Celtic Legends.

74

Evil-Minded Professor
Icom's Sherlock Holmes: Consulting Detective.
by Chris Lombardi

78
New Anchors for Uncharted Waters
Dave Arneson offers helpful tips for the recent Koei game.

82

Maskirovka or Perestroika?
CGW spies on Spectrum HoloByte's Crisis in the Kremlin.
by Johnny L. Wilson

86
The CGW Stock Watch
CGW publishes the financial views behind the news.

88
Do You Fear What I Hear?
Mike Weksler hears the case for a spectrum of sound cards.

93
Abstracts on Computer Game Design
CGW's officially sanctioned plagiarism from The Journal of Computer
Game Design.

96
Sedan Soccer
Ocean's Wild Wheels scores with Alan Emrich.

98
A Conversation With Raymond E. Feist
Craig Engler asks the best-selling author about Riftwar
Dynamix.

Legacy from

100
Sentimental Strategy
CGW uncovers QQP's upcoming Solitaire's Journey.
by Alan Emrich

108
On Becoming a More Perfect General
Richard Savage provides more tactical tips on the popular wargame.

112
Getting More Action Out of Action Stations!
RAW Entertainment's newest Action Stations! module.
by Bob Proctor

115
No Nonsense from Napoleon
Examining the early moves in L'Empereur.
by Michael Peck

118
A Rambling 'Mech from BattleTech
Syngvar Dalch reports for duty in the beta test of GEnie's Multi-Player
BattleTech.

120
Paiktography of Modern Warfare
An annotated list of wargames from the era of Korea through science
fiction. ...by M. Evan Brooks

126
He Said, She Said
Two reviewers consider Electronic Arts' Birds of Prey.
by Leah and Charles Wesolowski

Departments
8
Taking a Peek
16A (Margin of Insert)
Questions for the CGW Poll
18
Rumors
24
Once Upon a Time (Computer Game History)
44
Scorpion's View (The Magic Candle II)
58
Scorpion's Mail (Game Hints)
60
Over There (European Games Report)
64
The CGW Poll
66
PC Research/SPA Top Games
66
The Hall of Fame
104
Computer Wargaming World's "Broadsides & Gripeshot"
114
Reach Out and Crush Someone (Opponents Wanted)
128
Editorial

Taking a Peek

Amtex Software Corporation
25 Dundas Street West
Unit 7, Dockside
Belleville, Ontario K8P 3M7 CANADA
(613) 967-7900
SOLID STATE PINBALL TRISTAN:
Touted for having "realistic ball action
and tremendous scoring possibilities," it's
hard say more about a product like that
(grin). This impressive bit of software is a
great pinball game simulator, with
enough bells and whistles to give true
suspended disbelief to Mac users. The informative manual gives a history of pinball, while the copy protection is a list of
most of the important pinball machines
ever released and their manufacturers.
Macintosh LC/II ($69.95). Circle Reader
Service #1.
The Avalon Hill Game Company
Baltimore, MD
COMPUTER THIRD REICH: This
boardgame translation into silicon was
previewed in CGW issue 1/86, page 22.

Fairly faithful to the boardgame, the
"saved game turn by e-mail" feature is
probably its strongest point. Amiga, Atari
ST ($39.95). Circle Reader Service 112.
Broderbund
Novato, CA
JUST GRANDMA AND ME: This bit of
"story time" programming for children
ages 3-8 is delightful in its simple "click
and something happens" interface. On a
trip to the beach, Grandma (a gopher)
and her grandchild (the young user, also
a gopher) set out through adventures
and misadventures, supplemented by
easy-to-read sentences (which are also
read aloud for young learners). Just
about every image animates when clicked upon, giving young minds something
to keep them fascinated for hours upon
hours. Macintosh LC/II with CD-ROM
($54.95). Circle Reader Service 1/3.
Capstone
Miami, FL
FERN GULLY, THE LAST RAIN

Taking a Peek

FOREST: A computerized coloring book,
users will enjoy the line-art from the upcoming Don Bluth/Twentieth Century
Fox animated motion picture as they
"color" in the background and characters
using a 256-color VGA palette (of which
16 can be mixed at a time). Five different backgrounds and twenty different
characters are provided for "mix and
match" scene creation. Supporting a
wide range of printers, this ecology-touting product is printed on recycled paper
and ready to paint kids' minds a politically correct "green." IBM ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #4.
Domark
Distributed by Accolade
San Jose, CA
VIRTUAL REALITY STUDIO: Unless one
surrenders to the concept that anything
with 3-D polygon-filled graphics equals
"virtual reality," this product isn't it. However, it is a fascinating tool kit for creating and animating 3-D objects in 320 x
200 VGA resolution with a 256-color
palette. Users can create their own "walk
throughs," "fly bys" and even their own
games using this tool kit. Including its
own programming language, it is powerful enough to allow one to design "virtually" anything. IBM ($89.95). Circle Reader
Service #5.
Electronic Arts
Menlo Park, CA
BLACK CRYPT: As previewed in CGW
issue #91, page 30, this Dungeon
Master-style game includes full maps
and a cluebook. Amiga ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #6.
Interplay Productions
Santa Ana, CA
OMAR SHARIF ON BRIDGE: Even if
one has never bid a hand of bridge in
one's life, bidding becomes logical and
nearly intuitive in this game for amateurs
and advanced players alike. The digitized
voice option (Sound Blaster only) offers
a "Gee Whiz" aspect, but the beauty of
the game is its elegant "point and click"
interface combined with a capacity for
testing bridge problems with pre-dealt
hands. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #7.
Infogrames
France
GO SIMULATOR: The classic, ancient
game of strategy and intuition, this incarnation of Go comes in English, French
and German (with a cross-language glossary, no less) in this European import.
Using player-defined difficulty levels and
board sizes (from 9 x 9 to 19 x 19), this

package emphasizes the basics and will
help players learn and advance their skill
levels. IBM. Circle Reader Service #8.
MECC
6160 Summit Drive North
Minneapolis, MN 55430-4003
(612) 569-1500
THE SECRET ISLAND OF DR. QUANDARY: The strange and malevolent doctor manages to steal the energy force of
the player's character, leaving said character with the option of running the
gauntlet on his secret island or continuing life in the body of an aging carnival
toy. Through a combination of quick
thinking and quick reflexes, garners ages
eight and up will have plenty of challenges in store as they attempt to unravel
the puzzles in this game package. The
five island layouts and three difficulty
levels will keep adults, as well as
younger players, challenged. Indeed, special kudos are due the doe's docs. Written with charming brevity and wit in a
question-and-answer style, we are

amused! IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #9.
MicroLeague Sports
Newark, DE
MICROLEAGUE FANTASY MANAGER
(SPECIAL USA TODAY EDITION): Teaming up two top talents, Microleague
Sports and the telecommunications network sponsored by America's
newspaper, USA Today, this is fantasy
league/rotisserie design kit par excellence. From auction/draft day through
the end of the season, players will be
utilizing plenty of statistics (up to 14 different pitching categories and 17 batting
categories) as they constantly manage
and update their flexible-size rosters.
Trades, activations and free agents are
handled with a few simple mouse clicks.
With up-to-date statistics available for
download from the USA Today Sports
Center (among other methods), customizable rules and printable reports that
are clear and concise, any computer
baseball fanatic will want to look closely

Taking a Peek

at adding this new player to the lineup.
IBM ($49.95; not pictured). Circle Reader
Service #10.
New World Computing
Woodland Hills, CA
PLANET'S EDGE: The folks at New
World Computing can't seem to do anything on a small scale. Once again
they've combined their role-playing
design talents and their penchant for the
grandiose to create this magnum space
opus. The storyline may sound a bit
familiar (collect the parts of the humanitysaving machine), but the actual system
and universe is extremely well-done.
Players will sail the cosmic seas exploring hundreds of solar systems, collecting
and trading commodities with alien cultures, and engaging in Star Trek-esque
mini-adventures on alien worlds. It's a fun
way to see the uncharted backwaters of
the unfashionable end of the western
spiral arm of the Milky Way. IBM
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #11.
Tiger Media
5801 E. Slauson Avenue #200
Los Angeles, CA 90040
(213) 721-8282
THE CASE OF THE CAUTIOUS CONDOR: These two games present computer games in the genre of 1930s-era
"Airwave Adventures" in terms of sound
and storylines, with interactive, '50s-style
comic-bookish art. Both games are on
CD-ROM and support the Sound Blaster,
SB Pro and Thunderboard. Armed with a
cast of genre/pulp characters from the
cream of international society, this first
game is set aboard a luxury airliner (a la
Howard Hughes' "Spruce Goose") on
which a murder has been committed and
the player has 30 minutes to search out
the premises and find out "whodunit."
IBM CD-ROM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #12.
MURDER MAKES STRANGE DEADFELLOWS: The powerful patriarch of the
Steere family has died in a mysterious
fall and, as the family assembles in the
(now haunted) mansion for the reading
of the will, the player must guide earnest
young Nick through the adventure
ahead. In a collision of this world with the
next, humor and horror are blended as
the foul smell of foul play begins to permeate the premises. IBM CD-ROM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #13.
TTR Development, Inc.
Madison, WI
(608) 277-8071
4 GET IT: Another in the tradition of
strategy/puzzle solving games (alongside

Darwin's Dilemma and Shanghai), this
one has players dropping tiles from
precarious perches down through mazes
where they will touch like tiles and disappear. When a screen is cleared, players
advance to another (and more difficult)
level. Presented throughout using tonguein-cheek humor, this enjoyable distraction will keep players challenged and
smiling for quite a while. IBM ($44.95).
Circle Reader Service #14.
FUTURE WARS: THE RED STATE:
Hypothesizing a renegade long-range
bomber strike that launched thousands
of nuclear missiles at what used to be
the United States, this is an expansion
disk for Brigade Commander. Now, the
blue player must retake the America of
his forefathers from bases in Canada in
the new campaign game feature included
in the package. Amiga ($29.95; not pictured). Circle Reader Service #15.
THROMULUS: In this "battle for the
bloodstream" game, evil red mutant
blood cells are being fought by a blueblooded antidote in a strategy boardgame environment. With elements of
Othello, Blockade! and Go, this 0-2
human player mental match-up has
players inflicting white blood cells or
viruses and using moveable platelets in
addition to their normal "capture and convert" boardgame moves of jumping and
cloning. With three different board sizes
and a "biotech design" feature, this little
experiment might just be the cure for

several hours of boredom. Amiga
($44.95). Circle Reader Service #16.
Velocity
Palatine, IL
(708) 991-0594
SPECTRE: Packaged in a box the
shape of a familiar computer polygon,
this game is a cross between Stellar 7
and "capture the flag." Players select (or
"build") their own vehicles to take into
the arena or off-road as they zoom
around and zap each other on the way to
the objective(s). A multi-player network
mode is included in the package (however, it requires each player to own his
own personalized copy of the game). Interestingly, players can send away for a
"Spectre Network Party Pack" (complete
with invitations) to get around every
player needing to buy a copy of the
game. Hmmm... bet the boys in marketing dreamed up that one. Macintosh
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #17.
Virgin Games
Irvine, CA
THUNDERHAWK: A poor man's Gunship 2000, imagine a cross between
Cosmi's early helicopter game and EA's
LHX Attack Chopper. Utilizing some
Wing Commanderesque briefing segues
between missions, like that game it is
also easy to assimilate and begin playing. Includes a campaign game to go
along with the polygon-filled prescription
for action, action, action. IBM ($49.99).
Circle Reader Service #18.

Sneak Preview

Sneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. They are feature articles based on
"works in progress" that CGW's editors have deemed worthy of early coverage.
These articles are not intended to provide the "final word" on a product, since we expect to publish appropriate review coverage when, the game is completely finished.
Sneak Previews are designed to inform our readers about upcoming games and
generate excitement about the "state of the art" of computer game design in general.

reminded her of Clara Bow, the onscreen girl ingenue (or "It Girl," so known
after she played the lead in 1927's It)
who had that certain something (It?) that
made viewers know that she was going
to succeed. Indeed, Mario Thomas' Ann
Marie on That Girl offered something of
the same fresh-faced innocence combined with fierce determination that
made millions of girls believe that "That
Girl" could make it, that "That Girl" was
not just any girl.

emember when, in The Colonel's
Bequest, Laura left the safe, sane,
hallowed halls of Tulane University
to visit the bayou plantation home
of one of her school classmates?
Do images of an isolated plantation
(Misty Acres), where the cast of

related characters are hated by each
other and said cast is dropping faster
than trollops in a Jack the Ripper
novel ring a bell? If so, it should be
welcome news that Laura is ready to
make her way in the "real" world
now. She is headed for the "Big
Apple," and one almost expects her
to toss her Roaring '20s era hat triumphantly in the air a la That Girl of
the '60s.
In fact, the parallel is somewhat
striking. Roberta Williams originally
chose Laura's name because it

Yet, the parallel may even be more striking in the interaction between the creator
of Laura Bow, the designer/director of
Laura Bow in The Dagger of Amon Ra
and the character herself. Roberta envisioned The Colonel's Bequest as the
start of a new series with a female
protagonist. She neither expected nor
planned to direct all of the designs in the
series in the same way she designed the
original. So, in her current role as creator
of Laura Bow, she is taking the risk of
placing the destiny of her character in
other hands. To be sure, she placed her
character in the experienced hands of
Bruce Balfour (designer of Neuromancer, CGWs Adventure Game of the Year
for 1989), but they are different hands
nonetheless.
Just as John Bow, Laura's father, sends
his daughter off to New York to prove
her worth as a novice reporter for the
New York Daily Register News
Tribune, Roberta has allowed Bruce considerable free reign in sending Laura off
to new horizons and, in so doing, to attempt to earn his place among Sierra's
top designers. In fact, the idea of sending
Laura off to New York in The Dagger of
Amon Ra was, initially, something of a
surprise to Roberta. She had envisioned
the next Laura Bow as taking place in
New Orleans. Indeed, she had invested
quite a bit of time in researching and
mapping areas of New Orleans for just
such a contingency, but Bruce and Josh
Mandel (who currently directs develop-

Sneak Preview

by Johnny L. Wilson

ment of the in-house game designs) convinced her that all roads in both the film
and literary genres associated with irrepressible young female protagonists
led to New York.

name for the game involves the delightful denouement of the story. Laura is invited to the inquest in order to give her
evidence as to who the murderer or murderers may be. The coroner asks her
questions and the player provides the
answers by pointing at the menu and
clicking on the right answer. The program checks against the evidence which
Laura collected in the course of the
game and if the player is successful,
moves to the finale. If the player is unsuccessful, the game comes to a gruesome
end.

The Coroner's Inquest
At one point, the newest Laura Bow
game was almost entitled The Coroner's
Inquest. That would have been appropriate in several different ways. First,
the symmetry in the titles would have
united the games more closely in the
minds of potential customers. In the
sense that Laura is a continuing character and is true to her roots, that would
have been positive. Roberta gave Bruce
and Josh a list of "Would Do"s and
"Wouldn't Do"s with regard to Laura's
character and she believes the design
team has been true to her vision. In the
sense that the game still has the "punfully" clever tag lines after Laura's death
scenes, tying the two games together is
still appropriate. If anything, Balfour has
sharpened the slash of the word play.
In the sense of the look, feel and
design, however, the games are dramatically (pun intended) different. Where The
Colonel's Bequest was largely inspired
by the living theater style used in the
play Tamara (the long-running "stage"
production in which the audience
wanders from room to room in the old
manse where the murder occurred and
observes the action taking place in situ)
and featured plenty of non-interactive
eavesdropping and snooping, The Dagger of Amon Ra is much more interactive. Where the older game's background
scenery looked almost like a group of
stage sets, the newer game's settings are
beautiful interior settings that convey the
ideas of rooms more than sets. Where
the older game was divided into specific
announced acts (as in a play) in which
the player had to "perform" several
"Must Do"s prior to finishing a given act,
the newer game is divided into six acts

What's the Scoop?

that are neither announced nor entirely
visible. Where The Colonel's Bequest
had a very linear storyline and sometimes felt rather empty, The Dagger of
Amon Ra has more peripheral story elements and seems to hold to a livelier
pace.
Roberta Williams explained to CGW
that, although The Colonel's Bequest's
sales were not equivalent to the megahits
in the Sierra line, the satisfaction level
from those who did purchase the game
and did send in their registration cards
was the highest of any Sierra game.
She noted that the original Laura Bow adventure was particularly successful
among women. Her theory was that
women were more inclined to snoop
around and piece things together a little
at a time, while men wanted to be in control. Ironically, Bruce Balfour's design
reflects the more traditional control element of adventure game design, so it will
remain to be seen how well received The
Dagger of Amon Ra will be among the
devotees of the original.
The second reason that The Coroner's
Inquest would have been an appropriate

In The Dagger of Amon Ra, Laura
learns of both the pearls of New York
society and the perils of New York's
street life. The game begins with a freerunning animated introduction that sets
up a side plot, the main plot and the initial suspect. Of course, nothing in a '20s
era (or any era) murder mystery is as
simple as it seems. So, by the time Laura
arrives in NY, experiences a classic NY
welcome, is given her first reporting assignment and meets one of her rivals,
the gamer is ready for what proves to be
a serpentine plot.
Rich in historical allusion to the time
period being portrayed, the central plot
hinges on an Egyptian artifact (it doesn't
take much of a guess to figure out which
one) which has been stolen from a new
museum exhibition. The discoverer of the
artifact is Pippin Carter (Howard Carter's
smarter brother?). At another time, Laura
may find the autograph of up and coming minor league baseball star, Bob Ruth
(the Bobbino?). As Balfour told CGW,
"There seem to be a lot of famous
'brothers' in this game."
Not only does the game hint at personalities from the era, beyond the discoverer of Tut's tomb and the future
home-run king, but it also offers the expected ambience associated with the
time period. One finds flappers at the

Sneak Preview

local speakeasy, clever (but intentionally
limited) dialects, beautiful costumes and
art deco interiors. There is also a fascination with foreign and exotic persons and
items, as would be appropriate to the
post-war era of expatriate citizens (Fitzgerald, Hemingway, Miller, Stein et al.).

Fresh Interface and a Willing Espirit
CGWs early look at The Dagger of
Amon Ra, as well as King's Quest VI
and Quest for Glory 3, offers considerable evidence that Sierra has overcome
the most oft-sounded complaint about
the new interface. According to Roberta,
the first three titles all had the same draw
back. Roberta, Al Lowe (Leisure Suit
Larry V) and Jim Walls (Police Quest 3)
were so used to designing games for a
parser that, even though they thought
they had considered all the design implications, the games turned out to be
too easy and too short. As Roberta observed, "King's Quest V was really
linear. You pick up lots of objects and
put them in different places. There were
a couple of timing puzzles, but that was
basically it." In a later discussion, she
elaborated further, "We've looked back
at the first three parserless games and
noticed that there are entirely too many
cartoon sequences that just run on and
on. We aren't comfortable with simply
providing computerized movies."
In The Dagger of Amon Ra, Laura
uses a notebook interface to communicate with suspects, acquaintances and informers. The notebook is divided, for
easy reference, into persons, places,
things and miscellaneous. The notebook
is dynamic (adding new entries without
any effort from the player whenever new
names, items or locales are mentioned in
the dialogue) and allows Laura to ask
any character in the game about anything of which she is aware to that point.
Even mundane encounters with minor
characters become potentially rich in this
type of environment.
Beyond the notebook interface, a worthy addition to the tools of parserless
games, the game features familiar icons
in the command line. In keeping with the
atmosphere of the game, however, the
icons have been made to look like Egyptian hieroglyphics. Egyptian
hieroglyphics play an important role in
solving the mystery, too. At one point in
the game, the player can use the characters stored in the notebook to solve puzzles. Apparently, Sierra garners are
ready for this kind of challenge because
the company received 7,500 responses

to a contest in their promotional
magazine which used hieroglyphics, compared to under 2,000 responses for a
more typical promotional contest.
Besides the Egyptian aspects, The Dagger of Amon Ra boasts some other fresh
looks. Programmer Jack Magne has
developed a scaling technique that will
be used in all the upcoming Sierra adventures. The technique allows for more
realistic images at more than the industry standard three sizes. Instead, images smoothly shrink and enlarge using
a distance formula calculated on the fly
from a vanishing point.
Sierra's artists are also becoming more
versatile in the way they combine various
techniques. The current bag of tricks involves: painted/scanned backgrounds,
scanned/painted pencil animations, rotoscoping and stop-motion. With the new
scaling and art techniques, The Dagger
of Amon Ra features plenty of new
looks. One impressive screen shows a
close-up of the main characters from the
murderer's perspective. Most interestingly, the murderer is crawling up the inside
of a dinosaur at the time and the characters are framed by the sharp teeth of the
carnivore. Another special effect takes
place when the characters light a lantern.
The screen is dark, then illuminates a
shaft (replete with its own hieroglyphics)
slanted diagonally upward from the bottom left-hand corner of the screen to the
top right-hand corner. In addition, the
Sierra toolset now includes a "magnification" routine that allows the artists to display portions of the screen as though
one were looking through a magnifying
glass. Amiga owners may remember the
effect from Cinemaware's classic Sinbad game. CD-ROM garners would know
the effect from ICOM's Sherlock. In
short, the games are getting prettier and
The Dagger of Amon Ra is no exception.

Will Laura Bow Make Good?
Laura Bow 11— The Dagger of Amon
Ra looks like the kind of game that will
be campy, funny, challenging, satisfying
and, above all, entertaining. One wonders
if the game will be more or less successful with a male-dominated design team
and more control-oriented puzzles. Will
women still like to play it? Will it get the
original The Colonel's Bequest players
plus some new ones? Ironically, both
Roberta Williams and Bruce Balfour must
be wondering how Laura is going to do
in the big city. All the elements for success are certainly present, but it remains
for the community of garners to decide if
she's got It.

Industry News

• Roberta Williams' Scary Tales will be
the first CD-only product from Sierra. According to Roberta, it will feature 640 x
400 resolution, real actors, photo-realistic
backgrounds, full speech and full soundtrack, replete with eerie sound effects.
• Legend will soon unveil the third
product in Steve Meretzky's comedy adventure series, Spellcasting 301: Spring
Break. Why are we not surprised that
most of the action takes place at Port
Naughtytale?
• Task Force 1942, a simulation/wargame featuring tactical naval action, is
currently under development at Microprose. Admiral William P. Mack (ret.) of
Seventh Fleet fame is consulting on the
project. A "slide show" can be downloaded from the GEnie network for those
who want to see how some of the
screens will look.
• Villa Crespo Software is working
on a budget line of products called the

Coffee Break Series. These are expected
to be smaller versions of some of their
premium games. At $12.95 (suggested
retail price), the games will not have all
the "bells and whistles" of the company's
front-line games, but we know they will
be great-playing games.
• Comedy may be king in the fall. In
addition to Spellcasting 301, Legend is
hard at work on Eric the Unready — a
comic fantasy saga about the "unluckiest
hero in the kingdom." On a slightly more
modern front, Sierra's Al Lowe is
believed to be working on a "Blazing Saddles"-style comedy-western project. No,
the working title is not going to be
Leisure Suit Bartender.
• Those of us anxious to enter the CDROM gaming world on a budget hope
that Sega's limited success in marketing
the CD-ROM in Japan (our sources indicate sales of only 80,000 units since the
late 1991 launch) will not delay the U.S.
launch. Only one product in Japan

seems to really use the capabilities of the
hardware, but several U.S. companies
are planning to insure that this isn't the
case in the U.S. CGW recently saw some
of the work being done on Sega CD
products at Sierra. Corey Cole, co-designer of the Quest for Glory series, is currently working on Sega CD-ROM
projects. Adventures of Willy Beamish
and King's Quest V are expected to be
the first two out of the gate for Sierra/Dynamix.
• For those wondering what Jeff Tunnell, former president of Dynamix, is up
to, our spies tell us that his group (still
working with Dynamix) is planning to
publish a screen-saver for Windows 3.1
called The Castaway. It is a delightful online cartoon in which a little guy
marooned on a desert island wanders all
about the island, breaking out fishing
gear, throwing coconuts at passing ships,
putting notes in bottles, etc.
• Finally, for those who never got the
word: Quest for Glory 3 will take place
in darkest Africa. The creative team has
really come together and they are happy
with this one.

Industry News

Consumer Software and
the Mass Crusade
Reflections on the Spring Symposium of
the Software Publishers Association

open their checkbooks to provide "state
of the art" special effects for first-run feature films. Neither a network nor a cable
executive would be as likely to approve
such effects for a "made for TV" movie.
Both are viable markets, but the technological entry level is different. Likewise,
in the print media, there are hardcover,
trade paperback and mass paperback
markets. A book that premiers in
hardcover is much more likely to have
advertising and promotion attached to its
release than either type of paperback.
Yet many more mass paperback copies
of certain titles sell than the same titles
rang up in hardbound.
Lip until this conference, most executives in the software industry looked at
the film and television metaphors, as well
as the mass paperback example, as the
type of numbers that would enable them
to generate optimal revenue and, possibly, have maximum control of their
products. Yet, these same executives
wanted to be able to produce the flashy
new high-tech products that gain both
the industry's and the consumer's attention. They longed for the time when the
channel of distribution would give them
the same type of installed base as that of
the multiple channels of distribution available to other entertainment industries.

t is very likely that the average COW
reader would prefer that the space allotted to articles on the Spring Symposia and Fall Conferences of the
Software Publishers Association be
used for reviews or strategy articles on a
computer game (any computer game).
It is, however, just as true that there are
many CGW readers who, like the
editorial staff, feel that the panels and
speeches given at industry events are significant enough to give them insight on
where the entertainment software business is going and how that direction will
affect them. Frankly, there are plenty of
different directions the movers, shakers,
bean counters, litigators and entrepreneurs can take this fascinating technology we call interactive entertainment and
some of these directions do not bode
well for computer gaming enthusiasts.

I

The Search for the Holy
Grail
For the years that CGW has been involved with the Software Publishers Association (SPA), there has always been
a longing for the holy grail of becoming
a mass media. The financial wizards and

marketing myth-makers (with the topspin
and backspin associated with both levels
of executives) responsible for keeping
software publishers "in the black" and
growing (at the best) or surviving (at the
worst) have long been on a quest for the
ethereal glory associated with, and the
tangible rewards to be gleaned from, the
capacity of reaching the masses with
their computer games. These evangelists
of the electronic playground lust in their
hearts over potential revenues equivalent
to the television, film or recording industries. Yet the panel on the "State of
the Consumer Software Industry,"
moderated by Keith Ferrell of Omni
magazine fame, only managed to put the
grail of an entertainment software mass
market in the spotlight. It did not help
software publishers get enough grime off
that grail to shine it up and see what it
really looks like.
Most mass media, whether it is filmed
(or videotaped), recorded or printed entertainment is basically two-tiered. In filmed
entertainment, there is a difference between the box office, network television,
cable television and the video rental
store. For reaching the customer at the
box office, motion picture executives will

At this conference, Mark Goldstein of
Reality Technologies (developers of
WealthBuilder and other personal
finance programs, as well as the CEO
game on the Prodigy service) suggested
that the channel had become channels
of distribution. He cited the existence of
good lists of computer-literate consumers, proliferation of more general
venues (Price Club, Sears), on-line ordering through commercial networks and increase of superstores as providing new
opportunities to reach customers. "Our
dream," he elaborated, "is that in three
years, the PC will become just another
stereo component."
Gerry Blair (Vice-President of Marketing
at Microprose) expanded upon the possibilities cited by Goldstein when he observed that OEM possibilities (in this
sense, this usually means bundling
software with hardware purchases) were
becoming more prevalent and allowed
entertainment software publishers to get
their products before new groups of
potential customers. He predicted that
the bundling strategy would become
even more important in the future as part
of a multi-focused approach to reaching
new customers.
Both executives merely mentioned the
additional opportunities, but the implica-

Industry News

tions of these new opportunities were not
lost on the audience. During the question
and answer period, concerned developers
and publishers asked if the new opportunities would cause companies to offer
"cut-down" versions of their products.
Goldstein replied with a resounding "No!"
Blair explained that the mass market opportunity would require better life-cycle
management of products. He noted that
games that have begun to slow in sales
in the premium channel may be revitalized at lower prices in the mass-market
channel. Though he did not draw the
print publishing analogy, his point might
well have been illustrated by the fact that
today's best-selling hardcover may well
be next year's best-selling paperback.
Following on those lines, an audience
member asked the panel if "watering
down" the product included packaging.
The consensus of the panel seemed to
be that mass market editions and OEM
versions would not have the same type
of documentation and packaging as the
first-release product. None of the
panelists wanted to advocate partial
programs as being the answer for reaching the price points necessary to reach
mass market audiences.
Annette Schofield of LivingSoft, Inc.
challenged the audience to search for alternative products and alternative
markets. Schofield's company publishes
a program called Dress Shop that
enables users to modify dress patterns
on the computer and print them out. She
noted how few computer products
seemed to be designed with women in
mind. A representative of ICOM noted
that 30% of their customers were women
and a Maxis executive suggested that
their registrations indicated about 10%
women in their customer base. Blair observed that Microprose's audience was
predominantly 25-45 year old males.
Perhaps the most hopeful observation
for garners during this panel was that
Microprose is becoming increasingly
aware of the importance of modem play.
"We believe," Blair affirmed, " that
modem play is an important feature for
real garners. Mac garners want to play
IBM garners." The comment offers hope
to garners who are just beginning to discover the joys of connectability and implies that there may be a future opportunity for software being bundled with
modems in the near future.

Video Games — Are We
Having Fun, Yet?
Of course, the irony of the mass
market grail may be seen in the fact that

entertainment software companies have
a mass market in the video game world.
Indeed, entertainment software publishers
have been very successful in licensing or
publishing their successful floppy-based
products on the 16-bit cartridge platforms.
In a very real sense, Ed Thomas (a
senior buyer for Waldensoft) made this
clear when he described the different
audiences for computer platforms. The
personal computer, he observed, appeals
to older, more affluent players. They applaud more innovation and variety in
their games and can get mature subject
matter that is not currently available on
video game machines. Further, the 8-bit
videogamer requires familiarity in theme
and presentation. They buy the same
style of game over and over. Now, with
the 16-bit platforms, an older audience
that enjoys more intricate game play has
arrived and the audience is expected to
expand when the CD-ROM drives reach
the consumer level.

Dare we suggest that personal computer games are analogous to
hardcovers, 16-bit videogames to paperbacks and 8-bit videogames to books in
a formula-based series (i.e. romance
novels and pulp adventures)? Jeff Braun
of Maxis believes that the industry's problem is that it has focused on the CDROM media and platforms instead of considering the content and technology that
really distinguishes a product. He
believes that the key to reaching a larger
market with all interactive media (CDROM, personal computers and
videogames) is to try to come up with
software that no one has expected.
Braun's appeal to quality closed with a
quotation from Bill Harrah of the successful casino chain, "You just give people
quality and they recognize it."
It may well be that the so-called "holy
grail" of the mass media has been right
in front of the entertainment software industry all along. Quality may very well
be the determining factor in success. Cer-

tainly GamePro's John Rousseau did
nothing to dispel that contention when he
observed that the caliber of movie games
(i.e. games based on motion picture licenses) had been lousy in the last few years,
so most of his readers would not buy
them anymore. Diane Drosnes' (Director
of Licensing, SEGA of America) presentation almost immediately followed up
Rousseau's comment with the caveat
that movie licenses are a "crapshoot."
She underlined the fact that a license can
bring attention to a game, generate additional publicity and offer promotional opportunities, but observed that it contributes to a higher price and cost of
goods without guaranteeing the success
of a game. It remained unsaid that the
game would eventually determine its
own level of success.
Drosnes' presentation underscored the
changing nature of licensed entertainment, however. Her list of questions highlighted the close relationship between
film products and licensed game in a
new era of intermedla (multimedia): "Can
you tie in the licensing fees [for a film
license] with box office performance?"
"Will you be able to use the stars' likenesses?" "Will the music be part of the
license or require a separate negotiation?" "Will you be able to use film clips
[both in the game and as part of promotion] for your game?" "Will you have access to the sets for shooting footage for
backgrounds?" "Will there be opportunities for cross-promotion?" and "Will
the film distributor include the game in
the ads for the film?" Such questions indicate a growing and more sophisticated
market with new design and marketing
challenges. Certainly, licensed products
close the gap between that ephemeral
"mass market" that software publishers
long to reach and their traditional
market. How successful publishers are
going to be in reaching that "mass
market" may well depend on the answers
to such questions.

Shining the Grail
The new opportunities in marketing
channels and additional platforms go a
considerable way toward assisting
software publishers in their ongoing
quest for the holy grail of "mass market"
sales. The gaming community must
hope, however, that in grasping for that
broader market, the publishers do not forget their existing kingdom — the realm of
early adopters, dedicated garners and
sophisticated consumers. CGW predicts
that this year's SPA Spring Symposium will not offer the last discussions
on this quest for the holy grail.

Computer gaming in days gone by
t's time once again to sit back and take a nostalgic tour of
computer gaming in days gone by, as seen through the pages
of the oldest computer gaming magazine in the world: Computer Gaming World. In the May-June 1982 issue of CGW, we
reviewed what would become one of the classic computer games
of all time_ We said:

I

Wizardry: The Proving Grounds of the Mad Overlord
is a game of epic proportions comprising nearly 14,000
lines of code on both sides of a diskette. The brainchild of
Andrew Greenberg and Robert Woodhead, Wizardry is the
culmination of nearly two and a half man-years of intensive effort. The original Wizardry program was written in
BASIC, which proved too slow to make the game a viable
product. The game was rewritten in Pascal but was
delayed until the release of a runtime Pascal system
which would allow the game to be played on Apples
without language systems. The final result is a game
which is superbly playable but with enough
variation and complexity
to whet the appetite of
the most discriminating
adventurer.
Compared with other
games of the time, Wizardry
was indeed a large game.
Most games of the day took
a man-year or less to program. However, most top-selling computer games these
days have 6 to 8 man-years
of development in them. Up
to twelve people worked on
Wizardry VII (Crusaders of
the Dark Savant) for 18
months. The 14,000 lines of
code in Proving Grounds
produced a game of 10 dungeon levels. If Wizardry VII
had been done in the same
manner, the volume of code
would have translated to 240
Proving Ground levels!
In conclusion the author
made the bold assertion:
I would rate Wizardry as
one of the all-time classic
computer games. It sets
the standard by which all
fantasy role playing
games should be compared. In the years to come, if there is ever a Gaming Hall
of Fame, Wizardry receives my vote as the first entry into
its hallowed halls."
Indeed, when the Computer Gaming World Hall of Fame was
instituted in May 1988, Wizardry was one of the original nine inductees.
In that same issue, ten years ago, CGW interviewed Roberta Williams concerning her latest design: Time Zone. We said:
At six two-sided disks, Time Zone is easily the largest
game available. A game of this magnitude must, because
of sheer size alone, become a landmark in the computer
gaming hobby. As to whether the game becomes more
than a landmark (i.e. a "watershed game" or "classic")
remains to be seen. It will be interesting to see how you,

the buying public, responds to this huge and expensive
game ($99.95).
The judgment of time is that Time Zone was indeed a landmark
game, but it did not become a classic in the Wizardry sense.
In the June-July 1987 issue of CGW (#38), King's Quest III (To
Heir is Human) and Bard's Tale II (The Destiny Knight), among
others, were reviewed.
In a company report on Activision, Charles Ardai revealed an interesting rumor. He said:
Activision, it seems, is working on a Neuromancer computer game, which will probably feature art by Peter Max,
an original soundtrack by Devo, backing by Timothy
Leary and promotion by celebrities such as Grace Jones.
Certainly, this is a program worth waiting for. Will it be a
good game, however? That, in the end, is the question Activision must face.
Well, sort of.
The game did get made,
but by an Activision/Mediagenic affiliate: Interplay
Productions. And it was good
enough to receive the 1989
Computer Gaming World
Adventure Game of the
Year award.

In the same issue Scorpia
did a think piece on the state
of the art in computer
games. Five years ago she
said:
We stand now in the
dawn of the 16-bit computer [Ed. note: she means
computer here, not
cartridge machine]. These
are the machines of the future. With their superior
graphics and huge
amounts of memory, the
possibilities for the CRPG
are enormous. If Lord
British can do so much
with 64K, what is the
potential with 256K or
512K or more? The
prospect is truly mind-boggling.
Think of what could be
done: monsters you can converse with, and perhaps outwit without having to draw your sword; NPCs who join
your party, who have definite personalities of their own,
and behave like real people. A world that changes in
response to your actions, for better or worse, throughout
the game. The list is almost endless.
With all this additional memory, the question is: will the
game designers and programmers work on enhancing,
broadening, and refining the personal, or will they follow
the same old path of hack-and-slash, glossed over with
prettier graphics and nicer sound effects? Only time will
tell.
It sort of sounds like something Scorpia would write in 1992,
doesn't it?

International Viewpoint

Orient Impressed
CGW's Editor Gets an International Education
by Johnny L. Wilson

he

"ubiquitous they" tend
to mouth cliches such as
"Travel is broadening!" This
can be frightening when one's
physique is, as in this editor's
case, already as wide as the
whales one joins Greenpeace to
rescue. It can also be frightening
when, again in this editor's case,
one tends to already be so
"broad-minded" that he is accused of setting a wide mental
spinnaker to try to catch any gist
of an idea. Indeed, some have
claimed he latches onto these
zephyr-like ideas in order to
nudge the bow of his arguments
ahead of the competition without
actually having to worry about
the precise direction in which the logical
finish line lies.

T

So, it should come as a pleasant
surprise to the readers of this magazine
that, during a recent tour of companies
in the Japanese and Taiwanese entertainment software industry, this jaded journalist had all his presuppositions about
Japan and Taiwan turned on end. He
learned that, in many cases, the
presumed finish line of his presuppositions was more like the starting line of
reality.
Global Myth #1: Nearly every
Japanese household has a personal computer.
More Accurate Observation #1: Not
very many Japanese homes actually
have personal computers. Apple
believes that it is making great inroads in
the personal computer market because
they have a user base of over 200,000
color Macintosh computers in the
market. Mr. Yoichi Erikawa, President
and CEO of Koei Corporation agrees
that the Macintosh is growing at a fast
pace in Japan, but observes that most
are being used in businesses for purposes of desktop publishing. He does not
perceive the Mac as necessarily winning
the battle of the home. Apple may be
able to do so, however, as this editor saw

users to put Japanese software
on more standardized MS-DOS
clones. DOS V is also supposed
to be Windows-compatible in
the long run and will be able to
support desktop publishing
(which the 9801 has not been
able to accomplish). Several industry observers hope DOS V
will make personal computers
more accessible by bringing
costs down, but note that the
DOS V standard is being advocated by hardware manufacturers that lost out to NEC in an
earlier battle for a standard.

Macintosh LCs on sale in Akihabara, the
major electronics district in Tokyo, for
the same price he had paid for an LC in
the U.S. prior to Apple's last round of
price cuts (see picture on page 28).
On the DOS side, the NEC 9801 computer handles Japanese text (Kanji) characters via ROM and is considerably more
expensive than IBM clones in the United
States. Many software developers in
Japan long for the days when such an expensive proposition will be superseded
by DOS V, a powerful new operating system that can handle Japanese characters
through software solutions and allows

In the meantime, while
John(ny) Scully(seed) is planting Apples in the land of the
rising sun and DOS V tries to win its "victory," there are millions of videogame
consoles to be supported. Nintendo's
SuperFamicom (i.e. Super Nintendo)
gets serious attention in Japan. More
than a half-dozen magazines cover the
platform, as well as NEC's PC Engine
(i.e. Turbo-Grafx 16) and Sega's MegaDrive (i.e. Genesis).
One really fascinating discovery for this
editor was that there are so many dedicated word processors in Japan that companies like ASCII Software are converting computer games, complete with
graphics, to the word processor format.
We saw word processor versions of
Activision's original Shanghai and a
Hello Kitty! game in progress (pictured).
Global Myth #2: Anything American
will sell in the Japanese market.
More Accurate Observation #2: Although SimCity was a phenomenal success in Japan, SimEarth on the SuperFamicom has left most Japanese
garners cold. The software toy idea just
does not seem to translate very well to
the Japanese market. Koei's strategy
games sell extremely well on the consoles, but they are the exception rather
than the rule. Instead, there is a heavy action orientation to the Japanese market.
Videogames which emulate the fast-scroll-

International Viewpoint

provincial preference for strategy
games over challenging action games.
Global Myth #3: The Japanese
don't really care what Americans
think.
More Accurate Observation #3:
On the contrary, Sega takes into consideration the American market whenever they are making acquisition
decisions for third-party or licensed
products. Some products that might
have been perfectly acceptable in the
Japanese context have been rejected
because they could not be sold in
the American market.
ing action, bright color palettes and loud
soundtracks of the coin-op arcades
(which are still flourishing in every major
neighborhood, usually multi-storied)
seem most successful. As Activision's
Bill Swartz joked (when walking by a coinop arcade in Shinjuku where young
adolescent males were physically kickboxing with a custom coin-op game),
"You're not in Kansas anymore." Actually, Japanese journalists were rather disappointed with CGWs editor because of his

Indeed, Koei thought that they
might be focusing too narrowly on
Chinese and Japanese history with
their games. So, in addition to the
recently released L'Empereur, the
company plans to release Liberty or
Death and PTO — Pacific Theatre of
Operations in the U.S. during November of 1992.
Global Myth #4: Taiwan is a
smaller personal computer market
than Japan.

More Accurate Observation #4:
Taiwan alone has more than one million
personal computers. With 30% of these
computers in the home, this represents a
significantly larger penetration of computers per household than is found in
Japan. Though most computer games
sell under 10,000 units in Hong Kong
and Taiwan combined, the Chinese-speaking market is still a significant market. In
addition to computer games, the health
of the hobby in Taiwan may be seen by
the fact that the Chinese version of Corn-

International Viewpoint

flight to legitimacy was Asia Recording. Under the leadership of Chin-Po
Wang (President and CEO) and
Stephen Wong (editor of Chinese
CGW), Asia Recording aggressively
purchased licenses to publish
legitimate versions of U.S. software
products in Chinese markets. Such
licenses have effectively doubled the
price that garners pay for computer
games in Taiwan. With Acer, another
former pirate company and a rival to
Asia, entering the field, the bidding is
sure to escalate and the prices continue to increase. What that will
do to American software sales in
Chinese-speaking markets
remains to be seen.
puter Gaming World sells 15,000 copies
per month.
Global Myth #5: All the Taiwanese do
is pirate software.
More Accurate Observation #5:
Taiwanese copyright law is changing.
This means that even the companies
which formerly pirated software are going
to become legitimate in the next few
years. One of the early leaders in this

Asia Recording is not sitting idly
by, however. They have hired Yang
Ti as the planner for the company's
research and development. He has
just finished working on two original
titles for Asia. One is a Chinese
CRPG with the title Shadow Knights.
Artist Chang Kuen Yao has created a
look reminiscent of Might and Magic
III and utilized an interface similar to
Times or Lore in order to tell an an-

cient Chinese legend scripted by Wu
Chen Yee. A more traditional "occiden
tal" CRPG is also in the works at the
Taipei studio.
Global Truth? Computer entertainment, for all its differences in taste, cultures, platforms and expectations, is a
catalyst in building the global community. Playing together is important if
we are to learn how to get along
together. This journalist is absolutely convinced that computer gaming can help
us understand ourselves and others.
Here's hoping that's positive! caw

Review

Divine Mana-dement

TITLE:
Populous II: Trials of the Olympian Gods
SYSTEM:
Amiga
PROTECTION: Document Look-up
PRICE:
$49.95
DEVELOPER:
Bullfrog Productions Ltd.
DISTRIBUTOR: Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

by Maxwell Eden

H

omer (no, not Bart Simpson's father) writes

in the epic Iliad of a war between the
Greeks and the Trojans that includes a classic tale 6f deception. After besieging Troy for nine
years, the Greeks pretended to depart, leaving behind a huge wooden horse, which the Trojans triumphantly took into the walled city. Warriors hidden inside the horse later opened the city gates
and the Greek army sacked Troy.
Like the Trojan Horse, once Populous ll (Pop II)
is gleefully running inside the computer, nothing
can stop hordes of "sprite"ly, "byte"-sized worshippers from invading the screen. Players will be held
captive by losing all track of time.
Building upon and greatly enhancing the deity
powers and strategic conventions of the best-selling Populous, in which the world just wasn't big
enough for two supreme beings, Pop ll transports
players into an absorbing, non-stop struggle for
power, using Greek mythology as a backdrop.

The God Father, By Zeus!
As an offspring son of mortal woman and supreme god Zeus,
the player demands that his father grant him his birthright — immortality and a seat among the gods of the Pantheon. Zeus conditionally accepts by making his son an offer he can't refuse.
Defeat 32 gods and goddesses who rule the 1000 worlds of Pop
II. Then, for the final showdown, beat Zeus at his own game and
become an Olympian god.
Pop II is well-paced and entertaining, with a smooth interactive
interface. Players will be swept up in the visually superb, constant
ly animated excitement. The Divine Intervention Effects sequences are the stars of this show and include an awesome arsenal of
devastation such as Lightening, Plague, Whirlwinds, Fire
Columns, Tidal Waves and Hurricanes to name a few.
Willing to give his upstart mortal son a shot at the title, Zeus endows him with the power to choose his very own god persona
and name. By selecting from a variety of eyes, mouths and headpieces, the player conjures up a countenance that may appear
benevolent and wise, fierce and war-like, brutish and cruel, or
some variation of these characteristics. Since the player's "god
looks" are crucial to how the other deities in Pop II react in battle, an image should be selected carefully. If the player has an aggressive look, the opponent god may wage war even harder.
Adopt a scholarly appearance and combat tends to be more subtle and clever. A deity may respond violently to an opposing firegod and passively to a water-god.
To get things started, Zeus also throws in a few critical thunderbolts of deity experience. Measly though they might seem, the
player applies these thunderbolts toward mastery of People,
Vegetation, Earth, Air, Fire and Water — the six forces of nature
known as the Divine Intervention Effects.

Best Seat in the House
The player looks down upon the earth in a godly three-quarter
angle vista that makes for a superb 3-D perspective of all the
commotion. There are three views. The Close-Up Map, World
Map and the Colosseum appear simultaneously as islands floating in space. Two-thirds of the screen is devoted to the close-up

map, where players carry out divine acts, view
settlements and walkers, watch battles and
destroy enemy land. Bordering the close-up map
are the Divine Intervention Effects and Basic
Commands icon menu bars that control the
game.
Since moving around the land and invoking effects quickly is
fundamental to winning, Pop Ifs point-and-dick icon-driven system is ideal for fast game play. Zeus starts players out with a few
divine effects; the rest must be acquired by winning worlds, and
which earned effects the player can use varies from world to
world.
The Close-Up Map displays a magnified area of a corresponding point located on the World Map, which represents the entire
landscape of the current world. As the game begins, "Good" and
"Bad" populations usually inhabit opposite sides of the map.
Blinking dots of different colors provide information about Good
and Bad settlements and what catastrophic tricks the opponent
god is up to.
As the Good (blue) and Bad (red) populations grow, representatives of both sides enter the Colosseum. Good worshippers
sit on the left and Bad on the right, so players can tell at a
glance how well they're doing. The Colosseum can also display
the level of intelligence of a settlement, or a "Walker" (the
peripatetic on-screen character who represents a group of worshippers).
Sounds are an integral aspect of Pop II. A steady heartbeat is
heard throughout the game; the slower it pounds, the healthier
the player. At times, a roaring blaze, rumbling earthquake, or
brewing tidal wave evokes screams from the blue population or
the tell-tale "caw-caw" of vultures (plague) provides audible signals that the opponent deity is wreaking havoc on Good settlements. Players must check to see what's going on and, if possible, repair land and save the lives of their worshippers.

Greece Lightning
There are two modes of play: Conquest Games and Custom
Games. There is also a Serial Game option which permits play
against a human opponent via data link between computers by
modem or serial cable.
In Conquest mode, the player must win a series of worlds by
decidedly defeating opponent gods. Worlds get progressively
more difficult as players face both harsher terrain types and
more potent Divine Intervention Effects from stronger gods. Fortunately, one can opt to use the Computer Assist feature so that

Review

it is possible to concentrate on defeating
the enemy while the computer takes
over routine responsibilities (lowering/raising land and spreading settlements, etc.).
Players who conquer worlds are
rewarded with thunderbolts of experience
by the defeated god. How many thunderbolts depends on how deftly the player
won. Marginal wins may mean no
thunderbolts. The more experience a
player has in a specific element, the
more potent the powers of destruction in
that category. Each time a player wins,
or loses a world, Zeus provides the name
of the next world to tackle. One should
write down this name; games can be
saved and resumed. Players don't necessarily have to conquer all 1,000 worlds in
succession. Winning a battle skillfully often means skipping
several worlds ahead.
Custom mode lets the player call the shots by changing the variables of a world before attempting to conquer it. While Custom
games won't advance players toward the final victory against
Zeus in the Conquest series, it is useful for experimentation.

Mana Grows on Trees
Of course, a god without worshippers is a god without mana
and that adds up to a bankrupt deity for both player and opponent. As in the original Populous, mana is still the currency
for controlling the forces of nature and unleashing judgments
upon the enemy. Mana comes from the spiritual offerings of the
player's population. A savvy god earns more mana by spending
some mana to materialize roads, walled cities and greenery.
Although the Greek deities had control over nature, their
powers were severely limited by a monkey wrench called fate,
which takes the form of unpredictable acts of destruction during
a Conquest game — randomly benefiting Bad or Good.

Follow the Leader
Papal Magnets are icons of worship that are vital tactical tools
in playing the game. A papal magnet is used by Good and Bad
to create leaders (male or female) and heroes, as well as to influence the population to follow the leader into new territory. A
unique icon distinguishes the Good from the Bad papal magnet.
Good and Bad are terms used solely to differentiate sides, not
suggest a struggle between good and evil. life on the player's
side is no better or worse than under the "bad" god. In Conquest
games, the player is Good and the opponent is Bad by default.
Among the worshippers are Walkers, who represent the total
population of a particular settlement. Walkers are seen on the
close-up map trekking, building, growing old, dying and fighting
enemy Walkers. The level of intelligence of a Walker is equal to
the technology of the dwelling they
emerged from (i.e. if they came from a
hut, they're primitive; if they came from
a fortified castle, they're more advanced).
The first Walker to encounter the papal
magnet is engulfed in a blue flame that
converts him or her into the leader. Only
when a leader has been created can a
player move the papal magnet to
another area on the world map. One tactic is to move the magnet to Bad territory, then influence Good Walkers to
move toward the icon, killing the enemy
while establishing settlements along the
way. Once leaders are created, both the
player and opponent god can use the
papal magnet to transform said leader
into one of six (one from each element

of effects) Heroes, each able to employ a
unique method for destroying the enemy.
Hero Achilles, for example, is a fast runner with a head of flames who burns all
enemies in his path. Perseus, the most intelligent of the Greek heroes, makes a
strong and skillful soldier on a crusade to
destroy Bad settlements. Follow each
hero to observe his strengths and weaknesses. Although heroes are much
stronger than leaders, they weaken in battle and can be killed by overwhelming
odds. Players may, with sufficient mana,
turn as many leaders into heroes as they
wish. Each time a player creates a hero,
a new leader must be ordained by the
blue flame ritual. Opponent deities can
also transform their leaders into the
same heroes who fight against Good.

To Err Is Human, To Forgive Divine
Criticisms of Pop II amount to a tempest in a teapot. Still, there
are several items worth mentioning. The manual says that Helen
of Troy, the water element hero, leads enemy Walkers to a
watery grave. More precisely, she marches into enemy territory
and charms opposing worshippers away from their jobs until
they die. When the "Show Opponent Deity" button is toggled on
the "Next Conquest Screen," text describing the god is sometimes incomplete. Finally, sound effects, while excellent overall,
often lag behind the player's frenzy of divine devastation.
Pop II is a game of war, so it is understandable that the
majority of special effects are destructive with only a few constructive effects thrown in. Baptismal Fonts, for example, are useful tools for converting Walkers to the opposite faith. By placing
fonts in the middle of enemy territory, enemy units which fall into
the fonts will come out Good. It is simply too bad that the game
focuses on artifacts as the method of conversion rather than
having rival populations respond to more productive, humane
acts. The latter would provide more intrigue and a sense of
morality. What if sparing a badly beaten enemy settlement
counted for something with Zeus?

Awe-Struck
Remember the episode in Fantasia in which Mickey Mouse was
the Sorcerer's Apprentice and lost control of his master's
magic? Divine power without experience can backfire. For example, Laying Plague to the enemy can spread to the player's
own turf. Conversely, if the opponent deity casts a plague on
Good worshippers, players can invade and infect the opposition.
Killing enemy leaders quickly and as often as possible is a
must. To win a world, the enemy population must be completely
annihilated. Once the population advantage goes to the opponent, playing catch-up is extremely difficult, but there are successful strategies for resourceful sons (or
daughters) of Zeus. For example, one
can strike the enemy leader with a continuous stream of lightning bolts. Enemy
Walkers will blindly follow their leader
into the path of electrocution. So, while
the enemy is getting roasted, Good
populations can settle, increase their numbers and offer more mana.

The Oracle
Populous II is an elaborate program
that is instantly absorbing and addictive.
Fate will smile upon players who get
Populous II. Who said mana can't buy
happiness?

Review

How Do They Do That?
A Look At Genus GX Games—Inside and Out
by Mike Weksler
Hardware Requirements:
EGA Minimum, VGA
Sound Blaster (optional)
Mouse
Hard Disk Space required (including ell games
and C source code) 1.3MB
Price S59.95
Publisher.
Genus Microprogramming
2900 Wildcrest # 145
Houston TX 77042
Sales & Info: (800) 227-0918
BBS: (713) 266-9362 BBS
CompuServe: GO GENUS
Genus libraries are required for recompiling:
GX Kernel, supports:
GXL library interfacing
Virtual buffer creation
Virtual buffer scaling
Multiple graphics mode support
Multiple toolkit usage

G

X Games is a gamepack that includes:

Apples & Oranges, Mind Plus, Space
Miner, Puzzler and Black Jack. Additionally, the source code is included for each game, to
teach the player/programmer game programming techniques and to help answer the question that is as old as the first computer game:
"How do they do that?"

Apples & Oranges
In this Othello variant, players' pieces are
either apples or oranges. In single-player mode,
there are three levels of difficulty, the third of
which can be quite challenging. A two-player
(non-modem) mode is also included, with each
player taking turns at the keyboard. The winner
sees the board transform into his respective
fruit. There is a hint mode that shows the player
where to place a piece in tough situations as
well. This program illustrates the techniques for
board algorithms and efficient mouse decoding.

supports:
Defining custom mouse cursors
Maintaining a cursor type based on cursor position
Decoding mouse clicks efficiently
Drawing to virtual buffers
Pop-up windows for help
Simultaneous keyboard and mouse interfacing
Button definition and handling
Drawing to virtual buffers
Pop-up windows (for help)

GX Graphics,

GX Effects, supports:
Background Music (PC speaker)
Sound Blaster (digitized sound file support)
Creating Image masks
Transparent put
supports:
Loading .PCX images from a .GXL library

PCX Toolkit,

The following compilers are supported:
C:
MS C 6.x
MS Quick C 2.x
Borland C 2.x
Lattice C 6.x
Basic:
MS BASIC 7.x
Pascal:
Borland Turbo Pascal 4.0/5.0/5.5/6.0

Mindplus
This is a one-player Mastermind-style color combination guessing game. The computer randomly selects a series of four to five
colors from a palette of six to 10. The player must then guess
the colors, each of which may be used more than once. It is possible to have the computer give the player hints about each
guess. One must guess the color combination before running out
of moves. At level one, the player has four pegs, six colors and
fourteen moves. At level five, the player will have five pegs, ten
colors and fifteen moves. If the player is a Mastermind fan, this
game should prove entertaining. This program illustrates techniques for pop-up menus and board layouts.

Space Miner
This variation on a theme of Galaga is a one-player arcade
game in which the "miner" maneuvers his/her ship (sprite)
through space (a scrolling bitmap). The mission is to mine ore

floating through enemy space while simultaneously trying to blast enemy ships,
aliens, police patrols and the almost indestructible "mulcher," which is loaded
with ore. One well-placed shot in the "mulcher" will disable its ship-munching jaws
and leave its cargo floating in space for the
player to pick up. One has a quota of ore
to mine before being allowed to progress
to the next level. There are three levels in
all, with the final level being the hardest.
Genus was thoughtful enough to leave the
cheat keys in for those who will not be
recompiling the programs (refer to the
documentation). Space Miner is easily the
most enjoyable game included and, after
looking at the source code, the possibilities
are endless: no enemy ships or mulchers,
more lives and additional levels of complexity. Genus suggests making games
harder with shorter-range torpedoes, smart
bombs to blast all objects displayed on the
screen, hyperspace with random reappearances (handy for those police patrols)
and/or shields.

Additionally, more experienced programmers may create new levels, larger ore,
bonus objects and digitize sound effects for
their Sound Blaster cards. The speed of the
game is machine-dependent, and can be
adjusted with plus and minus keys, but the game timing is
machine-independent — for example, police patrols come just as
often and aliens fire at the same rate. The drawback to this
game is the keyboard handler routine. It uses the keyboard buffer and makes the game somewhat difficult to control — a joystick routine is needed here.
This program illustrates the following game techniques: animation, continuous images, image movement, multiple image control, multiple video pages, timing and collision detection. Much
can be learned from the source code of this one!

Puzzler
This game takes any .PCX image, either from a Genus .GXL
library or by itself, and scrambles the image into a randomly
placed matrix. The player clicks the left mouse button to select a
piece and the right button to place it. This is interesting and fun,
but it can be quite difficult — especially when two pieces look the
same. Fortunately, the programmers at Genus have also in-

Review

cluded a peek key to toggle the puzzle
image back and forth. The puzzle can be
rescrambled.
This program illustrates the following
techniques: scrambling an image, fast display, dynamic mouse hotspots, wide
video support and EMS memory support.

Blackjack
Blackjack consists of a single deck version of the game. The player begins with
$2,500 in his/her pocket and the dealer,
$10,000. The game ends when either the
dealer or player goes broke or the player
leaves the table. Winning hands include a
"blackjack" and a "five card charlie."

GX Games Compiled
GX Games is a product for both the programmer who has invested in one or more libraries of the GX Development series
and wishes to learn some gaming techniques, and the gamer
who has some programming experience and wants to know how
games tick, as well as how to modify them. As such, it is a showcase for 2-D gaming possibilities and what can be accomplished
with one's programming language compiler and Genus libraries.
The source code is well-written and extensively commented (including complete instructions on how to compile the source code

with each of the supported compilers).
The documentation, however, while comprehensive in explaining what techniques
are used in a particular game, should
have more in-depth discussion of game
programming techniques themselves. 3D programs, joystick routines and the addition of a Lode Runner-style game or a
chess game would be most welcome additions to future versions of this product.
As a game pack, GX Games is sufficiently entertaining, but its real value is as an
educational tool for learning fundamental
game programming techniques.

OPINION

Mindcraft's
Magic Candle II: The Four and Forty
as told by Scorpia

Scorpia is an experienced and
respected adventure game expert.
CGW is pleased to be able to provide
this forum for her distinctive and
often controversial perspective.

M

agic Candle II: The Four and
Forty (MC II) is the follow-up to the
original Magic Candle (CGW's RolePlaying Game of the Year in 1989) and
takes place ten years after the events of the
previous game. During that time, the lands
of Deruvia were thoroughly scoured of all
traces of evil beings. With his homeland
secured, King Rebnard then turned his attention to the east, to the continent of Gurtex,
a place laboring under the heavy hand of
the demon Zakhad.
Freeing an already subjugated land is not
quite the same as kicking out unwanted invaders, and Rebnard begins to worry that
he may have overreached himself this time.
Fortunately, just when things seem darkest,
along comes — you guessed it — Lukas,
hero of Deruvia, ready for a new challenge.
Actually, the hero can be Lukas or someone else. You have the option of bringing
your character (just Lukas) over from the
original Magic Candle or starting up with
one of five pre-created characters, two of
which are female. The character types are
ranger, bard, and fighter (duplicated for the
women, with the exception of bard).
Regardless of type, all have spell-casting
abilities, as well as fighting abilities. The
main difference among the professions is in
the starting values for various skills. The
straight fighter, for instance, will have the
best sword skill, while the ranger will be better with a bow. Read the character descriptions in the manual carefully to choose the
type of character you want.
While your hero arrives at Oshcrun Island
alone, he or she won't be lonely for long.
Some familiar faces are around, like Sakar,
Rimfiztrik, Hun and Nehor, who are willing
to join the quest. Other, new companions,
such as Tuff the halfling and Sir Gustrom
the knight, are also eager to come along
with you.
In addition, there are the hirelings, NPCs
who are in it strictly for the loot. On the
other hand, they generally have superior

skills and are often worth bringing into the
party. For instance, Argus, available for hire
at the Black Rooster in Telermain, is a darn
good fighter. He's very handy to have along
for a good stretch of the game.
The major difference between companions and hirelings is that hirelings never
share any of their items. You can run a hireling in combat just as you would a companion, but they will never, ever trade away
anything they have. So, you must be careful about what you give them. You won't
get it back again later.
Unlike the previous game, you can't split
the party into smaller, independent segments. What you can do that you couldn't
before is drop people off for training or
send them to specified locations. Then you
can invite another character into the party
to fill the gap. You can also dismiss characters outright, if you don't want them in the
group any longer. Dismissed members will
generally return to wherever you first picked them up, and can be invited back into
the party if you want them again.
You can keep in touch with absent party
members by using a new item called the
mindstone, magical gems that allow you to
talk, in a limited fashion, to anyone else
who also has one. [Ed: Sounds like someone has been reading The Prophet of
Lamath by Robert Don Hughes.) For example, if you have Sakar working away at
the Metalsmith's, you can call on him to
see how much money he's made so far.
Then, you could tell him to either continue
working, or go somewhere and wait for
you. You can also contact dismissed members (if they have a stone), but you can't
give them any orders.
Using the teleportal rooms has been improved. Now, you can use any code from
any teleportal to get to a particular destination. Once you know the code for a location (for instance, Oshcrun), it will work
from all teleportals to take you there.
Sleeping gods are back, but you may not
care to waken all of them. Some are good
or neutral, and will give your attributes a
boost automatically when awakened. However, there are evil gods now, and they
aren't quite so generous. These will
demand a sacrifice of some kind in return
for the benefits they confer. One, for in-

stance, wants you to hand over Brennix
first. Since Brennix is the best magic sword
in the game, you may be reluctant to
agree. Fortunately, it isn't necessary to
wake up any of these evil gods; you can
complete the game without obtaining
whatever they have to give.
On the magic front, three new spellbooks
have been added: Felmis, Vannex, and
Emenad. Felmis was written by Rimfiztrik,
and comes with him when he joins your
party. Emenad you get free of charge from
Ziyx (he also gives you a free Demaro
when you first visit him). To obtain any of
the others, you will have to find people with
magic books for sale. Save up for these;
they aren't cheap.
In the meantime, if you need spells, there
are a couple of Wizard Lodges where you
can rent spellbooks. You can memorize as
many spells as you want, for a flat fee. This
is more useful at the start, when you don't
have many books. Later, it's better to have
the books.
Speaking of dungeons... as before, once
they are cleaned out, they stay that way.
This applies both to ambushes in the corridors and nasty critters waiting in rooms.
Therefore, you can do most dungeons in
stages, coming out now and then to re-supply, without having to fight the same battles
all over again when you return.
The surface of Gurtex is a dangerous
place, with plenty of enemy patrols marching around. Camping out in these environs
isn't recommended. Fortunately, there are
Elden strongholds scattered across the continent. These buildings are absolutely
secure, and the party can rest in them safely. Of course, you will have to find them
before you can use them and they are not
obvious until you're right next to one.
A new and welcome feature in the game
is the note pad. This automatically records
information you come across as you play,
including: conversations, signs or scrolls
you read and spontaneous comments
made by party members. The notepads are
saved to disk as plain ASCII files, so they
can be printed off or reviewed with most
any word processor. You can also control
the level of detail recorded, ranging from absolutely everything to only the most important.

OPINION
Mapping is a little easier. Your hero has a
map that displays the immediate area,
either outdoors or in towns. However, in
dungeons, blue pearls are once again necessary to get a picture of the current level.
Fortunately, you don't have to go looking
for bowls; you can carry around a map
flask in which the pearls are dissolved to
provide the picture. You'll need a good
supply of those pearls, though, as the levels
are larger now and you cannot see the
whole thing with one pearl as you could
before.
Monsters are meaner and smarter than
ever. The spell-casting critters have the
same repertoire you do and they know how
to use those spells effectively. Khazis, for instance, make themselves invisible at the
first opportunity and then merrily cast
Paralyze at you. If you're not careful, a
game restore will follow in short order. So
don't underestimate your opponents.
Gameplay in general is much the same as
before, and the interface has not changed
very much. Mindcraft intended to have
mouse support for MC II, but numerous
problems forced them to drop it from the initial release. Naturally, you still expect to
have to fight your way through monsters in
the dungeons. However, the number of ambushes in these places (usually several per
level!), combined with the rooms you must

pass through, turns fighting into a tedious
chore.
While there is a Sense spell that warns of
nearby ambushes, it does not always work
properly. The party might walk all unknowing into a nest of concealed monsters and
be in very bad shape very quickly. Always
have Gonshi, Nift, Mirget and Luffin active,
as well as a magic shield at full strength
when going through dungeons.
The idea of using music as a weapon was
a good one, but not well thought out. First
you have to track down the individual
songs that affect different monsters. Then
you have to figure out which instruments to
play them on, as each song only works
when played on a particular instrument.
Since bard skill is a big factor in the effectiveness of a song, trying to determine if
poor results is related to low skill or wrong
instrument makes the whole thing too complicated to bother with most of the time.
Assigning party members to various tasks
has its own difficulties. Whenever characters are assigned, you must tell them where
you want them to go if you aren't there to
pick them up later. Unfortunately, the only
places they can be sent to are the Elden
strongholds (and only the ones you know
about).
In Oshcrun, which has no monsters roaming the countryside, there's no problem. In

Gurtex, however, this can be trouble. A lone
character trying to make his way to a stronghold (or dismissed and trying to get back
to wherever he was first picked up) might
be captured by an enemy patrol and sent
to a dungeon. Then you have to decide
whether or not you want to go rescue him
(and that not knowing in which jail he's
stuck).
That makes training outside Oshcrun
rather dangerous. If you aren't there when
the training is completed, the character
takes off immediately. This happened to
me with Fiz. He was dropped off in
Wanasol for library research training, while
the rest of the group went around town
doing other things. The party got back to
the school about fifteen minutes after Fiz's
training ended. By then, it was too late. Fiz
was already heading off to a stronghold.
With his stealth of zero, capture was all too
likely, so a game restore was in order.
The notepad handling is somewhat crude.
For one thing, you must save your current
notepad independently of the regular saved
game. It is all too easy to forget this, especially since no warning is given when you
quit. This happened to me several times
before I got into the habit of frequent notesaving, forcing a lot of back-tracking and redoing of conversations.
Also, there is no way to review an old pad
from within the game. You can only scroll

OPINION
through the notes of the current session.
Looking at anything prior to that requires
exiting the game and pulling the old notes
into a word processor. The best thing to do
here is edit your old note pads and print
them off between sessions so you have the
material handy.
The ending is essentially non-violent (no
big Foozle fight), but is handled in too low-

Update Information
As I write this, the most current version of
MC II is 1.3. This fixes most of the problems
noted above. Some have no fixes as yet, because they occur randomly and Mindcraft has
not been able to duplicate them. If you experience any of the following (except the random ones), you should send your disks to
Mindcraft for the upgrade (though the
problems all have work-arounds of one sort or
another, it's best to play a clean version).
Ziyx and the scrolls: There are four special
scrolls in the game. You're supposed to ask
Ziyx about them and he tells you in which
library you should do the necessary research.
Unfortunately, the bug prevents Ziyx from
recognizing the scrolls and he never tells you
anything at all. Fortunately, there are only
three libraries, so you can just try them one at
a time until you Find the right one for each
scroll.

key a manner. Instead of being spectacular
it is rather humdrum, taken care of more in
words than action or visuals. After the
fancy ceremonials of the original, this
comes as a bit of a letdown.
Overall, Magic Candle II is an uneven sequel to the previous game. Many improvements have been made, and some good
touches added. However, as noted, not all
Using the scrolls: Anyone in the party was
supposed to be able to use the scrolls at the
right moments. However, it turns out that only
the hero (your character) can use the scroll.
Kurgu and rubies: You practically get hit

over the head with clues that Kurgu likes
rubies. An unfortunate typo in the database,

however, will keep him from accepting any as
a bribe. The wrong item number was entered,
so Kurgu will take a topaz instead.
Senvara's resting place: Senvara is a

neutral goddess and worth waking up. However, the directions to her abode are given
wrong. She is SE of Pentyne, not NE.
Barbarian camp: Before you enter the barbarian camp, be sure your party is in the top

two rows of the formation. The exit square
was incorrectly placed and, if you have
anyone in the bottom row, your party will just
walk right back out into the wilderness when
they try to enter the camp.

those improvements have been properly implemented and, with the excessive combat,
makes the game irritating at times. More
work is definitely needed in some areas.
For all that, The Magic Candle II is still
several cuts above the typical CRPG. If you
enjoyed the first game, you are likely to
have a (mostly ) good time with this one.
too.

Wearing food: This is one of the random
problems, which seems to happen on the occasions when you sell food to make money.
Your clothing disappears and is replaced by
the food (the clothing is lost forever and you'll
have to buy a new suit). You are actually wearing the food. Fortunately, you can take the
food off and then sell it (or keep it and use it
as food).
Wrong songs: Another random problem.
Sometimes, when you learn a song, you get
the wrong one in your repertoire. Usually, if
you go back and ask about the song again,
you'll get the correct one.
Keyboard lockups: Some people have
reported occasional lockups of the keyboard,
for no discernible reason. Your only recourse
here is to reboot and restore to your most
recent save, since the cause of the lockup
(which does not happen to everyone) is unknown.

Industry News

by Chris Lombardi

he

metaphor and motif for this
year's International Conference &
Exposition on Multimedia and CDROM could not have been more appropriately chosen. Subtitled "Charting
the Course" and abounding in 16th century artwork and symbols, it would have
been impossible not to have drawn a
comparison between the state of the
world as known by 16th century
European explorers and the current state
of the CD-ROM/multimedia industry. Like
the ships of yore, the vessel of the CDROM industry, bearing the shining
figurehead of interactivity, has set out
with vague, though hopeful, notions of
what lies ahead. Like explorers of old,
these new explorers have the backing of
the "powers that be" in huge amounts of
R&D dollars. And, just as the European
hope was to find a short route to the
riches of Asia, so the attendees of this
conference hold to the dream of riches
that lay on some uncertain shore. After
seven years of searching and no land in
sight, one might ask whether the treasure
of Multimedia for the Masses is, like
Coronado's Cities of Gold, a product of
an eager imagination.

T

After seven years of conferences, research and hype, this conference found

multimedia developers asking the same
questions. The most popular issue was
that of platforms and standardization.
With nine major platforms (30 in total, according to one estimate), one must ask
whether a single platform will rise to
prominence and gain consumer backing.
Ironically, every hardware manufacturer
that spoke at the conference called for
standardization among multimedia
hardware while, at the same time, promoting their specific machine. Regardless of
the confusion over standards and platforms, the general consensus seemed to
be that no current platform is capable of
competing with current media forms for
the attention of the mass market.

"Oh, No! More Platforms!"
Dr. Toshi Doi, Senior General Manager
of the Sony Corporation, was one of
many such hardware manufacturers to
call for an industry standard. In a general
session on platforms, Dr. Doi claimed
that the industry must arrive at a CDROM standard by 1995, else the industry
would fall into disarray prompted by internecine warring among "company egos."
In the same breath, Dr. Doi announced
another independent CD-ROM platform
to be added to Sony's repertoire. The CD-

ROM XA Player, a portable DOS-based
machine, boasts 640K of RAM and a 320
x 200 256-color display. With a tiny keyboard and cursor pad mounted on a 7" x
6" x 2" console, the unit will support full
multimedia applications.
Sony was also showing a number of
software titles for their Data DiscMan
unit. The "Electronic Book Player" uses
8cm compact disks to display up to
200MB of text and sound data. Among
the 23 reference products already available, including the King James Bible, dictionaries, travel guides and such, was
their first entertainment product, Adventure 101 — Introduction to Tourist
Traps, Dwarfs, and Chivalry. Adventure 101, developed by Tsunami (the
new company founded by Sierra alumni) is a "Choose-Your-Own-Adventure"
type of book in which the reader makes
pivotal decisions influencing the plot line
and ultimate story outcome.

Hollywood in Multimedia: A
Title Role?
Another hot topic in multimedia circles
has been the question of Hollywood's
place in multimedia entertainment. This
issue was taken up at a "Computer and

Industry News

Home Entertainment" round table
moderated by Peter Bart, editor of the
Hollywood trade rag (or is that "trade
bible?") Variety. Mr. Bart's opening
remarks pointed the discussion toward
the question of whether Hollywood was
going to be the creative motivation behind the development of CD-ROM entertainment.
Panelist Geoffrey Holmes of Time
Warner felt strongly that Hollywood
would not make the transition to the new
media, citing resistance to change on the
part of Hollywood creators and the
prevailing attitude toward technology as
primary road blocks. According to Holmes, the question Hollywood typically
asks is "How can I use this new technology to do old things faster and cheaper?"
Obviously, such is precisely the wrong
type of question to ask of a new technology begging for a new art form.
Mr. Holmes felt that the new developers
of multimedia will need to be willing to
get their hands dirty with the technology,
a fact that will keep Hollywood types,
who are used to having a "well
developed user interface between their

place in multimedia. He also expressed
doubts about the prevailing view of the ultimate mass market multimedia box, the
"Ubiquitous Box," as an interactive
device with a single input button allowing
users simple, binary choices. He sees the
ultimate platform as an open-ended
device like the home computer and not
as a no-brain consumer electronics
device. He finds the value of multimedia
in providing people with tools for creating their own multimedia experiences.

creative efforts and the underlying technology," away from this new field. He
sees a new, younger creative class of individuals, people without a history in passive, linear, context-based art forms,
emerging over the next ten years to drive
the development of the New Media.
Another panelist, Jim Monaco, was of a
similar sentiment regarding Hollywood's

Finally, David Londoner of Wertheim
Schroder & Co., a Hollywood financial
analyst, made the nay-saying of a Hollywood-led multimedia industry unanimous. He sees very little consumer interest and investor value in the "
Choose-Your-Own-Ending" sort of movies, citing
that people are too entrenched in the passive mode of movie watching. He sees
the part of interactivity being played
through cable television in the form of interactive home shopping networks, game
shows, polling and programming. Rather
than entertainment, Londoner sees the future of multimedia in education, "video
games," and in the archival of reference
information.

Industry News

Goodbye Chalkboard, Hello
Motherboard
Without question, the most exciting
area of multimedia development is in the
realm of education. Not only are reference materials and hypertext education
titles being produced in waves, but some
of the best thinking about exactly what
can be done in the interactive environment is being done by so-called "education people." These developers are
moving beyond the excitement over the
possibilities of heaping huge amounts of
data dressing in stunning graphics,
sound and video on a child, and asking
fundamental questions about the interactive experience and how best to construct interactive environments. The goal
is to create software that will not only
turn children into Jeopardy! champions,
but also teach them to think, both linearly and associationally.
By far, the most interesting educational
project demonstrated at the show was
the Illuminated Book and Manuscripts
project. Sponsored by IBM and devleoped by AND Communications of Hollywood, CA, this project takes several
classic literary works, Ulysses, Letter
From A Birmingham Jail, Hamlet, etc,
and wraps them in a rich hypermedia environment. Just as the original "Illuminated Books" of the pre-Gutenburg
era added to the experience of reading
classic literature by the inclusion of
another medium, namely pictures, so
these Illuminated Books enhance the
reading experience through pictures, as
well as full-motion video and CD-quality
sound. More impressive than the video excerpts from Hamlet or the impassioned
readings of Martin Luther King were the
analytical tools provided in the environment. Pressing one "button" highlights
the more difficult words in a passage, allowing the user to call up definitions of
those words with one click. Pressing
another button highlights the material
which requires a certain amount of cultural literacy for a full understanding.
With a mouse click, one could then draw
up historical or allusary information to fill
in the background context of a phrase.
Yet another button highlights "items of
issue," sections of the works that might
be controversial. Clicking these "hot
spots" provides video segments of commentators offering several different
perspectives on the Issue in question.
Add to this a very simple authoring environment allowing students and teachers
to construct their own multimedia presentations and you have a very promising,
powerful product.

who have been following CD-ROM support recognize this as an industry trend.
Many companies are porting old
products to CDs (many with very few
"multimedia enhancements") and charging exorbitant prices for them. It seems
these are "success stories" only if they
take advantage of CD-ROM owners who
are parched for software to justify their
hardware purchase. These companies do
not yet want to invest the money and
take the risk to produce a hot CD-ROM
title. Yet it seems they can't avoid losing
money by releasing titles most garners
have already played.

Another new group of edutainment titles on show was the Knowledge Adventure group of products. The three titles in
the series (Knowledge Adventure,
Sports Adventure and Science Adventure) all provide highly associative hypermedia environments for children (and
adults) to explore. Knowledge Adventure allows its users to traipse through
the scope of human ideas by referring to
geographic or historical points and then
sampling the art, architecture, literature,
entertainment, geography, music and
science of that particular place or time.
Likewise, the sports program and the
science program (narrated by the late Dr.
Isaac Asimov) explore their topics
through associational historical and
geographic links. The Knowledge Adventure line comes on high-density floppies
— no CD-ROM is required.
Of related interest, Sanctuary Woods,
a British Columbia-based producer of multimedia titles, announced that Shelley
Duvall, actress and producer of I-IBO's
Faery Tale Theatre series, would join
their group and put her storytelling expertise to the task of developing children's
multimedia titles.

What's Entertainment?
The session entitled "Success Stories
from Entertainment and Games" was
about the only forum in which voices
from game companies could be heard.
Lucasfilm, Tiger Media and Reactor
each showed their CD-ROM titles and
sang the woes of working with a brand
new technology,
Lucasfilm showed off their Secret of
Monkey Island and Loom CD-ROM
projects in progress. These titles, already
"old news" among computer garners, are
being spruced up with speech and sound
and thrown onto optical disks. Those

The real CD-ROM success stories are
found with ICOM Simulations' Sherlock Holmes, Consulting Detective, an
original CD-ROM product with 90
minutes of full-motion (12-15 fps) video,
and Reactor's Spaceship Warlock, an
adventure for multimedia Macintoshes;
both original titles were designed around
the new capabilities provided by CD-ROM
technology.
In other entertainment news, Philips Interactive, developers of the CD-I platform, is releasing a title of interest. CGW
was given a preview of their Lords of the
Rising Sun project, which features fullmotion video sequences with some of
the more convincing original acting we
have yet seen. The strategy and action
elements of the game will be very similar
to those in the original home computer
product.

Land Ho
The general tone of the conference indicated that mass market-oriented, opticalbased, interactive entertainment is not
going to happen any time soon. Yet, this
is no reason for technophiles to despair.
There are many companies committed
to multimedia for the education and entertainment niche markets. In the months to
come, MS-DOS- or Windows-based CDROM owners can expect more "multimedia enhancements" to DOS-based
entertainment titles and even a few
original titles from the likes of ICOM and
Tiger Media. One can certainly expect
more references, collections and education titles than one could hope to own.
And, as the consumer base for DOSbased multimedia increases, it seems
creators will be able to take more risks
with their R&D money and try new possibilities with the new technology. It appears certain that CD-ROM will slowly become the standard for our little, though
lively, industry and hobby, despite its
failure to thrive in the current mass
market.

Review

diers were drafted. In the game's context, the remnants of these
different groups have banded together to face a new menace,
Baron Czarny.
The game has two updates from the original version. These are
available from Paragon by contacting their technical support
group. The first update fixes many "bugs" that are typical of first
versions. The second update, called "The Colonel," changes the
entire graphic look of the game. The only drawback is the 512K
expanded memory that it requires. The first update, however,
does not require any expanded memory.

Strategic Briefing
As the leader of a band of warriors, the player commands a
group of twenty characters in the course of achieving the game's
ultimate goal: destroying Baron Czarny and liberating Poland. One may
choose to use either the default
group provided with the game or create one's own group via the character generation system, possibly the
most outstanding system ever introduced in a computer game. In addition, each recruit may be saved and
printed nut on hard cony

Paragon Software's Twilight 2000
by J. D. Lambright

Recruiting a team member is simple and straightforward. One
selects the name, gender, icon, country and language to be
spoken by the character (and it's a good idea to cover all the
major languages, if possible). Next, players can assign attributes
randomly or by allocation. Standard attributes like strength,
agility, constitution, charisma, intelligence and education must be
assigned. Then background skills are given, realizing that these
will affect the career choices open to the character. Finally, basic
skills are assigned and secondary activities are generated. Finally, war breaks out and the recruit spends one term or more in
the armed forces.
The player repeats this sequence until there are twenty members in the squad. When the player has finished generating characters, they can be assembled into a squad for use in playing the
game.
Twilight: 2000
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
IBM
$59.95
PRICE:
PROTECTION: Document Look-up
DESIGNERS:
Marc Miller, Mark
Seremet, Paul Conklin
PUBLISHER:
Paragon Software
Greensburg, PA

Areas of Conflict

I

One thing to consider in the make-up of the team is that not all
of the available skills are needed in this game, though they may
be used in subsequent games. Skills such as bow hunting and
swimming are definitely not needed to win the game, though the
default characters have these skills. This reviewer found that
making the leader strong (i.e. with as many skills as possible) is
critical to success, since the leader will be involved with every
mission. Squads use four team members per mission and other
team members may be called up during the mission by using
the walkie-talkie. In the case of an emergency activation, one
member will have to be dismissed from the squad because four
active members are the maximum allowable.

Such is the world of man-to-man combat in Twilight 2000, a
post-holocaust nightmare, carefully crafted by Paragon
Software from the people and paper game of the same name.
The locale of the game is Poland in the year 2000. World War III
had broken out in 1995, starting as a conflict between the Soviet
Union and China. As the battles raged, the conflict went nuclear
in 1997. By 2000, most of the authority and formal governments
had ceased to exist. Cantonment systems had taken their place
and military units practiced forced recruitment in order to keep
up their strength. Neither politics nor national origin mattered, sol-

Important skills include: rifle, pistol, heavy weapons, medical,
language, interrogation, gunsmith, tracked and wheeled vehicle,
mechanic, foraging, hunting and fishing. Do not overlook the importance of initiative. In a battle of twenty-five against four, initiative often determines the outcome. Further, note that characters
have a load rating," representing the amount each character
may carry. This may be avoided by standing above an inventory
item (these look like a suitcase) and using the inventory icon to
pick up the items on the ground and place them into the inven-

cicles of sweat caressed his face as he woke with a start
and pulled his mistress, an M60 light machinegun, to his
chest. The dreams had come again, the psychadelic rainbow of bombs, destruction and death. He heard the banshee
scream of the mortar and dived under his bunk just as the
north wall performed a parlor trick, transforming brick to
dust.

Review

tory. This method will allow one's characters to carry up to 120
kilos over their load rating.
Players may also discover that speaking to NPCs can be difficult. One must be facing the NPC in an exact position for communication to be possible. Often, none of the squad members
speak the language and time spent waiting for another team
member to arrive is time wasted. It is a good idea to make note
of the spoken language of each town, since they will usually be
visited more than once.
Players should also consider the fact that the map is missing
one town, Proszowice. It is located at the juncture of the mountain and road between Slominiki and Igolomia.

Attack!
The game encompasses one year of game time, broken into
fifty-two weeks. One mission per week is normal, with later missions having two per week. The missions are three series of battle types. Series one encompasses eight missions in the "Acquire
Phase." One starts out with an empty vehicle pool and must
steal or retrieve vehicles. Smart players will have their characters
carry tools for both wheeled and tracked vehicles during this
phase, since their mechanics may be able to repair disabled
vehicles for later use.
Combat, of course, is common during
this phase. When marching from town to
town, attacks occur by either equivalent
or superior scout teams. Upon completing the mission and picking up the leftover weapons, however, it is possible to
march from town to town and acquire as
many weapons as one can carry. During
these period, regular trips should be
made back to the base to unload or get
ammo.
Note that hidden supplies may be discovered during these missions by using
the tactical mapper to see the supplies.
They will be represented by brown dots
on the screen.
During these missions, one is finding friends, weapons,
vehicles, food and fuel. The most effective weapons are the M60
LMG and belt-fed grenade launchers (as opposed to the singleshot types). Exit the vehicle pool and place the character's
weapons on the ground. Then reenter the base to select other
weapons. Upon returning to the outside, one can use the inventory icon to pick up the weapons, allowing one to be prepared
for almost anything.
Twilight 2000 does use a very simple method of play balancing during these missions. When travelling on foot, one will have
battles with other squads on foot. When in a vehicle, other
vehicles will attack. One can often avoid these random attacks,
however, by making small moves of ten kilometers instead of
rapid mobilizations from town to town.
The key to winning battles is primarily target discrimination.
Naturally, an enemy with a 9mm pistol is not a threat compared
to one with a grenade launcher or an AT-7 "Saxhorn." Further, it
will often require the use of all available weapons to win the early
battles, when the characters' skills are still low. Fortunately, skills
will improve with use and one's gunsmith can improve rifles by
using the basic tools when weapons and scopes are in inventory.
One important rule to be remembered is, "If a party member is

in an untenable position, flee." This will regroup the squad at the
leader's position. During this time, weapons may be reloaded all
at once that would normally take a combat round to do the
same thing. Save the game and then reenter interactive combat.
After a battle, one must rest in the tent to cure injuries. It may
take more than one eight-hour period to do this, but it will save
having to carry around medicine and a doctor to administer medical aid.

Repair
The next twenty-two missions constitute the "Powerbase
Phase," in which one defends, helps, cures, discovers spies and
rescues hostages in order to gain the loyalty of towns. Some missions consist of treating sick or injured people. The doctor will
either use the doctor's bag or antibiotic to cure the townspeople.
Note that there are never more than ten townspeople to cure.
Baron Czarny is not idle either. He is in the same stage of the
campaign. So, failure to complete a mission in the allotted week
will result in towns being lost to Baron Czarny.
Tanks come into play in this series and the M1A1 is the best
choice for protection and firepower. Use the radar to track
enemies targeted for destruction and remember that a tank is
not destroyed until it starts smoking.
Until that time, they are still viable. One's
mechanic may repair and drive back the
newly acquired tank on occasion and the
townspeople regularly refuel one's
vehicle upon completion of the mission.
Also, some missions involve the rescuing
of hostages. This requires one to travel
to more than one town. Check fuel consumption and distance before setting out.
Once out of fuel, one must hoof it.

Defense
The next twenty-odd missions constitute
the "Defense Phase." Missions are randomly generated and some require two
operations per week. The missions require the defense of acquired towns and unsuccessful missions
will result in a town changing sides. These missions involve
destroying as many as five tanks and twenty-five foot soldiers to
rescue the town. Note that it is not always advisable to follow orders to the letter. Sometimes the best defense is a good offense.
The final mission involves the defense of one's home base of
Krakow. This will occur on December 30, 2000 at 6AM. It involves two tanks and twenty-five foot soldiers. When completed, the
game will end with the capture of Baron Czarny and a warning
about the future.

Debriefing
Twilight 2000 is an excellent premise on which to build future
games. The character generation and the PAL role-playing systems could be used for any role-playing genre. Though the game
itself can be very repetitious at times, it offers a lot to the consumer. It will not, for example, be completed in one weekend.
Some battles have taken two or more hours In real time to play
and were still lost! Twilight 2000 successfully demonstrates that
Paragon Software is listening to their customers and learning
what role-playing is all about. RPGers who like plenty of combat
should find Twilight 2000 an excellent choice.

Game Hints

Scorpion's Mail

very other issue, Scorpia enters
the mail room in the back of the
Scorpion's Tale (that worldfamous tavern of the mind) and
answers readers' questions with
specific game hints. Readers who are
offended by such assistance should
avoid this location. In other words,
turn the page now.

E

Spring is here, and I really have to do
something about clearing some space in
this room. Of course, I've been saying
that for a while, and the place just keeps
getting more and more crowded. (I think
it's got something to do with all those letters that keep coming in.) And with a
bunch of new games just released, space
is going to become a critical issue pretty
soon. Urgg. Fred, I need a hand here.
(Fred hands Scorp an "I Hate
Housework" button and grins fiendishly.
Thanks a lot, Fred.) Anyway, while I arrange for the forklifts, let's get to the
good stuff (while there's still some room
to maneuver in here).
Eye Of The Beholder: Some more
hints toward those mysterious bonuses.
On level 4, you need to be pushy. In fact,
you may well find yourself going in
circles, as it were. A good pull is also
helpful. On level 5, look for the pantry.
Too bad it's empty. Maybe you can do
something about that (what do pantries
usually contain?).
Eye Of The Beholder II: Lots of letters showing up now on this game. One
part that people are having trouble with
is on the "nightmare level," that
Margoyle-infested section where you can't rest.
There is a room with pressure plates and
a sign that reads, "You must leave many
things behind." That's a tricky one. You
do not have to weight down every plate.
Remember, X marks the spot. As for the
moving pits that show up in some areas
— sorry, you can't turn them off. Really.
The only thing you can do is time your

moves to get across when the pits are
shut. Watch carefully!
LeChuck's Revenge: Secret of
Monkey Island II: It sure would help to
have some near-grog, wouldn't it? Too
bad Kate isn't feeling generous. Since
she won't volunteer any of the stuff, you
have to do it the hard way (hard for her,
that is — evil grin). Take a good look at
those flyers she hands out, and think lard.
Ultima VI: In a previous Mail column, I
mentioned at the end of a U6 hint that
"you only have 30 days to get everything
done." Unfortunately, some people
thought this meant you had 30 days to
do the whole game (oops). My apologies
to all who were misled by that one. Let
me clear up the misunderstanding: it is
only after you accept the Amulet of Submission from the Gargoyles that the 30day time limit goes into effect. Before
then, you have all the time you want to
go running around in the game.
Might & Magic III: For those who
missed my warning in a previous issue,
be extremely careful of what you touch
inside the pyramids. Some of those crystals cause permanent aging. This type of
aging cannot be undone, because actual
time in the game has passed. So keep
an eye on your characters' ages whenever you touch anything. If your people
are getting older, it's time to restore the
game (unless, of course, you want to run
around with a party of aged adventurers).
Bane Of The Cosmic Forge: Some
folks are having a hard time figuring out
the location of the pirate treasure. It isn't
really too difficult. Shucks, it's almost as
easy as rolling off a log. And we all know
how pirates and Jolly Rogers go
together. Just be sure to investigate very
thoroughly under the Altar of Ramm (if
you haven't been down there yet, worry
about the pirate treasure later).
Spellcasting 201: Returning to those
frat initiation days of yore (or yours), we

have the problem of the showers at Barmaid U. It would be simple to fix the
plumbing, if only Ernie's glasses didn't
keep fogging up. Of course, he can't see
a thing without 'em, so taking them off
won't do. Bet you missed a spell somewhere. Bet that spell is all the way back
at Sorcerer U. Where? Heh, I'm not
gonna tell. (What's that you say? You haf
vays of making me tock? Never!)
Elvira II: One obstacle that you may
have trouble with is a succubus in a
bedroom. For that, you need some
protection (look over the spell list). You
also need some intestinal fortitude. You'll
still conk out, but at least you'll wake up
again. Remember to search the room
before you leave. Then, you can deal
with the toothy one in the attic.
Willy Beamish: There are moments
when being a kid again has its difficulties. For instance, there's a certain gang.
Definitely, these people are not nice. You
might long to pull out an Uzi to remove
them from the scene permanently. However, Uzis (even in this day and age) are
not standard equipment for nine-yearolds. Try a bomb Instead. This may not
be quite enough, though, so you may
want to tell them to go soak their heads.
Better yet, assist them. Then you should
look tout de suite (French for "darn
fast!") for some assistance of your own.
That's about It for this look In the mailbag. Remember, if you need help with an
adventure game (please, no flight sim
questions — I don't do those games!),
you can reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi, visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie,
stop by the Games RoundTable (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US
Mall (enclose a self-addressed, stamped
envelope if you live in the United States):
Scorpia, P.O. Box 338, Gracie Station,
New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!

Foreign Correspondence

and only release format at the moment).
If an IBM conversion ever takes place,
most observers would expect to see a
386 polygon-filled option. Release is expected as this issue goes to print.

Over There
Binary Support
by Paul Rigby

magine Psygnosis' Armour-Geddon.
Then think of a similar game with
rather more depth and tactical opportunity. The second game would be
Psygnosis' new venture, entitled Air Support. Set in the middle of the next century, Air Support initiates a campaign in
which wars are fought via telecommunications, using computer control from
remote bunkers. The player is put in control of an entire combat division, commanding fighters, tanks, amphibious
units, artillery and support vehicles.

I

The entire conflict is viewed in close-up
3D with optional overhead maps. There
is the opportunity, however, for one to occupy the participating vehicle on those
critical missions on which one simply
must take control. The specification
looks impressive save for one important
factor: the graphics are shown in wireframe 3D (the same technology seen in
the original Starglider). Psygnosis argues that the design decision to stay with
wire-frame technology was to ease the
pain on the Amiga's processor (the one

Hill Street Blues, the license of which
belongs to UK outfit Krisilis, has been
the center of a "You show me yours and
I'll show you mine" deal with American
software house Digitech. The idea is
that Krisilis would allow Digitech to
publish Hill Street Blues, Jahangir
Khan's Squash and Laser Squad in the
USA and Digitech allow Krisilis to
publish something called Vikings Fjords
of Conquest plus two other unspecified
games in the UK.
The first impressions game release
this month is Air Bucks, a game which
allows the player to build a worldwide airline starting with a single Dakota and
$100,000 in 1946. In this trading game,
one can build up a fleet of aircraft,
negotiate for landing rights at city airports, run scheduled services and charter
flights carrying passengers and/or
freight. Decisions include flight planning
and aircraft procurement (new ones appear as technology allows), while players
are being billed for: fuel, overhead, landing rights, stock exchange deals and so
on. Reports and graphs aid planning and
decision making.
Air Bucks includes a random map generator and 256 aircraft to control, plus
their routes. Hmm, get the feeling this
game should have been called "Airline
Tycoon"? Release on Amiga, IBM and ST
is scheduled for May (IBM: £34.99,
Amiga/ST: £29.99).
Impressions' second game release of
the month is an adventure game published on their new 'If...' label. Called Crime
City, the player takes the role of an intrepid Sam Spade-type character in the
search for the killer, motive, murder
weapon and all that jazz. The game is
very much mouse-oriented, with the main
course of events cantering around a desk
that contains a number of hot zones to
transport the player to different modes.
For example, the notebook offers a number of names, addresses and phone numbers while a map shows the whole city
from which one can select locations to
visit. Interaction is based on clicking on
one question from a choice from six or
seven in a similar way to the Dynamix
adventure games. Crime City is out now
for Amiga and ST.
Three new CDTV titles have just been
released by Microdeal. Voice Master
(£39.99) includes an interface and

Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment

Foreign Correspondence

microphone that plugs into the CDTV itself (the parallel port to be exact). The interface can only be used with other
software, though, such as Joky Karaoke,
Voice FX or Asterix & Son. Voice FX
(£19.99) incorporates real-time voice
changing software to use with Voice
Master, eleven different effects are available including pitch bend, pitch down,
echo, reverb, etc. Music CDs can also be
played from the Voice FX software so
one can sing along with a favorite music
artist. CD Remix 2 (£29.99) allows one
to make a personal re-mix of any audio
CD. The user can jump around the track,
overlay any of the more than 600 sound
effects, speech or drum beats that come
with this package.
"Hurrah!" and "Lashings and lashings of
ginger beer" and "Hurrah!" again and
other spiffing phrases are part and parcel
of Enid Blyton's Famous Five children's
book series. Oh yes, that series of books
are well remembered — having just about
the whole series during this journalist's
single-figure days.
Any road up, The Famous Five — Five
on Treasure Island is a text/graphic ad-

venture of the classic school from Enigma Variations that includes some intriguing character handling, using a system called Worldscape. The game begins
when Julian, Dick and Anne visit their
aunt and uncle. This is the very first adventure, so they had yet to meet George,
the tomboy girl and her dog Timmy.
From there they worm their way into
treasure island, full of stereotyped villains
and secret caves.
The game world is dynamic, which
means that events move on while one
waits. The player can TELL and SAY
things as well as ASKing ABOUT things.
Characters have their own special facets,
so one can ask a character to perform
an action. The player can also BECOME
any of the Famous Five (except the
dog). Each character has their own advantages: Julian is strong while George is
the best swimmer. One can even split
the five up to explore several directions
at once. This is essential to solve some
of the problems. The parser is up to
modern standards with linked sentences
using AND, THEN and commas. Prepositions can be used to alter the meaning of
verbs and group commands such as ALL

and EVERYTHING are also included. Out
now on Amiga, ST and C64, this is adven
ture is a real blast from the past.
Incidentally, anyone who would like to
contact me can do so on Compuserve
(75300,1503) or by mail to 20 Malvern
Road, Liverpool, England, L6 6BW.
Please include three 'international reply
coupons' if you would like a reply.
Note: The above games, and any of the
other games mentioned in "Over There"
in past issues, can be obtained from:
Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY.
Telephone: 01144-51-263-6306.
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins sq., Burnt Mills, Basildon,
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ. Telephone:
01144-268-590-766; fax: 01144-268-590076.
Software City, Unit 4, BDC, 21 Temple
Street, Wolverhampton, WV2 4AN.
Telephone: 01144 902 25304; 24-hour
credit card hotline: 01144 902 25304.
All of the above telephone numbers assume one can dial direct. If there is any
trouble, contact the international operator
for assistance.

Bestseller List

New Edutainment Column

Beyond Carmen
Real Edutainment Software for the '90s!
by Sara Reeder
CGW is expanding its continued committment to edutainment products
with this new monthly column. Now,
parents will not have to wait for our periodic round-ups and occasional feature reviews in order to guarantee that
their children can have the same
beneficial experiences from computer
gaming that they do, fun and enlightenment. In the spirit of Wordsworth ("The Child is father of the
Man"), we present our newest feature.
any mom or dad who has
prowled the malls trying to find
entertaining educational software
for his or her kid can tell you, edutainment has historically been a good working synonym for wishful thinking. Even
the most casual observer (or bewildered
parent) quickly arrives at the realization
that the educational and entertainment
software industries have spent most of
the last decade on two mutually exclusive tracks: one making fun products
that were sometimes, as an afterthought,
sort of educational; the other making
pedantic programs that sometimes, by
sheer accident, were almost fun to use.
For a lot of reasons having to do with
demographics and the relentless march
of technology, those days have recently
drawn to a swift and unlamented end.
For one thing, it is beginning to dawn on
folks that the work of childhood is play
and that games are an essential part of
the learning experience. At the same
time, a lot of game-playing parents are
asking for programs that they can feel
good about sharing with their kids. Fortunately, almost every major software
publisher, on both sides of the fence, has
begun to respond.
Suddenly, after years of theoretical
dreaming, the '90s may finally be the
decade that real, honest-to-goodness
edutainment software comes into its own.
There are a lot of interesting new
products being published and many are
actually being done well. This growing
category combines the excitement and
technical artistry of games with the most
effective teaching strategies conjured by
the education developers.
This column is for all the parents out
there who are hoping to see that happen.
We will monitor the explosion of new
computer experiences that are now available to kids and deal with some of the
larger issues and concerns that arise as a
result. Since there are a lot of new ideas
coming from a lot of different directions,

this column's criteria for edutainment
will be, by design, somewhat arbitrary
and idiosyncratic: the products reviewed
may range from bestselling traditionaltype games to classroom programs that
also happen to be available to parents
and kids at home. A few of them may
not even be games in the classical sense,
but rather computerized toys that encourage exploration and experimentation. Basically, if it is fun and you are likely to learn anything from it, it is fair
game for this column. At last, "edutainment" is more than a buzzword.

It's Not Easy Being Green
This first column centers on greenware
— one of the most engaging new genres
to emerge from the edutainment market.
It probably goes without saying that the
very best way for kids to learn about the
environment is to spend a lot of time outside, getting plenty of first-hand interac-

tion with it. Nevertheless, a complete understanding of ecology also requires a
working knowledge of geology, animal
and plant biology, as well as meteorology — subjects that lend themselves fairly well to computer modeling, as well as
to learning about anthropology and
politics. The programs reviewed below
give kids a variety of hands-on experiences in one or all of these areas, reinforcing strong environmental values along
the way. The best news is that most of
them coat the message with a powerful
dose of fun.
For the youngest kids, First Byte's EcoSaurus introduces the basics of responsible eco-citizenship. The game's scoring
system rewards the player for accomplishing three basic tasks: saving water, using
electricity carefully and picking up recyclable trash. (Now, if it could only teach
them to pick up their rooms ....) EcoSaurus will appeal most strongly to
primary-schoolers who are already fans
of Zug the Megasaurus or who have
some other experience with First Byte's
talking games. The game is short —
anywhere from under an hour if one is
zipping around picking up trash and turning off spigots, to three hours if one is
taking the time to talk to the Eco Island
inhabitants, as well as taking the scenic
route through all the nooks and crannies.
The graphics are charming, with large onscreen hot spots to make it easier for little hands to navigate, but anyone who is
running a fast machine may find that
they have problems in getting the sound
to load properly. Still, EcoSaurus is colorful and appealing, while providing a
potential springboard for some good conversations about the larger effects of
everyday actions.
Dinosaur enthusiasts who are old
enough to read well and play longer,
more challenging games may enjoy
Designasaurus II (Brittanica
Software). Though the game's scenario
is probably more convoluted than it
needs to be (a mad scientist has stolen
the geneprints for a synthetic Gigantodon
and used time travel to hide them in 16
different times and places), most of the
game involves helping an on-screen
dinosaur survive long enough to complete the mission of finding a geneprint.
Players can choose one of ten everpopular dino classics (from tyrannosaurus to pteranodon) or create a custom beast in the genetic engineering lab.
The kids I know who played the game
thought the latter feature was the best
part: not only did they get to decide what
the critter looks like, which habitat it
likes, what it eats and how it defends itself, but they were also allowed to name
it. The program also let them print out
any of the real or created dinos (great for
coloring), and included an order form for
special transfer paper so they could stick
their custom dino on a T-shirt.
Once the dino is turned loose to search

New Edutainment Column

be better off taking the tykes on a hike in
the nearest national park.

for a geneprint, the object of the game is
to keep her fed, watered, rested, safe
from attack and, if all goes well, enable
her to court another of her kind and raise
a family. Of course, it was a
reptile-eat-reptile world back then: if one's dino is a
carnivore, it will often take a fight to the
death in order to get a decent meal.
While there are few drops of blood shed
during combat, the game spares sensitive young by never letting their dino die
onscreen. Instead, when the health points
are down, she gets very sick and is
teleported back to the lab.
The on-screen instruction scheme is
direct and clear enough to keep parents
or children out of the manual and in the
game most of the time (though there are
a few important interface points that are
not explained in either resource, like how
to scroll through the menagerie of existing dinos). The 16 scenarios, each of
which can be played through in a couple
of hours, require a variety of different survival strengths, so kids will come to
know lots of different dinosaurs and learn
the value of, say, endurance over fighting
ability. Besides communicating useful
messages about ecological diversity and
the role habitat plays in species survival,
the game is packed with good raw information about genetic adaptation, the
food chain and paleontology in general.
Given that Tanager Software got its
start porting games for Electronic Arts
and Accolade, it is not surprising that
their The Secret Codes of C.Y.P.H.E.R.
has the look and feel of a well-designed
entertainment product. It is all there: welldrawn graphics, a real music score (by
The Fat Man and Dave Warhol, no less),
an easy-to-use interface, competent and
complete documentation and enough intricacy of plot to keep anyone much
over the age of 10 coming back for more.
The object of the game is to solve
cloak-and-dagger mysteries, using information about hundreds of different mammals as a means of agent identification
and communication — sort of Carmen-Sandiego-meets-Marlon-Perkins. (There
are also frequent cryptogram puzzles to
solve, to exercise those reading skills.)
Completing the entire game can take
weeks, but it is broken up into nearly
200 small missions that can each be
solved in one sitting or less. Though the
graphics get monotonous after a while,
the game is brisk and varied enough to
be easily addicting, and the kids will
come away with a surprisingly deep
knowledge of the habitat, physiology,
diet and social habits of obscure animals
like the dugong and rock hyrex. The four
levels of play make it accessible for
nine-year-olds and challenging enough for
Mom. Tanager is planning C. Y.P.H.E.R.
sequels that use the same detective-story
theme to teach other subjects as well.
Audubon Software's Audubon
Wildlife Adventure programs are home

versions of games originally designed for
classroom use, so they are more overtly
"educational" than the others mentioned
here. The classroom origins are readily
apparent in the wonderful manuals,
which each contain 20-25 pages of related non-computer activities (games, puzzles, craft ideas and information sources)
to get the whole family involved and help
foster long-term concern for wild animals.
In Audubon's Whales!, players find
themselves in a variety of scenarios in
which they can sharpen wildlife observation and identification skills, learn about
whale habitats and life cycles, record
whale songs, participate in a beached
whale rescue and discover the (often dismal) history of human interaction with
whales. (Just for something different,
there is also a scenario dealing with manatees.) With the notable exception of the
evocative sound score, Whales! generally
lacks the high production values found in
more entertainment-oriented products,
but the scenarios are well-written and
packed with information that will appeal
to landbound middle-schoolers.
Once, many years back, I spent nearly
a year writing a US Forest Service ski
area feasibility study — a
once-in-a-lifetime job (or at least, I hope so).
Audubon's Grizzly Bears brought the entire aggravating experience back to life,
in appropriately unreal CGA semi-color.
Though the game follows the same
scenario-based design as Whales!, its emphasis is on balancing competing human
interests and making wise land use
choices for bear habitat. My own sense
of deja vu became completely unbearable (so to speak) while I was playing through the scenario in which my
alter ego was working for an oil company, working side-by-side with USFS
bureaucrats and doing seismic studies
(read: making big explosions) in sensitive bear habitat. While the kids will
probably learn a fair amount about bears
from this game, they are likely to learn
even more about the Byzantine political
realities of American forest management.
With only CGA graphics and no music,
however, most parents would probably

Earthquest Explores Ecology by
Earthquest is a Hypercard-based Macintosh product that defies description
within any of the usual categories. It is
an on-line interactive encyclopedia that
presents a broad range of ecological concepts in four distinct modules. The Rainforest and Eco-Simulator modules give
demonstrations of things like seasons
and climates, the water cycles, and the
food chain. The Carrot Cruiser module offers a variety of mini-games that reinforce the information with mazes, quiz
bees and sound identification. The fourth
module, the Renegade Tour, is a game in
and of itself, designed to give extra direction to a kid's exploration of the software. Hypercard 2.1 is packaged with
the program and users are encouraged
to add their own information to the stack.
There are some interface anomalies
that are not adequately documented in
the manual, though an experienced Mac
user can probably figure them out with a
few minutes of trial-and-error. It is the
overall tone of ecology that makes it special: never pedantic or condescending
and full of the wonder of scientific exploration. It is a good investment for any
family with kids over the age of nine.
Maxis' SimEarth has been reviewed,
featured, profiled, advertised and ballyhooed to death on these and other
pages. There is not much I can add to
the already deafening roar of acclamation, except to say that it is some of the
very best greenware going and a tremendously complex electronic laboratory
wherein kids who already understand the
basics of ecology can try out that
knowledge, stretch their imaginations
and get a small taste of how hard it really is to be God.
The same can be said of Balance of
the Planet by Chris Crawford Games,
an information-rich strategy game that illustrates, in awesome complexity, the
relationship between human economic activity and planetary health. In Crawford's
model, the gamer's only tool for changing human behavior is taxation of negative activities, like CFC generation or
coal burning, or subsidy of positive ones,
like solar energy development or population control programs. The profound interrelatedness of all the variables makes it a
tricky game, dauntingly complex for
many adults and potentially overwhelming for kids below high school age.
Next Issue: Everybody is doing "talking books" these days and the next
column is going to be an overview of the
current offerings. One central question:
How is sitting your kid down in front of a
talking book on the computer screen different than curling up in a big chair with
Mom or Dad and a low-tech printed
book? Look for some expert opinion
about this in the July issue!

Review

depending on the
types of creatures within it, is
allowed a certain
number of moves
between
hexagons per
turn. Lining the
screen are informational displays, along with icons for issuing
movement commands, building new fortresses, calling up
detailed statistics or shifting from the strategic to tactical display.
TITLE:
Celtic Legends
SYSTEM:
Amiga
PRICE:
$49.95
PROTECTION: None
Pierre Fallard and
DESIGNERS:
Frederic Gaulbaire
PUBLISHER:
UbiSoft
Sausalito, CA

by Allen Greenberg

F

or certain game players, there exists no greater satisfaction

than that which comes with poring over a prodigious tome
of a rule book and sifting through endless lists of numbers.
It is no secret, however, that the goal of many new software
releases is no longer to please that elite, slightly eccentric group
of players. For example, UbiSoft recently introduced Battle Isle,
a wargame which can comfortably be played with a joystick in
one hand and a bag of chips on the other. That same company
has also released Celtic Legends, a simple, yet imaginative,
piece of strategy gaming that might also fall in the same category of "relaxed-ware." Were it not for one major flaw, Celtic
Legends (Legends) would prove an ideal simulation for even the
most casual player.
Its title notwithstanding, Celtic Legends contains not one reference to the mythology of the Irish, Welsh, Scots or even the basketball players from Boston. Rather, the story takes place in the
fictional land "Celtika" in which two sorcerer-generals are at war.
The player, in the role of "Eskel the Good" magically generates
and leads an army of allies against "Sogrom the Bad."
Sogrom may be controlled either by the computer or a second
human player. The action takes place on one of 23 islands in an
archipelago, each of which features a different terrain that, of
course, affects the level of difficulty of the confrontation.
In a typical fashion, the solitaire game requires the player to
score victories on the easier islands before he or she may
choose to fight on those which are more difficult. In two-player
mode, however, the gamers may choose any of the islands from
the start. In both versions, players may elect to have the islands
populated by ill-tempered, mutant savages. The savages bear
equal animosity toward both good and evil sorcerers, and will
fight to prevent either side from gaining access to certain vital
sources of magic. Although the opening levels of the game may
be easily conquered, players will note that Legends increases in
difficulty very rapidly.
Graphically, Legends is quite impressive. The strategic display
includes an overview of the current island on one side of the
screen and a close-up view of a player-selectable portion of that
island on the other. For bookkeeping purposes, as well as for
defining certain special locations, the island is divided into the
traditional hexagons of our wargame heritage. Each fighting unit,

The tactical display is used for combat as well as spellcasting.
This is a full-screen close-up of one hexagon from the strategic
display, and is further divided into hexagons of its own. Framing
the screen are the statistics for any individual character on whom
the pointer is resting. Selecting a spellcaster calls up a series of
additional icons that indicate the spells that character is able to
cast. Pointing to an icon also gives the player a verbal reminder
of the icon's function.
Each on-screen fighter is capable of activity-specific animation
and the entire presentation can be quite interesting when magic
and combat are involved. However, the number of animations
may also be reduced by the player in order to speed game-play.
Combat takes place one step at a time, as each combatant car
ries out his order as soon as it is given. Players have the option
of allowing the computer to make all tactical decisions during
combat, or making these decisions on their own. The different
races of participating creatures each carry into the battle their
own restrictions and talents, and this largely determines how an
individual may be used. In addition, individual abilities improve
as a character survives an increasing number of confrontations.
Along with soldiers and magicians, Eskel's allies also include the
congenial, yet deadly, Cyclops, as well as a race of semi-divine
Archangels. Sogrom's followers include the vile Orques and
Skeletons, as well as the intimidating Demons. The impartial
savages also include a variety of creatures, including the megamutant, Minos.
Magic energy is the most precious resource in Celtika and both
leaders must fight dearly for it. Certain outcroppings in the
ground are the most abundant source of this power, and it is
only here that Eskel and Sogrom may conjure new soldiers for
their armies. Possession of these locations is an obvious advantage in the war, but overpopulating them with defensive forces will cause nasty repercussions. When the savages are
present, they will further complicate matters by defending the
magic sources, and they must be defeated without the use of
spells. The two leaders may also build, at great expense, fortres-

Review

ses which act as less powerful sources of magic. An enemy may
capture a fortress for its own use and occupation, but again,
must do so without casting any spells.
Because there are certain fighting conditions under which no
spells may be cast and because many spells affect the enemy's
ability to use magic, physical combat also plays an important
part in Legends. The strategic combination of both types of assault is well-balanced in the game, as are the various types of
obstacles with which players will need to contend. The mousebased interface, along with some keyboard shortcuts, works extremely well to keep the action moving at a comfortable pace.
Indeed, the program is potentially quite enjoyable, until one
makes the mistake of opening the instruction manual. Many poorly documented games have been imported from Europe, but none of these
could hope to compete with the low
standards set by the documentation in
Celtic Legends. There is, of course,
nothing new about pages of documentation wasted on an inept story that has
nothing to do with actual game-play,
while certain important features which
actually appear in the program go completely unmentioned. To this, Legends
adds sentences phrased in such broken
English as to defy understanding. Madeup terminology appears throughout its
pages, definitions for which are buried in
text several pages following the actual

use of the terms. The entire manuscript is then lovingly garnished with spelling and grammatical errors. The disparity in
quality between this piece of software and its documentation is
so great that one cannot help but wonder if UbiSoft did not
deliberately test Bishop Wilburforce's famous analogy and attempt to produce it via simian transcription.
In the hope that recreational computing will survive and
flourish, those companies guilty of packaging their software with
carelessly composed documentation must realize they are discouraging potential newcomers. Novices attempting to use
Legends, ironically a very user-friendly piece of software, will likely be as intimidated by its confusing 25-page manual as they
would by the most weighty rule-book that wargaming has to offer.
Legends is supplied on two copyprotected disks. A third, formatted disk
is required if a game in progress is to be
saved. A full megabyte of RAM is recom
mended and the new 2.0 operating system is supported. Unfortunately, the program recognizes only one floppy drive.
Legends is really a respectable piece
of work, one only hard-core strategists
may wish to avoid. Those casual
players who enjoy some depth to their
simulations, without the danger of drowning, will probably have a good time with
it. The instruction manual may be used
to wrap fish.

CD-ROM Review

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

T

he metaphor and language of movie-

making has long been in use in interactive storytelling. From a software
project's organizational structure
(producer, director, background painters
and musicians) to the concerns of
"camera" angles, cuts and, recently,
spoken lines, adventure games have
aspired to and moved toward a cinemastyle interactive movie. These cinematic inclinations have inspired the first software
project that anyone unfamiliar with adventure games would truly call an interactive
movie. Sherlock Holmes, Consulting
Detective, a CD-ROM multimedia product from ICOM Simulations (creators of Deja Vu and Shadowgate) is the first product
structured entirely around full-motion video segments. With 50
parts cast, 70 costumes designed, and 25 Victorian sets built for
the shooting of the video footage, Sherlock Holmes, CD seems
more a cinematic effort than a programming effort.
Sherlock Holmes, CD is a collection of three murder mysteries,
cut from Arthur Conan Doyle's classic mold and told through
strings of full-motion video clips. Each mystery is kicked off with
a longer scene in which the premise of the case and leading
suspects are introduced. From that point on, it is the player's
task to construct a viable, tryable solution to the case.

The Tools of the Trade
The garners-become-sleuths have several investigative resources available to them, accessed via a very clean, simple iconic interface. There is the newspaper (both a hard copy and an
electronic copy), which the player can browse for relevant facts;
Holmes' files, containing background information on many of the
well-known suspects; the Baker Street Irregulars, a network of
street-wise eyes and ears that will do a little footwork on demand;
and the Baker Street Regulars, a group of professionals who give
advice within their various areas of expertise. Finally, players can
access Holmes' suspect directory, a complete listing of all characters in the three stories. Players can choose to visit these in-

Sherlock Holmes, Consulting Detective
Multimedia IBM and Macintosh
CDTV, TurboGrafx-16,
and Fujitsu FM Towns
$69.95
ICOM Simulations, Inc.
Wheeling, IL

dividuals in person, initiating a video
clip of Holmes and Watson's interview
of the character.
The interviews are carried out in the
characteristic Holmesian manner; poignant questions with subtle undertones,
and the occasional introspective pause
and chin scratch indicating, "Clue!" Of
course, there is the jabbing banter between Holmes and Watson, which is a
shade more good-natured than is normal with the two (though Watson still
consistently comes out on the
patronized end).
The game is designed such that there is a single video segment
for each suspect. One might expect that returning to a suspect
after gathering a crucial clue might change the tone of a
suspect's song. This is not the case as all clue synthesis, which
typically blossoms into Holmes' brilliant deductions, is left to the
player. Fortunately, in these cases, an inhuman eye for detail
and a godlike sense of intuition are not required (not to say that
the cases aren't challenging).
When players feel they've gathered enough data to nail the
culprit, they may visit the court, where they are administered a
multiple choice exam by the justice. If players have their facts
straight, they are treated to a full explanation of the case by Holmes and given a score based upon the number of resources
used to solve the case.

Art for Game's Sake
Artistically, Sherlock Holmes, CD is unlike any entertainment
software on the home computer. The full-motion video clips,
some of which run several minutes long, seem to run near standard video resolution (actually they run at the equivalent of 15
frames per second). These clips are interspersed with flavorful
pencil sketches in an appropriate courtroom-artist style, creating
a rich visual effect. The setting, casting and acting are all of a
low-end television production quality (with only one or two cases

CD-ROM Review

of overzealous acting), equal to an
average public television production. The
sound track, with theme music, background sounds and scene ending fanfares, fills out this very solid effort.

Issues in Interactivity
With its novelty and high production
value, the case for Sherlock Holmes, CD
opened and shut. Unfortunately, there
are a few loose ends that must be addressed.
Sherlock has failings where nearly all
adventure games and interactive stories
are weak, that is, in replayability. This is
an issue that creators of interactive movies must solve or justify
if they wish to be successful in the future. Replayability isn't
much of a problem with current adventure games because
garners have come to expect it and are willing to pay for a future
"dust-gatherer" if the game gives an adequate amount of play
time (somewhere around 30 hours minimum?). It becomes more
of a problem with interactive movies like Sherlock, in which the
three mysteries can be played through in a couple of sittings
with little provision for replayability. The Sherlock design tries to
encourage replay by giving the player a score upon completion
of a case and challenging the player to best the fictional score of
Sherlock Holmes, but anyone with adventure game experience
will recognize this as a weak solution. Replaying a linear

storyline, especially a mystery story in
which one already knows whodunit, is an
exercise in tedium that few will be willing
to endure for the sake of an incentive as
contrived as this. One should give the
designers' effort points for recognizing
and attempting to address the problem,
but their solution just isn't adequate.

Concluding Statements
The question is, then, whether Mr. T.
Reviewer gives the software a recommendation or not. In the case of Sherlock
Holmes, CD, he does with qualifications.
This is a ground-breaking product with
whiz-bang technology that demonstrates
the full potential of multimedia. Players can expect a brief, lively,
and charming burst of entertainment out of the game, and perhaps 6 to 12 months of gee-whiz value to impress friends and
neighbors. Add to this the fact that Sherlock is one of the few
CD-ROM entertainment products out there that justifies one's expensive hardware upgrade. It is truly a novel product and something for every CD owner to see. The question remains, however,
whether garners will continue, once the novelty of the technology
wears off, to shell out $70 to $80 for games with limited play life.
This review is based upon the IBM version running on a 38620 with a Sony CDU7205 CD-ROM drive and a Sound Blaster
Pro.

Strategy

Nautical Notes on

Uncharted Waters
Finding Favor and Fortune
from the Flagship
by Dave Arneson

should be possible to discover ports along its
coasts, as well as along
those of the Middle East
and Africa. Alert captains
will not fail to travel up the
Red Sea to Mecca or to locate Java (east of the tip
of Malaya).
Captains who find themselves running short of
cash in this corner of the
world will find that there
are some good short
trade runs on India's
west coast and along the
east coast of Africa. It
only requires checking
the Port Markets for the
best buys. Courageous
captains should also
note that circumnavigating Africa takes long
enough that one should
leave with at least 60
days of food or plan on
plenty of stops. After all
of this, one simply sails
back along the northwest
coast of Africa and one
is homeward bound!

Bigger Is Better

D

ave Arneson drafted the basic rules

and concepts that burgeoned into
the original Dungeons & Dragons
people and paper game., as well as early
computer games like RAF: Battle of Britain.

Since players earn points for discovering
ports, the most efficient way to rack up points
is to plan on going around the world in one
voyage. For that, one will need Galleons with crews of roughly 60-100
men, loaded with supplies and all
the gold possible. Then one simply
weighs anchor and sets forth, heading west from England to Jamestown. Since there is nothing at
Plymouth and points to the north, it
is optimal to turn southward and follow the coast all the way down
around South America and up the
coast to California. In the Caribbean, one can find Santo Domingo
and Jamaica. Jamaica is empty
and Santo Domingo is east of
Cuba (There is no Havana). Once
one reaches California, it is possible
to load up in Eureka and head
West across the Pacific to Japan.
Silver will find good market value
in Japan. Once one reaches Asia, it

Captains with no objection to being combative should plan on
dropping by Seville
and buying some nice
new teak-hulled Galleons loaded with cannon. Successful captains will keep at least
200 men on their flagships and at least one
hundred able-bodied
seamen on each of
the other ships.
Militaristic merchants
who load ships
equipped in this
fashion with the maximum number of cannon will find that they should never have to
fear a pirate or enemy fleet again.
The secret in a naval battle, of course,
is to sink or capture the opposing flagship. Nothing else matters. Once the flagship is gone, the enemy surrenders. Basically, the computer enemy's goal is always to chase down the player's flag-

ship. So, any player with a modicum of intelligence will make his or her flagship absolutely
the most powerfully armed and best manned
ship of the fleet. The flagship's ability to resist
will, in turn, give one plenty of time to go after
the enemy's flagship.
Naturally, if the computer-controlled captains
of the other ships in one's fleet manage to
storm some enemy ships, their battle prowess
will increase, but frankly, the player's character is the only captain that really counts. It is
best to get the fight over with as soon as possible and move on to the loot. One can only
get gold, treasure and cargo from a defeated
enemy. No ships may be taken as prizes and
no crew members recruited to replace one's
own casualties.
Then, as soon as possible after a battle, one
must get to shore and fix any ships damaged
during the conflict, as well as redistribute the
crews. In this, one makes certain that the fleet
is in fighting trim all the time. Note: Rather
than have several weak ships, it is better to
have a few strong ones. Clever players will not
hesitate to scrap the clunkers out of their
fleets. There are more ships where those came
from and valuable cargo can always be transferred to other ships.
Oddly enough, whenever one needs supplies
in distant waters, there are pirates who conveniently show up. This can be tremendously
beneficial after a battle! It is far cheaper than
any port and may help bail players out when
cash is short.

I

Strategy

Adventurous garners will need to be aware
that, upon entering a hostile area, they will
have to pay a bribe or leave. At the start
of the game, one only needs to be concerned with the Turks. Later, the Spanish
are likely to become hostile to the player.
Except in the specific cases of Istanbul
and Seville, hostile ports can be "bought"
over through investment. Unfortunately,
once the Spanish and the Turks become
hostile, they tend to stay that way for the
duration. The usual bribes start at 3,000.
Since the bribe only lasts for one day, it requires forethought to use the time
wisely. This means one had better
purchase those galleons in Seville
on the very first day, since fitting
ships out will take several days.
Unfortunately, Seville is the only
place to get Galleons during most
of the game.
As for Istanbul, it is really bad
news. There are several missions
that take one there; there is no
way to get in without paying the
bribe and it is not always possible
to find a cargo of cheap artwork while there.
The latter will sometimes pay for the trip, but
missions to or through Istanbul are generally
money losers.

Ports Of Haul
Whenever one buys goods, all the prices in
the port go up. Likewise, whenever one sells
goods, all prices go down. Traders are best
off, then, keeping the number of transactions

to a minimum. The comments on specific

ports below reflect only the "sure-fire market
situations. These can change due to the effect mentioned above, such that even
great ports like Naples can get glutted
after awhile. This is usually the result of
selling and buying by the galleon-ful.

Strait Talk on Treasures
The Hydra Gem is at N60 W130 (North
of Eureka California) but the search starts
in London (usually).
The Ruby Helmet is at S25 W85. The
map ... well ... plan on a long
voyage.
The Royal Dagger hunt starts
in Panama to Vera Cruz to Bordeaux to S65 W145.
The Golden Ring search starts
in Lisbon, then to Mombasa, then
to Pisa and finally to Mecca. The
treasure is at N5 E50.
The Princess Rescue begins
with the Nasty Spaniard hanging
around the Straits of Gibraltar and
the Western Med. Keep attacking everything
in sight and he will show up. Algiers makes
a decent base, as does Valencia.

1

1

iI

n

n

n

V

Sneak Preview

On Not Raising a
Führer in the Kremlin
by Johnny L. Wilson
"Perestroika is a trick." "Glasnost is a
hoax." "Gorbachev is not to be trusted."
Such were the accusations of the political
right as a new style of governmental and
economic influence began to emerge
within the Soviet Union. While the West's
intelligence communities were warning
their respective governments that a coup
was highly probable and that Gorbachev
did not have enough support to force
open the Iron Curtain once and for all,
many casual observers questioned
Gorbachev's will to induce the kinds of
changes necessary to convert the Soviet
Union from a totalitarian regime with
planned economy to an open regime
with free-market economy.
At the time this issue went to press,
events in the Confederation of Independent States were still very much topical issues. Yeltsin's cabinet had
threatened to quit if Yeltsin's radical
economic reform program was not implemented, but the common farmers were
hesitant to accept the plots of land
promised them in the land reform already implemented. Reform is truly a difficult proposition. In Spectrum
HoloByte's Crisis in the Kremlin,
players choose between walking the
same tightrope that Gorbachev had to
cross, learning what it means to be
changing policies too fast for the conservatives and too slowly for the liberals;
tightening the reigns a la Brehznev, holding fast to old ideals without starving the
people or ending up with a bloodbath; or
ducking and weaving between bold
strokes and reasonable compromises a
la Yeltsin, discovering how difficult it is to
democratize when the populace is still
afraid of the process.

complete state ownership to highly
privatized ownership.
Player presidents are advised, however,
not to give away their strategic plan. If
one makes too many policy changes
over the default positions, it is very likely
to bring about an immediate hard-line
coup. Players either meet an untimely
end or make unreasonable compromises
when these hard-line coups occur, so it is
wise not to try to accomplish too much
at once. As in any form of politics, one
needs to move slowly enough to give the
majority time to get used to the change
that is occurring. Moving slowly is the
best policy if one is getting results on the
important fronts.
In Crisis in the Kremlin, the important
front is the economic front. If one is feeding the people and the quality of life is
getting better, the president will have
plenty of leeway to handle governmental
reform as the game advances.

President Calls for Patience

beginning of the game and each May
Day upon the anniversary of the Revolution. Style of Government runs the
gamut from despotic to democratic;
Military Posture can be set on a scale
from aggressive to pacifistic; Diplomatic
Posture flows from hostile to submissive;
Trade Policies can be either protective
or permissive (few restraints); Civil
Rights may be restricted or end up close
to anarchy; Media Freedom may be very
restricted or totally uncontrolled;
Economic Policy will either be based on
a matrix between a central bureaucracy
and an uncontrolled free market; the
Work Week may fluctuate between
forced labor and extreme leisure; the
government may establish complete
Wage Control or leave it unrestricted
and Type of Ownership may vary from

Since the player will not be able to
make any direct changes to the budget
until November of his/her first year in office, the best way to accelerate change is
to initiate one level of property reform
(Type of Ownership). Then one should
advance the calendar to November as
fast as possible. Since, however, the
player's predecessor has left the Rodina
(motherland) in such a mess, the player
is likely to be faced with a series of
crises. Many times the crisis will be
foreshadowed with digitized video
footage of the crisis situation (courtesy of
the Cable News Network archives) or a
Telex from one governmental agency or
another. The player should not feel guilty
about these early problems and should
merely try to stall major decisions until
he/she wields more political influence.

President Announces
Glorious Plan

Once the crisis is actually in play, the
player will be required to "answer a
phone call" and receive a text message
briefing him/her on the crisis. If the call
came from the president's ministers or
the KGB, there will be a suggested
course of action. Then the president will
be confronted with a check list of options
for dealing with the crisis. The president
can either choose one of the options or
ignore the circumstances by clicking on
his/her cup of tea. The decision will
either solve the crisis, forestall it or exacerbate the crisis.

The game begins with the player acceding to the presidency of the USSR. The
first order of business is to establish the
policies under which the player's government will rule the country. There are ten
categories of policies to be established,
in a range from one to ten, both at the

As play advances to the next month, a
summary of the president's position in
the crisis will be provided in either
newspaper form or a new digitized film
clip related to the decision. Whatever occurs, the player must, by all means, stay
in power until the budget process takes

Sneak Preview

effect in November. Frankly, the game
will be won and democracy established
via the war of the wallet. Everything else
is damage control.

President's Budget Slashes
Foreign Aid
Budgetary decisions will determine the
success or failure of any administration.
Crisis in the Kremlin allows players to
set the detail level with which they wish
to manage the economy, so that they
can determine if they want to macromanage or micromanage the Soviet
economy. This writer opted to micromanage the budget. In this way, he could
finesse certain budget cuts past his ministers (and the KGB!) and move swiftly
toward a balanced budget. Yes, conservatives, the president does get a line-item
veto in this political game. If one can
reach the point at which the economy is
growing and the budget surplus is higher
than the deficit limit, there is no stopping
the onslaught of democracy.
Budgetary decisions can be influenced
in several ways. In addition to the
president's ministers making budgetary
suggestions, a dynamic graph located in
the lower left-hand corner of the screen

shows crisis (red), problem (yellow) and
positive (green) points within the
country's infrastructure and occasional letters indicate surpluses and deficits within
the economy. Using the three potential
sources of information, the president can
decide where to budget those precious
rubles in order to bring about both
popular acceptance of the government
and overall improvement in the economy.
This writer experienced regular success
by slashing the foreign aid budget (not to
those within the republics) and the research and development funds for space

exploration, followed by small, but
regular, annual cuts in military research
and development, troop salaries and
weapons procurement. This proceeded to
give the government enough of a surplus
to fund fast-expanding agricultural advancement coupled with annual policy changes in ownership to simulate land reform.
If one can survive a couple of years in
this fashion, things usually begin to turn
around and it is possible to make more
substantive changes.

The President Launched a
Tirade Against Hard-Liners
Crisis in the Kremlin features a complex model underlying the decisionmaking process, interesting technological
chrome using video footage and a fascinating subject matter. In its early form,
the game looks and plays like the kind
of game that micromanagers will love
and macromanagers will hate. It calls for
a vision and a plan, as well as the
flexibility necessary to implement one's
ideals within the context of political
reality. Crisis in the Kremlin may be too
much of the real world for many gamers
to enjoy. Fortunately, it is solid enough
for many of us to savor.

A monthly look at the
Computer Entertainment
Stock Market

S

tock Watch!? What's that? It's something new that will appear in each issue of
CGW. Stock Watch will highlight the performances of public companies in the
entertainment software business. Currently, we will be watching five players: Sierra, Software Toolworks, Electronic Arts, Microprose and Broderbund. The charts
and commentary presented on this page are a reference point for hobbyists who might be
interested in investing in these companies. Stock Watch will function as a tool, albeit lagging (because of the lead times inherent in publishing a monthly magazine), for examining stock performances. Nonetheless, this column will be both a visual aid and forum for
presenting information concerning the relative strength of the entertainment software industry, which should be interesting to readers whether they are investors or not. As always, investors are advised to perform their own diligent research prior to investing.
Stock Watch will usually contain three features: a) one or more charts showing recent
action in a software publisher's stock; b) some rudimentary information for the beginning
investor and c) a news/analysis story about one or more of the software companies. The
latter should put the chart or charts in perspective.

How Can You Invest?
Computer gamers who do not currently have a stock brokerage account (but want to invest in the software industry) can usually open a cash account with a stockbroker for
about $2,000. Those with modems may want to consider establishing an account with
Quick & Reilly on CompuServe or Charles Schwab & Co. on GEnie. Such accounts
are handy because they allow one to place orders on-line twenty-four hours a day, for immediate execution upon the market opening (especially for those on the Pacific Coast
who do not like to phone their broker at 6:30 A.M.) and allow one to update their portfolio
value at any time.
Now, one only needs to know the stock one wishes to purchase and the price per share.
If one is using an on-line service to place the order, it is also a good idea to know the
stock ticker symbol (the abbreviation in all caps that often follows the company name in
a news story). The ticker symbol also helps investors to observe the latest transactions
when following the ticker on the CNBC or Headline News network or to be able to call up
quotes on a telecommunications service. Currently, all of the entertainment software publishers that are public are on the NASDAQ (over-the-counter market). The ticker symbols
for the five entertainment software companies are: Broderbund (BROD), Electronic
Arts (ERTS), Microprose (MPRS), Sierra (SIER) and Software Toolworks (TWRX).
Prices are listed, both in the newspapers and on the on-line services, on a per-share
basis. So, if Software Toolworks stock is listed at 6 (i.e. $6.00 per share), it would cost
an investor $600 to buy 100 shares (i.e. a round lot, the most common quantity in which
stocks are purchased by individual investors) plus the broker's commission. Brokers
make their money whether the investor makes any or not. A typical discount brokerage
(Quick & Reilly or Schwab) commission for that transaction would be approximately
$40 to buy the stock and $40 to sell it. That means that the stock would have to increase
one full point, to 7, in order for the investor to be able to sell it and even make $20 on
100 shares (although larger investors who purchase more shares pay less percentagewise on their commissions). Of course, once the commission is covered, the rest belongs
to the investor and, eventually, Uncle Sam (capital gains taxes are applied to the profits
of stock sales).

How Do You Read These Charts?
The top three charts in this month's Stock Watch are weekly charts. Each vertical line
represents one week of trading, with the high point representing the high price for the entire week and the low point representing the low price for the week. The short horizontal
line is called the closing tick and shows the final price for the week. The bottom two
charts are daily charts, showing highs, lows and closing ticks on a daily basis. This is because they are the newest public companies in the industry and do not have the trading
history possessed by the other three companies.

What's This Month's Big Story?
The most exciting news for this issue concerns Electronic Arts (ERTS). EA was trading in the mid- to high 40s (ca. $45) when they announced a two-for-one stock split for
every owner of stock on record as of March 16, 1992. This meant that for every share of
stock which an investor owned as of the close of trading on the 16th, they would have
two shares beginning trading on March 27, 1992 (the "x-date" when the split took effect).
Of course, each share would now only be worth half as much as before (that's the bad
news), but each point the stock rose in value would now mean double what it meant
before (since those who owned 100 shares would now have 200 shares and so forth).
The lower price should accelerate buying interest in the stock and create more demand.
So, if the company continues to grow at the same pace, the original investors could conceivably make money at a faster pace.
Note that the Electronic Arts chart does not show its high-flying period in the
mid-to-high 40s. This is because technical analysts (i.e. chart readers) adjust the trading history
downward so that the chart's pattern continues to show the same relative price movements (in this case moving steadily upward), even though the per share price is lower at
the present time than the per share price before the split.
EA's chart, both before and after the split, shows that investors are convinced that the
company will continue its stable growth pattern. Investors perceive solid corporate leadership, a diversified product strategy and prudent long-range vision as indicators that
growth will continue.

Survey

Which Sound Card Works Best For Me?
by Mike Weksler
ith all the accoutrements available in the world of IBM compatibles, the most amazingly
overlooked item is the speaker. It is a
cheap device that is one notch above a
buzzer and designed to beep an occasional warning rather than provide any
decent aural experience. It is the primary
area in which the IBM compatible lags behind the Amiga and Macintosh platforms.
Fortunately, this has, in the last few
years, changed as the technology incorporated into sound cards for the IBM-compatible platform has become increasingly
sophisticated.
This article will introduce the reader to
the current crop of add-in sound boards
and how they relate to games. It is not intended to uncover each detail of every
board on the market — a book would be
more suited to that task. This article
divides sound cards into three categories:
music synthesizer sound cards, music
synthesizer sound cards with digital audio
capability and multi-media sound cards.
Note also that, though some sound cards
are bundled with their own speakers,
sound output can be greatly improved by
jacking the sound card into one's stereo
system or quality amplified speakers.

Music Synthesizer Sound
Cards
Music synthesizer sound cards were
originally designed to add music and
limited sound effects to the IBM compatible gaming experience. With the exception of the Roland hardware, these
cards tend to be the lowest priced and
are available for under one hundred dollars. If one is only interested in background music and sound effects for
games, these cards should be more than
adequate.
Ad Lib: this sound card has been and
still is the current standard for FM synthesized music in games. Most games on
the market are labeled Ad Lib compatible. The Ad Lib card is bundled with
the Visual Composer sequencing software to create one's own music and the
Jukebox software for playing songs back
Sound Runner: this is basically a
stripped-down Ad Lib clone. It is priced
less and comes with only a small pair of
Sony SRST speakers. If one just wants
to play games, this is the most economi-

cal card available. Interestingly, this
sound card was first advertised as the
Sound Commander until the company
learned that there was already a sound
card available with that name. The
Sound Commander, though, is both Ad
Lib and Soundblaster compatible.
Roland LAPC-1 or CM-32L: The
Roland synthesizer cards are the ultimate
in music sound cards. The LAPC-1 is the
bus card version, which can be
purchased with or without a MIDI interface,
while the CM-32L (next generation MT32) is a separate module that connects
to a MPU-ITC-T MIDI interface. The price
is quite high at approximately $450
(street price) for the LAPC-1 and around
$500 or more for the CM-32L. Usually, sequencing software is bundled in with the
hardware. This is a professional Roland
synthesizer sans keyboard with: 32
voices, 128 instrument sounds, 30
rhythm sounds and 33 sound effects. To
hear one is to buy one.

Music Synthesizer Sound
Cards with Digital Audio
Capability
What does a synthesizer sound card
with digital audio capability have to offer
over an Ad Lib-style standard music synthesizer card? In two words, the answer is
"digitized voices." Such cards allow designers to bring real speech into games, as
significant a technology to computer
games as sound itself was to motion pictures in the late 1920s. One of the
problems of moving from the "silent
movies" of traditional computer games
to the "talkies" of more modern games is
the size of digitized sound files. Fortunate-

Installing a soundcard into one's computer can be as simple as dropping the
card into an empty slot, plugging in the
speakers and running the appropriate
setup utility for a given game. On the
other hand, hardware conflicts in IBMcompatible equipment can be a real
nightmare. The reason that conflicts may
occur is largely attributed to two cards
trying to use the same interrupt request
(IRQ) (on an ISA bus — EISA buses have

ly, this is remedied with the advent of CDROM, but such discussion is beyond the
scope of this article. Digital audiocapable sound cards are becoming more
numerous on the shelves and, in order to
be competitive, each one boasts different
features. All of the following cards mentioned below are compatible with the Ad
Lib standard.
Soundblaster: CMS manufacturers this
sound card, which has the Yamaha 11
voice mono-synthesizer chip identical to
the standard Ad Lib board. It is 100 percent compatible with regard to games
written to the Ad Lib standard. It also
has the capacity to allow gamers to digitally record and play back sound
samples. This is the standard that most
developers base their digital audiocapable products on. It is bundled with
digitizing utilities and music sequencing
software in addition to having multiple inputs for line-in, mic-in, and line-out. A
MIDI connector box may be added for
connecting to a MIDI-compatible keyboard (to record keystrokes into one's
music sequencer program). Additionally,
there is a joystick port (which also
doubles as the MIDI connection for the
MIDI box). Although there have been
many cards that have come out since
the original Soundblaster, it is still "tried
and true" when it comes to issues of compatibility.
Thunderboard: If one is not into all the
extra software that comes with the
Soundblaster, MediaVision's Thunderboard is a lower-priced alternative, complete with optional MIDI interface, and
claims 100% compatibility with products
written for both the Ad Lib standard and
the Soundblaster standard. It comes
bundled with demos of three front-line
software programs.
Sound Master II: This sound card from
Covox is compatible with their Speech
Thing (a device that plugs into one's
parallel port and plays digitized sound
through a speaker) as well as the
Soundblaster card. Unfortunately, it re-

the capability to share IRQs). There are
jumpers on most bus cards that allow
one to select which IRQ to use. Commonly, on a sound card, IRQs 2, 3, 5 and 7
are selectable. Additionally, there can be
DMA conflicts as well as base memory
conflicts. It is a good idea to have all the
information on each of one's bus cards
written down before a sound card installation is undertaken — of course, one can
always start yanking out cards until the
sound card plays the test music (which
sometimes ends up being a viable solution for getting a sound card to work in a
given system).

Survey

quires a TSR ("terminate and stay resident") driver to be compatible with the
latter and everyone knows TSRs take up
memory. Many games will not run with
any TSR in memory, however, so one
loses the advantage of having the board.
It also requires two IRQs. The Soundmaster II, however, does play Soundblaster digitized samples and comes with
a variety of digitizing and sequencing
software, including a program that converts the Soundblaster .VOC files for
replay through the Covox card. It also
has voice recognition and the capability
for digital signal processing for pitch
changing, harmonizing, flanging, reverb,
chorusing distortion and echoes. The
Sound Master 11 may not be fully
Soundblaster compatible for games, but
enough of the major developers support
the card in their games that some
garners will want it because of some of
the other things it does. MIDI is handled
on the card without the need for a MIDI
connector box. Additionally, the PC
speaker may be bypassed and the signal
run directly through the Sound Master ll
for an increase in the quality of output
from the PC speaker. The latter configuration is useful for games from Access that
utilize the Real Sound technology. If the
reader is into digitizing and creating interesting samples, this may be the card to
check out more closely.
Stereo FX: This one comes from ATI
—thesamcopnytkesh-rod
VGA cards such as Graphics Ultra. It is
a cross between the original Soundblaster (in that it requires an optional
MIDI connector box for MIDI support),
and the Thunderboard, if only the latter
had stereo capability. It is Soundblaster
compatible and is entirely software configurable. One merely bolts the card on,
drops the hood and then fires up the
software to set up the IRQ channel and
other configurations — in other words, no
jumpers. It comes bundled with speakers
and is competitively priced.
VGA Stereo FX: The reader who is
short on slots in his/her computer would
do well to consider this hybrid between
ATI's VGA Wonder XL 1024 x 768 x 256
color VGA card (which also runs in a virtual 32K color mode at 640 x 480 resolution) and ATI's Stereo FX card. It even
has a bus mouse port and comes with a
mouse (although it is not a replacement
for premium-line mice). All this card
needs is an industry standard SCSI port
and it would be an MPC card. There is no
volume knob on this card — it comes
bundled with the MIDI connector box, a
peripheral that handles volume control
and joystick connections. Software
drivers are included for most major applications, such as Microsoft Windows
and AutoCAD.

Sound Commander FX: This board,
from Mediasonic, is very similar to the
Thunderboard, but is capable of supporting MIDI (without a connector box) and
has an innovative infra-red remote control (sold separately), useful for business
demonstrations. It is also bundled with
presentation and Karaoke software.
Another nice feature is the ability to connect to CD audio. It is even compatible
with the Covox Speech Thing.

Other Digital Audio
Capable Devices
The Disney Sound Source plugs into
one's parallel port. It plays digitized
sound through its built-in speaker and is
supported by such Disney releases as
Dick Tracy and The Rocketeer.
Sound Star: Though it sounds like
another sound card, this is a device that,
like the Speech Thing, attaches to one's
internal speaker and allows the signal to
output to stereo speakers. This particularly enhances products using Real Sound
technology. It comes bundled with Labtec speakers (larger than most of the
speakers bundled with other sound cards.

Multi-Media Sound Cards
A Multi-Media sound card should support the following features: CD-ROM with
CD digital audio, minimum 8-bit DAC converter, minimum 8-bit linear analog-to-digital converter, digitally controlled analog
audio mixer, music synthesizer chip,
MIDI capability and should use DMA
channeling and an IRQ line. A MultiMedia or MPC sound card is the heart of
an MPC (Multi-Media PC).
Anyone who wishes to take advantage
of the eventual deluge of MPC software,
as well as anyone who wishes to have
their SCSI host bus adapter and sound
card combined in one slot, will need one
of these cards.
Media Vision's Pro-Audio Spectrum is
an MPC card, albeit some compatibility
problems were encountered when playing games with an early evaluation version. Media Vision claims that the new
Pro Audio Spectrum 16 will be
Soundblaster compatible, as well as
backward-compatible with the Pro Audio
Spectrum. This MPC card will have 16-bit
sampling and playback up to 44 kHz in
stereo, a 20-voice stereo synthesizer and
a volume control (one hopes in the form
of a knob on the back of the card — the
earlier generation of this card required
one to use a keyboard combination to
alter the volume). One will be able to perform audio mixing between the internal
synthesizer, digital audio, CD audio, external line-in, microphone and an IBM
speaker (all except the last two items are

Survey

in stereo). Bundled software will include
Stereo Studio F/X for waveform editing,
SP Spectrum for MIDI sequencing, a
software-controlled mixer, TrackBlaster
Pro, four-track editing software, Pro
Speech (a realistic text-to-speech converter), a music and sound effects

Guide to Sound
Card Manufacturers
Ad Lib, Inc.:
Ad Lib
Ad Lib Gold 1000
SCSI Interface Kit
Surround Sound Kit
Telephone Answering Kit
Ad Lib Gold 2000
50 Staniford St., Suite 800
Boston MA 02114
(800) 463-2686
American Pacific Concepts:
Sound Star
1955 W. Texas St. Suite 7-170
Fairfield, CA 94533
(800) 235 3837
ATI Technologies Inc.:

library, a multi-media presentation application compatible with software such
as the Autodesk Animator and a full
complement of MS Windows 3.1 drivers
and DLLs (Dynamic Link Libraries).
The Soundblaster Prois the second
generation of the Soundblaster from

ATI Stereo FX
ATI VGA Stereo FX
3761 Victoria Park Avenue
Scarborough, Ontario
Canada MTW 3S2
(416) 756-0718
Covox:
Sound Master II
675 Conger St.
Eugene, OR 97402
(503) 342-1271

Creative Labs, has stereo DACs, stereo
analog-to-digital capability from either a
microphone, CD or line-in, a sampling
rate of up to 44kHz (22kHz maximum
sampling rate in stereo), digitally controlled stereo analog mixer, stereo 24-voice
FM music synthesizer, a built in MIDI in-

Los Gatos, CA 95030
(408) 378-3838
Outside North America:
Creative Technology PTE. Ltd.
75 Ayer Raja Crescent #02-04
Singapore 0513
(65) 773-0233
Walt Disney Software:
Disney Sound Source
(800) 688-1520

Creative Labs:
Sound Blaster
Sound Blaster Pro
CD-ROM upgrade kit

Mediasonic, Inc.:
Sound Commander
Sound Commander FX
Sound Commander M
Sound Commander Gold

North American Distributor
Brown-Wagh Publishing:
130D Knowles Drive

40720 Fremont Blvd.
Fremont, CA 94530
(510) 438-9996

Media Vision:
Thunderboard
Pro-Audio Spectrum
47221 Fremont Blvd.
Fremont, CA 94538
(800) 845 5870
PC Turbo Corp.:
Sound Runner
515 Spanish Ln. #D
Walnut, CA 91789
(714) 595-3232
Roland:
LAPC-1
CM-32L
7200 Dominion Circle
Los Angeles, Ca 90040-3647
(213) 685-5141

Survey

terface, joystick port and a CD-ROM interface. This MPC sound card has been on
the shelves for a while and works with
Windows 3.0. Also, since it is compatible with the Ad Lib standard and
backward-compatible with the original
Soundblaster, it is compatible with the
majority of games. However, Creative
Labs recently announced a version 2 of
the Soundblaster Pro card that is expected to use a single Yamaha YM262
stereo FM synthesis chip instead of the
two mono Yamaha stereo FM chips used
in the current board. The result is that
developers whose products supported version 1 may find that these products will
not support version 2. However, it will
most likely be compatible with the Ad
Lib Gold card which will use the same
Yamaha stereo FM chip.
One rather disappointing feature of the
Soundblaster Pro is that its designers
chose to go with a 40-pin proprietary CDROM interface, rather than the industrystandard 50-pin SCSI connection. This is
a serious drawback to those readers who
have already purchased CD-ROM drives
that have 50-pin connectors. If the reader
has a Soundblaster Pro and is contemplating the purchase of a CD-ROM

drive, he/she is limited to the CD-ROM
from Matsushita. Creative Labs is offering
a CD-ROM upgrade to the Soundblaster
Pro that includes the appropriate CDROM drive.
The bundled software includes a MIDI
sequencer, the Intelligent Organ, a voice
editor, a text-to-speech utility, multimedia
presentation software (which plays
Autodesk animator files), an audio CD
player, the parrot software (really a utility
to create interesting 4-frame talking
animations), and Microsoft Windows 3.0
DLL and sound programs. Most of the
software came with the original
Soundblaster and although the new
software is useful — especially the audio
CD player — it does not look as slick as
that which will come with the Pro Audio
Spectrum 16.
The Ad-Lib Gold 1000 from Ad Lib,
Inc. will be backward-compatible with the
old Ad Lib card and, therefore, will be
compatible with most game software.
This sound card promises to have the
most features of any, including the following add-on daughterboards: an industrystandard 50-pin SCSI interface or the
stereo sound adapter, which includes an
on-board SCSI interface and a

microphone, a PC telephone answering
system and a surround-sound module.
The card itself supports 12-bit stereo
DAC, stereo sampling up to 44.1 kHz, an
analog mixer, a 16-bit FM sound DAC
(Digital to Analog Converter) and 20 FM
stereo voices. Another nice feature is the
ability to control bass, treble and balance
through the control panel. This panel will
also control the other options as they are
added. This sound card, like the ATI
cards, is software configurable and allows
interrupts above IRQ 7. Another model,
the Ad Lib Gold 2000, has all of the
above features including a built-in SCSI interface. The Ad Lib Gold 1000 card
should ship at the end of April, 1992.
Sound Commander M and the Sound
Commander Gold: These cards are
similar to the Soundblaster Pro and the
Ad Lib Gold respectively; however, they
utilize the feature of an optional infrared
remote control like their non-MPC card.

And The Winner Is...
Which sound card is best is entirely dependent upon what a particular individual
is looking for and it is hoped that this
overview will aid the reader on his/her
quest for sound.

Design Notes

Abstracts from The Journal
of Computer Game Design
t

least once per year, CGW
prints abstracts of selected articles from The Journal of Computer Game Design in order to stimulate thought concerning the philosophies behind and development of computer games. This year, we will look at
articles from Volume 4.6, 5.1 and 5.4.
The journal is published six times per
year. To subscribe to the journal, send
a check or money order for $30 to:
The Journal of Computer Game Design
5251 Sierra Road
San Jose, CA 95132

A

The Role of Intention in
Game Design
by Dave Menconi (in progress: Victory at
Sea)
Dave's article was centered around a
thesis that designers need to build the entire game design around a "purpose." In
defining that purpose, Dave notes that
this does not have to be some grand
noble purpose, but boils the essence
down to the effect the designer wishes to
convey to the reader.
With that proposition stated, he argues
that every design decision, every graphic
and each line of code must serve that
purpose. For example, "A sad game
should not have happy graphics; an exciting game should not be slow." Though
the advice seems rather mundane, he observes that keeping the overall purpose
(i.e. effect on the player) at mind
throughout the entire project will keep
the developer from getting tunnel vision.

Computer Games versus
Videogames
by Chris Crawford (Patton Strikes Back)
Chris suggested a major reason for computer games to be able to survive in
spite of the big money lure of videogames. He observed that the computer
game design environment can afford to
be more experimental. It is much
cheaper to develop and publish a computer game than a comparable

videogame. Then, he explained that the
real value of computer game developers
to videogame publishers is their willingness "to try new and different things."
Once it is proven that there is an
audience for a type of game or a value
in a given technological approach, the
videogame publishers are willing to
spend the money to acquire such a
game or approach.
The irony of the situation is that there is
an increasing trend for computer games
to be developed with an eye toward becoming videogames. This means that
they are actually costing more in research and development in order to be
less likely to be successful as videogames. Chris finished his analysis with a
plea for computer game developers to
retain their experimental style.

The Perils of Hollywood
Thinking
by Ernest W. Adams (Hot Seat for CD-I)
In a fascinating essay, Mr. Adams expressed the wrong-headedness of those
who use the Hollywood metaphor for
computer game design. He suggested
that computer games that adopt movie
production methods will find that 90% of
the budget will be consumed by graphics
and sound and only 10% on design,
coding, testing and debugging. He noted
that this is a higher percentage than currently employed and implied that this
would reduce the quality of all non-A.V.
factors in computer games.
In addition to the obvious plaint about
the lack of stable hardware in the computer game medium as opposed to the
film medium, he further observed that
most people have not considered the
very basic difference between the
linearity of a film and the non-linearity of
a computer game. Using continuity as an
example, he observed that it is normal
procedure to simply return set, props
and wardrobe to their original appearance at the start of each take. In a
computer game, there are so many different combinations of props, sets and

wardrobe that must be tracked to
prevent embarrassing mistakes that it is
impossible to accomplish this "simple"
task with traditional film methods.
Adams closed his article with a new suggested metaphor. He offered the formula
race car. He noted that they do not use
an assembly-line formula to make them;
he observed that they are allowed to
make the most out of the machinery
without having unnecessary limits imposed on them; he commented that they
are aimed at a sophisticated but small
audience and he finished with the note
that computer games, like race cars, are
assembled by small, close-knit teams of
specialists. While there are a few places
where one could contend with the
metaphor (computer games are duplicated rather than hand-built as single
products; formula race cars have competitive limitations which restrict their performance; etc.), it is refreshing to have a
new analogy to work from.

The Myth of the Mass
Market
by Jon Freeman (Swords of Twilight)
Jon did not mince words in this article.
Resonating with some of the observations concerning the mass market
presented in the Software Publishers Association report in this issue (p. 20), this
article expressed misgivings about the
concept. Jon expressed disapproval over
the willful ignorance of computer illiterates and general laziness of the
populace in both mental and physical endeavors. His most vivid examples concerned the improbability of Joe Sixpack
playing virtual reality football or fantasy
role-playing when the person disdains exercise and the unlikelihood that the same
Joe Sixpack who did not buy even a
single paperback book in the last year
would buy $60 computer games.
As he noted in his conclusion, game
designers should forget the mass
market. Instead, they should concentrate
on the market that they already know is
present.

Review

Ocean's Wild Wheels Takes a Good Turn
by Alan Emrich

TITLE:
Wild Wheels
SYSTEMS:
IBM, Amiga
# PLAYERS:
1-2 (network only)
PRICE:
$49.95
PROTECTION: Document Look-up
DESIGNER:
Red Rat Software Team
PUBLISHER:
Ocean Software, Ltd.
DISTRIBUTOR: Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

A

h, the British do love their "dark future games in which

there is plenty of violence and things die a lot," as one industry wag is so fond of saying. Perhaps, however, Wild
Wheels from the U.K.'s Ocean software house is a "bright spot"
in the trend of dark future games, driving on the premise that
super-efficient, environmentally clean solar and electric cars did
everything the old petrol-burners did — more cheaply — and so
they caught on. Unfortunately, they lacked the thrill, speed, excitement and raw power of the recently extinct gas-guzzlers.
Some enterprising person sold the U.N. on a new international
sport that would finish off the banned oil-eaters and thrill crowds
at the same time. Voila, Wild Wheels.
A cross between soccer (well, perhaps rugby might be more accurate) and a demolition derby, two teams of five specially
equipped cars take to the arena and attempt to move a huge
metal "power ball" into the opponent's goal. Only the player's
own ("strike") car has any real control, with the four other cars
on one's team being computer-controlled drones that can be assigned one of four tasks: Guards (to defend one's goal), Fetchers
(to get the ball and pass it to one's strike car), Blockers (to
protect one's strike car) and Killers (to hunt out the opposing
strike car).

Out of the Wreckage...
Each of these drone vehicles has but a single life to give for its

sport, while the strike cars have four lives (when the last is extinguished, the game is over). Thus, by the time each side is down
to its last strike car, it is usually a one-on-one duel (the drones
having died along the way). Death occurs through the irreplaceable loss of "impact points" on one's cars. Unfortunately, there is
no gauge for telling which vehicle is fresh, crippled or anywhere
in between. Player's strike cars must worry about tire wear and
running out of gas (which produces instant death), but these
problems can be remedied during the play of the game.
The point-scoring system is as wild as the game's title suggests. Points are scored for "kicking" in goals. The closer one's
strike car is to the opponent's goal when the ball goes in, the
more points scored. The down side, however, is that crashing
into the opponent's goal destroys the strike car! Many a charge
to the goal has met with such a tragic end.
Points are also scored for having the ball spend more time on
the opponent's side of the arena and for destroying their
vehicles. Naturally, negative points are assessed for destroyed
and damaged vehicles belonging to one's own team.

...And Onto a PC
Where the real rub of play is, though, is the ever-changing
arena in which Wild Wheels is played. The furious action and
"special tiles" that emerge and vanish on the playing surface

Review

some of the many more powerful vehicles that only impressive
scores and the correct item will afford one.
That's the gist of the game right there. Winning isn't everything,
it's only a step on the ladder toward driving an even more impressive vehicle in the next game. Players start with car models like
the Shrimp and Tadpole and work their way up through several
models to the likes of the Leviathan and the Colossus. Toward
the high end of this "food chain," cars acquire missile-launching
capabilities, and the game evolves into something more akin to
Car Wars in the arena. Fortunately, shots are limited, so what is
basically a game of violent maneuver and scoring remains essentially so, despite the odd pot shot by missile-firing marauders.

From the Press Box

give this game a Projectyle-like quality of excitement that can
reduce the most sophisticated adventure or war gamer into a
stark raving arcade game enthusiast. Oil slicks, ice patches and
electronic tiles grow to size and then shrink back again, creating
monumental driving hazards (as if opposing cars trying to ram
one into extinction weren't enough). Special tiles can also be
driven over by one's strike car to receive gas, tires, spare parts
(which increase one's score) plus bonus items required to drive

The playing screen quickly becomes second nature as part of
the interface and the action can be viewed from three different
"chase car" ranges or an overhead camera. With either keyboard
or joystick input, the latter is likely to be the choice of
preference. While network play is supported for a head-to-head
game, it is only available for the IBM version and then only
through NETBIOS.
Still, Wild Wheels is a great arcade game with all of the pulsepounding, joystick-jiggling, wrist-wrecking game play that a good
"computer sport" can generate. A clear level of thought has been
given to the gameplay aspects of this product, which makes it
transcend the British stereotype lampooned at the beginning of
this article. Thus, Wild Wheels is, indeed, a worthy addition for
the thinking arcade-o-philes among us.

Industry News

to make sure the game, like good fiction,
made sense. For instance, no one will
find a dragon waiting behind a door in
Riftwar Legacy if there was no
legitimate way the dragon could have gotten there.

by Craig E. Engler
n a world where CRPGs inundate the
software shelves and series often contain five or more sequels, it is difficult
for even a prominent gaming house to
bring out new, and successful, titles. One
way to sell a lot of games is to make
them innovative, like Eye of the Beholder, or to create something that's just
downright fun to play, like The Secret of
Monkey Island. The problem is that
there's only so many times you can
change the guise of what is obviously an
adventure game. So, innovation in the
today's entertainment software industry
frequently consists of porting games to a
fresh medium rather than designing
something new.

I

When Dynamix decided to create a
new CRPG with the potential to bloom
into series stardom, they called Raymond
E. Feist, a well-known fantasy author
whose Riftwar Saga books have sold
over a million copies worldwide. With
that kind of a fan base already installed,
a game by Feist would be practically assured of making a good showing in the
market. Of course, the logical thing to do
at this point would be to approach Feist
with an offer.
"Originally they called me and asked
me, would I be interested in writing a
game for them?" Feist observed. "It took
me about a half-hour on the phone to
convince them they couldn't afford me."
Feist is not only a professional author,
but is very aggressive with regard to contracts. Hence, he makes a good deal of
money and would have had to charge
Dynamix around $1,000 a day to hire
him for the project. And that's because
he liked the idea. If he didn't want to do
it, Feist revealed that he would have had
to charge them twice that. After
Dynamix realized Feist's pen was a bit
out of their league, they settled for licensing his Riftwar books and the world the
books place in, Midkemia. They also had
to sign a contract with Midkemia Press, a
company owned by two of Feist's college
friends.
With the licenses in hand and Feist as a
consultant, Dynamix began to create

their first game, tentatively titled Riftwar
Legacy. It's based on the book, A Darkness at Sethanon, the second to the last
book of the series (as it currently
stands). The game itself is more of a sequel to that book rather than just a plot
rehash. "What they're doing is filling in
the cracks," Feist pointed out. "The first
story takes place between A Darkness
at Sethanon and Prince of the Blood.
The idea is that it's a game that will attempt, in a gaming environment, to approximate a lot of the qualities of the
novel."
When Riftwar Legacy opens, Feist
revealed that characters from A Darkness at Sethanon will appear with
various tasks to perform. The overall
goal of the game is to prevent a villain
from getting his, her or its hands on the
lifestone, a conglomeration of the old
and powerful inhabitants of Midkemia
who had godlike powers and amoral tendencies. Feist commented on the variety
of subplots and mini-adventures
throughout the game, as well as there
being several paths a gamer could feasibly take to complete the adventure successfully. "Ultimately, what you end up
with is a game where you could probably
play it two or three different times and
end up with two or three different endings and still win the game," he said.
During Riftwar Legacy, players
operate various characters that have different options in different situations. For
instance, Feist said that if a bad guy
walks into a room, each character will
react differently depending upon which
subplots he/she has become involved in
throughout the course of the game. One
of the reasons Feist said he liked this approach is because the game becomes
something one plays to experience
rather than something that is played to
win.
Without being directly responsible for
writing Riftwar Legacy, Feist admitted
that he had ended up having a lot to do
with the game. Spurning the idea of an
adventure in which dungeons and
monsters exist for no other reason than
exploring and fighting, Feist said he tried

"One thing a good writer can do is
keep the plot making sense, while the
game designer is more concerned about
other things," Feist suggested.
On several occasions Feist said he had
to rework the game's plot so things the
game designer had characters doing
would be for legitimate reasons. There
was one part in the game in which two
major characters know about each other
and are essentially in cahoots, and
there's no way that could have happened, Feist said. After a 20-minute
phone conversation with Dynamix, he
restructured the plot to introduce a third
minor character and then the scene
made sense. Feist said he worked with
Dynamix closely, going through and
taking out all the big, red, flashing signs
indicating plot flaws. "By the time things
were hashed out, there is a very good
reason for everything," Feist explained.
"If we're lucky, the player won't notice
any of this."
Sounding very pleased about his deal
with Dynamix, and he wasn't talking
about the money, Feist said people at
the company were both enthusiastic and
intelligent. If all goes as planned, he said
Dynamix hopes to introduce the game
in November, to coincide with the rerelease of the Riftwar Saga in spiffy,
new hardback editions from Bantam/Doubleday.
As for future products, Feist believes
that possibilities are wide open. "You
could set up a scenario where something
that happens in one of my novels could
be going in another part of town while
you're doing something else," Feist said.
"You can have something that's the
equivalent of a novel in scope. Or it
could be one night. You can go from
very specific to very generic."
Although Feist doesn't have any immediate plans to expand his role in the
CRPG world, he said he has enjoyed
working on the Dynamix game. "I think
it's fun," he confessed. "I make my living
writing books, so this allows me to kind
of look off on the sidelines and see a
creative endeavor that I have a hand in."
The only other comment Feist had to
make about the deal was somewhat
tongue-in-cheek. "They will make wonderful Christmas gifts," he said. "Buy many
of them."

Sneak Preview

No Jokers, Please
A Previewer's Guide for Solitaire's Journey

O

ne thing that must be admitted
about the newcomers at QQP,
they know gameplay! Their first
two games, The Perfect General and
The Lost Admiral have both received
deserved acclaim for their excellent
designs as games. While neither is exactly "revolutionary" or "breakthrough" in
design or programming, they are both
fine examples of what a solid game,
translated into a computer medium, can
achieve. Now, with their third and latest
effort, QQP can almost be expected to acquire the type of brand loyalty associated
with long-standing companies like Sierra
that have a customer base of gameloving enthusiasts who will immediately
associate their label with the kind of
games they enjoy.

What's the Deal?
Admittedly, this wargame-mongering
journalist was a bit crestfallen when he
heard that the next game from QQP
would not be another wargame. In fact,
the initial enthusiasm mustered for
another computer program dedicated to
solitaire card games was roughly
equivalent to being told he would have to
have his teeth cleaned. It's nice, but not
preferable. Still, with a QQP game, it
shouldn't be unreasonable to hope for
something extra and Solitaire's Journey
is not disappointing. There is extra, all
right, and to spare!

Pick a Card; Any Card...
As a new computer game publisher,
QQP has not been averse to inspecting
outside submissions for (more or less) immediate attention and consideration for
publication. Bruce Williams Zaccagnino
(President of QQP) has already weeded
through dozens of game proposals since
his first two products debuted, but when
Andy Visscher flew his solitaire card
game program by, Bruce saw that "the
QQP touch" could make it a winner.
As submitted, what was to become
Solitaire's Journey consisted of 105 different solitaire card games. Compare this
to Sierra's Hoyle Official Book of

by Alan Emrich

Games, Volume 2: Solitaire and its 28
games or WinWare's Deluxe Solitaire
For Windows with 40 games and it becomes clear that there is a lot of solitaire
mileage to be made off Solitaire's Journey (more on mileage and "journeys" in
just a moment). What is particularly
pleasing is the large number of two-deck
solitaire games, all of which were new to
this critic.

52 Cards in 25 Words or
Less
What is truly amazing is the way the
rules are abbreviated for quick play.
Though the preview copy examined for
this article included no documentation
whatsoever, none was required because
of the complete on-line instructions. Each
solitaire game opens up with the cards
dealt out on the display (different backs
can be selected for the deck) and a
quick click on the Rules heading of the
menu bar brings up a window with a

"One picture plus 25 words" description
of all that is needed to know to play the
game. Once such abbreviations as "Tbl"
for tableau and "Stk" for stock are
learned, players will cease to need to
read the three to five paragraphs of text
that comprise the "long" version of the
rules. What this element gives Solitaire's
Journey is a play velocity that actually
multiplies its enjoyment level, because
more games can be played in a single sitting without fatiguing the human player.
Combined with a simple point-and-click
interface, a crisp, clean graphic look plus
the promised major sound card support
(which, alas, was missing from the
preview copy) and all the elements required for up-to-date family enjoyment
are there.

Card Counters, Take Note
Each game of solitaire is "scored"
similarly, by playing cards to the "foundations" and building them up (or down)
by suit (or other method — there are
simply too many variations to list). Each
card played to the foundation scores a
point. Thus, a perfect score is obtained
by reaching 52 points per deck used in
the game. Up on the menu bar, however,
is a button marked "history." It is here
where players will see their personal history in playing this game, including their
last 25 games played, their overall
average, their average against others,
etc. This screen, reminiscent of the
graphs used in The Lost Admiral, also
tells the players what an "average" score
for that game is (based on over 10,000
games played by QQP's numerous
playtesters). By comparing how one
does against this score, a player can test
their mettle versus the "odds."

Playing Again by Re"Quest"
If Solitaire's Journey were just the 105
fine solitaire games In a single package,
it probably would find its niche in the
marketplace. However, as The Avalon
Hill Game Company is known for putting their "touch" upon boardgames to
improve them, so, too, will QQP be
known for adding like touches to Andy

Sneak Preview

Visscher's game submission. Rather than
having 105 loose solitaire games just "rattling around" in the box, QQP has added
two different kinds of "campaign games"
for linking them together. It will take a
stretch of the imagination, but here
goes....
The first style of the solitaire campaign
games is the "quest." Here, players find
themselves in a room that leads to
others and where, ultimately, the exit
must be reached. To exit, however, gold
bars must be accumulated (earned by
playing games of solitaire) and other
items (such as keys) must be found.
When entering a room, players will see
how many gold bars are being played
for, plus the three games that the player
can choose from and the points required
in each of those games to earn the full allotment of gold bars. Playing a game
over or under the score to be challenged
will increase or decrease the player's
gold income. While the idea of a "quest"
is, to be sure, a difficult one to associate
with playing solitaire, it does make for
both a pleasant diversion and four different quests (with ascending difficulty)
are provided.

way. Poor play will cost the player
money as sponsors pull out (leaving the
player to pick up room expenses), while
beating "sol" completely in a game will
garner a player a free ticket to the next
city. With this slightly more plausible
premise, this reviewer took to the four
journeys like a shark takes to prey.

52-Card No Peeky

Road Games, Solitaire Style
The second type of campaign is the
"journey" (of title fame). Here, the player
assumes the role of "solitaire master,"
playing in tournaments in different cities
throughout North America. The object is
for the player to get from an original location to a distant location by purchasing
"bus tickets" with both one's original
funds and the additional money to be
earned in solitaire tournaments along the

Perhaps the best thing that can be said
about Solitaire's Journey is its high
kibitz value. No matter where this jaded
gamer found himself playing this game,
people gathered around the computer
and suggested their own moves and playing tips. One must acknowledge that's a
real plus for a game and bow to that
quality. Despite the "hokey-ness" of the
campaign games included, they are certainly playable and make mastering all of
the 105 individual games more desirable.
It's impossible to count the hours that
will be spent on such a quick, clean, playable diversion as Solitaire's Journey.
However, this previewer would recommend a "Boss" button be included for
hiding the game on a moment's notice
(grin)

7
7
0
3
3
7
7
9
1
9
1
1
5
6

8
4
3
2
7

8

7
1
2
7
0
2
2
7
7
5
7
2
2
2
2
4
7
7
7
7
2

ti

g

7
9
7
7
2
2

2
2
7
2
2
2
2
2
7
4
3
7
3
2
0
5

7

8

2
7
3
3
0

0
0

IC

COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD
June 1992

"I Came, I Played, I Conquered"

CGW #95

by Alan Emrich

New Business: New Games
ast issue, we went over the debate
about wargames without artificial opponents, and some very interesting
arguments on both sides of that issue
were presented. Apparently, one individual, who has designed two such
original computer games, has already
seen this as an opportunity to submit
them here for inspection (see: New Business). To begin this issue, however, let's
examine the end result of the rallying cry
for our "Opponents Wanted" Section.

L

Old Business: Reach Out
and Crush Someone

Editorial: Broadsides & Gripeshot
Strategy: The Perfect General Scenario
Dish — World War II Battle Set
Review: Action Stations! Scenario
Utility Disk

4
Opponents Wanted: Reach Out and
Crush Someone
Replay: L'Empereur
Sneak Preview: Multi-Player Battletech

120
Paiktography: The Modern Era — 1950
to the Present

126
Review: Birds of Prey
Computer Wargam ing World is published
twelve times a year as a free supplement in
Computer Gaming World.

When the rallying cry was raised for
people to either place an ad in our "Opponents Wanted" section or to call someone who did, we didn't know what to expect. Now, while we haven't gotten the
FBI to tap any phone lines to see if our
readers are actually placing more calls,
there has been a marked increase in the
number of individual listings in the "Opponents Wanted" section. Again, I urge
everyone reading this to call and connect
up! These computer garners have made
the first move; now, it's your turn.
For those who have wondered exactly
how the Opponents Wanted listings
work, here is an explanation in brief:
Ads from individuals run one time, but
we will gladly run others from that same
individual if we are sent another
postcard/feedback card/fax/e-mail, etc.,
with another ad on it. It is a free service,
so the price is certainly right. Ads for the
various Networks and BBSs are picked
up and re-run each issue, but often there
are changes and additions to them, so
jaded readers might want to give these
"old" ads another look to see what's new
in them. The listings in each section (networks, BBSs and individuals) are
presented in ascending order by area
code.

It's always exciting to receive an anticipated wargame. With Global Conquest, however, it was even more exciting for me when others received it.
That's because it is another Dan Bunten
modem-play special and, as a playtester,
I couldn't wait for everyone else to get it
so that the opponent pool would be
larger than just the playtest group. Now
that it's released, let the games begin....
Players of Global Conquest will want to
practice up, too. This magazine and
Microprose will be co-sponsoring a
Global Conquest tournament soon on
the CompuServe network. For details on
this event, be sure to read the CompuServe listing in the opponents wanted section on page 114 of this issue. Connectivity lovers will also be pleased to hear
that Sierra has finally launched their
long-anticipated multi-player Red Baron
on The Sierra Network. For details, see
their ad in the Opponents Wanted section.

"Games Sans Brains" Continues
Steven D. Jones (of the appropriately
named SDJ Enterprises, Inc.) is more
than just a new advertiser (see page
116). He has created a couple of interesting "labor of love" wargames and selfpublished them. While they have only
recently hit this desk, their strategic
scope, ease of learning and short playing
time have been great for me, simply because entire campaigns can be completed during a lunch break. Granted,
both La Grande Armee and Big Three
are of "shareware" quality and include no
Al. Still, though I regularly play no shareware games, I will admit to spending
several fascinating hours playing both
sides of these games over and over
again. Reviews of these and other wargames will be forthcoming, as will more
replays and strategy articles. Onward!

Strategy

[Ed: Last issue, Richard Savage outlined the advantages for players who
purchase the World War II scenario
disk for The Perfect General and
provided some tactical notes for the
"Okinawa" scenario. This issue, he issues tactical advice for the "Gazala-Bir
Hacheim" and "Anzio" scenarios.]

Precision in the Desert
(Gazala-Bir Hacheim)
The Gazala-Bir Hacheim scenario is ten
turns long (14 turns when one plays the
long game). After playing this scenario,
everyone will know why Field Marshal
Erwin Rommel called this battle "The
Cauldron." Both sides receive large
amounts of points for buying all the forces needed to get the job done, but just
as in real life, armor will predominate.

More Tips
Winning "The Good

War"
by Richard Savage

The defender assumes the role of the
British and receives 200 (250 in the long
game) points. The British may only purchase heavy tanks, reflecting the fact
that, historically, their tanks were Matildas. These tanks were large and slow,
but heavily armored. The attacker assumes the role of the Germans and
receives 300 (350 in the long game)
points and is restricted by not having any
heavy tanks. The limitation to light and
medium tanks is supposed to represent
the historical use of Panzer Ills and IVs
that were prevalent in the desert at the
time. They weren't as heavily armored as
the Matildas, but were faster and more
maneuverable. By far the biggest bonus
the German player receives, however, is
the ability to buy self-propelled artillery
(which is denied to the British).
The attacker sets up west of the defensive line. The victory condition for the attacker is simply to garrison one victory
point objective. The defender sets up
east of the defensive line and must
defend 24 victory point cities, forts and
airfields against the attacker's onslaught.
The wise general will pay attention to
the unique quality of the terrain in this
scenario. Desert acts as clear terrain and
does not restrict movement. Also, the
book states that forts cost one-half movement to enter, but this reviewer's experience has been that it takes the entire
movement allowance of a unit to enter a
fort. Further, QQP completely omitted
the fact that barbed wire is present in this
scenario and provides a major obstacle
for the Germans to overcome, as well as
costing one-half movement point to
move through.
Weather also plays a major factor in
this scenario. The first turn is a night

turn, neither allowing direct fire nor movement next to enemy units. Also, there
are a couple of turns of fog and rain that,
of course, restrict visibility. There is no
mention of this in the documentation.

Tactical Considerations
Attacker: The attacker will have to be
careful in making the initial purchases,
as well as in placement. While this is true
in most games, it is perhaps more vital
here than in many others. The reason for
this is that once one's forces are committed to a certain area, it is tough to
change objectives because of the vast
desert area depicted in this scenario. The
German attacker will have to attack all

along the line, if for no other reason than
to knock out defensive strongpoints and
replace the garrison units with offensive
units in order to receive the victory
points. Nevertheless, it will be necessary
to concentrate on one point as the
schwerpunkt (German for 'stress point')
where the attacker intends to deliver the
breakthrough. The book recommends
starting a lot of units from the far south
edge of the map, as Rommel historically
did. This is not a bad idea, but can be
countered by an astute British player. A
breakthrough in the north is possible,
with the use of engineers to remove
mines or the unscrupulous deployment
of infantry "mineblowers" (brave unthink-

Strategy

ing souls who march onto mines for the
greater good of their country). Wherever
one chooses to make the assault, it is advisable to make sure that the majority of
self-propelled artillery and reconnaissance cars are easily accessible. One will
have to "saturate" the area at which the
player intends to make the breakthrough
with a heavy concentration of artillery,
and use the recon cars to go like the
devil toward the heavy artillery that the
British player is sure to have placed as
far to the east as possible. One last word
of caution: the desert is a big place, so
one should try to make one's movements as unpredictable as possible. Heading in a straight line is sure to engender
a "wall of fire" created by three or four
heavy artillery barrages placed by the
British on the previous turn. Keep the
defender guessing, and use speed and armored mobility to its fullest.
Defender: The British player should
put bazookas on all the fortress hexes
facing the German front line. Make the
German pay for every one of them, even
if it means only weakening a medium
tank by 33%. Mines are a very important
part of the British defense and five or six
strategically placed mines along the
coast are a must. Put two mines on the
northernmost part of the map and place
one on the main coast road running to
the cities to be defended. One should
make sure that the mine blocks the
whole road, so nothing can get around it.
There should be sea on one side, and unclimbable escarpment on the other. One
should purchase four heavy artillery units
and place them in the rearmost town
hexes — with one out in the open, but
sheltered by escarpment. One should purchase plenty of heavy tanks and place
one in the Bir-Hacheim box. This will
usually be enough for the defender to
blow two or three light German tanks skyhigh. Finally, from the Bir-Hacheim box
down to the southernmost edge of the

map, one should place an infantry or
bazooka unit in every other hex. This will
stop the German from making a big
breakthrough on the first night turn. All
of these units will be destroyed during
the following morning turn, but they
should be worth the sacrifice. Later, when
reinforcements become available, one
can always analyze the situation and purchase units that are custom-fit to the current needs. For example, if the Germans
have broken through, eight heavy tanks,
appearing at the right place, might turn
the tide. Remember, as the defender,
one's entire philosophy should be delay,
delay, delay.

must be held, at all costs, until the "cavalry" arrives from Cassino to hook up with
them and drive on to Rome. This makes
for a perfect gaming situation and this
reviewer believes that it will be the most
played and discussed of all the scenarios
in the WWII Battleset.
In the Anzio scenario, the Allies, as the
attackers, receive 200 (in either game)
points for placement east of the Gustav
Line and an additional 100 points within
the Anzio beachhead. Meanwhile, the
defenders, the Germans, set up in the
remainder of the map, with 27 victory
points in the set-up area.
To make things even more challenging,
the attacker receives 20 additional points
per turn along the eastern and southern
map edges, as well as an additional 10
points per game turn at Anzio, as long as
it is held. The defender recoups 20
points per turn in Rome.

Tactical Considerations

Victory by the "Boot"straps
(Anzio)
The Anzio scenario is 12 turns long (16
turns long game). In this reviewer's
opinion, this is the biggest map of all the
scenarios. It is also unique in that both
players are playing offense and defense
at the same time. For the German
player, it is a game of desperately trying
to hold off the Allied forces driving up
from Cassino, while simultaneously trying
to push the Allied forces in the Anzio
beachhead back into the sea. For the Allies, the exact opposite applies. Anzio

The German player has to walk a fine
line between offense and defense. He has
to commit enough forces to delaying the
Allied player driving up from Rome, while
retaining enough units in Rome to push
straight into Anzio. This scenario will
probably have to be played a few times
before the "perfect" combination of offense and defense can be
choreographed. Just remember to use
mines wisely to stall the Allied player
coming up from Cassino. A few wellplaced light artillery units can also disrupt the roads and destroy key bridges,
forcing the Allied player to waste precious time. Just remember that the
longer the Allied player takes to break
through, the better chance the Germans
have to capture Anzio.
The key for the defending player is
Anzio. He must hold onto it for even a
chance of victory. Mines should be laid
at the river crossing to the north and
every town and clump of trees should
hide a light tank or bazooka team. A
heavy artillery unit is expensive, but positioned in Anzio itself, often can hold the
enemy at bay long enough for reinforcements to arrive. Remember that the
defender gets 10 points of reinforcements per turn at Anzio. A good tactic is
to use six of these on two light tanks and
then, next turn, with fourteen points accumulated, one can buy a self-propelled
artillery unit. If the player thinks he has a
good enough defense to keep the Germans from driving south from Rome, he
can then assemble a small force to drive
along the coast to meet up with the Allied units driving up from Cassino.

Review

The Bay of Biscay — CL vs. DD, day. Two British light cruisers
against 11 German destroyers. The action takes place in 1943
and in very rough weather. The larger ships make better gun
platforms in the rough seas, but they had better not let the
swarm of bees get too close!

More Action Stations! Fun
by Bob Proctor
TITLE:
Action Stations! Scenario
SYSTEM:
Amiga (V. 3.2), IBM
PROTECTION: None
PRICE:
$21.95
DESIGNER:
Alan Zimm
PUBLISHER:
RAW Entertainment
League City, TX

n an age of increasing specialization,
Action Stations! (AS) is an example
of a highly specialized wargame. It
simulates naval surface combat — no
submarines and no airplanes, just guns
and torpedoes. Within that narrow
scope, it has wonderful variety and a
wealth of detail. Dates range from 1920
to 1945; ships range from PT boats to
super battleships; guns are rated for accuracy and rate of fire. In
addition, damage control, national differences, fatigue and crew
experience are all taken into account.

I

In this reviewer's opinion, no other game handles the limited intelligence of a sea battle as well as AS. All of the visibility calcula
tions — reckoning target size and range with adjustments for
radar, darkness, smoke and squalls — are handled by the computer. One sees only what the on-ship lookouts could be expected to see. Hence, the use of searchlight and starshell is critical in night battles.
AS has been around for a while and has a loyal following. This
is not a review of the basic game but of the two-disk expansion
module from RAW Entertainment. It adds something for every
AS devotee. Those who just like to replay history will find 13 new
scenarios to try. All of them are interesting from both sides, even
played solitaire. For those who like random encounters, there is
a new version of the GENERATE program. Even more significantly, those who like to create their own scenarios will find 28 new
ship classes. This is particularly welcome as there is no utility to
create ships. As a bonus, 3 French battleships and the Hood, all
of which appeared in AS with minor data errors, are included
here in corrected form.

The New Scenarios
Historical battles:
Mers-el-Kabir — BB vs. BB, day. After the fall of France in
1940, the French fleet escapes to North Africa. The British, afraid
the French ships will fall into German hands, attack them in the
harbor.
Cape St. George — DD vs. DD, night. A delightful tussle in The
Solomons; five US DDs intercept a Tokyo Express of 5 DDs. The
victory tends to be decisive but with an equal chance to go either
way. The USN wins easily with the right combination of radar,
starshell and gunnery; the IJN wins easily if they can get hits
with their Long Lance torpedoes.

Surigao Strait — BB vs. BB, night. The southern IJN force
wanders into an ambush! This is a lopsided battle, tough for the
IJN to win. It makes a good intro for a beginner learning to handle lots of ships (take the US) or as a solitaire challenge for a very
experienced player (take the IJN and try to reach Leyte Gulf).
Hypothetical Battles That Could Have Happened
North Atlantic Sweep — BB vs. BB, day. Very early in WW2, a
combined British/French force with the Hood and the Dunkerque search for a raider force including the Scharnhorst and
Gneisenau.
Java Sea — CA vs. CA, day. A variation on the Java Sea
scenario that comes with AS. One can see what might have happened if the Houston and Perth had no prior damage and if the
Allied deployment was improved.
ABDA Strikes Gold — CA vs. CA, day. A hypothetical scenario
set in early 1942. The combined
American-British-Dutch-Australian fleet (basically the same ships as in Java Sea)
surprises a Japanese amphibious force while an invasion is in
progress! The IJN covering force is more powerful but is scattered at first.
Operation Domino — BB vs. BB, day. A could-have-been battle
off the coast of Norway in 1943, the Scharnhorst, with cruisers
and DDs, tries to slip north while the Renown, with cruisers and
DDs, is out looking for her.
Samar I — BB vs. BB, day. This scenario supposes that Halsey
detached six BBs to intercept Kurita's force before it can reach
Leyte Gulf. Pits the Iowa and the New Jersey against the
Yamato and Nagato!
Samar II — BB vs. BB, day. Another variation supposes that
the six old BBs from Surigao Strait have to intercept Kurita's
force; they are low on ammo from the battle the previous night.
Hypothetical Battles in Alternate Universes
Great Pacific War — BB vs. BB, day. What if there never had
been a Washington Naval Treaty and the US had gone to war
with Japan in 1932? This is a chance to experience a major fleet
action before carriers, a Jutland in the Pacific! There are many
classes of ships (like the Lexington class battle cruisers) that
were never built because of the treaty.
North Sea — BB vs. BB, day. WW2 is delayed five years and
the German navy is able to complete more of its construction
program of super-Bismarcks! Now it's 1945 and 10 German BBs
meet 16 British BBs for control of the North Sea.
Black Sea Invasion — BB vs. BB, day. WW2 begins with the
German attack on Russia somewhere around 1944 or 45. The
Bismarck and three improved pocket battleships protect an invasion fleet from the Russian Black Sea force.

The New Utilities
ADD-SWAP is a quick and easy way to modify existing scenarios. It allows one to add or delete ships to a scenario or to substitute one class of ship for another. It is a simple and quick way
to get a little variety. For example, if the gamer desires to see
what might have happened if the Germans had completed one of
their super-battleships and sent it into the Atlantic, it is possible

Review

to modify the "Battle of the Denmark Straits" scenario, replacing
the Bismarck with an H-44 and replacing the Hood and Prince
of Wales with King George V or even the Vanguard. Be sure to
replace the PoW, even though it is already a KGV class, because
its crew quality and reliability are greatly degraded in the Denmark Straits battle to reflect its unfinished state in 1941.
GEN33 is a replacement for the GENERATE program that

came with AS. This program lets the player specify two
nationalities and then build a scenario drawing ships at random.
The size of the fleets and other variables are completely customizable. GEN33 works just like the original except it allows
one to select a fleet data file for each side, instead of always
using the data file used by the scenarios.
The third new utility is DDFGEN33, which creates the fleet data
files used by GEN33. One can have up to 26 fleets,
designated A to Z. Using this utility, it is possible to
create fleets for a single nation or for several nations
in a specific period. For example, one could build
files for the USN and IJN as of June 1942, so that
there will not be any 1925 battlecruisers or "
super-Yamato" types appearing. Or, one could build files
for the navies of 1937 as they might have been with
no treaty limitations and not get any WW2 designs.
One could even create the French Fleet of 1928 with
German ships received as reparations for WW1 and
pitting them against the Italians.

Debriefing
No matter how much one enjoys the basic Action
Stations! program, this new module offers something
to extend every wargamer's enjoyment of the
product. It does not improve the graphics quality or
the user interface of the original, though; for that
gamers will have to wait for Fleet Commander, now
in development. At least wargamers have something
to entertain them during the wait!

Opponents Wanted

Reach Out and Crush Someone

Replay

Strategy and Tactics from Napoleon's Viewpoint
as "channeled" by Michael Peck

"Tactics ... may be learned
in treatises, but the science
of strategy is only to be acquired by experience, and
by studying the campaigns
of all the great captains."
Those who wish to learn the secrets of
we, Napoleon Bonaparte, should first
study those principles of war which once
made all Europe tremble at our feet. To illustrate our maxims, we will use Koei's
L'Empereur, that device conceived by
20th Century strategists to study our conquests. We will focus on the opening
stages of our victorious 1803-4 campaign
in Germany, just after the French people
made us First Consul.
War clouds were gathering that spring,
as the English gold of Perfidious Albion
stirred the reactionary regimes against
us. Denmark, Prussia, Russia and England had already declared war; Austria,
Turkey, Spain and Holland were wavering in their neutrality.

"When you are occupying a
position which the enemy
threatens to surround, collect all your force immediately, and menace him with
an offensive movement."
Rather than wait for our enemies to attack from every direction and gnaw at
France's vitals like a horde of ants, we
resolved to strike first. Because in L'Empereur, as in our campaigns, the Allied coalitions are slow, uncoordinated
and unaggressive, they can be defeated
in detail by concentrating your full army
on one enemy at a time. Seek the enemy's main army and crush it in open battle; all his cities will then fall like ripe fruit.
When planning a campaign, choose
those cities which will put you closer to
your objectives. We began our 1803 campaign by attacking the Prussians at
Frankfurt, since possession of the city
would give us a gateway to Berlin and
Scandinavia. Before our plans could
proceed, however, we first had to put
France on a war footing, and repair the
neglect of Barras and his bumbling Directory. During the Economic Interphase,

we allocated three-quarters of the ready
funds to war expenditures, to pay for
new artillery pieces. This should be done
every turn, because there are never
enough guns.

"When you have resolved
to fight, collect your whole
force. Dispense with nothing. A single battalion
sometimes decides the
day."
Next, we united our armies, because
the greatest folly in war is to divide your
forces. But in L'Empereur, the computer
generals always divide their armies into
groups of three or four corps, which can
be destroyed piecemeal. Alas, when we
became First Consul, we found the armies of France similarly divided. Therefore, we removed all the artillery battalions and infantry reserves in the cities
surrounding Paris, and sent them to the
Grande Armee forming in the capitol. Although this left the coastal cities and the
French Navy vulnerable to British or
Spanish landings, it is better to lose a
city to one opponent, while annihilating a
second opponent's army. Ideally, a commander should attack with about 10
corps, of which at least four should be artillery and one cavalry.
This also illustrates the value of
strategic movement during the Economic
Interphase, which is the only time that
leaderless troops can be moved. Use it to
concentrate your armies at key points, because a small garrison is the same as
leaving no garrison at all.
Finally, a wise commander collects all
possible information before embarking
upon a campaign. Since the Economic Interphase is the only time when enemy
cities can be examined for free, be sure
to spy on all the surrounding territories.
As expected, reconnaissance revealed
the Prussians had three corps defending
Frankfurt. Such a small number of corps
makes it difficult for the defender to
maneuver, because victory rests upon
control of the town hexes. Therefore, the
defender must sit in towns while the attacker can concentrate his forces and attack them piecemeal.

Replay

"Give them a whiff of
grapeshot."
As the Russians say, "Artillery is the
God of War." When setting up on the battlefield, guns should be placed in front,
so they can move into firing position
more quickly. Remember that artillery
moves slower than infantry and cavalry.
This was amply demonstrated at the Battle of Frankfurt, where the thick woods
limited the guns to moving one hex per
turn. The battle also demonstrated the importance of finding the high ground, because the absence of hills around
Frankfurt meant the guns had no easy
line of fire.
The keys to using artillery are position
and patience. Line up your batteries, on
hills if possible, and bombard a single
enemy unit until it is bled white and demoralized. Once demoralized, enemy formations are easily finished off by infantry
assault or cavalry charge. Remember,
you have 30 days to win the battle,
ample time for massed artillery to break
enemy morale and attrit his numbers.

one bridge. A river crossing is a hazardous enterprise because it channels the attacker over a few bridges which the
defender can destroy (sometimes while
the attackers are standing on it). The
best strategy is to bombard the
defenders until they are demoralized,
while the infantry build additional bridges.
Such were our tactics at Frankfurt,
where we positioned four batteries on the
river bank facing the western bridge to
the city, and commenced a fierce cannonade on the Prussian batteries guarding the crossing. The Prussian guns inflicted some losses on our valiant gunners, but weight of numbers told. Once
the Prussian guns were silenced, we then
concentrated fire upon the infantry
protecting the bridge. While the bombardment proceeded, our infantry endeavored
to build additional bridges. In L'Empereur, however, building bridges is
difficult along wooded banks, and the
construction attempts continually failed.

To reach the city of Frankfurt, we had
to cross a large river spanned by only

"All wars should be
governed by certain principles, for every war should
have a definite object, and
be conducted according to
the rules of art."
There are many other principles of war
that a great commander must remember.
For example, in between battles, use
every opportunity to train your troops.
Training is more important than raising
morale, because troops can always be encouraged during a battle. Similarly, be
careful of heavily reinforcing a corps in
the midst of a battle, because the raw
conscripts will dilute a unit's training and
morale.

Counterbattery fire is the artillery's first
task, because enemy cannon can wreak
terrible damage upon large attacking formations. During a bombardment, don't
put friendly troops adjacent to enemy
units; errant cannon shots are both common and devastating. Once your troops
have engaged the enemy, cease bombardment, unless the artillery can be positioned point-blank.

"Of all the obstacles to the
march of an army, the most
difficult to overcome is the
desert; mountains come
next, and large rivers occupy the third place."

most fragile of the combat arms. Against
small enemy units, or especially against
demoralized troops, a charge can be
devastating. First, disrupt the enemy
lines with cannon fire or infantry attack
and then, order the charge. At Frankfurt,
once each Prussian corps was demoralized, we committed Murat's cavalry,
which swept the enemy off the field in a
series of charges. Remember, though,
that cavalry is both fragile and expensive. It should not be used for normal attacks, but saved only for the climactic
charge against a wavering opponent. Attacks against large, fresh enemy corps
should be avoided, because cavalry
demoralizes too easily.

Still, timing is everything in war and a
great commander will snatch those fleeting opportunities offered by the Gods of
War. When the hail of shot disrupted the
defenders, we sent Marshal Davout's
corp charging across the bridge. He
decimated the enemy, and on the next
turn, Marshal Massena's corps crossed
and joined the attack.

"Charges of cavalry are
equally useful at the beginning, the middle and the
end of a battle. They
should be made always, if
possible, on the flanks of
the infantry, especially
when the last is engaged in
front."
Cavalry is the most deadly and the

The morale of his troops must be the
commander's first concern. In the heat of
battle, units will become demoralized,
and the commander must be free to rally
them. Therefore, he should not become
embroiled in the fighting. His personal
troops should be infantry, not artillery,
or else he will have the choice of firing
cannon or rallying his men.
A great commander will also judge his
marshals wisely, since fortune has endowed them with different abilities. Marshal Murat, for example, is an excellent
commander of horse but a poor infantry
tactician. In particular, artillery should
only be given to competent commanders
like Marmont, or else cannon shots will
scatter.
A commander must also judge his opponents well. For example, the English
will normally confine themselves to small
amphibious assaults, while the Turks are
very sensitive to Balkan conquests. Learn
from these principles, and use them to
enhance your own skills. Remember that
all glory comes to those who dare. Vive
L'Empereur!

Sneak Preview

A Sneak Preview of GEnie's Multi-Player BattleTech
by Syngvar Dalch

The depleted-uranium slugs
zipped up the back of the
Blackjack's left leg. Its armor
peeled off and fell away as if
it were diaphanous silk instead of tons of ceramic
armor. A silver spray of ions
shot out at the back of the
Blackjack's thigh, starting the
'Mech into a slow spin.
— Michael A. Stackpole, Lethal

As players succeed in
multi-player missions, as
well as single-player missions, the program updates their resumes, posts
their relative position on
the promotion list and
keeps track of the attitude
toward the player's character held by the leaders of
the house for whom the
character is currently serving. Working one's way
up the promotion list is
even more satisfying in a
multi-player environment
than it is in a campaign
game for a single-player
simulation. It becomes extremely exciting to pass
one's ally by on the
promotion list and almost
equally exciting to see
one's comrades-in-arms

Heritage, published by FASA Corporation, used with permission

A

lthough the quotation from the novel

is anachronistic in terms of the
BattleTech universe (Stackpole's
Blood of Kerensky series takes place after
the wars that are re-enacted in Activision's
MechWarrior game, most of the battles
that take place in the BattleTech Center in
Chicago and the missions assigned to
players in GEnie's new Multi-Player BattleTech), it is very useful for describing the
thrill to be discovered in Kesmai's new
Multi-Player BattleTech (now undergoing
beta test on GEnie).
Like MechWarrior before it, Multi-Player
BattleTech allows the player to participate
in a BattleTech battle from a first-person
perspective. It puts the player in the cockpit
of one of the giant ferro-titanium robots
(right out of Japanime such as Robot Carnival) and lets him/her (female mechwarriors are welcome in this dark future's version of armored combat) win or lose in a
real-time battle. The controls are still the
same as in the earlier game. One still
punches the Tab key in order to fire rapidly
and sequentially all the weapons at one's
disposal. One still places the crosshairs on
one's enemy and presses the Enter key to
target the weapons and the Space Bar to
fire all of them. One still presses the E key
in order to get a damage report on the
enemy and D to update one's own damage
evaluation.
The difference is that MechWarrior only allowed players to recruit computer-controlled
pilots to handle the other 'mechs in their
units. In Multi-Player BattleTech, however,
players recruit other human pilots to undertake the missions for which they contract.
How refreshing it is to command human
mechwarriors as opposed to counting on
the computer's artificial stupidity to cover
one's flank!
Where MechWarrior forced the gamer
into the role of mercenary in order to explore the universe of the Successor States,
Multi-Player BattleTech allows players to
enlist in the services of any of the major
Houses (Davion, Steiner, Liao, Kurita or
Marik) or become a freebooting mercenary,

serving the highest bidder. When players
begin the game, they choose their origin
and loyalty. Then they are invited to attend
the "academy." At the academy, they will
train in one of three types of 'mechs (light,
medium or heavy), depending on the
House to which they owe allegiance.
Once seven successful missions have
been completed at the "academy," the
gamer will have the opportunity to enlist in
an appropriate military unit. These units are
often as active as the other human mechwarriors may be, so one can terminate an
enlistment and join another group at any
time. This writer initially enlisted in the 3rd
Crucis Lancers, but failed to find much action whenever he was on line. So he used
the "data bank" in his unit's headquarters
to find out who was currently on line and
finding action. Then he sent a ComStar
message to the players and asked if he
could join them. They said, "Of course!" He
said, "All right!" Changing his enlistment to
the 1st Crucis Lancers, he rendezvoused

with the unit, under
then Leftenant
WilStarr's command, and
proceeded to roast
some dragon (for
the uninitiated,
House Kurita is
known as the
Draconis Combine).

being promoted.
First and foremost, the most enjoyable
aspect of multi-player on-line games is the
camaraderie formed between players.
GEnie even has special bulletin boards
reserved for the major houses from the
BattleTech universe in order to facilitate Email friendships and alliances (as well as
role-playing) between the players.

It's a special option used on
Solaris so the bookies can
monitor a 'Mech's performance during a fight. It lets
them lay off bets when a
'Mech takes internal damage
that isn't clearly visible to the
spectators.
— Michael A. Stackpole, Lethal
Heritage, used with permission
Speaking of on-line interaction, the screenshots used for this article have a fascinating
history that underscores this aspect of the
game. During a lull in the action, the writer
received a ComStar message from Thanos
to meet him in the arena on Solaris, the
gaming world. Foolishly, the inexperienced
Locust pilot winged off to Solaris and met
the code-named "god of the dead" in a oneon-one duel. "Nice Locust," smirked Thanos
by typing the line (as in any network's
"Chat Mode"), as Dalch tried to locate his
foe. "Like my Marauder?"
The mismatch was obvious, but Dalch
tried to use the mountainous terrain of the
Kobe Sector arena in order to get in close,
under the long-range firepower of the
Marauder. Thanos was patient and waited

Sneak Preview

until the light 'Mech broke cover, wasting
the Locust with one wave of long-range
laser beams. Of course, the action had
been too fast and furious to get decent pictures, so the CGW staff came up with an
idea. They typed a suggestion that the two
'Mechs meet in the center of the arena,
hold their fire and stop moving in order to
get the shots. Then, they would back off
and the heavy 'Mech could win the match.
"But, wait," thought the evil editors, "maybe
we can talk him into throwing the match."
CGW explained what they were doing and
Tom Waddell, a high school student from
Van, Texas (aka Thanos), proved to be a
good enough sport to allow himself to be
victimized by this dastardly deed. He posed
with his 'Mech as though it were a modelling job. "Is this my best side?" he queried.
Then, remembering the lengths some
gamers will go to win a battle, he belatedly
asked, "Are you sure this isn't a trick?" Assured the pictures would be in the
magazine, he insisted on "Firing for effect"
off into the horizon. Thanos had not lost a
battle for a long time and was "rewarded"
with a news flash scrolling across the
screen and telling all on-line warriors that
he had lost.
In the future, Kesmai plans to allow betting on the Solaris matches (just like in the
books), but they hope to keep unscrupulous journalists from getting matches
thrown in their favor by allowing bettors to

"watch" the matches live. Meanwhile,
Solaris is available to all on-line mechwarriors in order to provide an opportunity for
one-on-one dueling and the potential for settling grudge matches with a rival player.

Justin's Valkyrie cut to the
right as the heavy laser on the
Rifleman's left arm torched a
black furrow through the
meadow off to Justin's left.
"It can't continue to turn!" he
thought. "The torso locks up
after about forty degrees. if I
can get into its rear arc, it
can't continue to track me."
— Michael Stackpole,
Warrior: En Garde, published by

FASA, used with permission
The only major frustration for MultiPlayer BattleTech players is likely to
be what Kesmai calls the "artificial
stupidity." As in the original MechWarrior, the player can easily get behind the computer-controlled opponents
and blast away at his/her heart's content. In order to provide constant action, there are always missions on line
in which human players face artificial
opponents and, at press time, Kesmai
was trying to bring more play balance

into the computer opponent's strategy.
Solaris is always a consolation for those
who get tired of "outthinking" the Al.
The truth is that Multt-Player BattleTech
helps players suspend their disbelief
enough to enter the realm of conflict and intrigue surrounding the BattleTech universe.
From its inception as a people and
paper/miniatures game to its current incarnation as a fascinating simulation, BattleTech has allowed garners to escape into a
dark future where anthropomorphic
machines expand one's power and the oneon-one duel regains its chivalric ideal. We
think it is escapist fare that builds worlds.

Survey

The Modern Games: 1950 - 2000
his
by M. Evan Brooks

T

article is part of an on-going series
that will cover all wargames released for
the computer market. It consists of pre20th century (CGW #75), 1900-1950 (CGW
#88-89), Modern (1950-2000) and Future
(2000- ). The state of the art in computer wargames has changed dramatically over the last
decade. The Hall of Fame illustrates games
that were breakthroughs and commercial successes in their day. Yet, many of them do not
"age" well and it is doubtful if the computer
world will ever develop its classics, like
Monopoly of the boardgame genre. Thus,
these paiktographies will be updated and
revised on a regular basis, so that the user
may have some indication of what is/was available. It should be noted that the ratings are an
individual preference, and do not necessarily
reflect the opinions of the publisher or editor
of this magazine. Also, please note the platform availability: a five-star game on an Atari
800 that is several years old is not of the
same sophistication as a new product
designed for a PC 486-33. However, it has
been given its rating for what it did, to a lesser
extent, what it still does and perhaps for the
place it holds in this reviewer's heart and
memory. Of course, the designers look
askance at these ratings, and often deluge the
magazine with voluminous complaints. Still,
these are intrinsically subjective, and a discriminating reader should be able to temper
the ratings with this writer's normal reviews in
order to ascertain the inherent biases. What is
also noteworthy is that few computer games
have a shelf life longer than three years, yet
boardgames remain classics ten years or
more after their release (e.g. Napoleon's Last
Battles, A House Divided, Up Front).

In a ten-year span (1981-1991), the gaming
market has gone from a 16K 8-bit computer
to a 1-2 MB 16/32-bit computer with clock
speeds now in excess of 20 MHz. The 8-bit
market is moribund (if not outright deceased),
and the MS-DOS clones hold a commanding
lead in forthcoming titles. The ST has been virtually abandoned in the United States, and
while the Amiga's superior game and graphics
capabilities still hold a loyal following, the MSDOS machines are "where the action is."
Prices are difficult to determine for older
games, since they are so heavily discounted,
assuming they can be found at all. Thus, be
aware that the prices are only a rough
guideline. Also, since this guide is for reference, one should be aware that prices shift
downwards rapidly.
If any readers have additions/corrections/modifications, please send them to me
in care of this magazine or via modem on
GEnie (address: M.E. Brooks).

Legend
xxx = Data not available.
Line 1: Title
Line 2: Machine Format ([A]tari/[C]om-

modore/[Ap]plell/ [T]RS80/II[GS]/[Am]iga/[ST]/[M]acintosh/[I]BM];
Issue of CGW in which that game was mentioned (bold print refers to major article); Company; Designer; Date of Publication; Price
(O/P: Out of Print); Rating

A British import arcade game.
A-10 Tank Killer
I; #62,65,66,68,87; Dynamix; Damon Slye;
1989; $59.95; ****
Int/Air/Tac/1

A simulation of the "Warthog," the best CAS
(close air support) aircraft ever forced on the
Air Force. Version 1.5 has Desert Storm
scenarios, and the graphics are well done. Missions are varied, but joystick control is very
sensitive and maintaining level flight may
prove difficult, especially when using the chain
gun.
After Burner

0

Good use as a magnet holder
Avoid
**
Marginal
**
Average to Good
***
Very Good
*****
Highly Recommended
N-R
Not Rated
Line 3: Difficulty ([Beg]inner, [Int]ermediate,
[Adv]anced)/ Environment ([Land], [Nav]al,
[Air], [Dip]lomatic, [Econ]omic)/ Level
([Tac]tical, [Op]erational, [Str]ategic)*/ # of
Players (M: modem option)
Tactical:
man-to-man up to company level
(turns represent seconds to hours)
Operational:
battalion-level to division-level
(turns represent hours to weeks)
Strategic:
corps-level or higher
(turns represent weeks to years)

Military Organization
Unit Size

Minimum

Maximum

Fire Team
Squad
Platoon
Company
Battalion
Brigade
Division
Corps
Army

2
9
40
120
500
3,000
10,000
20,000
100,000

3
12
50
150
1,000
5,000
15,000
80,000
up

Game Listings
Abrams Battle Tank
I; #60; Electronic Arts; Damon Slye; 1989;

$49.95; **+
Int/Land/Tactical/ I
The first serious contemporary tank simulation for the faster 16-bit machines, this
product has been superseded by later releases
(cf. M-1 Tank Platoon, Tank). Graphics were
adequate, but terrain elevation left something
to be desired, and the main deficiency was
that the program only portrayed a single tank
while modern doctrine emphasizes larger element (company/squadron) employment.
ACE: Air Combat Emulator
C; #35,88; Spinnaker; Ian Martin; 1987; 0/P;

N-R
Beg/Air/Tac/ 1

Am/I; #65,66; Sega; Sega Enterprises; 1989;
?; *
Beg/Air/Tac/1
An arcade game that is far superior in the
coin-op cockpit than it is on the personal computer.
Airborne Ranger
C/Ap/Am/I; 41,43; MicroProse; Lawrence
Schick; 1987; $29.95; ****+
Int/Land/Tac/1
Contemporary Ranger operations in a semiarcade mode. Yet it is fun and it works. Challenging to both adults and children; recommended for a diversion from the more serious
simulations. It remains on the author's hard
drive.
Air Duel

Am/I; #85; MicroProse UK; Glynn Williams;
1992; ?; N-R
Int/Air/Tac/1
Forthcoming design from MicroProse's
British subsidiary, ostensibly covering
multi-period air combat a la Chuck Yeager's Air
Combat (cf. infra).
Air Strike USA
Am/I; #82; Cinemaware/Spotlight; Rod

Swift; 1990; $39.95; **
Beg/Air/Tac-Op/ 1
An arcade game semi-disguised as a flight
simulator, Air Strike portrays an ATF II (ultramodern attack fighter) in a multitude of missions world-wide. Documentation is somewhat
spartan and the world views and flight
mechanics are similar to the documentation.
Air Warrior
#63;67,88; GEnie; Kesmai; 1988; $6.00/hour;
***+.
Int/Air/Tac/1-multi; M
An on-line simulation of tactical air combat
from World War I onward. Continually being
revised and updated, it is interesting, although
it can become an expensive way of life. The
learning curve is lengthy, but often veteran
pilots are available on-line who are willing to
give assistance and tutorials. Korean War
vintage aircraft are now available.
Apache Strike
M; #48; Electronic Arts/Silicon Beach;

James W. Long and Tom Zerucha; 1988; ?; NBeg/Air/Tac/1
An arcade version of an AH-64 helicopter
simulation; all action occurs in an urban environment a la Air Wolf.

Survey

Arctic Fox

Futuristic arcade game of carrier-air operations.

Am/I; #28; Electronic Arts; Kevin Ryan, Jeff
Tunnel!, Damon Slye and Richard Hicks;
1986; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Land/Tac/1
A futuristic tank arcade game resembling
the early arcade Battlezone, but with more options.

Chuck Yeager's Air Combat

I; #85,86,88; Electronic Arts; Brent Iverson;
1991; $59.95; ****
Int/Air/Tac/1
A flight simulator offering the ability to fly
scenarios in World War II, Korea or Vietnam,
or mix-and-match them. Adequate graphics (although this reviewer is not overly fond of
polygon-emphasized graphics), good game
play and an excellent post-mission analysis
yield a high recommendation.

Armor Alley

M/I; #87; Three-Sixty Pacific; Arthur Britto II;
1990; $39.95; *+
Bas/Land-Air/Tac/ 1-4; M
A recent arcade tank/air support game, this
involves eight scenarios of increasing difficulty. Graphics and gameplay can offer a short
entertaining diversion, but little of serious import. An updated version of an early Apple 8bit game.

Civilization

Armor Assault

A; #3.1,37; Epyx; John Weber; 1983; 0/P; *+
Beg/Land/Tac/1-2
A tactical meeting engagement between US
and Soviet forces. This game was one of the
first to offer a "design-your-own-scenario" option. Units are limited to six vehicles each (no
other air or ground support); hence its realism
is very low. Given the contemporary market,
this game is visibly obsolescent.

Battalion Commander

ATAC

Battle Command

Am/I; MicroPlay; MicroProse UK; 1992;
$49.95; N-R
Int/Air/Tac/ 1
Initially entitled White Shadow (until many
people confused it with an old television show
about a white basketball coach in an inner city
school), this simulation (Advanced Tactical
Air Command) portrays the drug wars between the US and the Medallin cartel a la
Clear and Present Danger.
Avenger A-10

I; Spectrum Holobyte; Scott Bayless; 1992;
$69.95; N-R
Adv/Air/Tac/l-Multi; M
Part of Spectrum HoloByte's "Electronic Battlefield," this simulation will be a detailed
portrayal of the "Warthog" in various theaters
(cf. A-10 Tank Killer for similar treatment).
B-1 Nuclear Bomber

A/Ap; #37; Strategic Simulations Inc.;
David Hille; 1983; 0/P; **+
Int/Land/Tac/1
A modern simulation of company/battalion
level operations, this was an improvement on
Combat Leader, but its age still shows.
C; #40,74,88; Applied Computer Consultants; ?; 1986; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Land/Op/2; M
More of an abstract battle chess than a
modern simulation.
Battle Front

C/Ap; #32,37,88; SSG; Roger Keating and
Ian Trout; 1987; $39.95; ***
Int/Land/Op/0-2
A very flexible game covering corps-level
combat and proper use of the chain of command during World War II. Design-your-own
scenarios open the bulk of the 20th century to
gaming; however, the artificial intelligence of
subordinate commanders is notoriously weak.
The game system will either attract or repel
the player — there is no middle ground.
Birds o/ Prey

Ap; #1.1; Avalon Hill; ?; 1983; 0/P; 0
Beg/Air/Tac/1

Am/I; #85; Electronic Arts; ?; 1992; $49.95;
N-R
Int/Air/Tac/ I

An early game from Avalon Hill, its play
mechanics are embarrassing in the contemporary market; in fact, its play mechanics
were embarrassing when it was initially
released.

Blue Angels

Balance of Power

M/I; #29,34,40,57,64; Mindscape; Chris Crawford; 1985; $49.95; ****
Adv/Dip/Str/ 1-2
With numerous revisions having already appeared, this simulation of modern power
politics graduated from a bi-polar world
(US/Soviet) in its initial release to a multi-polar
world (US/Soviet/Chinese/Third World) in its
later edition. A newer edition will probably
simulate the newest version of Realpolitik,
with the collapse of the Soviet Empire and the
restoration of the instabilities inherent in Eastern Europe.
Baltic 1985

Ap; Strategic Simulations Inc.; Roger Keating; 1984; 0/P; N-R
Int/Nav-Air/Op/ 1-2
Part of SSI's "Rapid Fire" series, this simulation covers World War III in the Baltic.

Modern aerial warfare.
I; #63,65,67,70; Accolade; Rick Banks and
Paul Butler; 1990; $49.95; **
Int/Air/Tac/1
What if they didn't give a war but people still
came? This product simulates formation
flying, and does it rather well. On the other
hand, flying a hot interceptor without a viable
enemy leads to a certain lassitude.
Bomber

C/Am/ST/I; #66; Activision; Vektor Grafix; NA; N-A; N-A
Int/Air/Tac/1
Released in the United States as Strike
Aces, cf. infra.
Brigade Commander

Am; #85,86; TTR; Argonaut Software; 1991;
$44.95; N-R
Adv/Land/Tac/1
Carrier Command
M/I; #52,63,69; MicroPlay; Realtime Games;
1989; $39.95; **+
Int/Nav-Air/Tac/ 1

I; #92, 93; Microprose; Sid Meier; 1991;
$69.95; *****
Int/Air-Land-Sea/Tac-Str/ I
A "Sid Meier classic;" civilization from 4000
BC to AD 2100. More addictive than crack, it
should come with its own warning label. The
only deficiency is that it is so rich and textured
that the documentation is incomplete, thereby
almost necessitating the purchase of the "Help
Book" (authored by CGW's own Johnny Wilson and Alan Emrich).
Combat Leader

A/C/Ap; #3.5,37,88; Strategic Simulations
Inc.; David Hille; 1983; 0/P; **
Int/Land/Tac-Op/ 1
A simulation of armored tactical operations
over a forty-year period. Flexible, albeit with
primitive graphics.
Command HQ

l/M; #74,76,77,79,80,81,88; MicroProse;
Dan Bunten; 1990; $59.95; ****+
Int/Land-Nav-Air/Op-Str/1-2; M
A product capable of recreating World Wars lIV(?), this is a modified "beer and pretzels"
game. Highly recommended for entertainment,
although not as a historical learning experience.
Computer Conflict
Ap; Strategic Simulations Inc.; Roger Keating (Rebel Force) and Jim Yarbrough (Red
Attack); 1981; 0/P; N-R
Int/Land/Tac/1-2
Composed of two games, Red Attack is a
two-player introductory modern scenario, while
Rebel Force is a solitaire game of LJC (low-intensity conflict) with the player commanding
the conventional forces.
Conflict

I; #68,72,73; Virgin Mastertronic; David
Eastman; 1990; $14.95; ***
Beg/Dip/Str/1
Easy-to-learn game of the contemporary Middle East. Initially entertaining, but its appeal
palls rapidly.
Conflict Europe

Am/ST/I; #65; Mirrorsoft; ?; 1989; 0/P; N-R
Int/Land/Op-Str/1
Similar to Nato Commander, cf. infra.
Conflict in Vietnam
A/C/I; #26; MicroProse; Sid Meier and Ed
Bever; 1986; 0/P; ****+
Int/Land/Op/0-2
The final product of the Command series,
this simulation of campaigns in Vietnam
teaches valid lessons in an enjoyable format.
Yet, when all is said and done, Vietnam was
an unattractive war and there is little opportunity for the player to really "win." Without a
doubt, the best computer simulation ever done
on the period.

Survey

A modern combat simulation with helicopter
support, but basically an arcade product that
achieved most of its popularity due to its
modem-to-modem capability.

Conflict: Middle East

I; #86,87,90; Strategic Simulations Inc.;
Adv/Land-Air/Tac-Op/1-2
Norm Koger; 1991; $59.95; ***+
A serious simulation of the 1973 Yom Kippur War and a future Arab-Israeli War, this
product is very detailed. Mouse implementation is much easier than the author's last
design (Red Lightning), but it still requires
much time and thought. Recommended for
the serious aficionado.

Flight o/ the Intruder

Am/ST/I; #68,69,74,75,76; Spectrum HoloByte; Rod Hyde; 1990; $59.95; ***+
Adv/Air/Tac/1
A complex simulation of Vietnam air operations.
Geopolitique 1990

DEFCON 5

C/I; #38, CGF Winter 1987; Cosmi; Paul Norman; 1987; 0/P; N R
Beg/Air/Str/ 1

A/Ap; #4.1; Strategic Simulations Inc.;
Bruce Ketchledge; 1983; 0/P; *+
Int/Dip/St/ 1

DRAGON Force

Power politics in the 1980s; graphics and
reality have definitely rendered it obsolete.

Am/l/ST; #60,70,77; Interstel; Roger Damon;
1990; $49.95; ***
Int/Land/Tac/1
Known for Operation Whirlwind, Field of
Fire, Panzer Grenadier and Wargame Construction Set, Roger Damon updates his tactical system to the 16-bit machines. A logical
descendant of his earlier designs, this simulation offers several man-to-man tactical situations in the contemporary environment.

Germany 1985

Ap; #3.3,5.1; Strategic Simulations Inc.;
Roger Keating; 1983; 0/P; N-R
Adv/Land/Tac-Op/1-2
Global Commander
F-117A

I; #89; MicroProse; Jeff Briggs; 1991; $69.95;
****

C/I; #53,58,68; Activision; Dynamix; $49.95;
1989; N-R
Beg/Air/Tac/1

Adv/Air/Tac/ 1
The third generation of Stealth simulations,
this is an even more detailed and graphically
rich experience, but is definitely recommended
for those who are experts in the genre.

F-15 Strike Eagle

F/A-18 Interceptor

F-14 Tomcat

A/C/Ap/I; #4.6,74; Microprose; Sid Meier;
1984; $19.99; **
Int/Air/Tac/ 1
The first "classic" fighter simulation, this
product was a classic in its time. However, it is
extremely dated in today's market.
F-15 II

ST/I; #65,70,86; MicroProse; Sid Meier and
Andy Hollis; 1989; $54.95; ***+
Int/Air/Tac/1
An update of F-15 to state-of-the-art
graphics. A Desert Storm Scenario Disk
($29.95) has also been released.

C/Am; #50,56; Electronic Arts; Robert Dinnerman; 1989; $49.95; N-R
Beg/Air/Tac/ 1
A very user-friendly, mission-oriented combat
flight simulator with a wide variety of targets
and objectives.
Falcon

Am/ST/M/I; #43,44,63,64; Spectrum HoloByte; Gilman Louie; 1987; $19.95; **
Adv/Air/Tac/ 1
Falcon AT

I; #52,53,64; 1988; $59.95; ***
Falcon 3.0

ST/I; #61,66,69,83; Electronic Arts; Digital
Integration; 1990; $49.95; N-R
Int/Air/Tac-Str /1-2; M
A British import which is most noteworthy
with regard to excellent play balance and the
capacity for modem-to-modem dogfights.

I; #76,83,92; 1991; $79.95; ****+
Falcon is not so much a game system as it
is a way of life. Possibly the most complex air
simulator ever released for the commercial sector, its newest version (3.0) suggests utilization of DOS 5.0, a 486-33 MHz computer and
a math co-processor! The manual is consistent
with the game, and uses a layered level of
teaching flight operations. Recommended for
the serious power user! Two scenario disks
have been released for the AT versions
—OperationCusk
and Operation
Firelight (Amiga and ST only) at $24.95 and
$49.95 respectively.

F-19

Falklands '82

F-15 III

I; MicroProse; Andy Hollis; 1992; ?; N-R
Int/Air/Tac/ 1
Forthcoming version of F-15, which will ostensibly push the envelope of state-of-the-art
graphics and game value.
F-16 Combat Pilot

C/Am/ST/I; #53,55,56,64; MicroProse; Sid
Meier and Andy Hollis; 1988; $69.95; ***
Adv/Air/Tac/1
Simulation of the Stealth Fighter, it is richly
textured and complex (cf. F-117 for a newer
version).
F-29 Retaliator

Am/ST/I; #69,72,85,87; Ocean; Martin
Kenwright; 1990; $39.95; ***
Int/Air/Tac/1-2; M
An ultra-modem fighter simulation, this
product was distinguished by its relatively
moderate release cost. However, it is rather
generic in nature.

C; #34,37; Firebird; John Bethell; 1985; 0/P;
Bas/Air-Land-Nav/Op/ 1
Simulation of the Falklands Conflict, it made
up in price value what it lacked in historical accuracy. Yet it has aged poorly, and offers little
for the contemporary wargamer in either history or play value.
Fifth Eskrada

Ap; #4.4,5.2; SimCan; W.J. Nichols; 1984;
$60.00; N-R
Int/Air-Sea/Op/ 1-2
Firepower

C/GS/I; #42,88; Activision; Reichart von
Wolfshield; 1987; ?; N-R
Beg/Land/Tac/1-2; M

C; #48,51; DataSoft; J. Wilson; 1988; ?; **
Bas/Dip/Str/ 1
A global confrontation simulation, it bears little resemblance to reality and has limited entertainment value.
Global Conquest

I; #93; MicroPlay; Dan Bunten; 1992; $69.95;
N-R
Int/Land-Nav-Air/Op-Str/0-4; M,N etwork
A sequel to Command HQ, this looks very
promising.
Golan Front

C/Ap; #5.4,5.5; SimCan; W.J. Nichols; 1985;
$60.00; N-R
Int/Land/Tac/1-2
Gulf Strike

At/Ap; #4.5,5.1; Avalon Hill; Mark Herman
and Winchell Chung; 1984; ?; **
Int/Air-Land-Nav/Op/ 1-2
Based on the more successful boardgame of
the same name, its play mechanics are clumsy and its graphics are even worse. The color
scheme has to be one of the worst ever seen
in the computer field.
Gunboat

I; #68,71,72; Accolade; Tom Loughry; 1990;
$49.95; ***
Int/Nav/Tac/1
A simulation of Vietnam riverine operations,
it is more of an arcade game. However, it
does cover a combat aspect never attempted
before. The graphics are similar to Steel
Thunder by the same designer.
Gunship

C/I; #34,35,38,CGF Winter 1987; MicroProse;
Arnold Hendrick; 1986; $54.95; ***
lnt/Air/Tac/ 1
When initially released, this was the helicopter simulation. Good graphics (when released)
coupled with excellent gameplay made this a
classic.
Gunship 2000

I; #89,91; MicroProse; Jim Day; 1991;
$69.95; ****
Int/Air/Tac/ 1
An update of Gunship, it covers several
rotary-wing aircraft in various theaters. Probably the best helicopter simulation currently available on the market, but be sure to get the updated version (better collective implementation).

Survey

Halls o/ Montezuma

succeeds more than most of its competition.
However, the computer has still not shown itself to be a valid platform for detailed land
graphics in a fast-moving environment.

Am/M/Ap/C/I; #42,45,75; SSG; Roger Keating; 1987; $39.95; ***
Int/Land/Tac-Op/0-2
A simulation of U.S. Marine operations from
the Mexican War to Vietnam, based on the Battle Front system, cf. infra.

McArthur's War

C/Ap; #53,57,61,63; SSG; Roger Keating and
Ian Trout; 1989; $40.00; ***
Int/Land/Tac-Op/0-2
A simulation of Korean War battles, using
the Battle Front system.

Harpoon

M/I; #62,65,66,68,69,70,75,82,85; 360; Gordon Walton; 1988; $59.95, Battle Sets $29.95,
Challenger Pak $89.95 1-2, Editor; *****
Adv/Naval-Air/Tac-Op/ 1
The best simulation of contemporary naval
warfare, it is kept current through release of
new "battlesets" (to date, GIUK, North Atlantic, the Med and the Gulf). Detailed and intricate, yet easy to learn, it can teach valuable
lessons while remaining an entertaining
gaming experience.
Harrier Combat Simulator

I; #48; Mindscape; Mirrorsoft; 1988; ?; **
Beg/Air/Tac/1
A newer version of High Roller, but still
marred by a restricted area of operations and
clumsy mechanics.
Heavy Metal

C; #53,54,57; Access; Brent Erickson; 1989;
$39.95; **
Beg/Land/Tac/1
A tank simulation, more akin to an arcade
product than a serious simulator.
High Roller

I; #33; Mirrorsoft; ?; 1986; 0/P; **
Int/Air/Tac/ 1
A simulator of the Harrier jump-jet, it is
marred by an overly restrictive environment
and mediocre graphics.
Hunt for Red October

Main Battle Tank: Central Germany

Ap/ST/I; #65,68; SimCan; Steven Newberg
and Stephen St. John; 1989; $60.00; N-R
Int/Land/Tac/1-2
Main Battle Tank: Middle East

I; SimCan; Steven Newberg and Stephen St.
John; 1992; $60.00; N-R
Int/Land/Tac/ 1-2
Main Battle Tank: Northern Germany
Jetfighter II

I; #86,87,88; Velocity; Bob Dinnerman;
$69.95; 1991; ***+
Adv/Air/Tac/ 1
A sequel to Jetfighter, it has contemporary
graphics and play value.
Jumpjet

C/Ap; #39; Eurosoft International; Anirog
Software; 1986; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Air/Tac/ 1
LHX

I; #68,72; Electronic Arts; Brent Iverson;
1990; $59.95; **+
Int/Air/Tac/1
Ostensibly a simulation of helicopter combat, it enjoyed more popular success than this
reviewer thought it deserved, particularly considering its highly unrealistic flight model.
Lost Patrol

C/Am/ST/I; #30,32,46,48; DataSoft; Oxford
Digital Enterprises; 1984; 0/P; *+
Int/Nav/Tac/1

Am/ST/I; #72,81; Ocean; Ian Harling; 1989;
$49.95; 0
Int/Land/Tac/1

Based on the Tom Clancy novel, this simulation sold well in a movie tie-in, but probably
did more to turn off purchasers to the wargame genre than any other product. Slow and
clumsy mechanics yielded an ultimate failure
as a gaming experience.

This is an arcade game in which the player
attempts to bring his/her patrol home from a
grueling mission in Vietnam. The underlying
thesis is interesting, but keyboard input is
awkward and too slow, while joystick input is
so poorly done that the entire game is totally
unplayable.

Infiltrator

C; #29; Mindscape; Chris Gray; 1986; 0/P; *
Beg/Air/Tac/1
"James Bond-like" aircraft in an arcade
mode.

M-1 Tank Platoon

Infiltrator II

Arguably the best armor simulation available
on the market. Richly textured and complex. it

C; #41,44; Mindscape; Chris Gray; 1987;
0/P; *
Beg/Air/Tac/1
A sequel to Infiltrator offering more of the
same.
Jet Combat Simulator

C; #25; Epyx; Firebird; 1986; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Air/Tac/1
An F-15 simulator, with little entertainment
value.
Jetfighter I

I; #58; Broderbund; Bob Dinnerman; 1988;
$49.95; ***
Adv/Air/Tac/1
Detailed graphics and play value. Although
the basic scenario (occurring in the United
States) was tenuous at best, Jetfighter was
the first simulator to require tone acquisition a
la Top Gun and is still an entertaining product.

Am/ST/I; #62,65,66,66,71; MicroProse; Arnold Hendrick; 1989; $69.95; ****
Adv/Land/Tac-Op/1

I; #80; SimCan; Steven Newberg and Stephen
St. John; 1991; $60.00; N-R
Int/Land/Tac/1-2
The "Main Battle Tank" system features the
kind of limited intelligence and fast-playing
challenge usually associated with SimCan's
naval games. Although the series does feature
a visual replay of the games (with limited
graphics), the series' action is relayed to the
gamer as though by radio messages.
Mech Brigade

A/C/Ap; #5.4,29,33,37,43,48; Strategic
Simulations Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1985; 0/P;
Int/Land/Op/0-2
A successor to Kampfgruppe, it is a CGW
Hall of Famer, presumably because it corrected some deficiencies in its predecessor's
handling of stacking. Clumsy, but still worthy
of play.
MegaFortress

I; #74,76,81,89,90; Three-Study Pacific; Rick
Banks and Paul Butler; 1991; $49.95; ****+
Adv/Air/Tac-Op/ 1
Normally, this reviewer finds simulations of
tactical bomber operations intrinsically dull.
After all, one flies a bus-like lumbering aircraft
to a point, drops a bomb and flies home. However, Three-Sixty has made a difference and
this simulation is both realistic and entertaining. Excellent graphics and play mechanics
make this a program definitely worth looking
at. A scenario disk (Operation Sledge Hammer) has recently been released and other
scenario disks are planned.
MIG Alley Ace

A/C; #4.2,4.3; MicroProse; Andy Hollis;
1984; 0/P; **
Beg/Air/Tac/ 1-2
An early MicroProse release, it is obsolescent
other than as a curiosity. The first flight simulator to use split-screen graphics for two players.
MiG-29 Fulcrum

I; #81; Domark; John Kavanagh; 1991;
$49.95;
Adv/Air/Tac/ 1
A good example of pricing differentials, it
was originally released as a European import
at a price of $79.95. Billed as the most realistic flight model available of the MiG-29, its armaments are not realistic and, overall, it lacks
the panache of other releases.
Modem Wars

I; Electronic Arts; Dan Bunten; 1988; 0/P; NBeg/Land/Tac/1-2; M

Survey

MRCA Mach 2 Combat Flight Simulator

World War III in Central Europe. The game
has some interesting concepts (e.g. forward
deployment of subordinate units albeit at a
cost of added fatigue), but the user-friendliness/clumsiness of inputs is so awkward as to
make the product a tedious chore rather than
an interesting or enlightening experience.

A; #35; Firebird; Firebird Licensees, Inc.;
1986; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Air/Tac/ 1
An early F-15 combat flight simulator.
Nam

A/C/Ap; #28; Strategic Simulations Inc.;
Roger Damon; 1985; 0/P; *+
Int/Land/Tac/1

Red Phoenix

I; #78; Mirrorsoft; ?; 1992(?); ?; N-R
Int/Land/Op-St/ 1
A forthcoming simulation of author Larry
Bond's novel about the Second Korean War.

A simulation of various Vietnam actions, its
graphics were mediocre and its historical lessons were wrong, wrong, wrong. Mildly entertaining, but very misleading as to the effects
of fire support and small unit tactics.

Red Storm Rising

fusion and unable to coordinate his force into
a cohesive attack or defense plan.

C/Am/ST/I; #49,52,53,55,64; MicroProse;
Sid Meier; 1988; $54.95; ****+
Int/Nav/Tac-Op/ 1
A totally enjoyable simulation of contemporary attack submarine operations in the
"Next War." Although some purists decry certain design decisions (made for playability),
this reviewer considers the game to be one of
the best on the market.

Patriot

Reforger 88

I; Three-Sixty Pacific; Rick Banks; 1992; ?; NR
Int/Land-Nav-Air/Op/1
A simulation of the Gulf War.

A/Ap; #5.2,5.3,5.4; Strategic Simulations
Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1984; 0/P; **
Adv/Land/Op/ 1-2
A simulation of modern warfare on the
Central European Front, the game has clearly
been rendered obsolescent both by game
design standards and by historical events.

NATO Commander

A/C; #4.1; MicroProse; Sid Meier; 1983; 0/P;
***
Int/Land-Air/Op-St/1
The predecessor to Microprose's Command
series, this operational simulation of war in
modern Europe (US-Soviet) has become obsolescent (both in mechanics and reality). In
its day, however, it was easy to play and enjoyable.
Navy Seal

C/I; #61; Cosmi; Paul Norman; 1989;
$29.95/$34.95;
Beg/Land/Tac/1
An atrocious collage of arcade sequences in
search of a game, this horizontal scrolling action game teaches very little of value and is
only of interest to garners who enjoy non-realistic approaches to any form of combat.
North Atlantic 86

Ap/M; #3.6; Strategic Simulations Inc.;
Gary Grigsby; 1983; 0/P; N-R
Int/Nav-Air-Land/Op/ 1-2
An early game of US-Soviet conflict at sea.
Northern Fleet

C/Ap/M/ST/I; #62; SimCan; Steven Newburg; 1989; $60.00; ***+
Int/Nav/Op/1-2
Norway '85

C/Ap; #29; Strategic Simulations Inc.;
Roger Keating; 1985; 0/P; N-R
Int/Land/Op/ 1-2
Nuclear War
Am/I; #63,65,68,69,75; New World; Eric L.
Hyman; 1990; $49.95; ***+
Bas/Dip/Str/ 1
As a "tongue-in-cheek" game of global
destruction, it is not intended to be a simulation but rather a mild diversion. As such, it
can be fun, although its emphasis on massive
casualties will never garner a "political correctness" award.
Ocean Ranger

C; #52,55; Activision; Kevin Patrick; 1988;
$34.95; N-R
Beg/Nav/Tac/1
Arcade-like simulation.
Operation Com *Bat
Am/M/I; #75,76; Merit; Scott Lamb; 1990;
$49.95; N-R
Int/Land/Tac/1-2; M
Overrun

C/A/I; #60,61,63; Strategic Simulations
Inc.; Gary Grigsby; 1989; $59.95; **"
Adv/Land/Tac/1-2
A newer version of contemporary conflict
than Mech Brigade, it is on a smaller scale,
and requires much time and effort. Lack of a
strategic map often leaves the player in con-

PHM Pegasus

C/Ap; #36,39; Lucasfilm; Noah Falstein;
1986; 0/P; **+
Int/Nav/Tac-Op/ 1
A hydrofoil simulation, this game has good
graphics and play value, although the
scenarios are intrinsically less interesting than
one would have guessed. Strike Fleet uses a
similar system and is a more interesting
product.
Platoon

C/ST/I; #52; DataEast; Ocean; 1986; 0/P; NR
Beg/Land/Tac/1
See the movie; play the game. Vietnam
small-unit tactics in an arcade mode shows
another example of tie-ins rarely being successful.
Project Stealth Fighter

C; #42; MicroProse; Jim Synoski; 1987; 0/P;
***
Adv/Air/Tac/ 1

Return to the Falklands

Ap/I; GO; Owen P. Hall, Jr.; ?; $35.00; N-R
Bas/Nav/Tac-Op/ 1-2; M
The British-Argentine War, with minimal
graphics.
Seventh Fleet

Ap/I; #27,37; SimCan; Bill Nichols; 1985;
$60.00; ***+
Int/Nav-Air/Op/ 1-2
A naval simulation without graphics using a
paper map and counters, it is an interesting
simulation of US-Soviet operations in the
Pacific.
688

I; #59,63,64; Electronic Arts; John Ratcliff;
1989; $49.95; **
Int/Nav/Tac/ 1-2

Microprose's first release of a stealth fighter
simulation, this was characterized by good
graphics and gameplay at the time. However,
it has been superseded by later releases, e.g. F19 and F-117.

A popular contemporary submarine simulation, although this reviewer has never been
able to determine the reason for its popularity.
Game play resembles World War II submarine
operations more than the modern theater and
the simulation's emphasis on periscope target
acquisition is unrealistic.

Raid Over Moscow

Skyfox I-II

C; Access; Bruce Carver; 1984; 0/P; *+
Beg/Air/Tac/Str/ 1

C; #4.5,44,45; Electronic Arts; Jeff Tunnell;
1984/1987; 0/P; *+
Beg/Air/Tac/1

RAPCON

I; Wesson International; Robert Wesson; ?;
Adv/Air/Tac/ 1
The military version of TRACON, this is a
detailed simulation and quite interesting. However, its basic subject matter appeals to a narrow market; but for those with such interests,
Wesson International does an excellent job.
RDF 85

Ap; Strategic Simulations Inc.; Roger Keating; 1983P; N-R
Int/Land/Op/ 1
Red Lightning

ST/I; #62,63,64; Strategic Simulations Inc.;
Norman C. Koger, Jr.; 1989; $59.95; **
Adv/Land/Op/ 1-2

An arcade flight game which allowed
Dynamix to stretch their technological wings
as a developer.
Southern Command
Ap; #2.2; Strategic Simulations Inc.; Roger
Keating; 1981; 0/P; N-R
Int/Land/Op/ 1
The Yom Kippur War, covering only the
Sinai Front.
Stealth

At; #41,48; Broderbund; Tracy Lagrone and
Richard E. Sansom; 1984; 0/P; N-R
Beg/Land-Air/Tac/1
An abstract simulation with few doctrinal lessons to commend it.

Survey

A new helicopter simulation, more akin to an
arcade game.

Stealth Mission

C; #47,54; SubLogic; Steve Setzler; 1988;
$39.95; **
Int/Air/Tac-Str/1
An early simulation of the "Stealth" fighterbomber, it failed to keep pace with the MicroProse releases, cf. F-19, F-117.

Tomahawk

A/C; #42,44; DataSoft; D.K. Marshall; 1987;
0/P; **
Int/Air/Tac/ 1
A helicopter simulation; mediocre graphics
and gameplay.

Steel Thunder

C; #53,54; Accolade; Tom Loughry; $29.95;
1988; **
Int/Land/Tac/1

Top Gun: Danger Zone

I; Konami; ?; 1991; $49.95; N-R
Beg/Air/Tac/ 1-2

A tank "simulator," it was more akin to an arcade game. It is still entertaining, although lessons learned have little relation to reality.

Twilight 2000

I; #92; Paragon; Frank Chadwick and Mark
Seremet; 1991; $59.95; ***
Adv/Land/Tac/1

Stormovik

I; #76,77; Electronic Arts; Paul Grace; 1990;
$49.95; * *+
Int/Air/Tac/ 1
A flight simulator from the Soviet perspective, it lacks elan. The scenarios are forced
and reflect internal dissension (which was
somewhat prescient), but more US-Soviet confrontation would have been better received.
Strategic Conquest

Ap; #33; PBI; John L. Jamison; 1984; 0/P; NR
Beg/Land-Air-Nav/Str/ 1-2
Strike Aces

C/Am/I; #68,74,77; Accolade; Andy Craven;
1990; $39.95/$49.95; **+
Int/Air/Tac/ 1
Strike Fleet

Based on the paper RPG of the same name,
it postulates a US-Soviet confrontation in
Central Europe, and the player takes the survivors in a post-war conflict. Detailed and technical, but more for the RPG crowd.
Team Yankee

I; #74; Empire; ?; $59.95; 1990; **
Int/Land/Tac/ 1
An arcade-like product trying to pass as a
simulation of modern tactical armored warfare.
Team Yankee 2: The Pacific Islands

I; #92; Empire; ?; $59.95; 1992; N-R
Int/Land/Tac/ 1
If at first you don't succeed....
Theater Europe

C/Ap/I; #44,46,50,57; Lucasfllm; Noah
Falstein; 1987; 0/P; ***+
Int/Nav-Air/Tacp-Op/ 1

A/C/Ap; #29,34,39; DataSoft; Ian Steels;
1986; 0/P; **+
Int/Land/Str/ 1

Modern naval fleet actions with an emphasis
on "you-are-there" perspectives. Good
graphics and game play do much to overcome certain historical inaccuracies (sacrificed
for playability), but switching from bridge to
bridge to effect changes can be an awkward
experience.

A US-Soviet confrontation in Central Europe;
rendered obsolescent by historical events and
poor gameplay.

Suez 73

Am/I; #76; RAW; Al and Joseph Benincasa;
1991; $49.95; N-R
Adv/Land/Op/ 1-2
The Battle of Chinese Farm in the 1973 ArabIsraeli War. This program was initially slated
for release in 1987, but delayed until 1991
when the designers signed with a new distribution company. Now it is on indefinite hold.
Super Huey 1-11

A/C; #5.5,44,46; Cosmi; Paul Norman; ?;
$12.95; *+
Beg/Air/Tac/1
More of a flight simulator than a combat
model, it is characterized by clunky graphics
and gameplay.
Tank

I; 61,62,65,68; Spectrum HoloByte; R. Anton
Widjaja; 1989; $54.95; ***
Adv/Land/Tac-Op/1
A modern tank simulation, it is similar to M1 Tank Platoon and, in fact, covers certain
aspects in a better fashion, especially larger
unit operations. However, terrain slope
remains a significant problem.
Tank Platoon

Ap; #3.5; Dataworks; ?; 1983; 0/P; *
Beg/Land/Tac/2
An early tactical wargame in which each
player has ten units. It is interesting to see just
how primitive and virtually unplayable it looks
today.

Thud Ridge

I; #55; Three-Sixty Pacific; Acme Animations, Inc.; 1988; 0/P; **
Int/Air/Tac/ 1
One of the earlier Vietnam combat air simulations, it appears obsolescent in the current
marketplace.
Thunder Chopper
C/Ap/I; #42,44,60; SubLogic; John B.
Rosenow; 1989; 0/P; **
Int/Air/Tac/1
Helicopter simulation; of little interest or
gameplay.
Thunderhawk

Am/I; Virgin; Mark Avory; $39.99; 1992; N-R
Int/Air/Tac/ 1

U.M.S.
ST/I; #43,48,51; Firebird; Ezra Sidran; 1987;
$49.95; **
Int/Land/Op/0-2
A wargame design kit, characterized by easy
design parameters. However, accuracy is
sacrificed for playability, and often playability
is sacrificed for graphic display. Maritime
operations are ignored, so its universality is
not "complete." A Vietnam scenario disk has
been released. It will visually impress your
friends, although it is clumsy and awkward.
U.M.S. 11

I; #74,75,87; MicroPlay; Ezra Sidran; 1991;
$59.95; **+
Int/Air-Land-Nav/Op-Str/O-multi
A newer version of U.M.S., with more emphasis on strategic operations. A visual feast
and a playability famine. The "
design-your-own" disk is marketed separately and company support for the title is tenuous at best.
The designer has released a Desert Storm disk.
Under the Ice

ST/I; #54,59; Lyric; John Almberg; 1989;
$39.95; *+
Adv/Nav/Tac/1-2
A contemporary submarine simulation,
defeated by clumsy and ill-defined mechanics.
VC

Ap; #2.5; Avalon Hill; Britt Monk; 1982; 0/P;
N-R
Beg/Land/Tac/1
A tactical simulation of Vietnam — almost as
enjoyable as the real thing (i.e. not very). Obsolete and hopefully forgotten.
Wargame Construction Set

C/A/I/ST/Am*; #34,37,75; Strategic Simulations Inc.; Roger Damon; 1986;
$29.95/$34.95/$39.95*/**
Int/Land/Tac-Op/ 1-2
Basically the user-modifiable source code of
Roger Damon's previous works (Operation
Whirlwind, Field of Fire, Panzer Grenadier),

the game's potential for design-your-own
scenarios is limited by the failings of the
system's mechanics. It is most applicable to
the World War II era; a novice may well find
its flexibility interesting, although the graphics
are dated.
Wingman

A/C; MicroProse; Andy Hollis; 1982; 0/P; *+
Bas/Air/Tac/1
A very early flight-combat game. Of interest
only to the collector.

Review

he

sun is setting and the calm in the pilot's lounge is
broken by the squawk from the speaker in the flight
room. Radar has spotted three MiG-23 Flogger G aircraft
120 km away and heading directly toward the air base. Your
plane is ready on alert status as you jump in and fire up the
engines as the bunker door opens. While taxiing onto the runway, radar picks up three blips at 80 km. Slamming the throttle forward, the afterburners build to maximum thrust and
you scan the horizon. The HUD shows the bogies are closing
at Mach 1.

T

He Said,
Two Perspectives
By Leah & Charles

"Great," you think as you release the brakes and hurtle
down the runway, "it's gonna be one of those days." Climbing to 5000 feet, a tight turn is required to engage the target
that the radar has been tracking. A buzzer sounds — the lead
bogy, 50 klicks out, has sent an AA-9 missile screaming
toward you at Mach 3. "Yeah, it's gonna be one of those
days."

Pick a Plane, Any Plane
Birds of Prey is the latest combat flight simulator from
Electronic Arts. It allows the player to choose from 40 modern
aircraft, dating forward from the 1950s. The player may choose
either NATO and Western powers or opt for Soviet forces, as
East meets West in a multi-faceted air war fought over a
hypothetical landscape.
I he graphics are reasonable looking, allowing for a multitude of
outside views in addition to the standard cockpit view. The user
can adjust the graphic detail to suit slower processors; however,
these reviewers experienced no significant response delay in the
simulation, running on a stock Amiga 2000 using the most
detailed graphics mode.

TITLE:
Birds of Prey
PRICE:
$49.95
PROTECTION: Document Check
SYSTEM:
Amiga
PUBLISHER:
Argonaut Software
DISTRIBUTOR: Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

Unlike reality, the cockpit instrumentation graphics are the
same for all planes, as are the controls, radar and HUD. While
this abstracts a major portion of the simulation, it makes flying
different planes easier, since one doesn't have to adjust to different cockpit configurations. In other words, there is no asking
"Hey, where's my altimeter?" when switching from plane to plane.

joint campaign the authors engaged in was fought using a trusty
F-4 Phantom for all combat missions.

Multiple Wargasms
The user selects from twelve different missions encompassing
Air Combat (Chuck's favorite), Ground Support, Bombing
(Leah's favorite), Reconnaissance, Troop/Supply drop, Stealth
and Experimental. Not every plane can accomplish all of these
different missions, so aircraft selection plays a key role in any
strategy one might be trying. Naturally, even the versatile F-16
cannot execute a troop drop!
The strategic map is used for locating targets and planning
flight paths and works nicely in the overall game. The user can
access this feature any time during the simulation and it can be
zoomed from the full theater view to excruciating detail, pinpointing all targets and their nearby geographical features. Mercifully,
the game is paused while viewing the strategic map, giving
players a chance to study the vast amounts of data which it can
offer.

Hero or Hamburger?
Like any good wargame, Birds of Prey has a campaign
scenario. The campaign game is a series of mission scenarios
fought at the player's discretion. The object of the campaign is
to reduce the enemy air and ground forces to zero. To achieve
the goal, the player must choose a strategy and strike a balance
between mission types while minimizing his own losses. The best

The player/pilot outfits his plane before each mission with
whatever weapons he deems necessary to accomplish the
scenario's objective. The smorgasbord consists of air-to-air missiles, air-to-ground missiles, various and sundry bombs and, of
course, an extra tank of fuel for those long recon missions.
Again, not all aircraft can carry each weapon type and planes
are further restricted by the number of weapon pods they posses. A pilot can return to base for more fuel and ammo if necessary, which is common on ground support missions. Adding
another intriguing element, missions may be staged from either
ground bases or carriers.

Combat Ready
The HUD has a navigation mode complete with programmable
waypoints. A bombing mode dynamically computes fall line,
point of impact and drop point. This makes hitting the target a
manageable task with freefall bombs and a virtual certainty with
the laser-guided variety. Radar mode has Track While Scan,
Range While Scan, Ground Attack and Gun Manager functions.
These assist the pilot considerably in hitting any pesky moving
targets. The HUD also identifies the target so the pilot doesn't inadvertently fire on a friendly unit.
Missiles are fired by: acquiring the target on radar; flying within
the weapon's range; locking on and letting them rip. The plane's
computer assists the pilot by automatically selecting the nearest
target. Unfortunately, one does not always wish to track the

Review

Ske
on

operation. Therefore, the user is compelled to wait while the directory is gathered from the floppy each time the utility is entered.
Though this is a minor point, it is inconvenient for hard disk
users.

Birds of Prey

She Said, He Said

Wesolowski

While the reviewers of this game have agreed not to file for
divorce over this, a major difference of opinion has developed between them....
She Said: In terms of numbers of aircraft to fly, Birds of Prey
has a lot to offer. However, the lack of imagination in cockpit
design, the difficulty encountered when installing to a hard drive,
the disorganized manual, the silly "rookie" flight training mode
(the better half of this review team actually flew her plane nose
over tail while in this mode without crashing!) and the manual tar
getting weigh heavily in this woman's decision to rate this dogfight a dog.
He Said: I he mechanics of playing Birds of Prey take some
getting used to, but after a few games even groundhogs can be
flying like aces. Be careful when using manual targeting mode!
Each mission is a "manly" challenge and the campaign game is
quite entertaining (albeit time-consuming). The wide variety of
aircraft available is a real treat and these authors have yet to
master the Harrier "Jump Jet" and the X-15 (it's lonely out in
space) but will continue to give them the old "college try." Overall, Birds of Prey is a fast-moving combat flight simulation that
will give hours of enjoyment to the player who is more concerned about action than accuracy.

nearest target and, in this case, manual tracking is necessary. In
this mode, potential targets are highlighted on the HUD while the
player maneuvers a reticule over the potential target and hits "Z"
to lock it in for tracking.
This entire process is quite awkward when flying at Mach 1,
especially when one considers that the pilot loses control over
the aircraft during the selection process! In addition, the tracking
does not revert to automatic should the manually selected target
be lost. Instead, the plane enters the manual selection process.
This can be very confusing when no potential targets exist and
the plane doesn't respond to the flight controls. The authors
have crashed many a plane because of this phenomenon. A
"next target" key similar to Gunship or F-15 Strike Eagle 11 is
clearly called for.

Triple A
While these reviewers are in gripe mode, they might point out
that the manual could use some better organization. The game
did not contain a keyboard overlay. Instead, there was a command summary card. This made learning the game mechanics
somewhat tedious. Thank goodness for the Pause function. In addition, the disk utility function is lacking. Try as they might, these
reviewers could not get the game installed on hard disk. Fortunately, pilot files may be stored there, even when playing from
disk. [Ed: CGW did manage to install it on the Amiga hard
drive at our office, albeit manually and with some effort.] The
Load and Save functions always default to DF0: and do not
remember an alternate path specified during the previous disk

Editorial

Toward a
Definition...

S

tate of the Industry: In the
March, 1992 issue of Computer
Gaming World, we took an
editorial stance against the use of the
term virtual reality to describe any computer game in which the action takes
place on a flat screen as opposed to "totally immersing" the gamer in a 3-D environment (usually with the addition of
peripheral hardware). It was and is our
belief that the use of the term virtual
reality to describe even 3-D environments that exist solely on an ordinary
computer monitor screen is both disingenuous marketing hype and confusing
because of the groundbreaking work in
virtual reality that has been done by
companies like VPL and Autodesk.
Nevertheless, there is a need for a new
buzz word to describe the new style of
computer games that is just beginning to
emerge on the marketplace. A couple of
years ago, Origin revitalized the
company's vision with a new mission
statement/slogan ("We create worlds").
The implication, of course, was that while
others may have been satisfied with
making "ordinary" computer games, they
intended to establish credible worlds. The
emphasis on object-oriented programming that began to take shape with Ultima VI and is reaching a new zenith in
Ultima VII established objects that had
their "own" reality and environments that
had their "own" limitations.
Ken Williams recently attempted to expand the horizons of Sierra's design
teams in terms of "world creation." His
thesis used a buzz word that we would
not: "Sierra is going to become a virtual reality company." Nevertheless, we
agree with his concept. His concept is
that Sierra will lead out in creating
worlds that are distinctive from the characters within their games. Worlds, characters, vehicles, containers, objects will all
be so delineated that they could conceivably be transferred from one Sierra
world to another.
Cynics will immediately point out that
such a vision is a logical extrapolation

from the work being done for The Sierra Network. If his vision reaches fruition,
it will be no problem adding scenarios
and characters to on-line adventure
games. Thus, it would be simple for a
TSN customer to invite an adventure
game guru to help him/her solve a
vexing puzzle in an on-line game by
having the guru's on-line character join
the original gamer's on-line character.
Worlds would become even more fascinating to explore when one could encounter another TSN gamer's characters,
as well as computer-controlled NPCs in
the gaming environment.
At CGW, we find Ken Williams' suggestion to be an exciting vision. It resonates
with a previous editorial stance in which
we called for data storage standards that
would enable games to share "Save
Game" files in a "universal file format." In
this way, characters from one game
could visit other games and vehicles
from other games could be used to explore still other games (e.g. a race car
from Accolade's Road & Track
presents Grand Prix Unlimited challenging the Al in Electronic Arts' Mario
Andretti's Racing Challenge or cruising
the streets of San Francisco in
Spectrum HoloByte's Vette!).
We also find hope in the necessity of
standardization required to fulfill such a
vision. Internally, Sierra will have to
agree on standard definitions and file
structures in order to be able to move objects, characters and vehicles from one
game environment to another. We already see evidence of such activity in the
way Sierra's programmers are adapting
the tools to use the same kind of scaling
in each program and to draw from an entire pastiche of art techniques, within the
same set of tools. It even encourages us
to think that companies might actually,
someday, reach the point that they could
standardize installation programs and
every program on a hard disk might be
able to share the same directory of
device drivers (saving on costs of goods
for the publishers and on disk space for
the consumers). Indeed, an industry-wide

"universal file format" might not be far behind.
Another bright spot of the Sierra vision
is that it recognizes the emergence of
The Sierra Network as a telecommunity. It is a special "cyberplace" that
only exists as it is accessed by garners
and that comes to life as its teleresidents
appear. It means that major publishers
are starting to discover the human factor
in connectability. Whether that community be built around America
Online's Neverwinter Nights, GEnie's
Air Warrior or Multi-Player Battletech,
Prodigy's The Next President or
Baseball Manager or CompuServe's
Sniper!, telecommunity is happening and
it is, to turn a phrase, changing the way
America plays.
We just wish the industry would call this
style of world-building something other
than virtual reality. Whether they are
called "cyberworlds," "telereality," "conceptual reality" or "ontologity," we think
such world-building deserves its own buzz
word, not one borrowed from a different
style of computing.
State of the Magazine: This issue of
Computer Gaming World features the
first installment of a new feature, The
CGW Stock Watch. With so many entertainment software publishers successfully
going public, many readers are curious
as to what this means to them as
garners as well as potential investors.
The CGW Stock Watch will attempt to
disseminate some useful tutorial information for those who have never invested
before, but might want to because their
favorite publisher is offering stock, as
well as provide some analysis concerning
the relative health and future of each
company. Some months, the feature will
provide several charts to illustrate its
points, and other months, It will focus on
one particular story. We believe that
most of our readers will find coverage of
this facet of the Industry will shed additional light on the process of getting computer games from concept to customer.

