N

N

Vol. 5 No. 4

Sept-Oct 1985

FEATURES
Operation Market Garden
A Review

Fog Of War
A Critique of "Limited Intelligence"

Computer Games 1985
A Report From Summer CES

Ultima II
A Review of the Mac Version

Amiga: The Dream Machine
Review of the New Amiga Computer

Game of The Year Awards

14
Bob Proctor
16
Jay Selover
20
Rick Teverbaugh
22
Patricia Fitzgibbons
24
Jon Freeman
41

Help Us Select the Best Games

DEPARTMENTS
Taking a Peek

10

Screen Photos & Brief Comments

Come Cast A Spell With Me
Computer Gaming in Japan

Atari Playfield
Jack Tramiel and Gemstone Warrior

Sports Scoreboard
Sports Games Reviewed

Dispatches
Friendly Games

Scorpion's Tale
Phantasie Tips

A Crock of Crawford

21
Roe R. Adams III
23
David Stone
26
Rick Teverbaugh
27
Dan Bunten
28
Scorpia

Process Intensity in Games

30
Chris Crawford

Strategically Speaking

31

Playing Tips on Strategy Games

Micro-Reviews

36

The Railroad Works; Six-Gun Shootout

Commodore Key
Sound and Fury

40
Roy Wagner

Reader Input Device

41

Game Ratings

48

100 Games Rated

Don't Panic!
Regular readers of CGW will notice
that there is a slight date change on this
issue. Our previous issue was our
June/July issue (5.3). This is our Sept/Oct
issue (5.4). No, you did not miss a mysterious August/Sept issue. At the request of
our distributors we are taking this action
so that each issue of CGW can be on the
newstand before the cover date on the
issue.
The bottom line is that there will only
be five issues this year instead of six. Thus
our next issue will be our Nov-Dec issue
(5.5). The Jan/Feb '86 issue will be 6.1.
Those subscribers whose subscription expires on or after the not-to-be issue 5.6
have had their subscription's expiration
number extended one issue.
This date change makes life easier for
our retailers and we aim to make life easier
for everyone.

CGW Welcomes New Columns
Beginning with this issue CGW will
feature a regular column by Chris
Crawford. Those of you familiar with
Chris' writing know that he is always
informative and often flamboyant. In
keeping with that spirit, Chris' new
column will be called A Crock of Crawford.
We are also adding a Sports column
written by the very capable Rick
Teverbaugh.

Access Software Inc
925 East 900 South
Salt Lake City, UT 84105
801-973-0123
BEACH-HEAD H: is a multi-scenario,
multi-level game for one or two
players. The player can choose either
offensive or defensive game-play roles.
Good graphics, animation, scrolling
playfields, sound effects and some
voice synthesis. A practice mode allows
players to develop various battle skills.
It also has a provision for recording
the top ten scores. BH II is a worthy
successor to the original BH. Joystick
required. C-64.
Circle Reader Service #15

Artworx Software
150 North Main St
Fairport, NY 14450
800-828-6573
STRIP POKER: Based on the
standard game of five card draw. Suzi
and Melissa are your opponents on the
standard "data" disk, optional disks
are available (including male
opponents). Hi-Res graphics. Mildly
amusing program, might be fun at a
party. By the way, the program cheats

from time to time. Be aware the
models are anatomically correct.
Joystick. Many computers. $39.95.
Circle Reader Service #16

COMPUBRIDGE: A tutorial for
learning to play bridge. Ten chapters
of text, eight quiz sections. Computer
generates practice hands and evaluates
play. Useful mostly for pure novices to
the game. Many computers. $24.95.
Circle Reader Service #17

Avalon Hill
4517 Hartford Rd
Baltimore, MD 21214
800-638-9292
SUPER BOWL SUNDAY: A statistic
based hi-res football game for the C64. Although there are only five basic
offensive plays (off tackle, sweep, flat
pass, short pass, long pass) you do
select ball carrier/receiver. The defense
has a large variety of options. Despite
the limited offense (e.g., no screens or
draws) the game is exciting and does a
good job of creating the "feel" of
viewing a game on the "tube".
Computer can play either or both
sides.
Circle Reader Service #18

STATIS PRO BASEBALL: If we had
the review copy of this game for our
baseball survey it would have ranked
quite high. The graphics are minimal
and the text is sparse but the technical
quality is quite good. Players are rated
for many non-stat categories (range
factor, catcher's arms, etc in the same
manner as Computer AP A. Stats are
compiled and updated. You can create
your own teams. If you are in the
market for a stat baseball game this
one should be considered. We like it
better than AH's other baseball entry
- PRO MANAGER. Many computers.
$35.00.
Circle Reader Service #19

COMPUTER CIRCUS MAXIMUS: An
adaptation of AH's board game of the
same name. Design your own chariot
and then try it out in the Colosseum.
Up to 12 players. Five race campaign
game with wagering. IBM. $25.00.
Circle Reader Service #20

Ba'rac Limited
PO Box 37206
Shreveport, LA 71133
STAR CRYSTAL: A solitaire text
adventure series based on the

TRAVELLER science fiction roleplaying game system. Each episode is
played separately or in sequence as a
solitaire campaign. Five non-player
characters, 200 locations, 380 objects,
etc. Playing time is quoted at 10 to 50
hours! The nice documentation
includes quite a bit of background
material regarding the TRAVELLER
series. Apple.
Circle Reader Service #21

Broderbund Software
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903
415-479-1170
CAPTAIN GOODNIGHT AND THE
ISLANDS OF FEAR: An arcade game
with an animated hero, superb
graphics and varied scenarios. Captain
Goodnight fights aboard tanks, planes,
boats, submarines and ski lifts to
defeat the evil Dr. Maybe and his
Doomsday Machine. Joystick required.
Apple $34.95.
Circle #22
Berserker Works Ltd
PO Box 14268
Albuquerque, NM 87191
505-298-3237 Circle #23
WIZARD WAR: An interactive
fantasy war game by the creators of
Berserker Raids. You are the character
Prince Shan who must defeat the evil
forces led by the computer. The game
is an interesting variation in that it is

a true war game with fantasy themes.
You have standard war game items
such as range factors and target
selection, along with various magic
spells. IBM. $34.95.
PRIDE AND PREJUDICE: We get
hundreds of games a year into our
offices but this one is unique. You are
a young woman of the Regency Period.
Your goal is to marry the best possible
match and avoid spinsterhood. One to
six players with each player having
varied attributes - beauty, wit, grace,
etc. You attend parties, spread gossip
and keep an eye out for a wealthy
bachelor. Many computers. $34.95.
STARBALL: A 3-D game of
racquetball. Multilevel, real-time
action for one or two players in a fully
simulated four-wall court. Apple, C64. $29.95.
STARCLASH H: A strategic conflict
simulation, i.e. a fairly standard space
game of exploration, development and
warfare. Contains a nice short story by
Stephen Walton that sets the stage for
the game. IBM. $29.95.
FORCE 400: A game combining
elements of chess and checkers. The
result is a fairly interesting game of
strategy . For one or two players. IBM
and TRS-80. $34.95.

Big Ben Games, Ltd.
1765 Maple Street
Northfield, IL 60093
312-446-610
ATARI SMASH HITS #1: Big Ben is
the importer for a large number of
English games. This entry is a
collection of arcade items. Jet Boot
Jack, Firefleet, Dan Strikes Back,
Captain Sticky's Gold and Hyperblast.
Atari. $16.95.
Circle #24
CBS Software
One Fawcett Place
Greenwich, CT 06836
203-622-2525
DR. SEUSS - FIX-UP THE MIX-UP
PUZZLER: A delightful puzzle game
for the young (ages 4 and up). Pieces
of Dr. Seuss characters, such as the
Cat in the Hat, the Grinch and the
Star-Bellied Sneetch are mixed
together in a puzzle. The child must
unscramble the puzzle, at which point
the characters become animated.
Emphasis on problem solving, pattern
recognition and memory skills. Many
computers. $29.95. Optional use with
Muppet Learning Keys.
Circle #25
Cygnus
PO Box 57825
Webster, TX 77598
713-486-4163
STAR FLEET I: The first in a series of

complex space strategy games. It also
contains a role playing concept as you
start out as a rookie cadet in the fleet
and attempt to progress to admiral.
Extensive use of color and sound. The
98 page manual should be the tipoff
that this is not a Star Trek type game.
A lot of complex decision-making is
required for success. The
documentation is easily among the
best we have ever seen for a game
program, it rivals an IBM hardware
manual. Can only be described as
"state-of-the-art" for space games.
IBM. $49.95.
Circle #26
Davidson & Associates
6069 Groveoak Place #12
Rancho Palos Verdes, CA 90274
213-373-0971 Circle #27
MATH BLASTER!: Eye-catching
graphics, animation, bright colors and
sound effects to hold a child's interest
in learning math. Actually an arcade
game that incorporates four different
math learning activities. Includes an
editor so that parents or teachers can
add more problems. 1st through 6th
grades. Apple, IBM & C-64. $49.95.

SPELL IT!: All the Davidson products
utilize graphics, animation and sound
effects to encourage a child's
interaction with the learning process.
Spelling is a real challenge (interestwise) but this program has succeeded

in bringing life to a dull subject. The
arcade game seems well designed for
the intended age group (10 years and
up). Also has an editor to add your
own words. Apple, IBM & C-64.
$49.95.
Digital Kamp Group
1737 Walnut Grove
Decatur, IL 62526
CLASH OF WILLS: The scope of this
game is nothing less than the war in
Europe 1940-45. Includes production,
strategic air, weather, sea movement
(including amphibious assaults),
movement and combat. The computer
will play the Western Allies, the
Soviets or both. The hardcopy map is
a minus in that it is difficult to
interpret terrain features and
objectives. However, battles within the
game are resolved on a Strategic
Overview Map. Documentation is
minimal but adequate. Atari. $39.95.
Circle #28

Electric Transit/Electronic Arts
2755 Campus Drive
San Mateo, CA 94403
415-571-7171
WILDERNESS: A simulation of a
survival trek through the Sierra
Nevada mountain range. Threedimensional graphics, has correct
environmental details and survival
tools, plus realistic human responses to
the conditions. Your plane has crashed

in the wilderness. You must use the
few remaining supplies and equipment
(including a topographical map) to
help you survive and reach a distant
ranger station. You will face rough
terrain, harsh weather and wild
animals. The underlying programming
is sophisticated, this is a simulation not a game, although it can be enjoyed
on that level. The documentation
includes an excellent survival guide
that would be adequate to take on a
real-life wilderness hike. A new and
interesting simulation topic that comes
off quite well. Apple.
Circle #29
Infocom
125 Cambridge Park Dr
Cambridge, MA 02140
WISHBRINGER: Another addition to
the Infocom line of interactive fiction
games. In Wishbringer you're a postal
clerk in a small village called Festeron.
Your once-quiet town becomes the
focal point for a titanic struggle
between Good and Evil. You must find
the magic stone known as Wishbringer
and use its powers to make your town
safe again. Package includes excellent
(and beautiful)
beautiful) documentation, postal
map and
stone. Many
computers. Rated introductory level
by Infocom.
Circle #30
Prism Software
26600 Southfield Rd
Lathrup Village, MI 48076
313-559-5067
SITUATION CRITICAL: A three

phase arcade game. First is a mission
to find and assemble parts of a bomb,
requiring good reflexes and mapping
skills. Phase two is a cave battle.
Three is a bombing run over the Plains
of Xarlon (nice graphics on this phase).
Apple, Atari & IBM. $29.95.
Circle #31

Radarsoft
c/o ACK Inc.
655 John Muir Dr. #E411
San Francisco, CA 94132
415-239-5357
MAPS U.S.A.: Gives the player a
helicopter race in search of states,
cities and waterways spread out below
in smooth-scrolling graphics. An
educational program that teaches
political geography and topology.
Designed for ages nine and up.
Radarsoft is the best-selling software
company in the Netherlands. Also
available are Maps Europe and Maps
World. C-64.
Circle #32
Ram-Tek Co.
6752 Covington Creek Trail
Fort Wayne, IN 46804
219-432-2455
WIZ ZARD Z & WAR LORD Z :
Adventure role-playing fantasy. 15
level dungeon where you search for
hidden treasure and battle the assorted
fiends. Eight classes, six races and over
1,000 pieces of equipment to arm
yourself with. 3-D graphics and realtime action. IBM 128K. $49.95.
Circle #33

Continued on pg. 38

OPERATION

MARKET
GARDEN
by Bob Proctor

channel their attack in order to keep on their
timetable.
Name:
Type:
System:
Author:
Price:
Publisher:

Operation Market-Garden
Wargame
Apple II, Atari, C-64
Chuck Kroegel & David Landrey
$49.95
Strategic Simulations Inc.
Mountain View, CA

This latest SSI game of WW II on the western
front takes its theme from the Allies attempt to
capture the industrial Ruhr district of Germany in
late 1944. It involved seizing bridges across the
many waterways of Holland, with paratroops, and
sending an armor spearhead rolling north as fast as
possible to secure the corridor. Then,
hopefully, they could break eastward into Germany,
north of the Rhine river. It was a daring gamble
that failed at the last crossing, thus giving the title
"A Bridge Too Far" to a book and a movie on the
subject.
Operation Market-Garden is played on a map
showing Holland from the Belgian border north to
the town of Arnhem on the Rhine. It is SSI's
standard 31 by 32 hex grid scaled to about 2 miles
per hex. Terrain types are clear, forest, rough and
town. Major rivers are distinguished from smaller
streams and canals. And, of course, there's the all
important road net along which the Allies must

There are also many bridges, most of which can
be destroyed. The German player has no control
over this; there is roughly a 30% chance (it varies
with the difficulty setting) that a bridge will be
blown by the German garrison when the first
Allied unit attempts to cross. In reality, they were
ALL destructible, but the three major rivers in the
north have but one bridge across them. It would
make the game too much of a crap-shoot if they
could be blown after the Allies had struggled north
for five or six days. They will usually be welldefended anyway. Blown bridges can be repaired
by Allied Engineers.

The game is 10 turns long and the sequence of
play is very simple. Each turn is one day and
begins with the mundane activities of determining
weather, allocating air strikes, checking supply and
placing reinforcements on their entry hexes. Once
these chores are out of the way, the fun begins.
The day is broken into 4 phases. First, the Allies
move and attack, then the Germans, then the Allies
again and finally the Germans again. Since
everything costs operation points, many units may
use them all up in the first phase of the day and
have nothing left for the second phase. A typical
Operations Phase will have the player issuing orders
to every friendly unit on the map. Movement and
mode changes (from normal to travel or vice-versa)
are executed immediately but combat is deferred
until all movement is complete. It is often
important to move your units in just the right
sequence to keep them from obstructing each
other's movement and to have them attack in the
right order. This is important because only the first
attacker uses full combat strength. Once you make
a move, you cannot take it back or change it but
you can use up part of a unit's Operation Points,
leave it and move one or more other units, and
then return and move the first unit some more.
While the basic game is a good one, SSI has
provided many options to keep it from getting
stale. Not only are there four levels of difficulty,
but you can choose to play with Advanced rules
(the basic set is considered Intermediate). These
extra rules make the Allied player trace supply
lines to each unit supplied by air (tedious), prevent
either player from knowing the strength of enemy
units, allow both to control advances after combat,
and introduces Command Control into the game.
This last is an operation point penalty imposed on
any unit that gets too far from its headquarters
unit.
For additional challenge, you can play with
hidden units -- the only enemy units you can see
are those that are adjacent to your forces. For
variety, you can start with units in their historical
locations or you can select free set-up and pick
new initial drop zones for Allied paratroopers. The
starting German positions change too but the
German player has no control over them.
The weather can also be either historical or
random. Cloudy days restrict the amount of air
support and the number of airborne reinforcements
for the Allies. Overcast days prevent both. Playing
with historical weather means both sides know
exactly when the second and third drops will occur
In solitaire play, the computer always plays the
Germans. It can be an easy or a tough opponent
depending on the level of difficulty selected. Small
battles develop around each drop zone, the most
desperate being farthest north. The way units are
jumbled together without well-defined lines and
the uncertainty about where, when, and in what
strength the enemy will appear next keep the game
interesting for both sides. Even better, an entire
game can be concluded in a single evening. I
recommend this game to all WW II fans.

WHAT'S WRONG WITH
SSI GAMES?

Granted that the good people at SSI
brought out the first good historical computer wargame, that the quality of their
games has only been challenged recently,
and that the breadth of their line of games
is unsurpassed. The following list is offered
in the spirit that ANYTHING can be improved. While the Emperor is definitely
dressed, he's been wearing the same suit
long enough that it's beginning to get shiny
at the knees and elbows. We need.. .
1. A better player interface. A mouse
would be a much better way to move the
cursor than the 1 to 6 keys. Even the newer
Apple II's can support mice. Menus, help
screens, and good messages would make SSI
games much easier to play and understand.
2. Maps that look more like maps.
Admittedly this will be hard given the current limits on color and resolution, especially in the Apple II.
3. A more intelligent computer opponent;
one that can beat us by guile instead of by
shaving odds and increasing strength.
4. More variety from the computer opponent. One that might try to wipe out the
British 1st Airborne in one game and take
and hold Arnhem the next.
5. Better tutorials for learning the game
system. On-screen, context sensitive help
would be great but requires lots of room on
disk and in memory. A tutorial section in
the manual would help also.
Bob Proctor

ofWAR FOG
A Critique of Limited Intelligence in Wargames

by Jay Selover

Fog of war and limited
intelligence have become two of
the most popular catch-phrases
of computer wargaming. No,
they do not refer (respectively)
to fighting in London and the IQ
of your commanding officer.
They both have a kind of loose
definition as those factors in
warfare which force command
decisions to be made without full
knowledge of all pertinent
factors in the combat. Limited
Intelligence is certainly not a
new concept; it was recognized
as a big potential for computermoderated games well before
there even were any on the market. Considering the potential, it
is interesting to see how the
treatment of limited intelligence
in computer wargames has
evolved over the years.
When you buy a computer
wargame, you can expect one of
three possible treatments of the
fog of war issue. The treatment
will be a function of the depth
of simulation or design intent,
and no one approach is always
"right"; it depends on how the
design is handled. The first level
is to purposely ignore intelligence matters completely. This would be a game in which all units of
both sides are open to free inspection, and corresponds closely to most board wargames. Since this
approach wastes one of the greatest assets of the
computer, it is not surprising that only a few games
fall in this category anymore. There were several
examples of this approach among the earliest computer wargames when "state of the art" consisted of
translating a good board wargame to the computer
pretty much word for word. You still find games
published with this perspective in cases where limited intelligence is not the focal point of the design.
At the other end of the spectrum from games
which ignore or deny limited intelligence are a few
which use battlefield intelligence as a focal design
point. In these games, accurate portrayal of the
frustration and uncertainty of a battlefield command is central in the design. Games in this category may or may not be good on other levels, but
they should at least paint an appropriately foggy
picture of warfare. Examples include Napoleon's

Campaigns 1813-1815 and Carrier Force from SSI,
Grey Seas, Grey Skies and Fall Gelb from
Simulations Canada, and Carriers At War from
SSG.
Finally, bracketed by the two extremes, we find
by far the most populous class of wargames. These
are games which use limited intelligence as a conscious design feature, but which use more as an
added feature where ever it fits more that as a
central design point. Actually, it seems that designers want to do a good job, but end up with less
than ideal treatments because of programming constraints. It does not take a West Point graduate to
recognize some of the obviously unrealistic representations on the market, so what else could it be
but an inability to find programming solutions? The
obvious case in point is Close Assault from The
Avalon Hill Game Company. This game is no
longer "current" but it is such an outstanding example of an off-handed approach to fog of war that it
begs for a mention. Close Assault is loosely a computerized version of the classic boardgame Squad

Leader (at least the first three scenarios and one
mapboard). The computer game attempts to go one
step past the boardgame in "limited intelligence". It
does keep enemy squads hidden from view until
one of your units actually "sights" them. The problem is that once the units are sighted, they remain
on the map for the rest of the game. It does not
matter how far away they move or how many
buildings are between your units and them, they
always remain in clear view!
Obviously, there was a limitation inherent in the
programming approach used in Close Assault which
made it too difficult to rehide exposed squads.
And, it is nice to see that perhaps the greatest
strides in computer wargaming in the last few years
have been in programming capability. Still, there
are plenty of recent cases of what appears to be
"convenience programming" which gives "limited
intelligence" aspects of the design short shrift. Gary
Grigsby has put out three very good games with a
common system; Guadalcanal Campaign, Bomb
Alley, and North Atlantic '86 . All three of these
give both players complete and true knowledge as
to the damage inflicted on a task force by an
airstrike. That simply is not an accurate representation, especially in the World War II games. Not to
pick on Gary Grigsby (but let's anyway), he recently came out with War In Russia, which is an
excellent game. It really is
one of my favorites, but...
In War in Russia one executes strategic movement
while one's opponent is away
from the screen. It is possible
to shuffle the placement of
your forces to a large extent
from turn to turn without
giving a hint of what is happening. If your opponent attacks a hex and badly damages a unit, you could
pull it out and replace it with a completely new
unit without your opponent having any idea. Can
you imagine a German commander reporting that
there were still Russians manning the line in front
of him, but that he could not tell how many, what
kind of artillery support they had, or even what
unit or units they were? Also, if two units are in a
hex, your opponent cannot even tell what type of
unit either is. A favorite ploy for the Russians is to
stack an empty air group on the front line to make
a hex appear to be strongly held when it really just
has one weak infantry unit.
Lest you get the impression that Gary Grigsby
or even SSI are my targets here, let's just mention
some others. Carriers At War is a terrific game and
has a generally excellent limited intelligence "feel",
but even it slips up on a few points. There are
several way to spot an enemy task force; carrierbased search planes, reconnaissance planes, and
even coastwatchers. The designer's notes in the
game inform us that the reliability of a sighting
depends on who makes it (this makes perfect
sense). Unfortunately, when you get a sighting report on an enemy task force, you are not told who
made the sighting. If the sighting is near land it
could have been a reliable coastwatcher or it could
have been one of your bleary-eyed carrier pilots

reporting six destroyers as six fleet carriers. Also,
you get some information about the success of an
airstrike on an enemy fleet, but when you launch a
strike on an enemy airbase, you learn virtually
nothing of the success of the raid. You never get
any estimate of how badly the runway is (if at all).
Finally, since I started with The Avalon Hill
Game Company, it is only fitting that I finish with
one of their recent products. The "Bismarck" scenario in Dreadnoughts is a solitaire simulation of
the breakout, hunt for, and death of the Bismarck
in 1941. It really is excellent in the "fog of war"
department. (The two player "Battle" scenario is not
considered here -- it is an "all cards on the table"
shoot 'em up.) It is really amazing to see the vast
improvement in one company's product from Close
Assault to Dreadnoughts . In fact I can find absolutely no complaint with the "limited intelligence"
aspect of Dreadnoughts! Unless... There is a common problem with computer wargames which is a
close cousin of "inappropriate limited intelligence".
That is: "incomplete documentation", and Dreadnoughts really has incomplete documentation. When
you first play this game, I can guarantee that your
intelligence picture will be incomplete because you
are not briefed on things that the commander of
the Bismarck would absolutely have known. You
are not given even rudimentary information about
the probabilities of success of
recon missions or of intercepting an enemy force using
a "patrol" course, or the
probability of recovering a
floatplane in a given weather
at a given speed, or any estimate of British radio-direction finding capabilities (just
how good are they?). Thus,
there is no way to use your
intelligence gathering facilities as effectively as
would the true captain.
Fogging the war by shortchanging the rules and
explanations can be frustrating, but at least in the
case of Dreadnoughts, an excellent system waits to
be discovered beyond that. In too many other cases,
faulty or incomplete rules are just a thin veil over
an unrealistic "limited intelligence" treatment.
However, it is time for me to retract my fangs and
begin to soften my tone. Of course, I can pick and
choose my shots in an article like this; and you can
find fault with any game if you look hard enough.
And, of course, the handling of "limited
intelligence" has become more and more realistic
over the last four years in particular. The main
thing for designers and programmers to bear in
mind is that "convenience programming" is noticed
as at least a blemish on the final product, and that
we do understand and appreciate historical and appropriate "limited intelligence" in our computer
wargames.

Vote for the Game of
the Year -- Page 41

by Rick Teverbaugh
As a regular visitor at the June Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago, I have seen widespread
changes among the software manufacturers over the
past three years. Just two years ago, there were a
lot of flashing neon signs, scantily clad females and
unrealistic goals about what you - the computer
gamer - wanted.
This year I'm glad to pass along that most of the
companies were much more serious about their
games. Here are some of the more impressive products I saw.
Lode Runner's Rescue: Broderbund (from recently acquired subsidy Synapse). Yet a third program of this popular theme, it keeps the
create-your-own-screen format while adding a three dimensional aspect.

Captain Goodnight And The Islands of Fear:
Broderbund. Get set to save the world (again), but
this time you'll need expertise in the driver's seat
of helicopters, airplanes, tanks, trucks and a submarine.
The Fourth Protocol: Bantam. Help British intelligence officer John Preston as he races the clock to
uncover and foil a plot to smuggle and detonate a
nuclear device in England in this graphic
adventure.
Sherlock Holmes in Another Bow: Bantam. The
computer acts as Dr. Watson and in your persona as
the great detective you'll try to unravel six mysteriously intertwined cases.
Jet Combat Simulator: Epyx. Four separate options enable you to go from landing practice to
combat in the air. There is fully computerized
instrumentation, but don't expect this to be a snap.
Winter Games: Epyx. Done in the same spirit as
Summer Games I & II, there are six cold weather
sports offered; ski jumping, ski biathlon, hot dogging, speed and freestyle events and a bobsled race.
The World's Greatest Football Game: Epyx.
Easily the most exciting sports release at CES. The
play book can hold up to 120 plays and allows you
to design your own. You can also view the game
from a bird's eye view (long range or close-up)

over the stadium or you can view from the coach's
perspective on the sideline.
The Eidolon and Koronis Rift: Epyx. Two new
offerings from Lucasfilm Games. The former explores a magic world and the latter a space environment. The games have a two-thirds arcade, onethird strategy mix.
Fast Tracks: Activision. Three modes to create
some of the most interesting slot car races you ever
dreamed of. First you create the tracks with an
unbelievably easy system, then you can view it and
make any necessary changes and finally you can
race. You can save the track and your best time on
disk and then send it to a friend for him to test,
even if he doesn't own the original program.
Hacker: Activision. If you're fascinated by all
the places your computer can go, but not willing to
actually take it to the brim of illegality, this game
gives you a chance to experience some of that excitement without any of the danger.
Acrojet: Microprose. Not just another flight simulation program, this time there's a Decathlon of
Sport Aviation included. The events are a fun way
to make yourself a better pilot while keeping the
enjoyment level high.
Gunship: Microprose. For those who were fascinated by the maneuverability of the helicopter in
Blue Thunder, this is your chance to be equipped
with just such a machine and take it on one of
seven different missions.
Silent Service: Microprose. World War II submarine combat in the Pacific at its graphic best. There
is a wide range of historical scenarios with graduated skill levels.
Fix It: Random House. Easily the most difficult
game shown at CES to describe. You are given a
configuration of stuff that resembles, more than
anything, the stuff you keep meaning to get rid of
from that old spare bedroom closet. You must put
all the items in the proper location to make a
smooth-running machine. There are 200 screens
from which to work.

Continued on pg. 33

high on the charts after three years!), the pinnacle
of their admiration is reserved for the fantasy roleplaying games. Both Wizardry and Ultima have
huge followings in Japan. The computer magazines
cover Lord British (Ultima) like our National
Inquirer would cover a television star. When Robert
Woodhead, of Wizardry fame, was recently in Japan
he was practically mobbed by autograph seekers.
Just introducing himself in a computer store would
start a near stampede as people would run outside
shout that he was inside!

Come Cast A Spell With Me;

ROE R. ADAMS III

Computer adventure games are the hottest thing
in Japan since sushi. On a recent trip to Japan, I
attended the NEC show in Tokyo. It is the equivalent of one of our, alas, defunct Applefests. In
Japan, NEC accounts for the bulk of the Japanese
micro sales, and software for the NEC machines
dominates the market.
At the show every booth featured adventure
games. There were a few text adventures, but most
of them were spectacular super hi-res graphic
adventure games. The NEC machines have much
better hi-res resolution than any of our regular
machines. The colors seemed to jump right out of
the screen. The Japanese are even more hooked on
great visuals than we are.
American devotees of Japanese animation films
will not be surprised to learn that many of the
computer adventure games are based on these hot
movies. Several games have evolved from the
blockbuster Starblazer series, which has been running in serial form on some US television stations
for the past five years. Dagger of Kamui was previewed. This program is to be released this summer,
simultaneously with the top-notch animated movie
of the same name. Rumors of a Lensman adventure
game abound. The animation movie, based on the
famous E.E. Doc Smith book, has become the
equivalent Japanese hit of our Star Wars.
One aspect of Japanese graphic adventure games
that will come as quite a shock for most Americans
is that many of the stories contain nudity. This is
not porno software, like Custard's Last Stand, but
casual nudity and sex. There really never is any
emphasis on either, both are just there within the
storyline.
As much as the Japanese enjoy hi-res graphic
adventures (Roberta Williams's Time Zone is still

The top-selling Japanese designed fantasy roleplaying game is Black Onyx, designed by Henk
Rogers. Two of Japan's premier magazines, ASCII
and LOGIN, recently acknowledged Mr. Rogers as
having the best selling adventure game of 1984.
The latest release from Mr. Roger's company,
Bullet Proof Software (B.P.S.), is Demon's Ring. It
promises to be a hit sequel to Black Onyx. In our
country, Sierra is currently planning for a fall
release of an American version of Black Onyx for
the Apple and C-64. It is an excellent game with
animated combat sequences and visual spells.
Another Rogers' game, Asteka , offers breathtaking
hi-res graphics of Mexican ruins and beautiful
models.
Arcade games are not as dead in Japan as they
are in the United States. The biggest success story
over there, however, is an American product,
Broderbund's Lode Runner. Doug Carlston,
President of Broderbund, has stated that sales of
Lode Runner in Japan equaled the 1983 sales in the
US, when the game was the number one selling US
game of the year. Lode Runner also has the distinction of being the first American game ever
turned into a Japanese coin-op arcade game. It
went right to the top of the coin-op charts!
Another Japanese phenomenon surfaced at the
NEC show: Lode Runner contests. There were hundreds of students competing for the top scores on
the computerized version of Lode Runner. Twenty
computers were arranged in a numbered horseshoe.
Each round consisted of ten minutes. Three uniformed directors, looking just like American
gameshow hosts, stood in the center hyping the
game and shouting encouragement to the players.
Lights above each computer station would signal
the winners of each round. At the end, there was to
be a playoff between all the winners to determine
the top player. The show was being filmed for
Japanese television. There is even a large Lode
Runner fan club, complete with a monthly magazine, t-shirts and buttons.
The real status of MSX in Japan proved to be
one of the big surprises of the trip. All we have
heard in the United States for the past year is how
Microsoft's MSX had become the Japanese standard
operating system and how a unified Japanese market is going to sweep into this country. The truth
of the matter is that NEC refused to join the collaboration. According to several sources, NEC
hardware and software accounts for 80% of the
Japanese marketplace. So, the actual effect of the
projected MSX impact can be seen as most likely
inconsequential.

Continued on pg. 33

Ultima II:
The Macintosh Version

by Patricia Fitzgibbons

Ultima II
NAME:
Role-Playing Adventure
TYPE:
Many
SYSTEM:
Disk
FORMAT:
1
#PLAYERS:
Lord British (Richard Garriott)
AUTHOR:
$59.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Sierra On-Line, Inc.
Coarsegold, CA

Macintosh owners need not be envious any
longer of Apple, Atari, C-64, and IBM PC/PC jr.
users: Sierra On-line has ported ULTIMA II to the
Mac. Second of the best-selling games in Lord
British's acclaimed series, ULTIMA II ("The
Revenge of the Enchantress") is the baroque sequel
to the classic fantasy role-playing adventure. An
epic game of character development, continent
hopping, and time travel, ULTIMA II will stimulate and satisfy RPG and adventure fans alike.
The player's primary task in ULTIMA II is to
develop a powerful character through a seemingly
endless succession of hack and slash encounters.
However, to win the game, the player must also
unlock the mysteries of the Time Doors and solve
the secrets of Minax, a wicked female sorceress.
ULTIMA II's exceptional documentation includes a colorful cloth map and a well written
twenty-page handbook. The small manual contains
plenty of helpful clues as well as an entertaining
tale about the quest: "...It has been hypothesized
that a single traveler, strong and well equipped
with the right charms, could travel the time corridors to ultimately defeat Minax, thereby reversing
the destruction she has wrought."
After "cloning" a player disk from the ULTIMA
II master disk, an individualized character is created by allocating ninety points among six attributes: strength, agility, stamina, charisma, wisdom, and intelligence. Choices of race, profession,
and sex affect these attributes (e.g., a male character receives five extra strength points; an elf, five

more agility points; a cleric is given ten additional
points of wisdom). The distribution of attribute
points is vital to a particular character's success or
failure. High agility, for example, helps a character
to steal and wield certain weapons, whereas high
charisma results in lower prices for supplies and
equipment. A male elf thief is a good -- though
not necessarily the best -- beginning character. A
wide variety of characters is possible, and part of
ULTIMA II's appeal is that it may be replayed
many times with different types of characters (such
as a female dwarf wizard, a male human cleric, and
so on.)
The world of Ultima is graphically depicted as a
populated landscape in the map window portion of
the screen. A lone character must quickly locate the
nearest town where a weapon and a suit of armor
may be purchased or stolen (tip: head west, then
south). By roaming land, sea, and air, and slaying
all manner of strange creatures, a character's attributes and possessions increase dramatically.
Dungeons and towers are unimportant, and may be
safely ignored (no great loss since movement inside
these places is tedious). However, interplanetary
exploration and time travel are indispensable aspects of the quest, and involve danger as well as
opportunity. Luckily, a nice "resurrection" feature
is available.
ULTIMA II is a tough, time-consuming game,
and some players may not have enough patience to
kill all the monsters and collect all the gold that is
needed in order to buy upscale weapons and additional hit points. Those who do stick it out will be
rewarded with a virtually invincible character who
can easily (perhaps too easily!) destroy Minax.
The Mac version of ULTIMA II is a joy to play.
The mouse is used almost exclusively, and is a real
bonus in combat (the character can move and fight
along the diagonal). The menus are easy to use, and
Continued on pg. 35

enough to entertain a war gamer, and simple enough that it can be
played and enjoyed without paying strict attention to all the
numbers and formulas that affect the action. But I want to spend
what "time" I have left in commenting on Gemstone.

Atari Playfield

David Stone
REPORT FROM THE HARD SIDE
I would like to congratulate Jack Tramiel, Atari Corp's owner
and chief executive, on making the late spring delivery of the new
32-bit, ST512 Atari computers to retailers throughout the United
States, just as he announced back in January. I would like to -but I can't. Once again, Mr. Tramiel has announced, and missed,
a product shipment date.
If you were hoping to play the ST version of "M.U.L.E." any
time soon, you can put down that joystick. The new date for the
shipment of the ST machines is now late summer. You guess
which year.
A couple of facts underscore the probability that Atari will not
be releasing the new machines within the next few months. One is
that Tramiel is still up in the air about which ad agency to use to
introduce the new products. One source reports that Atari has
recently dropped its long-time, California based ad agency and is
now courting the New York agency that formerly had the Commodore account. Without an agency, let alone an advertising
campaign, it is highly unlikely that any new product is going to be
released soon. [Ed. Note: Less than 24 hours before this issue went
to press, Atari announced that they had hired a new ad agency
and that they would be spending an incredible ten million dollars
on advertising before Christmas.]
Another tell-tale sign that no product shipment is imminent is
that there have been no announcements of any new distribution
agreements between Atari Corp and any major department stores.
One theory for this is that Tramiel is having second thoughts
about the viability of relying on the computer-illiterate
salespeople found in most department stores to sell sophisticated
computers and peripherals.
"Atari watching" can be more fun than the soaps, but in the
long run the false starts and product delays have got to be bad for
Atari's credibility. However, Tramiel, as former head of
Commodore, has an incredible track record. So, nobody, even the
most skeptical, can count Tramiel out until he counts himself out.
Meanwhile, amidst spurts and lurches of a faltering Atari
Corp, new games for the Atari only trickle in. And, the trickle is
likely to stay a trickle until Atari shapes up and ships out (new
product, that is).
REPORT FROM THE SOFT SIDE
Two of the more interesting games for the Atari that have
recently trickled into CGW headquarters are Six Gun Shoot Out
and Gemstone Warrior, both from SSI. Six Gun is complex

Gemstone Warrior (GW) is a "conversion" game formerly
available only on the Commodore and Apple. Its humble
beginnings, however, do not detract from its playability. Overall,
I found GW challenging and just different enough not to duplicate
the action of other games in my rather large collection of action
and adventure games.
The title "Gemstone Warrior" may be a somewhat misleading.
"Warrior" implies that your objective is to fight. Not so -although a lot of fighting goes on. Gemstone Quest would have
been closer to the mark since your objective is to retrieve the five
segments of the Gemstone from the foe infested depths of the
caverns and mazes of the underworld.
The underworld is made up of dozens of colorful scrolling caves
and mazes that range in size from about two screens by two
screens, to three by five. The scrolling effect is continuous but not
particularly smooth. Because of the large number of screens and
connecting passage ways, map making is imperative each time you
play.
Your choice of weapons is simple: crossbow and arrows or
fireballs (like grenades). Since you can only carry a limited
number of these weapons, you will find it essential to continually
search for rearmaments. The best strategy early in the game is to
keep the crossbow ready and save the fireballs for the more wicked
foes (i.e., those that usually take three or more arrows to kill).
The inventory items that you find by searching coffins and
chests add interest, and some small amount of humor to the game.
Some of the items include poisons, elixirs, magic freeze wands,
invisibility spells, and mysterious ancient objects (that look
uncannily like diskettes) that have unknown powers. Since you
can have only one of these items ready to use with a single
keystroke, it's important to anticipate your needs and have the
appropriate object ready.
The foes of GW are well animated and include the standard
variety of ghosts, skeletons, squiggly blobs, and birds of prey, plus
a variety of other lesser-known, but just-as-feared demons. These
foes get harder to kill the deeper you go into the underworld. So,
you may find a strategy of "shoot everything that moves" used
early in the game soon gets changed to "run first, shoot only if you
have to".
A clever design feature allows either keyboard or joystick
control for moving, shooting, searching, and adding items to your
inventory. However, the keyboard is required for "using" an item
(such as drinking a regenerative potion). I found the keyboard
controls, especially for diagonal shooting, "too creative" to easily
master. And, because the action is "real time", keeping both
hands on the joystick at all times, ready to fight or run, is much
easier and faster than keyboarding. The only caution here is that
if you use the joystick do not forget about your inventory of spells
that can be used only via the keyboard.
GW has a save game feature which in the instruction booklet
sounds like normal save game. However, a word of warning about
this particular "save game" is in order. It is more like a "pause to
disk" feature than a save game that might be found in most
adventure games. What this means is that even though you can
save a current game to disk, if you are killed you cannot retrieve
it. After you are killed, you are immediately taken to the "high
score" screen to record your name. Subsequent attempts to
retrieve your last "save" will not work.
The few drawbacks of GW, such as the necessity of using both
joystick and keyboard (or of learning to move and shoot from the
keyboard) in a real-time situation and the somewhat unusual
save-game feature, are far outweighed by the game's superior
combination of action and adventure. Since the top scores are
saved to disk, GW is not likely to start collecting dust immediately
after the first time you retrieve the five Gemstones.
[Ed. Note: Actually, the "dead is dead" feature of Gemstone
Warrior is a refreshing change from the more common practice of
either resurrecting the character within the framework of the game
or allowing the user to hedge against the grim reaper with the save
game routine. We have never liked the flippant way death is
handled in most adventure games: "Oh dear, you have died! Well,
never fear; death isn't real. You can simply rise from the dead!
Resurrection is as common as dirt around here!]"

Amiga: The Dream Machine

by Jon Freeman

Faster than a speeding AT. More colorful than a
GTIA Atari. Able to process multiple tasks on a
single screen. Yes, it's the Superman of personal
computers, Commodore's just announced, much
heralded, and long awaited Amiga computer. Sure
to be called (without too much hyperbole) the ultimate game machine, the Amiga should establish itself at once as the first choice for game enthusiasts
(and just about everyone else).
Personal computers to date have been, to put it
mildly, less than ideal. Despite their partisans, each
of the leading micros has obvious flaws as a game
environment. The Apple and the IBM PC suffer
from mediocre graphics, lousy sound, expensive
joysticks, and no satisfactory provision for two
players. The Macintosh has no color -- and no
answer to the two-player problem, either. The
Atari 800 and the C-64 look and
sound better and, with a pair of
cheap joysticks, manage two people
easily, but their disk drives are slow
and miserly.
What we wanted -- what everybody wanted -- was a combination
of their individual strengths with
none of their obvious weaknesses:
something with reasonable memory,
fast drives with lots of storage, good
sound, high resolution, sprites and
other fancy graphics tools, and two
joystick ports. This apparent chimera
was not the machine of our dreams,
but the computer of our expectations. Unfortunately, since it didn't
exist, there was nothing to do but
settle for less, compromise in our
various ways, and defend our
disparate choices.
Well, you can wave the white
flag and break out the champagne. The Amiga is here and
the war of compromises is over
Anything your favorite
computer can do,
the Amiga can do
better. And faster.
And in stereo.

NOT JUST SKIN DEEP
To start with, the Amiga just looks nice: very
professional and vaguely like a cross between an
Apple //c and an IBM PC. The CPU is cantilevered, allowing the (separate) keyboard to slide
in and under it when not in use. The keyboard is
respectable, with all the expected keys in all the
right places; there are even four cursor keys logically arranged in a compact cross. The main unit
has all the connections you could want or imagine:
serial and parallel ports; an expansion bus; two
joystick ports; TV (RF), composite and analog RGB
outputs; left- and right-channel audio jacks for
your stereo system. A two-button mouse comes as
standard equipment, but you can plug in ordinary
(cheap!) Atari/Commodore joysticks, paddles, or
just about anything else.

What's inside the box, of course, is far more
important than the exterior, however attractive.
Volumes could be written simply about Intuition,
Amiga's new operating system superstructure and
user interface. Let me simply note in passing that it
learned a lot from the Mac; that it is everything
VisiOn, Windows, Topview, and GEM ever wanted
to be (and more); and that it gives the user pushbutton control over everything from the colors of
the standard display to the size and priority of each
window.
THE HEART OF A NEW MACHINE
The heart of the Amiga is a faster (7.1 MHz)
version of the same chip that powers the Mac (and,
for that matter, the Sun, AT&T's new Unix PC,
and the often promised but little seen Atari ST
machines): the Motorola 68000, a 16/32-bit hybrid.
For comparison, think of the 8-bit 6502 as a 4cylinder engine, the IBM PC's 8088 as a six, and
the AT's 80286 as an eight. In those terms, on that
scale, the 68000 is nothing less than a V-12.

But that's not all. As Mac owners and developers
have discovered, it's possible to overload even a V12. You can get reasonable sound out of the
Macintosh, but if you do, all other operations slow
to a grinding halt. To avoid this problem, the
Amiga, like the Atari 800 and the C-64 before it,
uses a pair of specialized support chips: one for
graphics and one for sound and (most) I/O. Since
multi-channel music or sound effects, fast animation, and even disk I/O can be done without much
(or any) of the 68000's time or energy, the main
processor is free to devote its attention to numbercrunching and data-processing: counting casualties,
calculating strategies, weighing alternatives. (In
fact, between the coprocessors and the Operating
System's multitasking capabilities, it would literally
be possible to play a game and do a spreadsheet on
the same computer at the same time.)
Nor is the Amiga cramped for space. One-hundred-ninety-two kilobytes of ROM and 256K of
RAM are standard. A single plug-in cartridge doubles the RAM to 512K, and if you want still more,
external expansion of many megabytes (all directly
addressable) is possible. A single 3.5" drive (using
the same hard-shelled disks as the Mac) is built in,
but you can add other 3.5", 5.25", or hard disk
drives. One standard Amiga disk will hold a
whopping 880K.
.AND SOUL
The machine's sound and graphics capabilities
exceed the wildest rumors you may have heard.
Because the display is organized in bit-planes, you
get as much -- or as little -- color and resolution
as you want, without paying the memory overhead

for more than you need. All display modes draw
from a palette of 4096 true colors; unlike the IBM
PC, for instance, the colors displayed are the same
whether you're viewing a TV, composite video, or
RGB output. Standard "low-res" is 320 x 200 in up
to 32 colors. (This is twice the standard resolution
of the Atari 800 or C-64, more than twice the
Apple's -- and with far more colors.) "Hi-res" goes
all the way up to 640 x 400 (interlaced) -- still
with up to 16 colors. Standard text display is nominally 60- or 80-columns, user-selectable.
Those are just the basics. Of special interest to
gamers is the Amiga's dual-playfield mode. One
playfield, for instance, might represent a cockpit of
any size and shape, with appropriate dials,
switches, and displays. Underneath, showing
through any transparent areas in the first playfield,
could be a view of the landscape outside the craft.
Objects, action, and colors (up to 8 in the bottom
playfield, 7 in the top) in the two playfields are
completely independent: the landscape could scroll
past without disturbing the cockpit display in the
least.
Naturally, there are sprites (what were called
"players" in Atari 800 lingo), those magical gizmos
that make possible high-speed, flicker-free animation. (All the icons and missiles in the Atari and C64 versions of ARCHON are players/sprites.)
Compared to those in the old Ataris, there are
twice as many (8), with twice the resolution (16
Amiga low-res pixels), and twice the color (i.e.,
three colors plus transparent). The difference in
detail this makes cannot be imagined: in the new
Amiga version of ARCHON, for instance, not only
Continued on pg. 34

Sports Scoreboard

Rick Teverbaugh
There is plenty of variety to offer this time
around in the computer sports world. In fact, variety is what best describes the lead item at which
we're going to look.
When Epyx first released Summer Games, there
was much oohing and aahing over the graphics and
the challenge of the sports involved. Even if there
were some groans that the two swimming events
were too much alike, there was a little something
for everyone - a little hand-eye coordination, a little strategy and a little stamina.
Now there is Summer Games II, released first
for the Commodore 64, but with the promise of an
Apple version soon. There are eight new events to
master and several more reasons to get excited
about the program.
First, the graphics are even better. The first
place the improvement is noticeable is in the triple
jump. When the athlete completes a good jump, the
crowd cheers, he waves back to them and on the
big board at the top of the stadium a replay of his
jump is shown. But when the athlete faults, he puts
his head down and slowly walks from the pit.
The second reason to cheer Summer Games II is
the variety of the challenges.
But before we go into that, let's make a quick
rundown of the eight events included. There's the
aforementioned triple jump, followed by rowing,
javelin, equestrian, high jump, fencing, cycling and
kayaking.
Physically, the gamer must perform a variety of
chores merely to survive. In the triple jump, two
well-timed thrusts to the right of the joystick must
be followed by one to the left and another forward.
In the equestrian event you must pump the joystick
forward to gain speed, push it to the right to make
the horse jump and again to the left to secure a
safe landing.
Fencing is the most entertaining, especially if
more than one is competing. In probably what is
the most realistic event yet portrayed in this series,
you have the choice of attacking all out, thrusting

with a return to a defensive posture or playing the
parry game to wait your best opportunity.
Cycling and kayaking, the final two events, are
the most unique. To win at cycling you must rotate
the joystick clockwise and in the proper rhythm to
gain the top speed. Both the rowing and cycling
feature a split screen so you can compete against an
opponent as well as against the best time.
Kayaking is my personal favorite. As the current
pushes you down through the course, different colored markers tell not only which path must be
taken, but also the manner in which the trip must
be completed. Some markers need only to be passed
through in a normal face-first manner. Others need
to be backed through, while a third type needs to
be passed through against the current. When that
event is finished, you get a rundown on how you
did at each gate, your overall time, plus any time
penalties for not following course specifications.
Yet, I think what I like most about Summer
Games II is the fact that you can use it in conjunction with Summer Games I to make a 16-event
challenge. Point totals are saved for the entire 16
events and world records are also saved to disk. By
the time I tire at all from Summer Games II, Epyx
has promised Winter Games.
Those of you with baseball or auto racing on the
brain, there are two new programs aimed directly
at you. One hits the mark at least partially and the
other will leave you wondering exactly what went
wrong.
For baseball enthusiasts there is Dave Winfield's
Batter Up by Avant-Garde. The program has two
sides. One is a tutorial to help you become a better
hitter. I doubt that there are too many tips that you
wouldn't already get from a Little League or Babe
Ruth coach here, but there is a well-written companion text that addresses hitting in more detail.
The highlight of the package is a program called
Slugfest, where up to nine hitters can compete
against a pitcher in a sort of batting practice-type
scenario.
There are eight different pitchers you can select
to hit against and at four different levels (sandlot,
semi-pro, minors and majors). There are even four
ballparks included, so what's a homer at Wrigley
Field could be a noisy out in the Death Valley of
left-center field at Yankee Stadium.
The program will keep track of what each hitter
has done. If you get too good against one of the
eight pitchers you have selected, the computer will
bring in a reliever. The pitchers included are patterned after Nolan Ryan, Steve Carlton, Bob
Gibson, Fernando Valenzuela, Randy Jones, Catfish
Hunter, Jack Morris and Phil Niekro.
You must decide when and if to swing and
whether to take a high cut, a medium swipe or a
low rip. An overhead view of the stadium will then
show you where the ball went and tell you the
result.
The only problem with the program is the vantage point of the gamer. Instead of seeing the ball
as the hitter would, you sit off at a 45-degree angle
to see both the hitter and the pitcher. It makes it
fairly easy to see whether a pitch is high or low,
'but not whether it is inside or outside.
Batter Up is available for the Apple II series.

Continued on pg. 40

Dispatches

FRIENDLY GAMES

Dan Bunten

Computer games should be friendly to their
players! After all, it's the players who shelled out
their hard earned cash to be entertained. They're
entitled to a little special attention from the game's
designer. Most of us would not tolerate a word
processor that wasn't "user friendly", so why do we
put up with games that are virtually "user hostile"?
It shouldn't be necessary to read a massive manual
and constantly refer to a "quick reference card".
Games should be easy to play.
On the other hand, games need to be challenging. No one enjoys a game that they win no matter
what they do. Players thrive on competition. A
game needs obstacles. Obstacles make winning an
accomplishment. Thus, game designers give a lot of
attention to blocking the "easy win". The player is
supposed to have to work for his achievement.
So how do we resolve this paradox? Should
games be easy on the player or hard on the player?
They should be both. Playing should be simple.

Winning should be difficult. Unfortunately, more
than a few game designers have confused these two
concepts.
In some cases it seems that the designer just
made it easy on himself by allowing the difficulty
of play to become part of the obstacle to winning.
This is a simpler job by far. As a designer I know
that if I can make it hard for you to discover how
to play I am also making it hard for you to win my
game. I feel strongly that this is "cheating" on the
design. It seems to me that some designers who
claim to be creating challenging games are really
making games that are hard to play. To a certain
extent, I feel most text adventure games fall into
this category. The contention by purists that discovering the words that make the game respond is
part of the "challenge" is so much hot air. The
challenge such games create becomes HOW to talk
rather than WHAT to say! Not all games that are
hard to play are the result of bad design. In some
cases the designer just seems to have gotten carried
away with obstructing winning to the point where
playing is also difficult. This may not be bad depending on the audience. (Some players seem to
enjoy solving the most obscure puzzles. There's no
accounting for taste!). Nevertheless, any game could
be improved by moving the difficulty from the how
to play category to the how to win one.
Games need to be "player friendly". Any game
would be better off if more time were devoted to
making it easier to play. Business, professional and
home management software designers have invested
considerable effort in making their products more
"user friendly". You can look at the progress made
in word processors to get an idea of the impact of
more "friendly" designs.
Back in the dark ages, the early '80s and before,
it was not unusual for word processors to offer
whole keyboards full of features. Every control
character would evoke a different function. In 1979
I wrote a word processor that boasted thirty commands. We thought it was a great idea to offer as
many options to users as we could. However, to use
those programs, you needed a memory like an elephant, or a third hand to hold the reference manual. Since that time, word processors have gotten
progressively better as they became easier to use.
Although the current word processors have far
fewer features, they seem much more powerful.
This shows the potential of "user friendliness" in
software design. Game designers can use the same
"tricks".
Paul Heckel, a software consultant, wrote a book
entitled The Elements of Friendl y Software Design
(1984, Warner Books). In this book Heckel covers
everything from "the seven traps that snag experienced designers" to "the thirty principles of friendly
software design". One of Heckel's basic premises is
that software design is a communication craft
rather than a technical skill.
Therefore, he draws quite a few of his examples
from other communication crafts such as advertising, film making and writing. This book is a must
Continued on pg. 35

Now, there is one thing I'm going to tell you
straight out about the game, and if you'd rather not
know it, don't read any further; just skip on down
to the next paragraph. Ok, there is one dungeon on
Gelnor that you won't be able to enter, unless you
have a Minotaur as a member of the party. This is
the dungeon presided over by the Minotaur God.
Therefore, at least one of your fighters should be a
Minotaur, right from the start, because that is a
very tough dungeon to get through!

Phantasie
As told by Scorpia
WARNING! Scorpion's Tale contains hints on
solving computer adventure games. If you do not
want help, do not read on.

Hmmmm, you're looking a little pale today. It
must have been all that messing around in other
people's minds. No matter, just pull your chair up
to the fire, and I'll have Fred pour out something
refreshing for you. Actually, what you really need
is a vacation from all that heavy cerebral stuff. In
fact, a little physical exercise, some good, oldfashioned, hack-and-slash, is definitely in order.
Not in real life, of course! Only in Phantasie.
So, you're off to vanquish the evil sorcerer,
Nikademus, and bring peace to the troubled land of
Gelnor. Your first move should be to read the docs,
very carefully. Read them several times, so you
know what you can do, and what you have
available to you in the game.
The party you create is crucial to success. Take
your time, and make sure that each character is as
strong and dexterous as possible. Remember, there
are no penalties for class, so any character of any
profession can wear any armor or use any weapon,
provided the character has the necessary attributes.
This will take awhile, but it's worth the effort. I
had very good results (winning the game) with a
party composed of one fighter, one ranger, one
cleric, one thief, and two wizards. However, other
combinations are certainly possible, so experiment a
little until you find what's right for you.

Equipping the party is pretty easy. The towns
only sell basic items; the really good stuff is mostly
in the dungeons. Buy the best you can (which won't
be much), a few healing potions, if you can afford
them, and you're ready (I hope!) for your excursion
into the outside world.
The world map is made up of 16 squares,
arranged 4x4. The first square is "filled in" and you
can see all the features around you. However, the
remaining 15 squares will be dark when you first
enter them, and only by moving around can you
see what's there. Fortunately, once you've moved
over a spot, it becomes a permanent part of the
map.
Make sure you go over each and every spot
wherever possible, or you will miss some very
important things in the game, such as towns and
dungeons, among others. This includes doing a little
swimming from time to time. That ability isn't just
there for show; you're going to be needing it.
Naturally, as you ramble around, you'll be
coming across all sorts of nasty monsters.
Sometimes, they will just be too powerful to fight,
especially for a beginning party. Once in awhile,
you can simply greet them, and nothing will in
happen. However, that doesn't always work, in
which case, combat is initiated.
Running works occasionally, but you'll probably
take a few hits before you can get away. Bribery is
better; 90% of the time, monsters will take a bribe
and leave you in peace. This is especially true of
night encounters, when most of the group will be
asleep. At such times, it's better to fork over the
gold rather than take a chance on getting wiped
out. Of course, the monsters might not accept the
bribe, in which case, you're going to have some
problems.
Fighting is fairly simple; you merely choose an
action for each character in the party, and hope for
the best. You do a lot of hoping, as the monsters
often come in multiple ranks, while your group is
all in one rank, spread neatly across the bottom of
the screen. Wizards and thieves are thus most
important in these encounters, as a thief can hit at
any rank, and wizards have spells that can effect
more than one monster. Read up on those spells
carefully; the offensive ones are usually preferable
to the defensive ones. And remember: if you run
out of spells, your wizards still have weapons,
which they can use in combat when necessary.
You'll be spending a lot of time in the dungeons.
Actually, "dungeons" is just a term of convenience;
most of them aren't dungeons as one usually thinks
of them: castles, a city, temples, caves, etc. Each
one is unique, and all of them are extremely
important. Take your time in each one, map it
thoroughly (ie, go over every possible space), and

remember that they all have secret doors, traps, and
other tricks to them. Move carefully, and get out if
you're taking a beating. The program will save
what you've done so far, if you want it to, and you
can come back later to do more.
There is something to be found in every
dungeon; a word or phrase you find in one may be
critical in another. Make note of everything you see
and hear in them. Always pick up weapons and
armor that you find, whether lying around or after
encounters. If you can't use it, you can always sell
it. Keep in mind that some doors are locked, but
the key can be found somewhere else in the same
dungeon (of course, it might not be EASY to find
or get hold of!).
Along the way, you will come across numerous
scrolls. Some of these you can buy in towns, others
will be found in dungeons. Each of them contains
clues and information you'll need to finish the
game. Make note of which scrolls you've found,
and what they say (since they're numbered, this is
not hard).
Then you can sell them (every gold piece helps!).
By now, you're probably wondering, what about
the rings? Well, eight of them will be found in the
dungeons, and they won't be easy to obtain. The
ninth ring can be purchased for gold in a certain
town, which is not easy to get to. If you haven't
found that one yet, remember that the towns are
also numbered from 1-11. That should help you to
determine where to go; all you have to do now is
figure out how to get there (maybe you should
check your list of spells).
Then there are the four runes of Air, Fire,
Earth, and Water. You'll need those to complete the
game, too. They can all be found in the dungeons,
but a couple of them will not be easy to come by.
In fact, I listed them in a certain order; I'll leave it
to you to figure out why.
So, you've got the rings, you've got the runes,
and now the Oracle tells you it's "time to visit the
Gods". Where are they? In Olympus, of course.
Getting there is easy, if you know where to go.
Check out Lord Wood's castle VERY carefully
(watch out for the sliding floors!), and you should
have no problem in reaching the astral plane.
When you arrive, you'll find things are a bit
different there. For instance, it's rather empty.
Most of the dark spots will remain dark as you
walk over them. Also, Olympus is a bit larger than
you might think, so you'll have to do a lot of
walking. Patience! You'll find the Gods eventually.
When you do, you'll have to pass certain tests,
but you're equipped for that now, so you should
just breeze through the dungeon, and meet up with
Zeus himself. He'll give you a little gift, and then
it's time for the final act of this little drama.
Once back in Gelnor, it's off to see the wizard.
You may have found his castle before this; if so,
you also found you weren't able to get in before.
Don't worry (or, maybe you should!), this time,
you'll get in. If you haven't found it yet, you
haven't done enough swimming.
In any case, Nikademus' place is going to be
rather tough to get through, so come prepared with
your best weapons, armor, and plenty of healing
and magic potions. Black Knights are all over the

place here, and you'll have to fight them at every
turn. You'll also have to find your way to the
throne room, which is not easy. As with every
other dungeon, it's important to go over every
possible space.
Eventually, you'll find what you're looking for.
When that happens, your party should be at their
max hit points and magic points. Nikademus is the
single toughest monster in the game, and it will
take magic to defeat him; ordinary weapons will
hardly even get in a shot on him. So, just pour it
on, and keep at it; he's hard to defeat, but it CAN
be done! One final word: after you've polished
him off, you'll find that the game doesn't exactly
"end"; you can go around the countryside killing off
more monsters. I had a chat with SSI about that,
and they told me they MAY bring out a sequel to
Phantasie... so don't let your characters get too old!
Well, I guess that's it for this issue's Tale. As
always, if you need help with a game (or three),
you can send your questions to me (along with a
self-addressed, stamped envelope, if you live in the
United States) at the following address:
Scorpia
P.O. Box 338
Gracie Station
New York, NY 10028
See you next time, and happy adventuring!
Copyright 1985 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

This is not to say that data has no place in a
game. Every game requires a certain amount of
data. Process and data are analogous to differential
equation and boundary condition. A differential
equation specifies how one quantity changes in
proportion to other quantities. A differential equation never tells what the value actually is; it only
tells how it changes. Thus, a differential equation
in isolation has no direct predictive value; only
when we provide the data of the boundary conditions can we use the differential equation to calculate useful information. In a similar way does a
game with rules but no data lack any useful context. Who cares for the rules of purchasing a hotel
in Monopoly if there is no place to put it, and no
money with which to buy it? What good is a combat results table in a wargame if there are no places
to fight?

A Crock of Crawford

Data is thus the raw material to be manipulated
by the processes of the game. It is the fuel for the
rules, the fodder for the processes. It is a vital element, but not the central element. The processes of
the game are the central element.

PROCESS INTENSITY VERSUS
DATA INTENSITY
Chris Crawford
One of the concepts that I frequently use in designing games is the concept of process intensity.
Process intensity is definitely one of the more esoteric concepts in game design, and certainly one of
the least understood. I have seen many games, some
of them done by experienced and proven designers,
that fail to properly utilize process intensity.
Process intensity is the opposite of data intensity. They sit on opposite sides of a spectrum. Data
intensity sits on the side of facts. In the middle lie
events. On the opposite side are processes. Facts
are, events happen and processes interact. Data intensity concerns itself with the way things are. It
emphasizes long compilations of textual, graphic or
numeric data. Process intensity concerns not the
way things are but the way that they change.
Process intensity does not address the simple fact
that things change, but rather the whys and
wherefores of that change, the causes and relationships that lead to change.
Process intensity is important to game designers
because it is essential to interactiveness. Facts are
dead; you can't interact with a fact. You can't even
interact with a fixed event. If you are going to
have an interaction, then you and your opponent
must both be able to effect change. A game must
therefore have rules for defining how change is
effected. These rules (processes) are the heart and
soul of the game. Its other features (titles, graphics,
etc.) are mere accoutrements.

Process intensity manifests itself in many ways.
A process intensive game offers the player many
choices, and the choices are of a richer and more
subtle nature. The process intensive game has
many, many branches and many endstates.
Internally, the process intensive game carries out
many computations and sports a large number of
branches. It has much code and few tables of data.
The data intensive game is also easy to spot. It
offers the player very few choices, and those few
are seldom very interesting. The data intensive
game has few outcomes other than the simple declaration of victory or defeat. It uses large amounts
of data in its program, with a puny program picking over the masses of data like a fly buzzing over
a pile of fruit. The data intensive game does very
little with its data other than to select which pile of
data it wants, and then ship it to the player without
further processing. The data intensive game has
much to show and very little to do. It may have
lots of pretty pictures or impressive music, but the
player can't do anything with them.
Stories are data intensive and have no process
intensity at all. They present a great many facts and
events, but the reader or viewer has no option to
interact with the story. Nevertheless, stories are
concerned more with the processes of human experience than with the simple facts presented. The
audience of a story must infer the processes from
the events of the story.

Continued on pg. 33

there is a chance for reinforcements. The Japanese
player only has to transfer most of his Bettys to
Truk each time Rabaul gets reinforced, then
transfer all back to Rabaul when you have enough.
I built a force of over 300 Bettys this way. Did you
know that the Japanese player can train Bettys for
carrier operations? This could give the American a
long-range jolt.
Mike Briggs
Compuserve 76324,2130

Strategically Sneaking

Strategically Speaking covers strategy game tips, including tips
on wargames, sports games, economic and other "real life"
simulations, and classic style games.
DISCLAIMER: The tips printed in SS are those of the authors.
We try to avoid printing tips that don't work, but we cannot
playtest all, or even most of them. So, let the player beware.
Beginning with this issue we play $5.00 for each Strategically
Speaking tip used. Presently the bulk of tips submitted to CGW
are on wargames. We also need tips on other types of strategy
games as well. Tips can be mailed to Strategically Speaking c/o
Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 4566, Anaheim, CA 928034566. Try to keep tips under 250 words if possible.

REFORGER '88
Warsaw Pact player: In the opening turn of the
"Surprise" scenario the WP player can inflict farreaching disruption of NATO strategy by inventive
deployment of his air forces.
Taking advantage of the guaranteed absence of
NATO interceptors, the WP player should direct his
airstrikes against West German bridges deep behind
NATO lines. By eliminating the road bridges
adjacent to <1,20>, <2,20>, <1,29> and <12,23>, a
total of six attacks, the WP player will prevent the
resupply of forward NATO units between
Fulda-Aschaffenburg-Wurburg for several turns until
engineer battalions have arrived to correct the
situation. These engineers will be hampered in two
ways; their movement will be impeded by refugees
and subsequent airstrikes will disrupt their bridge
reconstruction efforts.
The drop in supply (to front-line units) can be
exploited by strong, repetitive and coordinated
attacks. Frequently this results in the early capture
of Wurzburg, securing the southern shoulder and
permitting a redirection of force towards RheinMein AFB.
Douglas M. Dery
Denver, CO
GUADALCANAL CAMPAIGN
Japanese: The rules state that if the number of
Bettys on Rabaul drop below a certain number then

OPERATION MARKET GARDEN
The historical set-up for the 82nd Airborne
makes for a difficult defense of the unit's supply
hex. The Allied player, in the "Free Set-up" option
can rectify this problem. The drop site should be
positioned in hex <11,10>. Drop one regiment in
<12,8> and its subsidiary battalion in <10,9>. Their
mission is to eliminate the LOSS Recon unit in
<11,8> and secure the Nijmegen bridge. With the
Div HQ in <11,10> providing artillery support, the
elimination of the recon unit and seizure of the
bridge should occur by the end of the second turn.
Taking Nijmegen this early will permit the 82nd
to reinforce British efforts in Arnhem. The new
HQ position makes for a smaller perimeter defense.
This perimeter could incorporate the defensive attributes of the Groesbeek periphery. The 82nd
would retain the capacity of flexible defense
throughout the Groesbeek, Mook, Grave and
Nijmegen quadrilateral.
Doug Dery
Denver, CO

CROCK (cont.)

CES REPORT (cont.)

The data intensive game and the process intensive game are like a statuette and a diamond. The
statuette derives its beauty from its data --- from
the fineness of detail of execution, the colors and
shadings of the surface, the texture and contours of
the figure. The beauty of the statuette can be
appreciated in a single long glance.
The diamond, however, has no beauty of its
own. It has no color, and its shape is not a source
of great joy. Its beauty arises from its interaction
with the light around it. The diamond processes the
light (refracts it) and casts an array of sparkles in
all directions. Moreover, the beauty of the diamond
cannot readily be appreciated in a single glance.
The diamond must be moved around, viewed from
different angles and interacted with before the eye
can comprehend its beauty. Both the statuette and
the diamond are beautiful; the statuette is beautiful
in its data and the diamond is beautiful in its
processes.
So too it is with the universe. The greatest and
most beautiful truths are not the facts and events
of the world, but the processes behind them. Facts
and events are only the palpable manifestations of
the grand processes by the which the universe
turns. A game should strive to mirror those processes, rather than merely aping their issue.

Telarium. Take on a tough case as one of the
world's most beloved lawyers. Graphic adventure
lets you do almost anything Mason would do from
cross-examining the witnesses to introducing evidence and consulting privately with the judge.
Star Trek: The Kobayashi Alternative: Simon &
Schuster. An interactive text adventure with you in
the role of Admiral James T. Kirk. Each of the
familiar characters on board will react with familiar
personality traits and will be invaluable to the successful completion of your mission.
Quations: Scholastic. Use numbers and math
operations to fill in a Scrabble-like board for
points. You can use just addition to give the
youngsters a sportin' chance or take in all four
basic math operations for a real challenge.
The Mist: Mindscape. Text adventure based on
the Stephen King story about terror in a quiet New
England town.
The Halley Project: Mindscape. The search is on
for knowledgeable pilots for top secret space explorations. Complete a series of missions, then send
a codeword to Mindscape and they'll put you onto
the main task at hand.

Chris Crawford is a veteran game designer of
titles such as Eastern Front and Excalibur. His
newest release is Balance of Power by Mindscape.
CAST SPELL (cont.)
For many years the Japanese-US software
pipeline has been practically a private Broderbund
conduit, but now there are signs that other companies may want to share the trade. The Black Onyx
deal with Sierra may be the beginning of several
such deals as a revitalized Sierra starts to branch
out again. Sir-tech is considering publishing an all
Japanese version of Wizardry. The work will
probably be done by Japanese programmers in
Japan.
The acknowledged top deal maker on the new
Orient Express is Ms. Kazue Osugi, who is president of the Oakland based Qualitas Trading
Company. In dealing with a country like Japan
where who you know is everything, Ms. Osugi can
open magical doors to all the levels of computer
software.
Japanese computer stores differ from American
computer stores in one important area - they stock
software! When you walk into a Japanese computer
store you see it crammed from floor to ceiling with
software. Not only do they carry hundreds of titles,
but they also have a depth of 15 to 20 in each title.
The dealers encourage customers to preview the
software before purchase. That form of consumer
consciousness is long, lamentably, dead in our
country. Perhaps that is one reason why the computer industry is still so dynamic in Japan.
Look for many more fine Japanese adventure
games to arrive on our shores and challenge the
charts. Perhaps Japanese software will be able to
succeed where Japanese hardware has failed so
often.

Perry Mason: The Case of the Mandarin Murder:

These are just a few of the probably 100 new
items shown at CES. Nintendo even offered an
entirely new game system. Computers certainly
aren't dying out and neither are the games.

AMIGA

(cont.)

can you now clearly distinguish the Knight's helmet, shield, and sword; you can even discern the
gap in his visor and the insignia on his shield.
For greater flexibility, you can reuse the sprites
to get more of them, or you can combine ("attach")
them to get sprites of up to 15 colors. If you want
still more, there are Bobs (short for "blitter objects"
but perhaps not unrelated to the fact that seemingly
every other person at Amiga -- including R. J.
Mical, who wrote most of the sprite/Bob firmware
-- is named "Bob"), which can be thought of as
software sprites. While not as fast as real, hardware
sprites, Bobs are essentially unlimited in size,
shape, number, and color.
Sound on the Amiga actually lives up to its
graphics. There are four separate audio channels,
each of which can do a good job of matching the
total sound output of an Atari 800 or C-64. More
to the point, real-world sounds are possible for the
first time: you can tape a song, a crash, a speech;
digitize the sounds; and store and replay the results
on an Amiga -- and it will sound like the original.
It's not true Hi-Fi, but it's certainly the equal of
anything you get out of your TV set. Equally revolutionary is the fact that the channels can be
grouped as two stereo pairs. In addition to music in
stereo, this allows you to fire a missile from one
side of the screen to the other -- and have the
sound of the missile follow along.
As a final treat, speech synthesis -- not in ROM
but on disk -- is standard on the Amiga. No programming is required. One program translates into
phonemes any text you type in; another takes those
phonemes and renders it as speech. You can even
play around with the sound of the voice if you
want.
CONCLUSIONS
While I have left out more goodies than I have
mentioned, it must surely be obvious that the
Amiga includes all the tools -- memory, storage,
sound, graphics -- to do every kind of computer
game there is (and some that don't exist...yet). For
the first time, designers can worry about straining
the limits of their imagination rather than the limits
of their chosen machine. For the first time, you
can buy (for less than the cost of much of the
competition!) a machine that is perfectly suited to
your favorite sort of game without giving up the
capabilities necessary for other kinds. If this combination does not spark a computer
game/videogame Renaissance, nothing will.
You don't even have to give up respectability.
For the first time, a machine designed with games
in mind was also designed to be the best microcomputer on the market. Since you can hook it up
to your TV, stereo, or VCR, and since it makes
possible better word processors as well as better
games, it virtually defines the term "home computer." Described variously as a "Mac-killer" and a
"Sun-killer", the Amiga has the capability (as unlikely as it may be) to replace every micro on the
market. At very least it has the capability to
produce the biggest avalanche of trade-ins the
industry has ever seen.

There is a hitch: software. No new machine is
going to have the range of software available on a
successful computer two or three years old.
This is clearly only a temporary problem.
Although the first programmers are having as tough
a time as the early Mac developers (and for much
the same reasons), the program deluge is coming
sooner than you think. Software companies are
looking for a hardware savior to stimulate the market, and the consensus nominee is Amiga. Every
programmer I know wants one for a personal toy,
and some companies are already having trouble
getting people to work on anything else.
There should be dozens of products available
this fall in plenty of time for Christmas, but (for
different reasons) two game companies should lead
the pack. Thanks to a strong, early commitment,
within the next two months Electronic Arts alone
will be publishing more than a dozen new products
for the Amiga: games and construction sets, music
programs and productivity tools, new titles and enhanced versions of previously released products.
(No doubt someone will complain about my mentioning this, but, yes, ARCHON and Archon II:
ADEPT will be among them.) Since text adventures are relatively easy to convert, I would also
expect Infocom's full line to be available almost
immediately.
What else will be available in the same time
frame I'm not sure, but there will be enough products -- and enough exciting products -- to ensure
that the limiting factor in Amiga Christmas sales
will be Commodore's ability to keep up with demand.
Following the convergence of programmers and
the conversion to the Amiga (within 6-12 months)
of just about everything already on the Mac, an
unprecedented wave of standardization will center
on 68000 machines in general and the Amiga in
particular. By Christmas of 1986, 8-bit machines
won't be sold outside antique stores, and only the
most ossified of East Coast corporations will still be
buying IBM PCs.
As an interesting corollary, assembly language,
the gaming standard of the first half of the 80s, is
doomed -- partly by chip and machine incompatibility, but mostly by time: writing 256K programs
in assembler is not a job; it's a career. The language of choice for the next few years is clearly C.
(BASIC's been obviously too slow for five years;
FORTH is bass-ackwards and, on the evidence, a
software black hole; PASCAL is just a constipated
C.) The fact that C is, for practical purposes, the
Amiga's native language, will just make the
changeover that much faster.
The personal computer revolution has been
stalled for a couple of years for reasons that are no
big secret: marketplace confusion, uninspiring software, lack of standardization. Computer companies
have been the obvious scapegoats: software developers could blame hardware limitations and conversion difficulties; adherents of incompatible micros could blame manufacturers for not coming up
with anything that deserved to be a standard.
With the arrival of the Amiga, everyone just ran
out of excuses.
Copyright 1985 by Jon Freeman

DISPATCHES (cont.)

ULTIMA (cont.)

for anyone involved in software or game design. In
fact, it is so well written and so informative that I
would recommend it to anyone interested in communication in general.

just a click of the mouse initiates a helpful pause
in the action. About half of the screen consists of
the map window; other windows display a command journal, the character's status, and the character's possessions.
While faithfully translating Richard Garriott's
original program, Sierra On-Line's Bob Heitman
has made good use of the Mac's user interface.
Players can easily access the pull-down menus to
choose armor, weapons, and spells, and may rapidly
select game commands such as attack, transact,
steal, bribe, launch, view, and resurrect. The
graphics are sharp, and the lack of color is not a
significant deficiency. The sound consists of irritating static, but it can be toggled off.
Although ULTIMA II is an exciting -- even
indispensable -- addition to any Mac owner's game
library, this version unfortunately contains a number of atrocious misspellings ("paralized," "caugh")
and bugs: Female characters undergo an irreversible
sex change when their attributes are modified; certain guards are immobile and cannot be attacked;
the display flickers when new items are obtained;
provisions are not consumed when traveling by
frigate, plane, or rocket. It is also very difficult to
distinguish villages, especially when they are situated near a forest. It is hoped that Sierra On-Line
will soon correct the minor problems that prevent
ULTIMA II from being an otherwise flawless game.
Copyright Patricia Fitzgibbons, 1985. All rights
reserved.

There is no way I can do justice in a short column to the material Heckel covers. However, I will
mention a few of the fascinating things I learned
from his book. Heckel chose filmmaking as the
ideal art form for teaching software folks about
communication. Apparently, filmmaking went
through a transition from an engineering discipline
to an art form much like software design is doing
now. Thomas Edison, the inventor of filmmaking
technology, said at one time "Eight minutes on a
single story, it won't sell. People want variety. At
least four or five subjects on every eight minute
reel." From Heckel:
Movies did not flourish until the engineers lost control to... the communications
craftsmen. The earliest filmmakers did little
more than point the camera at an interesting
event and turn the crank. If one person can
be credited with inventing the film as art it
is D. W. Griffith. With "Birth of a Nation"
filmmaking became what it is today - the
art and craft of using film to communicate
to an audience. Friendly software design is
in much the same state that filmmaking was
at the time of "Birth of a Nation". To make
our products useful to new audiences, we
have to identify and develop the equivalents
of the filmmaker's techniques--close-up,
moving shot, editing and so on. We already
have some of these techniques - menus and
cursor control, for example - but just having them is not enough; many of Griffith's
techniques were first used by others. Even
more important, we have to learn to use our
techniques to communicate more effectively
to our users. We can only do this by changing our perspective of software design from
WHAT the software does to HOW it does it-from an engineer's perspective to an
artist's.

Not bad stuff! The only point I would like to
add is that by the very fact of describing software
(game) design as a communication craft, we place
the responsibility for effectively communicating on
the originator. Almost every game designer has had
at least one product that failed in the marketplace.
Although we would love to claim that the audience
"just didn't get it", we know better. In any case, it's
more appropriate for game designers to work
smarter than for game players to settle for less!

Dan Bunten is the author of Computer
Quarterback, Cartels & Cutthroats, and Cytron
Masters available from Strategic Simulations. He is
the lead designer of the Ozark Softscape group that
wrote M.U.L.E., Seven Cities of Gold and Africa
available from Electronic Arts.

THE RAILROAD WORKS

The major trend in model railroading
over the past few decades has been toward
smaller and smaller scales, reflecting the
increasingly cramped quarters most of us
inhabit. The Railroad Works (TRW) from
CBS Software takes this trend about as far
as it can go, compressing an entire model
railroad construction kit into the space of
a floppy disk. We might call this "binary
gauge". Some severe design compromises
were necessary to compress the three-dimensional world of model trains into the
two-dimensional environment of the computer display screen. Nevertheless, this is a
solidly crafted and highly entertaining
product.
The best entertainment software usually combines elements of creative imagination with the competitive play features
of hand-eye coordination and reaction

time. TRW is extremely flexible in this
respect. You can create your own model
train layout from scratch, and operate for
the sheer joy of going "choo-choo", or you
can call up a ready-made array of track
and scenery from the disk, and play for
points as you race to deliver boxes of software, tanks of water, cattle and carloads of
passengers.
On the 48K Apple version, the program has an unusually long loading time.
Your wait is rewarded with a nice bit of
music An opening menu prompts you to
select joystick, mouse or keyboard cursor
control. You really need a joystick or
mouse, the keyboard is too slow. The main
menu selections include: Construct,
Operate, Play Game, Save, Load, Clear
Layout and Change Engine and Cars.
To construct a layout, you move the
cursor to lay track, position scenery and
locate your factories, depot water tanks
and similar economic assets. The C-64
version has a richer selection of scenery
and graphics. Any layout you create can
be named, saved to disk and later recalled.
The trains themselves can only be described as cute. You have a choice of 19th
Century steam or modern diesel-electric
locomotives and corresponding freight,
tank, cattle and passenger cars. Throttle
control and switching are handled very
nicely. You select the engine throttle icon,
which gives you a throttle display indica-

tor at the bottom of the screen. You then
use the joystick to move between Reverse,
Stop and Forward. Your locomotive, and
everything attached, moves as you command. To throw a switch, you position the
cursor at the junction of two tracks and
click the joystick button. Loading and
unloading cargo is accomplished in the
same way, with some very clever animation effects. For example, to unload freight
cars a tiny fork lift truck comes out and
carries away boxes.
By selecting the map icon, you can
view a schematic layout of all twelve
screens, with the depots and the current
locations of your two trains indicated.
Collisions are possible, but utterly
harmless. The trains just stop, there are
no derailments in binary gauge.
TRW is not a complete simulation of
railroading, or even of model railroading,
but it is great fun. It is a creative, non-violent entertainment. The C-64 and IBM
versions are rather better than the Apple
version. Younger users may need a bit of
help and encouragement before they get
the hang of moving among the many options and functions. Boot up, and all
aboard! Apple, C-64, IBM.
Mike Markowitz
[Ed. Note: Mike is Games Editor for
Microtimes magazine and has had reviews
published in the US Naval Institute
Proceedings and other publications.]

SIX-GUN SHOOTOUT

Tuco's smile was a mixture of annoyance and amusement. He was unaccustomed enough to hot baths to resent the
intrusion of any member of the male sex
into his private paradise, but it struck his
sadistic sense of humor to think of the interloper's expression when he looked behind the screen and found the tub empty.
Tuco tensed his finger gently back on the
trigger as the one-armed would-be assassin peered around the screen to find his
target absent from the tub and a lead "No
Trespassing" sign headed for his chest. A
look of disbelief was permanently etched
upon his visage as his form fell into the
tub and his own blood turned the bathtub
water into a rusty liquid cesspool of death.
Such is the opening encounter of one of
the scenarios of Six-Gun Shootout (SG),
one of the latest releases from SSI. SG is a
game of man-to-man combat in the days
of the "Wild West" with an appearance
reminiscent of Galactic Gladiators. The

game consists of ten scenarios based on the
"Wild West" of Hollywood and popular
legend with a modicum of history thrown
in. The object of the game is to survive,
not necessarily to use the historically
correct weapon in the exact historical
locale. For example, the "Gunfight at the
0. K. Corral" actually takes place in the
corral for the scenario. However the local
Tombstone newspaper published eyewitness reports that made it clear that the
gunfight took place in the street outside
the corral (the intersection of Third and
Fremont) and local historian John Myers
notes that the bad guys ended up holed up
in C. F. Fly's photography studio (DOC
HOLLIDAY. Lincoln, Nebraska: University
of Nebraska Press, 1955, p. 141).
Nevertheless, the scenarios are challenging and worth playing. SG also offers a
campaign game in which the player can
create and arm a "personal character" and
attempt to have him survive all ten scenarios (Hint: In order to accomplish this,
the player should definitely be a "good
guy", otherwise he will not likely survive
the "Shootout at Stinking Spring" scenario
where Pat Garrett parlayed a 12-5 advantage into the death of "Billy the Kid.").
Although the game mechanics are similar to those in Galactic Gladiators, SixGun's mechanics are smoother. The capacity for hidden movement is an improvement that is quite useful and impressive. Each character is also able to use
"cover" more effectively as the options of
allowing the characters to be prone, kneel
or stand affects line of sight differently
than the line of sight in the earlier game.

The game also has a "View" command
which allows each character to test the line
of sight against the other characters prior
to ordering a character to shoot at a target. Unlike the earlier game of man-toman combat, SG isn't very flexible in creating one's own scenarios. The earlier
game had a tremendous capacity for designing scenery and characters to fit fictional situations. In SG, there is no built
in mechanism for creating such scenarios,
only modifying the existing ten scenarios.
It is to be hoped that if SG is a successful
game in sales that such a "construction
kit" might be available as an additional
diskette. Otherwise, SG is a superior game.
Each scenario involves the movement
and combat of two "teams": "The Good
Guys" and "The Bad Guys." The scenarios
include: "The Gunfight at the 0. K.
Corral,"; "The Good, Bad, The Ugly"; "Rio
Bravo"; "Shootout at Stinking Spring";
"The Battle of Ingalls"; "The Dalton's
Demise"; "El Siette Magnifico"; "Northfield
Nightmare"; "The Treeing of Placid"; and
"Indian Raid." The first, fourth, fifth, sixth
and eighth listed scenarios are based on
historical situations. The second, third and
seventh are based on recognizable movie
situations. The final two are generic
"might have happened" scenarios.
Depending on preference, the player could
end up controlling Wyatt Earp, Billy the
Kid, Jessie James, Doc Holliday, Pat
Garrett, or The Man with No Name
(Blondie).
The commands are simple. Each char-

Continued on pg. 47

PEEK (cont.)

Sierra On-Line
Sierra On-Line Building
Coarsegold, CA 93614
209-683-6858
CHAMPIONSHIP BOXING: This one
got the gang in the office all worked
up. Sharp graphics and good feel for
the sport of boxing. You are given a
choice of 54 boxers, ranging from John
L. Sullivan (1885) to Marvelous
Marvin Hagler. You can also create
your own boxers. You can choose to
fight in an arcade mode, with each
move and punch entered, or simulation
mode, in which you select a strategy
for your boxer at the beginning of each
round (go for the body; protect your
head; go for the knockout; etc). If you
find a boxer that can beat Rocky
Marciano, let us know! Jack Dempsey
came closest for us. IBM 128K.
Circle Reader Service #40

Simulations Canada
PO Box 452
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia
Canada B4V 2X6
GOLAN FRONT: A simulation of the
1973 Arab/Israeli war, featuring the
battles in the north between Syria and
Israel. As with all Simulations Canada
games, the computer displays text
descriptions of game activities which
are followed on a map with counters.
The computer can play play either
side. Apple, C-64.
Circle Reader Service #41

Software Country
270 North Canon Dr #1297
Beverly Hills, CA 90210
213-278-8450
GOLDEN OLDIES: An esoteric entry.
A collection of original, "uncut"
software classics such as Pong,
Adventure, Life and Eliza. For trivia
fans, the president of Software
Country is Les Crane of '60s television
and winner of a Grammy for
"Desiderata". Many computers. $29.95.
Circle Reader Service #42

Strategic Simulations
883 Stierlin Road
Bldg A-200
Mountain View, CA 94043

Circle #43

MECH BRIGADE: Advanced tactical
level simulation, based on modern
weaponry. Pits Soviet vs NATO forces
using approximately 45 different
vehicles,
plus
guided
missiles,
helicopters and artillery. Game
structure is virtually identical to
KAMPFGRUPPE. Four historical
scenarios plus the ability to create
scenarios, including designing your
own terrain features. This one is
already a best-seller and deservedly so.
Apple & C-64. $59.95.
COMPUTER QUARTERBACK: This
is the second edition of CQ and packs
several added options. A Pro Draft
allows you to create a team in your
own image, there are additional plays
(36 offensive plays, 24 defenses) and
enhanced artificial intelligence. The
Robot Team will "learn" your
tendencies and make adjustments.
Solid sports product. Many computers.
Joystick/paddle required. $39.95.

COLONIAL CONQUEST: Arrived just
before deadline and is getting a lot of
play. Strategic game covering the
period of colonial expansion (late
1800's on). Choose one of six countries
and attempt to conquer the entire
world. The computer will play any or
all of the countries. Tax your lands
and use the money for espionage,
subversion, economic aid or simply
buying armies and fleets. Excellent
scrolling color graphics. Joystick
control. Atari & C-64. $39.95.
Strategic Studies Group
1747 Orleans Ct.
Walnut Creek, CA 94598
415-932-3019
REACH FOR THE STARS (SECOND
EDITION): Takes an already popular
game and makes it better. Enhanced
computer opponents, limited
intelligence, random game generation,
improved (and slick) player aids,
variable victory conditions and an
improved menu structure. We liked the
first edition and the enhancements
make this one of the best space games
around. Apple & C-64. $45.00.
Circle Reader Service #44

SPORTS (cont.)
After much advance publicity, Gamestar has
finally released On-Track Computer Model Car
Racing. The game is a disappointment. The game
pales by comparison with every computer racing
game I've ever seen on the market.
There are 10 tracks included, most modeled after famous layouts. You view the game from the
overhead perspective with extremely spartan
graphics. There is no such thing as a spin out, only
a trip off the road and into the grass, which only
slows you down. When two cars collide they merely
do several rotations and go their merry way.
There are three characteristic drivers to assign to
the computer or take yourself. The races can be
against time only, against the computer or
head-to-head. Races can be five or 10 laps or endurance
races of either a simulated 12 or 24 hours.
Either way it is a test of endurance just to play
this game for more than 15 minutes at a stretch. It's
not that the game is too easy, for racing against a
computer foe for 10 laps when you must shift your
own gears is indeed difficult, but there just isn't
much substance to the game. I guess even a company with the fine reputation of Gamestar can
"miss" once in a while.
Next time we'll peek at The Great American
Cross Country Road Race by Activision, the
General Manager's disk for Micro League Baseball
(if they ever get it out) and a supplemental course
disk for SSI's Professional Tour Golf.

The Commodore Key
Roy Wagner

SOUND AND FURY
SAY WHAT?
Recently, we have been seeing quite a lot of new software
adding speech to the list of game features. Very handy for
spelling programs and adding an interesting new dimension to
games, the C-64 easily lends itself to this capability. The first
major product which came out was S.A.M. (Software Actuated
Mouth). It gave the computer the capability to speak and the
user the ability to add that capability to their written software. It showed that it could be done with NO add-on hardware. It was all done with the magic of software and the SID
chip in the C-64.
Then came other implementations. Ghostbusters from Activision and Impossible Mission from Epyx have their moments
of speech. Now several games are using it. Many implementations are still crude and certainly sound like computer generated voices, but others are now sounding very good. Kennedy
Approach, from MicroProse has some good speech. The most
impressive voices I have heard recently are those of Barbie and
Ken in the Barbie game from Epyx. These voices sound very
clear and realistic: as if tape-recorded. I hope these represent
the new level of speech which can be expected from digitized
sound, as opposed to the current computer simulated patterns.
I should mention that the Barbie game is not recommended, except to hear the voice. Young kids (under ten) may
love it, but it will drive anyone else insane. The game is very
simple and terribly frustrating. The "buy" ethic and male
chauvinism of the game is too much for most people.
FAST, FASTER, FASTEST
In order to speed up C-64 disk access, several software
implementations are available; Kwik Load, Turbo 64 and even
one published by Compute magazine. When these work, they
are great: but they have to be loaded into memory somewhere.
That somewhere is often the same somewhere that your favorite game uses for code. As a result of these conflicts, many
new games incorporate fast load code with the program itself.
Another method of speeding up disk access with the 1541
Commodore drive is to use a fast load cartridge. While there
are now several available, I have only used Fast Load from
Epyx. It is an excellent product which is not only compatible
with most software but includes several handy features, such
as "wedge commands" to simplify disk commands, file and copy
programs and a machine language monitor. There are all accessible from a menu and do not require SYS commands to implement. If there is a conflict with the software the cartridge
can easily be disabled with a single command. A final method
to speed disk access is by installing modified ROM chips in the
C-64 and 1541. The best implementation I know of is a product
called Flash, by Skyle's Electric Works. If your ROMs are not
soldered in then installation is technical but fairly easy with
clearly written instructions. Included is a switch for each ROM
that permits you to return to your original ROMs if any problems occur. Some programs have a problem loading at the
higher speeds, Flash can slow down access with a software
command. The product includes several utility commands and
"wedge" which can be brought into use by a SYS command
giving you simplified disk commands. I have found Flash to be
compatible with nearly all software. In terms of price, the
Fast Load cartridge, at $25-35 is a bargain and a best buy for
anyone. Flash costs about $90 but offers multiple machine
discounts. Many dealers will install it for about $25. If you
seriously need fast loading all the time, I highly recommend
Flash.

GAME OF THE YEAR
Computer Gaming World proudly announces the COMPUTER GAMING
WORLD AWARDS which are to be
awarded to the best war, strategy, adventure, and action games of the past year.
As with our popular R.I.D. rating system, you, our readers, will make the actual
selections.
The staff of CGW has compiled a list
of nominees for BEST GAME in each of
four categories. Please use the RID card
opposite page 9 of this issue to enter your
votes on these games. Using the first five
spaces on the RID card, place the corresponding letter for the game of your choice
in the appropriate space. In space five go
back through the list of nominees and select the letter which corresponds to your
choice for BEST GAME OVERALL.

Please mail your ballot before
Sept. 27, 1985.

RID #21 (use card at page 9)
On this page a number of games are
listed for evaluation. When evaluating a
game consider such things as PRESENTATION (graphics, sound, packaging,
documentation); GAME DESIGN (design,
playability, interesting?); LIFE (does the
game wear well?)
For each game you rate place a 1
(terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next to
the appropriate number. Leave blank any
game which you have not played enough
to have formed an opinion.

SIX GUN

(cont.)

acter may: ready a weapon; load a weapon:
fire; move according to an 8 position grid;
stand; become prone; kneel; use dynamite;
and/or view potential lines of sight. Each
character phases by move segments according to a formula for character movement rate combined with weapon movement rate. The character movement rate is
not static, being modified by such things
as health condition and body position.
SG is an relatively simple, fast-moving
and enjoyable game. It is satisfying and
clear-cut in its determination of victory
points and victory. One only wonders if
the allowable adjustments to the ten scenarios will allow it to have as long a shelf
life as previous SSI games. Apple, Atari,
C-64. $39.95.
Johnny Wilson

Vote for the
Game of the Year
on Page 41

This issue's RID Ratings constitute the next step
in our continuing effort to make this information
as useful as possible. We have divided the games
into two groups - Strategy and Adventure/Action to avoid the problem of comparing apples and
oranges.
We have also noted the number of times each

game has been rated and the number of times each
game has made the Top Ten. The "Rating" is an
average of all scores in all RIDs for that particular
game.
Two notes of interest: Kampfgruppe received
the highest rating yet seen for a strategy game; the
Wizardry series (with three entries) has been rated
30 times, rating in the Top Ten 29 times!

