September 1988 Number 51

Features
The Politics of War

12

Two Strategy Games from Japan / Arneson & Brooks

Campaign '88

14

A Trio of Political Election Games / Wyatt Lee

Wings of Fury

18

Arcade Action in World War II / William W. David

The President Is Missing!

22

Cosmi's Anti-terrorist Adventure / David M. Wilson

Global Commander

23

Datasoft's Geopolitical Challenge / M. Evan Brooks
PT-109
Spectrum Holobyte's PT Boat Simulation / Bob Proctor

24

Neuromancer: Sneak Preview

28

Cyberpunk Comes to the Computer / Johnny L. Wilson

William Gibson: Interview

30

The Hugo Winner Looks At "Neuromancer"

Rommel

32

SSG's North African Scenarios / Jay Selover
U.M.S.: Another Look
Evan Brooks Examines Pluses and Minuses

38

Dr. Dumont's Wild P.A.R.T.I.

40

Scorpion's Tale Offers Hints / Scorpia

Gettysburg: The Amiga Conversion

42

View From A Playtester

Departments
Taking A Peek
Letters
The Rumor Bag
Video Gaming World (Katz, Kunkel, Worley)
Reader Input Device
CGW Hall of Fame
100 Games Rated

4
8
20
50
55
55
56

Taking A Peek

Avalon Hill
4517 Harford
Baltimore, MD 21214

Broderbund Software
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903-2101

Compu-Quote
6914 Berquist Avenue
Canoga Park, CA 91307

THE CIVIL WAR: 1861-1865:
American Civil War buffs who have
longed for a strategic level approach to
the "War Between the States" will be interested in this computerized version of
the popular Victory Games boardgame.
Steve Estvanik, programmer of AH's
Ram! (Ancients Naval Conflict),
designed the computer version. One intriguing feature is the ability to save battle results and print them out later for an
afterbattle report. The game utilizes the
actual map as reprinted from the
boardgame, so the spartan on-screen
graphics are functional, not pretty. The
game runs on 128K with CGA card. IBM
($35.00). Circle Reader Service Card #1.

SHUFFLEPUCK CAFE: So, you're
the "top gun" around at air hockey and
you wish you could find a little fresh
blood? Why not trundle over to the
"Shufflepuck Cafe" and handle some
otherworldly competition. This Macintosh product features great sound and
smooth animation. Essentially, players
can use the mouse to play distinctive
computer opponents at air hockey. Mac
($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card #2

CARD/FAX: Although this product is
not a game, those who follow the "grand
old game" of baseball will probably be interested. Card/Fax is a database of
baseball cards and values for the serious
collector. Entry of data is very user-friendly. The user simply types in the "Topps"
card number, condition, and year. The
computer calls up player name and
value. The program can also tabulate
the total value of your collection or be a
valuable cross-reference for determining
the value of anticipated purchases. The
program supports a two floppy drive system, but using a hard disk is highly
recommended. IBM or Macintosh
($95.00) A preview package is available
for $15.00. Circle Reader Service Card
#4.

TYPHOON THOMPSON: SEARCH
FOR THE SEA CHILD: Airheart, the
fast action arcade game with over and
under the sea action, was a tremendous
success on the 128K Apple II machines.
Now, the game is available in a deluxe
version on the Atari ST. As "Typhoon
Thompson," player attempts to
maneuver through and outwit the wily
Sea Sprites that live in the archipelagoes
of the Aguar's island system. Atari
520/1040 ST ($34.95). Circle Reader
Service Card #3.

DataSoft
19808 Nordhoff Place
Chatsworth, CA 91311
COSMIC RELIEF: Cosmic craziness
is the assumption underlying this actionoriented game. After all, you are trying
to locate the fellow who invented the
famous "Swiss Army Farm Animal" (the
one that can be used as a cow, goat, or
even, chicken). Alert adventurers will try
to solve the mystery of Professor
Renegade's whereabouts based on clues
like an Ultra-Dimension Camera built
out of old pipe cleaners, a steel-wool
pad, and a used copy of J.D. Salinger's
"Catcher in the Rye." Atari ST ($34.95), C64/128 ($24.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #5.

Epyx
600 Galveston Dr.
Redwood City, CA 94063
HOME VIDEO PRODUCER: Another
presentation tool for home video directors who want to customize and polish
their productions, this creativity product
allows users to personalize ten different

video sequences. If the user wants to be
more creative, he/she may utilize the
construction kit to introduce borders,
typefaces, scenic screens, or one of 75
different images from a library of color
graphics. Apple II, C-64/128, IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service Card #6.

Apple II series, IBM ($59.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #8.

METRO CROSS: This fast-moving
European import (from U.S.Gold) offers
the chance to put the "race" back in the
"rat race." Think of this game as an
urban obstacle course through a
metropolitan subway. Players attempt to
avoid slime, barrels (presumably toxic
chemical drums?), potholes and rats.
The logic breaks down with careening
tires, hurdles, mysterious placement of
springboards and unattended
skateboards, however. Atari ST, C64/128 ($24.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #7.

SPACE M+A+X: The new version
(2.1) of this extremely sophisticated
simulation allows for both a hard disk installation or a floppy disk back-up, offers
an interactive tutorial, and offers more
and clearer project summary screens.
This product is used by both engineering and business management courses
in U. S. universities, but the lowest level
of difficulty has been made easier for the
novice player. The new version also offers 9 (instead of 1) game saves and a
"Save and Continue" option. IBM with
CGA ($59.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #9.

PRINT MAGIC: This creativity tool
boasts 15 fonts, five built-in greeting
card templates, a scratch pad template,
an idea pad template, and two graphics
disks of pre-designed icons. Of course,
users can create their own designs, as
well. Three separate disks are included.

Final Frontier Software
18307 Burbank Blvd #108
Tarzana, CA 91356

Leisure Genius
c/o Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404

Conversions
Received
For the Amiga:
Questron 11 (SSI)
Solitaire Royale (SpctHolo)

For the Apple II:
King's Quest III (Sierra)
requires 128K

For the Apple IIGS:
Mixed-Up Mother Goose (Sierra)

For the Atari 8-bit:
Video Title Shop:
Graphics Companion ll (Datasoft)

For the Atari ST:
Speed Buggy (Data East)
Warship (SSI)
For the IBM:

Ultima V (Origin)
Wargame Construction Set (SSI)
Warship (SSI)

For the C-64/128:
Bubble Ghost (Accolade)
Napoleon In Russia (Datasoft)
letters for you (Polarware)
numbers count (Polarware)
opposites attract (Polarware)
The Spy's Adventures in
North America (Polarware)

MONOPOLY: This is the authorized
computer version of the famous Parker
Brothers' Real Estate Trading Game. Besides quality rendered graphics which
replicate the board perfectly, the addition
of computer opponents makes this an
interesting addition to a family computer
game library. The computer opponent
doesn't make stupid trades like many of
the "Public Domain" Monopoly
programs, either. C-64/128 ($29.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #10.
SCRUPLES: If your idea of a moral
dilemma is whether to watch Oprah or
Phil, this may not be the game for you.
If you are interested in learning about
people, society, and even yourself,
though, you can be challenged by the
computer version of this popular
boardgame. Up to ten people can play,
but there is a solitaire version which utilizes a group of 64 different computer
characters. Atari ST ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #11.

Mastertronic
Mesa Business Centre #9G
711 W. 17th Street
Costa Mesa, CA 92627
SPACE RANGER: The title character
in this arcade game from Amiga
programmer, Robert Clardy, must not
only defeat a xenophobic race (as distasteful as the fabled "Three Clawed
Tranctrarimian Devil Dogs of Cirrius
Gamma" according to the documentation), but avoid the indigenous fauna
(like Tyranasaurion, Snub Beaked
Turtles, Hoppappes, and Icerunners), as
well. The animation seems crudely
done, but the landscaped backgrounds
are interesting. Amiga ($). Circle Reader
Service Card #12.

Melbourne House
Mesa Business Centre #9G
711 W. 17th Street
Costa Mesa, CA 92627
JOHN ELWAY'S QUARTERBACK:
In spite of the celebrity endorsement,
this is simply a quality conversion of the
coin-op arcade hit, Quarterback. The
graphics are extremely well-done and
the action is fast-paced. The IBM version
even features digitized speech. The
player's manual is concise and readable
and a "Stats Form" template has been
supplied for those who wish to
photocopy it. C-64/128, IBM ($34.99)
with Apple II and IIGS due later this year.
Circle Reader Service Card #13.

Mindscape, Inc.
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, IL 60062
INDIANA JONES AND THE
TEMPLE OF DOOM: "Why does it always have to be snakes?" you'll be
wondering as you start this action adventure game based on the successful film.
Like its namesake, this product is intended to be a non-stop action rollercoaster through a serpentine plot line.
Those who liked the original game's
look and interface will enjoy this treatment, as well. C-64/128 ($34.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #14.

Patch Panel Software
11590 Seminole Blvd.
Seminole, FL 34648-3204
FIGMENT: THE IMAGINATION
PROCESSOR: Have you ever played a
game of interactive fiction and felt like
you could have done it better? Ever imagined that you would like to do a game
based on a short story, novel, or movie,
but knew that the licensing requirements would be too expensive? Ever

wanted to design a game that only you
or your friends might want to play? This
product functions as a construction set
(or development tool) for doing just that.
It allows you to design your own adventures. The price is higher than that for
games because this will be used by diskbased magazines to generate material,
by a trial lawyer to test cases, etc. IBM
($95.00). Circle Reader Service Card
#15.

Rainbird Software
3885 Bohannon Dr.
Menlo Park, CA 94025
ENLIGHTENMENT: Hasrinax the
Druid faces Acamantor and his demon
princes in this joystick-driven adventure
game. The player must conjure "elementals" to fight for the Druid in order to
progress toward the Dark Mage's
domain. Those who fail may earn the
rating of "Orc Breath," while those who
succeed may attain the level of "Overlord." Amiga ($24.95), C-64/128
($19.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#16.

STARGLIDER II: This Amiga/Atari ST
program picks up where the original arcade game left off. The difference is that
this one allows the player to perform
combat maneuvers in the atmosphere of
a planet and soar over alien landscapes.
Faster animation teams up with solid
three-dimensional graphics to enhance
game play in the sequel. Amiga, Atari
ST ($44.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#17.

Scorpion
19 Harbor Drive
Lake Hopatcong, NJ 07849
PHANTASM: What happens when a
destitute, wandering one step ahead of
the tax collector, is transplanted into a
situation where he can save the world?
That's the thesis behind this arcade
game where players must choose which
of eight regions of the earth to save first.
After successfully saving a region, the
player can dock and decide on the next
section. Amiga, Atari ST ($34.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #18.

Strategic Studies Group
P.O. Box 261
Drummoyne 2047 NSW
Australia
DECISIVE BATTLES OF THE
AMERICAN CIVIL WAR, VOL. II:
GAINES MILL.TO CHATTANOOGA:
When modified command rules are combined with a proven and venerable
game system, players get a challenging
strategy game from a command perspective. This is the heritage of SSG games
and Decisive Battles II is the latest offering in that tradition. This is certainly an
incredibly versatile and formidable game
system. Apple II, C-64/128 ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service Card #19.
REACH FOR THE STARS: THIRD
EDITION: The third edition of this
popular space conquest game includes
the original scenario plus a new
scenario and some new advanced game
options. Want to include natural disasters, solar debris or xenophobes in
your campaign? Want to allow hidden

victory conditions or set up your own
task forces? Want to enhance the computer opponent to make it even tougher
to beat? The new edition allows you to
do this and more. Apple IIGS with 512K,
C-64/128, IBM, and Mac ($45.00). Circle
Reader Service Card #20.

Taito Software
267 W. Esplanade
North Vancouver, B.C.
Canada V7M 1A5
A.L.C.O.N.: Think of a Zaxxon look
and feel with more variety in the screens
and you get the picture of A.L.C.O.N.
Like other Taito games, this one is
based off a successful coin-op approach
to the subject. Atari ST ($39.95), C64/128 ($29.95), IBM ($34.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #21.
ARKANOID: The fast-paced, multiple
screen version of breakout that is incredibly addictive has come to the C-64
with tremendous success. See the
review of the Amiga version from discovery games in CGW #44 for more
details. Apple II, C-64/128 ($29.95), Atari
ST, IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #22.
BUBBLE BOBBLE: What do you get
for all your trouble, a Bub or a Bob to
burst your bubble? Bub and Bob are the
heroes in this clever approach to a
shoot-'em-up maze chase game. In this
game, the players blow bubbles to capture their foes and burst the bubbles to
dispose of them. The coin-op version
was number one in Europe for more
than three months in a row. Apple II, C64/128 ($34.95), Amiga, Atari ST, IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#23.
RASTAN: The hero's sword operates
slower than in the coin-op version, but
otherwise this conversion seems faithful
to the original. This fantasy/action adventure follows a barbarian warrior through
a mythical land filled with classic
monsters of legend. The object of the
game is to face the mighty castle king.
C-64/128 ($34.95), Amiga, Atari ST,
IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #24.

Be Sure To Fill Out
Your R.I.D. Card

RENEGADE: Another street fighter adventure game, this conversion of the
coin-op game allows players to try to be
the baddest dude on the streets. You,
too, can become a subway avenger in
this action game, but you'll have to use
your fists and feet to do it. Watch out,
the computer opponents know how to
gang up on you and they don't fight
fair. Apple H, C-64/128 ($34.95), Amiga,
Atari ST, IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service Card #25.

Letters

Kaiserlauten, Federal Republic of Germany
I've gotten to the point where I won't
buy a game I haven't played until you
review it. I like articles that do comparisons of similar games.
D. L. Hetsko
Los Angeles, CA

Passing In Review
I just renewed my subscription to CGW
and there wasn't a bit of doubt in my
mind about doing that. I don't read your
magazine cover-to-cover, as mentioned
by some of your readers, because I have
keen interest in specific areas of computer gaming and little or no interest in
other segments of the "sport." However,
there is a lot of good stuff in each issue
that stimulates my anticipation for the
next issue. As you very well know from
your reader letters, your game critiques
are key to game customers. These are
my primary source to buy or pass it by .
.. and that's the heart of the matter. For
example, I'm a baseball fan, but I did
not like computer baseball until Earl
Weaver Baseball reached the
marketplace. . . . Your review had the information that made my "buy" decision.
A key reason that the games get better
is your reviews. I don't know how much
difficulty this gives you in dealing with
the game makers (This would make for
an interesting article!!!), but . . . my
thanks to you.
Paul Varbedian
Cliffside Park, NJ
Lately, you have published letters from
a few people who aren't too thrilled with
your magazine. Well, I wanted to tell you
personally that CGW is far and away the
most helpful, honest, and reliable computer magazine available. People are
going to have to realize that you are
trying to satisfy a very broad range of tastes. I am partial to CRPG's myself, but I
enjoy all the articles just the same. CGW
is the only magazine I know of that
keeps me glued until I've read every
word. I just wanted to voice my word of
approval and praise for a job consistently well done.
Adam Fleishman
Maplewood, NJ
Ed.: Maybe we ought to move to New
Jersey? Actually, the feeling is a little
more widespread.
Your game reviews are great! You truly
make choosing games easier. I've
bought several, mainly because of your
reviews.
Robert B. Riddle

I don't buy a game I haven't read
about! Good work!
Bill Boyer
Williamsport, PA

Torpedoing
Submarine Mythology
I recently read Mr. Battles' article on
Datasoft's The Hunt for Red October.
Mr. Battles seemed to have mixed emotions about the game and I must agree
with him. The game itself has both good
and bad points, but it is certainly not the
ultimate submarine simulation. In dealing with modern submarine warfare,
Datasoft has several misconceptions
which keep the game from portraying
an accurate representation of present
day submarine tactics and combat.
I am currently a submarine ship control specialist for Rockwell International in the Washington D.C. office. Before
taking this job, I served seven years as a
trained nuclear submarine officer. My
tours include two years at the Pentagon
in the Office of Naval Intelligence and
three years as a division officer on board
USS Sturgeon SSN 637 (a nuclear fast
attack submarine).
The game itself has several GCE's
(gross conceptual errors) which detract
from its representation of modern submarine warfare. First, I am not sure
where they came up with flack. No submarine (either US or USSR) has a towed
noisemaker. Datasoft is most likely thinking of the towed noisemakers that many
surface ships use. All submarine countermeasures are expendable, much like
chaff or flares from an airplane. This
towed noisemaker gives the boat an essentially unlimited noise making
capability. In reality, a submarine uses
noisemakers only as a last resort and
the supply on board is limited.
Although many of the tactics presented
in the manual are valid, several GCE's
show a lack of understanding about the
capabilities of the modern acoustic torpedo and how to defend against it. The
manual states that submarines can fire
torpedoes at other submarines, but normally, the defending submarine can outrun them. Submarines do not outrun
torpedoes, as such. The torpedo is

much faster than the boat. You avoid torpedoes by being smarter than they are.
The torpedo projects an acoustic cone
in front of it which, in turn, detects the
submarine. The object is not to be in
the cone long enough for the weapon
to acquire you. This requires quick
maneuvering perpendicular to the axis
of the cone. Outrunning implies a race
between the boat and the torpedo. This
makes a big difference in the tactics you
choose.
The manual also recommends running
straight at the torpedo to get inside its
minimum range. If you are close
enough to the other boat to get inside
the minimum torpedo range, you have
more problems than the torpedo. The
way an acoustic torpedo works is by
sensing noise from the ship. Believe it or
not, the worst thing you can do is head
directly at or away from the torpedo.
This gives it exactly what it needs to acquire you. A secondary factor is the location of the other submarine. In a close
quarters melee with continuously
maneuvering boats, you usually do not
have a firm idea of where the other boat
is. For that reason, a submarine commander would never intentionally close
the enemy for fear of collision. You
would attempt to open and clear datum
to regain your acoustic advantage.
As far as the presentation and
mechanics of the game, there are
several factors that detract from the
realism. For instance, on a real submarine, ESM only gives you a bearing to
the enemy radar or communications
source (actually, ESM is usually solely associated with detecting radar transmissions). In the game, however, an ESM
update gives you distance, as well as
bearing. The periscope presentation and
operation also leave much to be desired.
The periscope view looks more like
something from Tank than a submarine
periscope. It shouldn't have been that difficult to make the periscope, at least,
marginally realistic. Its operation further
hinders the player. On my IBM version,
the scope turns so slowly that it nullifies
the advantage of the scope. If you are
not already lined up on the target when
you raise the scope, you must keep the
scope up far too long to get a simple observation. You should be able to raise
the scope, find the target, get the observation, and lower the scope in under 15
seconds.
The CGW article on the game also
brings up some problems with the game
that I agree with. The article, however,
makes some misleading points. Mr. Battles states that ". . . you can turn toward
the torpedo and let it strike you without
incurring damage." Modern torpedoes

do not strike their targets. They inflict
damage by exploding near the target.
When fired at a surface ship, for instance, the torpedo explodes several feet
under the keel; lifting the ship up and
breaking the ship's back. If the torpedo
does strike the ship in the game, that is
another problem with the game.
The article talks about "ESM
(Electronic Surveillance Manual)." It is actually Electronic Surveillance Measures."
Mr. Battles goes on to say that the
game ". . seems authentic down to the
engine's hum and the 'ping ping' of
sonar." This is an example of one of the
many things that actually makes the
game less authentic. Think about it.
Nuclear submarines do not make engine noise. Even a diesel submarine
does not make noise when on its batteries. Further, sonar has not made a
pinging sound since World War II. The
contemporary noise is far from a ping.
It is more like a shifting tone.
The article states that "Naturally, use of
ESM or firing a torpedo gives away your
position." While it is true that shooting
(Submariners never say fire. Fire is hot,
makes smoke, and burns things.) a torpedo makes noise, ESM is totally passive
and cannot give away your position. It is
simply an antenna that you put up to
detect radar. It has no active emissions,
so it cannot be detected. The mast is
visible, however, and can be seen by a
passing ship or airplane.
Unlike Mr. Battles, I was actually able
to sink ships. The program may have a
glitch which keeps the ships from sinking while you are looking at them. I normally take a look, fire my torpedo, and
lower the scope. After getting a hit or
two, I come back up and can no longer
find the ship. Mr. Battles is right,
though, in pointing out the larger number of torpedoes you have to fire to get
results. It took me three torpedoes to
sink the trawler at the start of the game.
This is just another point to make about
the lack of authenticity of the game (it
also bothers me that the crew did not
get upset when I sank the trawler and
later, an Alpha Class submarine).
Some of the tactics recommended in
the article are questionable. The article
recommends use of active sonar to
detect mines and enemy. This is one of
the few points where the game really
does parallel reality. Use of active sonar
draws unfriendly units right to you. The
major axiom of submarines is never use
active sonar unless you have been
counterdetected and have to use it to
survive. The only other acceptable time
is one pulse just prior to shooting a torpedo to verify the target's range if range
is questionable. I feel the reason Mr. Bat-

ties is ". . . hitting a line of Soviet ships
blocking the pass" is the use of his active sonar. Many of the other recommendations and tactics from the article are
good.
Overall, I realize this is just a game and
authenticity is often sacrificed for
playability. Modern submarine combat,
however, is exciting enough that it
should be playable, even when it is very
authentic. I was disappointed with the
game and hope that someone will
develop a more realistic modern submarine combat simulation in the near future. I, for one, would be willing to pay
the money for it. I feel certain that many
other people feel the same way.
Glenn Kenney
Arlington, VA 22202
Ed.: We feel like such a detailed and
provocative letter deserves a detailed
and well-considered response. The
response from Datasoft follows:
I read with interest Mr. Kenney's comments on our software product, The
Hunt for Red October, in light of his
background and knowledge. Mr. Kenney
commented, in great detail, on a number of points that he felt would make
our software product more realistically
simulate the operation of a modern day
submarine. While it is true that several
aspects of our computer software game
may not fully simulate the actual workings of a submarine, one has to remember that our software product was
designed to provide home computer enthusiasts with a challenging and enjoyable entertainment experience. I do not
believe that any computer software
product actually simulates the realistic ex-

periences that one may find on a $100
million aircraft, submarine, helicopter,
battleship, or other military vehicle. What
we attempt to do with a computer
software product is provide a realistic
framework from which a computer enthusiast can enjoy the storyline and
game play of the product; to immerse
themselves in an entertaining, fantasy
world where they become the submarine
commander of the Red October. In attempting to provide this type of environment, accompanied by full hi-res
graphics, sound effects, animation, etc.,
the memory of a home computer is
often insufficient to fully simulate all the
workings of a real submarine. Unfortunately, many aspects that would greatly improve the authenticity of a software
product are just not possible because of
memory limitations. It is a fine balance
between what makes a game enjoyable
and exciting to play and what elements
are essential to convey a sense of
realism.
Notwithstanding these points, Mr. Kenney did raise a number of good points
that Datasoft will definitely attempt to
correct or add to the Apple, Apple IIGS,
Macintosh, and Atari software versions
currently under development. These versions are expected to be released in late
September.
I also wanted to comment on several
points Mr. Kenney raised in his letter.
1. Mr. Kenney commented that "I am
not sure where they came up with flack."
Actually, the term flack was used by
Tom Clancy in his book, The Hunt for
Red October, to identify the electronic
decoys used to deflect and confuse incoming sonar controlled torpedoes.

Thus, avoiding a direct hit. In Tom
Clancy's book, the use of towed
noisemakers was also an integral part of
the countermeasures used by submarines to avoid torpedo attacks. Again,
our software product was based on the
storyline taken from Tom Clancy's book
and not intended to accurately depict all
aspects of a real submarine operation.

pointed out that "A riskier proposition is
to head for the torpedo! This only works
if you're within 1000 meters of the
launching vessel. A fish doesn't have
time to arm itself within that distance.
Thus, if you ram it, it won't explode."
This point was simply made to point out
a tactic, albeit risky, that players may use.

2. Another comment made was "The
manual states that submarines can fire
torpedoes at other submarines, but normally the defending submarines can outrun them." While it is possible for a submarine to avoid a torpedo attack by outrunning the "Fish," the range or distance of the submarine from the attacker has to be sufficiently far enough away
to outrun or lose contact with the sonar
guidance device of the torpedo. We
have since corrected our instructions
(on a second printing of the manual) to
avoid any misconceptions about this
point. Our apology to Mr. Kenney and
others who felt this was inaccurate.

4. A fourth point was that ". . . on a
real submarine, ESM only gives you a
bearing to the enemy radar or communications source. In the game,
however, an ESM update gives you distance as well as bearing." This was an
element added to the game that was intended to make the game easier and
more exciting to play. Our feeling is that
if the features can be enhanced to permit better game play, why not? Adding a
distance reading certainly doesn't detract
from the game, although it is perhaps
less realistic than the real thing.

3. A third point mentioned by Mr. Kenney was, "The worst thing you can do is
head directly at or away from a torpedo."
While this may be true, we merely

5. Mr. Kenney's comments about the
periscope operation are well taken and
are one of the main priorities that we
plan to address in the upcoming versions in development.
6. In regard to the sound effects used

in the game for the "ping" of the sonar
impulse and the engine noises, which
Mr. Kenney felt to be unrealistic, we
again added these effects for the enjoyment and benefit of the game player. Although they may not be a true simulation of the real sounds on a submarine,
if one can improve upon the real thing
to enhance the enjoyment of the game
play, we feel that is the correct approach.
7. Mr. Kenney commented that "The
program may have a glitch which keeps
the ships from sinking while you are
looking at them." This is certainly not
the case. If you are viewing the ship
through your periscope and make a
direct hit, you will actually see the ship
you hit go up in smoke and sink. It
merely takes a brief time after a direct hit
for this to appear on your computer
screen. It may only require one torpedo,
at a close range, to sink an enemy ship.
However, torpedo hits from a long distance may inflict damage, but not actually sink the enemy ship. The best tactic
to sink the enemy ship is to launch your
torpedo from close range to guarantee a
direct hit that will sink it.
8. A last point on which I wish to comment is Mr. Kenney's comment that the
crew did not get upset when he sank
the trawler and Alpha Class submarine.
In Tom Clancy's book, the Red October
successfully defected to the United
States Naval Forces without firing a
single torpedo. In the software game, to
avoid all contacts with enemy ships or
mines without any type of combat or interaction would be a major drawback on
the game play itself. Again, I only wish
to point out that it is important to
balance realism with game design and
playability. We felt that allowing the Red
October to engage in battle without
causing a crew mutiny added to the
game play.
I wish to thank Mr. Kenney and Computer Gaming World for bringing this letter to my attention. I do feel that, perhaps, several of the points he raised, although technically correct, would detract
from the game play. Unfortunately, one
can not actually simulate modern submarine combat in a software product
that encompasses all of the realistic
nuances of an actual submarine. The
creativity and involvement of the player
is crucial to the game play. In that
regard, we feel that The Hunt for Red
October provides an exciting and challenging forum for computer enthusiasts
to become the commander of their very
own submarine.
Samuel Poole
President of Datasoft
Chatsworth, CA

Review

Two
I games
which effectively deal with historical periods of great
political consequence
were released for the
United States' market
in June of 1988. Both
games come from
Japan (Koei Corporation) and deal with
the unification of
countries during a
feudal era and both
games offer the sophisticated strategy player an
opportunity to balance
economic, diplomatic,
and military decisions
during a formative period
of a foreign nation. Dave
Arneson, best-known as
the co-creator of Dungeons & Dragons-,
reviews Romance of the
Three Kingdoms (Second
Century China) and Evan
Brooks, CGW's controversial wargame reviewer,
considers Nobunaga's Ambition (Sixteenth Century
Japan).

Romance
of the
Three
Kingdoms
by Dave Arneson
What do you mean Lie Yan has defected to Cao Cao?
Did / not just give him 20,000 more men and three
generals? Now, you say all has been lost! Was it not bad
enough that you advised me to marry that wretched Cao
Cao's daughter and he demanded an entire province as a
gift? My life has become wretched and your advice like the
dry wind.
—Last report of Zhang Liao, former advisor to his late
Master, Sun Quan, prepared in the year of the Rat for his
new Master, Liu Bei.

The Lessons of History
Han emperor general Tung Cho utilized a puppet to rule
the lands of China in A.D. 190. With his assassination in
A.D. 192, central authority broke down. As a result, provincial governors and generals became autonomous. Then,
war broke out between generals Cao Cao and Liu Bei in

A.D. 194. So, begins the
opening stages of

Romance of the Three
Kingdoms.
Cao Cao was successful
and became de facto
ruler in 196. He chose to
rule through a Han puppet Emperor, but the
provinces in the south
remained independent.
Still, Cao Cao's kingdom
stretched across the area
north of the Yangtze river.
In A.D. 208, he fought
a coalition of southern
provinces which led to his
defeat at the naval battle at
Red Wall. After his death in
A.D. 220, Cao Cao's son,
Cao Pi deposed the Han
emperor in order to found
the Wei Dynasty.
Now, there remained two
other kingdoms: the Shu in
the southwest and the Wu in
the southeast. The Shu were
established by Liu Bei (who
claimed descent from the
Han Dynasty). It held its
greatest time of strength and
prosperity from A.D. 223-234
under Zhu Ge Liang. The
Wu Dynasty was founded by
Sun Quan. Its greatest influence was around A.D.
250. The strife between
these three kingdoms sets
the stages for the final
scenario in Romance of the

Three Kingdoms.

The Building
Blocks of History
The product comes on two game disks and a storage disk.
It also includes the invaluable rule book and several handy
charts. It is primarily a menu-driven game with a great
wealth of rich historical detail.
Its graphics are extremely nice. Even on an amber screen,
the graphics show great detail. When most orders are executed, a picture, sometimes animated, appears and
portrays the event. These show the nature of the order
which has just been given and depicts it quite nicely. Further, each and every one of the sixty-five plus generals has
his own picture.

Romance will require some note taking during play. There
is a lot of information in this game and a player will find it
difficult to recall everything they need to know. The informa
tion is available, but looking it up all the time can be quite
tedious. Keeping a few notes will save you lots of time.
The player can govern the provinces himself or he can
authorize generals to govern provinces. In the fourth
scenario, the large kingdoms almost require players to do
that. Also, in the first scenario, when things are more

manageable, the player will want to keep control. Actually,
authorized governors do a fair job. They concentrate on
keeping the peasants happy and developing the land. The
power hungry ones will engage in covert actions against
your neighbors, though. They will do this whether you want
them to or not. Unintelligent governors oppress the
peasants and cause revolts. Keep an eye on all the governors through the "Summary of States" menu option during
your turn. A good governor needs high intelligence and
loyalty. In fact, discerning players will insure that key governors and generals will have high loyalty by giving them
regular gifts.
The economic segment of the game is weak. Players can
try to make extra gold on the rice market, but it usually not
worth the effort involved. A good deal will only net around
250 gold.

The Essence of History Creation
The goal in all of the scenarios is to conquer all of the
other provinces. This may be accomplished through war
and/or diplomacy. Wars are risky and expensive affairs. With
no zones of control, the battle situations can become very
fluid.
One of the most important military tactics is the incendiary
attack and an unusually potent tactic it is! Fire can force a
strong enemy out of a position, no matter how large he is.
Even with the expected limitation that a fire in a castle will
usually not spread, this game judges that troops in a burning area that do not evacuate that area will be totally
destroyed along with their general.
Thus, a good strategy is to seize the weather gauge and
set fires that will force the enemy to retreat. Starting a fire is
not a 100% certainty, but it is still a high probability based
on a general's "Luck" and "Experience" ratings. Fires spread
against the wind are, of course, ineffective. Otherwise, a fire
can burn in an area for several turns before burning out.
New fires can still be started in previously burned areas. All
of this strikes me as quite silly and adding very little to the
play value of the game.
Here are a few tactics that seem to work more often than
not. When one of your generals has a character weakness,
keep a close eye on him. He could go off to the opposition
in a twinkling of an eye, so do not let him do anything important. Such generals do, however, make good messengers.
Further, guard your rice and your commanding general.
Take the most reliable general and make him
commander-in-chief (with, at least, 5,000 men in tow). Then, have him
sit on top of the rice stocks for the duration of the war.
Keep him there even when it looks safe. If the war exceeds
one month, the enemy may send in reinforcements. These
might appear next to your unguarded rice. Remember, an
attacker needs a considerable superiority, both in generals
and number of troops, to take out a well-defended province
in a single month.
In addition, a balance of arms seems best provided by
using a large central force which is well-equipped in combination with one or two lighter armed, but well-trained, forces to be utilized in incendiary raids and general harassment.
The attacker needs to be certain that he has enough
generals to occupy each castle. Most castles are next to
each other, so a single general's force can "split" and occupy two castles at the same time. Nevertheless, an extra

general is useful to cover the rice and any "defections" from
your ranks.
Defending a province as a whole is easier. It is far easier to
harass the enemy with incendiary attacks, feint at his rice
and try to kill their commanding general. Do not hide in a
castle, since you can get burned out rather quickly. Learn
the "art of harassment" (how the mouse drives the elephant
mad) in order to slow down the attacker enough to cause
the campaign to go into another month. This, in turn, will
cost the enemy rice and give the defender a chance to reinforce. Remember that one of the most destructive covert actions is burning
1/3 of the
enemy's rice per
operation! Thus,
even huge
stocks of rice
can dwindle
quickly.
Beyond this,
the defender's
goal should be
to hold the
castles. If he can
capture the
enemy's rice or
remove their
commander, the
attacker is immediately forced
to retreat. An attacker must
destroy the
enemy army or
capture all the
castles in the
province in order
to win. Unfortunately, the
enemy will rarely
sit around waiting to be
destroyed. In battle, even a
small force can survive one
or two rounds of combat
with a larger one and this
provides enough time to
retreat or start a nasty fire.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
# PLAYERS:
DESIGNER:

Romance of the Three Kingdoms
IBM (5 1/4" disks - hard drive okay)
$69.95
0-8
Bill Swartz
(American Version)
Koei
Torrance, CA

PUBLISHER:

The Substance of Diplomacy
This is a game where diplomacy is just as important as
fighting battles. Diplomacy must be done in an organized
fashion with specific goals in mind. One positive goal is to
give presents to neighboring powers and reduce their
animosity toward your master to "0." This will cost around
10,000 gold, but will prevent them from attacking you.
When animosity is "0," the player should offer a daughter for
marriage. If the proposal is accepted, he can ask to receive
a province as a wedding gift! The diplomatic activities in
Romance are a whole game by themselves.
An allied or friendly "master" can be a great "Sugar
Daddy." Players can often get loans of rice and gold from
"Dad" at no interest. If one has a military alliance, "Dad" will
harass your mutual enemy. In fact, the nice thing about this
(Continued on page 31)

Survey

CAMPAIGN '88
A Survey of
Political Election
Games for the
Computer
by Wyatt Lee

Did the press expose your
candidate's speechwriter as
the screenwriter for a sleazy
soap opera? Did your
favorite candidate's opponents charge that his
aunt's brother-in-law's
cousin was treated for mental illness? Are you down in
the dumps because your
hopes for a brokered convention were flushed faster than
a Watergate plumber's alibi?
Are you tired of seeing your
candidates lower in the
polls than an overweight
bassett hound's tummy?
Well, then, strike up the
band with "Happy Days Are
Here Again!" and manage
your own presidential or
senatorial campaign. You
might even learn something
while you are stomping
those demagogues in that
"other party."

What's New,
Pres. Elect?
This is the "game" that called the 1984
presidential election "on the nose" three
years early as we reported in our very
first issue, Volume 1,
Number 1, (out of
print, but available to
anyone with a large
enough campaign contribution). Though an
earlier feature article
charged that the
demographics were
heavily oriented toward
the right (CGW 4.4, p.
17), the game is still extremely interesting and
playable. In fact, it is
even more so in its
President Elect 1988
Edition incarnation.
The roll call of candidates has been increased on both sides
of the aisle. The
Republicans can now
choose Patrick
Buchanan, George
Deukmejian, Elizabeth
Dole, Pierre Dupont,
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
Jeane Kirkpatrick, or Pat
# PLAYERS:
Robertson in addition to
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
those in the original
PUBLISHER:
game. The Democrats can
now choose Bruce Babbitt, Joseph Biden, Dale
Bumpers, Henry Cisneros, Mario
Cuomo, Michael Dukakis, Dianne
Feinstein, Geraldine Ferraro, Richard
Gephardt, John
Glenn, Albert Gore,
Gary Hart, Ernest Hollings, Lee Iacocca,
Jesse Jackson, Sam
Nunn, Charles Robb,
or Paul Simon in addition to the "cloakroom" full of candidates in the earlier
version.
In addition, the allocation of campaign
resources as "Political Action Points"
rather than "dollars" (which the original
game used) meshes better with reality.
The PAPs, as the game now refers to
them, represent organizational effort and
energy, as well as the dispersal of cam-

paign funds. As in the earlier version of
the game, play begins by deciding
whether to take a foreign trip or not.
Veteran players will not have to be
reminded that this decision is something
of a crap shoot. However, immediately
after this decision, the new version of
the game allows a candidate to choose
the level of his organizational efficiency.
This decision underscores the importance of PAPs. However, it seems less
than optimal to utilize this option and
choose a number below 100. After all,
who wants to build less than the "best"
campaign organization? The theoretical
advantage is that lower
campaign overhead
frees more funds for
campaigning. The disadvantage is that those
dollars are not spent as
effectively.
Veteran campaigners
who have played President Elect know that
the bulk of decision
points in the campaign
revolve around the judicious expenditure of
PAPs. The first decision
of each campaign week
is the amount assigned
to National Campaigning (televised speeches,
promotions, or advertisements with national impact). The documentation recommends that
candidates rarely and
only under unusual cirPresident Elect '88
Many
cumstances use fewer
0-3
than 500 PAPs per week
$24.95
Nelson Hernandez, Sr.
in this portion of the camStrategic Simulations, Inc.
paign. In reality, it is difMountain View, CA
ficult not to lose ground if
one drops below that
magic 1000 mark. [Ed.: We observed
the game's designer and publisher play
against each other and neither one
seemed willing to
drop below the 1000
PAP level.] Note that
candidates with a
higher personal magnetism glean greater
impact from this type
of campaigning.
The second
decision point of
each campaign week
is the amount of
resources slated for
Regional Campaigning (primarily media
buys and direct mailings targeted at
regional issues). There is a temptation
to utilize this strategy every week (because it is there), but the documentation
is quite correct that this strategy is most

effective when used in those regions
where most of the states are relatively
close races. The same point could be
made with regard to the third decision
point of each campaign week, Individual
State Campaigning (rallies, use of local
politicians, direct mail on local issues,
etc.). This is probably the most expensive type of campaigning, since the
manual notes that " . . . 1 PAP used in
national campaigning may swing several
thousand votes, ... 1 PAP used in state
campaigning may only swing several
hundred . . ." (p. 8). Of course, since
these are, literally, swing votes, this type
of campaigning may
also be the difference
between winning and
losing.
Of course, the most interesting part of any
campaign has to be the
schedule of public appearances. If your candidate has a high personal magnetism and
public speaking rating,
this portion of the game
will be his forte. Multiple
appearances have a
beneficial effect on any
given state's vote, but
the diminishing returns
make appearances
beyond three to five of
these in a given week
seem like mere "whistle
stops" which have little
impact on the final vote.

presidential politics: "Never debate when
you have a substantial lead." The new
version of the game allows up to six
debates.
After each campaign week, the computer adjusts the "polls" and draws a
map of the United States to reflect the
changes. This map, coupled with the
election night "boxes" that contain that
familiar message, "The computer is
projecting the state of
, " as well
as the vote count, make up the "graphic
presentations" in the game. As an election night junkie, this happens to be my
favorite portion of the game.

being "Pro Labor" and being "Pro Big
Business" had been cross-referenced. As
it is now, there is no penalty for making
promises out of both sides of a
candidate's mouth. Perhaps, though, the
game takes a more cynical attitude on
this point than the reviewer.
The second lesson to be found relates
to building a campaign organization.
This is the part that can remind players
of Monopoly. The various states are
color coded according to electoral votes.
The "Red" states have 3-8 electoral
votes; the "Yellow" states have 9-16 electoral votes; and the big "Blue" states run

President Elect 1988
Edition is a stimulating, educational, and
challenging experience
of American presidential politics. If you follow political events with
any interest at all, you
owe it to yourself to
play this game, at least,
once.

Promises!
Promises!

Even though CGW's
"Taking A Peek" on
this game called Campaign Promises the
Monopoly of political
election games, this
product offers more
TITLE:
Campaign Promises
than a parlor game apSYSTEMS:
IBM
# PLAYERS:
Finally, both can1-6
proach. Admittedly, the
PRICE:
$39.95
didates are given an intelgame is fast-paced (in
DESIGNER:
Edward and Dina Hayduk
ligence report to get an
our experiences, it never
Birch and Janine Taylor
PUBLISHER:
Front Runner Software Co.
idea of the other
took more than an hour
Collinsville, CT
candidate's activity
and a half to play a
during the given week
game) and more fun
and both candidates are given an opporthan substance, but it teaches some
tunity to debate. If both players are
authentic lessons about real politics, as
human players and have even a slight
well.
sense of humor, the
debate phase can be
The first lesson is
very entertaining. As
found when play
far as the game is conbegins. Each player
cerned, the players
must select three
will answer anywhere
promises from the
from two to six questable of available
tions (from a data
promises (see chart).
base of 45 possible
Since these promises
questions) by allotting
will have a direct beara percentage of time
ing on the number of
to five different lines
campaign promise
of argument. The
votes to be gained in
computer can't hear the human opeach state's presidential election, the
ponents exaggerate their positions and
game teaches that special interest
insult the other player as they type in
politics are part and parcel of any camnumbers, however. As a campaign
paign. That principle seems valid
strategy, however, players should rememenough, however, it would have enber the cardinal rule of American
gendered more impact if promises like

from 20-47 respectively. In order to organize any or several states, the player
must land (by means of a computerized
dice roll) on a state coded with the same
color as the state he/she wishes to organize. Hence, the dice can rule the
early maneuvers of this game as easily
as landing on the right property can
determine one's future in the popular
real estate game.
What does this teach about presidential politics, though? Well, since campaign organization votes are allotted to
the candidate in each state's election on
the basis of the number of turns the
candidate's organization has been
(Continued on page 36)

Review

Baa! Baa!
Flak Sheep!
Broderbund's World War II
Arcade Game
by William W. David

y
o

our heart pounds in your chest as you rise from the
deck of the carrier. You check your weapon systems
one last time as you race towards the Japanese island. Suddenly, bullets rip through the cockpit as the
shore batteries notice your F6F Hellcat. You quickly
silence them
with a few wellplaced rockets.
You feel confident as you
move towards
the enemy
bunkers on the
island. Then
you notice the
pair of Zeros lifting from the
airstrip to greet
you . . .
This is the atmosphere
created by
Wings of Fury,
the new arcadestyle air combat
simulator from
Broderbund.
Players take on
the role of an airman in the
South Pacific in
1944. Your
aircraft
carrier,
the
USS
Wasp, has been
I I I LE: Wings of Fury
badly damaged and must limp its way
SYSTEMS: 128k Apple systems
# PLAYERS: Solitaire
safely back to a distant friendly port. In
PRICE: $34.95
its way are the forces of the Japanese.
DESIGNER: Steve Waldo
At this point in the war, the Japanese
PUBLISHER: Broderbund Software
San Rafael, CA
have become desperate to maintain
control of their remaining territory and
they battle ferociously to prevent your passage. The only
thing standing between the guns and torpedos of the
enemy and the lives of the crew of the Wasp is one lone
combat-worthy airplane.
What an airplane, though! It is the mighty F6F Hellcat, a
real work horse. Capable of bearing an impressive arsenal
of bombs, rockets, and torpedos, it is able to lay waste to
any ship or ground emplacement and is more than a match
for anything that the enemy can put into the air.
The enemy comes in several forms. First of all, there are
the islands which contain bunkers, machine gun emplace-

ments, shore batteries, airstrips, and of course, Japanese
soldiers. Next, come the ships which range from the lowly
cruiser to the powerful aircraft carrier. There are also
Japanese fighter planes ("Zeros") which come after you and
torpedo planes that attempt to sink your ship.
The instructions provided with the game are simple, wellwritten, and refreshingly brief. It doesn't take hours of pouring over obscure charts to get started in this game.
The entire game is played using the joystick. The controls
are easy to use and are learned very quickly. The moves executed on screen correspond very well with the users hand
movements, making for a highly responsive game.
The graphics are some of the best action graphics pulled
out of the Apple in recent memory. They are, quite simply,
stunning. The attention paid to graphic detail turns this
game into a truly outstanding experience. The puffs of
smoke, the enemy troops running for cover, the signalmen
on the carrier, and the deck pitching with the roll of the
waves are all memorable visuals. [Ed.: Memorable is right.
We remember some of these graphic routines from their
original manifestation in Broderbund's mega-hit,
"Choplifter!"] The sound effects leave a little to be desired,
but not much. One thing that stands out in this area is the
crackling sound of fire in the bombed-out ruins, a nice
touch.
The game also has a nice difficulty curve. The novice does
not die so quickly as to become frustrated and scores are
able to show a consistently steady improvement. This is not
to say that Wings of Fury is easy, however. While the expert
can indeed clear the first screens with ease, the upper levels
continue to offer a challenge.
Despite the setting, this is not a wargame or a flight
simulator by any stretch of the imagination. It is, however,
an exciting action arcade-style game that tests the reflexes
of the most demanding gamer. Beyond this, Wings of Fury
does a good job of creating a feeling of the spirit of flight. It
is more than just a mere combat game. It has a feeling of
depth that is missing in many other current offerings.
Bottom line: This is an exciting, memorable game for
anyone remotely interested in action games. Broderbund
should have a hit with this one. It is worth your while to
check it out.

Industry News

N

o maskirovka! I would tell the
same to the KGB. I was simply
on vacation in Chicago and happened to end up at the Art Institute. I
was not looking for secrets or expecting
to find any. I was camped out in the gallery where the paintings by Monet are
displayed and found myself
walking by one of Rodin's sculptures. The statue's face was
contorted in a look of agonizing pain and I was just drifting
into a meditation on the
human condition when I overheard an incongruous chuckle
in the background. Glancing
out of my peripheral vision, I
noticed a lovely lady giggling to
her bearded escort. "It looks
like a gamer who just ran into
the `Umanu' in Starflight II!"

toward the portion of the gallery that
houses the paintings by Renoir and Van
Gogh. On the way, I entered a room
dominated by a wall-sized Seurat. A lecturer at the institute was demonstrating
how Seurat would shuffle up to his canvas, strategically place one dot, and

could be hidden in their shadows. Those
thoughts of distant lands reminded me
of how many games with oriental
themes were waiting on our western
horizons. Infocom just announced their
licensed product based on James
Clavell's Shogun. Dave Lebling is the
designer of this game where
players take on the role of Blackthorne. The graphics (I confess,
comrades, I did say, "Graphics")
are imitative of traditional 16th
Century Japanese style. They
are used as both illustrations
and text borders, since the
game is still primarily interactive
fiction.

THE RUMOR
BAG
by Sergei Petrovich Romanov Kosygin

Now, I hadn't actually heard
anything about Starflight II
before, so I followed the couple
from Monet to Monet in order
to get the information. It seems
that the sequel to the popular
space game will support EGA
and offer a whole slew of
bizarre new races. The actual
events in the sequel take place
thirty years after the previous
game ended. Players can bring
over their crew and ship from
the first game, as well as a few
artifacts from the initial adventure.
The sequel is based on a
barter economy; offers a deadlier race
than the Uhlik; reveals the story behind
the Uhlik of the original story; and
provides just enough time travel to keep
players off balance.
The young couple moved through the
gallery at a faster pace than I prefer, but
stopped quickly in front of a sculpted
monkey. The monkey was dancing as
though for an organ grinder and had
the most eloquent expression of disgust
on his face. The couple laughed loudly
at this objet d'art. "I haven't seen an expression like that," observed the masculine partner in the duo, "since we
started working on Caveman Ughlympics." My hand slid quickly to my
notebook. I had heard rumors about
Electronic Arts' upcoming product
where these comic Neanderthals are
competing in such events as the "Mate
Toss" and other zany events. I had even
heard that designers at EA's recent Artist Symposium were vociferous in their
enthusiasm with regard to the game.
Now, I was hearing that the product
should be in the stores by October.
Not wanting to be found out as the
eavesdropper I was, I wandered back

return to view the entire painting from a
distance. Warped mind that I am, the
lecturer's shuffle reminded me of skating
and skating reminded me of hockey
back in the motherland. I thought about
some information I received about a
product under development by Bethesda Softworks, the people who
designed Gridiron!. Now, they've taken
the expertise of Doug Carpenter, coach
of the Washington Capitols and Brian
and Terry Murray of the Caps, as well as
Bobby Orr of Boston Bruins fame and
put that expertise to work in Slapshot!.
The Washington Capitols actually allowed the designers to tape a special
practice in order to get the digitized
sounds right. Like their previous sports
simulation, this is expected to blend
statistics, physics, and real-time action
into a fast-paced game. Unfortunately,
our great Red Army team is not in the
game. I guess it would have unbalanced
the game in favor of my countrymen.
You do know that we Russians invented
hockey, don't you?
I passed by some dark hallways to
return to the gallery of impressionists, imagining how many secret policemen

Origin Systems is busily
working on Moebius II. This adventure is set in the Orient and
offers much more authenticity
than the original game. A
tremendous amount of research went into gleaning art
ideas from ancient Chinese and
Japanese scrolls, as well as incorporating primarily Chinese
legends (with a mixture of some
Japanese folklore). The game
will offer a greater depth to
characters (particularly, nonplayer characters) than its
progenitor. Those who didn't
like killing for the food and
water so precious in the original
adventure will be pleased to
note that it is not as significant
a factor in the sequel. In fact,
there is no killing in Moebius II,
since opponents will flee rather than
fight to the death.
Also, Koei is planning to release Genghis Khan prior to the end of the year.
The game reportedly has a similar interface to the games covered in this issue,
prettier graphics, and more challenging
game play. There is also a new, "quick
resolution mode" to resolve those battles
where one or the other side is grossly
outnumbered. Since the name of these
games is history and the opportunity to
remake it, this game offers the chance
for those who conquer Asia to move on
to Europe. It is even possible to run into
Richard Ill in this game. This may, indeed, be a "winter of discontent" for
many a computer "Richard."
I must have been talking aloud, because these two fellows who looked
suspiciously like KGB were following me.
Of course, it might have been someone
who was trying to steal game ideas. I
reversed direction and tried to lose them
in a special exhibit on "Arms and
Armor." Naturally, these were medieval
arms and armor, but one fellow was pontificating rather effectively on the relationship of personal armor to armored

vehicles. I'm not sure I followed his argument, but I did catch the point that he
had been researching the use of armored vehicles for some Simulations
Canada games. It seems they are starting a series of tactical armor games
(nine in all) under the general title of
Battletank. Due in December or
January, this is an approach to armor
which will use the doctrinal concept utilized in other SimCan games. It is even
possible that SimCan will use a graphic
replay (Yes, comrades, I did say
"Graphic.") to give an "after battle" report
when they publish Battletank on the 16
bit machines. I also heard that the company is planning to publish several naval
games: Northern Fleet (modern naval
combat in the North Atlantic); Grand
Fleet (tactical naval combat during
World War I); and Jutland Campaign
(strategic naval combat during World
War I).
Speaking of armor, my loquacious
source wasn't anywhere near finished.
He alleged that there were even futuristic tank games in the near future.
Origin Systems plans to release a
game with the working title, Cybertank.
In this strategy game, players will design
their own fighting machines using a
"pull-down menu" interface. Ideally, if
players tire of the library modules of
sample tanks and opponents, they can
download opponents from various bulletin boards that will provide support for
the game. It looks similar, but superior,
to the Robotwar game from now
defunct Muse Software.
Another variation, my source went on,
is the first BattleTech adventure from Infocom. Although the game will offer the
most locations of any role-playing game
to date (the company claims over four
million locations), the battles to be
fought will require skill enhancement
through weaponry and intelligence,
hardware upgrades, and tactical combat
skills. Each adventurer must learn to
operate his BattleMech, a thirty-foot tall
combat robot, in order to stave off an
alien invasion. If you enjoy "Japanimation," you will probably enjoy the look
and feel of this game.
Some clown in the gallery had the
nerve to hush my source and I thought
seriously about using one of those halberds on display to get rid of this unwanted heckler. Fortunately, I realized
that the halberd would be an ideal
weapon in Infocom's new Journey
game and my mind wandered onto
other thought patterns. This classic fantasy adventure will utilize both graphics
and be menu-driven. The company is
suggesting that the game will introduce
a new genre which they are calling "role
play chronicles."

The good folks at the institute were getting ready to close the gallery, so I had
to exit out the main entrance. That
wouldn't have been bad, except that I
had to pass right by those two foreign
fellows I had been dodging earlier. As I
walked by, I heard the tell-tale sounds of
words like Frobozz, Double Fanucci,
Peggleboz, and Megaboz. Whew! Those
comrades weren't Soviets. They were
Steve Meretzky fans warming up for

Zork Zero the hilarious (and graphic) prequel to the Zork series which features a
mouse interface. The brutes accosted
me, put a Leather Goddesses of Phobos
tee-shirt on my torso, and threatened to
put me to work in a granola mine in Antharia if I revealed anything about the
new Infocom games. Little did I realize .
. . . [Ed.: Make certain that the art
department removes the milk and
cereal stain from the bottom of this page.]

Review

Non-Resident
President
by David M. Wilson

T

he
President of the United States has been kidnapped. He won't be lonely, though. The ter-

rorists were kind enough to abduct all of the
other heads of states attending the "top secret" summit. Now, a global
search is being
made for the world
leaders. The
player's skill will
determine whether
they find him in
time or not.
The game, an interactive graphic
adventure simulation, is set in June,
1996 (so those
who dislike the current administration
should not get too
excited). The player
is assigned as a
Special Investigator
by the Vice-President and empowered with access to federal
TITLE:
The President Is Missing
SYSTEMS:
C-64/128, IBM
databases. Reports of federal
# PLAYERS:
Solitaire
agencies, official government
PRICE:
$24.95
DESIGNER:
Paul Norman
documents, public and private
PUBLISHER:
Cosmi Corporation
records, files of intelligence orWilmington, CA
ganizations, and cooperation of
related investigating agencies are all available to the
player. Sounds simple, right? Well, it is not simple!
There are so many files to go through and so many
clues that most players will not know where to start.
As a matter of fact, the complexity of the game may
be a shortcoming.
The mechanics of the game are simple enough,
though. Players can access a files menu and begin
reading subject files on everyone from Irish terrorists
to the Vice-President. Finding the right clue in those
files is the trick. The files menu also access top secret
documents, reports, photographic files, records, and
personal case files.
The files are most impressive, graphics-wise. Each
subject file has a realistic-looking computer-generated
photo display. The photographic evidence files are
also quite authentic looking.
The game comes with a dramatized audio tape

which contained clues. Players must listen carefully
and repeatedly to the tape. Hint: Listen to the President and First Lady carefully, a different wording
provides a large clue.
The tape also contains a portion of a Morse code
transmission received in the Mediterranean Ocean.
The recording of this segment is extremely irritating to
listen to because it has the sound effects of a storm
and an overload of radio static. By typing in Codes on
the request screen, players are able to bring up a
code deciphering tool for Morse code and enigma
code messages. Players can also send the encrypted
message to Langley to be decoded by "The Company." The code screen can be used to learn Morse
code, as well, if a player is so inclined.
The Special Investigator has eight agents assigned to
him for investigatory purposes. Wise players will utilize
these agents to the fullest degree by sending them to
check out everybody. The game is slowed considerably, however, when the S.I. must wait for the agents to
report in. The game has programmed in real time
"dead time," but those who have played Def Con 5
and Chernobyl will not be surprised at this approach
since Norman used real time "dead time" in those
computer-computer simulations, as well.
It is very important that players make certain that all
assigned agents report in prior to shutting down the
terminal. If you "log off' the game before you have
received the reports, agents will "forget" that they are
on assignment and the entire process must be approached again when play is resumed.
Players may find themselves confused by the mislabeling of the two double-sided floppy disks. The
program refers to disks 1-4, while the disks are
labeled Disk One, Side One and Disk One, Side Two,
as well as Disk Two, Side One and Disk Two, Side
Two. It seems like a minor matter, but I finally took a
magic marker and wrote 3 and 4 on the appropriate
sides of Disk Two. This oversight can be irritating.
Even though the player is allegedly given clearance
for all documents, access to two documents is
repeatedly denied. Players should continue typing in
numbers until they break the code for these documents. They are vital to solving the mystery. This
seemed unrealistic, since the program gave the player
as many tries as necessary to break the code. Later,
the program even changed one of the codes that I
had written down.
The President Is Missing is a game that starts out
with an exciting premise, an interesting plot, and wellplanned graphics, but ends up as a poorly executed
program. The game will simply prove not to be worth
the trouble to most players. Extremely experienced
players who enjoy tough games might be delighted by
the potential challenge, but the game has simply too
much dead-time to be truly exciting or for players to
maintain their initial enthusiasm.

Review

GLOBAL

COMMANDER
by M. Evan Brooks

G

lobal Commander (GC) is a simulation in which the

player administers global security through various options (e.g. SDI, military force, electronic eavesdropping) in the year 2032. Successful performance leads to
comfortable retirement. Failure yields early termination or
the unwelcome experience of watching the world become a
radioactive cinder.
Written in a semi-humorous context, the documentation
delineates the various options. However, victory conditions
are omitted (with each turn being one week, success is dependent on surviving at an average rating or above for one
full year).
A separate map and flag counters are included as a physical graphic aid to show current attitudes between the
various member nations of the UNN (United Nuclear Nations). Given the "real-time" speed of the game and the
awkwardness of monitoring the various computer inputs
plus the map, the latter quickly becomes an exercise in
futility.
As Global Commander, the player must preserve world
peace (or minimize conflict). Five game functions (represented by icons) are available to assist in this task. The first
icon represents satellites. Six laser defense satellites are available for placement in order to intercept nuclear missiles. In
addition, three reconnaissance satellites are useful for checking on member nations' compliance with nuclear stockpiles.
The second icon offers information. Various reports show
missile stockpiles, natural resources, and technological
capability. Generally, one should strive to equalize natural
resources and technological capabilities. A third icon is used
to command the UNN Force. In the game, the player's
troops can be committed to a member nation as a security
force (useful for keeping a lid on trouble, except that too
long a stay can generate bad feelings by the indigenous personnel). A fourth icon functions as the ubiquitous "In/Out
Tray" possessed by any busy executive. Players can receive
messages from member nations seeking assistance or attempting to clarify a policy; provide redistribution of assets;
commend/criticize member nations; and direct nations to improve their relationships. The fifth icon represents the use of
short-wave radio. Here, players may intercept member
nations' signals in order to determine what may be happening behind the scenes.
Radio intercept may be accomplished in two fashions: frequency select (time-consuming, but reliable) or frequency
scan (quick, but intercepts must be decoded). This reviewer
recommends the latter; even if the intercept can only be partially decoded, sufficient data will be recovered for action.
The slower frequency select simply requires too much time
with too much else happening.
Initial responses must be geared to equalize natural and
technological assets among the sixteen member nations. Attempt to totally equalize the world; it will take time, but in
the long run, it is a safer path to world peace.

Disarmament directives are generally ignored unless the
receiving nation has the honor of hosting the UNN Security
Forces. Therefore, don't waste time on disarmament unless
positive results
are being
achieved. Victory
lies in maintaining peace and
not securing
universal disarmament.
Central
America and
Libya are the
paranoics of the
world. While
Central America
can be placated,
Libya seems to
respect military
force. Therefore,
stationing the
security force in
Libya becomes
virtually mandatory; their
transfer elsewhere generally
will trigger at
least a conventional war by the
Libyan fanatics.
Also, Canada,
the European
United Eastern
Europe and the
United States generally cheat on
missile sites. Watch them by satellite!
GC has a very nice musical background accompaniment. For the
first five minutes, it is enjoyable.
Thereafter, it becomes tedious. No
toggle-off switch exists; the only way
to turn the music off is to lower the
volume on one's monitor.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:

PUBLISHER:

GLOBAL COMMANDER
C-64/128
1
$19.95
J. Wilson, D. Martin
B. Notarianni, &
R. France
DataSoft
Chatsworth, CA

The game may be saved only in RAM; no disk save option
has been included. While this does allow one to ignore a
devastating week, the
length of the game and
lack of a disk save was
sorely missed, although
DataSoft maintains
that a complete game
may be completed in
two (2) hours.
Global Commander is
an inexpensive game of
diplomacy and strategic
initiative. Currently available for the C-64/128, it
is being converted for
the IBM/ST/Amiga. However, the 16-bit price will increase to
$39.95. DataSoft notes that the 16-bit version will have improved graphics, game play and save options. This would
be useful. The game can be entertaining, but overall, the inconveniences may outweigh the advantages.

Review

PT-109
Spectrum Holobyte's
Torpedo Boat Simulation
by Bob Proctor
he night is warm and very dark. You are patrollTing the waters around New Georgia in your PT
boat, hoping to interfere with any Japanese
barge traffic that shows up. It's been dull so far and
the dull thrum of the
engines is making
you drowsy. It's almost 2:30 AM! Suddenly, a sighting
report races through
the boat like a
spark! There's something out there, just
a little to the left as
you look out over
the bow. You raise
your binoculars but
it's still too far—
maybe 7 or 8 miles—
to see anything but a
black lump, just
slightly darker than
the star-filled sky.

NAME:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE: $49.95
# PLAYERS:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:
Alameda, CA

After hours of
boredom, the chance
for action is like a
cold shower. You
speed up to close the
target and steer
toward it. The range
begins to dwindle.
Watching through
your night glasses,
you strain to make
out details. Yes!
There are definitely tall masts, this is
PT-109
something more than barges! Down
Mac
to 3 miles now, the silhouette that
1
emerges is tall and complex. Can it
Digital Illusions,
be the pagoda mast and funnels of a
Sean Hill, and Mark Johnson
Spectrum HoloByte
heavy cruiser? You allow yourself to
hope. You remember that night off
Guadalcanal when you got in under
the guns and put 4 fish into the side of a heavy. The
big ship actually made an easier kill than smaller
destroyers and escorts. Throttle back to reduce the
noise and wake, stealth is your best chance to get in
close.
Two miles now, almost into the range of your guns.
There's still something funny about this cruiser,it seems
to have one too many masts. Just as the sickening
realization hits—you've been fooled by overlapping silhouettes—the two destroyers turn toward you and

begin firing! You also realize, somewhat belatedly, that
your desire to add 11,000 more tons of shipping to
your record has kept you from assessing the risk to the
boat and crew. Now you face almost hopeless odds.
Suddenly, time seems to slow down, you are completely calm. You got them here, it's up to you to get
them out! First launch all four torpedoes, you have to
get rid of them anyway to lighten the boat enough to
outrun destroyers. May as well shoot them toward the
enemy. Now, full throttle and right full rudder! The idea
is to put them dead astern and start the smoke generator! With only a 3 knot advantage in speed, it will take
you over an hour to get out of range. Can you possibly
last that long without taking a hit? Your boat is only
plywood, a hit anywhere, even a near miss, will probably slow you down enough to seal your fate. Better radio
your base, too. At least,they'll know your approximate
position and that may mean the difference between
being picked up and becoming an MIA.
Salvo after salvo explodes around you, sending up
geysers of water. Suddenly, an explosion lights up the
sky behind you—one of your torpedoes has found a target! One of the enemy destroyers drops rapidly astern.
The other continues to give chase for a bit, but then,
turns away to help its sister ship. You've made it! You
return to base in the bright dawn light. You have no
sinkings to show for your long night, but you feel, deep
inside, a sense of belonging. You're one of the elite, a
Devil Boat skipper!

Stand By to Cast Off
If the story above seems to describe the kind of computer simulation you'd like to play (but don't really expect, at least, with the current generation of computers), I have good news.
With PT-109, it is possible to experience action like
that—in fact I was describing an actual scenario of my
own. Of course, there has to be some "willing suspension of disbelief;" it won't seem quite the same if you
keep reminding yourself that you are sitting in front of
a computer and your hand holds a mouse instead of a
wheel.
Still the game can provide every element and thrill
that I described and is therefore a remarkable accomplishment. However, don't stop reading before you
run off to buy PT-109; I have some advice that will help
you achieve a sense of "being there."
PT-109 is strongly reminiscent of GATO. It is much
more realistic, but this in no way detracts from
playability. There is a strong emphasis on graphics and
sound and the view "from the deck" has improved,
featuring more realistic ships and a greater variety of
weather and lighting. The way the targets appear as
small blobs and grow into identifiable targets is great, I
don't expect to see better until games are designed for
2 megabytes of memory. And, of course, you can use
the binoculars for a magnified view. There are 12 different types of enemy ships you might see, from the
heavy cruiser down to fishing boats even smaller than
your PT, and there are airplanes that can swoop down
out of nowhere!

Away All Boats!

the game at level one, but when you're ready for a challenge, a lot of the patrols will already be familiar to you.

The basic patrol structure of GATO remains, only now
a patrol (usually) takes place in a single night, not over
days or weeks.

Fortunately, there is an alternative. There is a practice
mode that will give you training with your boat and
weapons. Use it! Get comfortable with your boat's
capabilities, then go directly to level four (the highest)
and start a campaign game. Trust me! You wanted as
much realism as possible, didn't you? Level four is not
all that much harder than level one. You can still sink
escorts with your guns alone! It does turn off your
super-radar so that there are some surprises left in the
world and keeps you from being almost invulnerable.
At level one, you need not fear a pair of destroyers. At
level four, discretion is advised.

You leave your base after dark with orders to follow a
route at specific speeds. If nothing eventful happens,
this route would bring you back to base around dawn.
Don't worry, though, there is not a single uneventful
patrol in this game! Your route is shown on the map,
which depicts a real area of the Pacific and Med, not
some hypothetical grid of islands. In general, you will
view the map on the screen and use "rapid deployment" to speed up time until you get to a combat situation. At this point you go to the cockpit view and the
timescale reverts to normal.
If you chose to play a single patrol, you select the
time and place from five choices: the Loss of the Phillipines in early'42, Guadalcanal in late '42 and early
'43, New Guinea or the Mediterranean in late'43 or
early '44, and the Return to the Phillipines in late '44.
There are 45 patrols in total, 10 from each locale except the last which has but 5.
To make things more interesting, a campaign game
has been added. If you play a complete campaign, you
will always begin at the beginning of the war and play
through the finish for a total of 35 patrols. In late 1943,
you get a choice of doing either the 10 New Guinea
patrols or the 10 patrols in the Med. A skipper that com.
pletes at least 10 patrols in a campaign is eligible for
the Top Skippers list, assuming the score (tons of shipping sunk) is high enough. Campaigns make for more
fun, not because of the scoring, but because they add
suspense by making survival so much more important.

Full Speed Astern
The bad news is that I don't play PT-109 any more be.
cause I've used it up. All patrols in PT-109 are
preprogrammed and I've played all of them 2 or 3
times, some of them 5 or 6. A single campaign game
uses 35 of the 45 possible. Once I recognize a particular scenario, I know what kind of ships (and planes)
will appear and where. I'm not likely to mistake 2
destroyers for a cruiser and I'm not likely to waste 4 torpedoes on a freighter if I know a tanker will show up
later. Somehow, without the element of surprise, the
game just doesn't seem as much fun.
So, you have some choices to make. You can play
this like an arcade game if you want and have a lot of
fun for a little while. I call this the "can of beer" approach where you just chug-a-lug and go on to something else. An alternative is to approach it more like a
fine wine, determined to savor every last drop. It is for
those of you who chose the latter approach that I offer
the following advice.
If you really want to get the most from this game,
don't just jump in and play lots of the patrols at level
one. That level is designed for novices and makes life
much easier. It's easier to get hits on the enemy and,
at the same time, harder for them to hit you. Even if
they do get a hit, damage is less severe and more
quickly repaired. Enemy ships and planes show up on
the map view which turns it into super-radar that
reveals the whole picture. Yes, you'll have fun learning

Green Dragons Forever
Your basic PT boat stayed pretty much the same
throughout the war
and the boat you
command has realistic speed, range and
armor (if you can call
plywood "armor," that
is). Your weaponry
matches the period
of your patrol. Early
in '42 you get only 4
torpedoes and a light
machine gun, but by
1945, you have 50
caliber MG's, 40mm
cannons, depth charges, and even a rocket launcher! Novice
levels of play allow
you to use the more
powerful weapons at
any time.
All boats have the
same radar set no
matter what period
you choose. Radar
was not common on
PT boats until late
1943 and was always somewhat unreliable. In PT-109, you get 100% reliable radar that
sees everything out to 32 miles. My advice to purists is,
don't use the 32 mile setting for scenarios during
1942. Used at the 8 mile setting, it sees just about
what the crew could see with their normal vision and
you can pretend that you have an ever-alert crew instead of a top-secret radar set.
The funny thing is, the game could have done away
with the radar entirely for these early scenarios because
of the excellent digitized sound. There are the sounds
of gunfire and explosions, of course, but at several
points during the game your crew talks to you. If your
radar is knocked out by battle damage, you will still
know when a ship comes within sight because you'll
hear a klaxon and "All hands to battle stations".
There several other areas where I think the game
lacks realism. They do not detract from the fun and I
don't intend these comments as criticism of PT-109,
which strikes a nice balance between fun and history. I

mention them for those readers that are interested in
extreme realism and want to know whether this game
will satisfy them.
Firstly, combat
results. Even at the
highest level of difficulty, this PT
packs a wallop! It
never misses a zero
that flies within
range. It has no
trouble at all winning gunnery duels
with armed escorts
or 6000 ton freighters with deck guns. It makes for fun,
at first, but after a while, it takes a really big fleet to intimidate you. On the other hand, in the Solomons campaign, the Japanese used groups of destroyers to run
supplies "down the Slot" at night. These ships were
short of crew and so heavily loaded that they could not
fight well. In PT-109, all DD's that you encounter in the
Slot will be the Emperor's finest. So, be careful! These
are the scenarios I go back to—it takes skill to pick off
one DD out of a group of 4 or 5 and get away safely!

three outcomes (your commanding officer rates you on
a scale of try harder, successful, and outstanding) to a
patrol. Once again,
the constraints of
the real world put
limits on our
simulations. PT109 is not a game
of PT boat patrolling, it is a game of
PT boat combat.
The whole patrol
structure is just a
way to give a more
realistic background to the combat situations. There
are some types of combat that I would have liked to
have seen included. For example, attacks against shore
installations were pretty common for PT boats and I
was very disappointed that none of the "Return to the
Phillipines" patrols dealt with the Battle of Surigao Strait
(where PT's got to ambush battleships!).

Mission Well Done!
The next point has to do with the overall feel. PT
boats rarely were given orders to follow specific courses
at specific speeds. PT-109 just doesn't give you, as skipper, the initiative that you should have to patrol where
you want and to try to find where and when the supplies are moving. I also wish there were more than

So, there you have it. Spectrum Holobyte has
another game with superb graphics and sound in their
line. It has enough realism for most and uses the Mac
interface to make a complex simulation very easy to
play. Just remember not to rush into it.

Sneak Preview

Console Cowboy
A Sneak Preview of Interplay's "Neuromancer"

Y

by Johnny L. Wilson

ou wake up to the tune of Ratz' prosthetic arm as he
wipes the bar with a dirty rag. You realize that you are
p to your nose in a plate full of synthspaghetti and it
isn't even as healthy as those amitriptyline tabs you're usually
popping to counter your depression. You used to be the best
console cowboy in the business,
but that was before you
doublecrossed the wrong people.
They pumped you full of that
secret Russian mycotoxin and
damaged your nervous system
enough to make sure you would
never work again.

Now, this fellow Armitage is offering you a job with a 10,000 New
Yen advance. The job must be big,
but you want to check up on the
guy before you do anything. You
use the advance to get your "deck"
out of hock and start to check out
the various bulletin boards
(dataspaces) which are available.
Using the "boards," you manage
to pay your overdue bill at the
Cheap Hotel, download more
powerful software, and discover
what is happening in Chiba City.
Later, you can find the back doors
to each dataspace, use your Cryptology chip (which jacks right into
a silicon socket in your head) to
break the code on the passwords,
and make some extra cash.
That is the premise of Neuromancer, an adventure game
based on the Hugo and Nebula award-winning novel. The game
uses the environment, characters, technology, and basic plotline
of the novel, but the plot has been changed enough that even
those who have read the novel will have plenty of surprises.
Commodore 64/128 owners will get the first opportunity to
play the game, but Amiga owners should get an enhanced version before the game goes too far.

Cyberfunk and Cyberpunk
The game begins with a splash screen and a soundtrack taken
from DEVO's Total Devo album, "Some Things Never Change."
Somehow, the song seems appropriate for the cyberpunk
mythos this game utilizes. After this, the player's character wakes
up in Ratz' bar. The upper two-thirds of the screen is taken up
by the animated figure which represents the character and the
location where the action is currently taking place. The lower
third of the screen has eight icons on the left side of the screen.
These are command options which may be accessed by a joystick-driven pointer. However, it is possible to maneuver the
player via the keyboard and access the command options via
command keys, as well. One option enables the player to toggle

through various types of information (including amount of
money on credit chip, exact time, date, and physical constitution); take an inventory, operate a PAX machine (sort of a
master electronic information, mail, and banking service); initiate
a conversation with an NPC; access any skills which have been
acquired; toggle into "Walk" mode
and control the player character's
movement; build software with
ROM construct abilities; or
load/save the game from/to disk.
In order to converse with an
NPC, the player simply points at
the conversation balloon icon and
presses the button on the joystick
or presses the "T" key. Now, the
player can choose what he wants
to say by toggling statements back
and forth in the conversational balloon which appears in the upper
portion of the screen (as in
Cinemaware's Sinbad and the
Throne of the Falcon game).
When the player decides what he
wants to say, he simply presses
the button on the joystick and the
conversation proceeds. Some of
the choices enable the player to
finish the phrase in the conversational balloon by typing in a word.
This is very handy if you are trying
to pick up a valuable clue. Fans of
William Gibson's novels will be
delighted to discover that several of the conversations utilize text
from the novel itself.
In order to operate the PAX machine, the player simply points
and clicks over the PAX icon. The PAX (a mnemonic for Public
Access) machine operates like a friendly on-line information service. Players can check their electronic mail, upload or download
funds, catch up on the Night City News, or send electronic mail.
Besides having clues to assist in solving some of the game's puzzles, players will not want to miss a message on PAX or any of
the dataspaces either. Jargon from the underground bulletin
board culture is utilized and a wonderful sense of humor is often
displayed. In particular, should the player character be arrested,
finally pay his hotel bill, or "pull a Wilson" (cyberpunk slang for
making a truly classic error), he may find himself becoming a
hilarious story in the Night City News.

Night City Blues
Should the player decide to physically explore the environs of
Chiba City, he can access the "Walk" icon and travel from "room"
to "room" as in any adventure game. Many of the "rooms" are, in
actuality, street scenes which function like hallways in a castle or
corridors in a dungeon. Each shop, restaurant, office, or hotel offers an interior room to explore. Fans of Gibson's novels and

short stories will enjoy actually entering "The Gentleman Loser"
and the "Matrix Restaurant." It can be especially interesting to
converse with Julius Deane, Shin, and the infamous Finn of
"Metro Holografix" (In "Burning Chrome," this software store was
located in New York, but it is located in Chiba City for purposes
of the game).
If the player enters restricted areas, commits a crime, or is
"framed," he will be arrested. The "Compu-judge" scenario is wellconceived and offers an interesting early obstacle in the game.
Since the player is fined whenever he is found guilty, this becomes an irritating setback which is nothing near as fatal as
many adventure games' early difficulties. If worse comes to
worse, the player can always sell body parts to raise money,
much as today's skid row residents sell plasma.
Up to this point, readers will note that one element almost invariably found in adventure games has not been mentioned.
Combat does not occur in the physical realm in Neuromancer.
Although there are a
few shoot-outs and assassination attempts
in Gibson's fiction,
there are none in the
game. Where then,
you may well ask, is
the excitement, risk,
and challenge of the
game? As in the
books and stories, the
excitement occurs
when the hero invades
cyberspace and gains
access to private, corporate, government,
and military data and
artificial intelligence
that is normally and
legally inaccessible. Instead of laser pistols
or plasma guns,
though, the weapons
utilized in this invasion are types of
software. The right
communications
program to interface, virus to infiltrate, and shielding to protect
the cyberdeck become the weapons and armor in this game.

Geometric Invasion
Cyberspace is a geometrical representation of electronic
dataspaces. These shapes are spaced out on a grid which, in
turn, represents the matrix. Cyberspace uses the same basic display as the physical realm. The upper portion of the screen
shows the view of the matrix from the current cyberspace location, the left side of the lower screen is occupied by command
icons, and the right side of the lower portion of the screen
depicts the player character's electroencephalograph monitor
(EEG) and enables the player to keep tabs on his brain waves.
The command options in cyberspace enable one to check the
direction he is heading on the matrix, take an inventory, check
the list of acquired skills, access the ROM construct skills,
save/load the game to/from the disk, or exit from cyberspace.
Where, then, does the conflict take place? It sounds like the
player can move easily from one dataspace to another with impunity. This would be true except for ICE (Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics). Think of "ice" as a lower level Al (artificial
intelligence) acting as a security guard attempting to keep you
out of a dataspace. The player tries to select the right software to

break through the layers of "ice" prior to the "ice" realizing that it
is being infiltrated. If the player is unsuccessful, the ice layers will
respond to an alarm such that the strength of the layers doubles
and makes it significantly harder to break through.
In addition, there is a backup defense called an Al which can
"flatline" the player character. Flatlining occurs when the Al hits
the hero's brain with a neural shock and keeps the victim braindead for a period of time long enough to stop his physical body
from functioning (In Gibson's Count Zero, Dixie Flatline was said
to have been flatlined on three different occasions before he was
finally killed.).
During the cyberspace portion of the game, players select the
best icebreaking software for the job. Some dataspaces require
slow-acting icebreakers and others necessitate one which acts
with brute force. Players must also note when they encounter a
back-up Al so that they can beat a hasty retreat rather than
being flatlined. Once inside a given dataspace, there is no stopping the "cowboy."

Some Things
Really Change
With the release of
Neuromancer, Interplay Productions is
continuing their
trend toward adding
more role-playing
aspects to graphic
adventure games.
Wasteland involved
the increase of personal characteristics,
enhancement of
weapons/armor, and
advancement in skill
levels through other
means in addition to
combat. Each time a
player successfully
utilized a skill, there
was a percentage
chance that the skill
level would increase. This is similar to the approach of some of
the better pen and paper role playing games. Also, the game allowed for more than one way to solve the puzzles in the game,
reducing the frustration level considerably over the linear style adventure games.
This game goes a step farther. In addition to skill improvement
and equipment enhancement, the game requires that the player
act as a hacker detective and glean all the clues possible from
PAX, BBSs, and dataspaces. The way one reacts to NPCs either
in person or via electronic networking can determine whether
you get the vital information necessary to solve the game's puzzles. Like Wasteland, Neuromancer is considerably non-linear
and offers more than one way to solve each puzzle.
Neuromancer has taken considerable creative risks and broken
several of the "conventions" of traditional computer role-playing
games. Since there is no killing, no combat, no character classes or character generation, and no monsters or magic, it will be
interesting to see how well this adventure game is received.
Science fiction enthusiasts should be thrilled with the faithfulness
of this game to its literary roots and Gibson fans, in particular,
should be hoping that the game is successful enough to warrant
a sequel based on Count Zero.

Interview

An Interview with
William Gibson

C

GW was privileged to question Hugo,
Nebula, and Philip K. Dick award-winning
novelist, William Gibson, about the upcoming computer game based on his first novel,
Neuromancer. We found his
answers interesting enough to
share with our readers.
CGW: Who originally conceived the
idea of converting Neuromancer into a
computer game (It's such a natural!)?
Gibson: The computer game rights
were part of a package, sold along with
the film rights. The group who bought the
package were already in touch with
Timothy Leary, who brought in Brian
Fargo of Interplay [Ed.: an affiliated
publisher of Mediagenic]. We had a long
and very interesting discussion, then, at
Leary's house, and things took off from
there.
CGW: Besides creating a fascinating
and believable future environment/story
line, complete with corporate oligarchy
and countercultural anarchy, what kind
of input were you afforded toward game
design?
Gibson: I was offered a lot more opportunity for input than I felt
capable of acting on. As a novelist, I'm not primarily concerned
with the creation of what I believe are called "gameable" scenarios.
My job is to make something that feels real, rather than something
that necessarily displays levels of internal logic below (or beyond)
the surface of the text. It's an interesting
distinction, actually .. .
CGW: At Activision, now Mediagenic,
there was, for a time, a lot of talk that
the project simply could not be done.
Several insisted that the technology
wasn't yet here. Did you (and possibly
Dr. Leary) originally intend to work with
a non-traditional interface (Obviously,
not wetware or biochips, but some kind
of bio-feedback?)?
Gibson: I suppose the ultimate
Neuromancer game would pit you against
a real Al ... And I like the idea of biofeedback, though this is the first I've heard
of it.
CGW: Your stories, as well as the
game, are replete with jargon from the
BBS underground. Is it safe to assume
that William Gibson himself networks his
way through the "boards?' If so, what
kind of "deck" do you use?
Gibson: I hate to disappoint you, but my BBS experience is
limited in the extreme. I'd never so much as touched a PC when I
wrote Neuromancer. I wrote it on an ancient Hermes manual
typewriter—the "clockwork" typewriter Case sees on Julius Deane's
desk. I think the jargon comes through because that's what I was
working from in the first place. The science fiction underground
and the real computer underground tend to overlap a lot, so I was
exposed to the people first. And what fascinated me was the pas-

sion these people brought to the topic, and the poetry of the jargon, rather than what they might actually be talking about.
These days I use a beat-up Apple IIc and the word-processing
end of Appleworks. I do have a modem but I don't really use it for
anything. People expect me to write on something matte black
with all the serial numbers sandpapered off .
CGW: Some of your stories, like "Dogfight!" which was
reprinted in Burning Chrome, seem very cognizant of the world
of computer games. Do you play any computer games? If so, do
you have a favorite or a favorite genre? What are the limitations
of the genre as opposed to printed fiction with its relatively linear
storytelling? Has computer gaming ever influenced your writing?
Gibson: More disappointment! I don't play computer games.
Mainly because writing fiction forces me to sit in front of a screen
all day anyway, and when I'm not doing that I'd much rather be
riding my mountain bike or just staring blankly at the ceiling, listening to music, whatever. Writing fiction is too much like playing a
computer game; the reader gets a linear story, ultimately, but the
writer has had to make countless decisions in order to arrive at it.
And it takes even longer to do that than to play a really sophisticated computer game!
When Michael Swanwick and I wrote "Dogfight!", I suppose I
thought of it as an extension of arcade technology, but the
storyline was Michael's idea. I'd had a sort of dream-image, of
these tiny biplanes flying above a pooltable; Michael took that and
worked up a rationale for it, a why, imagined the required technology, and there we were. That's a pretty typical example of my working method.
CGW: There is a running theme throughout your body of work
which was quoted in an essay by Norman Spinrad: "The streets
have their own use for technology." Do you perceive this "streetwise" technology as a positive, neutral, or negative impact on social evolution? Does the evolution of computer entertainment
have a place in this?
Gibson: Positive or negative, it's just there. We're surrounded by
the stuff, we're of it. I'm old enough (40) to remember when there
was no tv. Then there was, a little round screen the size of a
saucer, mounted in this big box of varnished wood. Hold that
image while you fastforward about thirty-five years to ... what?
MTV? How could anyone have predicted this from the fact of that?
Computer entertainment will probably have a similar impact. I
don't see why it shouldn't. Although I don't think we've yet grasped
what it is exactly that television has already done to us .. .
CGW: Are you happy with the environment of the Neuromancer computer game and the way the designers have interfaced
characters (like Armitage, Finn, and Shin) and places (like The
Gentleman Loser, Cheap Hotel, and Metro Holografix) from your
fiction with the gameplay of trying to break through the ice ('Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics)? What advances and/or differences would you like to see if the company produced Count
Zero?
Gibson: I think it's an interesting environment; the characters
and place-names are the texture of the book, from a writer's point
of view.
I think the key to a Count Zero game might be the voodoo entities. It might be fun if you could have these powerful, rather perverse personalities—who are actually the scattered fragments of
the cyberspace overmind at the end of Neuromancer—have them
sort of popping into your game at the worst possible times,
making demands, insisting you cut private deals with them .. .
CGW: Since the future projected into your fiction is, like our
modem society, fraught with violence, do you object to the fact
that you cannot be "killed" in Neuromancer? Is this at philosophical odds with your future or is it more in line with the reconstruction of Case after he had been "flatlined" prior to the action in
the novel?
Gibson: I think I'd go with the analogy to flatlining. Or cloning,
as practised by the Tessier-Ashpool's. And, really, with a game at
this level of complexity, I think you want a way to get back on
track if you've been axed.

The Politics
of War
(Continued from page 13)

program is that, unlike human opponents, the computer
"masters" stay bought.
If the player wants to accomplish this without lowering the
economic value of his home province, he can simply have
his governors send gifts to lower the animosity of surrounding provinces. Also, the player should use at least one governor to examine as many outside provinces as is practical.
The player can take notes on the intelligence acquired by
his surrogate and offer gifts or bribes on his own province's
turn as they are needed.
Finally, it is never a good idea to Loot without good
reason. In desperation, to search for beautiful women as
gifts for one's generals, or making a quick buck are acceptable reasons. Nevertheless, looting costs the master circa
75 points of loyalty in that province and will cost several
thousand points of rice to get that loyalty back. Remember
as well that bandit attacks are worse when the peasants
hate you or there is a war going on along the route. So,
don't waste long term resources on short term gains.

The Wisdom
of Sun Yat
Arneson

The Mystery of
History Making
There are some peculiar features in the game design. For
example, equipment costs the
same whether you have no
men or 100,000 men. One
hundred points of equipment
is as high as it is possible to
go, so don't buy more than
you need. I quickly observed
that the "Training" and "Equipment" ratings are purchased
for the particular general and
not his troops. No matter how
many soldiers there are, the
ratings cost the same amount
for the general and stay at the
same numbers. This seems
unreasonable.
Further, if you are defeated,
there is a good 20-30%
chance that some retreating
generals will be captured by the enemy. The general's
troops are lost along with all of the gold and rice you have
sent with him. Note that these losses occur even when your
general has voluntarily retreated from the field. It would
seem that a voluntary retreat would minimize such things.
(Continued on page 34)

much a master needs to do than to be "stuck" fighting a war.
Also, should your master be killed, the loyalty of everyone in
his kingdom will be seriously weakened. Most generals' loyalty
will drop by some 20 points with regard to the "new" master.
Generals who have their loyalty drop below 30 points may
even defect and take their troops with them! Do not send
your master on personal missions unless it is very safe or very
important.Learn to use the Simultaneous attack. This tactic
will increase a defender's losses by about 50% and allows
each force adjacent to the enemy to attack in turn. Thus, the
same attack can be delivered several times in a row.

A good early game strategy is to build up the economies of
your interior provinces. Then, build a ring of buffer states
around that central core. Corner provinces are easy to make
"safe," but they are usually quite poor.

Avoid the Charge tactic when you really need to advance
and the odds are 4-1 in your favor or higher. Such an attack
also tends to kill the defending general that you ordinarily
might have captured.

Expand quickly into as many provinces as is practical in the
early scenarios. Don't worry about whether you can hold
them or not. The fact is, you get to use their resources for, at
least, a little while. More importantly, each province that you
control gives you an additional command to perform.

It is often useful to equip the troops with metal weapons
and train them sufficiently. Actually, equipment seems to be
more important than training in fighting battles. Training increases mobility on the first turn of a war. However, all troops
have an upper movement limit of "15." This can be gained
simply by sitting in one spot. Note that equipment will initially
slow your troops down, so you are faced with a typical tradeoff.

Note that when you lose a battle, you lose everything. So, if
an attack looks likely, loot a province completely and drag
the goodies back home. Losing early wars can be deadly and
winning an early campaign gains more enemies.
It a general defects to you in battle, be certain to "retreat"
him. A defecting general cannot be trusted until you can
"build" his loyalty. Whatever you do, do not let him guard the
rice!
Leave your master out of the front line action. There is too

Romance of the Three Kingdoms is not a game of absolutes. There are good moves and reasonable chances, so it
is safe to assume that you will not get burned if your moves
are sensible. The computer, however, can do all of that scouting and checking around that takes us mere humans a lot of
time. It can and will find your weak points and exploit them
better than you can, so set the difficulty low at first.

Review

Rommel:
Battles For
North Africa
by Jay Selover

their

he latest release from Strategic Studies Group in
Battlefront series, Rommel: Battles For North
Africa, may be their best game since they burst on the
scene with Carriers At War back in 1984. Pretty strong
words, right? How do you justify such an endorsement for a
game which is really
just a collection of
scenarios using the
Battlefront design system? Well, I don't
know, exactly. This
game just feels so
right. Here's my best
guess: the game contains eight of the
best developed
scenarios I've ever
seen. They are constructed within the
framework of a game
system which is appropriate for the type
of actions simulated
and the system itself
has been around
long enough that we
have learned to accept with grace its
peccadillos.

Rommel is
designed (as are virtually all of
SSG's releases these days)
TITLE:
Rommel: Battles for North Africa
SYSTEMS:
Apple, C64/128
within the framework of the
PRICE:
$40.00
Battlefront system. The game
DESIGNERS:
Roger Keating,
Ian Trout,
system has evolved so little
Mark Holman,
since the original release of
Phil Niven, &
Battlefront that I feel a bit silly
David Freer
PUBLISHER:
Strategic Studies Group
describing it once again.
Walnut Creek, CA
Nevertheless, for any recentlyemerged under-rock-dwellers,
here again is the capsule description. The game system
simulates operational level engagements between opposing
forces up to one Corps in size. The maneuver elements on
the map are battalions, though the smallest organization the
player can interact with is a parent regiment. Ground scales
range from about 800 meters up to about 2 kilometers per
hex and the time scale uses four turns per day (3 daylight
turns and one turn for night activity).
The real focus of the Battlefront system is putting the
player into a realistic role of the overall commander present

at the battle. Thus, the orders you can give to each of the
(up to) three divisions under your control each turn are
limited to: allocation of divisional assets among the regiments, allocation of off-board artillery and air support, movement orders for the divisional headquarters, and individual
orders to the component regiments. These regimental orders constitute the heart of moving and fighting with your
units, and they are constrained within realistic limits. Your
available orders for the regiments will depend on the contact status of each regiment with enemy units. Orders include movement towards either scenario objective hexes or
contacted enemy units, four levels of attack (probe, prepare,
assault, and exploit), three levels of defensive mode (support, defend, and delay), and entering "reserve" mode (time
to retire, regroup, and rest).
When you actually play the game, the entire system is
menu driven and becomes old hat fairly quickly. The access
system was really one of the best design features of Battlefront, and not to have meddled with it in subsequent
games is a credit to the designers. You fight your battle (a
scenario) somewhat by the seat of your pants; there are no
hard and fast combat values available for your troops and
only scant intelligence available on enemy forces. For each
of your units, you will know: whether it is infantry, armor, armored cars, anti-tank, or another of the fifteen discreet unit
types available; what types of vehicles or major weapons are
utilized (if you don't know what "Pz Ilj" or "Bofors 40mm"
means, that's tough, there is no glossary); what their casualty level is (in increments of 10%); what their fitness level is
(ranging from fresh to exhausted); whether they are "routed"
or not; and their administrative and supply situations. For
enemy units, you don't know anything until they have been
"contacted" by friendly forces. Then, you are told whether a
unit is "large" or "small" and "infantry" or "armor." Each turn,
you can give orders to each of the regiments under your
control. Then, you sit back and watch as the two to four
component battalions in each regiment (the actual "units"
on the map) move and fight according to their regimental
commander's interpretation of your orders. The system
design does a good job of removing superfluous decisions
from your role as overall commander. That is, you don't,
and a Corps commander wouldn't, determine the hex-byhex line of march for each battalion in each regiment in
each division in your Corps. That level of detail is left to underlings (in this case, the computer).
So, that's the Battlefront system in a (pretty big) capsule.
What, then, is new about Rommel? Well, the folks at SSG
make a pretty big deal of the new system refinements compared to previous releases, Battles In Normandy and Halls
Of Montezuma; but you really won't even notice them. One
possible exception is "brittleness." Now, as in Halls of Montezuma, some formations can be specified in a scenario as
brittle. This means that if they are chewed up beyond a certain point, they have been permanently damaged and no
amount of rest in reserve status will bring them back up.
You should make a note of any potentially brittle units
before playing any scenario, and be very careful to monitor
their casualty levels. Other system changes will probably be
welcome additions if you are currently designing your own
scenarios using any of the Battlefront games, but "players"
just won't be aware of them too much.
Speaking of designing your own scenarios, you can't really
discuss Rommel (or any of the Battlefront games) without
mentioning the scenario design utilities which are included.
The fact that SSG games are so "open" is still much to be
lauded. The last 20 pages of the Rommel booklet describes
how to use the "Warplan" utility to either design your own
scenarios or make any modification you desire to the Rom-

mel scenarios. You can access virtually every element of
what defines virtually everything in a game; design your own
maps, design your own graphics icons (using the new "Warpaint" utility), design your own units with whatever sorts of
capabilities you want, design your own organizations of
units, and design your own scenario parameters. In essence, there is absolutely nothing to have kept you from
designing all eight of the scenarios in Rommel yourself. So,
why not do it yourself, right? Why should you pay for this
whole game, when you could have done it yourself with just
the utilities? I'll tell you why. It is a lot of work to design a
scenario. It is more work to input the mounds of data that
make up a scenario and it is a tremendous undertaking to
design a scenario that is realistic, balanced, historically accurate, and fun to play.
That's what it comes down to, basically, with this game.
You are paying all of that money for someone to have
developed those eight scenarios for you within the Battlefront framework. Is that the kind of thing you want to pay
for? My answer is a resounding "Yes." There is no way in the
world that I would ever have spent the time to do so complete a job on similar scenarios (I also don't make laminated
mapsheets or 72 page rulebooks for my homemade
scenarios). The situations are all interesting; the forces, objectives, and terrain types are varied; the details are historically accurate; and the system allows the flow of a typical battle
to develop in a very realistic manner.
I he selection of scenarios is excellent; no setpiece assaults like Second El Alemain; mostly fluid situations; and
due consideration to some of the less well publicized

aspects of North Africa (Scenario One on the British drive
into Vichy Syria and Lebanon during June, 1941, is a good
example). Pure routs are avoided (Beda Fomm might be a
fun solitaire scenario to design yourself), and many of the
well known battles are
represented by
scenarios covering
only the most interesting parts of the action.
The scenarios include
three from the 1942
desert campaign (Sidi
Rezegh, The
Cauldron, and Alem el
Haifa), three from the
Tunisian campaign
(Kasserine, Maknassy,
and Tebourga Gap), a
hypothetical Invasion of Malta during 1942, and the
aforementioned action in Syria.
That is the essence of Rommel: good scenarios, good
development, good system. Wait a minute, what about that
line about the Battlefront system having "peccadillos" we
have learned to accept? (I'll bet Ian Trout stopped reading
this review right there!) Well, I stand by the statement, but
my gripes with the Battlefront system are minor compared
to my enjoyment of the current offering. Rather than take a
chance of confusing the message of this review, I'll hold
that discourse for some future "commentary" article. The
message of this review?—Excellent game.

The Politics
of War
(Continued from page 31)

period covered, aside from having read and watched James
Clavell's Shogun. In fact, the title of the game almost
reminds one of what Buffalo Bob used to say to the Peanut
Gallery on the Howdy Doody show—"Kowabunga, kids!"
Nevertheless, instead of a childish kid show from the Fifties,
Koei Corporation has presented an articulate simulation.
Oda Nobunaga was a daimyo in central Japan. Machiavellian by nature, ruthless by method, and successful by
(Continued on page 48)

The Mesmerism of History Making
There are, frankly, aspects of this game that are poor. For
example, it
would have
been nice to be
able to print out
a hard copy of
statistical information. Providing record
sheets for the
generals would
save a lot of
time, too. Some
of the combat
mechanics mentioned earlier do
not make sense
and should be
changed. Nevertheless,
Romance of the
Three Kingdoms
is a great historical simulation
and will keep
players at their
keyboards for
many a night in
order to win
their empires. It
has economics,
intrigue, bribery, covert action,
TITLE:
Nobunaga's Ambitions'
diplomacy, war, and more! There
SYSTEM:
IBM with CCA or EGA
PLAYERS:
1-8
are many ways beyond simple conPRICE:
$59.95
quest to accomplish one's goals. I
DESIGNER:
Bill Swartz
(American Version)
most heartily recommend Romance
PLJBLISHER:Koei Corp.
to all serious game players out there.
Torrance, CA

NOBUNAGA'S AMBITION
by M. Evan Brooks
Nobunaga's Ambition is a detailed economic / diplomatic
/ political / military simulation of the unification of Japan in
the Sixteenth Century. The period is one known to few Occidental garners and the beauty of Nobunaga's Ambition is
that it painlessly teaches history while maximizing enjoyment
and sheer fun.
This reviewer admits to an abysmal ignorance of the

The Wisdom
of Oda
Brooks
(1) Be patient; early aggression is the surest road
to defeat. Since the daimyo begins at an early age,
one can look forward to c. 40 more years of life.
Therefore, develop a sufficient base in terms of both
economic and military spheres before expanding.
(2) Initial moves should be confined to increasing
tax rates, productivity, and the military. As morale
decreases in both military and civilian sectors, some
assets will have to be "squandered" on "people
goals", or as the Federal Government currently
defines it, "quality initiatives".
(3) Alliances can be rewarding; however, carefully
consider the advantages and drawbacks of early
pacts. While pacts/marriages may insure peaceful
borders, insure that a route of expansion is available.
(4) Be careful with computer-administered fiefs.
Military fiefs will become aggressive subordinates,
often embarking on rash conquests and suffering ignominious defeats. This reviewer recommends careful supervision of computer-administered fiefs;
military fiefs should be restricted to rear areas, where
they can maximize training and numbers of recruits
without having a target for premature expansion.
(5) While restructuring the army is somewhat costly
early in the game (30 gold pieces), the need for
such action is prime. Combat success is dependent
upon the bigger unit pounding the smaller unit into
submission. The usual army is composed of five
units (command, cavalry, rifles, and 2 infantry). If the
command unit is destroyed, the battle is lost;
however, this unit can usually be protected by terrain and other units. Therefore, this reviewer recommends adjustment of initial disposition (20-20-20-2020) into a strong wedge (10-59-21-0-0) formation,
i.e. weakening the command unit, maximizing the
cavalry and rifles, and deleting the infantry.
(6) Some commands are less effective than others.
Stealing peasants is rarely used, and as the designer
of the American version, Bill Swartz, notes, arranging marriage pacts are analogous to nuclear missiles, i.e. use them carefully!

CAMPAIGN '88
(Continued from page 15)

functioning, the moral is to organize
often and early. Also, just as in real life,
fund raising is directly proportional to
one's organizational efficiency. Organization is a very important underlying principle in both the game and "real life."
What is not authentic about this
product's "parlor game" approach to the
presidential election is that any player
may call an election in any state at any
time he/she has been organized in that
state for, at least, four turns and happens to be located in a state with the
same color code. On the other hand,
since the one who organizes first in a
given state will have an organizational
advantage whenever the election is
held, this is probably not critical to the
outcome.
The third lesson to be learned from
this "parlor game" approach to politics is
that "Politics is not pretty." In fact, "dirty
tricks" are a vital part of the strategy
available to players and an integral part
of the fun in the game. If sex scandals,
rumors of plagiarism, and campaign contributions linked to questionable contract awards sound familiar to you, it is
because Campaign Promises has
gleaned a "Murphy's Law" list of 25 possible acts of campaign sabotage. Learning to use these disasters effectively is
important to the game.
Finally, candidates must learn to use
advertising effectively. This is the final
step prior to receiving the election
results in any given state. Each candidate is allowed to type in what he/she
plans to spend in advertising for that
state. This has a direct bearing on the
third kind of votes in the vote count, advertising votes. In one of our games,
judicious use of advertising dollars in
close elections (where all candidates
were organized within a turn of each
other and had an equal number of
promises factored in) made the difference in five key states (and ultimately,
the entire election). Actually, the only
kind of votes that players cannot impact
in this game are the fourth kind, just
plain luck votes.
All in all, Campaign Promises is fast
enough to be a good family game; offers enough strategy to intrigue the
thinking gamer; provides enough luck
to attract the casual gamer; teaches
enough valid lessons to make citizens

think at election time; and is entertaining enough to make one play it over
and over. If one does not want too
cerebral a game, but is interested in
politics, Campaign
Promises has a lot to
offer.

Paint
Your
Bandwagon
On The Campaign
Trail is a detailed and extremely well-documented simulation of a
senatorial campaign in
a fictitious state with
finely balanced
demographics. It has a
wealth of information
and options at the
players' fingertips. The
lessons to be learned in
this game are not fleeting
and can easily be seen at
work on both the local
and national political
scenes.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:

PUBLISHER:

The first time we played
this simulation (There is no computer
opponent, so you will need to find a
friend to oppose you), we wanted to do
everything possible. We wanted to raise
funds, make campaign appearances,
use direct mailing,
produce media spots,
select media buys,
and take surveys.
Utilizing these
weapons, we were
determined to run an
aggressive and issueoriented campaign.
If you expect to ever
succeed in real world
politics, you should
never run an issue-oriented campaign.
The documentation makes use of Benjamin Page's "Theory of Political Ambiguity," a principle enunciated in the
American Political Science Review in
1976. Stated succinctly, Page suggested
that taking a position on any policy

issue involves a voter trade-off. Therefore, candidates should focus on general
"consensus" issues where most voters
agree ("Issues" like the need for leadership, experience, and vigor).
Even though the game affords candidates the greatest number of opportunities to take a stand on different issues, we discovered that the player who
consistently stuck to consensus issues
did much better than the player who
carved out a distinctive policy position.
How does this hold up
in real life? Note who
the presidential candidates are. Are the
nominees the ones
who pushed "issues" or
general leadership
ability during the
primary campaigns? Indeed, weren't the issueoriented Babbitt and
Gephardt eliminated
very early from the
Democratic race? How
about the issueoriented Robert Dole in
the Republican race?
Another significant
lesson to be learned in
this simulation had to
do with timing. The
documentation maps
out a formula for a successful political camOn The Campaign Trail
paign. The first phase is
IBM
devoted to developing
2
"Name Recognition" and
$29.95
Murray Fishel,
takes place from 100-45
David Copoian, &
days prior to election day.
J. Michael Stacey
Campaigns & Elections
In the game, this must be
Washington, D.C.
accomplished by raising
funds and using the
media effectively. We learned to use the
survey function to determine where our
candidate was behind among the
viewers of each television network.
Then, we could focus our media buys
onto those networks
where we needed improvement.
The second phase
focuses on "Candidate Credibility" and
takes place from 4521 days before the
election. We found
that this is a good
time to bring in
celebrities and assign
them to speak in the counties best
suited demographically for their message. This may also be the best time to
find a consensus issue like being concerned about the federal deficit and getting some mileage out of that position.
(Continued on page 47)

Review

U.M.S.
Another Look
by M. Evan Brooks

Introduction
Universal Military Simulator (UMS) has already been subjected to considerable coverage. With a "Sneak Preview"
(CGW No. 43,
January 1988) and a
"Modification" article
by the designer
(CGW No. 48, June
1988), the product
has been billed as
"definitely a
breakthrough
product". Is UMS a
breakthrough
product or one merely of media hyperbole? Naturally, the
editors at CGW assigned the review to
this iconoclast, "affectionately" referred to
as the "Howard
Cosell of wargame
critics" (at least, those
are the nicer things
that have been said).
To avoid the
suspense, the answer
is yes and no. UMS is
a new and innovative
TITLE:
U.M.S.
wargame—it does represent a
Universal Military Simulator
breakthrough in some aspects.
SYSTEMS:
Atari ST/IBM
However, it is a first generation
REVIEWED ON: IBM
PRICE:
$39.95
of the game structure and cerDESIGNER:
D. Ezra Sidran
tain defects/bugs/omissions are
PUBLISHER:
Rainbird Software
Menlo Park, CA
present. Whether the game
belongs in your library depends
on how you feel about pioneer efforts. That is, their innovation may cover defects which will be corrected in later
productions.

Documentation
The documentation is well done. The user manual succintly delineates the use of the simulation as well as design
modifications that the user can input. The scenario handbook presents an excellent summary of the five scenarios included in the basic game (Arbela, Hastings, Marston Moor,
Waterloo and Gettysburg). Mr. Sidran has several additional
scenarios under construction taken from Creasy's Fifteen
Decisive Battles of the World (Tentatively, these would include Blenheim, Saratoga and Valmy, plus a scenario from
World War II (a Bulge scenario has already been finished),
as well as an American Civil War disk (Shiloh, Chattanooga,
and Antietam) and Vietnam disk (by Ed Bever) due to be

released in late September. Players can also download usercreated scenarios from Compuserve's Atari ST SIG. Some
are also available for downloading on GEnie.

The Game
UMS is impressive. There is no disputing that fact. While
unprotected, the infamous "type in the third word of the
second paragraph of page 13" is used to prevent illegal
duplication. However, once the player gains access to the
simulation, the topographical battlefield is an inspiring sight.
Even non-wargamers will be impressed. There is no question that the topographical terrain is the star of this product.
UMS is a "miniatures" simulation with three-dimensional
"feel" reduced to the two-dimensional screen.
One can choose to view the battlefield from an infinite
variety of perspectives (e.g. north, northwest, zoom
southeast, etc.), as well as looking at a particular sector in
depth. On top of the views, UMS allows any of these views
to be quickly and easily dumped to a printer for hardcopy access.
The sheer number of units tend to overshadow one
another, but UMS allows one to zoom in on each particular
unit in order to determine strength, type, morale, efficiency,
moves, speed and status.
Turns can be variable in duration, but in the "canned"
scenarios are generally an hour and a half. Thus, the user
must order his army to the objective and watch its execution. Traffic management is a definite consideration herein.
Contact may be viewed in detail or in overview. In detail,
each separate engagement is rated for strength, weaponry,
terrain elevation, weaponry, morale, status, efficiency and accuracy. Interim and final analyses of battle results show
casualties in gross numbers, percentages, and also a
graphic representation of both sides in a "pie chart".
Units already available for use include infantry (heavy/light),
cavalry (heavy/light), archers, elephants, chariots, knights,
catapults, pikemen, artillery (field/horse/armored), headquarters, armor, airborne and assault troops. In addition,
one can create up to another six types of troops (e.g. space
marines, orcs, MASH units).

The Pluses
(1) UMS is an easily modified construction set. The terrain
views and the facility with which one can create both terrain
and unit types defies the imagination.
(2) The computer can be used with 0-2 players. Watching
the computer play itself is a valid learning tool, as one can
observe the general flow of battle which the computer
develops. In solitaire play, one can allow the computer to
decide its own strategy or compel it in several modes (e.g.
offensive, defensive, left/right flank attack, double envelopment, center thrust).
(3) UMS's greatest strength lies in its flexibility. While titled
as a "Universal Military Simulator", even the designer concedes that the title is somewhat exaggerated. Nevertheless,
UMS is a new concept and one whose descendants will
pave a new path in computer wargaming.

The Minuses
(1) UMS is not a true Universal simulator. Terrain effects
are limited to four levels; this means that while geographic

height can be portrayed, there is simply no provision for
urban combat.
Mr. Sidran has acknowledged this. Initially, the simulator
was to be a construction set with an emphasis on open field
simulations. Portraying the effects of urban combat are
simply beyond the capabilities of the simulation. [Ed.: Not to
mention the lack of water with no rivers or seas. Sorry, Admiral Nelson, you are not part of this universe!]
(2) Victory conditions are dependent on enemy casualties.
While this is normally the case, terrain objectives can override normal military guidance. Mr. Sidran's modification (cf.
CGW #48) includes a "quick fix;" one simply creates a "wild
card" unit with a high strength value but a firepower of zero.
The problem with this is that it is a one-way street. Once the
victory unit is overrun, there is no reason for the opponent
to retake the objective. Thus, there is no way to compel a
see-saw battle over a key terrain site. Once it has fallen, its
utility in game terms is finished.
(3) The Artillery/Armor Phenomenon. If one examines the
power of artillery, there is a sense of surprise. The units are
powerful. Since artillery can "shoot and scoot" or vice versa,
players quickly learn that optimal tactics include using artillery in pre-twentieth century as the cutting edge of the assault. The Napoleonic tactic of massing artillery in the face
of the enemy has been modified to include massing artillery
through the face of the enemy—not realistic, but effective.
(4) The program execution is slow. UMS redraws the battle with each move. The slowness of the IBM execution
quickly turns a tense battle situation into a tedious waiting
game. This reviewer has been told that the ST version has a
much faster execution, but IBM users simply have to bear
with it.
(5) The simulation covers set piece battles. There is no
easy way to allow reinforcements to enter the battlefield at a
later time. While one could expand the battlefield and place
the reinforcements further from the point of decision, this is
an artificial fix.

Observations and Preconceptions
There is an interesting phenomenon of movement in
UMS. Moving across elevation changes costs an additional
movement point; but if this is the last point, the movement
can be made. For example, if a unit can move four movement points, the following example can occur. If the elevation change occurs at point two, the unit will only be able
to move three points in total. However, if the terrain changes at point four, the unit will be able to "crest" the hill.
This is a basic change from most wargames. Traditional
board and computer wargames "round down", i.e. if one
lacks sufficient points to make the objective, then one has
to wait until the following turn. On reflection, though, that
convention is artificial. It is just as accurate to acknowledge
that units nearing their objective may rush the last few feet
to make the grade. Thus, while traditional wargamers may
feel that this "bonus" is incorrect, they should examine their
mindset beforehand.
Also, note that scenarios have been modified for play
balance. Thus, at Waterloo, the Prussians have been
omitted. That's like throwing a surprise party and forgetting
to invite the guest of honor.

Conclusions
UMS is an easily modified construction set. Its strength lies

in the terrain and the ability to view the battlefield from different angles. Its weakness lies in its attempting to accomplish more than it can deliver.
Mr. Sidran has considered revision of a "War College" version which would add to the complexity and realism. Currently, UMS delivers an open terrain set-piece battle. The
computer intelligence is not overly bright (given the burdens
placed upon it,
this is not
surprising; a one
scenario game
[e.g. Gettysburg
or Hastings] can
develop more intelligence for the
specific battle
situation—a
general construction set has to
be somewhat accurate overall).
Playability is somewhat awkward and the end result is a
modified "beer and pretzels" conflict simulation. Then again,
sometimes a little beer and pretzels hit the spot.
Overall, UMS is impressive, but its flaws are apparent. If
you are interested in creating your own battles, then UMS is
highly recommended. On the other hand, if you desire to
learn accurate lessons from military history, then UMS may
be a shade too general. This first generation simulation is
an interesting design; its third or fourth generation descendant may prove essential.

Game Hints

Warning: Scorpia, the venerated
storyteller in Adventuredom's most
famous tavern ("Scorpion's Tale")
conjures up illuminating hints about
games. Let the reader beware!
Ahhhh . . . summer is winding
own and autumn is almost here
about time, too!). Fred is
back from the Grues Convention,
where the proposal against daylight
savings time was passed unanimously, so he's feeling pretty
pleased at the moment. Let's hope
he doesn't get carried away and
make the drinks too strong. Your
mind needs to be in good shape for
a P.A.R.T.I. of another kind.

d

you can get your mind out of the computer. Mainly, you have to find five keys
to put in the desk and obtain five
mystery objects (or elements, as the
game calls them) to prepare yourself for
the shutdown (which sounds pretty
ominous). A piece of cake, right?
One thing you should do is check your

Scorpion's
Tale

Dr. Dumont's Wild P.A.R.T.I. (for
Particle Accelerator and Reality Translation Integrator) is a bizarre mental journey inside a sophisticated computer. Not
that you planned on this, it happens sort
of by accident. Dr. Dumont (just this
side of being a mad scientist) is trying to
teach the computer how to view subatomic particles, in particular Particle X.
In order to teach the computer how to
see it, he needs a human being to link
up mentally with the machine. He
doesn't mean you, though. He just
wants you to get inside the shell so he
can make some adjustments. Naturally,
something goes wrong and before you
can say "subatomic theory," your mind is
inside the computer. What fun!

There isn't much in the apartment
aside from the jeans, so after taking
those it's time to see what else is out
there. What you come to is a lab room,
much like the one you were just in (or
are still in, depending on how you want
to look at it) before all this started.
Radiating off this room are eight entrances that lead to interesting places (including the apartment, which you won't
need to go back to for some time).
You can visit them in almost any order,
but I highly recommend going north first
to the schoolhouse. Here, you find out
some of things you need to do before

Do visit all the rooms and take everything you can get your hot little hands
on (somewhere in there, Prof. Parti
will show up with some instructions
for you). Then, sit at the desk to read
the koans. What's a koan? Play the
game and find out! (grin) Each koan
relates to one of the puzzles you
must solve to obtain a key, so read
them carefully (you can come back
at any time to re-read them, if you
need to refresh your memory).
When you are done with the
school, return to the lab and try the NE
entrance, which leads you to that blue
prairie you saw from the window of your
apartment. Further, along is the
pyramid. Inside it, sitting on a pedestal,
is a teddy bear (just what you've always
wanted!). Unfortunately, the light reflecting off the pyramid's many surfaces
makes vision a bit difficult. In fact, not
only difficult, but impossible. Awwwwww.
Well, maybe you should leave that for
now and continue onwards to Doc
Gravity's world-famous kite races. Make
sure you read the flyer that came with
the game, as it contains some important
information on racing kites (where, by
the way, you run and the kite flies,
hehe). You'll get something quite useful
when you win the race (if you don't win,
try again).

Ok, maybe not such fun, as the only
way to get out again is to view the
mysterious Particle X, represented in the
game as that famous celebrity of stage
and screen, Fred, A Star (no relation to
my Fred!).
You begin in what seems to be an
apartment, but there are some odd
things about it, like the fact that some of
the furniture is just painted on the walls
and not real at all or the window that's a
sheet of clear plastic looking out on a
blue prairie with a pyramid on it. Right
off, you get the idea that this is going to
be a weird one. You've got the right idea.

we'll start at the noon position (so to
speak) and work our way around the
clock. That's the school, with four rooms
in all (you will find that mapping is not
necessary in most cases, as the individual areas are fairly small).

score frequently, especially each time
you pick up an item in the game. This is
the only way to tell if you have found
one of the five shutdown elements (the
keys are pretty obvious). You really do
need all of them.
Oh yes, one more thing. Learn to
meditate (with the proper objects) early
in the game. Often, meditating on something can give you a valuable hint on
the solution to a puzzle (not always, but
sometimes it comes in handy).
With that said, let's do some more exploring. Some of the areas are self-contained puzzles, in that everything you
need to solve the problems are around
in that area somewhere. You simply
have to manage to figure out what to
do. Some places will need to be revisited, because you need items from
another area. So, the order you visit
them isn't too important. Be ready to restore, though, just in case.
Since order isn't absolutely necessary,

East of the lab is the apartment, and
you've already been there, so SE is the
next stop. Here you find a museum full
of interesting exhibits (but don't neglect
the outside!). One of them displays a
nifty laser, but it's behind glass, and you
can't take it (they ARE making things
hard for you, aren't they?).
Moving along, you come to an odd display of a large glass slab balanced on a
crystal pyramid (no, don't push the
slab!). You may want to look at both of
them. From there you proceed to
another exhibit, showing a waterwheel
and a generator. There doesn't seem to
be much you can do here, at least not
at the moment. Maybe you'll have better
luck with the water chamber.
This large room has several controls,
as well as inlets and outlets. Plenty for
you to fool around with or even drown
yourself with, if you aren't careful (save
the game before you touch anything). I'll
bet you think there's a connection
among all these things and you are
quite correct, although there might be a

missing connection somewhere. Think
about it.
South of the lab is the theater. You
won't be able to get in the front door
right now, but there is an alleyway with a
convenient fire escape to let you in backstage, where you find yourself up on the
catwalk. This ain't called a catwalk for
nothing, either: go far enough, and you
find yourself facing a pretty ferocious
feline (He's hungry, and kitty chow isn't
on the menu).
Of course, you'll find a way to deal with
the cat eventually, and when you do,
you can visit a couple of interesting
dressing rooms (actually, you can get to
one of them right now, if you prefer).
One of them has a makeup brush and a
souvenir ("Viva I as Vegas!") pillow; the
other has the most weird clock you've
ever seen. Just be real careful how you
handle that clock! (Oooops . . . I told
you to be careful, and now you're kinda'
dead . . . Well, look around at everything. There's a clue there somewhere
on what to do).
Southwest of the lab is the
planetarium, a pretty dark place (as
might be expected). Without a light
source, you probably won't get very far
(at least you don't have to worry about
grues!). When you can find your way
around, one thing you'll pass is a small
exhibit on the vacuum of space: a jar
with a key inside. You may be tempted
to break the jar. I wouldn't advise it, at
least not without some way of keeping
yourself in one piece.
Further on is the projector room. Too
bad the projector isn't working these
days, or you could get to see a neat star
show. Looks like a part of the device is
missing . . . (sigh!). Then again, who
knows . . . you might come across the
missing part somewhere or other.
Whatever you do, look around a bit
more before you leave.
To the west of the lab is the pond
area, with some other places of interest,
especially the clearing where a huge
pinata hangs from a tree. I wonder what
could be inside? You could break it and
find out, if only you had something to
break it with.
Aha, a duck! Well, what else would you
expect to find around a duck pond? Ok,
maybe not a duck in a Groucho mask
("Say the secret word."), but this
feathered friend can be very helpful to
you, in more ways than one. A leisurely
stroll around the pond and environs will
show you that.
Finally, northwest of the lab is the fair
grounds. Here you can re-live your
childhood by playing ring toss (just try to
figure out the right prize to take .. .

hehe!) and upset your stomach with rollercoasters and other fun rides. There is
Karni's Korner, where you can take the
Milky Way quiz (I hope you're up on
your astronomy and candy . . . you simply have to know the right answers, there
are no clues in the game to this. Also,
you only get one chance to take the
quiz, so save first!). Everything here, by
the way, is self-contained, so you should
have little trouble at all obtaining the key
(sure Scorp, easy for you to say...grin).
Hmm, that does seem to complete our
tour of all the places around the lab. By
this time (with perhaps a little back-tracking now and then), you should have all
the keys and shutdown elements. So,
don't just stand there. Go put the keys
in the desk and get your diploma. Showtime is almost here!
However, before you go running off to
the theater, you'll want to be carrying all
those shutdown elements . . . you may
not have much time on your way back
to pick them up (this means, ahem, that
you'll have to er, drop your jeans to
make room for everything . . . hope you
aren't the shy type . . . hehe!).
So, at last, you get to see Fred, A Star!
Look fast, though, because he won't be
there for very long and other things are
going to start happening about now,
like the shutdown. Uh oh. What are you
going to do about this? Well, maybe you
should sleep on it, and the answer will
come to you (grin).
One word of caution here to IBM
owners: the version I played had a flaw
in it: while I had all five shutdown elements, the program insisted on telling
me I only had four of them. This caused
me a lot of unnecessary grief and running around looking for something I already had. Fortunately, this did not affect winning, since I was able to complete the end game without any
problems (whew). As to what that particular item was (and it was always the
same one), I'll just say it was no bull.
Well, I see by the old invisible clock on
the wall it's about that time again. If you
need help with an adventure game, you
can reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie: Stop by the Games RoundTable
(type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
On The Source: Send SMail to
ST1030. By US Mail (Enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in
the US and want a reply!): Scorpia, PO
Box 338, Gracie Station, NY NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!Copyright 1988 by Scorpia, all
rights reserved.

Playtest Report

View From A
Playtester
The Amiga Conversion of
"Gettysburg: The Turning
Point"
by R. F. Batchelder
en Strategic Simulations, Inc. released Gettysburg: The Turning Point in July, 1986, it was an immediate success. Released for the Apple II family of
computers, it was soon followed with ports for the 8-bit
Commodore and Atari, as well as IBM PC. If you owned one
of the new 16-bit computers, you were out of luck. Well,
there is good news.
SSI has finally
released a new port
for the Amiga. The
usual procedure is to
make any conversion
a straight port with
provision for mouse
and enhanced
graphics and sound.
Gettysburg, though,
is an exception to the
rule. From the moment you boot it up,
Gettysburg on the
Amiga will simply
blow you away. Gone
are the stark white
lines with black background that has
characterized practically all SSI wargames to date. Your
battle map is now a
pleasing green that is
reminiscent of the Wargame Construction Set. Higher elevations are progressively lighter and outlined in brown for easy
viewing, giving the whole map a completely different appearance from that of its 8-bit cousin. In fact, it is almost a
bird's eye view. Roads are a dusty brown and rivers, creeks,
or runs are a rippled blue. The town actually looks like a
small town viewed from overhead and trees are portrayed so
that there is no mistaking what were unidentifiable blobs on
some 8-bits.

which was digitized right out of a Hollywood movie. Another
pleasant audio surprise is the "Runaway!" screamed by routing troops as they flee the field (Hmm! I didn't think that
was an American Civil War film.)
Another nice feature is the player's option of using the
familiar SSI keyboard configuration, IBM configuration, or
mouse interface. All three are easy to use, so it depends en
tirely on the player's preference. There is even an option to
use both mouse and keyboard.
Applause and plaudits go to Eric Hyman for this tremendous little gem. Amiga owners may recognize him as the fellow responsible for Kampfgruppe on the Amiga. Though
the product has been long in the making, the wait has
definitely been worth it. We should also be hearing a lot
more from Eric Hyman, since several more of SSI's ACW
series of games are in the planning stages.
As with most things in life, one must take the good with
the bad. So it is with Gettysburg on the Amiga. While some
marvelous changes have been made for the port, the basic
game system has remained the same. Personally, this
gamer would have loved to have seen a few changes. For
example, it would have been nice to have a random retreat
plot instead of the usual predictable one. After all, is anything really predictable in war? How about permanent loss
of efficiency when a unit takes casualties? It's hard to understand how a unit could suffer 40 to 50% casualties and
have the same efficiency. Every gamer probably has their
own changes they would like to see made.

One of the most significant graphic improvements for
game play is that units no longer block out the terrain they
occupy. No longer will players have to access the terrain key
in order to determine if their units are in advantageous terrain or are sitting ducks out in the open.

Interestingly enough, SSI has always been responsive to
garners when they engage them in discussion or correspondence. Nevertheless, at the present, SSI feels that sales for
the Amiga ports do not justify any changes other than those
for ease of game play. One can understand this attitude,
why make changes if sales do not warrant them? So, I encourage fellow wargamers to buy those Amiga ports if you
want to be able to argue for more substantive changes.
Above all, I encourage you not to pirate any programs. Is it
possible that the low sales which SSI feels do not justify
design changes are due to piracy? Since SSI games have
provided me with many hours of enjoyment, I would feel
badly if they reduced their commitment to wargames, due
to low sales.

Of course, since this is an Amiga port, one would expect
more than improved graphics. Another strong point of this
conversion, like its predecessor on the 16-bit, Kampfgruppe,
is that of sound. Particularly impressive is the artillery fire

Gettysburg is an award winner and the Amiga port definitely enhances this program. Therefore, it you should be able
to concur with me that this improved version is definitely
worth the price.

I

CAMPAIGN '88
(Continued from page 36)

It may sound like an "issue" that could
get your candidate in trouble, but it isn't
really a problem until your candidate
gets specific about what he/she is going
to do about the deficit. That is where
candidates start to lose votes, as well as
gain them in Page's trade-off. Whatever
you do, though, do not use up all the
available celebrity visits or you won't
have any extra boost for the final phase.
The third phase involves "Contrast/Attack." The game does not really make
any allowance for this period which
usually takes place from 21-5 days
before the election. This would make
the game more interesting if such a
provision were included, but may be just
as well omitted since it is also the area
where a politician is most likely to have
his tactic backfire. The lack of opportunity to do this should remind the
player of the necessity of taking Page's
high ground of consensus.
Finally, there is the "Bandwagon"
phase from 5 days prior until the election. Players should hold some high
profile celebrities in reserve for this final
week of campaigning and a significant
war chest of media dollars for one last
media blitz. The impression to be
desired in this phase is that your candidate is well-known, competent, and
the inevitable winner. Sound familiar?
Frankly, On The Campaign Trail is an
awesome program that can teach
players more about politics than several
college courses. However, the program
uses so many different demographics
and variables that it is often slow in execution. Every media buy must be calculated separately and the interface requires the same basic information to be
reset over and over again when using
the "Media" option. If the simulation
could only be sped up and made more
friendly, this would be the perfect election game. It offers play balance, sound
political principles, and numerous options. What more could one ask?

Hail To The Chief
Each of these software products offers
valuable insights on elections in the
United States. Some of the insights are
rather frightening, but all are enlighten-

ing. This reviewer only wishes that more
eighth grade courses in the constitution
and high school courses in civics had access to this software. It might make a
lasting difference.

Nobunaga himself, and computer generated visages of the
daimyos (feudal lords).

The Politics
of War
(Continued from page 34)

events, Nobunaga had subdued circa one-half of Japan
before his career ended by treacherous means. His protege,
Tokugawa leyasau, completed Oda's dream by uniting
Japan and becoming Sei-i-taishogun (Commander-in-Chief
of the Empire) in 1603. His dynasty ruled for the next three
centuries.
In Nobunaga's Ambition, the player's role is to begin as a
daimyo and strive for the Shogunate. While beginning as
Oda has certain advantages, there are forty-nine (49) other
daimyos available as well, each with his own distinct personality.

High Gloss Presentation
The documentation is highly polished. As a bonus, Koei
has included a 17" x 22" poster. On the obverse is a map of
Japan delineating the fifty (50) fiefs, sites of major battles
during the Warring States Period, the route of march of Oda

The documentation is complete and well-indexed. Although somewhat long (123 pages), half of the documentation is composed of historical sketches of the daimyos, a historical chronology and a discourse on Oda Nobunaga's life
and times.
The graphics for Nobunaga's Ambition are among the
best that this reviewer has ever seen for the IBM. While
much of the graphics are composed of maps, the small
touches reveal the craft that went into this product. Thus,
when the daimyo distributes rice to the peasants, a vignette
shows the lord throwing sheaves to the peasants who gratefully pick it up; as taxes are increased, the peasants flow
with tears.
When war begins, the screen changes to a 5x10 hex area
for the execution of the battle. Terrain is effectively
delineated as hill, mountain, village, river, plain or castle;
deployment is dependent on the route of invasion.
Overall, the graphics were surprisingly good, and more
reminiscent of Amiga/ST graphics than IBM.

Highly Efficient Interface
After deciding upon a daimyo, one must select a persona.
Akin to role playing games, characteristics are composed of
health, ambition, luck, charm and IQ. Generally, one should
reselect if any single characteristic is under 80 (especially
luck and/or IQ; there is nothing worse than a stupid daimyo).
The main display shows the regional fiefdoms. Initial selection may be made for a 17-fief game (central Japan) or a 50fief game (the entire Home Islands). While the documentation notes that a 17-fief scenario may be completed in 4
hours, this reviewer took 17 hours to complete the game
successfully.
Each turn (year) is composed of four seasons, during
which the daimyo ages (and will eventually die of old age).
Each daimyo may accomplish one action each season for
each fief he personally controls; these actions often affect
other parameters of play.
One may transfer soldiers between fiefs, go to war, increase taxes (which causes a decrease in peasant loyalty
which may lead to rebellion), transfer rice or gold to another
fief, raise the level of flood control (which decreases productivity), make a non-aggression pact or arrange a marriage,
cultivate (which increases productivity, but decreases
peasant loyalty), use a merchant (to buy/sell rice, borrow
funds, or purchase weapons), recruit for the military (soldiers or ninja), train the army (which increases fighting efficiency), spy on a rival, expand a town (which increases
taxes collected, but decreases peasant loyalty), give food/rice
to peasants/soldiers (to raise morale), steal peasants from
rival daimyos, allocate military strength, recuperate (even a
daimyo can get sick), turn over a controlled fief to the computer for administration, or pass a turn (hint: when one has
no idea of what to do, train the troops.)

High Profile Critique
Nobunaga's Ambition has been released in Japan for five
years. Yet, the game is fresh. Bill Swartz, who translated the
game for the U.S. market, notes that the product has been
through five major and, at least, four minor revisions before
the current American product. Koei contends that the game
is as historically accurate as possible (by the way, although

computer levels range from 1-5, level 1 is probably the most
historical).
This reviewer thoroughly enjoyed Nobunaga's Ambition.
Since any product can be improved, the following criticisms
are noted:
(1) This reviewer felt that the randomness of the initial
character generation served no purpose. However, Koei has
pointed out that in multi-player games, a stupid daimyo on
the active player's border is an asset beyond redemption.
Also, the expert may wish to strive for success with a sub-optimized daimyo. Koei stresses that Nobunaga's Ambition is
both a solitaire and a multi-player game.
(2) While initial battles are interesting, too many battles
can quickly generate battle fatigue; a quick combat option
(a la Roadwar 2000) would have been appreciated. Koei's
latest product (Genghis Khan), due in November, does have
a quick combat resolution mode.
(3) While Koei has tested their products on numerous configurations and passed with flying colors, this reviewer's
Zenith did have some problems, e.g. the "0" key would not
work and the NumLock zero had to be used (the comma
key). and while the game could be saved, a saved game
could not be reloaded on the Zenith, although it worked
fine on the Commodore PC-10-2. Will you have
problems? Probably not, but this is the first problem that
this reviewer has had with the Zenith.

The product retails at
$59.95, which brings it to the
higher end of the computer
game scale. In terms of dollars
per hour of computer enjoyment, though, Koei games are
relatively cheap. In fact,
Nobunaga retails in Japan for
9800 yen (c. $76.56). So,
even with yen inflation, the
American pricing does have its
advantages.

Highly
Recommended
This reviewer was glued to
his computer for 13 hours,
stopping at 3:00 am. Not
since Gunship has this occurred. The end result is that
the computer gamer must have, at least, one Koei game in
his inventory! By the way, if your local store does not handle
Koei, they will handle direct sales for customers without access to stores (c/o Koei Corporation, 20000 Mariner
Avenue, Suite 100, Torrance, CA 90503).

Video Gaming World
Video
Gaming
World's
Newswire
Videogame manufacturers
are tagging sports stars as
spokesmen for Autumn ad
campaigns. St. Louis Cardinal Ozzie Smith,
Washington Redskin Doug
Williams, and NBA slamdunk champ, Spud Webb,
will headline the Atari
videogame ads. Chicago
Bear Walter Payton and future Hall of Famer Reggie
Jackson are Sega spokesmen for new sports games.
Meanwhile, Acclaim tagged
the biggest star of them all,
7'S" and 500 pound Andre
the Giant, to tout their upcoming WWF WrestleMania
for NES. Crowds lined up at
the Summer Consumer
Electronics Show to meet
the monolithic monster and
get his autograph . . . Activision went to the arcades
for its latest 2600 videogame
titles: Commando, a crusade
through enemy territory
armed only with a machine
gun and hand grenades,
and Kung Fu Master, a martial arts battle through a
wizard's temple in order to
rescue the captive maiden.
Both will be available this
Fall. . . Atari will introduce
45 new games this year and
plans to spend $10 million
on an ad blitz. Many of the
games will be translations of
hit game originally produced
for computer gaming by
such companies as Accolade, Broderbund,
Cosmi, Data East, Epyx,
Electronic Arts, LucasFilm, and others . . .The
Flying Dragon (Culture
Brain) is yet another oriental
import scheduled to arrive in
the USA next spring. The
hero must fight in a fourpart battle against The Tusk

Soldiers, mysterious enemies
from another world. It is martial mayhem against
wrestlers, kick boxers, and
other super fighters . .
Home Express, a chain of
retail stores, named Nintendo their "Vendor of the
Year." The award was
presented to honor the vendor "who has given us the
most merchandising support
throughout the year" .. .
After one of the licensing
coups of the year, FCI
programmed Ultima for play
on the Nintendo. Already a
best-seller in Japan, the computer game classic grants
control of four characters in
a role-playing assault against
evil. Said to have over 100
hours of game time . . . Capcom watched cartoons for inspiration to design their

latest. Scheduled for Winter
1988 release, Mickey Mouse
is a romp through Wonderland as Mickey and Minnie
help Alice escape the evil
queen . . . LJN Toys went
on a license-shopping binge
this year! Who Framed
Roger Rabbit is the latest
videogame drawn from the
movies announced by the
licensing giant who has already spent big bucks for
rights to the hit movies,
Jaws, A Nightmare on Elm
Street, and Friday the 13th .
.. Hoop fans should be
watching out for Double
Dribble (Konami is publishing for NES). This
five-on-five basketball game has
simultaneous play for two
players, as well as competition against the computer . .
. An advance look at Sega's

Monopoly indicates this
could be a masterpiece. Up
to ten human or computer
opponents (or any combination thereof) compete on a
beautifully reproduced
playfield which includes,
among many other niceties,
animated dice and tokens. It
looks like a faithful recreation of the classic Parker
Brothers game . . . The
videogame industry is
coping with a chip shortage
that has some games indefinitely postponed and
others in short supply. Some
companies estimate they'll
only receive 30% of the
games they order from Nintendo (who manufactures
the cartridges and packaging for their third party licensees). Others set the figure
at a more optimistic 70%.
Bob Bernstein, VP of Sales
& Marketing for SunSoft discussed the problem with
CGW: "The chip problem will
delay shipment, but not stop
it. The numbers [of games
on the market] will be less
than expected until after the
end of this year." Bernstein
described his company's
philosophy of new game
releases: "We decided to
ship all the titles announced,
rather than concentrating on
larger numbers of just a few
titles." (The SunSoft titles
slated for Autumn release
are: Platoon, Blaster Master,
and later this year,
Xenophobe. Bernstein added
a rueful comment: "The industry is in a tremendous
growth period. This
[shortage] may weed out the
smaller, newer or inexperienced companies." What
does this mean to the
videogamer? This fall, some
of the scheduled games may
have delayed releases and
others may not appear until
next year . . . or never.
There should be plenty of
software available, but when
a retailer sells out, there

could be delay in getting
reorders filled. If you see a
title you would like, buy it
quickly, before the merchant
runs out of supplies!
—Joyce Worley

ega bases its system's
reputation on
S software that is, as
Buster Poindexter says, "Hot,
hot, hot!" Choplifter, Afterburner, and the two 3-D titles, 3-D Missile Defense and
Zaxxon-3D, all
promise and, to
various degrees,
deliver genuine
arcade quality
chills, thrills and
graphics.
The latest
entry in this
tradition is
Space Harrier,
a modified firstperson perspective marathon of
destruction that
is the best arcade shoot-'em-up of the
year. Nothing else Sega has
done, in two or three dimensions, surpasses this
faster-than-light roller coaster ride
through a realm inhabited
by mythological monsters,
jet planes, woolly mammoths, leviathan canaries,
gigantic killer robots and
much, much more.
The player is cast as the
Space Harrier, equipped with
a jet-propelled backpack and
armed with an automatic
weapon capable of discharging an infinite number of
pulse-like bursts. The Harrier
is viewed from a position just
behind him, much as the
player's vehicle is seen in
games like Pole Position.
The difference here is that
the Harrier can fly over the
checkerboard landscape at
tremendous speeds.
Two types of objects appear on the landscape:
enemy creatures and inert
objects (like trees, rocks,
weeds and mushrooms)
which can be obliterated
with the rifle and
indestructible structures (such as the
Tower of Doom, The Matsutake Mushroom, the Incaic
Poles and the Tower of

Swords) which cannot be affected. The player must
destroy the destructible and
avoid the indestructible
while travelling at great
speeds through nine levels
of increasing difficulty.

like the serpentine Squilla,
the rock-like Syura and the
twin-headed Salpedon.
These harrowing creatures
can only be destroyed by 16
clean hits to the head.

Warning: This is a game
designed for arcade
sharpshooters, but it can be
played, if not entirely
mastered, by those of us
who know our hand-eye
coordination is on the
downslide. It takes per-

For pure visceral excitement, Space Harrier is as
exciting a game as this
reviewer has ever played. So,
strap on that backpack, flip
the release on the pulse rifle
and start shooting!

TITLE:
Space Harrier
Sega
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS: 1
PRICE:
$43.00
PUBLISHER: Sega

severance, since the game
moves at blinding speed,
but it can be done. The trick
is in developing a sense for
the rhythms of the game.
The graphics are tremendously impressive and have
an astonishing range of targets and obstacles. Personal
favorites include the Tomos,
metal spheres which spread
their "petals" in order to attack and who are vulnerable
only when in this mode. The
most impressive thing about
this game, however, is the
speed at which all this occurs. At first, it seems almost
faster than mind and eye
can track, but the human
eye soon adjusts to the
frenetic pace.
The only quibble with the
graphics is that when the
Space Harrier takes a hit, all
on-screen action freezes, including explosions. This
looks, in effect, a little silly.
At the end of each level,
the player must face off
against a "Boss" monster,

—Bill Kunkel

TITLE:
Tiger-Heli
SYSTEM:
NES
# PLAYERS: 1-2
PRICE:
530-535.00
PUBLISHER: Acclaim Entertainment

is an excellent
ent videogame version
of the popular Taito
coin-op game. A straightahead blast-a-thon, TigerHell puts the user in the
cockpit of the ultimate
stealth jetcopter, a turbopowered aircraft armed with
heat-seeking missiles and
destructive impact bombs.

l

According to the instructions, the terrorist nation
Cantun is about to launch
an attack on "the whole
world" (they may not be
smart, but they sure are ambitious!). To that end, Cantun is mobilizing all its carriers, bombers, anti-tank attack modules and soldiers at
an "impenetrable military
base . . . hidden deep in the
center of the country."
So, it's all up to the TigerHeli, the only aircraft
capable of reaching
Cantun's formidable defenses. Blasting away at everything that moves and most

things that don't, the armed
jetcopter passes over an impressive array of landscapes
while facing off against the
assembled might of
Cantun's war machine.
Tiger-Heli combines an effective overhead perspective
with a smooth vertical scrolling to create a compelling
action entertainment. Visually, the game is broken into
landscape zones which include residential areas,
desert and waterways, each
with its own
compatible battle machines.
Objects and
topography are
nicely
delineated to
create a vividly
realistic effect
that is almost
cinematic in its
kinetic intensity.
Players use
the control pad
to steer the
Tiger-Hell left,
right, up or down. The dual
action buttons control an unlimited supply of heat-seeking missiles and a maximum
of two impact boms (which
can easily wipe out all onscreen enemy installations).
Along the way, there are
various bonus objects which
can either be shot to obtain
extra points or utilized in conjunction with the copter.
There are extra bombs and
bonus blocks (which can be
collected for additional lives)
and a pair of support helicopters which the craft can linkup with for added firepower.
There are only two
problems with the game.
First, even with good
graphics, it is almost impossible to determine the
jetcopter's altitude. Second,
it is too easy to accidentally
discharge an impact bomb
while firing missiles. Thankfully, neither of these weaknesses create serious
problems for Tiger-Hell.
Therefore, it is one of the
most exciting arcade shoot'em-ups to turn up on the
NES.
—Bill Kunkel

d Niki, Radical Ninja
is yet another in the
seemingly endless
parade of horizontally-scrolling running/jumping/shooting games for the Nintendo
Entertainment System.
This time, the player takes
the role of Kid-Niki, a pintsized martial artist with
spiked-out hair who is
moving from left to right
over a danger-fraught
landscape in
search of the
great videogame
MacGuffin, the
kidnapped
girlfriend. The
girl's name is
Princess Margo
and the fiend
who snatched
her is known as
The Stone
Wizard and, as
usual, the heel
has left behind
several flavors of
under-demons
to discourage
Kid-Niki's pursuit. As with all
games of this type (Super
Mario Bros., Karnov, Ghosts
'n' Goblins etc.), the only distinctive elements are the
player-character's choice of
weapon and the enemies
who bedevil him along his
quest. Kid-Niki is a swordguy, which means he lacks a
projectile weapon and must
walk right up to his enemies
in order to dispatch them.
As for the enemies, they
are an imaginative-looking
bunch. There are Red Foxes
and Striped Foxes. These
guys are not actually foxes
at all, but a battalion of
midget martial artists in hockey goaltender masks a la
Jason from Friday the
13th. There are living kites
which protect the wizard's
castle, Chubbies (who use
beads for weapons, though I
can't imagine why), Masked
Devils (who employ deadly
bubbles, of all things) and
several types of cute, but
lethal birds.
Each of the game's seven
levels also has a Big Boss
monster. These specially-empowered heavy hitters include: Death Breath, Stone

Buddah, Horned Witch,
Samurai Guard, Green
Grub, Mad Monk and, of
course, Stone Wizard himself. There are also several
bonus objects, including the
powerful golden and silver
bells. The golden ones kill
enemies from a distance
while the silver acts as a
protective forcefield. There
are coins, scrolls (one for
each Big Boss) and the totally inexplicable "Mini Kid-

TITLE:
Kid Niki, Radical Ninja
SYSTEM:
NES
# PLAYERS: 1-2
PRICE:
$44.95
PUBLISHER: Data East

Nikis" and "Mini Princesses"
which can be good for extra
lives.
Though the game's background could literally be
taken from any of the games
in this genre, the character
animations are especially
cute and colorful. Kid-Niki
opens with a non-interactive
sequence in which a bird
bursts through the paper
walls of the Kid's martial arts
school. It continues in this
whimsical vein through all
seven racks. Of course,
Niki's sword doesn't look anything like a sword and most
players will probably assume
this twirling weapon is a pair
of nunchuks or a kendo
stick, but so what?
If running/jumping/shooting contests are to your taste,
you will enjoy Kid Niki. One
does have to wonder,
though, how many of these
interchangeable games Nintendo will authorize. Even
devotees must be getting

tired of the same game in different disguises.
—Bill Kunkel

L

imber up your button-

pressing fingers and
prepare for a supreme
arcade action test. Commando has arrived in a home edition for the Nintendo Entertainment System. From
the moment the helicopter
deposits Super Joe in the

TITLE:
Commando
SYSTEM:
NES
# PLAYERS: 1-2
PRICE:
$29.95
PUBLISHER: Capcom

heart of enemy territory,
Capcom's greatest creation
delivers relentless
fire-and-movement action.
The gamer controls a soldier armed with a rifle and a
limited supply of hand
grenades in a one-man assault against four playfields
packed with hostile patrols,
entrenched troopers and
defensive fortifications. To
win, Super Joe must blast
through the defenders, enter
the underground shelter,
and rescue the hostages
whom the enemy has hidden there. The hero starts
the game with four lives, but
can earn extra ones.
The control pad moves
Super Joe in any of eight
directions. Button "B" fires
the rifle, while Button "A"
throws a grenade. Aiming is
automatic. Super Joe always
shoots the gun and tosses
grenades in the direction in
which he is currently
moving. This makes the
commando particularly vulnerable to attacks from the

rear or the flanks. It is a
good tactic to keep moving
in an irregular path that
frustrates attempts to catch
Super Joe in a "nutcracker."
The vertically scrolling,
multi-screen playfield shows
the action in modified overhead perspective. The
vantage point is above and
slightly behind the advancing commando. This gives
objects a solid look which is
often lacking in programs
where the
player looks
straight down
at the battlefield.
Super Joe
can find valuable pieces of
equipment on
the ground and
these will make
it easier to overcome the lopsided odds
against him.
The objects
are: wireless
radio (free passage to the next screen),
medal of honor (one extra
life), binoculars (finds hidden
shelter), bullet-proof vest
(protects against both gunfire and grenades), gasoline
can (bonus score), flashlight
(aids in night-fighting) and
hand grenades (additional
weapons for Super Joe's
limited supply).
Super Joe also gets
rewards for killing certain
types of foes. Wiping out
enemy soldiers with a hand
grenade gets K-rations or a
bag of money for the hero.
Both of these also net
bonus points for the player.
In the underground, Super
Joe gets similar bonuses for
eliminating sergeants and
lieutenants in the defending
force.
Commando is ideal for
blast brigadiers who want to
show their mettle against
tenacious computer-directed
opposition. Few cartridges
can equal its non-stop action. This is one coin-op hit
which should certainly prove
popular among home
videogamers, as well.
—Arnie Katz & Joyce
Worley

Back Issues

Hall of Fame / RID.

Reader input Device #51
On this page, a number of games and articles are listed for
evaluation. Some general interest questions are provided, as
well. For each game you have played or article you have
read, place a 1 (terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next to the
appropriate number on the card provided opposite page 4.

Be it known to all gentle persons that the
games inscribed above are honored for
their high popularity with the people of our
fair land. These august games have been
well spoken of by our readers over a goodly period of time and, thereby, have gained
the respect and good will of the powers
that be at CGW. Be it known to all that
read these words that any game found on
this list is a game of renown and worthy
of play by all.

Game Ratings Chart

Venerable titles are gracing the top 10 on the Strategy
side. The few recent releases have been panned by our
readers, so older titles will be re-rated. Meanwhile, "Earl
Weaver Baseball" was the only baseball strategy game to
weather the dog days of summer and "Breach" managed
to reach third place by shooting the gap left by a group
of retreating rebels from Chickamauga.
As for Action/Adventure, gamma particles from "Was-

teland" weakened the bard's constitution enough to let
the post-holocaust game mutate past "Bard's Tale III."
In addition, "Pirates" threatened naval bombardment
against the "Dungeon Master's fortress and Sid Meier's
crew of ruffians seems on the verge of making Lord
British walk the plank by tying "Ultima V." Meanwhile,
"The Three Stooges" didn't miss "The Train" as they
slapped and gouged their way into ninth position.

