VOL. 2 NO. 1

JAN. - FEB., 1982

Features
4

REWRITING HISTORY ON THE COMPUTER:

By Robert Billings

Napoleon at the Battle of Leipzig

10

NAPOLEON'S CAMPAIGNS 1813 & 1815:

By Daniel Weitz

A Review of SSI's New Game

12

THE SWORDTHRUST SERIES:

By Deirdre L. Maloy

A Survey

GALAXY: DESIGNER'S NOTES

13

The Designer Talks About His Game

By Tom Cleaver

16

CASTLE WOLFENSTEIN:
The Way Out! — Maybe!

By Graham Masters Jr. & Bob Boyd

17

TANKTICS:

By Bob Proctor

Review and Analysis

22

ATARI ARCADE
Three Games for the Atari Personal Computer

By John Anderson

THE GREATEST BASEBALL TEAM OF ALL TIME:

23

Part Two of the GBTOAT Tournament

A COMPUTERIZED CROSSWORD PUZZLE
OPERATION APOCALYPSE:
A Review and Campaign Scenario

24
25

By Paul Todd & Russell Sipe

Departments
From the Editor
Hobby and Industry News
Initial Comments
Micro-Reviews (Thirteen Reviews)

2
2
3
26

1

From the Editor...
The response to our first issue coupled with
discussions I have had with many of you convince
me beyond a doubt that the computer gaming
hobby is a sleeping giant. The social and economic
fabric of the baby boom generation, is such that
computer gaming cannot fail to be a tremendously
growing entity in the 1980 's.

the computer gaming industry. Let us know what
you think.

CORRECTIONS
The following corrections relate to Vol. 1 No. 1 of
CGW.

As the growth continues some recurring subjects
seem to interest our readers and industry representatives. These subjects include (among others):

Chris Crawford, author of "The Future of
Computer Wargaming" is an employee of Atari.
The disclaimer as to Mr. Crawford's employer was
to have preceded the article but was mysteriously
misplaced.

Tele-Communication Gaming
The Coin-Operated Arcade Phenomenon
The History of Computer Gaming
The Copyright Laws and Computer Games
Home Video Games
Computer Game Tournaments

The article entitled "Political Apple" may have
caused some of our readers to wonder if CGW
acknowledges the existence of the Democratic
party. The Republican candidates in the game
were duly listed as well as the third party
candidates; but the Democrats were left out. Sorry
about that. The Democratic candidates in PRESIDENT ELECT are: Bill Bradley, Jerry Brown,
John Y. Brown, Robert Byrd, Jimmy Carter,
Shirley Chisholm, Hubert Humphrey, Henry
Jackson, Lyndon Johnson, John Kennedy, Robert
Kennedy, Ted Kennedy, Eugene McCarthy, George
McGovern, Walter Mondale, Patrick D. Moynihan,
Ed Muskie, Jay Rockefeller, Mo Udall, George
Wallace, and Andrew Young.

CGW would be interested in reporting news and
publishing articles in these fields. If you would
like to write in any of these areas, please give us a
call or drop us a line. COMPUTER GAMING
WORLD, 1919 E. Sycamore #203, Anaheim, Ca.,
92805. Our phone number is (714) 776-4979.
Future plans for COMPUTER GAMING
WORLD include a column on coin-operated
arcades and a column on programming and game
design. We exist as a forum for our readers and for

HOBBY AND
INDUSTRY NEWS
According to John Williams of
On-Line Systems, Atari has lost a
preliminary injunction against the
distribution of JAWBREAKER.
JAWBREAKER is still being shipped says Williams.
On-Line Systems has released
MOUSKATTACK for the Atari
400/800 computer. You play a
plumber trying to fix the plumbing
as well as trap giant rats which
chase you. The Apple version, by
Ken Williams, should be out in the
second week of January. The Atari
version is by John Harris.
The long awaited TIME ZONE
by On-Line is scheduled for a
January 5th release. The multi-disked game will sell for $99.95.
Tom Hirschfeld (see the review of
his book HOW TO MASTER THE
VIDEO GAMES) is working on two
sequels to HTMTVG. The tentative
titles are HOW TO MASTER THE
VIDEO GAMES VOL. 2 and HOW
TO MASTER THE HOME VIDEO
GAMES.

Avalon Hill will be releasing at
least five games at this year's
Hobby Industry of America show
(March): COMPUTER STOCKS
AND BONDS, CONTROLLER,
COMPUTER FOREIGN EXCHANGE, GUNS OF FORT
DEFIANCE, and DNIEPER
RIVER LINE. Long range plans
include SHOOTOUT AT THE OK
GALAXY and CLOSE ASSAULT
(similar to AH's board game, Squad
Leader).
Broderbund's newest release is
DAVID'S MIDNIGHT MAGIC.
DMD is a hi-res pinball action game.
It runs on the Apple II (48K) and
sells for $34.95.
Sirius Software has three games
slated for early January release:
TWERPS (a space rescue mission
game), BORG (maze game), SNAKE
BYTE (you're the snake). All three
will run on the Apple II computer
(48K and disk) and sell for $29.95. In
February Sirius plans to release a
semi-real action game tentatively
entitled BROADSIDE (fighting
sail).
SIRIUS SOFTWARE has a new
address: 10364 Rockingham Dr.,
Sacramento, Ca., 95827.

2

SSI's Paul Murray (WARP FACTOR) is working on two new space
combat games. The first is a tactical
game similar to WARP FACTOR;
the second is a strategic space
game that can be played with
the tactical game.
SSI is planning to release
ROAD TO GETTYSBURG in late
February. RTG will cover the Gettysburg campaign using the NAPOLEON'S CAMPAIGNS 1813,
1815 game system. In March SSI
plans to release GRAF SPEE (using
the COMPUTER BISMARCK
system but with a better tactical
combat resolution phase). Look for a
BATTLE OF BRITAIN game this
summer.
SSI's delayed second edition of
COMPUTER AMBUSH is tentatively set for a late February release.
This one will be infinitely faster
than the old version.
Atari user's will be able to purchase an Atari version of SSI's
SHATTERED ALLIANCE in late
January.

INITIAL
COMMENTS
In addition to games mentioned
elsewhere in this issue the following
games have been received by CGW.
Most but not all of these will receive
more detailed attention in future
issues.

Adventures International
Box 3435 Longwood, FL 32750
STAR FIGHTER: Space combat
game in which player controls a
SC-78503 Star Fighter assigned
to rid the galaxy of the dreaded
Petro Resource Conglomerate
spacecraft. A 32-page attractive
rule book guides you through this
challenging game. This game is
more detailed than the average
space combat game. The program
runs on the TRS-80 models 1 or
3 computer.
Horizon Simulations
107 E. Main #2
Medford, OR 97501
SHADOW HAWK ONE: A two
mode space combat game. In the
combat mode you fight against
3-D hi-resolution space ships
(similar to Bill Budge spaceships). In the Solarmap mode you
seek out the enemy in the galaxy.
Capturing enemy ships gives you
raw materials which can be used
to upgrade your ship. The program
available for the Apple and Atari
personal computers.
Softape
10432 Burbank Blvd.
North Hollywood, CA 91601
DRAW POKER: A well done hiresolution Poker game for the
Apple II personal computer. You
play against a computerized
opponent. Computer play can be
set for "consistent and deliberate"
or "a bit more capricious " .
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
465 Fairchild Dr.
Mountain View, CA 94043
COMPUTER BASEBALL 1980
TEAM DISK: Contains all 26
major league rosters for the 1980
baseball season.
COMPUTER QUARTERBACK
1980 TEAM DISK: Contains
all 28 NFL teams for the 1980
season as well as some of the
great teams of the past 20 years
(e.g. 1968 Jets, 1975 Steelers, etc.)

SOUTHERN COMMAND: Strategy
game of the Israeli Counterattack
Across the Suez Canal during the
October War of 1973. A scrolling
screen allows the players to view
a map that is nine screens large.
Look for a feature article on
SOUTHERN COMMAND in our
next issue.
TIGERS IN THE SNOW: A
historical wargame for the Apple
II computer based on the Battle of
the Bulge.

3

Synergistic Software
5221 120th Ave. S.E.
Bellevue, Washington 98006
THE LINGUIST: A general
purpose language translation and
tutorial program for the Apple II
computer. THE LINGUIST has
proved to be a popular program in
educational programs across the
country. The languages covered
are Hebrew, Russian, Greek,
Japanese, Phonetic, English,
French, German, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian, Danish, Icelandic, Swedish, Norwegian, Latin,
Esperanto, Dutch, Polish,
Czechoslovakian.

,_
REWRITING HISTORY ON THE COMPUTER
__ __

__

NAPOLEON AT THE BATTLE OF LEIPZIG

Note: In the late summer of 1813,
Napoleon was south of Berlin with a
new army (replacing the one lost the
previous year in the long winter
retreat from Russia). Although long
accustomed to being outnumbered,
he seemed now in a desperate
situation. He was surrounded by a
vast array of armies from all the
nations of central Europe--determined to crush him once and for all.
Bothered by health problems and no
longer possessing his former limitless energy, Napoleon was no longer
the Napoleon of Austerlitz and
Borodino. What would the Battle of
Leipzig have been like if fought by a
"different" Napoleon? Two computer
game players recently tried to find
out using SSI's Napoleon's Campaigns
1813 and 1815. What follows is a
recreation of that battle as it was
fought out on a computer nearly two
centuries after it had taken place in
history.
It was late afternoon on October
14, 1813--a beautiful fall day with
the air crisp and fresh--when
Napoleon rode south toward Leipzig.
He knew his enemies would be feeling
they once again had him in a bottle
waiting to be capped. Would they
never learn? He'd only been teaching
them now for nearly twenty years
that the old way of fighting battles
had gone with their pre-Revolution
aristocratic delusions.
He knew they would be thinking
they had him surrounded and heavily
out-numbered. Trapped, they would
be thinking--with almost every
reigning monarch of Europe, each
with his own army, out there ready
to pounce. Well, he wasn't as young,
as full of energy as he once had been.
A sharp, familiar pain in his abdomen
gave sudden credence to the thought.
Then in a moment it was over, and
his mind was back to his immediate
problem.
His troops were scattered from
Leipzig north to Dessau. Four corps

(Victor, Augereau, Lauriston, and
Poniatowski) plus Murat with two
cavalry corps were just south of
Leipzig--over 50,000 men). Many
miles north, near Dessau, were the
corps of Bertrand, Macdonald,
Souham, and Reynier, plus the two
cavalry corps of Latour-Maubourg
and Sebastiani (approximately 74,000
men). And in between, but closer to
Leipzig, was Marmont 's reinforced
corps and the crux of his power, the
Young and Old Guard--altogether
about 66,000 men. So although he
had no more than 75,000 near any
one point on the map, he had 190,000
men and 680 guns in the general
area, ready for a quick concentration.
He knew he was heavily outnumbered. First, some distance to the
north and west of Halle was the
Army of the North under Bernadotte,
with close to 50,000 men. Blucher,
the doughty old Prussian, had
another force, the Army of Silesia,
with 55,000 men in Halle itself.
Together they equalled more than
half Napoleon's entire army. Yet
they were only the northern splinter
of the force he was opposing. Most of
the Allied forces were south of
Leipzig, scattered over a large area
but containing so many corps from
so many countries (many of them
with their kings and czars present)
that, though it was under the control
of Schwarzenberg, it was referred to
as the "Army of the Monarchs. "
Directly south of Napoleon's men at
Leipzig were two Russian corps, a
Prussian corps, an Austrian corps,
and a cavalry corps totaling more
than 43,000 men. Perhaps not an
impressive number against his own
50,000 just north of them. But this
was really only the advance guard
of Schwarzenberg's force. To the
west were the Cossacks under Platow
(8000); to their southeast were two
corps of Austrians (27,000); and near
Altenberg were Schwarzenberg's
main reserve, the Austrian Reserve
Corps under Hesse-Homburg and
the Russian-Prussian Reserve Corps
under Konstantin (altogether about
43,000).
And there were more. Further to
the east but available as additional
reinforcements were two other
groups, Colloredo's Austrian I Corps
(nearly 20,000) and the Army of
Poland under Benningsen (close to
35,000). Taken all together, his
enemies could bring about 280,000
men and 1,300 guns against him. He
was indeed, in their minds, surrounded and out-numbered--cut adrift
in a sea of powerful armies, foreign
princes and alien people.

5

Or so it must seem to them, the
Emperor thought, smiling grimly.
Well, they should have learned by
now he had changed all the rules
they had been playing by. His
desperate condition (in their eyes)
was, seen from his own, a great
opportunity.
The plan was simple. He would
concentrate the bulk of his force at
Leipzig and fight a major battle
with Schwarzenberg 's Army of the
Monarchs--before its separate
pieces could all be assembled.
Timing was the key point. Therefore
Napoleon's orders to his subordinates had been explicit. All troops
were to move immediately. Bertrand,
Macdonald, Souham, and Reynier
were to march southward to join the
Leipzig forces for a quick assault on
the 43,000-man advance force nearest
the city before they could be reinforced by Schwarzenberg 's many
powerful corps to the south. Marmont's corps, reinforced by Arrighi 's
cavalry, would be placed to protect
Leipzig from Blucher. Marmont 's
22,000 would be able to block the
tough old Prussian ' s 55,000--at
least long enough for the major
victory to be won south of Leipzig.
Finally, two cavalry corps were given
special duties. Latour-Maubourg
was to hurry to Leipzig to protect the
city itself from Cossack raiding
parties while the battle was fought
further south. And Sebastiani ' s II
Cavalry Corps should circle away
from the battle and toward the
. northern armies ' supply lines-thus perhaps causing Bernadotte's
50,000 (and even Blucher's 55,000-although this was far more doubtful)
to scurry north to secure their supply
lines.
The main thrust, then, was against
Schwarzenberg. Orders had been
sent to Augereau to start his attack
immediately with the forces already
there. Now, late in the day, word had
already come back that Augereau
had done well, causing 7,000 casualties while losing only about 5,000.
The full attack would have to await
the arrival of Napoleon himself with
the powerful Old and Young Guard,
as well as Bertrand 's and Macdonald's
33,000 from far to the north. It would
be a footrace for the first twenty-four
hours--but the Emperor estimated
everything could be in place by
afternoon of the next day, October
15.
To the south another leader of a
grand army had been pouring over
his maps, estimating distances and
pondering odds. Schwarzenberg had
decided to make a fight of it. By

rushing his mass of reserves from
Altenburg, he felt he could muster
113,000 against Napoleon's probable
115,000. But in addition Blucher,
with 55,000 more, would be marching
up from Napoleon's right rear. Bernadotte should also be coming down
fast from the north. But the clinchers
were the two forces far to his right.
Colloredo's Austrians should be
there the day after tomorrow, and
Benningsen and the Army of Poland
a day later. Yes, the odds were very
good.... Even the Cossacks (who
couldn't be depended on for too much
in hard fighting) had been ordered
to stage a raid into Leipzig. That
ought to keep Napoleon a bit off
balance.
October 15
The day dawned clear but soon
clouds were gathering. Napoleon
didn't want rain. Most of his troops
were already on the field and he
wanted an early attack. It was true
his troops were tired--but then,
the enemy's must be equally tired. If
he was to win, Napoleon knew he
had to strike quickly, before Schwarzenberg could gather all his farflung forces.
Before nine o'clock the Emperor
ordered the assault. He could see
Schwarzenberg had brought up at
least some of his reinforcements. He
estimated his enemy would have
immediately available about 88,000

men and another 27,000 moving up.
Schwarzenberg, however, would soon
outnumber him in guns by two-to
one. Still, it was close enough for the
confident commander. But he decided
to wait until Bertrand and Macdonald came up with their 33,000 before
launching his all-out attack. Meanwhile, those on the field were sent
into the attack.
The Cossacks had threatened
Leipzig, but Latour-Maubourg's I
Cavalry Corps, riding through the
night from the far north, had arrived
right on schedule and fought them
off. But to the northwest of Leipzig,
there was that major threat of
Blucher's army. Word had come that
the aggressive Prussian was quickly
preparing to assault Marmont's
holding force.
By the middle of the day the
Emperor had evidence that he had
won a major victory in the first big
clash of major forces on the field
south of Leipzig. For the loss of little
more than 7,500 men, he had caused
an estimated 15,000 loss to Schwarzenberg's force. Because of troops
fatigued by the fierce fight after a
night of marching, Napoleon decided
not to press the attack further until
the arrival of Bertrand and Macdonald.
Schwarzenberg meanwhile, felt
equally confident. His troops had
arrived from Altenburg in time to
hold off Napoleon's main assault--

6

though the battle had been costly.
His troops had fought well so far,
against that living legend of military
genius, Napoleon himself. And he
had a strong point in his favor in
Blucher's force. However, he wondered where Bernadotte and the
Army of the North were? Were they
moving up as ordered?
About the same time, Napoleon
knew that he had trouble in the
making. He had received word that
Marmont was under hard attack by
Blucher, had suffered heavy losses,
and was close to breaking. The
Emperor, ever the realist, decided to
call off his afternoon attack even
though Bertrand and Macdonald had
arrived on schedule. The troops, he
knew, would not be ready for such a
major battle after their long march.
But there was good news from
Leipzig. The I Cavalry Corps had
routed the Cossacks, destroying
perhaps half their entire force. That
would protect his rear from the
closest threat. But the bigger one
from Blucher loomed larger every
minute. He sent orders to Marmont
to make a planned withdrawal across
the Elster River.
The orders were given none too
soon. Blucher struck again with a
blow so heavy Marmont's forces were
sent back demoralized. Yet the withdrawal plans had proceeded far
enough to save the force from a rout.

Despite some heavy losses they were
able to retreat across the river.
But now more perilous news arrived.
The Emperor's most remote force,
the two corps under Souham and
Reynier, had been making good time
southward. Napoleon had planned
to use them as a block to stop Blucher
from taking Leipzig. Yet a late report
made clear this would be impossible.
Those two corps were being held up
by--of all generals--the slowmoving Bernadotte. Somehow he had
got his Army of the North moving
fast enough to intercept them before
they could reach Leipzig. Well, in
war there were no certainties.
Napoleon would have to do what he
liked least--draw two corps away
from the main battle and send them
to protect Leipzig from Blucher. He
began to consider it possible that he
would not be able to destroy Schwarzenberg's main force before the other
Allied reinforcements arrived. If so,
the Emperor would have to be sure
of an open retreat route for his army
to squeeze through. Considering his
situation, hemmed in by superior
forces on all sides, it would be threading his entire army through a
narrow-eyed needle, with disaster
hovering close on either side. By the
end of October 15, Napoleon knew
he was in for a genuine battle. No
quick and easy victories now.
October 16
The next morning saw light rain
falling over the whole battle area.

Exhausted men struggling out of
their brief, disturbed sleep prayed
for the rain to continue. But all too
soon it had stopped and preparations
were going forward for the day's
major battles.
By five o'clock Schwarzenberg had
been informed of Bernadotte's collision with the corps of Souham and
Reynier north of Leipzig. Well, he
thought, that will hold up some of
Napoleon ' s reinforcements, even if
it is doing the same to mine. The
news from Blucher was good-Marmont routed. Yet Blucher's troops
were dead tired from the constant
marching and fighting. They had to
be given some rest. Schwarzenberg
prayed for the rain to continue-at least long enough to hold off
Napoleon's main attack south of
Leipzig until more Allied reinforcements had arrived.
Some miles to the north, the
Emperor juggled troops to meet the
demands of the day. Souham and
Reynier, it was clear, would not be
able to block Blucher--held up as
they were by Bernadotte. But Victor's
and Augereau's corps, hastily withdrawn from the main battle against
Schwarzenberg the previous night,
had reached Leipzig. Now they
should be able to move down the
road to Halle and stop the victorious
Blucher.
By noon the rain had stopped and
Napoleon sent in his main attack
south of Leipzig. His Guard Corps

7

was in the lead. In a short while the
entire area was engulfed in smoke
and flame, with hundreds of guns
pouring fire into tens of thousands
of men. Napoleon was using some of
his best troops, and they were
having their effect. The reports were
good. The Allied troops were losing
heavily. Schwarzenberg ' s troops
seemed ready to break. Yet still they
held, taking heavy casualties but
standing firm.
By late afternoon Napoleon had
to reduce the scale of his attack. The
odds were shifting. Losses had been
much more nearly even in the
afternoon. The Guard itself was worn
out. Bertrand and Macdonald had to
be thrown in. His reserves were
rapidly diminishing. Finally, about
seven o'clock, he stopped the assault
altogether.
Word came in from Victor and
Augereau's battle with Blucher,
who was now pushing harder than
ever. The French troops, after the
bitter fighting against Schwarzenberg on the 15th and the hurried
march back to block Blucher during
the night, were taking heavy casualties again and seemed ready to break.
Napoleon saw what he had to do.
He sent word to authorize retreat
for the battered force. Could no one
stop Blucher? The next day he would
send the recovered troops of Marmont
as well as the Guard itself. But now
a new danger surfaced. He began to
get reports of the Army of Poland's

approach from the east. His original
plan was obviously not going to
work. The French assault was not
routing the enemy. Small victories
were not enough. He would have to
retreat from Leipzig.
Orders went out for all troops not
moving toward Blucher to rest during
the night. He would need their
fighting strength on the morrow.
Then, just before midnight, came a
glimmer of good news. Although
Augereau had begun his retreat over
the Elster, Blucher had discontinued the attack against him. Napoleon
decided to take a chance. He ordered
Augereau back across the river. The
First Cavalry Corps were now getting
into position to help. Together these
forces might be able to hold Blucher.
If they could, the new troops coming
up--especially the Guard--would
have a chance of routing Blucher.
This would both hold open the escape
route for the army and make it
possible to salvage one claim for
victory out of the deteriorating situation. Now it was Napoleon's turn
to pray for rain the next day.
October 17
In the early morning the rain began
to fall on the weary troops. Napoleon's
first feeling was one of relief. This
would mean a few hours more of
much-needed rest for his soldiers.
His course was now clear. Let his
troops get some rest, then get
Marmont's recovering corps, Murat's
cavalry corps, and the Guard into
position for a devastating assault
on Blucher--blow him right out of
the battle and open up a retreat
route to the west. But to do that the
rain would have to stop in time for
him to get his troops moving and
ready for the attack by the 18th. And
most of all, the troops left behind
fighting Schwarzenberg would
have to hang on in a bitter-end fight
of desperation. To make matters
worse, it was becoming clear that
both Benningsen's Army of Poland
and Colloredo's Austrian Corps were
beginning to come into action. If
this were true the fat was really in
the fire. Now he would be even more
desperately out-numbered--especially in the key area south of Leipzig
where his troops were struggling in
their bitter rearguard action. The
Emperor could see it was going to be
a close call, even if he were able to
pull off the miracle of threading his
army through the shrinking eye of
the needle.
Further south Schwarzenberg,
riding behind his battle lines, sensed
his position improving. At first it
seemed that Benningsen was coming

into the battle in perfect position-to the left rear of the main French
troops, with a chance of cutting
them off from Leipzig. Then to his to
Leipzig.
Late in the day, the rain having
stopped, Schwarzenberg called for
an all-out assault. He was sure he
was dealing with only a rearguard
now. Yet to his dismay it maneuvered
so well against his over-cautious
subordinates that he found his attack
was yielding him no real victory. By
the end of the day he sensed the
master was still in control, despite
the mounting odds against the French.
October 18
The day dawned slightly overcast
but soon cleared. Schwarzenberg had
been hoping again for rain for Blucher,
whom he feared might soon rout.
His other attacks seemed to be
getting nowhere and his losses had
been heavy. He sent the Cossacks
and 15,000 infantry to the west to
block the route of a possible retreat.
Otherwise he ordered most of his
troops to stand against what he felt
were still impending offensive moves.
Napoleon would have been glad to
know that Schwarzenberg was
worried. To him it was completely
otherwise. He had been pouring corps
after corps against Blucher to the
northwest, and that tough old
Prussian was still attacking. Bernadotte to the north was being held
off by Souham and Reynier--but
these troops, out-numbered
two-to-one at the start and taking heavy
losses for some time now, might not
hold much longer. He was trying
hard to keep his weary, exhausted
corps together until a retreat route
could be established and its flanks
secured. But in addition to all of
Schwarzenberg's other corps, he now
had the Army of Poland working its
way around his eastern flank. This
morning in particular the field
seemed to be in a state of chaos, with
corps scattered all about the countryside, weary troops fighting equally
exhausted opponents, and neither
sure which would rout first.
Finally at five in the afternoon the
news came to both commanders.
Blucher, determined old soldier that
he was, having absorbed blow after
blow from Napoleon's corps stolen
from other parts of the field, at last
routed. The French had attacked
first with Augereau, but after fierce
fighting that force had routed.
Augereau however, had been ready
with the Guard Corps and had sent
it in. At first the losses were heavy,
but this most trusted body of

8

Napoleon's men persisted, and
Blucher finally gave way, his troops
streaming up the road toward Halle.
Napoleon knew this was his only
chance; the door to the west and
safety would now be open--for a
very brief moment. He would have
perhaps one more day. Everything
would have to be done by then.
Before him he had only the weak
remnants of the Cossacks. Murat
was sent ahead to brush them aside.
To his north, Bernadotte was closing
in. Souham and Reynier had had to
be withdrawn south to the main
retreat rout. Now there was only
Latour-Maubourg's small cavalry
corps to hold off this entire Army of
the North. Behind him to the east
two corps under Lauriston and
Poniatowski, fighting off the Army
of Poland, had been shunted northeast and appeared lost, completely
out of contact with the main army.
Still, they appeared to be holding
out. The main corps of Schwarzenberg were pushing hard on the rear
of the Emperor's retreat column,
and he knew they would soon be
coming round to cut him off from the
south. The Emperor felt he was
running down a tight iron corridor
whose walls had suddenly started to
contract and close him in.
October 19
Like a juggler with all his ninepins in the air at once, Napoleon
maneuvered his troops down the
narrow corridor. The corps of
Bertrand and Macdonald and even
the Guard Corps itself, all exhausted,
had somehow managed to cross the
Pleisse in the night and were for the
moment safe--but in very bad
shape. Napoleon ordered Marmont's
force to take up the rearguard action.
One thing he could do to preserve
a shred of victory. He had Sebastiani's
cavalry corps free near Halle-placed there to disrupt Blucher's
supply line. He was in perfect position
to attack Blucher's troops streaming
back up the road toward him--to
harry them, give them no time to
reform, push them until they were
completely destroyed. For even one
small cavalry corps would be enough
to continue the rout of that formerly
powerful army of 55,000 men.
Another small cavalry corps was
also giving yeoman service. The
First Cavalry Corps was fighting
gallantly, to hold Benardotte's army
north of the Elster through the long
dragging afternoon. Finally they
gathered their remnants and launched a last desperate charge. The Army
of the North quivered with the shock,

were held momentarily, then absorbed it--shock, First Cavalry Corps
and all. They reached the river to
find they were too late. Napoleon's
last troops were passing safely on
the other shore. But the First Cavalry
Corps had simply disappeared into
the mass of its enemy.
For the main body of the army it
had been a hard day of fighting
while running, holding off superior
forces from the left, the right, and
the rear, while pushing the Cossacks
out of the way in the front. The
Emperor was rushing Souham's and
Reyniers corps forward to support
Murat--for he knew Schwarzenberg would surely have a heavy
force take the place of the Cossacks
before long. The rear was still
holding. Bertrand and Macdonald
were finally routed after dark but
were able to retreat across the Elster
and keep up with the army. For
Marmont's troops, in spite of their
gallant fight all over the field from
the opening battle against Blucher,
it was too late. Caught at the end of the
column, unable to break loose from
their rear guard action, they were
finally cut off. Like Lauriston's and
Poniatowski's men, from whom now
only faint sounds came from far to
the east, they would have to be left to
their fate.
Napoleon was not through the
gauntlet yet. Murat had defeated the
Cossacks before five o 'clock in the
afternoon, but then was struck by a

much larger force. Fortunately
Napoleon had rushed forward with
his staff and headquarters--800
strong--to be at the crucial point.
Murat's men held at first-- then
finally broke. For a few moments
there was only Napoleon and his
headquarters' troops to hold back
the waves of enemy about to engulf
the narrow retreat corridor from the
south. The horses of the charging
800 reared as their riders slashed
about them. A precious few moments
were bought. Then, just in the nick
of time, Souham and Reynier appeared streaming forward through the
night's shadows to hold back the
threatening flood and keep the
retreat route open.
October 20
Schwarzenberg sensed that he had
done well--but the cost had been
terrible, and he knew that he had
almost had the master in his clutches,
only to let him escape.
Napoleon was riding with his retreating troops, tired, sick, and
physically exhausted, but knowing
he had somehow once again held
everything together and kept himself from defeat. He knew he had
won no great victory--though a
victory could be claimed. Blucher's
army was now being rapidly destroyed, still pursued by Sebastiani,
Poniatowski, Lauriston, and all their
troops were lost. And Marmont, cut
off and left behind in his last brave
rearguard action, must soon surren-

9

der too. Latour-Maubourg's First
Cavalry Corps, gallant defender
against the Army of the North, had
now disappeared into the mass it
had held back. But except for those
elements, the rest of the army's units
were intact and in orderly retreat.
Yet for every one of those 84,000 men
retreating in his column, there lay
another back there around Leipzig.
Total French casualties had been
80,000. And another 21,000 would
soon surrender. Well, he would return
to France and raise another grand
army. And then....
But it was getting harder. This
time his men and his own resources
had held. Leipzig had not been the
endgame for him. But he was older,
more exhausted, sicker. Would there
come a time soon when the great
Napoleon would not be able to pull it
off? When he would ride out to meet
his.... He wondered idly for a moment
what would be the name of that
great city (or perhaps some small,
unknown country town) that would
ring down through history as the
site of his final defeat.
Well... at least it wouldn't be
Leipzig.
Note: The actual battle of Leipzig
resulted in 110,000 French casualties, 90,000 Allied losses and the
unseating of Napoleon in 1814. The
game recounted in this article resulted in 100,000 French losses, 145,000
Allied losses, and a much less certain
outcome of the 1814 campaign.

commanders such as Kellerman, Uxbridge, Murat,
and Blucher to name but a few, are factored into
the battle in different ways depending on your
tactics and the terrain. The horrendous casualties
can often cripple the victorious army while dispersing the vanquished. The above is handled in
an exciting and challenging manner and shows
why even the Emperor had an occasional bad day.

I've always been curious as to why generals had
so many aides-de-camp hanging around; having
played NAPOLEON'S CAMPAIGNS 1813 &
1815 I now understand that their primary function
was to convey information and to deliver orders.
The game includes separate scenarios on Leipzig
(1813) and Waterloo (1815). In the solo version of
the Leipzig campaign you are Napoleon, and
attempt to defend your supply depot at Leipzig
against 300,000 Austrians, Prussians, Russians
and Swedes which are attacking from all points of
the compass. In that of the Waterloo simulation
you are Wellington attempting to defend both
Liege and Brussels against Napoleon's last fling,
while simultaneously trying to crush the French
which you outnumber two to one.

All of this takes place on a nice high-res strategic
map. There is another map that is a disaster. The
game comes with a hard-copy map of the campaign
areas and a series of cardboard corps markers and
estimated enemy strength chits, which seem to
serve no really useful purpose other than as an
attempt to discourage game pirates. The hardcopy map is both ugly and confusing. Instead of
using the pseudo-antique style of the instruction
book, we are presented with hexes in various
shades of brown and grey, with a confusing array
of little red dots that represent the highways. The
map on the screen (which is displayed in segments)
could also be somewhat improved.

The game is a corps level simulation with the
emphasis on limited intelligence and the problems
of command control. Although I've played
wargames for over twenty years I have never
encountered a simulation which handles the above
so well. Through a series of dispatches your corps
commanders relay information to you based upon
the patrols of their light cavalry, the accuracy of
which depends upon the comparative strength of
the various screens. This information is however,
often quite out of date, and you might receive a
dispatch sent at 9:00 AM at 9:00 PM. In addition,
you are bombarded with vast amounts of intelligence reports which may or may not be accurate.
Having decided upon a plan of action (striking the
map with your finger and shouting "We will crush
them here!"), it merely remains to order your
eleven independent corps commanders to concentrate their forces at the appropriate spot. Unlike
cardboard counters on a paper map, they are often
quite uncooperative. They may decide not to push
their troops too hard, or to attack at a secondary
point, or to ignore you because your messenger
never got through. If and when they show up at
the battlefield, and if you've discerned the enemy's
Napolenic"bt strategy, a long and bloody "
takes place. Heavy and light cavalry; riflemen,
grenadiers, light and line infantry; artillery; and
the historical tactical abilities of the various

One of my other interests is wargaming with
15mm Napoleonic miniatures, and I had hoped
that this game would be a useful tool when my
friends and I wished to play a campaign game. To
a certain extent this has been fulfilled, as in the
two-player version of the game we can resolve
tactically with our own miniatures the engagement
which the computer describes as about to take
place. Unfortunately, there is no way for me to tell
the computer the result of my tactical encounter
with miniatures. I had hoped that Mr. Billings and
the gentlemen at SSI would have made provision
for this.
This game is a must for anyone interested in the
problems of army-level command or Napoleonic
simulations. If Napoleon had an Apple and this
game at Leipzig, he would have seen the handwriting on the screen and headed for the Rhine,
kicking his aides-de-camp all the way.
NAPOLEON'S CAMPAIGNS: 1813 & 1815
runs on the Apple II (48K) computer with Applesoft
in ROM and sells for $60.
10

In the first scenario, no provisions are made for
saving the game. This is a hassle because there is
a lot to it, and even though I know most of the
scenario, it is still difficult to complete it without
dying. The next four scenarios, however, all have
save options. However, this is a different type of
save--the next time you run that disk, the scenario
will be started at the saved point. This game does
not (rats!) allow reusing characters that should be
six feet under.

Although there are many fantasy role-playing
computer games on the market, the Swordthrust
series is very different from most. Most fantasy
games I have seen use the Dungeons and
Dragons concept of character class--a character
is a magician, fighter, thief, or priest; he cannot
have any abilities of another class. Swordthrust,
however, uses a system more like another popular
fantasy role playing system called
-Runeqst- that is a character can and should have skills in as
many areas as possible. Spells, armour, and
weapons can be bought, and many things can be
found while on an adventure.

The first scenario seemed short at first. Later, I
discovered how much there really is and drowned
trying to get all the treasure out. The best rule of
thumb is not to bother with anything unless you
have to and search everything as best you can.
Some options are not immediately evident, but
careful thought will bring them to light. A Power
spell, all anyone can afford at the beginner level,
may prove invaluable. However, it can throw
fireballs back at the user as well as heal, so be
CAREFUL!

Swordthrust is a mixture of a puzzle-type
adventure and a "hack-and-slash" game (such as
Ultima). This is the best role-playing I have seen
in any computer game, and better than some
Dungeons and Dragons or Runequest scenarios I have played in. Currently, there are five
Swordthrust scenarios available (with, hopefully,
more to come), each sold separately. Each scenario
has a unique goal and most have time limits.

In the Vampyre Caves (scenario 2), the rats will
probably like you, but neither the vampyre or his
hunters will. The better you do finding treasure on
the first scenario, the better set up you will be for
this one. Spells are infinitely valuable--don't
overlook them. By this scenario (if you are
attempting them in order), you should be able to
afford at least a Heal spell, and possibly a blast as
well.

Swordthrust has some unique features. A
useful feature is an "auto-repeat" of the last
command by pressing return. This saves a lot of
typing (and errors). Also, there is the "suicide
plan" which allows you the option of refusing lessthan average characters. Armour, weapons, and
shields are all subject to breakage, which is not my
idea of fun--but it is fair.
Initially, the most useful skill is charisma.
Someone with really high charisma (such as my
character Jordan's 22) will be able to start off
initially with chainmail, 4 good weapons, a Power
spell, and perhaps training too. However, no
statistic is useless, and hardiness is perhaps the
single most important.

Kidnapper's Cove (third scenario), is where you
get to play delivery boy and Errol Flynn in the
same scenario. The object is to rescue a kidnapped
boy and get him his medicine. The time limit is
definitely a factor in the game. Hint: water washes
off dust, but beware of tridents unless you are very
experienced. If you flee from a trident, he (at least
everytime I've tried) automatically follows you.

One thing to watch is fatigue. Every time you
take damage, it fatigues you . Fleeing and casting
spells also fatigue you. If you lose consciousness,
there is a chance you will die if there is a monster
in the room (or if a monster wanders by). Your
chance to hit is also lowered by fatigue, which
seems very reasonable.

The Green Plague (fifth, and most recently
released scenario) starts with your character
contracting the disease, thus giving him a very
valid reason for finding a cure. Don't make the
mistake I did. I spent so much time reading the
gray book "Ringworld Engineers" that I ran out of
time and died of the plague.
12

ED. NOTE - I was introduced to computer gaming
by Tom Cleaver. A few years ago Tom showed me
his multi-player space warfare game entitled GALACTIC EMPIRES (not to be confused with
Broderbund's Galactic Saga series). It was then
and, I feel, still is the best multi-player game
available for the personal computer. Now that
Avalon Hill is distributing GALACTIC EMPIRES
(under the name GALAXY) the game will get the
kind of attention it deserves. It runs on the Apple
II (48K) and Atari 800 (32K) personal computers.
Here are Tom Cleaver's thoughts about the
development of GALAXY.
HISTORY
GALAXY did not spring forth full grown from
the head of Zeus. Like all things on this earth (and
off), GALAXY evolved from lower forms.
One Friday evening I was woolgathering when
the idea for a computer game crossed my mind.
Now, I want you to be aware that this was not the
first time that a game idea had occurred to me.'
But most of my ideas up to this time had led to
dead ends. However, this idea came to me with
such clarity and detail that I knew it couldn't fail.
That weekend I sat down before my Apple II and
programmed the first version of what was
eventually to become GALAXY.

I called it GALACTIC EMPIRES, and it was
an instant success with my friends at the Falls of
the Ohio Wargame club. My ego inflated by their
enthusiasm, I got a bit of free publicity in some of
the gaming magazines, and soon I was selling
program listings by mail for $2.00 each.
The next step was to find a company willing to
publish my game. I sent samples to a few software
houses, but the only one really willing to publish it
was a small company on the East Coast. And they
wanted revisions. So GALACTIC EMPIRES
was translated from Integer BASIC to Applesoft,
modularized, polished and debugged, a process
taking about 100 hours of work. It was published
in late 1979.
For several reasons which are best not explained
at this time, GALACTIC EMPIRES did not sell
as well as I had hoped, in spite of quite favorable
reviews by the critics. I therefore sought to have it
published by a larger company.
On a whim, I sent the game to Avalon Hill, not
really expecting them to accept an "outside" design.
But to my amazement and elation, AH was
impressed with GALACTIC EMPIRES and
authorized me to do a rewrite of the game for the
Apple II, and to supervise the production of
versions for the Atari, TRS-80 and PET.
I began by hiring the best programmers

13

(available) money could buy--students in electrical
engineering and computer science at the University
of Louisville. We worked together for four months
to produce the pinnacle of the game's evolution:
GALAXY.

You may play solitaire, in which case your task
is to colonize the entire galaxy before game's end.
In my opinion, the multi-player game is much
more exciting. Your task in this game is to control
the most planets at game's end. The orders which
you key into the computer are invisible, so no one
can tell what you are doing. This simulation of
"the fog of war" makes it possible to launch
surprise attacks on your opponents.

Writing the first program in Integer BASIC was
easy, and the product of the programming was a
"good" game. But it took two years of slow and
often painful evolution to advance that game to its
present state. I think the effort was worth it. I hope
you do too.

GALAXY runs in 16K of free memory. A game
in progress may be saved to tape or disk.

PHILOSOPHY
The typical computer game is a solitaire arcadestyle game with fancy high-resolution graphics. It
requires lots of manual dexterity and good reaction
time. I like this kind of game. But not all the time.
Where is the camaraderie of playing a game with a
friend? Where is the intellectual challenge?

INSIDE THE PROGRAM
This section discusses what only the programmer knows for sure--the algorithms that lie behind
the code.
The computer randomly assigns industry to the
neutral worlds. There is a 25% chance that a world
will have no industry, and thus be economically
worthless (but still strategically valuable). If a
world does have industry, it is likely that it will
have only a small number of industry units,
usually less than five, although there is no
theoretical limit to the amount of industry a
neutral planet may have.

When I set out to design a new computer game, I
was looking for one which would be multi-player
and which could be played repeatedly without
growing stale. What I ended up with was sort of a
combination of STARTREK, DIPLOMACY
and RISK. It can be played by up to 20 players,
and no two games are ever alike.

Ships are assigned to players based on a complex
algorithm awarding extra ships for proximity to
other players' worlds and taking away ships for
proximity to neutral worlds. This tends to even
things out so that, for example, there is no particular advantage to having your home world in
the middle of the galaxy.

I also wanted to take advantage of what the
computer does best, not graphics and animation,
but number crunching and bookkeeping. Thus
GALAXY does some fairly sophisticated mathematics when calculating movement and combat
results, and it handles all the record keeping that
can become so burdensome in a board game. The
computer also serves as a moderator, applying all
game rules impartially and allowing players to
enter secret moves.
Don't expect to find gaudy graphics in GALAXY.
What you will get is well-organized and "clean"
text displays that provide all the information the
gamer needs. Austere, you say? Perhaps; but
fancy graphics would have been gratuitous, and I
have made one concession to the arcade game
freak--lots of sound effects in the form of phasers,
explosions, sirens and more.

Ships are assigned to neutral worlds based on
the number of industry the world has and a
random factor. Neutral worlds with lots of industry
can be expected to have lots of ships. Keep this in
mind when scouting the neutrals.
Fleets of ships move two light-years on the turn
they are released and three light-years on every
turn thereafter. Distances are computed according
to the Pythagorean Theorem. Thus if the destination world is 4 light-years north and 5 lightyears east of the origin world, the distance is 6.40
light years, and the trip will take three years (time
is rounded up).

GAME MECHANICS
As the game begins, you will send fleets of ships
from your home planet to explore the unknown
resources of the stars. The planets circling the
stars may be barren worlds, or they may possess
industrial capacity and defensive ships to resist
your colonization efforts. If you should succeed in
conquering a neutral planet, its industrial capacity
will be converted to producing new ships for your
continued expansion.

When ships arrive at a hostile planet, combat
occurs. First, each defending ship fires one shot.
Then each surviving attacker fires one shot. Shots
are traded until one side is eliminated. The probability that an attacker will hit its target is given
by the formula,
P=G D/(A+D)
where G is the gunnery factor (a random number
with a mean of 0.707), D is the number of defending
ships, and A is the number of attackers. A similar
formula applies to the defender's fire.

GALAXY allows from 1 to 20 players to compete
for control of up to 40 star systems. The computer
produces a different galaxy every game.
14

A little mathematical manipulation will show
that, with equal gunnery factors, you have a 50/50
chance of winning the battle if you come in with
30% more ships than the defender has. If you come
in with double the number of the defender's ships,
you will have an excellent chance of winning, but
it will cost you a number of ships equal to the
defender's force to capture the planet. To minimize
your losses, come in at 5 to 1. Even at these odds,
however, you still stand to lose a number of ships
equal to 65% of the defender's force. It is inadvisable to attack at more than 5 to 1 odds because if
ocur an unfavorable gunnery factor should
(gunnery factors for attacker and defender are
randomly determined at the beginning of each
invasion) the victory could be Pyrrhic.

you play. However, as your rep gets better known,
people will learn to leave you alone. Obviously,
this strategy works only if you play with the same
people regularly.
3. Establish a reputation as a loyal ally. This
strategy works best if there is someone else in the
game who is as trustworthy as you, and you can
make that person your ally. A rep for square
dealing will pay off in any other games you play
with the same individuals. You will find that this
idea carries over to the "real world" as well.
4. Emulate Machiavelli. If you find yourself in a
game with strangers, pretend to be the loyal ally
as described above. Then when the game is drawing
to a close, send ships to your partners weakly
defended worlds, all timed so that they arrive on
the last turn of the game. I personally eschew this
strategy, but its success cannot be denied.

HINTS ON PLAY
Diplomacy can be an important part of multiplayer GALAXY. Some appropriate strategies
are given below.

EPILOGUE
The above notes are intended to give you some
insight into the "guts" of GALAXY And they
may provide you with enough hints to give you an
edge. But the only real way to become a winner at
GALAXY is to play it.

1. Look dumb. If you don't appear to know what is
going on, the other players may ignore you, thinking that you are no threat.
2. Acquire a reputation for vindictiveness. If you
let it be known that you are a badass, the timid
players will be intimidated by your bluster. If you
single-mindedly attack anyone who invades "your
space," you will probably lose the first few games

1 Some of my other ideas have resulted in published noncomputerized games, namely SWORDPLAY and THE
CONQUEST OF SPACE.

15

Tanktics:
Review and Analysis
Bob Proctor

Your tank has stopped amid a group of small
hills; up ahead, through a thin screen of trees, you
can see the east-west road down which the Russian
tanks were supposed to be coming. Where are
they? Sure, if they were coming this way, they'd be
here by now. Could they have gotten by already?
Are they about to open fire from behind? The
thought of a shot " up the tailpipe " is enough to
make you want to scout the territory. Before you
can act, your doubts are dispelled by the appearance of a tank on the road! It's not a T-34, it's a
KV-85; no wonder they weren't here sooner! Well,
there's no point in waiting for a side or rear aspect
shot on a KV, the armor's the same all around, so
you take careful aim and fire! Good shot, it hits
square on the front hull...and bounces! You slam
the hatch shut and reach for another round as the
return fire screams overhead...

on cassette at $24 for Apple II, Atari, PET and
TRS-80 or on disk at $29 for the Apple and TRS-80.

IS THIS A BOARD GAME?
The first thing that catches your eye when you
open the box is a brightly colored mapboard.
There are two of them and they lay side-by-side to
make a 16" by 18" map with forests, lakes, roads
and "rough " ground. It is a purely hypothetical
map, not intended to represent any real place; the
idea is simply to have a relatively flat area with a
few bumps, dips, and trees where the tanks can
"play around." The game is played in the computer
but it is impossible to visualize what is happening
without referring to the map. The map is covered
with a grid of hexagons (known as "hexes") and
each hex is identified by "coordinates" (from Al to
FF24) clearly printed on the board. The computer
tells you where things are by giving their coordinates; there are no graphics or pictures whatsoever. At first, taking the graphics off the screen
and putting them on a mapboard may seem like a
step backward, but there are two big advantages.
First, it means owners of Commodore PET's and
TRS-80's can run the game too and, secondly, we
can all enjoy a larger, more complex game this
way.

As you can guess, TANKTICS is a game about
armor battles between the Germans and Russians
(the Eastern Front) during World War II. It is
Avalon Hill's first historical microcomputer wargame since their original 4 computer games hit the
market last year. Like those games, TANKTICS
is easy to play and fairly short, but it is a much
more complex simulation than MIDWAY CAMPAIGN or B-1 NUCLEAR BOMBER. It's a
fairly conventional board wargame with a computer as both referee and opponent. There is no
provision for two players to compete except to
alternate games and compare scores. It is available

There are about 240 half-inch square counters to
mark the positions of the tanks on the map. Each
has an accurate outline of the appropriate type of
tank, the movement allowance, and a letter from A
to P to identify individual vehicles. German
17

THE PROGRAMMER'S CORNER

Although only the speed is shown on the counter,
each tank is rated for size of gun and three kinds of
armor (front, side and rear). You can select from
five different types of German tanks. The Panzer
Mark IIIJ and IVH are inferior to every type of
Soviet tank and won't get used much. The later
Panzers--the Panther, Tiger and King Tiger--are
all useful though you will soon learn that the
Panther has reduced side and rear armor dangerously to obtain its 11 point movement allowance.
There are 6 kinds of Russian tanks--2 T-34's, 2
KV's, and 2 JS's. Both sides also have Anti-Tank
guns which can be used on defense; they function
like tanks with a movement allowance of zero.

For those of you who know BASIC, here are
some simple improvements for TANKTICS.
These changes apply specifically to the Apple
version, but similar logic can be used with the
others.
Our first concern is to fix the problem that
occurs when a Russian and German tank
occupy the same hex and it is not resolved as
an overrun. If either shoots at the other, the
program stops because it 's trying to divide by
the range which has a value of zero. The error
occurs in line 20130 and it can be fixed just by
adding line 20125:

PLAYING THE GAME
First you select one of the 5 scenario types (see
below) and choose how many tanks you will have.
Then you pick the type of tanks that both sides will
use. You can mix types but the computer cannot.
Then the computer determines the starting positions
and the location of the objective. Now you're ready
to start.

20125 IF RG = 0 THEN RG = 1

Another worthwhile change will permit
any number of Russian tanks (up to 16) no
matter how many tanks you choose for
yourself. This is done by modifying line 120
and adding line 125 so that they look like this:
120 PRINT "HOW MANY TANKS FOR YOU? ":: Q=8: GOSUB 10000:

The game is played in alternating turns and you
always get to go first. At the start of your turn, the
computer displays the positions of all of your
tanks and the locations of any enemy tanks which
they can see. Each turn, you can move each tank
up to its maximum movement allowance unless
you choose to have it shoot instead. The winner is
determined by a point system which takes into
account how many tanks were destroyed, how
long the game took and how close to the objective
the attacker got. All of this is explained in 5 pages
of the 12-page rulebook, which also covers loading
the program and gives some examples of play. The
rulebook lists the following 5 "scenarios":

HN=Q: HL=0
125 PRINT "HOW MANY TANKS FOR ME? ": Q=16: GOSUB 10000:
CN=Q: CL=Q

1. MEETING ENGAGEMENT - Both sides start
away from the objective hex and must try to
capture (occupy) it.
2. HEDGEHOG DEFENSE - You set up near the
objective and must keep the Soviets from capturing
it.
3. ARMOR ASSAULT - Same as #2 except that the
Russians are defending and you must overrun the
objective.
4. LINE DEFENSE - You set up in a line across the
board (in this one case, you get to choose which
hexes you will start in) and the Soviets try to break
through your line to reach the objective.
5. LINE ASSAULT - The reverse of #4, with the
Germans attacking a Soviet line defense.
In actual play, these are all the same game with
different starting positions. In spite of the
geographical "objective", victory is always determined by points and all of the scenarios continue
19

until one side or the other is eliminated. This gets a
little strange in the case of scenario #5, where you
can punch a hole in the Russian line and overrun
the objective only to find that the game doesn't
end until you go back and mop up every last unit.

working backwards. In each new scenario, give
yourself only the tanks that survived the previous
round. Surviving all 5 rounds is proof that you
have mastered the game.

In every game, the computer gets twice as many
tanks as you do. This gives scenarios 2 and 4 an
authentic feel; the Russian "hordes" attempt to
swamp the defenders by weight of numbers. You
have an advantage being on defense because you
can sit and shoot while the attacker cannot both
move and return your fire. When YOU must attack
it ' s a tough row to hoe--you must give yourself very
good tanks and the Russians weak ones if you
want a reasonable chance of winning.

How good an opponent is the computer? The
rulebook claims that it will make "very few stupid
moves" but I've seen it move tanks backwards
several times. It also gives up side and rear aspect
shots more often than it should but does use
protective terrain pretty well. You'll find it
difficult to win at first, but as your tactical skill
improves you'll begin winning regularly. At this
point, it 's time to start giving yourself poorer
tanks.

WINNING THE GAME

SOME COMPLAINTS

The scoring system makes zero points a tie
game. Any plus score is a win for you, a minus
score is a loss. It is possible to capture your
objective and still lose; it is even possible to wipe
out the Russians and lose. You can't predict how
many points a tank will be worth--anywhere from
10 to over a hundred! In any given game, though,
each kill will be worth more than the last. This
makes the last tank worth quite a bit and tremendous come-backs are common.

The Apple version of TANKTICS, which I was
using, suffers a little from program errors. This is
not the problem it might be thanks to Avalon
Hill's policy of selling programs that can be
changed (see the programmer's corner), however I
feel uncomfortable with a product that doesn't
seem finished. Fortunately, the Apple version
seems to be the only one with problems.

THE COMPUTER AS OPPONENT

My only complaint about the game system itself
concerns lines of sight. TANKTICS handles
sightings as probabilities. Beyond adjacent hexes,
sighting is never certain, it is likely or unlikely. It
takes a while to get used to seeing "through" hills
and forests, but I can visualize very low, rough
ground and thin forests and live with it. It certainly
makes programming easier. The problem is that
the game has no memory of previous results. Thus
it sometimes happens that you can see a tank on
one turn but can't see it on the next, even though it
continues to fire at you!

You lose 3 points per turn, so accomplishing the
same result in less time means a higher score. The
importance of time-pressure varies with the
number of tanks. Ten turns (30 points) represents
a much bigger percentage of the total score in a
2-tank game than it does in an 8-tank game.
Both sides also score points for each hex they
move toward the objective. Consider the difference
between scenarios #1 and #2. In #2, your tanks
begin in position around the objective; you just
find good protective terrain and wait for the
Russians to show. The further away they start, the
longer it takes and the more points they have by
the time you spot them. In scenario #1, you start
away from the objective too, and get points for
your approach to offset some of those the Russians
are getting. On the minus side, you don't know
who was further away, who will get there first, or
whether the two forces will meet "in route." The
bottom line: #1 is more exciting and unpredictable,
and not any harder to win.

CONCLUSIONS
There are two types of people who might be
disappointed with TANKTICS. The first is
someone who buys it wanting an arcade-style
game; this it obviously is not and was never
intended to be. The second is the serious wargamer
who expects the computerized equivalent of
PANZER or SQUAD LEADER. This game has
neither the complexity nor feel of these board
games. In some areas (like combat resolution) it
comes close, but in other ways (lines of sight) it's
much simpler. You don't have the sense of control
that you do in a board game; average luck on an
unlikely shot and poor luck on a likely shot all
come out the same: a miss! You can't tell the
difference and if you can't shrug that off,
TANKTICS may irritate you. For those of us who
enjoy a little uncertainty and for all you readers
who now know what to expect, TANKTICS is just
plain FUN! know why things are happening.

A total disaster for you will often mean less
points for the computer (because you lose fewer
points on time and the Soviets don't get as close to
the objective) than if you had lost a longer game.
This makes "head-to-head" competition with a
friend a bit frustrating but you can still accumulate
points over many games to make a "campaign "
game. One way I do this is to start with 8 tanks
and play each of the scenarios starting with 5 and
20

by John Anderson

When the ATARI first appeared in the
marketplace, lack of software was cited as a major
disadvantage. Since that time, a veritable software
explosion has taken place. Dozens of quality
programs from third party manufacturers have
surfaced as the expansion of Atari shelf space in
local computer stores attests to this fact.

Finally getting a little weary of Invaders? Try
GALACTIC CHASE on for size. I'd wager the
author would have called this program
"GALAXIAN" (R) if the name hadn't already
been "coined." For those of you who save your
quarters for the laundry, Galaxian is Invaders
with a slight twist--every so often a formation
breaks off the pack to snuff you out. Graphics and
sound are superlative, addictive qualities strong,
and a frighteningly difficult advanced level awaits
survivors. Also excellently paced, the insectoid
aliens are deliciously hateful.

The ATARI Software Exchange, offering
programs such as in-house genius Chris Crawford's
EASTERN FRONT, has added to this growth.
And now, first rate graphics, of a kind formally
attainable only by ATARI programmers themselves, have reached the marketplace.

The real moments in this game come when you
are attacked by formations on all sides--four, six,
or more aliens bent on bombing or ramming you
out of existence. The novice will not survive an
assault like this. However, with much practice,
you can learn to " spear" the enemy, vaporizing
them on the nosecone of your ship. This calls for
nimble steering, needless to say, and all the while
you must fire at your other attackers.

Let's look at three excellent examples of quality
third party game graphics, from three separate
sources! JAWBREAKER, from On-Line Systems,
GALACTIC CHASE, by Stedek Software, and
PROTECTOR, from Crystal Computer and
Software.
Please don't be misled by the name JAWBREAKER. This is the arcade game known most
commonly as"PAC—MAN"(R), though there are
a couple of amusing and original alterations. You
are a roving mouth with a voracious appetite,
gobbling up all the candy in sight. You are pursued
just as voraciously by a group of multicolored
smiles, whom, you may incorrectly surmise, want
only to wish you a nice day. Nothing of the sort.
What they really want to do is corner you in the
maze so they can knock your teeth out. I never did
really trust people who say "have a nice day."

Perhaps the most ambitious game of the pack is
PROTECTOR, from Crystal Software. Though
the game is somewhat flawed, it shows great
potential.
The game is akin to the arcade game
"DEFENDER"(R). Your job is to save the last
survivors of a lost city before they are tractor
beamed into a volcano by an alien ship. This game
makes use of the Atari's horizontal scrolling ability.
As you fly east or west, the terrain scrolls by
giving the exciting illusion of a "microworld."
Atari's extraordinary capabilities in this area are
sure to be exploited further in the future.

In respect to the "theme" of this package, I think
it holds together better than even the arcade game
itself. If you succeed in clearing a board, a manic
toothbrush shoots across the screen for a quick
going over before the next session. Even the
instructions reflect some wit and humor. This is
not merely an arcade game transplant.

The game is very difficult at first, and on that
account, is relatively addictive. Also, the scrolling
terrain is fun to survey. Why then, is the game
ultimately somewhat disappointing? First of all,
it's got a number of quirky bugs in it--bugs that do
not surface right away. A promised meteor storm

As for the graphics and sound, when I first saw
the program, I could not bring myself to believe
the game was not written by ATARI. It is not only
truly addictive, but also "paced"--that is, you get
tougher, the enemy gets tougher, Four stars to this
one.

Continued on page 36
22

THE GREATEST BASEBALL TEAM
OF ALL TIME TOURNAMENT (PART 2)

1955 BROOKLYN DODGERS
Name
6. Hodges
J. Gilliam
P. Reese
J. Robinson
C. rillo
Fu
D. Snider
S. Amoros
R. Campanella
D. Hoak
D. Zimmer
R. Walker
0. Newcombe
Pitchers
D. Newcombe
C. Labine
C. Erskine
B. Loes
J. Podres
D. Bessent
K. Spooner

In our last issue (Nov. - Dec. 1981) the staff at
CGW proposed a baseball tournament to determine
the greatest baseball team of all time. Using
Avalon Hill's MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL
or Strategic Simulation's COMPUTER BASEBALL
you can set up a tournament which includes the
premier teams in baseball history. The statistics
for the first four teams of the tournament (1927
Yankees, 1931 Athletics, 1948 Indians, and 1961
Yankees) were included in our last issue. The
statistics for the remaining four teams are included
in this issue. The winner of the upper bracket (last
issue) should play the winner of the lower bracket
(this issue) in a best of seven series to determine
the overall winner of the GBTOAT tournament.
To guarantee that the results of your replay are
included in CGW your tournament results should
be in our hands by MARCH 31, 1982 (PLEASE
NOTE THAT THIS DEADLINE IS CHANGED
FROM THE ORIGINAL). The results of the
tournament will be published in our May - June
1982 issue (not the Mar.-Apr. 1982 issue indicated
in our last issue). Important ground rules for the
tournament can be found in the Nov. - Dec. 1981
issue.

R H 2B 3B HR RBI BB 50 5B BA FA
6
AB
R 150 1B 546 75 158 24 5 27 102 80 91 2 .289 .991
S 147 538 110 134 20 8 7 40 70 37 15 .249 .968
R 145 553 99 156 29 4 10 61 78 60 8 .282 .965
R 105 317 51 81 6 2 8 36 61 18 12 .256 .966
R 140 523 83 164 24 3 26 95 43 43 4 .314 .981
L 148 538 126 166 34 6 42 136 104 87 9 .309 .989
L 119 388 59 96 16 7 10 51 55 45 10 .247 .972
R 123 446 81 142 20 1 32 107 56 41 2 .318 .992
R 44 279 50 67 13 3 5 19 46 50 9 .240 .960
R 88 240 38 67 10 1 15 50 19 66 5 .239 .969
L 48 103
6 26 5 0 2 13 15 11 1 .252
6 18 1 .359 .907
L 57 117 18 42 9 I 7 23
N
L
H
K
65
6
C6
IP
BB
ERA
17
20
5 34
31
234 222
38 143 3.19
13
5 60
8
144 121
55 67 3.25
1
11
B 31
7
29
195 185
64 84 3.78
4 22
10
19
6
128 116
46 85 3.59
9 10 27
24
5
159 160
57 114 3.96
8
1 24
2
I
63
51
21 29 2.71
L
6 29
8
99
79
14
2
41 78 3.64

Pos. B
2B
SS
3B
RF
CF
LF
C
3B
IF
C
P
THR
R
R
R
R
L
R

1936 NEW YORK
Name
L. Gehrig
T. Lazzeri
F. Crosetti
R. Rolfe
6. Selkirk
J. Powell
J. Maggio
B. Dickey
M. Hoag
B. Chapman
J. Glenn
R. Ruffing
Pitchers
R. Ruffing
M. Pearson
B. Hadley
L. Gomez
J. Broaca
P. Malone
J. Murphy

YANKEES

Pos. B 6
AB
R
1B L 155 579 167
2B R 150 537 82
SS R 151 632 137
3B L 135 568 116
RF L 137 493 93
CF R 87 324 62
LF R 138 637 132
C L 112 423 99
OF R 45 156 23
OF R 36 139 19
C R 44 129 21
P R 53 127 14
W
THR
L
6
R
20 12 33
R
7 33
19
R
14
4 31
7 31
L
13
7 37
R
12
4 35
R
12
R
9
3 27

FA
H 2B 38 HR RBI BB 50 SB BA
205 37 3 49 152 130 46 3 .354 .994
154 29 6 14 109 97 65 8 .287 .968
182 35 7 15 78 90 83 18 .288 .948
181 39 15 10 70 68 38 3 .319 .957
152 28 9 18 107 94 60 13 .308 .974
99 13 3 7 48 33 30 16 .306 .976
206 44 15 29 125 24 39 4 ,323 .978
153 26 8 22 107 46 16 0 .362 .976
7 16 3 .301 .955
47 9 4 3 34
37 14 3 1 21 15 20 I .266 .965
35 7 0 1 20 20 10 1 .271 .970
37 5 0 5 22 11 12 0 .291 .986
H
K
C6
IP
BB
ERA
65
33
25
271 274
90 102 3.85
31
15
223 191 135 118 3.71
17
8
174 194
89 74 4.34
30
10
189 184 122 105 4.38
27
12
206 235
66 84 4.24
9
5
135 144
60 72 3.80
5
2
88
90
36 34 3.38

1934 ST. LOUIS CARDINALS
FA
R H 2B 3B HR RBI BB SO SB BA
AB
Pos. B 6
Name
1B 5 154 600 116 200 40 12 35 128 57 50 2 .333 .991
R. Collins
F. Frisch
28 5 140 550 74 168 30 6 3 75 45 10 11 .305 .977
146 500 S 62 130 26 5 3 70 33 40 2 .260 .957
L. Durocher
55
P. Martin
3B R 110 454 76 131 25 11 5 49 32 41 23 .289 .936
RF S 154 647 106 184 35 3 11 72 49 56 10 .284 .975
J. Rothrock
CF L 105 337 39 101 14 4 0 31 27 31 6 .300 .986
E. Orsatti
LF R 149 620 110 198 40 18 18 106 21 83 3 .319 .960
J. Medwick
C R 107 347 45 104 22 4 9 65 34 27 0 .300 .988
S. Davis
IF R 100 332 55 92 13 5 1 24 12 19 5 .277 .959
B. Whitehead
C L 93 253 41 80 18 3 13 40 41 37 1 .316 .980
B. Delancey
OF R 69 199 21 52 9 I 0 26 14 11 4 .261 .969
C Fullis
5 3 0 .271
3 19 2 0 0 16
IF L 61 70
P. Crawford
7 17 4 1 1
4 11 0 .236
8
B. Mills
OF R 29 72
H
K
ERA
THR
L
6 W 6S
C6
IP
BB
Pitchers
30
7 50
R
312 288
33
24
75 195 2.65
D Dean
P. Dean
R
19 11 39
26
16
233 225
52 150 3.44
T. Carleton
R
16 11 40
31
16
241 260
52 103 4.26
12
4 24
L
19
10
153 160
66 76 3.12
B. Walker
163 195
66 70 4.25
L
8 12 32
26
10
B. Hallahan
2
4 32
7
1
49 27 5.49
J. Haines
L
82 114
R
1
1 19
4
1
62
14 33 3.66
59
D. Vance

Continued on page 36

23

Operation Apocalypse: A Review and Campaign Scenario
by Paul Todd and Russell Sipe
the blink of an eye (no speed problems with this
one like COMPUTER AMBUSH). For combat
modifiers the computer factors in terrain (for
attacker and defender), unit type and mode, and
adjacent friendly and enemy units. If after combat
a unit still has movement points left it can
continue to move. Movement points are subtracted
for enemy zones of control (less is subtracted at
night). The program even has reinforcements
arriving pseudo-randomly and calculates the
victory conditions at the end of the scenario. You
can play all the scenarios for many turns after
they are officially over if you want.

OPERATION APOCALYPSE is the second
game Strategic Simulations has put out by Rodger
Keating, REBEL FORCE (hereafter RF) being his
first. The game simulates in an abstract fashion
four engagements between the Germans and
Americans in World War II. Operation MarketGarden (the Allied attempt to breach the Siegfried
Line through a combined airborne and regular
infantry assault) is represented by two scenarios,
one being similar to the air drop at Arnhem and
the other being similar to XXX Corps advance up
the highway. There is an invasion scenario and a
scenario that is a general advance to contact
situation with the winner holding the most towns.

The map contains six types of terrain as well as
rivers, all in color. The units are black and white
which causes some difficulty in unit identification
but facing is different for both sides so with a little
practice there isn't much problem. Unlike RF you
can see the terrain under any unit at the stroke of a
key. Another significant improvement over RF is
the ability, through the use of a pause function, to
leave a unit temporarily in order to move another
unit out of the way.

When I say the simulation is abstract I only
mean that historic references like unit designations and town names are not involved. The
actual tactical feel is very realistic. This game has
it all: off board artillery, bunkers, landing craft,
engineers (they even build bridges), hidden units,
infantry river assault, pseudo-random terrain set
up, paratroop drops, panic movement, night turns,
flak and anti-tank units and beautiful hi-res
graphics.

The use of unit modes is another improvement
on the RF system. Units can be in one of six modes:
attack, normal, transport, reorganization,
defense, river (infantry), fire (tanks), or bridge
building (engineers). Each mode has it's special
effects on movement and combat, which the
computer keeps track of (and you better too if you
want to win). The different modes, especially
reorganization, forces you to direct your army in
an historically correct manner. (I lost several
units to off-board artillery by reorganizing too
close to the front).

The physical components are standard SSI
quality. You get two plastic covered player aid
cards with a blank map board, turn record chart,
command quick reference chart, and unit mode
chart. You also get a scenario selection card with
reinforcement schedule and victory conditions for
each of the four scenarios. Also included is a very
well written rule book and four felt tip pens.
The program itself is great! It handles everything. You cannot make an illegal move. All the
combat and movement modifiers are calculated in
25

OPERATION APOCALYPSE is a two player
game. But if you can't find someone with which to
play, the computer plays a good game. There are
no less than four levels of solitaire play. The
computer can even play both sides. The game
contains sufficient tactical problems and
complexity to give it a realistic feel.

GERMAN STRATEGIC VICTORY. If the Allies
score a decisive victory then the second and third
scenario, Advance to Contact, is played. Points
are awarded the victor of a scenario according to
the Scenario Point Table. After playing the
scenarios and adding up the points consult the
Campaign Victory Table to determine the overall
results.

OPERATION APOCALYPSE runs on an Apple
II computer (48K with Applesoft in ROM. $59.95.

by R.S.

by P.7'.
SCENARIO POINT TABLE

The four scenarios of OPERATION APOCALYPSE can be linked together in a semi-historical
order to create an interesting campaign for two
players or a player versus the computer.

Allied
Allied
Allied
Decisive Substantive Marginal
Victory
Victory
Victory
1. Invasion

The campaign involves playing the four
scenarios of OPERATION APOCALYPSE in the
following order: Invasion represents D-Day; Bridgehead represents Operation Market; Highway represents Operation Garden; and Advance To Contact
represents a general engagement in a valley somewhere in France or Germany.

+4

2. Bridgehead

+3

+1

German
German
German
Marginal Substantive Decisive
Victory
Victory
Victory
-1

Any Allied Victory +3

-3

-6

Any German Victory -2

3. Highway

+4

+2

+1

-1

-2

-3

4. Advance

+3

+2

+1

-1

-2

-3

CAMPAIGN VICTORY TABLE
POINT TOTAL

It is possible that the campaign will not require
all four scenarios to determine a winner. The
campaign can be shortened by either player based
on the results of the battles actually fought.
The first scenario, Invasion, is critical to the
whole campaign, just as the events of D-Day and
Operation Overlord were critical to any future
campaign in France. If the German player scores
a Decisive Victory in the first scenario the
campaign is immediately concluded with a

CAMPAIGN RESULT

+6

Allied Superior Victory;

Allies win war in Dec. 44

+5 to +3

Allied Strategic Victory;

Allies win war in May 45

+2 to +1

Allied Victory;

Allies win war in Dec. 45

0

European Campaign Fails

-1 to -2

German Victory;

-3 to -5

German Strategic Victory:

Operation Sea Lion Revived

-6 less

German Superior Victory;

Germans win the war

Peace with Germany intact

yourself. You can learn a lot faster and a lot less
expensively by watching others. ED. NOTE — Mr.
Hirschfeld's first point is well taken. However
please do your reconnaissance with style . Don't
crowd a stranger to watch the game. Some players
resent close quarter observation of their play. Use
good sense and common courtesy while performing
your reconnaissance. By Teamwork, the second
step, the author simply means that players should
share their ideas with one another. The other steps
are apparent. Following the chapters on the games
themselves, Hirschfeld even has a chapter on
exercises for the video-gamer (hands, eyes, and
fingers).

MICRO - REVIEWS
HOW TO MASTER THE VIDEO GAMES
HOW TO MASTER THE VIDEO GAMES is
a 177-page book that bills itself as the first complete
guide to the 30 most popular coin-operated arcade
games. The book, written by Tom Hirschfeld, is
published in paperback by Bantam Books ($2.95).

The games themselves are divided into five
categories: Space Invaders-Type Games; Asteroids-Type Games; Maze Games; Reflex Games;
and Miscellaneous Games. The Space-InvaderTypes include Astro Blaster, Astro Fighter,
Centipede, Galaxian, Gorf, Moon Cresta, Phoenix,
Pleiades, Space Invaders and Space Invaders Part
II. The Asteroids-Types include Asteroids, Aster-

After a couple of short introductory chapters
Hirschfeld lists "Seven Steps to Mastery" of the
games. They are: 1) Reconnaissance; 2) Teamwork;
3) Concentration; 4) Tempo; 5) Observation; 6)
Experimentation; and 7) Memorization. The first
step is obvious but often unheeded, observe the
game being played several times before playing it
26

oids Deluxe, Defender, Scramble, Space Fury,
Space Odyssey, and Star Castle. Maze Games
include Armor Attack, Berzerk, Pac-Man, Rally-X,
Targ, Venture and Wizard of Wor. There are three
games in the Reflex cat-agory: Monaco GP, Sky
Raider and Space Zap. The Miscellaneous
category also has three games: Battlezone, Crazy
Climber and Missile Command.
The book is just the ticket for the game player
who wants to be more than a novice. If you really
want to enjoy the coin-operated arcades take a few
of those spare quarters and pick up HOW TO
MASTER THE VIDEO GAMES, you'll come out
ahead in the long run.
Stanley Greenlaw

GENETIC DRIFT

WEBSTER'S MICROCOMPUTER
BUYER'S GUIDE

GENETIC DRIFT has an original if not
realistic theme. At the center of the monitor
surrounded by drifting mutated life forms, your
mission is to turn them into friendly life
forms. Since TV is such an important part of our
lives, the friendly life forms are represented by TV
sets--shades of "My Favorite Martian" reruns.

Although most of us don't often buy $25.00
books, here's one that you might find interesting.
Webster's Microcomputer Buyer's Guide is
over 300 pages of industry information. An evening
with this book and you'll be an instant authority.
The book documents almost every foreign and
domestic manufacturer and is also a primer on
programming languages, memory storage systems,
software, microprocessors, communications networks and many other related products. All very
well done and interesting reading.

At the start of the game you are surrounded by
sixteen mutants; four in each of the cardinal
directions. As the mutant life forms drift from side
to side they sling genetic garbage at you. Three
hits with that junk and you're gone. To defend
yourself, and your precious genes, you have a
diamond-shaped turret from which you fire your
mutation gun in an effort to change the unfriendly
forms into friendly ones. The mutants floating
around you at the start of the game are about
midway through the evolution cycle. If you succeed
in turning all four mutant forms on the same side
of the screen into friendly TV forms you will begin
to be bombarded with hearts. Don't shoot these
symbols of good will as hitting a heart will in most
cases cause the forms sending the heart to
destabilize into a form more alien than the original.
From time to time a group of friendly life forms
will send their heart upside-down. These must be
shot to invert the heart or the whole side destabilizes.

Chapter 1. Introduction Microcomputers and Systems.
Chapter 2. Peripheral Devices for Microcomputers.
Chapter 3. Introduction to Microcomputer Software.
Chapter 4. A Summary of the Basic Language.
Chapter 5. The Big Future for Desktop Personal Computers.
Chapter 6. Guidelines for Selection of Microcomputers.
Chapter 7. Microcomputers and Word Processing.
Chapter 8. Future Trends in Microprocessing.
Chapter 9. Communications and Networking with Computers.
Chapter 10. Microcomputers in Education.
Chapter 11. Independent Z80 & 8080 Based Software Products.
Chapter 12. Independent TRS-80 Software Products.
Chapter 13. Independent Apple Computer Software Products.
Chapter 14. Independent Commodore Software Products.
Chapter 15. Independent Motorola 68XX Software Products.
Chapter 16. Microcobol for Microcomputers.

If you succeed in turning all sixteen mutants
into friendly forms, the High Mutant (an oversized
TV set) congratulates you by sweeping the board
clean of mutants. Then follows the next round
which, of course is more deadly than the last.

The book's only shortcoming is that some of the
information is already out of date. The industry is
just changing too fast. For example, the new IBM
personal computer is not included. But if you want
or need a rapid education about the microcomputer
industry, this book will help you at least know the
right questions to ask. That in itself could be worth
a great deal.

Avoid going on a shooting spree. This game is
not for the over-zealous slash-and-hack player.
You can't shoot wildly at anything that moves for
you might hit your friends, the TV sets, who will be
destabilized and revert to the lowest life form.

Gene Allen

Starting at Level 3, as if you didn't have enough
27

problems, radioactive hunks of critical mass will
begin whirling around you. These must be
destroyed quickly as they are closer to you than
the mutants, you might not see their missiles until
it is too late.

destroyed-by-your-weapons games. While many
versions of the ADFTSBDBYW type of game are
very similar to the coin arcade games that they
were based upon, this one has a flavor all it's own.
The difference lies in the fact that you have a
variety of weapons at your disposal rather than
the ubiquitous missile firing ship. Your weapons
include two multi-barreled precision cambered
meanie blasters, one ultra-sensitive wide-range
multi-frequency redar, one government surplus
anti-thud rocket, and one Van Apple Rediation
(sic) Belt repair kit.

Level four has the critical mass still present, but
now when you shoot them, they evolve. They
mutate into things such as diamonds, spheres,
and fiendishly grinning happy faces. As for what's
beyond Level 4, your guess is as good as mine. I
cannot imagine anyone getting so far except
someone who is a mutant himself.

Play involves blasting the invaders before their
bombs strike your defensive installations. One of
your strategies, therefore, should be to be selective
about which bases you protect. If you lose your
radar your blasters become less effective. If you
lose your missile launcher you can't fire your
rocket which will wipe out all the aliens on the
screen. If you lose your Van Apple Rediation Belt
repair kit you won't get a new Belt of protection
every few thousand points. And if you lose both
blasters the game is over. It is very difficult to
defend all of these and remember, to defend everything is to defend nothing. Try covering the center
and one blaster as the loss of one blaster will not
greatly effect the game.

This is not a game for the pondering thoughtful
player. I would recommend this game to arcade
addicts only. The game can become extremely
angering especially when you've got all but one
form turned into a TV set and while waiting for it
to come back into range you notice the heart
peacefully drifting toward you from the rear is
UPSIDE DOWN. Quickly you lunge at the
keyboard. Too late. "Well, I didn't care about
seeing the next level anyhow. I don't know why I
play this infuriating game. I could be doing more
productive things with my life" you say, as you
reach for the return key to start a new game.
GENETIC DRIFT is definitely habit forming!
definitely exciting! definitely fun!

IT IS HIGHLY RECOMMENDED THAT YOU
USE A JOYSTICK TO PLAY THIS GAME. The
rules proclaim that those who play the game with
paddles are "brazen" (i.e. marked by contemptuous
boldness). Even with the joystick RED ALERT
requires the reflexes of a seasoned arcade player.

GENETIC DRIFT by Broderbund Software,
runs on the Apple II computer with 48K in RAM.
The price is $29.95.

A good game for arcade players, RED ALERT
runs on the Apple II computer with 48K in Integer
basic.
Luther Shaw

WALL STREET
WALL STREET, by CE Software, is a stock
market game using the stock market as it's vehicle.
In the designer's notes section of it's rulebook
Donald Brown, the author, says "Any similarities
between it (WALL STREET) and real life are
largely coincidental". While written with tongue
in cheek the statement is, none the less, true.
WALL STREET isn't much of a simulation of the
stock market; rather it can better be described as a
game which uses the stock market as it's vehicle.

RED ALERT
Flee for the hills! Here come the bareboned
thudputters! Can you imagine. Educated adults
staying up all night to blast thudputters and space
meanies? Of course you can, because you've
probably spent a night or two blasting one alientype or another yourself. Well, here's another in
the long line of aliens-dropping-from-the-skies-being

The game involves buying and selling of stocks
on a simulated stock market made up of thirty
stocks. The stocks are divided up into six areas:
computer, entertainment, oil, automotive, retail,
and appliance. The names of real companies are
used. For example the computer stocks are Apple,
28

a scenario or allow you to choose your own.
Scenarios include the following variables: type of
product (necessity, luxury, or mixed), costs of raw
material (fluctuating seasonally or randomly, or
based on the demand in your game), inflation (low,
controlled, high or runaway), economic rate (from
slow decline to strong expansion), and there even
exists a chance of an economic swing, up or down.
All together these variables do provide a wide
variety of possible game backgrounds and situations against which you may compete in the
marketplace. The market simulations seem quite
good although even the manual admits that beyond
40 quarters the economic simulation begins to
break down.

Tandy, IBM, DEC, and another of the gigantic
computer megacorporations, CE Software.
Most traditional stock market games are built
around buying on margin or on selling short.
WALL STREET uses the latter approach. Selling
short involves selling stock that you don't own.
They really do that on Wall Street folks! The trick
in "selling short" is to sell the stock when it is high
and deliver the stock when it is low. What the
player is doing is trying to make money on a stock
that he feels is going down in value.
Another important element in the game is the
buying of information. There are five levels of
information gathering. Each level is five times
more expensive than the previous level and
increases your chance of getting secret market
information by 10%. The highest level gives a 50%
chance of picking up information and costs $6,250
per week. The next lower level is 40% but the cost is
only $1,250 per week. Is the 10%, increase in chance
of getting information worth a five fold increase in
cost? Most of those with whom I have played the
game think not. The 40% level is the most popular
level.

Among the program features are several one
shot bits of chrome that become tedious upon the
third or fourth repetition, such as a moving
high-res graphics interlude that must slow processing of the turn, and the programmer's version
of witty sayings that soon repeat. These combined
with the rendition of "We're In the Money" at
program start leave one with the impression of a
glossy version of Lemonade Stand, which is
unfortunate.

After playing the game several times I believe
that the program sets up patterns for certain
stocks. I am somewhat tentative in this statement
exist,hy because of the fact that if the pattern
are subtle. For example, in a recent game we noted
that one particular oil stock seemed to lag one day
behind the others in type of action. If the other four
changed from an up day to a down day the stock in
question would make the same change only do it a
day later. If you find any patterns in the game
please drop a note to CGW. I'd like to read about it.

The most refreshing feature is the ability to play
a hard-copy game. I believe this to be the most
convenient way to play, allowing everyone to view
his reports of which there are many. This reviewer
does so much work with terminals that my eyes
begin to cross, especially with the low quality of
most Apple monitors (i.e. T.V. sets). Thus a hardcopy of the reports is most pleasant. This feature
also makes the program ideally suited to use by
high school instructors, in courses in microeconomics, who wish to set up class participation.
The program also allows the use of paddles to page
through the reports but most will find this of little
real benefit.

One of the best features of the game is the ability
to list the day's stock quotes on a printer. This has
two advantages over viewing the quotes on a CRT.
First, you must flip through several "pages" of the
daily report to see all the stocks on a CRT. Second,
hard copy allows you to get a history on a stock.

There are many random events to make play
more interesting, such as fires, strikes and
solicitation by charities. These are well executed
and allow interaction by players with the program.
Beginners are aided by a special memo which
points out basic strategies and hints. They are
helpful but usually not much more than common
sense. The packaging is typical SSI. The large
spacious box (which allows the game disk to slip
out of its cover--beware) contains a well printed
manual, short rule card and planning sheets.
While the manual is a good introduction to microeconomics, it ' s a poor intro to the game program,
resulting in some play being necessary to familiarize yourself.

WALL STREET, by CE Software, runs on the
Apple II Computer with 48K and Applesoft in
ROM.
Daniel Hockman

CARTELS & CUTTHROATS
SSI's Cartels & Cutthroats presents to the
computer gamer a well executed economic simulation. The premise of this game is that you (and
your fellow players) own companies which produce
some item or commodity. The exact item is not
specified.

While an excellent program, the casual gamer
may find his interest wane after a short time. This
game is best suited for those who are interested in

During set-up the computer will randomly generate
29

marketing simulations and are willing to expend
the time needed to play them well.

tants of Arcturon will blow up the planet to avoid
being made slaves of the invading Griplems.

Robin D. Roberts

Your evacuation ship is controlled by the paddle
which moves it up and down on the screen and the
paddle button fires your laser. Every once in a
while, a space storm will occur. This means the
attacking ship will be thrown about in a random
fashion, making it extremely hard to hit. The
transport ship attacks straight on. The commando
ships are very small and fast and come in on an
angle. The third type are the slowly moving
fighters.
The high score for each mode is saved on disk
which is a nice feature. The graphics are good in
the "Fortress" mode and outstanding in the
"Escape" mode. As current arcade games go,
however, ESCAPE FROM ARCTURUS tends
to be a little simplistic.
ESCAPE FROM ARCTURUS, by Synergistic
Software, runs on the Apple II computer with 48K
in RAM. Paddles and disk drive are required. The
price is $35.00.

ESCAPE FROM ARCTURUS
ESCAPE FROM ARCTURUS is played in
two modes. In the "Space Fortress" mode you are
surrounded on all sides by alien attack bases
which are firing photon torpedoes at you. You
cannot destroy these bases, you simply try to
survive as long as possible. The G J Y and Space
keys form the diamond-shaped pattern that fires
your gun. You can take three hits from photon
torpedoes before you are destroyed, and you get a
bonus ship after 2000 points for doing so. If you
shoot and hit nothing, it deducts 10% from your
energy supply. When your energy supply reaches
zero, you cannot fire. Every time you hit a photon
torpedo or attacking ship, you add 1% to your
energy supply. When they start making shield
attacks, the shields slowly move toward you while
the bases are firing photon torpedoes. These shields
protect the photon torpedoes so you have to wait
until the photon torpedoes get close to shoot them.
There is a 200 point bonus for surviving a shield
attack. After the shield attack comes the circling
attack ships which are worth 50 points. After you
survive the circling attack ships, the bases start
firing photon torpedoes again only this time the
action is a lot faster. Later on, you will be attacked
by spiraling ships, worth 50 points.

Bob Boyd

ON-LINE ADVENTURE GAMES
MISSION: ASTEROID, MYSTERY HOUSE and
THE WIZARD AND THE PRINCESS (three
adventure type games by On-Line Systems)
follows the traditional two-word adventure game
format, with one interesting exception. In addition
to a text description you get a hi-res graphic view
of the scenes.

In the "Escape" mode you evacuate people from
the planet Arcturon while protecting the planet
from the attackers from outer space. The attack
comes from three types — troop transport saucers,
commando ships, and fighters. They are all worth
10 points each. If one of the ships reaches
Arcturon, one of your factories is destroyed. You
start the game with three factories. At each 1000
points, you gain another factory. As soon as all
your factories are destroyed, the remaining inhabi-

The gaming system is easy to learn with the
program containing a basic vocabulary of some
300-400 words. You give two word commands
involving a verb and a noun and the computer
responds with the appropriate actions. Though on
the surface the system appears uncomplicated, the
games themselves provoke a flurry of mental
31

twenty treasures to find, and the battery-powered
lamp gets dim all too soon. There are two other
sources of light, but they can be lethal.

activity. All of your wits are needed as you
encounter one problem after another. Solving
particular situations may take you just a few
minutes while others may take several hours
(perhaps even weeks) to conquer.

There are many puzzles to solve: how to put your
treasures away once you find them, how to get
west of the timber room (with light, so you don't
get eaten by a grue), how to open the egg, how to
get the water out of the reservoir (especially
without harming yourself), etc. Fortunately, ZORK
has an exceptionally large vocabulary to accomplish all this.

Movement is totally in your hands as you
command the computer to perform various actions.
The color graphics are superb, providing the
amateur sleuth with surprises and entertainment
galore. MISSION: ASTEROID is the simplest of
the group and only requires a few hours to solve.
MYSTERY HOUSE is considerably more difficult
and provides many traps for the unwary in a
wonderfully Victorian setting. THE WIZARD AND
THE PRINCESS has the best graphics and has a
beautiful fairy tale setting as its theme. Of the
three it was the most challenging and should be
attempted only after you are familiar with the
gaming system.

If you have trouble finding out where the
dungeon is, the trap-door is under the rug in the
living room of the house. If you have trouble
getting in the house at all, look for a window. Any
further clues would spoil the fun, so I'll keep mum
from here.
ZORK is a program that is worth the money for
anyone even mildly interested in adventure games.
Those that like puzzles will have their fill, I'm
sure. Master adventurers will even take a while on
this one.

The only drawback to most "adventure" type
games is the necessity of limiting commands to
just two words. Many actions seem to require more
words than are contained within the program's
vocabulary. However, if you experiment enough
with different terminology, you can overcome this
potentially frustrating experience. One hint to aid
you in solving these adventures is to "get " any
and all objects you can as they will come in handy
at some point in time.

Deirdre L. Maloy

The "save game" command is a particularly
useful feature. If you can solve these games in one
sitting you are truly a master at puzzle solving. It
will probably take many sittings and you may
wind up being stumped at some particularly
difficult point. Have no fear, ON-LINE SYSTEMS
thoughtfully include a panic number which the
hopelessly frustrated can call during reasonable
daytime hours.
All three games run on the Apple II or Apple II
Plus computers (48K diskette).
Mark Marlow

BLITZKRIEG
BLITZKRIEG is a high-res arcade-type game in
which the player mans an anti-aircraft gun and
attempts to destroy enemy bombers and fighters.
The shells follow a realistic looking trajectory that
is appealing to the eye. It's fun to watch a well
aimed shell arch up into the sky, intercept an
enemy plane and see the succeeding explosion and
debris knock out other planes. Destruction! Rah!
There are two versions (1979 and 1980). While the
old version only ran at one speed, the new version
has ten speed levels, each level being faster and
yielding more points for each destroyed plane. At
low speed levels the shells arch gracefully like a
well hit 9-iron and the planes glide leisurely by. At

ZORK
ZORK is an excellent adventure game. It has
several nice features--it allows more than two
words in a command, it allows multiple commands
on one input line, and continually shows both
score and turns used. Although it does access the
disk, it is quick--no waiting five minutes for moves.
Strategy for ZORK is similar to that for any
adventure game. A map is necessary, as well as a
list of where things are. In ZORK, there are more
objects to tote around than in most other adventures, so planning is necessary. There are also
32

higher quality) In the dungeons, the player kills
monsters for experience and gold and when the
character leaves, he will gain hit points. To prevent
there are several very nasty monsters,
suthis,
ch
as gelatinous cubes which lunch on armor, and
gremlins which steal food. One thing to remember
in ULTIMA is that when hit points are gone, they
are gone for good.

high speed levels the shells are more likely to
resemble water drops flying out of a fountain and
the planes streak by ("who was that masked
bomber?"). Which strategy should you use: slow,
easy to hit planes that yield small points per plane
or fast and elusive planes that score big for each
hit? If you can avoid being taken out by the
bombers as they drop their deadly loads on your
gun, the higher difficulty levels will yield the
higher scores. But be warned, the "if' in the
preceding sentence is a very large one. While the
old version had bombers, it was a rare "lucky"
shot that took out the gun. The bombers in the
updated version are much more deadly. You will
find that one of the lifesaving techniques you must
quickly learn is the fine art of hitting the bombs as
they come hurling down upon you. I have often
nailed the bomb just "inches" above my gun. I
have just as often missed that same bomb and
payed the penalty of losing the rest of my shots as
well as the 50 points that are deducted from your
score in such cases.

As the technology improves, so do the available
armor and weapons. At first, nothing better than a
mace will be available, but near the end the player
can buy (or steal) phazors, blasters, vacuum
suits and reflect armor. Weapons and armor can
be stolen from cities and castles, but watch out if
the character gets caught! If caught in a castle;
from then on he will always be caught on the first
attempt to steal in that city.
The two castles on the map are useful. The king
can give the character hit points if he gives the
king gold, and the king will raise statistics or give
a valuable gem if the character completes a quest.
One of the quests is to kill a gelatinous cube, which
can be found on the third floor of a dungeon. The
other quest is to find the Pillar of Knowledge,
which can be reached only by boat or air car.

The 1979 version kept tabs on the number and
types of planes hit as well as missed, but you had
to decide for yourself the relative value of each kill
and/or miss. The new version has taken care of
that by assigning points for each plane type
relative to the speed level you select. It should be
noted that fighters are 3 1/2 times more valuable
than bombers at speed 0 but only 1/5th more
valuable at speed 9. It is therefore best to
concentrate on fighters in the low speed games
(where you have a half-way decent chance to hit
them) and concentrate on the easier-to-hit bombers
in the high speed games.

The only real bug this program has is reincarnation. It is possible to be reincarnated into the
middle of the ocean! Since reincarnation causes
you to lose many possessions, there is no way of
getting back on land (you can't walk on water!).
The only way out is to reset the game or get killed
by a monster. The other disappointment is
incomplete documentation, although what is there
is nice. There are two sides to the diskette, which is
somewhat confusing at first, since it isn't explicitly stated.

There are many excellent arcade games on the
market today, but I still find myself coming back
to BLITZKRIEG as one of my abiding favorites.

Deirdre L. Maloy

BLITZKRIEG, by Programma/Hayden, runs
on the Apple II (32K min.)computer. It is written in
machine language. $19.95
Daniel Hockman

THE BATTLE OF SHILOH
ULTIMA

On April 6, 1862, General Albert Sydney
Johnston led his 45,000 confederate troops in a
desperate attempt to save western Tennessee from
invasion. Johnston's plan was to catch the army
of U. S. Grant by surprise and capture their camp
and supply points on the Tennessee River. It
almost worked, but the outnumbered Northern
forces wouldn't give up. They kept the Confederates
from breaking through to the river on the first day,
and that night 25,000 fresh Union troops ferried
across. On April 7, Grant counter-attacked and
drove the Southerners from the field.

ULTIMA is one of the best computer fantasy roleplaying games to date. It is also one of the few
games that allows the use of two disk drives (in
fact, it is better if you have two). One unique
feature of ULTIMA is that the technology
improves as the game goes on. At the end, the
player is in outer space, in a very well-done arcadelike segment.
The dungeons in ULTIMA are drawn in 3D
graphics (similar to those in AKALABETH, but of
33

periods of inactivity longer than 5 seconds or so.
The game is absorbing; you are constantly making
decisions and watching for weaknesses in the
enemy.

THE BATTLE OF SHILOH by SSI allows you
to refight this battle in a few hours. You can play
against a friend or play either side against the
computer. You can even have the computer play
both sides if you like spectating.

THE BATTLE OF SHILOH, by Strategic
Simulations Inc., runs on a 48K Apple II with
Applesoft in ROM (or equivalent). $39.95

The game is much like a board wargame. It is
played on a map covered with hexagons, 11 high
by 19 wide. When you start the game, you have two
options which are very nice touches: you can omit
the hexagons -- it's easy to play with out them and
the map looks better -- and you can indicate
whether you're using a B&W or color monitor. In
color, the map looks very nice -- the white brigades
(little men pointing rifles) stand out readily
against the blue rivers and streams, green woods,
and orange hills.

Bob Proctor

THE SHATTERED ALLIANCE

The 16 Confederate brigades enter on the left
side (South) and try to capture Pittsburg Landing
on the right edge. Between them and their goal are
14 Union brigades who must slow down the
attack, standing their ground when they can and
retreating when they must. Each brigade has a
combat strength based on its historical performance but this strength will change constantly
with combat losses and reinforcements. A point
system keeps track of losses and lets you know
how you're doing compared to the actual battle. It
is fairly easy for the Union forces to hold out until
evening (when 11 fresh brigades arrive) but very
hard to do so without losing the game due to heavy
casualties.

Rome attacking the Gates of Mordor; Gondor vs.
the Vikings; it's all possible with THE SHATTERED ALLIANCE from SSI. It offers a choice
of seven scenarios plus many you can create with
the fourteen armies provided. This game has the
new Rapid-Fire system which makes the game
play as fast as you can type in the orders with the
maps and units shown in beautiful hi-res color. To
play, you must first pick a scenario - historical,
fantasy, or a little of both. Once the game is set up
and the armies displayed, the computer will begin
the game by lighting one of the units. Now you
enter your command. The flashing unit can either
use spells, be moved, or attack. As soon as you key
it in, it's done -no waiting for the computer. Play
continues until one army's morale reaches zero.
That army then sounds retreat and routs.

My major complaint about SHILOH is the
manner in which the designer compensated for
the weakness of the computer. It has trouble
moving units efficiently, so to make up for this it
gets to move them farther. Computer-controlled
units get about double the movement allowance of
the same forces under human control. This seems
to be too much; it certainly produces drastic
differences in strategy in what is primarily a game
of maneuver. I think human vs. human is the best
game for both balance and historical accuracy.

Combat can be by melee or missile weapons with
all weapons getting bonuses or handicaps, dependent upon the opposing troop ' s type and armor,
(i.e. a javelin works better against light infantry
than it does against heavy cavalry). The five types
of terrain also affect the battle. After each battle,
the forces are modified to reflect casualties, and
the updated force list is shown. Various spells may
also be used which can provide greater mobility,
protection from attack, combat effectiveness, or
increased troop morale.

You can choose to play either the full 2-day
battle or just the first day. In the 2-day affair, the
South will always be ahead after the first day and
must try to hold on to this lead. In the 1-day game,
the North gets 75 extra points, about right for a
game between 2 humans but not enough to hold off
the computer. If you find the regular game too
hard or too easy, you can increase or decrease the
strength of each side independently. Unfortunately,
you can't change their movement allowance.

Play is offered in three forms: player vs. player,
player vs. computer, and computer vs. computer.
An excellent feature of this game is that the
computer can play either side. This way you can
never feel the computer has the advantage as, in
the next game, you can play the opposite side of
the same battle. There are also two skill levels,
beginner and advanced, which can modify the
scenario by adding to an army's strength and/or
morale.

This is a very well designed product. Although it
will take at least 2 hours to play the first day (and
as much as 5 hours for both days), there are no
34

Continued from page 22
never materializes. A hatch won't open. The game
sometimes hangs up. And, when these difficulties
are finally surmounted, and victory is achieved,
the end of the game is a bit of a let-down.

Scenarios are saved on a scratch disk, which the
program initializes, but you must supply. Games
may be saved, in progress, on the same scratch
disk. The game's limitations lie in that the most
units any army has is eight, and the armies are all
predetermined. You must choose from the armies
given, which cannot be modified in anyway.
Additionally you are limited as to which armies
you can pit against each other. For example, you
cannot put the Roman army on both sides of the
battle. Neither can you match Carthage against
Rome to recreate battles in the Punic Wars
(although both armies are in the game system).
SSI says that they can put out a utility disk which
will not only allow you to pit any of the armies
against one another, but will also allow you to
make up the composition of the individual units
themselves. SSI will make this disk available if
there is enough interest. If you are interested, drop
them a note.

Still, PROTECTOR represents a breakthrough
of sorts. The music in the program is excellent, and
remains constant throughout the game--with the
result of adding much character to its play. When
your ship is downed, an ambulance shoots out to
drag you away. The overall result is humorous--at
least until frustration sets in!
It's been nearly a year now since Atari let its
secrets out. The rewards are now beginning to be
realized. Atari graphics are far and away the best
around; this fact is even more apparent from these
and other third party software vendors.

Continued from page 23
1976

CINCINNATI

Name
T. Perez

The above mentioned problem aside, the graphics
are excellent, and the Rapid-Fire system makes
playing fast and easy. All in all, I feel THE
SHATTERED ALLIANCE is a very enjoyable
game.

Pos. B
III

J. Margin

R

H

2B 3B HR RBI

527 77 137 32
R 139
2B L 141 472 113 151 30

6 19

FA

50 88 10 .260 .996

5 27 111 114 41 60 .320 .981

R 152 576

9

69

P. Rose

3B

S 162 665 130 215 42

6 10

63

86 54

K. Griffey

RF

L 148 562 111 189 28

9

6

74

62 65 34 .336 .979

2

49

56 95 22 .307 .985

9 29 121

52 89 17 .306 .994

162

74

7

28

C. Geronimo

CF

L 149 486

59 149 24 11

6. Foster

LF

R 144 562

86 172 21

C
UT

49 68 21 .281 .968
9 .323 .969

R 135 465

62 109 24

1 16

74

81 95 13 .234 .997

L

32

54 11

1

7

44

43 32 14 .247 .994

98 219

D. Flynn

IF

R

93 219

20

62

5

2

1

20

10 24

2 .283 .985

M. Lue

OF

L

84 136

15
78 20

31

5

1

3

20

22 24

0 .228 .999

23

3

2

2

7

6 22

7 .295

17

37

6

1

6

23

16 26

0 .298

E. Armbrister

OF

R

73

B. Bailey

OF

R

69 124

Pitchers

THR

M

6. Nolan

R

15

L
9

6

6S

C6

IP

H

34

34

7

239

232

K

ERA

27 113

3.46

BB

P. Zachry

R

14

7

38

28

6

204

170

83 143

2.74

F. Norman

L

12

7

33

24

8

180

153

70 126

3.10

D. Gullett

L

11

3

23

20

4

126

119

46

64

3.00

R. Eastwick

A

11

5

71

0

0

108

93

27

70

2.08

P. Borbon

A

4

3

69

1

0

121

135

31

53

3.35

N. McEnaney

L

2

6

55

0

0

72

97

23

28

4.88

CROSSWORD ANSWERS

36

BA

BB SO SB

91

SS

J. Bench

Bob Boyd

REDS

AB

0. Concepcion

D. Driessen

THE SHATTERED ALLIANCE, by Strategic
Simulations, runs on the Apple II computer (48K
with Applesoft in ROM). $59.95

6

I

