January 1991

Features

Not a "Bored" Game

Win Some Money and Start a Trend

5

Rules for CGWs Third Annual Top Ad Awards

"Sim"ply Fascinating
A Minister Looks at SimEarth / Dr. Johnny L. Wilson

Accolade's Ishido
Jung and Fun / Caitlin Ackelson and Alan Emrich

Electronic Zoo's Spherical
The Game of Opposites / Allan Greenberg

Above the Trenches
Three-Sixty's Blue Max / M. Evan Brooks

The Future De" tech" tive

Checking Out Interplay's Checkmate
11

Access' Countdown
Nobunaga's Ambition II
A Sneak Preview / Wyatt. Lee

Feel the Power

An Evaluation by a Rated Player / Jay Kee

Citadel — An Adventure for the Mac

19

Dave Arneson Enters Another Man's Dungeon

Buck Rogers: Countdown to Doomsday

22
24
28

Where are Computer Games Headed? A Special Report
A "Popcorn Not Included" Review / Charles Ardai

Accolade's Victorious Stratego / Alan Emrich

30
44
46

Sneak Preview: EA's Powermonger / Johnny L. Wilson

Scorpia Welcomes SSI to the 25th Century

Number 78

50
54
70
72

Departments
Taking A Peek
Letters from Paradise
Scorpion's View (Fountain of Dreams)
The Rumor Bag
Game Ratings (100 Games Rated)
Hall of Fame
Over There (European Games Report)
Reader Input Device
Editorial

6
7
12
14
48
49
58
89
96

Announcing...

Computer Gaming World's

Third Annual
Top Ad Awards

H

i, Navy Nathan here in the crowd at the entrance to the

palatial CGW Grand Crystal Ballroom where computer
game stars are arriving for the Third Annual Computer
Gaming World Top Ad Awards ceremony. The crowds, the
lights, the glitter: New Hollywood is abuzz tonight. Our camera
crews have been kept on their toes trying to capture the action
for you, our viewers. All the biggies are here. Just moments ago
legendary Lord British arrived with his entourage (including his
personal advertisement designer). He was preceded by perennial
hit artist Sid Meier of Microprose who had to make his way
through a bevy of beautiful autograph seekers (I overheard one
young lady tell Sid "It's for my boyfriend... really!"). Rumor has it
that LucasFilm Games' Larry Holland will not be able to be here
tonight as he is still on location shooting Secret Weapons of The
Luftwaffe. Industry pundit Chris Crawford entered earlier; industry insiders will be waiting to read Chris' analysis of this
year's awards in tomorrow morning's Journal of Computer
Game Design.
God-game gurus Will Wright (SimCity, SimEarth) and Peter
Molyneux (Populous, Powermonger) were deep in conversation
as they went in earlier. That's kind of scary.
The list of dignitaries goes on and on. Last years big Top Ad
winner, Koei ("Experience Japan's Greatest Strategy Simulations" Ad) sent a number of people from their Tokyo offices.
And now as the music from inside the Ballroom indicates that
the ceremony is about to begin, I see a final limousine pull up. It
looks to be ... yes, it is ... Jon Van Caneghem and the Game/Ad
design team from New World Computing, first place finishers in
the 1989 Top Ad awards ("The Basic Elements of Adventure In
Their Most Advanced Form" Ad) have just arrived. Let's follow
them into the Ball Room from the start of the 1991 Computer
Gaming World Top Ad Awards. I'm so excited!
Oh, by the way, just as in 1989 and 1990, you, the readers of
CGW, will be the judges in our Top Ad Contest. As a judge in
(Continued on page 9)

Taking a Peek

Accolade
550 S. Winchester Blvd.
San Jose, CA 95128
TEST DRIVE III: Subtitled The Passion, the player can opt to drive one
of three dream/muscle cars along
the California coast. Features such
as weather, headlights, windshield
wipers, instant replay, etc. add some
exquisite touches to this driving
simulator. One nice thing is the way
the cars handle through all of the interesting "off road" terrain. Too bad
a 4-wheel drive vehicle isn't among
the choices one is given! IBM
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #1.
Capstone
14160 S.W. 139th Court
Miami, FL 33186
CARDINAL OF THE KREMLIN:
Based on the Tom Clancy book, the
player must develop America's SDI
defense before the Russians do.

There are many areas and personalities to keep track of as the
game/puzzle unfolds. Resource
management (human and physical)
is the key to successful play. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #2.
Disney Computer Software, Inc.
500 S. Buena Vista Street
Burbank, CA 91521
MICKEY'S ABC's: Spend a day at
the fair with Mickey and learn about
the alphabet. For ages 2-5, when
your child hits a letter, Mickey performs an action based on a word
beginning with that letter. With upper
and lower cases included, there are
over 80 different nicely animated
responses to keep the little ones
amused for quite a long time. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #3.
MICKEY'S 123's: A big surprise
party is heading Mickey's way, and
(Continued on page 92)

Letters

Byting The Apple
Will Harpoon be released for the Apple IIGS?
Will CGW again feature an article on a game that is available for the
Apple IIGS?
Will I renew my subscription to CGW?
The answer to the third question depends on the answers to the other
two. The first question reflects the stampede in the industry to the IBM
banner. The second reflects your need to follow the new products in the
industry. Since I use CGW as a reliable buyer's guide to what is available
on the computer game market, I find there is less and less for me in the
pages of your magazine. I don't enjoy reading about products that I'll
never be able to use. Economics dictate that I will not buy a new computer just so I can buy a new game, nor am I likely to buy a game that
does not work in my home computer.
It is unfortunate that my subscription to your fine magazine will fall victim to the IBM fever that has swept the industry. Lately, however, I can
get more information on games for my computer in the pages of lncider
magazine, a sorry state of affairs.
A frustrated subscriber,
John M. Braaten
Thousand Oaks, CA
Maybe. Yes. We hope so. The designers of Harpoon provided their
source code to a freelancer who wanted to convert the game to the
Apple IIGS. To be very honest, the design team didn't really believe it
was possible to place Harpoon on a 6502 processor and most people
do not believe that the IIGS is a viable machine on which to spend
additional money for the purpose of developing IIGS games. Most
software publishers have taken the IIGS off their longterm product
lists. On the other hand, Will Harvey developed The Immortal, a new
action/adventure game from Electronic Arts, on the IIGS (although
it was converted to the Atari ST and Amiga prior to its release). So,
we will review The Immortal as a IIGS product. As for your current
position on purchasing a new computer, we wonder how long you
will actually be able to hold onto an extremely tenuous position.
It would be nice if software publishers were encouraged to convert
more games to the Apple IIGS. My understanding is that the marketing
base is now very significant.
Perry L. Holman
Dixon, MO
Unfortunately, market demographics do not support your contention. High-tech life goes on and the industry, as well as CGW, has
had to move into the 16-bit world of MS-DOS.

Strategic Confluence
I enjoy articles like the Empire strategy. I wish this was a regular feature.
Bob Campbell
Downers Grove, IL
Please print more strategy guides for all games. I was very grateful for
the one on Empire and Their Finest Hour.
Brian Hess
Williamsburg, VA
Super issue. I very much appreciated the effort to revive an old, great
game like Empire and the section of Pre-20th Strategy games, so I know
what to hope for if they convert to an Amiga. May I suggest periodic articles for Hall of Famers to revive interest? I'd love to get M.U.L.E. for the
Amiga. Finally, how about an index by game of mention/reviews in
CGW? It would be an enormous help for those of us who have to wait for
ports.
Charles Hickok
Harrisburg, PA
There is always a tension between covering the new products and
providing new value for older games. Our readers seem to put a
(Continued on page 84)

Announcing...

Computer Gaming

World's

Top Ad Awards

our contest you will be eligible to win $250 and a lifetime subscription to CGW. Quickly now, read the rules and find out how
to vote.
As a judge in this year's contest we welcome you to the judge's
table. If you require anything, your server Fred will take care of
you. If you have not yet read the information below, please do so
now, then return and judge this year's ads.

The Rules
1. Use the Ballot Section of this month's Reader Input Device
card located opposite page 8, or a facsimile thereof, to cast your
votes.
2. In the "Full Page & Spreads" Category, vote for three different full-page and/or two-page spread ads.
3. A two-page spread ad would be an ad that appears on adjoining and facing left- and right-hand pages and is one continuous
advertisement. A two-page spread ad counts as a single ad for
voting purposes.
4. Select a first place, a second place, and a third place ad.
5. In the "Fractional Page" Category vote for three different ads.
These are ads which are less than a full page in size.
6. On the ballot, list the company names and page number of
the ads you are voting for. For example: to place a first place
vote for Acme Company's 1/2 page ad on page 345, write
"Acme pg.345" on the line for 1st place in
the fractional ad column.
7. The criteria for evaluation are very
simple: consider the graphics, copy,
and overall impact of the ad.
8. The votes will be weighted, added and
then averaged.
9. The reader that comes closest to pick
ing the final correct order of winners will
win $250.00 cash and a lifetime subscription to Computer Gaming World!
10. Entries must be postmarked by
February 15, 1991. No purchase is necessary. Winners will be notified by mail.

Review

THE TEN-BILLION-YEAR
AFTERNOON
by Dr. Johnny L. Wilson ,
uestion: What's an ordained Southern Baptist minister
doing writing a review of a program that presumes that
volution is a reality?
Answer: Gaining an appreciation for creation and providence.
Since SimEarth models the history of a planet from a system
perspective and does not make any judgment calls with regard
to the existence and efficacy of God as Creator, a player/observer can make his/her own decisions about creation. This minister finds the concept of a Creator God who painstakingly
sculpts the world from molten mass to arid environment over the
course of billions of years to be infinitely more interesting and
powerful than a Creator God who might have made us on the
spur of a moment. For those who are not offended by this perception of God, SimEarth offers a chance to make some of
those "divine" decisions oneself and observe how they affect the
other laws and systems that have been established.
One of the most amazing perceptions that can be garnered in

experimenting with a simulation like
TITLE:
SimEarth
SimEarth is the interdependence of
Macintosh
SYSTEM:
systems within the overall ecosystem
IBM (early 1991)
of this planet, or indeed, any planet
PRICE:
569.95
DESIGNER:
Will
Wright
capable of sustaining life. James
and Fred Haslam
Lovelock called this the "Gaia
PUBLISHER:
Maxis Software
Moraga, CA
Hypothesis" and this perspective underlies the SimEarth algorithms.
Named after the ancient goddess, the Gaia viewpoint recognizes
that the conditions necessary for life are all interrelated in a sustained system of dynamic feedback.
James Lovelock offered a simple illustration of this hypothesis
when he posited a theoretical world with only three possibilities:
white daisies, black daisies and desert. Now, white daisies reflect
light. Therefore, they would make the temperature cooler. Yet,
black daisies like cooler temperatures, so they would proliferate
in the adjusted environment. However, black daisies absorb light
and would make the temperature warmer. Of course, once the
temperature warms up, there is a proliferation of white
daisies and the cycle continues.
Whereas the example just given emphasizes the albedo effect (ratio of reflected to absorbed light), SimEarth uses a
manifold number of interrelationships (chemical composition
of the atmosphere, expenditure of energy and its attendant
chemical by-products, climate, albedo effects, continental
drift, seismic occurrences, meteor and/or planetary collisions,
atmospheric and oceanic circulation, and plenty more) in establishing its model. There is even a "DaisyWorld" scenario
based on the simple example noted above.

Without Form and Void
SimEarth is so complex and impressive that it seems like it
can run itself. This curious cleric was so impressed by what
the program can do on its own that he wondered if there was
really a game present. In one afternoon, however, the answer
as to whether there was a need for a guiding intelligence or
not was clearly provided. As an experiment, SimEarth was allowed to run (without benefit of extra-program intervention)
for ten billion years. Somewhere between five and six billion
years, the planet developed radiates (radially symmetrical
multicellular life forms with up to three tissue layers, but no internal organs) and trichordates (animals with three-chord
spines). Unfortunately, there was no further development.
Somewhere between seven and eight billion years, the
oceans heated up and soon, there was virtually no life of any
kind.
The experiment may not prove the necessity of divine
providence for those who are skeptics, but it does prove the
necessity of human intervention for creating a successful SimEarth environment and that means there is game (or, at
(Continued on page 60)

Opinion

Scorpion's View
Scorpia Empties the Fountain of Dreams
Scorpia is an experienced and
respected adventure game expert. CGW
is pleased to be able to provide this
forum for her distinctive and sometimes controversial perspective.

at the Obeah temple, where you have to
do this when Big Daddy is in.
All characters come with stats and
skills, which can be improved over time
as level increases. Each new level gain
provides points, usually two, that can be
put into mental or physical attributes.
Skills can only be increased as they are
used in the game.

peering into the crystal ball, I see .. .

nothing. Nothing but deep, dark, unrelieved black. No vision forms, the
veils do not part. This is a bad omen .. .
A bad omen, indeed. Every so often, a
real oven-roaster comes along, and we
have one on the table today. The leading
contender for this year's Benjamin
Franklin National Bird Award is Fountain
of Dreams (FOD).

I recommend stuffing the points into
Dexterity, until it's up to around 25 or so.
This is necessary because the Clowns
are extremely fast and can blow your
party away before you get a chance to
do anything. Even with better speed, you
will find them difficult to kill, but more
about this anon.

There are some who, playing into it a
short way, might be inclined to label it
"Dregs of Wasteland Meets Son of
Scavengers", but that would be defaming
Wasteland, which (despite certain flaws)
is a good game.
Unfortunately, Wasteland does come
into this, to a degree. FOD is built
around a pseudo-Wasteland engine, incorporating all the worst features of that
game, and not much of the good. It is a
perfect example of grasping the form,
but not the substance, of a superior
product, and coming up with a loser.
As you've figured out already, we are
once again in a post-nuke paradise. This
time it's Florida, now an island courtesy
of nuclear by-blows and an earthquake
or two. The inhabitants of Miami live behind a massive wall to keep out whatever
may be left of the rest of the world's
population. Obviously, the Miamians
believe in the maxim "good fences make
good neighbors".
The plot (such as it is) centers around
the search for the "Fountain of Dreams,"
a supposed pool of water with almost
magical healing powers. In fact, you
don't really do much searching. You
spend most of your time killing and blowing up things, until someone pretty much
takes you by the hand and tells you
where the fountain is.
Your problems with the game begin at
the very start. Some people like to make
up a team, or use a pre-created one (if
available), to bounce around the game a

bit, get a feel for it, see how things work,
then plunge into it seriously. Unfortunately, you can't do that with FOD.
The first time you boot up the game,
you have the ability to create a party of
up to three characters. This is your only
chance to do so. Once play begins, if
you change your mind about who you
have, too bad. There is no way, short of
re-installing files, to make a new party (at
least the manual says nothing about how
to restart).
If you are unhappy with your original
team, you will have to rely on recruiting
NPC's instead. Some will join immediately; others have to be bribed one way
or another, and of course there are a few
who will never join. The party holds a
total of six at any one time. Once on the
team, the NPC's behave (i.e., are controlled by you) the same as your originallycreated characters.
These NPC's (and even PC's) can be
dropped off at various locations in the
game to make room for others. Each of
these dropoff points can hold three characters (although the manual doesn't tell
you this; you have to find out the hard
way).
You can return any time to these areas
to get the character back again, except

You arrive in Miami to find it is not a
happy place. Bahia Mafia gunrunners,
Obeah voodoo worshippers, Beachcomber muggers, and DeSoto rum-smugglers have turned it into a
less-than-salubrious environment. The various
mutated critters running around don't
help any, either. Nor do the Killer Clowns
that roam the wilderness outside the city.
Before you can get on with locating the
fountain, you have to fix up everyone's
problems. Essentially, that means putting
the Mafia and DeSotos out of business,
patching up the feud between the
Obeahs and the Beachcombers, and
spreading death and destruction among
the Killer Clowns when you rescue
Gramps' wife from them.
When you finally reach the pool, the
game ends quickly with a picture of a
fountain of clear water and text remarking on how wonderful everything is going
to be now that the pure water will be
available to all. End of game.
Throughout, you will be aggravated by
the infamous auto-save "feature" that was
universally decried in Wasteland. Each
time you enter a new location, the game
is saved at that point, whether you want
it to be or not. This can cause some
nasty problems at times.
For instance, if you step onto Imelda's
bed in the DeSoto estate, everyone in the
party falls asleep. They wake up in
(Continued on page 67)

Industry News

The Rumor Bag
by John Fiorello Koch

T

he Big Apple—At last, I'd made the

big time. My editors were here to attend some multi-media conference,
but I was simply here to pad the old travel
and entertainment budget, while garnering
a few juicy rumors. The airline dumped us
off in the old Pan Am terminal at JFK Airport and we were swept along with the
human current toward the baggage claim
like a bunch of lemmings. In fact, a
software distributor up ahead of me even
said so: "You know, I haven't felt so much
like a lemming since I played an early version of Psygnosis' Lemmings over in Liverpool." I found out as we waited for our luggage that Lemmings is expected to debut
on the Amiga and IBM, but the company is
so sure that it's a unique concept in arcadestyle games that there will probably be
either a Sega or TurboGrafx-16 version
before the end of next year.
His eyebrows raised as I mentioned the
possible Sega conversion. "It's not unusual," I muttered defensively, "New World
Computing is planning on doing a Sega
conversion of Fairy Tale Adventure, the
classic Microillusions title. Since you've
got an Amiga, though, the best news is that
David Joyner is designing a Fairy Tale Adventure II for New World. It's due out on
the Amiga first, followed by the IBM."
The walls at the baggage claim couldn't
have been any more discolored if they had
been located in the hallways of an inner
city high school. I wandered into the rest
room and read graffiti disguised as political
diatribe on the wall. A fellow had scribbled,
"Armageddon is now!" using red and black
magic marker in that inimitable subway calligraphy. It reminded me that Psygnosis is
nearing completion on Armorgeddon, a
fast-moving three-dimensional tank game
using vector graphics.
I grabbed my bags and walked to the sign
which explained how to catch shuttle buses

I

into Manhattan. I read the
information on the JFK
Express and went out to
meet the bus. I stood at
the curb waiting for the
bus and started talking to
the gentleman standing
next to me. When I had explained why I wear the
bag over my head, he told
me about the last airport
bus he had ridden. He
said he thought the driver
was trying to play "chicken" with the bus, just like
in the movie, Red Heat.
"By the way," he asked,
"any chance of a Red
Heat computer game?"
I told him that I was unaware of one, but
pointed out that Cinemaware is working
on a modern action "buddy" adventure
similar to Lethal Weapon. He could watch
for that about the middle of next year. He
took it philosophically, though, stating, "At
least, I'll have Secret Weapons of the
Luftwaffe to keep me occupied until it
comes out."
Since the long-term parking shuttle he
was waiting for was just arriving, I barely
had time to offer the bad news, "Uh, sorry,
but Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe won't
be out until the first quarter of 1991. It
seems that the mission builder was not all
that Larry Holland wanted it to be." As he
stepped onto the bus with enough New
York street language to shock a 747 full of
nuns, I did manage to offer the good news,
"Lucasfilm is putting out two samplers
($3.99 each). One will have portions of
both Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe and
Their Finest Hour and the other with portions of Loom, Indiana Jones & The
Quest for the Holy Grail, and The Secret
of Monkey Island. That way, you can get
some experience with the games before
you have to shell out all the dough."
The parking shuttle pulled out, leaving
only myself and an airport regular in a
greasy stocking cap and worn-out jacket,
holding a bottle of indubitably "excellent"
vintage complete with label carefully hidden
from less discriminating consumers by
means of a recycled paper bag, walked up
to me. "So," he breathed the delicate bouquet of California's Central Valley into my
face, "what bus are you waiting for?"
"The JFK Express," I answered confidently. He started laughing.
"That bus hasn't run for two years," he
said. He had no sooner spoken than
another shuttle pulled past us. I ran to
catch it and just as I pulled even with the
front door, the driver looked at me and
pulled away. He was as illusive as a final
version of Three-Sixty's MegaFortress.
Originally scheduled for Christmas, it's
being held until March of 1991, just to
make sure it is done right. "Welcome to

New York!" yelled the airport
regular. "Sure hope you know
more about computer games
than you do about airports!"
"Personally," he continued
with unsolicited abandon, "I
get all my games from
Europe. Got one called Air
Strike U.S.A. on order now." I
expressed disbelief that someone in his position could possibly be aware of a videogame-style flight combat
simulator that Cinemaware
plans to import for its Spotlight Software line. He
responded, "So, who do you
think you are? Mr Know-It-All?
I read about the CD-ROM version of Harpoon in your
column. You forgot to mention that it's supposed to
come out on CDTV, too."
A bus bound for Atlantic City went by on
the main loop as I struggled to regain my
composure. "Okay," I said, "here's a possible deal that hasn't even been signed yet."
An ego is a terrible thing to waste and no
street person was going to best me in a verbal duel. "I understand a deal is in progress
where Villa Crespo Software would create a brand new product that would integrate the best elements of their classic
Amarillo Slim's Real Poker and a program
called Vegas Johnny's Dealer's Choice
that our reviewer said was the best poker
program out there. Now, instead of just
having a challenging version of five card
stud, you'll have a choice of eight different
kinds of poker and tons of variants."
He wasn't impressed. "If I want mental
games," he scoffed, "I'd go watch Karpov
and Kasparov at the Hotel Macklowe. I'm
an action kind of guy. Why don't you tell
those software companies to make more
wargames?"
Ah, I had him there. I watched my bus
pull up to the curb and handed my bags to
the driver. I turned triumphantly and said,
"For your information, Chris Crawford happens to be working on a Battle of the
Bulge game as his very next product." I
entered the bus and waved adieu to the resident airport connoisseur.
"Chris Crawford?" asked the bus driver.
"Isn't he the guy with the blue tunic that I
just took to the Marriott?" When I told the
driver he was, the driver told me he didn't
play computer games because they were
too complicated. "When I want to relax," he
said, "I watch boxing on the tube."
I couldn't resist. I simply had to tell him
that Cinemaware plans to unveil T/
Sports: Boxing in the Fall of 1991. "It's supposed to have a three-dimensional perspective of the ring and should be to boxing
what their football game was to the
gridiron."
By this time, the bus was leaving the confines of the airport proper and I watched
the freeway ahead with great expectation.
The Big Apple—In spite of my inauspicious
introduction, I just couldn't wait. (To Be
Continued)

Review

Only the Oracle Knows...
A Review

of Accolade's Ishido

by Caitlin Ackelson and Alan Emrich

W

at do a bag of stones, the / Ching and Carl Jung all
have in common? The answer lies within Accolade's
new strategy game, Ishido. This unusual computer
gaming package takes the basic premise of most solitaire games
(to beat "Sol" or to set a new high score) and adds a dimension
of fortune-telling to it. Therefore, an alternate goal of this classic
solitaire-style game is to have one's fortune revealed by the
oracle of the computer (and, yes, one can see clearer with a
VGA crystal ball). Ishido is a remarkably complete entertainment
resource, with some pleasant surprises in the box which offer
more than just an absorbing strategy game.

Stick With Stones

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Ishido
IBM, Amiga and Macintosh
$54.95
Michael Feinberg
Accolade
San Jose, CA 95128

It is not surprising that Ishido
has many of the subtle nuances
of Activision's
Shanghai and
Shanghai II:
Dragon's Eye.
Of course, this is
not surprising,
since Brodie
Lockard (designer/programmer
of the Shanghai
products)
rendered the
graphic artwork
on Ishido. In
Ishido, however,
the actual play is
"reversed" from
the way it works
in the Shanghai games. Rather than removing pieces from a
pile (as in the Shanghai games), the player places "stone" tiles
on an 8-by-12-square grid board in an attempt to order and
codify the aesthetics of their placement. In other words, each
stone tile must be placed adjacent to one that was previously
played (six randomly selected "stones" are placed by the computer at the start of the game). In order to place the "stone," it
must match color and/or symbol, according to some simple
rules based on the tiles adjacent to the "stone" the player is attempting to place. For the true game enthusiast, Ishido calls
upon the elements of strategy, patience, chance and intuition.

Points are scored in the Modern (most played) version of the
game by creating 2-way, 3-way and 4-way matches in order to
score the highest number of points. Conversely, in the Ancient
way of playing, the player "wins" when he or she places all of the
stone tiles on the board, so that the higher the number of
matches achieved, the more highly skilled the player rates. In a

way, this shows the modern goal of "greed" (as represented by
scoring a high point value) juxtaposed against the ancient values
of meditative concentration and "quality" of play (as represented
by the skill required to place all of the stones).

Cheating, Anyone?
Ishido offers several different options of play, including
solitaire, cooperative, challenge and tournament, with each option available in its Modern or Ancient version. In the solitaire
mode, the contestant may choose to accept assistance from the
computer in the form of foreknowledge of the order in which the
stones will appear or in demonstration of possible plays (i.e., the
old "show moves" feature). Ishido is similar to solitaire in the
sense that it provides the player with an ever-enticing opportunity
to cheat when desired.
The cooperative mode provides the chance for two players to
take turns placing stones for the highest possible team score. To

Review

compete against each other, two players may opt for challenge
play and complete a single, ongoing game as opponents. In tournament play, each player is given an identical opening tableau
and draws stones in the exact same sequence, so that each
player may complete a full game individually to achieve the
highest score.
It is this myriad of possible modes of play that keeps solitaire
games like Ishido interesting for experienced players and beginners alike. Each way of playing is substantially different from the
others, which means that there is less chance that this game
might become an owner's "dust collector" (next to the copy of
Shareware Arcade Meets CGA Graphics).

Living In A Glass House With Ishido
In addition to the different modes of play available, Ishido also
offers a variety of boards and pieces from which the player may
choose. For the IBM, board "surfaces" include wood, marble,
ebony, Oriental and Egyptian designs. Stone designs for the IBM
come in Ginza, Ishido, Inner Shapes, Chungfu and Egypt styles.
On the Amiga version, additional stone sets such as Gems,
Magica, Ramses, Runes and Shaman—with a matching board surface for each—are available. Just experimenting around with all
the possible combinations is almost a separate pastime!
The VGA-level graphics are richly detailed and extravagantly
colored. Stone designs are both aesthetically pleasing and intellectually appropriate for a wide variety of players (there's a
"look" there for everyone from grade-schoolers to rocket scientists). The crisp, simple Inner Shapes design, for example, features wonderfully clear primary colors (ideally suited for younger
players), while the subtlety of the standard lshido set will appeal
more to the "purist."
Whether child or genius, everyone finds a certain appeal in a
box of crayons. For the true Ishido connoisseur, there is an internal paint program from which customized stone designs (or
modified existing designs) can be created. Already, these
reviewers can see a market in trade for custom stone sets (flags,
Greek letters, etc.).

Dominoes Delivers, But With Ishido You
Get Eggroll
The most difficult and most highly coveted achievement in
lshido is the 4-way match, performed by placing a single stone
tile in the center of four adjacent stones, matching two by color
and two by symbol. Each time this challenging feat is accomplished, the player is rewarded, not only with an exponentially greater number of points scored, but also with the opportunity
to ask a question of the Oracle of the Stones. This "oracle" represents tapping into the truth, knowledge and wisdom of the ages
through a system of divination based on the principle of
synchronicity. (When was the last time any game documentation
referred the player to the works of Swiss psychologist Carl
Jung?) If Jung's concept of synchronicity doesn't ring a bell,
check back over those old college notes from Psychology 101.
There, one will rediscover that synchronicity is "the theory that
the coincidence of events in space and time involves something
more than mere chance."
In consulting the Oracle, the player gets his or her fortune told,
tea leaf-style, upon the successful consummation of a 4-way
match. It is the designer's stated philosophy that "the computer
is certainly a most appropriate oracle for our new age." As it
threatened the elevator operator of the 1920's, technology now
(Continued on page 38)

Review

Sphere of Influence
Electronic Zoo's Spherical
by Allen L. Greenberg

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:

Spherical
Amiga, Atari ST,
IBM, C-64
# PLAYERS:
1-2
PRICE:
$39.95
DEVELOPER:
Rainbow Arts
DISTRIBUTED BY:Electronic Zoo
Baltimore, MD

marbles, but it is also an innovative,
fast-moving and satisfying arcade experience for sentient humans as well.

Spherical challenges the player to
guide a glowing "Starball" through an
obstacle-filled room to an exit. The
player, represented by a tiny wizard,
accomplishes this by creating and destroying brick walls. The
hero must also deal with a variety of traps, pitfalls, monsters and
mystical paraphernalia.

R

ecently, an article appeared in the Journal of Spherical

Health And Medicine (S.H.A.M.) which indicated that an
alarming number of spheroid objects were suffering from a
lack of guidance. Abandoned orbs from Marble Madness, lacking human leadership, have become lethargic or still. Dozens of
reflective balls, once the subject of animated demonstration
programs, now grumble and wait for entropic doom to put an
end to their once blissful orbits. Fortunately, we now have Spherical from Electronic Zoo. Not only does this arcade/strategy
game restore badly needed guidance to these mistreated

Each room is displayed from top to bottom in a two- dimensional view. The rooms are tastefully furnished in "early Dungeons & Dragons™ ," which is to say, stone walls and barriers.
Most rooms also contain a small variety of magical miscellany
which can affect both the wizard and his environment. Finally,
there are several guardian gollums who move back and forth
across a portion of the room doing (what else?) their best to
make life miserable (and much more brief) for intruders. If the
wizard touches one of these creatures, he will bleed energy until
he either breaks the contact or dies.
The player's pint-sized puppet has the ability to create or
(Continued on page 27)

Review

by M. Evan Brooks
TITLE:
SYSTEM:
B PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

B

Blue Max
MS-DOS
1-2
$49.95
Rick Banks & Paul Butler
Three-Sixty
Campbell, CA

lue Max is a flight game of World War 1 aerial combat.

Rick Banks had previously designed Accolade's Ace Of
Aces, and Blue Max is an obvious descendant, although
in an earlier milieu. Note that the product has been described as
a "flight game" and not a "flight simulator;" this is intentional, because Blue Max was produced for the general market and not
the World War I grognards. In short, this yields both the design's
greatest strengths and its greatest flaws.

Documentation
The documentation is of average quality. Game mechanics are
succinctly explained, although it appears that the proofreaders
were asleep during final copy edit, so some confusion can result.
Also, a separate summary card would have been appreciated.
While one cannot expect programmers to be perfect grammarians, it seems to be a maxim that a programmer cannot differentiate between the possessive "its" and the contraction "it's".
In Blue Max, this coupled with some obvious errors in final composition (e.g. using the Fokker Dr I heading in two places or
noting that Allied pilot Albert Ball disappeared on 7 May 1917
but then characterizing him as a "war survivor") serve only to unsettle the user.
Although the plane characteristics are given, there are no dates
of in-service use, which would have been appreciated. The
planes chosen were based on single seater fighters that were the
most widely used:
Axis:
Fokker Dr I (Summer 1917-Spring 1918)
Albatross DIII (Winter 1917-Winter 1918)
Fokker ElII (Spring 1915-Summer 1916)
Fokker DIII (Summer 1916-Summer 1917)
Allied:
SE5a (Spring 1917-Fall 1918)
Sopwith Camel (Summer 1917-Fall 1918)
Nieuport 17 (Spring 1916-Fall 1917)
Spad VII (Fall 1916-Spring 1918).
No bibliography is included, although Mr. Banks noted that he

relied extensively on Aces Of The Great War. A suggested reading list is appended at the conclusion of this review.

Graphics
The graphics are very good. The impressive opening screen
shots are digitized photographs, and include George Peppard's
role as a fighter ace in the movie Blue Max.
The now-standard flight camera is present, and allows good
flexibility as well as playback in both directions. However, the
camera (VCR) is only accessible in campaigns and not in single
or strategic mission modes.
While sound support easily allows one to know that he is being
damaged, it is much more difficult to determine if his shots are
causing damage to the enemy. This reviewer recommends utilizing the two-player option, and using one of the players as a
"moving target" in order to determine the general hit ratios
before delving deeply into competitive play.
While there are variable cloud cover and wind, there is no sun.
Thus, Edward Mannock's famous dictum "Beware the Hun in the
Sun" has no relevance or effect. The designers note that this was
done to expedite game play and make it a more equal struggle,
notwithstanding the fact that most dogfights were quick affairs
with few pilots eager to engage unless they had a decisive advantage.

Game Mechanics
Blue Max emphasizes a two-player mode. Utilizing a split
screen and commands via joystick, mouse and keyboard, two
users may fly in cooperative or competitive missions. However,
(Continued on page 80)

Sphere of Influence
(Continued from page 22)

destroy walls from within one or two spaces of where he stands.
The walls are necessary in order to guide the Starball to its intended target. The walls are also what the tiny wizard must climb
upon in order to get where he needs to be on the screen. The preexisting walls which furnish the room are also available for the
player to use, but they may not be destroyed. Thus, in order to
reach a destination, the wizard may have to construct a quick
stairway, build a bridge, or simply jump. If he jumps, he will not
be injured, no matter how great the drop.
Each round begins with a 20-second grace period within which
the player must study the screen and decide where he needs to
be. After the 20 seconds have passed, the Starball will be
released from somewhere near the top of the screen. Often, it
will be in danger of falling into some dead-end trap. Unless the
player manages to provide a wall to prevent this tragedy, he will
have to restart the round. The player may only restart a round
four times. After four "restarts," the player's only option is to end
the game.
A successful round is completed when the player causes the
Starball to collide with a special block which is labeled "IN." The
"IN" block is usually located somewhere in the lower third of the
screen. This leads the player "IN"to the next screen. There are
100 levels to be mastered in the single-player game. An additional 100 levels become available for the two-player game in which
two wizards work in a cooperative effort. In addition, the player is
confronted with a special battle sequence versus some nefarious
creature at the successful conclusion of every 10th level.
Most of the magic items available to the wizard affect his environment. Liberally scattered around the dungeons are various
potions and devices which may: exterminate all creatures currently on the screen; freeze time; reverse gravity; open doorways to
other levels; or offer several other interesting effects. An option is
available at the program's opening screen which will enable the
player to view an illustrated list of these objects and receive an
explanation of their function.
Also appearing in selected dungeon rooms are scrolls which
contain code words. When a code word is entered during the
opening screen, the player will be permitted to bypass all levels
prior to the one in which the scroll was found.
There are several other interesting options available when the
program is first booted. One of these is a practice mode for the
player to simply get the hang of moving the wizard and learning
the subtle art of mystic masonry.
Yet one more option allows the player to choose from a list of
dungeon-inspired background tunes. Although any selection from
the list is enjoyable, using the sound effects by themselves
seems to make for the best gaming experience. The sound of
the Starball being released is useful, else the player may not
glance up in time to see it fall. When the restart button is hit, the
program responds with something like a computerized "awwwwwww...". Unfortunately, the sounds are not available while
music is playing.
Spherical comes on one copy-protected disk and requires
512K of memory. One joystick per player is also required. For
an arcade game, Spherical contains an unusual degree of
strategy. This alone sets the game apart from others. For an interesting challenge of both thought and reflexes, get Spherical!

Industry Update

Technological Trends for Future
Computer Games
A

s the lounge at the top of the Mar-

riott Marquis Hotel in New York
City rotates, one gets a variety of
views of the Manhattan skyline. In many
ways, one skyscraper looks like another
skyscraper, but once in a while, the stately lines of the Empire State Building slide
into view. For so long, the Empire State
Building was recognized as the tallest
building in the world that it seems
strange to view the venerable edifice surrounded by so many other tall structures.
It seems almost certain that people
must have gawked at that famous building in times past and quietly assured
themselves that nothing could ever compare with such a marvelous structure. In
much the same way, computer gamers
look at their VGA graphics and enhanced
sound boards and wonder how anything
could ever match the thrill of: destroying
those digitized target ships in Silent Service II; experiencing the incredible sound
effects and graphic impact of Wing
Commander's space combat sequences;
savoring the watercolor-style images
from King's Quest V that look like they
belong on a canvas rather than a screen;
or vicariously entering the dark, cyberpunk comic art of Rise of the Dragon.
Where can one go from here?
The entertainment software industry
has heard that rhetorical question and is
striving to answer it in many ways. The
goal of advancing technology is to create
the World Trade Center of computer
games to surpass the apex of the Empire
State (of the art) Building of entertainment software. Game designers and
development teams will be using enhanced graphics, sounds and interfaces
based on new platforms and peripherals
to make these advances possible. This
update is intended to hint at some of the
"surprises" which may be in store for
computer garners in the next few years.
It is based on conferences and exhibits at
both InterTainment '90 (held in New
York City during October, 1990) and Fall
Comdex (held in Las Vegas during
November, 1990).

What You See, Isn't Yet
The biggest buzzwords in software
development right now are "multi-media"
and "full-motion video." The former
speaks of combining the computer with
images and sound developed in other
media for purposes of interactive
products. So, multi-media may be as
simple as Recreative Inc.'s
photographic data base/interactive tour
guide (developed on the Amiga 500,
combined with a "trackball" and built into
a console) which features still pictures
and information for the City of Flagstaff,
Arizona's tourist bureau, to A.I.M.'s ABC
Wide World of Sports golf game with

broadcast-quality graphics and compact-disc-quality audio on CD-I (Compact Disc-Interactive). Full-screen, full-motion video (with its 30+ images per
second frame rate) has been the problem which has caused CD-I to be delayed
for so long (although Philips is now claiming that the product launch will be within
300 days instead of "next year").
Why are these buzzwords so important?
The fulfillment of the multi-media vision
is expected to be the key to reach the
mass media. Like compact disc audio
technology, which began with elitist
audiophiles and to date has caused a
revolution in the recording industry (currently, 30% of U.S. households have a
CD-Audio Player and this penetration is
expected to be 50% by 1992), multimedia represents the ideal of reaching
the masses with computerized entertainment. As Cinemaware Vice-President
David Riordan has noted on several occasions, "Television is the standard the
masses are in love with and that
shouldn't be a tough standard to emulate."
The goal of emulating television's broad-

cast standard has a mixed message for
the computer gamer. It is exciting to imagine broadcast quality graphics and CDAudio sound, as well as to consider how
much larger games could be on a 600700 MB CD-ROM. Expect to see more
use of large cel animation (as in quality
motion picture and television cartoons)
and rotoscoping (technique of filming
live actors first, digitizing the outlines and
coloring in the shapes via the computer).
Further, the capacity for sharing art between machines after it has been captured and digitized is much easier when
the data is stored on CDs. Since the FMTownes machine (a CD-based MS-DOS
computer currently available in Japan),
CD-I, and an IBM with CD-ROM and VGA
graphics can share graphics data with
very little manipulation, it is becoming
more and more plausible to develop platform-independent software readily adaptable to each of these three platforms.
Still, even the graphics which are being
utilized in current production for CD-ROM
products are not quite broadcast-quality.
Brian Moriarty, the father of Loom,
believes that CD-ROM products will set
back the art of computer game design in
the near future because graphic art is expensive and the market is not currently
large enough to support both additional
art and in-depth design. Therefore, the
publishers will opt for more art at the expense of design. Even Moriarty sees that,
"...by the year 2000, all our games will
look like television."
Note also that both CD-I and NEC's
Turbo-Grafx 16 CD-ROM units allow play
of regular CDs and CD+G (compact disc
plus graphics) in their disk drives. The
audio capacity of these players also
opens up other opportunities. Since there
is so much room for audio on the CDs,
companies like Sierra and Lucasfilm
are developing multi-lingual soundtracks
for their CD-ROM games. Lucasfilm's
Zak McCracken and the Alien
Mindbenders on CD-ROM and Loom on
CD-ROM will contain both English and
Japanese Kanji soundtracks. Sierra's
Mixed-Up Mother Goose CD-ROM has

Industry Update

both English and Japanese, but other
products are expected to utilize German
soundtracks and French soundtracks, as
well. In addition, Zak has 23 different
audio tracks for specialized sounds (e.g.
street noise, musical themes, etc.) and
Battlechess on CD-ROM will eventually
have different musical themes which will
branch to reflect the strength of the
player's position vis-a-vis the computer
opponent (not to mention the themes
which accompany each piece). The CDAudio capacity will definitely strengthen
the entertainment experience.
However, the two-edged sword of the
proposition is that less, not more, of the
computing power of the machines will be
directly accessible to the user. Accessibility will be masked by the application
(i.e. less programming and less direct
control so that the interface can be
simpler). Bill Gates, CEO of Microsoft,
observed in his keynote address at Comdex that growth in the computer industry
will slow down considerably unless computers are made easier to use. The emphasis on "point and click" games (e.g.
Sierra's King's Quest V on CD and Rise
of the Dragon), use of interfaces such as

CD-I's "appliance control panel
metaphor" and the three-button interface
in Kellyn Beck's Detectron for CDTV
(see the later discussion in this article),
proliferation of GUls—Graphic User Interfaces like OS/2, Windows 3.0, New Wave
and Geos for MS-DOS—and de-emphasis
of keyboards will make the new generation machines look like they will be even
less like computers than ever before.
This will mean that many long-term
computer garners and several traditional
computer game designers will be
unimpressed with the early products
using the technology. Chris Crawford
believes "CD-ROM is a hammer that will
turn everything else into nails." By that,
the outspoken designer is stating that
design issues will become secondary to
finding new ways to use and fill up one's
CD-storage capacity.
At InterTainment '90, Anita Sinclair of
Magnetic Scrolls (Wonderland) listened patiently to Dick Fletcher with
Grolier's Multi-media Encyclopedia and
Laura Buddine of Tiger Media (see the
later discussion) speak of the necessity
of getting away from text in order to

reach the mass market. Then, Anita
decried the manner in which computer
users are being patronized by the assumption we are all regressing to
children and cannot read. It is hopeful
that, eventually, sophistication and
simplicity will find an acceptable equilibrium in computer entertainment
products.

Coming Soon
With the proliferation of CD-ROM drives
for personal computers (and subsequent
drops in price, due to the competition),
promised launch of CDTV in the Spring
(with Battlechess, Jack Nicklaus' Unlimited Golf, Detectron, TV Sports: Football and more), imminent arrival of NEC
Turbo-Grafx 16 CD-ROM products like
Cinemaware's It Came From The
Desert and ICOM's Sherlock Holmes,
Consulting Detective games, decisions
by Tandy, Leading Edge and IBM to
market CD-ROM machines, rumors of
the FM-Townes machine utilizing Windows 3.1 and the C-Cube CL550 video
chip (see later discussion) in attempting
to reach the American market in 1991 or
(Continued on page 35)

Review

W

hat is it
about amnesia, I wonder, that
makes it such an irresistible device for
authors of interactive
fiction?

It is not a particularly noble affliction,
nor is it as rich in
dramatic potential as
the frequency with
which it is exploited
would suggest. Is it
possible that when
Chris Jones began
to sketch out the
plot for Countdown
(which casts the
player as an amnesiac secret agent),
he was unaware that
he would be mining
the same by-now-exhausted vein from
which such games
as Mindshadow,
Deja Vu, and
Thomas M. Disch's
Amnesia were
tapped? Perhaps he
was aware and simply . . . forgot.

Access Software's
Countdown
by Charles Ardai
The Popcorn Not Included Critical Creed:
From the start, computer games have aspired to a style
and a degree of polish best described as 'cinematic.' Only
with today's most sophisticated techniques are significant
advances being made toward this goal. However, in
adopting a cinematic mode, today's games open themselves up to criticism on a
cinematic level. It is not
enough to achieve moviequality software; one
must also achieve quality
movie-software.

Actually, the
answer is simpler
than that. Amnesia is
a convenient crutch
on which game designers lean when
forced to deal with
the problem of a disparity between the
knowledge a player
possesses when he enters a new game-world and the knowledge
his character should possess. How, other than through recourse
to the blessed loophole of amnesia, is one to explain a player's
stumbling around in broom closets when surely the character he
is playing would know his way around his own apartment? How
else is one to understand meeting for the first time people with
whom one's character is supposed to have well-established
relationships?
Then, too, amnesia brings with it its own built-in quest —the
quest for self-discovery-which adds apparent psychological
depth to a game's more ordinary tasks, such as gathering
treasures, surviving, or saving the world. What designer could
turn down the loophole or the depth, much less both in one
cheap package?
The trouble is that amnesia has been done. For that matter, so
has espionage, escape from a sinister asylum, clearing oneself ol
a murder charge, preventing nuclear devastation, and most of
the other pieces which make up the puzzle that is Countdown.
They have all been done to death. For Countdown to resurrect

It is from this critical
standpoint that we will
consider the new generation of "Interactive
Movies."

these old saws is disappointing; for it to
breathe new life into
them is inconceivable.
Yet, this is exactly
what Countdown
does. Read that sentence again. What
you have in this
review's first four
paragraphs is a
serious, but also the
sole, criticism of
Countdown. If we
set my gripes about
its old-hat storyline
aside, Countdown is
as close to perfect as
any game can be. It
also comes closer to
earning its self-appointed identification
as an 'Interactive
Movie' than any of
its predecessors or
competitors.

Countdown is
such a good game,
in fact, that I feel
compelled to defend
TITLE:
Countdown
it against my attack.
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$59.95
"David" (of 'and
DESIGNERS: Brent Erikson, Chris Jones
Goliath' fame) was
PUBLISHER: Access Software
hardly a new subject
Bountiful, UT
when Michelangelo
tackled it, much less
when Bernini did. Yet
Bernini's statue is an
extraordinary accomplishment, a triumph over the previously perceived
limitations of his
medium. Similarly, Caravaggio's paintings of the saints leave his
predecessors' work far behind: they are no longer pretty
portraits, but images of real human beings. To be unbearably
crude about it, both artists took old saws and gave them new
teeth—which is what Countdown does, beautifully. Like Caravaggio, Countdown shows us the dirt, the texture, the substance of
its subjects; and like Bernini's "David," Countdown offers exuberant, animated, and ingenious solutions to problems which
have stumped designers for years.
Countdown accomplishes this through abundant use of digitization, both of sound and of graphics; through a felicitous control
system which eliminates all the flaws, while retaining the virtues,
of the system pioneered in Access' Mean Streets; and through
exciting and imaginative storytelling. The story being told may
be one we've heard before, but we have never heard it told this
well.

Try To Remember .. .
Frank McBain is dead. Mason Powers is alive, but trapped in a
(Continued on page 37)

1

Technological
Trends...
(Continued from page 29)
early 1992 and CD-I possibly on the
market before Fall of 1991, the reality of
enhanced computer entertainment
products seems close at hand.
New companies are forming to take advantage of multi-media platforms. One
company is Tiger Media. The first entertainment product for multi-media
machines to arrive from this company is
expected to be The Case of the
Cautious Condor. Using period comic
style art (from the '40s or '50s) and a
Chandler/Hammett-style prose often associated with the detective stories on
radio during the same period, the game
can be played to a conclusion in 30
minutes (Tiger Media designs their
games as a television analog which assumes an attention span of not more
than 30 minutes), but offers three full
hours' worth of pictures.
Another company formed to develop
CD-ROM entertainment products is
Whitestar Mageware. They are developing a game called Golden Immortal, a
hero-quest which integrates VGA animation, CD-audio sound and a variety of
prose in order to build a story based on
comparative mysticism and/or religion.
The company also publishes interactive
tour guides like their Sophisticated
Santa Fe (New Mexico) CD-ROM
travelogue due early next year.
Kellyn Beck (Defender of the Crown,
Centurion: Defender of Rome and Rocket Ranger) and Doug Sharp (Chipwits
and King of Chicago) have been working on Detectron, a futuristic detective
game based on Doug's "Dramaton" concept (designed in 1985). "Dramaton" was
the predecessor to King of Chicago and
was a computer program designed to
enable stage directors to be able to
"play" with a script before producing it.
Out of testing the "Dramaton" concept,
Doug saw the potential for using "claymation" for King of Chicago long before the
California Raisins popularized the technique in the television commercials (but
well after the Gumby adventures on
television). Detectron uses digitized film
footage to enrich the backgrounds and
mixes art and digitized images to establish the foreground. Obviously, the goal
is to give the product a film-like realism.
The protagonist of the adventure
(Would you believe...Max Adams?)
moves about the screen and continually

has a choice of three different options.
These change with regard to the situation
Adams finds himself in, but there are
never more than three. The reason for
three options is because the game is intended to be played from across a room
via an infrared controller (i.e. a remote
control), and three options are the maximum number of choices one can see
clearly from across the room.
The emphasis of this detective game is
not on combat or puzzle-solving. It is interactive "drama" in that the detective
must solve the mystery realistically (i.e. if
he uses his gun, he may risk losing his
license, being incarcerated or charged
with a felony).
Even multi-media educational products
are taking their cue from computer
games. Susan Lynton of Northwood
Entertainment demonstrated a CD-I
product at InterTainment '90 that is intended to teach Spanish as an interactive
Berlitz course. In presenting the language, the learner/player is immersed
into the language by being sent into a
Spanish-speaking country as a baseball
talent scout. His task is to find the next

Fernando Valenzuela. In the course of
trying to survive, he meets a woman who
he believes does not speak "Ingles" (the
love interest) and a young boy (his cultural and lingual guide/teacher). In
"default" mode, the story begins with no
instructions on "how to use" the "game."
The instructions are embedded in the experience of the game itself.
Where once the realm of CD-ROM
products was rather limited to the
Microsoft library of reference works,
Compton's Multimedia Encyclopedia,
and text-intensive reference works, the
scope of CD-ROM publishing is becoming greater and greater. In addition to
entertainment products, the Bureau of
Electronic Publishing offers a catalog
with 74 pages of CD-ROM atlases, reference works, image and music samplers,
statistics packages and video databases.
The company even offers a U.S. History
on CD-ROM package (complete with the
best of 14 selected U.S. History
textbooks) bundled with a Hitachi CDROM drive for under $1,000.

Far, Far Away, But In Our
Galaxy
The simple fact of CD-ROM storage and
the use of digitized still pictures will not
bring multi-media products to the mass
market, however. It will take full-motion
video. At Comdex, C-Cube demonstrated
its CL550 video compression and
decompression chip. The chip is already
compatible with JPEG (Joint
Photographic Experts Group) and will
run full-motion video from a hard disk at
30 frames per second (in connection
with CCIR601 video inputs). It does not
yet meet MPEG (Motion Picture Experts
Group) standards (100K of graphics per
second and running off a compact disc in
stead of a hard disk). However, the chip
is only slowed by the speed of the hard
disk at this point. If the information is in
RAM, the video images can perform at
more than 40 frames per second. The
chip runs with existing architectures on
the Macintosh and in MS-DOS environments and Fujitsu showed a prototype
of an FM-Townes machine with a CCube chip at a recent Tokyo Multi-media
Exhibition. Coupling advances like this
with Intel's recent announcement that
they were halving the price of their DVI
(Digital Video Interactive) chips to
around $1,000, the technology is much
closer to the gaming consumer than one
would have thought a year ago.
Of course, with some aspects of the
new technology getting closer, even the
"wild stuff' like virtual reality begins to
seem possible. The video game companies are enthusiastic about bringing
such advancements as virtual reality and
networked games to life. As Robert
Faber of NEC's Home Entertainment
Division notes, "Kids like space age stuff,
they tend not to like old-fashioned
things." He visualizes networked games
from a first-person perspective with different views for competing players. This
may seem a long way away, but NEC
(the company that developed the
one-to-five player adapter for the Turbo-Grafx
16 that games like TV Sports: Football
take advantage of) is experimenting with
a Turbo-Grafx 16 modem peripheral in
Japan that is probably only two to four
years away. Since Michael Katz has observed that Sega is no longer supportive
of the Tele-Genesis concept of modem
play, this could be a significant introduction.
Virtual reality is another frontier for
gaming applications (see CGW #72 for
more information on this technology).
Rich Gold of Mattel demonstrated the
PowerGlove at InterTainment '90. This

Industry Update

analog to the VPL dataglove (although
one finger of the glove does not function
as a cost-cutting decision) uses
ultrasonics to allow players to control images on the television screen on X, Y,
and Z axes with quarter-inch resolution. It
is, Gold suggests, a "kinesthetic
metaphor" for arm and hand movement.
The first product to specifically use it is
Super Glove Ball on the Nintendo
Entertainment System. Also, to show
that Mattel isn't simply satisfied with "vir
tual" space, he demonstrated their SFX
electronic toy (which makes sound effects according to kinesthetic movement)
and called it the "first virtual sound
product."
Perhaps, of more interest on the virtual
reality front was a presentation by Chris
Gentile of AGE (developers of the PowerGlove for Mattel). He announced an
agreement his company has with
Logitech to create an ultrasonic
dataglove peripheral for personal computers that is expected to retail for under
$200 and revealed that the company is
working on a three-dimensional "flying
mouse" similar to some very expensive
versions on advanced workstations.

Gentile believes, however, that the most
important application of virtual reality
into gaming is total immersion in an artificial world. AGE is working on a NR
(total virtual reality) game system with its
own lightweight head-mounted display
(HMD), complete with full sound
capability. Unfortunately, the initial units
(expected to test in late 1992 and launch
in 1993) will use monochrome graphics
because color requires too much processing to enable small processors to keep
up an acceptable frame rate on the images. One of the games under development places the player in the cockpit of
a Formula One race car. With head-tracking, the player will be able to turn their
heads and see what's behind, above and
in front of them.
In conjunction with the TVR research,
AGE is expected to develop attractions
for two major theme parks using virtual
reality. One park is expected to be built
in Osaka, Japan (and will allegedly cost
$680 million excluding the price of land)
and the other may be built on the east
coast of the United States. Virtual reality
would let the amusement park operators

pack more attractions into a smaller
area. For example, one attraction is a
race with twenty radio-controlled cars.
Drivers wear head-mounted displays and
get the three-dimensional views from
cameras placed inside the R/C models.
They will see the people waiting in line
as though they were "in the stands" of a
major race. Also, using HMDs and 3-D
camera techniques, amusement park
operators would be able to have people
ride on miniature roller coasters, but experience the ride as though they were on
the largest coaster ever.

Say, "When"
Of course, the real problem with future
technology is the fact that it never arrives
as soon as one expects it. CD-I has been
in "Real Soon Now" state since 1985.
CDTV was absolutely promised for
Christmas of 1990. DV-I and multi-media
machines are just now reaching the top
line of price acceptability and really
haven't become "consumer" items as of
yet. Still, the Empire State (of the art) better get ready to be overshadowed by the
World Trade Center of tomorrow.

Included III
(Continued from page 30)
Turkish prison hospital, accused of McBain's murder. Did Powers
really kill McBain? What do you think?
The problem is that secret agent Powers has amnesia and cannot remember the details of the mission that landed him in
"protective custody." It's up to the player to break Mason out of
jail, search out familiar people and places to jump-start Mason's
memory, and
get the poor
guy back on
the trail of an
international
terrorist
who's got a
nuclear bomb
set to go off
in ninety-six
hours .. .
somewhere.
Where? Good
question.
Hence, the

name Countdown. There's plenty to do before finally disarming
the bomb, and precious little time to do it in. Just escaping from
Turkey will take all the ingenuity and cunning at Mason's disposal, not to mention more hours than the old boy can really afford to spare; and when Mason escapes, there's still a globe-trotting adventure ahead of him, which leads him through Egypt and
Italy and France, through gaudy bars and sinister hideouts,
through meetings with hitmen and hostages and a blonde dancer
named Golden Desire while, in the background, the seconds
quietly tick away.
There are window ledges to be climbed on, sewers to be
braved, bribes to be paid, and doses of truth serum to be administered. There are low-tech and high-tech solutions to puzzles
(a catapult and Mason's hand-held computer are the extremes
that come to mind), as well as a few puzzles that cannot be
solved—just enough to keep players on their toes. There is an encounter on the Orient Express worthy of Hitchcock at his prime
and a nail-biting climax with no room for error. There are sexy
women of the James Bond variety and a handy blackjack game
to match. (Bribes cost money, don't you know?)
In short, there is everything except the kitchen sink.
(Countdown has more than one sink, but none to be found in a
kitchen.) What makes all of this so exciting is that every scene
has been digitized, either from location photographs or from actual miniature sets constructed for the game. Every stone in
every cellar is richly detailed; one can practically see the walls
sweat. Metal in Countdown looks like metal, wood looks like
Left: Building miniature sets.

(Continued on page 41)

Review

Only the
Oracle Knows...
(Continued from page 20)
threatens the job security of every palmist
and fortune teller at the fair (and all this
from the comfort and safety of one's own
computer console).

Weighing In At 12 Stones
Ishido has both 3.5- and 5.25-inch disks
included with the game (for those IBM
owners out there who hate sending away
for the other disk size). Of course, there is the ubiquitous Accolade copy protection secret decoder wheel, as well as a booklet by designer Michael Feinberg, entitled The Way of Stones.
This handy little booklet details the fascinating origins of the
game itself as well as the Oracle of the Stones. Finally, "accolades" (pun intended) are also due Accolade's documentation
for Ishido. In sharp contrast to their Strike Aces and Star Control documentation, Ishido's reference materials are thoughtfully
presented, clearly illustrated and wonderfully complete.

Gall Stones
The sound in Ishido is limited (having a sound board is not a

necessity to fully enjoying this game)
and bears a bone-chilling resemblance
to Chinese water torture each time a
stone is placed on the board. While the
music is nice when a 4-way match is
garnered, players will probably opt to
turn the sounds off before being driven
insane by them. Another feature that
could have been a far greater plus for
the game is the on-line rules. These,
alas, are not illustrated. Where a picture is worth a thousand words, this fortune cookie wisdom could also apply
to adding some illustrations to the online rules. While not a huge minus
without them, the rules would have
been truly "perfect" with the inclusion of some of the
documentation's illustrations done in those nice color graphics.

Passing Stones
Ishido is a puzzle of deceptive simplicity and a seemingly endless array of possibilities for play. With visual elements that appeal to the imagination, the intellect and the aesthetic sense,
Ishido offers a genuine challenge to the player's strategy skills
and powers of perception of the game's "big picture." For both
the novice and the master, Ishido provides a straightforward
strategy game with a mystical undercurrent that is likely to
amaze and amuse.

1

popcorn Not
Included III
(Continued from page 37)
wood and filth looks like filth. People, too, look like people—and
what's more, Access has cast models who look just right for their
roles. The VGA/MCGA-only graphics are a triumph, and the
animation (especially in Mason's non-interactive flashbacks) is in
pressively fluid.
Countdown is a joy to watch. It is also a joy to listen to. The
potential of RealSound speech and sound effects is still somewhat underutilized, no doubt due to memory drain (as it is,
Countdown comes on eight disks), but where sounds are used
they are very effective. The music track makes the most of an
AdLib board, if you've got one. (Several other boards are supported as well.)
Playing Countdown is a shocking sensual experience, not unlike putting on glasses for the first time when one has needed
them for years. Compared to Countdown, Sierra's various
Quests are mere cartoons; Countdown is a feature film.

Countdown Rundown
Of course, the best graphics in the world mean nothing if a
game is no good as a game. One has to be able to get from
scene to scene, preferably in an entertaining way. Does
Countdown offer anything, one may well ask, from this perspective?
It does. Much as in Mean Streets, gameplay is divided between
exploring locations and conversing with characters. (Mean
Streets' extraneous flight simulator has been eliminated.) Both ac
tivities are menu-driven. While exploring, a typical roster of adven
ture game commands is available ("look," "open," "move," "get,"
etc.); while conversing, one chooses among 'approaches' such
as "pleasant," "hassle," and "bluff." The computer supplies the actual dialogue, which is usually clever, or interesting, or both.
In Mean Streets, one had to keep a pencil-and-paper list of key
words and names for use in later interrogations. Here, the computer keeps the list for the player, and even indicates which subjects a given character has already been asked about. This
eliminates, in one move, all the processes that made Mean
Streets a test of one's patience. No longer does one have to
worry about keeping notes and spelling everything correctly.
Players are free to enjoy the story without the game mechanism
intruding.
It may be argued that, list or no list, one still has to ask
everyone about everything, and that it is still tedious; but this is
not so. Not that one doesn't have to run through the list of
names with each new character—late in the game, some of
Mason's contacts will answer literally dozens of questions. It's
simply that it never becomes tedious.
Each character has information to produce and produces it in
an interesting fashion. Almost any question one can ask yields
an interesting answer. This isn't a technical innovation. It's simply good writing.
Similarly, one might complain that it is too difficult to guess
what approach to use to get a given character to talk. Is it
'Pleasant-Hassle-Hassle' with Doctor Hashish, or is it '
Hassle-Pleasant-Bluff'? Will the sympathetic guard respond to '
Help-Help-Help,' or does one need to throw in a 'Hassle' somewhere?

In practice,
however, finding the
proper approach is not
a hit-or-miss
proposition.
The game
provides hints
both through
the characters' dialogue
and through
their
animated facial expressions. An observant player can tell when he is pushing too hard,
or not hard enough. (Cautious players can always save before an
encounter and restore afterwards if they are unsuccessful.) This
psychological sparring is half the fun of the game.
The other half is, of course, the puzzles, which rarely reach the
lunatic height, say, of Infocom's, but which are satisfying nevertheless. There are only two 'ordering' puzzles in the game, one of
which is the disarming of the bomb—many find such puzzles a
mindless nuisance, but two per game is certainly tolerable.
Similarly, there are a few situations which depend on one's
precise timing (the catapult puzzle is one such), but not so many
as to frustrate less coordinated players.
The remainder of the puzzles are challenging but always believable. There are no magic spells here, no easy ways out, only difficult situations and ordinary tools. Character interaction takes
precedence over gadgetry (what an idea!) and the puzzles are
usually solved by quick and clear thinking rather than some silly
manipulation of objects.
This realism in the puzzles matches the realism in the graphics,
and both combine to create a consistent story and atmosphere
that really does feel like a spy thriller. One can easily imagine
Countdown as a film—very little would have to be changed.
There are sets, there are characters, there are incidents, there's a
climax . . . and there is also interactivity, making Countdown a
candidate for the best marriage of cinema and gaming yet seen.
The only drawback, one must recall, is that the story is so
familiar. Of course, however, if one really thinks about it, even hit
films such as this year's Die Harder, Goodfellas and Ghost lack
something in the way of plot originality. Think: what was the last
truly original James Bond movie? (Dr. No, no?) If nothing else,
lack of originality gives Access something to aim for next time.

Sugar and Spies
Countdown is a wonderful game. It's gorgeous, it's loads of
fun, it's substantial (eight disks will keep even the sharpest
player busy for a while), and it's profoundly cinematic. It is an
MS-DOS showpiece if there ever was one. Indeed, it is a reason
to upgrade to a VGA/soundcard system if there ever was one.
Those who think this reviewer is overstating the case and might
even own stock in Access (since one isn't used to reading superlatives under this by-line) are invited to express their disagreement. The only catch is that one must play the game first. Once
you do that, I know you'll be hooked.
Trust me—out of the host of amnesia games players have suffered through over the years, Countdown is memorable.'

1

Sneak Preview

Ode to Nobunaga
by Wyatt Lee

W

hen Koei first opened
its U.S. offices and introduced its first two titles, Nobunaga's Ambition
and Romance of the Three
Kingdoms, one staffer could
never quite get the name of
the former correct. He called it
"Nobunaga's Revenge." With
Nobunaga's Ambition II, that
staff member may be right.
Whereas, in the first game,
many of us successfully followed in Oda Nobunaga's
footsteps and managed to
unite the warring fiefdoms of
16th Century Japan under his
shogunate, those who play
Nobunaga's Ambition II have
a tougher task before them.
Not only are the rival daimyos
(when you are playing computer opponents instead of
human opponents) more ruthless, but players must budget
their attribute points (as in Genghis Khan) and pay attention
to the role of leadership and
delegation of authority (as in
Bandit Kings of Ancient
China). With this greater challenge to face, Nobunaga's Ambition
players may well refer to Nobunaga's
Ambition II as "Nobunaga's Revenge" in
a pleasantly contrasting manner to the
way tourists to Mexico remember Montezuma. In other words, this game has
lasting play value.

Management Secrets of
Nobunaga
Those who have never played a Koei
game before will need to know that these
games use a menu-driven interface which
is pregnant with options, decisions and
conundrums. Using the keypad or numbered keys, players cycle through nine
different menus in order to make administrative decisions. These decisions

may cover everything from building
dams for flood control to offering an alliance or from developing the town to
generate more potential income to training one's men for war. Players can
develop their fiefs and later, their
kingdoms into self-supporting economies
or try Keynesian economics by borrowing gold to finance their military campaigns. Most of this was possible in the
original Nobunaga's Ambition, but
Nobunaga's Ambition II makes the
process even more challenging. Now, as
in Genghis Khan and Bandit Kings of
Ancient China, players must invest
Body Points (numerical attributes
equivalent to strength and constitution)
in order to accomplish the tasks called
for in the administrative process.

Players are even called upon to make
those difficult human decisions. Various
ronin (masterless samurai) appear from
time to time and attempt to pledge fealty
to the player's daimyo (a feudal leader
roughly equivalent to a baron in Western
culture). Does the daimyo trust him
enough to accept him? What if the
daimyo trusts him with a group of men
and he decides to strike off on his own
and terrorize the outlying boundaries of
the fief? After conquering another fief,
the player will have to decide what the
daimyo will do with regard to the captured samurai: behead them, release
them or recruit them. After all, there is always the chance that the recruited
samurai will either defect to a neighboring daimyo or turn on the daimyo in the
next battle.
Whereas the original Nobunaga's Ambition allowed players to make the
decisions for each fief controlled on a
seasonal basis, Nobunaga's Ambition II
allows them to make the decisions on a
monthly basis (and three decisions per
month, at that). Should the player decide
to send his daimyo and/or samurai to
war, play shifts to a tactical battle map.
The battle map is a high-resolution tactical depiction of mountains, forest, plains,
rice paddies, hills, bodies of water, towns
and castles. Each samurai has a counter
reminiscent of those in board wargaming,
representing the number of men that
leader commands. These are placed on
the map. Then, tactical commands are
(Continued on page 83)

Sneak Preview

Power Hungry
A Sneak Preview of Electronic Arts' Powermonger
by Johnny L. Wilson

O

ne of the animated
television series based on
a line of toys (action
figures) used to begin with the
hero wielding a tremendous
sword, voicing a standardized invocation and closing with "I have
the power!" In the latest game
from Bullfrog, the British
developer for Electronic Arts
and creators of the enormously
successful Populous, players get
to "have the power" in many
ways: conquest, trade and political alliance.

is slower). Powermonger also
features outstanding sound effects to portray sheep bleating,
the wind blowing, swords clashing and men dying. The artistic
touches are...well...powerful.
Around The World In
Eighty Ways
The artistic touches alone are
not enough to convince one to
purchase this game, however. It
is the fact that the game offers a
huge strategic challenge each
time it is played, plus the fact
that it is replayable. Since the
computer opponents react differently according to the player's
decisions, this creates a different
environment for each replay.
One game, the player may opt
to try to use "Trade" to win the
world. Another game, he/she
may opt for straight-ahead conquest. Yet another game, he/she
may opt for a "scorched earth"
approach to conquest. Since the
game scales the artificial opponents in reaction to the
player's posture and actions, the
game is dynamic enough to offer
new challenges with each playing.

Powermonger is Populous
from a rational perspective. Appearing initially on the Amiga
with the MS-DOS only slightly behind, Powermonger is an icondriven, real-time strategy game
"played" across a three-dimensional environment which can be
rotated and magnified at will. It
is not only an intriguing solitaire
game, but offers additional play
value for two players via modem.
The concept of the game is
that the player assumes the role
of a a tribal leader whose
homeland was destroyed by an
earthquake of Brobdingnagian proportions. It is the player's job to see that
new worlds are explored, settled and,
sometimes, conquered in order to provide for the quality of life which his/her
people deserve. In fact, it is not even a
chauvinistic game. Queries (a function
which potentially offers a pop-up window
to describe every person by name, as
well as every tree, corpse, workshop,
building, village and castle in the game)
will often turn up female warriors, as well
as males, complete with weapon in hand
and ready to perform the tribal lord's bidding.
Players explore the huge world of
Powermonger, one landscape at a time
through the complete 195 territories. In
Powermonger, the landscapes not only
look more realistic than those in
Populous (which were inspired by
Lego™ pieces), but feature some delightful special effects like flushing pigeons
out of trees and having tree stumps
remain after logging has been done.

Further, the artificial opponents will set
their technological tendencies differently
according to the default abilities of their
populations and the natural resources
available on their landscape. Since
Bullfrog designed each landscape to
have its own personality, part of the challenge of the game is for the player to
learn to judge the potential of each
landscape. The player learns to respond
to the environments which he or she is
confronted with.

Also, weather is not only vividly
portrayed, but has an effect on the action
(i.e. food is consumed more rapidly in
winter to reflect scarcity and movement

The diplomatic posture established by
the player also enters into how the tribe
will be received. A passive posture will
usually allow the tribe to enter into an alliance easier, but this must be balanced
against the tribe's potential for running
away from an unexpected battle. The
neutral posture, of course, allows a tribe
the flexibility for either war or trade. In addition, there is a chance of wooing some
of the enemy to the player's side, thus
(Continued on page 52)

Computer Gaming World's
See Reader Input Device on page 89

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem-solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first-person perspectives of
real-world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take an alter ego
through a storyline or series of
events.
Role-Playing Adventure (RP):
Adventure games that are
based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.
Games are often listed in more
than one category. In this
case, the first listed category is
considered primary. In order
to be recognized as the 'Top
Game" in a given category, a
game must be listed as being
primarily of that specific type.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games in
CGW's Hall of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated by
our Readers
over Time.
They are Worthy
of Play by All.

Review

Sic Transit Gloria Mundi
(Thus Passes the Glory of the World)
Accolade's

Stratego

by Alan Emrich
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Stratego
IBM, Macintosh
$49.95
Ken McLeod
Accolade
San Jose, CA

ost people here in
the States don't
know much Latin.
For them, the classic
phrase about the inevitability of defeat ("Sic
transit gloria mundi")
might as well be translated, "If you're sick Monday, don't transit to work but glory in a game of Stratego." Accolade has definitely connected with the computer solitaire strategist
crowd, and their digitized version of Milton Bradley's classic
boardgame delivers plenty of goods, including a computer opponent
tough enough to send some of your previous glory packing on some
kind of mass transit.

M

Identical Armies
The computer version of Stratego stays very true to its boardgame
roots. The board and pieces have remained unchanged in their form
and function, as have the standard rules of play. Through the courtesy of computer magic, however, different styles of pieces and different looks for the game board are available to players. Players can
opt for high-resolution "plastic"-looking pieces or decide instead on
brownish "stone"- or "wood"-looking sets. The board can be set in
either the terrain-covered standard map or be switched to the stylized
modern or sterile classic boards. After experimenting with all of the
different piece/board combinations, the standard pieces on the standard map really look the best and, honestly, the game would not have
suffered much with the loss of these "gee whiz" graphics for the map
and pieces.

Yes, War Has Rules!
The standard rules are those from the Milton Bradley version
game from start to finish. It is the subtle additions and new tournament-level rules which makes Accolade's Stratego a worthy purchase consideration. Experienced Stratego players will embrace
these variations as bringing new life and challenge into a long-time
favorite game.
Added as variants to the standard rules are the Scout Attack and
Defender Moves options. When using the Scout Attack rule, Scouts
can end a multi-square move with an attack on any adjacent enemy
piece. This makes them much more useful for their reconnaissance
work. The Defender Moves option simply places victorious defending
units in the losing attacking unit's square, rather than having it stay
in place. This creates some interesting circumstances on the game
board, and can quickly break open stalemated sections of the front.

Stratego's

#1

Piece

What puts the value in the game box, however, are the Tournament Rules. While there are only three of them, their impact is considerable and will greatly alter a player's strategies during play. When

first learning these rules, the computer will obligingly give players a
well-deserved lesson in hard knocks as to their correct application.
The Aggressor Advantage rule gives tie battles to the attacking
player. Thus, a "3" versus "3" battle will be won by the player initiating it. Now, Spies are not the only Field Marshall stalkers around,
since the other Field Marshal can just as safely dispatch the enemy!
Having a strength-piece parity on the board is no longer an assurance that good defensive play will likely yield advantages to
patient players. Now, aggressive play is rewarded with considerable
potential advantages (to offset its risks).

Looking For A Few "Old" Men
The Silent Defense rule can also be considered something of a "fog
of war" or "intelligence vacuum" situation. Here, the victorious piece
does not discover the value of the enemy piece which it eliminated.
Scouts still get the dirt on the enemy piece which destroys them, but
one can never be quite sure of the "piece count" advantage when
this option is in effect. There is a saying that there are many old
(read cautious from experience) generals, and many bold generals,
(Continued on page 68)

Sneak Preview

Power Hungry
(Continued from page 46)
having some added population left to be
productive after the battle when using a
neutral posture. In some cases, though,
one must simply use the hostile or aggressive posture in order to help insure
that the tribe's warriors will be thorough
in their conquest. When using the latter
posture, one should expect to see plenty

of animated angels departing the field of
battle in order to depict the total annihilation of the enemy. One can also expect
the next enemy confronted to be less likely to deal from a neutral posture when
fighting the player's tribe. The checks
and balances in Powermonger are marvelous to observe.

Power Lunch
Food is the primary balancing element

in the game. Naturally, should a tribe run
out of food, there will be a high desertion
rate among the military. Also, should a
tribe not be generous enough with the
conquered villages and towns, they are
likely to revolt against them. As an aside,
one can readily see that animal rights activists are not going to like the role of
sheep in Powermonger. In this game,
sheep exist simply for the purpose of
being slaughtered for food.
There is an ecological message to the
game, however. Should the player's tribal
leader order his followers to exploit the
environment too much, it can have larger
consequences. For example, players can
order their tribes to attack any living
thing. This includes trees. By reducing
forests to stands of tree stumps, the
player's tribe can limit a village's (or
town's) capacity for improving weapons,
defenses or the economy through technology. Should the player's tribe resort to
this tactic too often, however, the loss of
forested land will create a correlative
reduction in temperature.
With reference to the temperature, a
caveat may be welcome here. Since food
is such a premium in the game and it
takes almost twice as much food to feed
the tribe during the winter, it is advisable
not to travel, invent, or fight during the
winter (particularly, during snowstorms).
In this way, more resources will be
cached away for future and more
profitable use. Again, the game is very
good at using checks and balances such
as these.

Power To The People
Powermonger, then, is more than a
real-time wargame. Its use of artificial personalities for both the individual
landscapes and computer opponents in
the game, as well as
economic/diplomatic trade-offs make it a
multi-faceted strategy game. For those
who take the time to observe what is happening in the game, it is a dynamic
treatise on the human capacity for aggrandizement and the potential consequences therein. For those who simply
want the challenge of a fast-playing
strategy game that offers both cerebral
and aesthetic stimulation, Powermonger
appears to provide literally hundreds of
hours of play.
One word of caution, however, is in
order. Powermonger has even more addictive qualities than Populous. In fact,
Powermonger players just might become infected with what our editorial
staff has repeatedly observed and
dubbed "PMS" or "Powermonger
Syndrome," an overpowering urge to
relentlessly conquer all one surveys.

Review

Castle keep
Interplay's Checkmate
by Jay Kee

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Checkmate
Amiga
554.95
Chris Whittington
and Andy Pennell
Interplay Productions
Santa Ana, CA

O

h, no! Not another chess program! Well, yes, but
this one is different. It is tough, merciless, cunning, and unpredictable. In fact, it is (dare we say
it?) almost human. Above all else, it is this near-human
quality, this eerie sense that one is playing another person, that makes Checkmate such a remarkable chess program.

Top Of Its Class
According to the manual, Checkmate is the highestrated chess program available for a personal computer
(rated at over 2000 on the ELO scale, in the Candidate
Master category). While the manual may certainly be somewhat
biased in its evaluation (one has to watch those marketing
guys!), there is absolutely no question in this reviewer's mind
that the program lives up to this claim. As a tournament player
some years ago, this reviewer had plenty of opportunity to lose
to people rated in the 1900 to 2000 range and knows how good
a player has to be to achieve that high a rating. Checkmate has
caused some deja vu.
This reviewer has never had much trouble beating any of the

chess programs on the market (until now), finding them to be
predictable once past their opening books and vulnerable to tactics that sacrifice pieces for positional advantages. Checkmate,
however, is an altogether different story. It has routinely, almost
disdainfully, overcome some of the classiest gambits in the
hobby, game after game. Checkmate displays an amazing grasp
of abstract tactical concepts, exhibiting an uncanny knack for exploiting weaknesses with direct and aggressive attacks rather
than relying on the conservative middle-game development
favored by so many other chess programs. Further, it can learn

Review

from experience, actually adapting to one's style and getting
tougher with every game played (very much the way a human
opponent can).

Moves
The game itself is beautifully done. The graphics are clean, with
uncluttered screen displays and a host of user-definable options
to customize the game to personal taste. Checkmate supports
all the standard features found in other mainstream chess
programs, such as 3D and 2D perspectives, take-back moves,
print moves, switch sides and variable levels of play. It also introduces a few new wrinkles of its own.

And More Moves
One of those wrinkles is an improvement to the user interface.
Three selectable move settings provide the player with a variety
of choices for moving pieces—from the classic point-dick-anddrag, to a single mouse click that automatically executes the entire move.
Another new feature is an optional test that actually grades the
player's skill level. Under normal circumstances, an ELO rating
can only be obtained through tournament play—something not
everyone has the time or inclination to do. Checkmate's rating
test provides a less stressful and time-consuming option, producing an equivalent ELO rating based on one's ability to solve 24
different chess problems. With the clock running, the player gets
four attempts at solving each problem. The final rating ultimately
depends on how many attempts
are made, and how much time is
taken in the process. This reviewer
scored very close to the rating he
had previously attained as a tournament player.

Failing The Test
If there is a downside to this feature, it is the fact that there is only one set of problems. Once
completed, they can't really be used again to accurately judge
any improvement in one's rating. If there is ever an upgrade for
Checkmate, it should offer a complete library of test problems,
so that players could monitor their skill levels and rankings on
an ongoing basis.
The "what if' option—a tutorial feature that lets the player
analyze various lines of play in order to determine the strengths
or weaknesses in a particular opening or a certain gambit—is
another wrinkle which deserves applause. Although other chess
programs have used this feature as a "kibitzing" mode, this one
offers a more "professorial" tutorial.

Let Me Draw You A Picture
On the lighter side, if one is tired of using the same old chess
pieces game after game, Checkmate provides an unexpected
answer: make your own. Using Deluxe Paint III, one can design
their own chess pieces and import them to a special custom file
that can be used during play. On the other hand, if one does not
have any desire to play Rembrandt, but is still hungry for a
change, the game provides four additional custom sets to use in
place of the traditional chess pieces. Unfortunately, these are too
distracting to be of any real, practical use: the designs are well
done, but so totally unusual that it is difficult to distinguish one
piece from another, which is a major handicap in any chess
game, but even more so in a game as competent as Checkmate.

Open(ing) Book Test
While all of these innovative design features provide compelling
testimony to the quality of this game, the strength of its programming and aptitude for learning is what truly sets Checkmate
apart from the crowded field of computer chess games. At the
heart of these qualities are some
unprecedented options that permit
the player to exercise discretionary
control over the program's decisionmaking processes. Using the Opening Book Control editor, one can
not only dictate the program's
choice of opening moves, but determine its style and strength of play.
By setting Strength, Popularity and
Random options, the game can be
programmed to choose openings and strategies that are either
aggressive or conservative, or shift at random between the two.
Perhaps more significant, however, is the fact that the game
supports two additional opening libraries: an ASCII file designed
to accommodate user-defined openings; and a supplementary
file, activated by selecting the Learning option from the main
menu, which will record and store any interesting, unusual or
strong moves the program learns (from its human opponent or itself—a major factor in its uncanny ability to emulate a human
player).

Check And Mate
It is the combined effect of these features that makes this program such a formidable and intelligent adversary: constantly
learning and adapting, and virtually impossible to predict. Truly,
it's almost human. Thus, Checkmate is a whole new ballgame,
and it's definitely major league material. While it may be particularly attractive to more advanced players wishing to improve
their game or looking for some long-term challenge, its wealth of
educational options will also appeal to novice players by providing tools that go a long way in helping a beginner achieve the
most gain with the least pain.
Just another chess program? Is the Taj Mahal just another building? Is Bo Jackson just another ball player? No. They are all outstanding.

Foreign Correspondence

huge development system. Set in
colonial India during the 1800's, Raj attempts to capture the political atmosphere of the period. Six diverse interest
groups (ranging from the British East
India Company, the Mogul Empire and
minor princes) hold the future of India in
their hands.

Over There
Up With Empires
(Real, Unreal and Undead)
by Paul Rigby

R

each for the Skies—The Battle for

Britain 1940 is the next release
from Rowan Software
(developers of Flight of the Intruder for
Spectrum Holobyte). To be released by
Spectrum Holobyte in the States, Battle
of Britain gives one the choice of being
the British or German "controller" (with
the chance to change the course of history and dabble in 'what if' scenarios) or
a pilot on either side. Choice of aircraft
to pilot include Spitfire, Hurricane,
Me109, Me110, or Ju87. Players also
have the option of being a gunner in an
Me110, Ju87 or Ju88.
Missions are, reputedly, those flown
during the actual battle, with bombing targets and intercepts lined with historical
accuracy. Training sessions are included
for player familiarization. Using a polygondriven environment, Reach for the Skies
will be available before Christmas for PC,
Amiga and ST.
Champion of the Raj is a
Cinemaware lookalike from Level 9
(remember the graphic/text adventures:
Lancelot, Knight Orc, etc?) using their

The object of the game (up to six
players can compete) is to unite India.
Players face a variety of villains, including "The Thugs," as well as completing arcade sequences such as elephant and
tiger hunting. Available under the Imageworks label for the PC, Amiga and
ST before Christmas.
Produced by Realtime Software
(producers of Carrier Command),
Duster is a 3-D game set in an agricultural colony called Heaven during AD
3800. Unfortunately, because of the
planet's close proximity to the sun, the indigenous life-forms have a high mutation
rate. They also wreak havoc among the
crops. The player, therefore, takes the
role of a bug hunter or "Duster," using a
private ship as transport and weapon.
Profits for successful operations mean
more funds to upgrade your craft. Available for Amiga, PC and ST before
Christmas.
Rowan Software, as a break from
their "heavy" simulations, are in the
midst of producing a more actionoriented simulation-based game. Called
Red Phoenix and based on Larry Bond's
book of the same name, the game is
based on a second Korean War. Utilizing
simulation sequences for aircraft and submarines, the player can control one of
six main story characters. I'll provide
more details as they arrive.
Lords of Chaos, a strategy-based fantasy game with vague similarities to
Omnitrend's Breach system, is for one
to four players, with role-playing elements (included only if the player
chooses the one-player option). In the
old days, the Arch Mages used to rule
the Old World with no plagues, floods or
natural disasters. Mana (magical energy)
began to build up at an alarming rate. Noone was quite sure where it came from
and unpredictable things started to happen (the world began to act like a plot
from a Terry Pratchett novel). The
people rebelled, blaming the Mages for
their misfortunes, and so the Mages fled
as the world broke into pieces—the result
of untold wars and earthquakes.
Each piece of the Old World took form
as individual worlds in themselves. Portals were created, allowing one to venture

Foreign Correspondence

to other Old World "pieces." The end
result of the cataclysm was that no wars
existed on the new worlds, but no peace
existed either—only chaos.
Three scenarios (an expansion set is already under development) are provided
in Chaos, in which the player controls a
single wizard in an overhead viewpoint.
Collecting treasure is important, as is
destroying the foe, because victory
points are awarded for doing both of
these. Points are converted to experience
that can, in turn, be used to upgrade
your wizard's character stats.
Spells range from attacking spells, such
as a Magic Bolt—a physical attack, to
defensive spells such as "Flood," which
can be used to combat a wizard who
casts "Fire" in your direction.
One can summon creatures, such as
dwarfs, to do your bidding. Dwarfs, or
any creature with hands, can carry and
"use" objects. Creatures, such as
elephants, can be mounted and ridden
throughout the land. One can do a fair
bit of interacting with the game world.
Doors and chests can be opened, objects
(such as weapons, vials, potions, etc.)

picked up and drunk/eaten and so on.
Available now for the C-64 and 16-bit
machines in the first quarter of 1991.
The French company, Ubisoft, has
released Zombi, a game right out of a
George Romero movie. Zombi arrives on
one disk and a "manual" that comprises
a comic-book intro and just two pages of
instructions and tips.
The screen is divided into a number of
sections. The largest window provides
the view to the bit-mapped game world.
Other areas include bar graphs showing
character stats, inventory, character
portraits and command icons. Zombi is
played on a first-person perspective view
through the eyes of one of four characters which the player controls (they all
start on the roof of a mall by a recently
landed helicopter, along the plot lines of
Dawn of the Dead). Each character is
moved down each floor of the mall, exploring the areas and looted shops.
During your travels, one will come across
items lying on the floor or within containers that open if clicked upon with the
arrow pointer. Items taken into your in-

ventory can be used on other objects—a
video tape in a video player, for example.
Whilst wandering the area there is always the chance of a zombi appearing.
This results in a scrambling to get rid of
the thing either by a weapon, or your
bare fists. Characters risk dying or, even
worse, turning into a zombi themselves!
Available now for C-64, ST and Amiga.
NOTE:
The above games, and any of the other
games mentioned in "Over There" in past
issues, can be obtained from:
Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY.
TEL: 01144-51-263-6306.
SDC, 60 Boston Road, London,
England, W7 3TR. TEL: 01144-1-567-7621
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins Sq., Burnt Mills, Basildon,
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ. TEL: 01144268-590-766.
All of the above telephone numbers
assume that you can dial direct. If you
have any trouble, contact the international operator.

Review

TEN-BILLION-YEAR...
(Continued from page 11)
least, a toy) in the product. Actually, there is both. In game
mode, players try to develop a planetary system conducive to
life within allotted energy budgets. In experimental mode, wouldbe creators get to "play" with planets without any energy constraints.

On the Face of the Deep
When players boot SimEarth, it is possible to choose between
three levels of difficulty (or the experimental mode described earlier) and, as in SimCity, between designing one's own creation
(in this case, a planet) or playing a pre-designed scenario (out of
seven). In the "Aquarium" scenario, one attempts to create continents on a planet with 100% hydrographic coverage; in "Stag
Nation," one attempts to cause a major migration in order to advance a struggling civilization past the stone age; another
scenario deals with earth in the Cambrian Era and offers a
chance for budding bio-engineers to enhance evolution; another
scenario deals with modern day earth, but allows players to experiment with civilization over a period of centuries; "Mars" has a
dearth of water and atmosphere, so the player's challenge in the
scenario of that name is to terraform Mars; in "Venus," one seeks
to cool off the planet to make it habitable; and "DaisyWorld" has
already been explained. Of course, just as the biggest thrill of
SimCity is to design one's own city, the most impressive part of
SimEarth is creating one's own planet and guiding it to life-sustaining status.
Players decide whether to play at Geologic Scale (the last 4.5
billion years), jump to Evolutionary Scale (covering the last 600
million years), skip to Civilization Scale (10,000 years of historical awareness) or leap to Technological Scale (the last century).
Regardless of where the player starts, however, the simulation accelerates to the time scale of whatever plateau the planet
reaches (i.e. once viable life forms have been established, the
time scale becomes millions of years instead of billions).

Let There Be...
Unlike SimCity, however, where the player is constantly changing the landscape by fairly direct
means and where some reasonably
constant relationships can be ascertained by casual observance or common sense (e.g. commercial zones
grow faster when surrounded by
residential zones), SimEarth models
so many different and seemingly
diverse factors that the results of one's
manipulations are not readily apparent.
Yet, the game/toy/simulation is absolutely fascinating. One learns to
gradually nurture the incubating planet
rather than attempt to do too much
too soon. Using four control panels
(i.e. one each for atmosphere, geosphere, biosphere and civilization),
one uses a slider to adjust different settings and determine growth rates,
stress rates, and other factors while
pointing and clicking one's way to
simulated divinity.
In the early stages of the planet, it is

profitable to determine how much continental drift the planet can
tolerate. Once the continents have evolved to the player's
preferences, one can reduce the number of volcanic eruptions,
meteor collisions, and planetary core heat in order to enhance
planetary stability. After that, players should probably concentrate on heat and atmosphere by increasing cloud and surface albedo, decreasing solar input slightly and establishing a
rain cycle. Without some adjustments in this area, a planet can
overheat quite readily.
Once life begins to form in the primordial soup, it behooves the
player to determine the temperature range most conducive to
sustaining that life. By nurturing the most efficacious temperature
in a broad bandwidth, one has the best chance of allowing life
forms to proliferate across the planet.
Once a temperate zone of sufficient width has been established,
the next challenge becomes monitoring the species advance rate
against the mutation rate; establishing a reasonable carbon
dioxide absorption rate for the biosphere; and deciding on the
necessary reproduction rate.
If players can keep all of these factors in some semblance of
balance, the mystical point of sentient life can occur. Civilizations
begin at the Stone Age level and the decisions to be determined
with one's sliding scale revolve around expenditure of energy
(bioenergy, solar/wind, hydro/geo and eventually, fossil and
even, nuclear fuels) and their allocation for quality of life in terms
of philosophy, science, arts/media, agriculture and medicine.
When things are not going well for the civilization, players are
apt to hear a moaning from the computer. This reviewer could
not help but be reminded of God's words to Moses on Mt. Sinai
that he had heard the cries of His people.
When matters are going well for the developing civilization, however, the technology level continues to advance. Different technology levels mean different levels of energy efficiency, as well, so
the alert player will carefully adjust the expenditures of energy so
that the civilization gets the maximum amount of benefit from
the least number of hours.

Blasphemy
In spite of the strength of SimEarth's model and the enthralling

Review

power it places at the player's disposal, there are a few negatives that
must be noted. First of all, there
doesn't seem to be the amount of
pleasant feedback that SimCity had
to offer. Whereas SimCity had roads
full of traffic, evolving buildings and
rapid transit constantly moving and
changing, many of the SimEarth
screens change subtly enough that
one must constantly study the screen
for each update or constantly be calling down reports. One of SimCity's
strengths was the graphic representation of its subject matter.
Many will feel like SimEarth has gone away from its strength.
Players with a bent toward puzzle solving or empirical experimentation will not be dissuaded from enjoying the game as a result,
but many of those who were captivated by SimCity will feel like
something is missing. To offset the lack of visual feedback, there
needs to be more reward and celebration for each plateau the
player reaches.
Second, the fact that the program immediately focuses on one
sentient lifeform once it reaches sentience may be a realistic
depiction of natural selection, but it takes away from some of the
feeling of divinity. If, for example, one's civilization develops
around trichordates and one brings them into the atomic age, vertebrates and mammals still may continue to evolve, but one cannot nurture them to the point where humankind evolves. This
seems too limiting in a "god game."

And It Was Good
In the long run, SimEarth is more
complex, challenging and fascinating
than SimCity. Those who wish to
master the game will have to do considerably more research than they did
with its predecessor because the
scope of the product is much larger.
In addition, the game affords much
more replayability because each Time
Scale must be mastered independently before the entire horizon of
planetary history unfolds in a "divine" masterpiece. There are
many more nuances of strategy in SimEarth than there were in
SimCity and that should be satisfying to serious strategists.
Question: Why does an ordained Southern Baptist minister
even play a game that assumes evolutionary development of the
world?
Answer: Possibly, such a minister needs to learn to express
gratitude. This pastor's first actual SimCivilization groaned and
fought its way into nuclear war. Frankly, he's glad that his creation can simply be rebooted.
Maybe that is a large part of the appeal of systems simulations
that put the player in godlike or God-like roles, the ability to
wield cosmic power without the responsibility for actually destroying lives.

Cartridge Game Coverage

Firing Up the TurboExpress
NEC's Hot New Hand-Held System
by Roe R. Adams, III

forcing players to immediately purchase
an AC adapter (either one that plugs into
the wall or into a car's cigarette lighter).
The TurboExpress cannot use rechargeable batteries. As can be imagined, nothing is worse than getting involved in a
really hot game and having the machine
die from lack of power!

ike the grinch, NEC may steal
Christmas this year with its new
hand-held TurboExpress. More than
just a mere GameBoy rip off, it is the hottest and flashiest game item to be imported from the Japanese this year. This
hand-held wonder features enough sizzling graphics and intense colors to practically command people to play.

L

TurboExpress' secret lies in its impressive technical innovations. This system
plays the same standard TurboChip
cards that the its larger base unit, the
TurboGrafx-16 machine, already uses.
This is important because American
players have been suffering all year with
Nintendo's GameBoy, even though a
large number of units have been sold.
Not only is the GameBoy a
black-and-white machine, but it only allows play via
its own unique type of game cartridges,
which are quite different from those used
in the basic NES (Nintendo Entertainment Systems) machines. Only a fraction of a regular NES games will fit on
one of the GameBoy cartridges, even in
black-and-white. This means that what
the player gets is a greatly simplified,
stripped-down version (in exchange for
GameBoy's portability). Yet the
clutch-and-carry nature of the GameBoy has so
captured players' imaginations that the
GameBoy has been a huge marketing
success. Players have even spent the ad-

ditional $20-$30 per title for each GameBoy cartridge!
Now, along comes NEC's TurboExpress and it says to the players: "Color
is beautiful" and "Don't spend another
dime for special software." The question
is, can NEC deliver the goods to back up
all of these amazing claims? Let's turn to
the holy specs sheet for the preliminary
findings:
Dimensions (in inches): 4.3 x 7.3 x 1.8
Weight: One Pound
Power: Batteries (6 AA) or AC adapter
Play Time: about 3 hours
Screen Size: 2.7" diagonal
Pixel Resolution: 238 x 312
Colors available: 512
Colors On-Screen (at one time): 512
Maximum Sprites (at one time): 64
Sound channels: 6
Price: $250.00
These figures translate from the specs
sheet into a machine that is, alas, a bit
chunky; gobbles power like crazy; has an
intense color screen with fabulous resolution; plays games with many things jumping, shooting, crawling around all over
the screen; has really fine stereo sound;
and is, of course, considerably more expensive than the GameBoy.
Also, one should note that these features are not all "positives." The power
consumption is truly awesome, almost

Others might find the weight to be a factor also. The machine is somewhat large
and hefty, but NEC has done some interesting ergonomic design twists to make
playing the TurboExpress comfortable.
The bottom of the top edge of the
machine is beveled so that a player's
palms rest easily when using the controls. The back panel is scooped out on
both sides for fingers. The Active Matrix
display eliminates ghosting and trailing effects and the screen is adjustably backlit
for lessened eyestrain and gaming in the
dark.
Being able to play the entire line of
TurboChip games (around 50 titles by
this Christmas) is a major marketing
coup for NEC and drastically lessens the
cost of ownership of the TurboExpress.
No matter how much a person spends
on the machine, it is the cost of software
that really determines how expensive a
machine is to own. Another major factor
will be that the player does not have to
settle for stripped-down versions of his
favorite games. He gets to play the
original game in all its glory, thereby con
tinuing to advance through a game while
on the go. The TurboExpress also has
four times the processing power of its
competitor.
Although no two-player telecom games
exist yet for the TurboExpress, the
machine does have a communications
link on the bottom for hooking up to
another TurboExpress.
The piece de resistance in tempting a
person to buy the TurboExpress is yet
another marketing innovation. For an additional $80 (price not yet fixed), a special TV tuner can be attached to the side
(Continued on page 69)

Scorpion's View

and machete. Auto-save, dontcha just
love it?

(Continued from page 12)
another room, firmly tied, and without
weapons. Since this is a location change,
the game is saved (you guessed it)
where you stepped on the bed. Thus, if
you quit and restore (you must quit;
there is no way to restore from inside the
game) you find yourself back on the bed
and one move in any direction will cause
you to be captured all over again.

Odd things happened at times, for
which there seems to be no explanation,
possibly due to faults with the auto-save.
As an example, after taking BL Astor
into the group, we couldn't get into
Guns'N'Clutter until we handed over
Ochoa's Rifle to Jake (as a bribe for BL's
scummy husband). Some time after that,
it seemed the game had forgotten this,
and Jake wouldn't let us in. Then, further
along the line, suddenly everything was
fine again and we could go into the store
to shop.

A similar situation occurs in the Killer
Clown fortress. If you go too far into the
hallway of the main building, you are
stopped by Clowns who demand your sur
render. Agreeing to this gets you taken
to another area, where you lose all your
weapons, and are equipped with only a
single .45 handgun, spare ammo clip,
and a machete apiece.
Should you quit here and restore, your
party will be back in the main hall. It
would seem at first that everything is fine
... until you check your inventory, and
discover that everyone is armed with a
single .45 handgun, spare ammo clip,

Combat is frequent, irritating, and not
very well-balanced. The whole of Miami
seems overrun with mutated spiders,
rats, Dobermans, and wolves, plus the occasional snake here and there, not to
mention unfriendly humans. It is difficult
to take more than a few steps in any
direction without running into something
hostile whose sole purpose in life seems
to be bringing about your immediate
demise. It doesn't take long before all
this constant fighting becomes an exercise in tedium.

Fighting itself is in The Bard's Tale /
Wasteland style: all text-driven; pick a
monster group to attack and watch the
results. For automatic weapons, you
have a choice for single-shot, burst, or
full automatic (uses up the entire clip).
Explosives thrown at any group will
damage all opponents. One of the few
good things about combat is that characters will not fire if their target has already
been killed.
Monsters (anything unfriendly can be
considered a monster here) never flee;
they always fight to the death. Your party
can try to escape, but usually this has little real value, except to give you a
chance to quit the game and restore. Critters stay on the map, and will chase after
you. Even when you change locations,
they don't go away, and you can count
on them to be waiting for you when you
come back.
Combat will be difficult until your party
is equipped with reasonably good armor
and weapons (such as assault rifles and
explosives). At this point, you are able to
blow away any opponent with relative
(Continued on page 86)

Sic Transit Gloria Mundi
(Continued from page 50)
but that there are very few old, bold generals. With these first two
tournament rules in effect, the player is quickly challenged to become one of those few old, bold generals and the Marshal Blucher's
among us will do quite well.
Finally, there is the Rescue option. Akin to moving a pawn into the
opponents back row in chess and converting it into another piece,
the Rescue option allows up to two pieces per game to be "rescued"
from the captured pile by moving onto a square in the opponent's
back row. The newly arriving piece must be placed on the owning
player's half of the board. Scouts may not perform a rescue, nor
may bombs be rescued and reused.
The consequences of this rule are enormous. No longer when the
enemy's Field Marshal dies does one's Spy become naught but a
slow Scout. One must, therefore, keep his Spy on waivers, because
that enemy Field Marshal is the prime candidate for rescue! Piece advantage strategies are even less viable under this option than with
the other two tournament rules. Suddenly, there is an element of
more subtle maneuvering then the old "probe and hammer" tactics.
Now a quick dash to the opponent's rear can yield substantial
results. Even more, however, one must guard against deep enemy
penetrations! The yin and yang of attack and defense become quite
intense with the employment of this tournament level rule.

Stratego's Defeats
Stratego from Accolade, however, is not without its shortcomings
and failings. Players will quickly notice that the last thing required to
play this game is sound support. The game provides only an opening and closing tune, with very few sounds of note in between. Also,
there is not a lot of graphic panache on the board once the game is

underway. When one piece captures another, it is as dry as most
chess programs, with no graphic reward to the victorious player.
Critics are always right there looking backwards saying "it might
have been nicer if...," and this reviewer is one of them. While certainly superfluous, Stratego might have been better off with Battlechesslike graphics and sound for movement and captures in this "
VGA-graphics-and-sound-boards" day and age. The rattle of musketry, the
yelling of "Charge!," or the explosion of bombs with related graphics
would have added an element to the game which might have raised
it a notch in today's MTV "quick thrill" market. Certainly, younger
audiences would have preferred this to the rather passive new map
and unit graphics.
The real shortcoming to this reviewer, however, is the lack of any
two-player capabilities. No Al routine will ever be as devious as a live
human opponent, and not all computer gamers are the stereotypical
anti-social nerds without friends (or "a life"). With the library of
"modemable" head-to-head strategy games ever increasing in size,
Stratego was the perfect candidate for this feature. While one may
not always have the chance to stop watching the kids long enough
to get together at his gaming buddy's house, a by-phone game is the
next best thing. Besides, our eight-year olds could play each other
with just as much enjoyment (there goes daddy's computer time!).
Missing out on two-player options is Stratego's biggest miss.

Capturing Stratego's Flag
Even with its disappointments, Stratego will have a home on this
reviewer's hard disk. It remains an extremely challenging solitaire
game of remarkable diversity and subtlety, largely thanks to
Accolade's fine supplement to the rules and vicious-playing artificial
opponent. The trick, as is always the case when playing strategy
games against the computer, will be not to accuse the computer of
cheating when one loses (even when it does seem to always manage
to dodge your bombs).

TurboExpress
(Continued from page 64)
of the machine. This small wonder has
an antenna to pick up local stations
while traveling and a video-in port that
can transform the TurboExpress into a
portable color monitor for a camcorder.
What versatility!
One slight downside will be the limited
availability for this Christmas. It is probable that only stores in New York, Los Angeles, and San Francisco will be getting
allocations for the holidays. Widespread
distribution will not occur until the Spring
at the earliest. For those in the San Francisco area, be sure to check out NEC's
first retail location. It is a kiosk called
TurboZone in the Serramonte Mall in
Daly City and is probably the best source
to obtain one of these hot elusive
machines.
The impact of TurboExpress and NEC's
innovative marketing strategy is sure to
have profound affects on the game
machine market in the United States for
years to come. To see this machine in action is to fall in love with it.

Review

A Crystal-Clear Look at Citadel
Adventure

on the Macintosh

by Dave Arneson

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Citadel:
Adventure in the Crystal Keep
Macintosh, IBM (December)
$49.95
David Pavan
Postcraft
Valencia, CA

n CGW #44 (p. 36), reference
was made to a product being
developed for Mindscape's distribution program entitled Citadel.
The reference noted " ...a unique
approach to the command interface from earlier efforts;...". A
later reference (CGW #45, p. 16)
went on to say, "...offers the most
unique character creation scheme
that we have seen, ...." That was
1988. Now, in 1990, the design
team of Citadel has managed to
market the game without
Mindscape's distribution muscle.

I

Postscraft's Citadel: Adventure of the Crystal Keep still features an intriguing character
generation system. Characters
begin in the "nursery" where one
gets to choose what sort of folks
his/her parents were (reverse
genetic engineering?). Whereas
most games allow players to
choose the character's race,
Citadel allows them to choose
the parents' vocations, as well. At
this point, players are presented with a bar graph that shows
where the character starts (statistics-wise) as a youth. Players
must then choose how the character will spend his/her formative
years (in work, study or play) and this, in turn, determines what
classes one's character is eligible to participate in.
This is a fascinating way to develop characters, but alas, everything is almost immediately translated into numbers, so one can
only ask "Why bother?" Once the data is converted into numbers, the background is never again referred to in text. One tends
to be a bit "let down" when all that intriguing work turns into
simple number-crunching.
Next, players create a "stable" of characters for the Inn. Once
that is complete, it is possible to go to the Inn and add them to
the party with only occasional difficulties. Oh, 'Bad' characters
tend to shun their part of combat, but nothing grotesque like
characters attacking other members of the party occurred to this
reviewer's notice.
The party needs to visit the shop, which has a limited inventory
of overpriced items. It is a good idea to have one "money bags"

character early on in order to help purchase the party's allocation of basic
equipment. Note, however, that even
when the party has enough money, it
is not always possible to get what one
wants.
Speaking of the shop, there is
another intriguing twist. At the point in
the game when the party goes to sell
the chalice, it is possible to haggle.
Characters can refuse one offer and,
in turn, the shop keeper will come
back with another! After too much haggling, however, the man will close the
shop for a week and really leave the
party high and dry. Now, that is unique!
By the way, there is no robbing or pillaging allowed within the village and,
in fact, the village is really just a series
of menu choices rather than an environment for the party to explore.
The "edge of town" area with all the
pointing signs is interesting, but even
it is just a pretty picture and the signs
only lead to fancy menus. It is impossible to walk around the town or surrounding countryside and get a sense
of what the Citadel universe is like. Indeed, the universe is a dungeon and
nothing more. So, it's off to the dungeon in order to build up those characters.
The game has good dungeon graphics and there are some very
nice animation routines. Also, Citadel's sounds are interesting.
At least, that door closing behind the characters definitely sounds
like it is closing and locking. This writer certainly ended up checking it out enough times. Players also have the option of personalizing their character icons. One's edited icon shows up well,
even if it isn't in color on the Macintosh.
Wandering about in the dungeon will quickly demonstrate that
it isn't very big. However, one soon discovers that a lot of areas
are closed off until the keys are located; one learns how to
operate the elevator; and the secret doors are discovered. In
other words, the dungeon offers standard fare with a few interesting twists.
Now a good story can make up for a lot. Unfortunately, this
one is run-of-the-mill. A nasty wizard imprisons a sexy good
wizard and turns his attention to enslaving the world. Naturally, a
(Continued on page 90)

Review

Buck Rogers Continues
by Scorpia

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Buck Rogers:
Countdown to Doomsday
C64, IBM
$49.95; (C-64) $39.95
Bret Berry and Dave Shelley
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA

There are six races: Terran, Martian, Venusian, Mercurian,
Desert Runner, and Tinker. The first four are pretty much
human, but the Runners and Tinkers are actually bio-engineering
creations, combining both human and non-human traits. All
races get various pluses or minuses to stats, so some are better
suited for certain professions than others.
Speaking of professions, as you might expect, they're a little different, too. This time the choice is among Rocketjocks (pilots),
Warriors, Medics, Engineers, and Rogues (basically a thief type).
A good party will have one of each, except Warriors, of which
there should be two. Runners make the best Warriors, and
Tinkers the best engineers.
During character creation, it's necessary to keep the manual
handy. Unlike the AD&D series, Buck Rogers: Countdown to
Doomsday is very heavy on skills. Many are used during play,
but a few aren't. Those that aren't used are clearly noted in the
docs, so check the manual to be sure you don't waste points on
something that isn't important.
Skills come in two varieties: career skills and everything else.
Career skills vary by profession: Battle Tactics for Warriors, Pilot
Rocket for Rocketjocks, Bypass Security for Rogues, etc. Each
time a character gains a new level, he or she is awarded points
to distribute amongst the skills: 40 points for career skills, and
20 points for everything else.
k, all you rocket jockeys! It's time to strap in, blast off,
and save the universe once again! Sinister doings are
afoot, and only you can stop them!
Replete with captures, escapes, rescues, combat, underhanded
schemes, a nefarious villain, and a dastardly plot to uncover,
Buck Rogers: Countdown To Doomsday is classic space opera.
There's nothing especially deep about the storyline. It's the ageold tale of underdog freedom fighters versus tyrannical overlord.
This time around, the underdog is NEO, the New Earth Organization, and the tyrant is RAM, the Russo-American Mercantile,
which has something of a stranglehold on most of the planets in
the solar system. Only Earth has broken free, and that freedom
is still rather shaky.
So NEO is recruiting to beef up the ranks, and naturally you
sign on. You and your five friends, that is. As with SSI's AD&D
line, you get to create a full party of characters for the game.
However, since this is a high-tech environment instead of sword
and sorcery, you'll have to adjust to some major differences.

Since what is a career skill for one profession falls under "everything else" for a different one, it is possible for any class to learn
any skill, although of course advancement in a skill outside one's
profession is naturally slower.
Still, this comes in very handy. One of the most important skills
in the game is "Maneuver in Zero-Gravity". A lot of the party's
time will be spent in areas that have little or no gravity, and how
well a character can move or fight depends on the Zero-G skill.
Wise players will beef this one up every chance they get.
Other "everything else" skills that are helpful include Programming, Library Research, Befriend Animal, and Planetary Survival
(none of these are career skills for any profession).
A very nice feature is the "Leadership" skill available to Warriors. This allows you to control NPC's who temporarily join your
party. If the Warrior makes his Leadership roll, one or more
NPC's can be directed by you, instead of fighting on their own.
This is especially handy when you're preparing to throw a bomb
into the middle of the enemy! Nothing was more aggravating in

Review

the AD&D series than eager-beaver NPC's who charged into the
fray just as your mages were letting loose with fireballs. Now, at
least, you have a chance to avoid these little mishaps.
Also as with the AD&D series, you have the ability to modify
character stats before beginning play. I highly recommend
making use of this feature, particularly since the higher your
stats, the better some of your skills will be.
All characters come equipped with a spacesuit (armor), bolt
gun (weapon), and some money. These items are already
equipped for you, since you get thrust into the action at the very
start of the game.
Just as the orientation for new recruits begins at NEO's
Chicacorg center, RAM forces stage an attack. The base is taken
completely by surprise, and it's up to your group to perform the
heroics that will repel the RAM invaders. Once you've accomplished that little task, you are whisked away to NEO's
secret orbital base, Salvation, and the game begins in earnest.
At first, your assignment is of a rather humdrum nature: scouring space for old ships that NEO can cannibalize for muchneeded parts. Hardly what you were expecting after such a brilliant performance back on Earth, but fear not! That will change
very quickly.
Possibly, too quickly. It isn't long before you come across what
appears to be an abandoned ship. Oddly enough, it looks to be
in very good shape. That alone is enough to give anyone second
thoughts, but our brave spacefarers won't get very far if they
don't investigate.
Once through the airlock, you have the feeling you just stepped
onto the set of "Alien". No one's around, warning lights are on,
and there's an unpleasant sensation that something (maybe
many somethings!) is just lurking in the dark, waiting for you.
This is an excellent place to save the game.
As you explore the ship, you will find that the "somethings"
aren't the worst of your troubles. A mysterious rash begins to afflict your party, first as a minor irritation, then as a major disaster, causing characters to go berserk. And you thought
scavenging was dull!
Fortunately, the condition can be cured if you find the right
place and take the proper steps. Still, it's a little nerve-wracking
to be walking around a death ship, wondering who will next fall
victim to the mysterious ailment, while you're trying to find out
what's going on, and fighting off nasties on top of it all.
Once you're past this part of the game, you have more
freedom of movement. While you will be getting regular assignments on Salvation, you generally don't have to go rushing right
off. Take some time to visit the asteroid belt and planet bases, to
see what's for sale in the various shops (not everyone has everything, and sometimes prices for items can vary considerably).
This is a good place to talk about combat, as there is a fair
amount in the game. First, it's much like that in the AD&D
series; most of the commands, movement, etc., are the same.
However (and it's a big however), this is high-tech, and the
weapons make a big difference, thanks to RoF.
RoF is "rate of fire". Handguns and rifles can be fired multiple
times per turn. Rocket pistols, for example, have a RoF of 4.
Anyone using this weapon gets to shoot four times with it. Of
course, there's no guarantee you'll hit every time, but with four
shots, you're likely to get in at least one strike, and maybe more.
(By the way, most fully loaded weapons carry 250 rounds.) This
allows the non-Warrior classes to be much more effective in corn-

bat, a pleasant change from the usually inept performances by
non-fighters in the fantasy series.
It is, by the way, a good idea to have a small selection of different weapons for each character. Hostile robots are always popping up when you least want to see them, and they are generally
immune to one or more types of weapons (so, for that matter,
are several types of critters). In particular, the heavy combot (AC
-4!) can't be hurt by lasers or rockets. Needle guns, bolt guns,
heat guns, and good old-fashioned swords, however, will certainly
do the job on it.
Most importantly, the minute one of these things appears, drop
a chaff grenade on it to keep it from using its primary weapon,
the rocket launcher. This can do mucho damage to your team in
a very short time. Once it's sitting in a cloud of chaff, though, it
will switch to a needier, which is a trifle less painful. Everyone in
the party should always carry several chaff grenades, as you
never know who will be first to move.
After combat, your medic will automatically try to heal anyone
who's been injured. This is the only time healing is done by a
party member. How much is done depends on the medic's skill
in curing wounds, so most points should be put into healing
light, Serious, and Critical wounds. "Diagnose" needs only 15
points to be effective, so no more than that should be put into
this skill.
The ship itself has medical facilities, but these can be used only
when the party is returning from outside. If there are injured
people in the group, you are automatically queried on re-entry if
you want to use the onboard medic. Finally, if you still need healing after this (or run out of medical supplies), several bases have
hospitals to patch up the walking wounded.
You have the option, from time to time, to avoid random encounters, if you're lucky. Occasionally, while meandering through
an enemy stronghold, you will happen upon hostile inhabitants
and be given the opportunity to hide from them. If this is success
ful, the bad guys move along and you can then go your way
without having to fight. My party seemed to do better at this
when the Rogue had a good skill in Hide In Shadows.
Combat resolution overall is extremely fast, although I can't tell
whether that's due to the code or the speed of my 386. Either
way, everything moves at a good pace, and fighting is usually
over pretty quickly.

Review

The one place where combat lags terribly is ship-to-ship combat. This part of the game was not very well implemented. Basically, you fight enemy ships from time to time, but this is at your
discretion since you can usually avoid a fight if you prefer. You
will probably want to engage the enemy some, however, because
you can use the hulks of your defeated enemies for salvage,
which puts money in your special NEO account.
This account is used to purchase fuel, repairs, and such at
various bases. Fuel is the most important item; you can use it up
pretty quickly during space travel, and there may not always be
enough left to get back for a refill at Salvation (where ship maintenance is free). Thus, from time to time you simply must
engage in space combat.
The basic technique is to disable the enemy ship, then close so
you can board it and take over the Engineering section, signaling
victory for your side. Unfortunately, there aren't many options
available here. Your ship has several weapons, most of which are
rather weak lasers. The best weapons are fired by the pilot, who
doesn't have the best chance at hitting. There is no skill at all for
anything like "Ship's Gunnery", a surprising omission in view of
the many other skills that are included in the game.
Everyone simply shoots their weapons and hopes for the best.
No maneuvering, no real tactics, nothing particularly special.
Ship combat thus turns out to be more a static slugfest than anything else, and is the weakest part of the game.
So, just what is all this fighting about, anyway? That's some-

thing you must discover as you bounce around the solar system,
going from the asteroid belt to the steaming jungles of Venus,
the arid plains of Mars, and the satellite stations of Mercury. RAM
is up to no good, and time is running out.
In between, there are a few "side quests" you can undertake.
They have no particular bearing on winning, but they provide experience, and being related to the overall plot, add a little extra
spice to the game. Buck. Rogers makes a cameo appearance or
two (including a brief stay with your party), as does Wilma Deering.
The game moves quickly; there is always somewhere to go and
something to do. In that sense, it is reminiscent of Pool of
Radiance, where assignments were always waiting at the town
hall. You are never at a loss for where to head next, so it's difficult to go wrong.
Where Buck Rogers differs from POR is that everything, one
way or another, relates to the central theme of RAM's sinister
plot that must be uncovered. It all fits together nicely, and is thus
very satisfying.
Countdown To Doomsday is a fun game to play. Combat is
well-balanced, the use of non-combat skills is good, the villains
are nasty, and the flavor of the old-time serials is maintained
throughout.
Bottom line: Good, light adventuring and a nice change of pace
from the fantasy line.

Review

Blue Max
(Continued from page 24)

Max allows one 2,000 rounds without flaw. Flight mechanics
have been liberalized, although selecting the early Fokker III is a
challenge to even the expert player.
Even in a dogfight scenario, one can practice bombing and
reconnaissance missions. But dogfights last until one lands; thus,
the destruction of an enemy plane will generate another, until
such time as one is killed or succeeds in putting the plane on the
ground. Landing is not difficult, since it merely involves levelling
out at a speed of 50 mph or less. The difficulty lies in terrain
orientation. Although there are maps printed in the text, one can
not access a strategic map in flight. Granted this is more accurate; it is just that in a product emphasizing the game aspects,
one would wish to have geography play a less important role.
Damage is generic, and the "lucky shot" does not occur. Flight
continues until the plane simply incurs too much damage to
remain in the air. Degradation of flight does occur (i.e. turning/climbing ability), but is equitably apportioned. Thus, there is
no distinction between firing into the left wing root or the cockpit.

Conclusions

since only one key or input may be accessed by the computer at
a time, the mechanics of pressing keys is somewhat clumsy (if a
stumble-fingered opponent lingers on his key, one has to wait).
A strategic mode allows input via the traditional board gamer's
hexagon map (a la Yaquinto's Eagles or SSI's computer
Eagles). After the moves (roughly 150 feet per cell) are locked
in on the right screen, the left screen executes them in a cockpit
perspective. If the enemy plane flies into one's sights, he may
then fire in "real-time". The strategic mode can be played with
variable time per turn and per flight; the designer recommends
15 second turns and 20 minute flights.
One may elect realistic or direct flight and bullets or crosshairs.
The former options are more accurate in a historical sense, although they vastly increase the difficulty of the game. Realistic
flight causes a novice to continually overcompensate, while bullets compel one to properly "lead" the target.
In practice flight and action dogfight scenarios, each side has a
balloon, which can easily be destroyed. In fact, balloon destruction may be too easy, since historically, they were surrounded by
heavy concentrations of Archie (anti-aircraft emplacements).
Three separate campaigns are included: Bloody April, the Battle
of Amiens and the Ludendorf Offensive. Each campaign includes
several missions, involving fighter cover, aerial reconnaissance
and bombing of objectives.

Game Play
The designers and publishers of Blue Max note that it is a playing experience, and not a detailed simulation (though the packaging and advertisements for the game do not make this clear). Although the planes will stall, it is still possible to literally sit on
one's tail and climb to 20,000 feet, or to do a complete loop. Historically, the vertical climb was impossible until the advent of the
jet, and the famous "Immelman Turn" was devised because a full
loop was impossible given the underpowered machines of the
First World War, thus Max Immelman's half loop with a full twist
was the most effective method to achieve a rapid 180 degree
turn.
While ammunition and jams were always critical factors, Blue

Blue Max strives to give one a feel for World War I dogfighting;
accuracy is sacrificed to gameplay. The aircraft are simply overpowered for their historical period, and the use of the wingover,
the "Immelman" turn, sideslips, barrel rolls, etc. are ignored.
The historical gamer may find the historical verisimilitude
slighted too much to yield a simulator capable of being both a
learning tool and an entertaining experience. However, as noted
above, the game was designed for the general market; garners
who are more into "game" than "simulation" should find Blue
Max enjoyable.
This reviewer would like to thank the staff at the USARSOC
(United States Army Reserve Special Operations Command),
Ft. Bragg, NC, for their permission to access the computers
therein, without which this review would not have been possible.

Bibliography
The following media are recommended for further information:
Anonymous, War Birds, George H. Doran Company, 1926.
Diary of an American aviator during World War I.
Hunter, Jack, The Blue Max, Avon, 1960. Probably the best historical fiction
on done on World War I. Actually part of a trilogy
which goes through World War II, the first novel is by far the
best. Made into a movie of the same name with George Peppard
and Ursula Andress, it is also mandatory viewing for anyone with
an interest in the period.
Leonardi, Alfred and Kaufman, Douglas, Ace Of Aces, Nova,
1980. A novel wargame system using two pictobooks, allowing
excellent playability and layered on rules for added realism.
Several editions have been printed, e.g. Rotary Engine, Flying
Machines, PowerHouse, Balloon Busting.
Longstreet, Steven, The Canvas Falcons, Ballantine, 1970. An
excellent history of World War I aerial warfare.
Spick, Mick, The Ace Factor, Avon, 1988. An analysis of what
makes an ace, with historical overview.
Taylor, S. Craig and Peek, J. Steven, Wings, Yaquinto, 1981.
The most detailed boardgame ever done on the period. The
aircraft data files alone are enough to recommend this.

Ode to
Nobunaga
(Continued from page 44)
given via another series of menus and
sub-menus.
Thus far, that sounds almost exactly
like Nobunaga's Ambition and the rest
of the company's games. In Nobunaga's
Ambition II, however, there is yet
another wrinkle. Now, players have the
option of ordering their units to "Flee" to
the castle. Once inside the castle, the opposing forces will have to storm one of
the gates and make their way to the
inner fortress in order to attack the
player's units. Since selection of this option introduces yet another high-resolution tactical map with gates, walls,
moats, fences, towers and the inner
fortress, outnumbered players will find
that the castle option can use up time
which can, in turn, turn the tide of battle.
Also, like the earlier Koei games, the
player(s) has (have) a choice of, at least,

two scenarios. One scenario offers a
chance for the daimyo to take one fief
and conquer the others in order to forge
his shogunate and the other allows the
daimyo to enter the game as Oda
Nobunaga with a hefty edge in the number of fiefs controlled. In single-player
games, the "Nobunaga's Ambition"
scenario (which begins with an intact empire) offers enough strategic challenge to
test the finest player's skill and is possible to play through in a few hours.
In multi-player games, most garners will
find the scenario where each player
begins with one fief to be the most playbalanced. Also, in multi-player games,
human players should choose fiefs on
outer boundaries far away from each
other. This allows time to build up one's
empire economically and militarily prior
to having to face a human player's forces. Since the computer opponents are
even more ruthless in Nobunaga's Ambition II than they are in the original game,
it's important to work them over before
the human players start to work on one
another.

Nobunaga's Ovation
About the only negatives that this
reviewer can voice about the new game
is that it doesn't offer sound card support, still features a clunky menu-driven
interface (with no short-cuts), and
doesn't support direct-connect or modem
play to help facilitate those multi-player
games. Still, Nobunaga's Ambition II
features graphics which are far superior
to the original game, more in the style of
Genghis Khan and Bandit Kings of Ancient China. In addition, the economic
model is basically the same, but the overall strategy is more challenging due to
the use of body points (to purchase actions), necessity of leadership requirements (as in Bandit Kings, one must
have enough samurai to be able to field
the appropriate number of men), and
more ruthless computer opponents.
Along with these refinements comes the
addition of the extra tactical screen for
the castle siege sequence. All in all,
Nobunaga's Ambition II is an enhanced
package that should please all the fans
of historical simulations.

Hawk's Revenge, I thought I would write to you to clear up a couple of
points raised in your preview article.

(Continued from page 7)
premium on the former and look upon the latter as secondary. We
will include articles on strategy/tactics when possible, but the bulk
of the magazine will continue to be news and reviews. As for the
index, we intend to make one available in the very near future.

BattleTechnicalities
As the original producer for Infocom's game BattleTech: The Crescent

First, as most importantly, the article gave the impression that there
were only six missions in the game. That is 21 missions off. There are actually twenty-seven missions in all, though a player will not play all of
them every time he or she plays through the game. What was described
as the end of the game is merely the conclusion of the first segment—approximately 1/4 of the game. The story continues through the rescue of
Jason's father, his assumption of command of larger and larger units,
and eventually, a transition to the 3050s and the start of the Clan Wars.
Jason eventually must lead his unit in important actions in the final showdown between the Inner Sphere and the Clans on Luthien.
It should also be made clear that the game is

not a CRPG. The package is quite clear on that
and there is no intent to mislead. Thus, as the article states, there is no exploration, aliens (there
are none in the BattleTech universe), strange artifacts and the like. Nor should anyone expect
there to be. The game is about combat and
leadership. Over the course of the game, Jason
must learn to act as a commander rather than
an individual warrior. He must command larger
and larger forces and the welfare and success of
all those forces must be taken into account. The
core of this is the idea that you do not directly
control other units. Rather, you give them orders
and goals to accomplish. Since each pilot is unique and each machine has its own capabilities,
those units' behavior is not always completely
predictable. This is part of command.
Finally, I don't doubt that many of the difficulties in control and understanding of the game
(and the mechs) will be resolved by the final
documentation.
On a completely different issue, there is a
small error in your review of Phantasy Star II
from SEGA (my current employer). In the article, you refer to the game as a six megabyte
game. This is wrong. It is a six megabit game.
This is the difference between 6,291,456 bytes
and 786,432 bytes! It is a common mistake,
especially from those of us who got our start in
the computer industry. Cartridge games are traditionally measured in megabits, where one
megabit is the same as 128K in computer
speak. This tradition came to our shores with
the Nintendo. In Japan, measurements tend to
use smaller units and larger numbers—just try
paying a hotel bill in Tokyo where 150,000 yen
is not all that uncommon!
Scott Berfield
Foster City, CA

Thanks for the information. Our sneak
preview was based on an early build in
which only six scenarios were present. We
will cover the twenty-one other missions In a
later review. Sneak previews are designed to
present the "flavor" of a game, whereas
reviews are expected to be more thorough.
The preview did emphasize the non-role-playing aspect of the game (primarily because it
is being released under the Infocom label),
and compared the product favorably to the
very successful boardgame.
As for the megabit typo in the Phantasy Star
II review, it is interesting that we printed the
correct "divide by eight" formula in our Industry update on page 28 of the December
issue. So, we knew better, but the error
slipped through, anyway. We had never really thought of the Japanese cultural disposition toward larger numbers, but find it an interesting observation.

Scorpion's View
(Continued from page 67)
ease, except for Killer Clowns, who are
practically super-human in their ability to
take punishment and deal out death with
remarkable speed.
The only way to handle them is with full
clips of ammo and plenty of explosives,
preferably plastic, especially when they
show up in numbers greater than one.
Your best bet when running into them as
a random encounter is to run, quit, restore, and hope you don't see them
again as you make your way to wherever
you're going.
In the wilderness, you can occasionally
see something (always hostile) coming;
indoors (inside Miami), you generally
don't have such luck, unless you ran
away from it before. All combat is
preceded by annoying beeps from the
game (very annoying, given the number
of encounters), in case you haven't been
watching the screen to see the "Oh oh!
Trouble!" message.
One of the biggest dangers involved
with combat is mutations. A bite from
any mutated animal will eventually cause.
mutations in the character bitten.
The mutation will give the character a
new ability (most of which didn't seem to
be worth much), but has the unfortunate
side-effect of slowing healing rate to practically nil.

Ordinarily, a wounded character will
recover points automatically as time passes in the game. Mutated characters, however, either heal not at all or so slowly
that it isn't worth thinking about. Then
you have to go to a doctor and pay for
recuperation. By the way, having someone with Doctor skill in the party does no
good in this respect. Party members with
Doctor skill cannot heal injuries as in
Wasteland.
This negative side-effect can be suppressed temporarily (usually two days)
by drinking some DeSoto liquor or some
healing water. However, drinking the rum
has its own side-effect of making the character inebriated, and the party as a whole
tends to move erratically thereafter,
going in directions you hadn't expected,
even though only one may have had any
liquor to drink. There's no credit for
having a designated adventurer in your
party.
Mutations, in both my experience and
that of others who played the game, also
appear to happen spontaneously at
times. A character not exposed to
mutagens by animal bite will suddenly
come down with a mutation, for no apparent reason and with no prior warning.
Early in the game, you can visit Dr. DeMedici who is able to cure mutations, but
later his compound is trashed by the
Clowns. After this, you must rely on the
stopgap measures of rum and healing
water.
Overall, the game is dull and mechani-

cal. The plot makes no sense at all. The
Bahia Mafia have no connection with anything relating to the fountain; putting
them out of business is just a "make-do"
segment. The DeSotos use small
amounts of fountain water in their rum
(hence the mutation-suppressing), but
are basically a dead end, since you don't
really learn very much about where the
water comes from.
It is not until you rescue Wilfred in the
swamp (where you go because there
isn't any place left except the Clown compound) that some glimmer of light appears. This immediately ends the feud between the Obeahs and the Beachcombers (amazing, as up to this point
they have been bitter enemies), and tells
you the source of the water is in the
swamp in the hands of intelligent animals.
When you finally get to talk to the intelligent mutated critters in the swamp,
everything is patched up by Gramps and
Doc Brewhoe. These two have known
what was going on for a long while, but
it's not until you wipe out (or seem to)
half the population of the area that they
feel it's time to get things settled once
and for all. Why they couldn't have done
this long before is never explained.
There is, though, one good thing: FOD
is one of the fastest-loading games I
have ever seen. That, combined with no
copy protection (but then, a product like
this probably doesn't need any), makes it
very handy for the many, many times
you will be quitting and restoring. One
might almost think the game was
designed with that in mind.
So with faulty design throughout, "features" designed to aggravate, incessant
and boring combat, and a storyline that
doesn't hold together, my personal
opinion is simple: don't buy this game.
Period.
Whew. I'm glad that's over with (bet
you are, too). So let's move on to the
usual: if you need help with an adventure
game, you can reach me in the following
ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu).
On GEnie: Stop by the Games
Roundtable (type: Scorpia to reach the
Games RT).
By US Mail (remember to enclose a selfaddressed, stamped envelope if you live
in the United States): Scorpia, PO Box
338, Gracie Station, New York 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!

Reader Input Device

Conversions Received

A-10 Tank Killer
(Dynamix) Amiga
Balance of Power — 1990
Edition (Mindscape) IBM
Buck Rogers (SSI) C64
Conquests of Camelot
(Sierra) Atari ST
Earl Weaver Baseball
(EA) Mac
Faces (Spectrum Holobyte)
Mac
Jack Nicklaus Championship Courses of 1990
(Accolade) Amiga, Mac
Jack Nicklaus Unlimited
Course Design
(Accolade) Amiga
King's Quest — Enhanced
Version (Sierra) IBM
Loom (LucasFilm) Amiga
M-1 Tank Platoon
(MicroProse) Amiga
Shadow of the Beast
(Psygnosis) Atari ST
Where in the World is
Carmen SanDiego?
Deluxe Edition
(Broderbund) IBM
Where in Time is Carmen
SanDiego? (Broderbund)
Amiga

Review

A Crystal-Clear Look...
(Continued from page 70)
call goes out for heroes to go get him and end the menace. (Insert auditory track for Andy Rooney voiceover here:) Did you
ever wonder why simple adventurers were called upon to do
things that the greatest wizards in the world couldn't handle?
Just think about it! Anyway, the story is nothing special.

Body Blows (Combat)
As Scorpia so correctly pointed out in a recent editorial (CGW
#76, p. 44), combat is the one area of CRPGs whose importance
is unquestionable (as well as an area where the publishers can
make greater strides). Citadel does not make it on this score.
Combat is slow and hard to follow. Players will need to turn off
the "hit" boxes if they want to see what is happening on screen.
Unfortunately, that will mean that they will not be able to tell how
badly their party members are being trashed!
Character movement must really be done one character at a
time. That is, assuming the bad guys give you that much time.
Auto-combat should have solved some of this problem, but, unfortunately, the auto-combat mode is even slower than moving
characters manually. In auto-combat mode, it seems like characters attack from left to right, as well as without regard to anything. So, one at a time they fling themselves on more powerful
foes and get eaten alive. Manually, the same foes could be
beaten and done so more quickly, too! When characters are on
the right side of the screen, their moves are almost totally passive. Long minutes go by when nothing happens and then a
slight shuffle occurs followed by more nothing!
Why so slow? One would almost think that the Al was carefully
adopting a low-risk attitude, but the exact opposite is true when
the characters are located on the left hand side of the screen.
Frankly, even SSI's venerable Wizard's Crown seemed to do
more things quicker and better on an 8-bit Atari.
There is the usual assortment of weapons, all of which are, at
least, slightly different and are used differently by the characters.
Bows are extremely useful, but there are only four arrows in a
quiver (four!). So, any character with a bow ends up sticking
them in pockets, belts, and other characters' pockets and belts,
etc. Even going to the latter extreme, one is more than likely to
use them up in one encounter.
Yours truly also managed to shoot one of the members of the
party during one encounter. That would have been all right, but
the arrows killed the good guy with one shot. That never happens with the bad guys!
Another problem is that it is tough to develop the characters
fast enough to meet the inevitable challenges to come later in
the game. In one game, there was only one Goblin-like monster
to be found on the first level and a handful of skeletons located
on the second level. This meant that the party was still first level
when it reached the third level. There, the nasties were coming in
groups of six to nine high-level monsters at once. It is most discouraging to get trounced so quickly.

Spell Binding (Magic System)
Magic "Play" is one feature that is not slow in Citadel. The special effects are very nice and the use of rune symbols add a nice
touch. Also, forcing characters to carry around that "Spell Book"
helps to make such an artifact more real. Being able to share
that book among the magic users in the party offers extra value,

too, along with the capacity for creating one's own scrolls. This
critic finds the magic to be handled much better than in games
which use simple inventories and lists!
Unfortunately, the cute "Rune Menu" gets tedious to use after a
while. Much of it can be "Macroed," but there are enough
decisions to be made when casting spells that Macros cannot do
everything. So, ultimately, all the "neat" stuff that makes the
magic system unique ends up slowing the gamer down as the
game progresses.

Puzzling Perceptions (Puzzles)
There are only a few, but here is an example. You enter an Alcove where there is a stone carving of a Death's Head on one
wall. Pointing and clicking on one of the two round "jewels"
results in the statue becoming animated and stating, "To pass,
you must know whence I came to this keep." Those who are
alert will probably figure out that the answer must concern Nequilar (The bad dude who sank the Citadel into the mountain). If
one knows that Nequilar came to the Citadel 53 years ago in the
Spring and 'sank' it six months later, one can assume that the
answer is "Spring," the season in which Nequilar came to the village (as opposed to six months later when he 'sank' the keep). It
is not explained, at this point, why the carving (seemingly a part
of the Keep built hundreds of years ago) "is" Nequilar, nor how
the player is supposed to discover this.
Players will also discover that even when told that their characters can't carry any more (in terms of weight, not number), they
actually can. One merely shuffles things around, puts them in
pockets, or arranges them differently and "Voila!," it becomes possible to carry another item.

Final Inventory (Conclusions)
Players will need, at least, a Mac Plus with one megabyte of
RAM and 6.02 (or later) system software. MAC II owners need to
set their CRTs to Black & White mode with two colors (instead of
256) before starting Citadel: Adventure of the Crystal Keep.
The game supports a hard disk, which is definitely recommended.
This writer finds Citadel: Adventure in the Crystal Keep very
disappointing, even though he was predisposed to like the game.
The character generation and magic system are both quite interesting initially, but the one translates into the old 'number
crunch' and the other becomes tedious after the first few times.
Simply put, it falls short. One pretty much hacks his/her way to
victory and there is no genuine sense of "role-playing."

Taking a Peek
(Continued from page 6)
the digits zero through nine feature
prominently in it. Fortunately, there
are over 60 different animated
responses to these numbers, each
with our favorite Disney characters.
Note that both "ABC's" and "123's"
are supported by the SOUND
SOURCE ($34.95), which adds
voices, music and sound effects not
available on the internal speaker (although no other sound systems are
supported). IBM ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #4.
Dynamix
c/o Sierra
PO Box 485
Coarsegold, CA 93614
STELLAR 7: The old Apple and C64 game has come to life fleshed
out with full polygon-filled 256 VGA
color graphics, sound support and
lots more action. Arcade action marches on! IBM ($34.95). Circle Reader
Service #5.
Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, Ca 94404
THE IMMORTAL: It's you against
the odds in this 3-D fantasy adventure. Wander through the labyrinth,
slay the monsters, collect all the
goodies and, most importantly, take
a nap on the bed of straw! The live
action battles are manageable, even
for non-arcade gamers, and there is
plenty to explore. Amiga, Atari ST
Apple IIGS ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service #6.
MAGIC FLY: Arm your spaceship,
cadet. We're sending you off to the
huge asteroid to zap the enemy.
Akin to "Tunnels of Armageddon"
(California Dreams), with a spaceace race flavor as you search and
destroy your way to arcade happiness. Amiga, Atari ST ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #7.
Electronic Zoo
3431-A Benson Avenue
Baltimore, MD 21227
BLACK GOLD: There's a heck of a
good economic model of huge multinational oil operations in that game

box. The bad news, though, is that it
is wrapped around some arcade sequences which will keep this game
from being one for the pure
strategists. Amiga ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #8.
Interplay Productions
3710 S. Susan #100
Santa Ana, CA 92704
BATTLECHESS II, CHINESE
CHESS: This second in the Battlechess series looks at the ancient
game of Chinese Chess (with cannons, ministers, et. al). Players move
along lines rather than into squares
and the board is divided by a river
(representing the Yangtze). The
Yangtze becomes the player's
Rubicon in this mental battle where
resonant sound effects and hilarious
animations offer amusing respites
from the cerebral exercise of the
game. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service #9.

Live Studios, Inc.
30151 Branding Iron Road
San Juan Capistrano, CA 92675
THUNDER STRIKE: TV ratings are
the goal, and the Military Olympics
is the name of the game that gets
the ratings. The player flies his
fighter along a "track" or the contours of the ground, defending his
base, attacking enemy generators,
all the while keeping the ''show" exciting enough to maintain the ratings
needed to dominate the world. 3-D
vector graphics neatly wrap up this
arcade flash & zap shoot 'em up.
IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service
#10.
Odyssey Software, Inc.
P.O. Box 367
N. Eastham, MA 02651
SUPER GAMES PAK: Three arcade
classics "redone for the 90s" constitute this game package. Deathbots

Taking a Peek

is the near reincarnation of Berserk
(one can almost hear the Cylonesque voice calling out "Intruder
alert! Intruder alert!"). Jail Break is a
descendant of Breakout and
Arkanoids, and Byteman (pictured)
is... Well, if you can't figure that one
out, you won't be able to find the
on/off switch on your computer,
either. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service #11.
MicroLeague Sports Association
2201 Drummond Plaza
Newark, DE 19711-5711
MICROLEAGUE FOOTBALL: This
is a fine, statistics-based manageroriented NFL football game. Players
"coach" their teams to victory or
defeat, based on plays selected and
real NFL statistics. Add on disks are
available for drafting and trading
players, plus another for great
teams/players of the past. A
statistician's delight. IBM ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service //12.
Psygnosis Ltd.
South Harrington Buildings
Sefton Street, Liverpool L3 4BQ
United Kingdom
THE KILLING GAME SHOW: In
French, German, Italian or English
you can play in the game show of
your life (or, more likely, death). The
floodwaters are rising throughout the
16 pits of death. Amiga. Circle
Reader Service #13.
SHADOW OF THE BEAST II: This
sequel continues the story as the
Beast Mage has kidnapped your
sister. Across the various screens are
the foes to face and friends to help
in the quest. Amiga. Circle Reader
Service #14.
SPELL BOUND: A one or two
player standard Psygnosis arcade action game, this one has the player(s)
out to rescue their tutor so that they
might graduate. Amiga. Circle
Reader Service #15.
Sierra On-Line, Inc.
Coarsegold, CA 93614
JONES IN THE FAST LANE:
Previewed in CGW #72 (June, 1990)
as Keeping Up With Jones. IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service -#16.

OIL'S WELL: While the player will
spend considerable time breaking
new ground, this latest offering from
Sierra doesn't. Touted on the back
of the box as "...mindless entertainment for your home computer," this
Lock 'n Chase game with land mines
will certainly find a place with the
quarter-pumpers out there. IBM
($34.95). Circle Reader Service #17.
Spectrum Holobyte
2061 Challenger Drive
Alameda, CA 94501
OPERATION FIREFIGHT: This is
the second mission disk for
Spectrum's extremely successful Falcon F-16. The enemy is invading the
player's territory, so much is involved in air-to-air combat. Soviet
Hind helicopters and T-80 tanks provide some new challenges. Amiga,
Atari ST ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #18.

I

Editorial

Please release me
T

he State of the Industry: With

computer games growing larger
and larger (a direct result of an implicit standard for VGA graphics and
sound board support), software publishers have had to stretch and strain in
order to get their anticipated Christmas
products on the shelf. As this issue goes
to press, CGW still awaits more than 50%
of the announced Christmas titles for
1990. Some advertisements have already
appeared multiple times in our magazine,
but we have yet to see the finished
product.
As a result, many of our readers have,
in the language of Horatio Hornblower,
taken the wind gauge and opened up a
broadside upon our stern. They are
furious that we, allegedly in collusion
with the software publishers, have
whetted their appetites for new product
and forced them to wait. Further, even
though we at CGW try not to publish
specific release dates (hedging references to seasons, quarters, and prior to
the end of the year), we regularly receive
a pounding from the readers when companies miss their announced release
dates.
Therefore, it seems like we need to take
a little time to let the smoke clear and
make sure we're fighting the right
enemy. In reality, there is not only an absence of collusion with regard to pre-advertising products and missing release
dates, but such realities are a disappointment to all parties concerned (the publishers, press and public). At CGW, we
would like to see a revision in the way
release dates are handled. First, we recog
nize the necessity of informing one's distribution and retail channel about the expected availability of a product. Release
dates were originated, believe it or not,
primarily as a means of providing advance notice to retailers and distributors.
They have evolved from a "tool" for the
marketing channel and "goal" for the
production department into a perceived
"commitment" by the consumers and, at
least, a portion of the press.
CGW suggests, however, that communications to the marketing channel be
filled with "weasel words" from the very
beginning. News releases and product information sheets should honestly
espouse information like, "We are targeting a mid-July release of The Madwoman of San Diego and anticipate a
possible four- to six-week delay, should
we run into technical difficulty." To be

sure, there would still be delays and confusion, but accusations of "vaporware"
would be disingenuous. At CGW, we
have been attempting to reduce the impact of targeted release dates for some
time, but it would help if the marketing
departments injected some room to
maneuver in their communications, as
well. Our mailbox on the PRODIGY Interactive Personal Communications Service is continually full of messages stating, "November 15th was the national
release date for Invasion of the Used
Car Dealers. Where is it? And why have
you been advertising it for three
months?" These frustrated queries cannot be good for the industry.
As for the pre-advertising issue, this is a
result of the current market environment.
Companies have to create early demand
for products because new products have
a limited amount of time to prove themselves on the shelf. They have to commit
to an advertisement months before the
cover date of the magazine in order to be
assured of a position in that issue. So,
when one of their producers tells the
marketing department that the Advertising Blimp Simulator is six to eight
weeks away, the company commits to
the ad. Then, when they find out that the
"Vic-20" driver doesn't work with a
"Fender" soundboard in place, it takes
two weeks to a month extra to fix it and
everyone is upset. We encourage readers
not to assume that a product is going to
be immediately available when they first
see the ads. Rather, an ad should simply
be an early indicator to start watching for
a given product. Together (press, public
and publishers), we can change our understanding of release dates.
State of the Magazine: The Rumor
Bag Guy has asked that we assure
readers that he prints every solid rumor
he can in "The Rumor Bag." The fictional
wrap is intended to round out the page
and offers its own puzzles for industry insiders. To those who have requested less
fiction and more rumors: Please remember, the Rumor Bag Man is a sensitive
guy and is devastated by your uninformed request. There would not be any
more rumors in the column if the fiction
were removed. Instead, it would revert to
a half-page column and many regular
readers (who like the fiction) would be
disappointed. So that the Rumor Bag
Guy will feel better, please write him a letter letting him know what a swell guy he
is (flowers are nice).

