1

July 1989

Number 61

Features
Special Report: Trends in Computer Games

4

CGW Visits the Summer Consumer Electronics Show

Air Traffic Control, Can You Handle It?

11

Marbles From Hell

14

Cinemaware's "Lords of the Rising Sun"

16

27

Compuserve Has Your Number / Johnny L. Wilson

SSI's "Overrun!"

28

Gary Grigsby's Modern Tactical Wargame / Buddy Knight

Getting "The Scoop" On The Competition
Spinnaker's Murder Mystery / Scorpia

Departments

19

SSG Simulates a 'Police Action"

"Sniper!" World War II Telegaming

42

Shogun, Samurai, and Sex / Michael Chaut

A Sneak Preview of Lucasfilm's Graphic Adventure Game

"MacArthur's War"

35

Psygnosis' "Ballistix" Is Addictive / Douglas Seacat

CGW's Test Lab Rigorously Examines The Latest Joysticks

"Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade"

32

CGW Looks At The Trend and the Hardware

Wesson International's "TRACON" / M. Evan Brooks

The Gamer's Guide to Joysticks

Is VGA Worth It?

30

Taking a Peek
Conversions Received
Game Ratings
CGW Hall of Fame
Reader Input Device

6
7
24
24
48

Summer C.E.S.

ravelling northbound
on 1-94 toward O'T Hare Airport, your intrepid editorial staff found
themselves enjoying the
warmth of a mild Chicago
day, while recounting the
most interesting and innovative aspects of the
Summer Consumer
Electronics Show. Suddenly, the sky went dark. A jetliner on final approach
had flown so low paralleling the freeway that the
plane's shadow obscured
the sun as it passed and
gave us an eerie feeling
that the plane itself was
about to crash into us. It
only lasted long enough to
cause us to catch our
breaths, but it was a
memorable encounter in
spite of its brevity.

bat Pilot from the U.K.

The Shadow of
Your Style
New Directions at the
Consumer Electronics Show

The Nintendo
phenomenon has already
lasted longer than many in
our industry thought it would and cast a
more disturbing shadow over the diskbased entertainment software market
than our "plummeting" jetliner. Now,
however, judging from the new products
we were shown, the shadow of "Me, too!"
Nintendo-style disk-based games may be
passing. In general, the entire range of
disk-based entertainment software looks
more promising than it has for over a
year and a half. Even as we had held our
breaths for a brief, unnerving moment
on 1-94, it seems that the entertainment
software industry is finally catching its
breath after an ominous first quarter
and 18 months of trying to discover its
identity.
"More" (Multi-Player Games)
There seems to be a renewed emphasis
on multi-player games. Jon Freeman and
Ann Westfall are beginning to see the
light at the end of their "Rainbow Road"
(working title) and Electronic Arts will
publish it as Swords of Twilight. The fictional "universe" contains eight different
worlds connected by a "Rainbow Road,"
equivalent to a worm hole or time-space
warp. These worlds have been subverted
by evil Shadowlords (not to be confused
with the Shadowlords in Ultima V). The
player(s) choose from 31 characters
(each with a unique personal history and
graphics display), in order to defeat the villains. The "universe" is dynamic and changes according to player interaction. The
interface allows different players (up to
four can play simultaneously) to do different things at the same time. The handling of non-player characters is interesting in that they have "long memories"

and will act accordingly if the player-characters do not treat them appropriately.
Atomic Entertainment, a new
developer for Activision, will offer two
multi-player adventures before the end of
the year. Each will support up to four
players playing simultaneously by means
of keyboard (two players) and either a
joystick/mouse or two joystick combination for the other two players. The working title of the fantasy action/adventure
(more in the Prophecy than Gauntlet
style) is Enchanted Lands in which the
players explore eight different realms
(each twelve screens across by twenty
screens down and featuring 256 color
graphics and smooth-scrolling sprites).
They call it a CRPG with an arcade-style
engine, but they insist that players won't
want to shoot everything and there is
more free-will than in most action-adventures. Atomic is also developing a timetravel adventure, tentatively called Time
Raft, utilizing the same basic interface.
Another approach to multi-player
games is Origin's Omega, a neural cybertank battlegame where players build the
chassis and Al for a cybertank via an
easy-to-use Mac-style interface and intuitive
pseudocode. After the file is saved, the
program can pit several different player's
tanks against each other in something
like an advanced version of the old Robotwar game from now defunct Muse
Software.
Many games to be released during the
year will utilize null modem or standard
modem connections to encourage
human-vs.-human competition.
Electronic Arts is importing F-16 Corn-

with a Gladiator mode
(human-to-human), as
well as five solo training
missions and a solo campaign game. Other EAUK products which support modem competition
include Powerdrome
(think of it as Ferrari Formula 1 in outer space)
where players set-up space
ships for seven different
courses and Populous
where players take on the
role(s) of cosmic forces
creating and ruling over
entire worlds. Epyx offers
a modem/null modem option for their space race
game, Flyton 500, which
features ten different courses and four vehicle classes.

Spectrum Holobyte is
working on a game with
the working title Tank. It
uses unclassified information from the DARPA database to
recreate the maps from three different
geographical areas: Ft. Knox (training),
the Middle East, and Europe. There will
be a network option for the game (in
cooperation with a major consumer network) which can involve up to thirty different tank commanders utilizing the
same polygon fill terrain. Also, for those
who can't really handle the "real-time" elements of a simulation, the game can be
played like a wargame with the player
giving orders and sitting back to watch.
Also, Compuserve has just announced
a new two-on-two version of Sniper! (see
also page 27).
Even the dedicated game systems get
in on the multi-player act, as Sega's new
16-bit Genesis machine comes with a
TeleGenesis or modem option. Also, Acclaim has built on the success of its
remote wireless controller for Nintendo
with a new Double-Player System
which gives two players the capacity to
compete against each other without untangling a mass of wires.
Perhaps the most unique of all the
multi-player games presented at the show
was the Battletech Center concept from
FASA/ESP Corp. (the principals in ESP
Corp. are also the principals from FASA
Corp. who created Battletech). This is an
environmental concept where players will
pay approximately $5.00 for a thirty
minute experience (a 10 minute briefing
in a futuristic Combat Information Center, followed by a 10 minute strategy ses(Continued on page 20)

Taking A Peek

Cinemaware
4165 Thousand Oaks Blvd.
Westlake Village, CA 91362
SPEEDBALL: "Rollerball", the bloodthirsty sport of the future, finally makes it
way to the computer. A cross between
soccer, hockey, and roller derby, Speedball enables the player to play solo, faceto-face, participate in an eleven team
league, or act as spectator. Acting as
general manager, the player chooses a
franchise and builds his team from the
ground up. Then, it's off to the steel
arena to compete, cheat and bully your
way to the top. If things look bad, you
can even bribe officials or get opposing
players to "take a dive". IBM (pictured),
Amiga, & Atari ST ($39.95). C-64
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #1.
TOTAL ECLIPSE: Players race
against a real time clock, as they search
through a 15 level pyramid for the ancient shrine of Ra. The shrine must be
destroyed or an ancient curse will
destroy the moon. This won't be a cake
walk as this overgrown grave is chock
full o' puzzles, traps, and the undead
bodies of the tomb's occupants. Smooth
scrolling 3-D graphics enhance the first
person perspective. IBM (pictured),
Amiga and Atari ST ($39.95), C-64
()$29.95). Circle Reader Service #2.

Cosmi
431 N. Figueroa
Wilmington, CA 90744
NAVY SEAL: This action game offers

garners the chance to become one of
the Navy's elite. Players parachute from
a transport, engage in an underwater
speargun battle, repel down ropes, and
fire their silencer rifles at hostile targets.
After completion of several training sequences, the Seals face five missions of
graduating difficulty, including underwater sabotage, hostage rescue, and
surprise raiding of an enemy base. C-64
(pictured) ($29.95), & IBM ($34.95).
Circle Reader Service #3.

Epyx
600 Galveston Drive
P.O.Box 8020
Redwood City, CA 94063
AXE OF RAGE: Axe me no questions,
I'll tell you no lies. The latest action
game from Epyx gives new depth to the
"hack and slash" genre, as players literally chop and dice their way through valleys, caves and dungeons to the ultimate showdown with the evil Drax. The
player has a choice of male or female
characters to run, and up to 10 axe
moves in each battle sequence. With 18
different creatures to fight, all the battle

moves get used. From the campy, some
might say tasteless, box art to the
grouchy dungeon dude in the kinky
shorts, the game is done with a dark
sense of humor.... would that be like
"axe-in-cheek"? C-64 ($34.95). Circle #4.

DEVON AIRE: Hidden diamonds and
a mysterious mansion are the basics in
this graphic adventure/treasure hunt
game for one. The game features great
three dimensional graphics and some
unique monsters (killer canaries and
mutant pig-mice). The player must
move furniture, stack chairs, balance on
champagne glasses, open drawers and
search everything for the hidden jewels
before the killer capons and ravaging rodents steal all their strength. Atari ST
(pictured) ($49.95) & C-64 ($29.95).
Circle Reader Service #5.
OMNICRON CONSPIRACY: "Pigs in
Space" would be a good subtitle for this
humorous, graphic adventure game
from Epyx. The player takes the part of a
space cop on a mission to bust up an intergalactic drug ring. Flying spaceships,
exploring taverns and temples, and fer-

or two players lead selected heroes on
this quest which spans across forests,
deserts, temples, and multiple dungeon
levels. the 3-D, overhead graphics and
play system bear close resemblance to
the arcade hit, Gauntlet. C-64 version to
be released later this year. Circle Reader
Service #9.

Sierra On-Line
P.O. Box 485
Coarsegold, CA 93614
SILPHEED: Intergalactic terrorists
threaten the harmony established by the
Milky Way Union, and it's up to the pilot
of the experimental Silpheed fighter to
set things straight. Pilots face multiple
levels of 3-D enemies on their way to
the ultimate conflict with the battleship
Glore. Nice graphics and tremendous
sound, but an arcade game system
we've seen many times before. IBM
($34.95). Circle Reader Service #10.
SPACE QUEST III: The wacky exploits of Roger Wilco continue in part
three of the Space Quest series. Roger's
latest task: rescuing The Two Guys from
Andromeda. The Two Guys have been
kidnapped by the Pirates of Pestulon
and are being forced to create second
rate games for the disreputable publisher, ScumSoft. Sierra takes their unique
brand of adventuring to new heights
with detailed, animated sequences, a
wonderfully silly storyline, and a sound
track so stunning, it may justify the purchase of a soundboard. IBM ($59.95).
Circle Reader Service #11.

Taito
267 W. Esplanade
North Vancouver, B.C.,
Canada, V7M1A5
SKY SHARK: Taito ports another arreting out clues from a variety of unusual suspects will keep players moving.
Resist the temptation to shoot everything that moves. (How refreshing!) IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service # 6.

Ishi Press
1400 N. Shoreline Blvd.
Building A-7
Mountain View, CA 94043
COSMOS: Players test their skill
against the computer in this version of
GO. The computer comes with 100
levels of play, offers online hints and
move explanations, and the board can
be set up from 7x7 to a standard 19x19
matrix. The game can be learned easily
on the smaller board and then the
player can tackle larger boards as his
level of play increases. The game also
features automatic replay, move recall,
option to play black or white, and plays
at a 15 Kyu level. If Chess is a battle,
GO is a war. IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service #7.

Microdeal
576 S. Telegraph
Pontiac, MI 48053

SLOTS & CARDS: Pack your money
belts and get ready for another trip to
Vegas. This package provides five slot
machines (multipliers, Sevens Wild, MultiBar, & Fruit Multi-Bar), four video card
games (Blackjack, High/Low, & two
types of Video Poker), and Keno. The
game was designed with the aid of a slot
mechanic from one of the major Vegas
Strip hotels, so the odds and reel loadings have been figured just as they are
done in the casinos. (That means you'll
probably win just enough to keep playing till you lose!) IBM (pictured), Amiga
and Atari ST ($39.95). Circle Reader Service # 8.

Strategic Studies Group
1747 Orleans Ct.
Walnut Creek, CA 94598
FIRE KING: A magical beast and its
evil hordes have descended upon the
land, killing the Fire Lord and holing up
in the catacombs below the city. The
mayor has elected you to confront the
beast and restore order to the land. One

cade hit to the PC market. In this one,
players pilot their P-40 fighter through a
host of enemy units including fighters,
tanks, and battleships, in an attempt to
rescue POW's from a highly guarded
enemy base. A joystick jockey's delight!
IBM (pictured) ($34.95) & C-64
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #12.

Conversions Received
Action Fighter (Mindscape) ST
Baal (Psygnosis) Amiga
Bubble Bobble (Taito) Amiga, ST
Deja Vu II (Mindscape) Amiga, JIGS
The Duel (Accolade) C-64
The Games (Epyx) ST
Gauntlet (Mindscape) Mac
World Karate Championship (Epyx)
ST, C-64
Mind Roll (Epyx) Amiga
Modem Wars (EA) IBM
Operation Wolf (Taito) Amiga
Renegade (Taito) IBM, Amiga, ST
Steel Thunder (Accolade) IBM
Tangled Tales (Origin) C-64
Where in World is Carmen San Diego
(Broderbund) Amiga
Where in USA is Carmen San Diego
(Broderbund) Mac

Review

Initial Approach
TRACON (Terminal
Radar Approach
CONtrol) is a detailed
simulation of the world
of air traffic control.
There have been
numerous other air traffic control products;
most noticeably,
MicroProse's Kennedy
Approach (1985). However, that product was
much more of a game,
while Tracon is a very
detailed and complex
simulation, which could
well be used as a training tool by actual traffic
controllers.

Can You Handle
the
Stress?

In February of 1989,

Wesson International
released Version 1.5,
which allows actual voice
communication and a
corrected compass heading (see Game Play). In
addition, three (3)
scenario disks have been
released (Western,
Central and Eastern
United States), each
having an additional
eight (8) airports. Pricing
for the sector disks is
$19.95 for one, $32.95
for two, and $39.95 for
all three.

Air Traffic
Controller School
(Documentation)
The documentation is very complete and professionally executed. As a learning device, a tutorial tape is included which
gives the player a basic understanding of his role. While one's
first impression may be intimidation/terror, the program is relatively easy to learn. In fact, a one-page "Quick Reference Command"
is sufficient for initial play.
A READ.ME file is included on both master and scenario disks,
and should be printed out before play. This gives needed information and a quick reference as to the heading and altitude approaches for the various airports.
Perhaps the documentation's only real failing is that it does not
disclose how much traffic would actually occur at different times
in the various airspace boundaries. This would have allowed the
player to gauge his progress against reality.

Radar Display (Graphics)
The graphics of Tracon are well done. Different airports and
numerous center hand-off points are displayed, while the aircraft
themselves are easily discernible. The playing screen resembles
an actual radar screen, and with the voice-actuated commands,
one can readily enter this "simulation world". Help-keys are easily
accessible, and one should often use Alt-M (display map references) and Alt-F (display flight paths) in order to maximize performance. If the situation is static, the Fl 0 key will "accelerate" time.

A Detailed Air
Traffic Control
Simulation

In addition, the "+" key
zooms perspective up to
4X, while the "-" key
reverses this process.
Such zooming is essential for vectoring aircraft
into an accurate final approach; just insure that
one does not ignore the
rest of the "world" while
concentrating on a
single plane.

No Ivory Tower
(Game Play)

Game play is a misnomer; Tracon emphasizes simulation play.
Review by M. Evan Brooks
This is a valid distinction,
because the product is
so accurate. In turn, this
accounts for possible
criticism as a "game."
There are certain occupations which seem fascinating to the outsider,
but the reality yields little
long-term enjoyment.
For example, a blackjack
dealer at a casino would
seem to be an interesting job; but would you
really like to deal cards
TITLE:
Tracon
eight hours a day to a
SYSTEM:
IBM (CCA minimum);
(a Mac version is scheduled)
crowd of somewhat
SYSTEM REVIEWED ON:IBM 386 (VGA)
obstreperous tourists?
PRICE:
$49.95
Similarly, air traffic conWesson International
PUBLISHER:
1439 Circle Ridge
trollers stare at a radar
Austin, TX 78746
screen for eight hours a
(512) 328-0100
day and the slightest miscalculation on their part
could result in massive tragedy (or even a mass firing, as PATCO
discovered to their dismay). The "burn-out" and suicide rates for
traffic controllers is dismally high, and their beverage of choice
would seem to be Maalox. Tracon yields a fascinating picture,
however. Small doses of this occupational madness can be accepted with alacrity and eagerness.
Although the simulation may be played via keyboard, use of the
mouse and keyboard are strongly recommended. As planes appear on the screen, one must vector them into proper approaches: overflights are the easiest to handle, since one simply
hands them off to the next center at the proper time; take-offs
should be carefully watched to insure no "traffic jams" develop,
while landings offer the most challenge. One must have the
plane descend to the proper altitude and enter the proper flight
path; even if one does everything right, "lousy" pilots miss their
approaches 50% of the time.
If a landing is botched, have the plane climb to an altitude at
least 1000 feet higher than other planes vectoring into the final
approach and circle around, being last on the incoming traffic.
At the same time, insure proper separation and clearance from
other flights. A separation conflict (3 mi/1000') may easily lead to
a near miss (1 mi/1000') or to a crash; the latter will disclose how
many innocent individuals one has killed, terminate his employment as a controller, erase his previous records, and dump one
(Continued on page 47)

Survey

The CGW Test Lab

W

The Gamer's
Guide to
Joysticks

hat do you look for in a joystick? Do you want one that
s easy to hold or one that fires fast? Do you prefer one
that has plenty of tension in the stick action or one that
offers more "give"? At CGW, we noticed that very few hardware
reviewers write about how the hardware affects game play, so we
decided to try some experiments. We tested several joysticks for
their performance in "rapid fire" mode and raced against the
clock (and each other) to check their performance in terms of
left/right and up/down response. Our results are described in this
article.
Ergonomics: Gamers who play arcade-style games or action/simulations for hours are concerned about comfort. Epyx
was the original leader in this field with their Epyx 500XJ joystick
that conformed to the human hand. Mindscape followed suit by
designing the Power Player's Joystick with a handle which can
easily be held like an ice cream cone. These solved part of the
problem, but they were still made out of hard plastic. Wico's
Ergostick went several steps further and now offers a shape
which is pleasantly conformable to the human hand, a soft pliable material that is easy to hand onto, and fire buttons placed
conveniently at the bottom of the controller. For those who
prefer a more stable base on their joysticks, the controllers from
Advanced Gravis offer a very wide base out of hard plastic, but
they also offer a foam-padded stick/grip. The Kraft and SunCom
controllers have a traditional base and stick.
Rapid Fire: Most arcade-style games require shooting. Since
most of these games have no ammunition limitations, players will
normally perform better by using continuous fire. We wondered if
there was any difference in the rate of fire between different
models of joysticks. On the Commodore 64/128, we used Taito's
Sky Shark to test rapid fire (Note that these joysticks are compatible with Amiga and Atari ST, as well.). Each controller was
tested multiple times with the same technician operating the fire

button. During the test, we noticed a potential drawback to the
Advanced Gravis controller when used on these machines.
When in rapid fire mode, the stick will not allow the player's onscreen character (in this case, the airplane) to move backward.
Joystick
Bullets per 10 Seconds
Advanced Gravis:
46
Epyx:
48
Mindscape Power Players
47
SunCom Tac5:
49
We repeated the tests on the IBM using the same software.
None of the joysticks offered a true continuous fire mode on this
product, but when the operator fired as fast as possible, the following results were collated:
54
Advanced Gravis:
Wico Ergostick:
42
40
Kraft KC3:
On the Apple IIGS, we used Data East's Ikari Warriors to test
the rapid fire capabilities of the joysticks. The Kraft functioned
equivalent to its performance on the IBM compatibles, but the
Wico suffered on the Apple.
Kraft KC3:
39
Wico Ergostick:
37
Movement Response: Sometimes, games require fast left/right
and up/down movement in order to cause the on-screen character to move faster. We tested the same joysticks for this response
by using the "Velodrome Cycling" event from Epyx's The
Games:Summer Edition. Each joystick was tested in both controller ports against all of the competing hardware.
The SunCom Tac5 won every heat, no matter which operator
was using it. Although the left/right and up/down response on
this controller feels sloppy, it actually offers a very short stroke at
the base when moving between the contacts. The other joysticks
are presented in the order of their finish in this competition:
Epyx 500XJ
Mindscape Power Player's Joystick,
and Advanced Gravis Joystick.
On the IBM, we used the portion of Mindscape's Combat
Course where the soldier crawls under the wire to test this
response. The Advanced Gravis performed best in this test,
probably because it allows users to adjust the handle tension to
any of eight settings. We used it at the highest tension setting.
The Kraft KC3 also performed well on this test, leaving the Wico
Ergostick behind.

1

Sneak Preview

S

can Connery is
the man in the
gray suit. He is
also the link to both
myth and mystery in
both the film and
graphic adventure, Indiana Jones and the
Last Crusade. Imagine the humor of
Zak McCracken and
the Alien
Mindbenders, an expanded interface
beyond Maniac Mansion, a plot with more
puzzles and possibilities than the
latest and final Indiana Jones film, and
EGA graphics that are
better than either
Maniac Mansion or
Zak McCracken. If
such a game can be
imagined, one has a
very good idea of Indiana Jones and the
Last Crusade.

' Also, the designers
added a "What is . . ."
command which can
be clicked on an item
to determine what objects are "active" in a
given scene. That
should speed up play
over the previous
games. Distinctive
from the earlier
graphic adventures, Indiana Jones and the
I .a.st Crusade offers
more commands and
special-case animation so that characters
actually perform onscreen the actions
that the player commands them to do.
More importantly, in
order to make a game
out of a film, there
are multiple solutions
at various junctures in
the game. One can
usually be successful
by imitating Indy's actions in the film, but
there are more complex possibilities that
can earn higher
scores. Many players will want to play the
game several times to try out all of the
options.

The Man in the
Grail Flannel Suit:

Indiana Jones and the Mything Link

A Sne, Preview of Indiana Jones
and the Last Crusade

Those who have
seen the film are already aware that Sean
Connery plays Henry Jones (Indiana's
father, as well as a scholar who has made
it his life's calling to find the Holy Grail).
As a seeker of the Holy Grail, he serves
as the link between Indy and the myth of
the grail. For
those who are unaware, the "Holy
Grail" was, allegedly, the cup which
Jesus used for the
wine (which symbolized His blood)
in the Last Supper. Since the
Bible itself does
not harbor any
specific traditions
concerning the
grail, the story is
easily susceptible
to imaginative
speculation. According to tradition, the
cup was later used
to collect the spilled blood of Jesus at the
cross and was kept as an artifact of
power until it was recovered during the
First Crusade and carried off to England.
From that point, the grail became intertwined with the Arthurian Legend.
Lucasfilm's movie and the graphic adventure based on it wisely eschew the Arthurian entanglements and build upon a
new story about what happened to the
grail. The movie uses the concept of a

"Grail Diary" which was painstakingly kept
by Connery's character over a period of
years to advance the "mythos" surrounding the grail. The game fleshes out the
movie property with a sixty page version

of the "Grail Diary" which cross-references
hints and advances the plot in both an
on-line and off-line version. In addition to
the obvious purpose of providing copy
protection, there is a reason within the
plot for having the diary both on-screen
and in hard copy format.
The familiar Lucasfilm interface has
changed in several ways. Similar to
Maniac Mansion, players can shift command to more than one protagonist.

The game recognizes that there are two
distinct appeals to
the Indiana Jones
persona and
players will want
to utilize both of
them. The game
offers players a
reasonable
chance to "talk"
their way out of
various encounters. The adventure utilizes a
dialogue/menu
driven conversational approach
analogous to
Cinemaware's Sinbad and the Throne
of the Falcon or
Interplay's Neuromancer with their conversation balloon interface. In "Indy," however, there are no balloons, just a selection of potential repartee from a menu. It
works, though. The other appeal is to action and the player has the option of commanding Indy to punch his way through
a given situation in kind of a revised
Rocket Ranger fist fight. Recognizing that
most players will simply use a keyboard in
(Continued on page 22)

Review

MacArthur's War is the umpteenth release from SSG
using their "Battlefront system". Well, maybe
umpteen is a bit of an exaggeration, but
MacArthur's War does follow the footsteps of four prior
releases designed around the same system (Battlefront, Battles In Normandy, Halls of Montezuma and Rommel). Even
though the Battlefront system is now three years old, with
only minor modifications having been made through the
series of releases, it has held up well. The game system is
designed to place the players in the role of a Corps commander in an operational-level simulation of a battle or
series of engagements (of up to twenty-five days in length).
As usual with all SSG games, there is a set of editing subroutines which allow players to modify the existing scenarios
or design their own from scratch. This scenario design
capability is completely open-ended; one can create units in
any of fourteen categories and change combat strengths,
movement capabilities, experience levels, and all other operational parameters. Scenarios can include any map one
chooses to design and there is also a graphics editor which
allows creation or modification of the terrain icons on the
screen (make your "hill" hexes look more like real hills if you
want). As usual with games in the Battlefront family, purchasing any one gives you the freedom to design limitless
scenarios on any modern combat situation.
With the availability of such freedom to "design your own",
why do people buy more than one entry from the Battlefront
series? Here we get to the true differentiation between the
games which have been released - the predesigned
scenarios included in each. MacArthur's War includes eight
scenarios from the Korean War, and although one could
have theoretically created them all by looking up enough
source material and using the scenario design utility, there is
no doubt that few players could have produced such well-researched designs.
The names of the scenarios will likely not be familiar unless
one is a devotee of the topic; "Across the 38th", Taejon, Naktong Bulge, Unsan, Chongchon, Chosin Reservoir,
Chipyong, and Imjin. They do, however, represent a good
cross section of the actions occurring from the start of hostilities in June, 1950, through spring of 1951. Notably lacking from the selection is a scenario on the Inchon landings.
Unfortunately, this scenario was already presented in the
prior SSG release, Halls of Montezuma (along with another
scenario on the Pusan perimeter), so players who really want
to play out this battle are faced with purchase of another
game (I would much rather have seen the Inchon scenario
included as a "bonus" ninth scenario in MacArthur's War).
If there is any tarnish on the spit-shine of MacArthur's War,
it is a certain "sameness" about the scenarios which is inevitably dictated by the nature of the conflict. Let me briefly
describe several of the scenarios. "Across the 38th": hordes
of NKPA troops roll over untrained ROK forces. Taejon: Task
Force Smith attempts to delay and withdraw before a horde
of NKPA troops. Naktong Bulge: a small force of well-supported Marines tries to dislodge a horde of NKPA troops
from Obong-ni ridge. Unsan: II Corps of the ROK gets
chopped up by a horde of Chinese troops while hoping the
1st Cavalry arrives. Chosin Reservoir: a small force of Marines
holds defensive positions against hordes (and here I mean
real HORDES) of Chinese troops. Chipyong: the U.S. 2nd
Division holds out against hordes of Chinese and NKPA
troops, hoping for relief from 5th Cavalry. You get the idea!
Of course, most of the battles during this period did proceed
along those lines; the vast numbers employed by NKPA and
PRoC forces were the one constant factor in Korea.
MacArthur's War uses the Battlefront system with its latest

Unparalleled
Conflict
SSG's "MacArthur's War"
By Jay C. Selover
set of refinements (virtually unchanged from Rommel). The
system uses four turns per day
(three day turns and one night
turn) and scales from 500m to
8km per hex to simulate Corps
level actions. In MacArthur's
War, these actions involve
U.N., U.S., and South Korean
(ROK) troops on one side, and
North Korean (NKPA) and
Chinese (PRoC) troops on the
other.
The system sets up the player
as a Corps commander with up
to three divisions under his
command. Each division can
consist of up to four regiments
plus four independently attachable battalions (each regiment
itself is composed of up to four inMacArthur's War:
TITLE:
dividual battalions). Even though
Battles for Korea,
June
1950-April 1951
the system uses battalions as the
SYSTEMS:
Apple II, C-64/128
units of maneuver, the player can# PLAYERS:
1-2
not directly control their
$40.00
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
Roger
Keating,
maneuvers. Rather, the player isDan Antolec, and Ian Trout
sues commands to divisions and
Strategic Studies Croup
PUBLISHER:
Walnut Creek, CA
regiments which are then interpreted and acted upon by subordinates (whose role is filled by the computer), resulting in the
actual movement and combat of units on the map.
As in the previous releases, the system places significant importance on factors such as supply, fatigue, and regimental
cohesion; items which the player need not worry about administering, but which must be considered when deciding
which troops to commit to battle and which are in need of
rest. Such diverse factors as realistic air support, weather effects, experience levels,
and leadership effects
make the system quite
capable of simulating combat on an operational level.
Despite the tremendous
sweep of the maneuvers
during the first year, Korea
has never been a "pretty"
war and has always been
seriously under-represented in wargaming. This
alone makes MacArthur's War almost a "must". That the
game is a darn good simulation, is easy to learn, and gives
you a real feeling for the capabilities and operational limitations of both sides is just an added bonus.

Summer C.E.S.

(Continued from page 4)

sion among team
members, and
climaxed with an intense 10 minute firstperson battle experience in the cockpit). Each cockpit has
about $27,000 worth
of hardware tied up in
three proprietary computers plus one
Amiga system to run
the display screens in
a full 256 color
palette. The game surrounds the player in a
sophisticated version
of Activision's MechWarrior game.
FASA/ESP Corp.
hopes to place 170
Battletech Centers
across the country.
The product has already been licensed
for distribution in
Japan.

"I Can See Clearly Now"
(Graphics)
On the Amiga front, Taito began
releasing its personal computer versions
of coin-op games with actual graphic files
from the arcade versions. Now, Melbourne House is guaranteeing identical
Amiga versions to several of their coinop hits. These games will require a
megabyte of RAM, but can accomplish
the feat because the coin-op games were
built for their sister company, Arcadia
Systems, to run on Amiga boards
within the coin-op cabinets. By the end
of summer, Rick Davis's World Trophy
Soccer and Magic Johnson's Basketball
(similar to the recently released Magic
Johnson's Fast Break Basketball) will be
released.
On the IBM PC and compatible front,
the industry is moving toward heavy use
of VGA graphics. Data East's ABC Monday Plight Football license,
Broderbund's Wolf Pack (WWII Submarine Simulation), Accolade's Conspiracy, Sublogic's UFO, and
Mindscape's Star Trek V: The Final Fron
tier all utilize beautiful VGA graphics (see
page 32 for other VGA products). Most
companies are still backwardly compatible with CGA being the lowest common denominator (Hercules
Monochrome in other cases), but VGA is
rapidly becoming the high end in entertainment graphics.
Another graphics trend seen at the
show is the use of digitized images or live
models. Activision contracted for permis-

well. Strategic
Simulations, Inc. is
busily preparing
Curse of the Azure
Bonds, a CRPG sequel to the novel
(Azure Bonds) and
the pen-and-paper
module based on the
novel. The game adds
the Paladin and
Ranger classes and allows characters to be
transferred from Pool
of Radiance and/or
Hillsfar. By the year's
end, SSI will add
David Landrey's War
of the Lance (a fantasy wargame set in
the Dragonlance
world), Sword of
Aragon (a fantasy wargame with role-playing flavor), and
Dragons of Flame (an
action game from
U.S. Gold, but not
Heroes of the Lance II).
sion to digitize images from the film in
their Die Hard and Ghostbusters II action
games, Accolade used over 500 digitized
images for their Conspiracy: The Deadlock Files espionage adventure, and
Dynamix used live models, props, makeup, etc. to set up their unique look for
the story portion of David Wolf—Secret
Agent. The combat sequences in
Origin's Windwalker (Moebius II) are
based on work with live models and
some of the static faces are digitized versions of faces from ancient papyri.

Good Vibrations (Sound)
Owners of PC Compatibles will be
thrilled to know that there is considerable
support for several sound formats. Almost every publisher we spoke to was
supporting the Ad Lib board and Covox
Sound Machine. In addition, many companies were supporting the Innovation
board and most top line products supported the Roland MT-32. Several
programmers stated that they wanted to
support "every board out there," but that
it was not always practical. Access
Software has developed a remarkable
software process, Real Sound, which is
very effective on several compatibles
(depending on speaker placement), but
almost doubles the code required on the
downside.

License to Sell
Licensed products continue to be
popular. Activision has a first-person
military simulation from FASA's BattleTech system, entitled Mech Warrior and
involving some strategic planning, as

Film and television licenses continue to
abound. In addition to Mindscape's Star
Trek V The Final Frontier (an adventure
game with action sequences), Taito has
developed Rambo III (an action game
similar to Gauntlet in the first two missions and a tank game in the third, but
with more puzzles to be solved than their
previous games); Broderbund is marketing Domark's Licence To Kill (an arcade
game with six levels; Activision has Die
Hard and Ghostbusters II (heavy action
emphasis in both); Microillusions has
successfully duplicated the feel of the
Hanna-Barbara cartoon shows with
Scooby Doo (four adventures with
graphics and interface reminiscent of
Maniac Mansion, Jonny Quest (a linear
adventure game using a series of miniquests), and Flintstones (an interactive
cartoon with large characters that look actual size); Lucasfilm was demonstrating
Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade in
both its graphic adventure (see Sneak
Preview on pages 16 and 22) and action
game formats; and Intracorp has
prepared Superman and Miami Vice
(both with eight levels of arcade action)
for mid-summer release on the Atari ST.
Cinemaware isn't working from a
license, but their '50s era "B" horror flick
adventure It Came From Out Of The
Desert is somewhat a parody of the "B"
movies of that time, particularly "Them"
and "Invaders From Mars". Ken Melville, a
professional screenwriter, wrote the
"screenplay" for the game. His effort
shows (Good plot & subplots).
Book licenses can also be popular. In-

terplay will ship the IBM and Amiga versions of William Gibson's Nebula awardwinning Neuromancer this summer and
Intracorp says they have inked a pact for
computer game rights to Tom Clancy's
Cardinal of the Kremlin. Brand-name
licenses seem strong, as well. Spectrum
Holobyte should have Vette! ready by
Fall. Vette! is a 3-D driving game where
players race a Corvette through the busy
(and extremely detailed) streets of San
Francisco. Mindscape licensed the Harley Davidson brand for Harley Davidson: The Road to Sturgis. Our sources
tell us that the "Harley" folks' image of
themselves is not equivalent to that of
popular culture. Some of the sequences
in this action game with an adventure
wrapping were taken from actual events
at biker rallies, but had to be changed because the "Harley" folks didn't like the
image.

"Back In Time"
As usual, adventure games figure
prominently in the mix of products which
were shown (or discussed). Three games
currently under development involve time
travel: Broderbund's Where In Time Is
Carmen Sandiego?, Activision's Time
Raft, and Interplay's Mean Time (not
shown). Three games involve the Arthurian legend: Sierra's Conquests of
Camelot (from scriptwriter Christy Marx of
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles fame),
Spirit of Excalibur from Melbourne
House (the same basic interface and
graphics from War In Middle Earth, but
with more depth promised), and
Infocom's Arthur: The Quest for Excalibur (using the Journey style).
Other adventure games to surface in
the next six months include: Avalon
Hill's Legends of the Lost Realms (a
CRPG on the Mac in which players travel
through an 84 level maze to recover five
missing magician kings); Broderbund
hopes to release Dark Heart of Uukrul
and Michael Cranford's Centauri Alliance
before the end of the year; Kyodai will
ship the action/adventure Ancient Lands
of Ys with its 100 hours of gameplay by
Fall and has a PG-Rated mystery game
called Murder Club (which combines
graphics and text elements) which should
release very soon; Interplay plans to capture the Apple II with 128K market with
their hi-res graphic CRPG which utilizes a
combat system similar to Champions and
250 off-line paragraphs similar to Wasteland, Dragon Wars; Accolade will ship
The Third Courier (an espionage game
by Ivan and Carol Manley which develops
character attributes by creating a character history) and Don't Go Alone (a contemporary horror adventure where characters cannot die, but can go crazy and
scientific formulae are used instead of

spells); Origin's Knights of Legend is
potentially the deepest CRPG we have
seen to date (even competitors noted
this) and their Space Rogue tries to hit
both the flight simulator market (the
designer worked with Ned Lerner of
Chuck Yeager's Advanced Flight Trainer
fame at an earlier point) and science fiction fans; and Epyx has adapted Robert
Moranes, a French super spy game, into
Project Neptune (called Undersea Commando).
Perhaps the most unique adventure
game we saw was Lucasfilm's Loom.
Brian Moriarity, designer of Trinity and
Beyond Zork for Infocom, has developed
a game with a musical interface,
philosophical storyline, imaginative environment, intriguing mythos, and
fabulous graphics by Mark Ferrari (fantasy artist who executed many of the
Cthulhu materials for Chaosium). The
radio play, which is packaged with the
game and introduces the game's story
and universe, is fabulous.

Overbooked
Of course, one never counts on the
flight being overbooked. Not only was

our return flight to Orange County overbooked, but so was this issue of CGW.
So, next issue we will continue our Consumer Electronics Show coverage with
notes on Sports and Military Simulations.

(Continued from page 16)

Indiana Jones and
the Last Crusade
the action sequences, the designers have optimized all the action
interfaces for the keyboard.
Perhaps, it is most significant that players have a chance of winning the game with a rating even more efficient than Indy's actions in the movie script. Some will wonder how there even is a
game in a product based on a movie script. The designers admit
that about 80% of the plot elements from the film are in the
game, but note that only about 20% of the puzzle elements in
the game came directly from the movie. The Games Division
believes that there are actually better endings than the one utilized the movie script and the project team feels that the game allows a better chance of attaining those optimal endings. In fact,
the designers suggest that players will be able to get a higher
score by solving the mental puzzles placed throughout the game.
The graphics to this game are an improvement over previous
graphic adventures from Lucasfilm. Both Indiana Jones and the
Last Crusade and Loom (a fantasy role playing adventure from
Brian Moriarity to be released in the Fall) utilized hi-resolution
graphics on the IBM for the first time in a Lucasfilm graphic adventure. The graphics use a 16 color EGA palette, but the
dithered effect used by the artist offers a feeling that there are
more colors utilized. Further, the three-dimensional oblique overhead view utilized in the catacombs is magnificent. The character
icon meanders through the tombs and the screen is dark except
for the small portion of the oblique-view screen which lights up in
proportion to the light from Indy's flashlight. The effect is very effective, as is the top-down view of Castle Brunwaldt's interior.
The game play, except for the endgame, flows at a leisurely
pace with nice humor (Don't miss the plaques and books in the
ancient library!) and intriguing puzzles. We liked the puzzle which
used a combination of three statues much like a Rubik's Cube in
order to open a passageway. We also liked the humor surrounding the puzzle in the Berlin Airport.
The endgame, with its climactic scenes in the Grail Temple, utilizes time constraints with no possible saves. This simulates Indy's
dilemma in the film and does it effectively.
It is interesting to note that on at least one occasion the game
includes a scene that was edited out of the movie. When, on the
Zeppelin, Indy says to his father, "I didn't think they would fix the
radio so soon", the scene to which Indy refers, (his "destruction"
of the radio), was removed from the film. Only players of the Indy
computer game get to see this scene.
Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade is a project which offered
significant risk to Lucasfilm. Previous games based on films, with
the possible exceptions of The Three Stooges, Who Framed
Roger Rabbit? and Aliens, have experienced significant sales resistance because they did not advance the motion picture experience. If ever a company tried to move beyond the movie itself
and add to the enjoyment of both film and game, however,
Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade certainly has.

Game Ratings Chart

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first person perspectives of
real world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take your alter
ego through a storyline or
series of events.
Role-Playing Adventures
(RP): Adventure games that
are based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG): Simulations
of historical or futuristic warfare
from a command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.

Be it known to all gentle persons that the named games on
these rolls have been well spoken of by our readers over a
goodly period of time. Therefore they have been enshrined
in the CGW Hall of Fame as games of renown
and worthy of play by all

Review

A

s I crawled through the window and prepared to launch
an assault on my opponent's
back, the only sound to be heard
was my own heartbeat and the distant clicking of my computer keys. /
slipped quietly around the corner,
slinking cat-like until / spotted his
unsuspecting figure silhouetted
against the window. There he was,
a brightly illuminated
upper case letter. I
opened up with my
semi-automatic rifle and
the enemy fell backward, an obscene fountain of crimson gushing
from his chest. His letter
was reduced to lower
case and its luminosity
faded. My radio
crackled as a hostile
message assaulted my
ears. The screen printed,
"RA3: Sneaky dog!" A torrent of verbiage escaped
me in response. I rapidly
typed "/RA 3 Turn about,
you know, fair play!" The
radio crackled again,
"RA3: What would you
know about fair play?"
printed on my monitor
screen and brought a
chuckle to my throat.

Players type in commands for their
men using "/xx" commands like /MO
for "Move," /SI for "Sight," /FI for
"Fire," and /EV for "Evade." The object of the game is usually to survive
while wreaking havoc upon the
enemy. In "Patrol" scenarios, one
must have his men touch the
opponent's baseline (Victory Point
by Johnny L. Wilson
Area) and return to his own
baseline without being
destroyed. In "Infiltrate"
scenarios, one squad
tries to get past the
enemy's baseline, while
the other tries to stop
him. Naturally, one
wants to "waste" as
many of his opponents
as possible while keeping his own casualties to
a minimum.
The program determines line of sight (LOS)
and does not allow the
opposing player's men
to appear on the screen
until they are visible to
one's own men. Even
though the terrain is
marked by ASCII characters, players will learn
how to use stone walls
(o), exterior walls (#),
TITLE:
Sniper!
hedges (n) and rough areas (@ and &) to their
SYSTEMS:
Compuserve Information Network
Sniper!, Compuserve's telecommunications
advantage. These terrain features not only af# PLAYERS:
1-2
version of the popular TSR board game (manfect LOS, but they also affect the potential for
PRICE:
$12.50 per hr. 1200-2400 baud;
$6 per hr. - 300 baud
to-man combat in World War II), does not
hitting and causing damage. Some of the
DESIGNER:
Steve Estvanik
seem, at first glance, like it would be as intermore experienced players on the system (D.J.
PUBLISHER:
Compuserve
esting or addictive as it actually is. Initially, the
II and Leinafets, for example, watch out for
Columbus, OH
use of text characters to simulate a game map
them) actually play solo games in which they
and counters caused me to feel like I was playing a public
switch sides back and forth in order to scout machine gun posidomain version of a board game translated to the computer.
tions and potential sites for ambushing opponents.
Once I started to play, however, I discovered a new universe of
Although the game is addictive, challenging, and stimulating as
gaming. Since, in Sniper, players compete against what Dan Bunit now stands, one of the best points to on-line games is that
ten calls the "Real I" (human intelligence), as opposed to "Al" (arthey can be revised without having to send an update to every
tificial intelligence), there are plenty of surprises. Since the
player. Once the software at the mainframe is updated, everyone
mainframe computer back in Columbus handles the "stack" of orplays the new version.
ders, there is seldom any lag time, players are almost constantly
entering commands. Because of the way the mainframe handles
Here are a few of the changes which this reviewer would like to
the "stack," there is no real advantage for users at higher baud
see implemented. First, since the game is keyboard driven, it
rates over the lower baud users (this problem occurs in Islands of
would be nice to have a "Repeat last action" macro. This could
Kesmai and other telegames from time to time). Further, since
save lots of keystrokes. Second, it would be nice to order units to
the "/RAdio" command allows players to communicate with each
fire immediately upon sighting the enemy. The problem is that
other, there is a camaraderie that develops (especially among
once soldier #6 sights one or more active enemy units, a
regular opponents). Indeed, some players will use the "/REcon"
separate /DS ("Display Sighting") command must be typed in
command to scout prospective opponents by observing a game
before one can know where the potential target actually is. Third,
prior to playing them and several players will "debrief' at "Steve's
it would be very helpful if players could define macros for the
Saloon and Salad Bar" (the meeting area for the game) to dismost used commands ("Move," "Sprint," "Sight," and "Fire") rather
cuss tactics, dispense congratulations, or fling insults after the
than having to input the three keystrokes plus unit number plus
games.
direction each and every time an order to given.
In addition, the intensity of each game is enhanced by the fact
that players earn rank points for each mission they play and
Sniper! on Compuserve is a fascinating social experience and
these points apply toward a promotion. Whenever a player enters
stimulating competition. It has certainly changed this reviewer's
the "saloon," he is identified by rank. This makes it simple to find
mind about "real-time" games (I used to hate them!). Now, inan opponent at roughly the same skill level as oneself. It also ofstead of being a quiche-eater (see CGW #56, p. 35), I'm ready to
fers an incentive to play well (and play often). The most effective
take command on a "real-time" battlefield. Now, where's that
players are listed in an on-line Hall of Fame which further inModem Player's Challenge Guide (An On-Line Directory of Opcreases the incentive to perform well.
ponents for Telegamers provided by Compuserve)?

Sniper!

Telecommuting to War

Review

Buddy Knight is a 1981 graduate of
the U.S. Naval Academy, Annapolis, MD. As a reserve naval officer, he is currently employed as a
weapons systems quality/reliability
assurance engineer for a major
defense contractor. He disclaims
any use of classified U.S. documents in preparation of this review.

B

reathing hard, you peer
over the rubble in front of

depressions in the ground, which
can slow you down at the most inopportune time.

Command and Control
As in the real world, plans rarely
survive first contact with the
enemy intact. However, it is
paramount that the commander
have a firm idea of how he is to
employ his forces so as to maximize the use of the (relatively) few
orders available. Complicating this
is the fact that, while all units
have radios, they can randomly be
made "Out of Command/Control",
simulating the effects of enemy
jamming and the fact that things and people
just get confused at times.

Strategic Simulations'
Simulation of Modern Warfare

you toward the opposing
hill. The shelling has finally
stopped, and the sound of enemy
armor is getting louder. Your own artillery's
counterbattery fire sails overhead, piercing the
sky with a sound like ripping silk.

By Buddy Knight

Just as losing your head can have a disastrous
personal effect on you, losing an HQ can result
in turning the tide of a battle. When a formation HQ is destroyed, all units in that formation
are transferred to computer control for the
remainder of the scenario. Then, they execute
orders according to the computer's battle plan,
not yours. For this reason, it is wise to protect
you HQ's. Should an HQ which also has subordinate HQ's under it be destroyed ALL of the
subordinate HQ's will be out of command/control, although their subordinates will not be affected. This prevents the subordinate formations from utilizing the All-Units mode.

Suddenly, the tanks and APC's appear from
the trees, racing toward you and your men.
Grabbing the radio microphone, you lean
against the muddy wall of your foxhole and
order the anti-tank units to fire while your
second-in-command calls in the assault helos.

The Battle Begins!
The scene described above could have occurred in any of the world's trouble spots of the
past couple of decades or might yet happen in
the Europe or Mid-East of the 1990's. Now, wargamers can try their own hand at a modern
land warfare simulation fought at battalion/regimental-level. In Overrun!, players experience the fine art of command and control.
The game system itself is derived from the Panzer Strike/Typhoon of Steel system, with
modifications made due to the technological adTITLE:
vances of the past 50 years. Additions include
SYSTEMS:
helicopters, reactive armor, HEAT vs. Kinetic Ener# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
gy weapons, thermal sights, and non-line of sight
DESIGNER:
weaponry. Forces are available from the U.S., the
PUBLISHER:
U.K., France, West Germany, Israel, Iraq, Iran, the
Arab states, the Warsaw Pact, and the Soviet
Union. Combat may be simulated for the '56, '67,
'73, and later Arab-Israeli conflicts as well as near-future
European conflict. With some effort, almost any land battle in the
past 35 years, either real or hypothetical, can be simulated. The
game, which comes with a disk for each theater of operations
(Europe and the Middle East), is a feast of detail and delight for
raw recruits to wargames and veteran garners alike.
The game scale is small, with each icon representing either a
single vehicle or a single squad/team and each turn representing
one minute of combat. The units available are varied and
numerous. SSI has resisted the temptation of loading the game
up with only the latest and greatest in killing machines. Each
side, whether Red or Blue, has an assortment of platforms and
weapons ranging from WWII holdovers to those being fielded in
the next few years.
The battlefield is represented by a map consisting of up to 3600
squares in a 40 x 90 layout. This grid of squares, each of which
denotes a 50 yd. x 50 yd. area, can contain any of 60 terrain
types. Also, combat can change the terrain. Weapons fire can
change a building to either a burning building or a pile of rubble.
Trees and fields can be set afire, with the appropriate effect on
field of view and movement. Finally, artillery can create large

Advances!

Overrun!
Apple II, C-64/128
1-2
$49.95
Gary Grigsby
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Mountain View, CA

Overrun! reflects many of the advances made
in modern warfare since WWII. Gary Grigsby
has incorporated helo-borne assaults, improved
artillery systems, armour advances, air defense,
and Anti-Tank Guided Missiles (ATGM's) into a signal package.

Air Assault: Helicopters have changed the nature
of the battlefield. Serving as transports or roving
marauders, these deadly craft can turn the tide in
a battle. In OVERRUN!, a variety of different helos
are available, including the new Soviet HAVOC attack chopper. Each helo can be armed with a wide range of
weapons. Transport helos, such as the HIP of HUEY, can
transport infantry squads and teams. There is no provision, however, for the airlift of vehicles.
Fire Support: The Overrun! system allows off-map artillery to
change states, reflecting the improvements in fire-control and firedetection. Each off-map artillery unit can be in one of four states:
Off-Map, Destroyed, Relocating, or counter-battery. The relocating state simulates the act of physically relocating a unit to
prevent successful counter-battery fire on the part of the enemy.
Counter-battery fire may be ordered to attack an opponent's offmap artillery.
Armour: New advances in armour are reflected by the rating of
each unit in terms of its resistance to either an Armour-Piercing
(AP) or High Explosive-Anti-Tank (HEAT) attack. In addition,
penetration is randomly adjusted to simulate striking the armour
at an angle, which would increase the effective thickness of the
armour. Reactive armour has also been included for some
vehicles.
Air Defense: Both Anti-Aircraft Artillery (AAA) and Surface-to-Air
Missile Systems (SAMS) are provided to defend against enemy

helos. The AAA systems are all self-propelled. SAMS are provided
in both the mobile and (Afghan admired and Soviet feared) handheld variety.
ATGM's: Overrun! contains all of the major ATGMS currently
held by the armies represented. Proposed systems, such as the
Fiber Optic Guided-Missile (FOG-M) are also supplied to gaze into
the future. ATGMs may be used for anti-armour or assault purposes.
Overall, these new features to the Panzer Strike system allow
the electronic warrior to simulate the
problems encountered by today's combat
commander.

Retreats!
Even though Overrun! is a superb simulation of modern land warfare, several "shots"
appear to have missed the target. The first
and foremost of these is the documentation, which is atypical of SSI. Some of
these are:
1. Nowhere is the player told that helos
will automatically shift to Fly Slow in order
to fire. The fact that this occurs also contradicts the combat penalties listed for the various helo states.
2. Although FOG-M is said to be able to attack vehicles beyond
the line-of-sight, the rules do not cover the criteria and adjustments for this capability.
3. Entire units are missing from the Order-of-Battle (Marine
squad, LT-MG, and 60mm Mortar).
4. In the organization table for the Blue Mid-East force, the
Marine Co and the LAV SPT PLT are mixed, effectively eliminating the LAV SPT PLT from the documentation.
5. Blue Mid-Est formation 31, the LAV-AT PLT, does not exist in
the software.
8. Depending on whether you are in the European or Middle
Eastern Theater, the M60A3 may or may not have thermal sights.
9. The Hummer is not available in Europe!
As for game play itself, the following problems may be noted:
Artillery: The human player can only change the state of his offmap artillery in all units mode and only when unit "0" is also an
artillery piece. This is not in the documentation, and greatly handicaps you when playing the "Breakthrough at Neukirchen"
scenario.
Unit Fire Control: In the game, the fire control characteristics
are tied to the platform and not the weapon system mounted
upon it. This results in some severe limitations.
With the air defense rating of a unit tied to the platform the
player is prevented from constructing a Bradley-based ADATS
unit (which is what the Army is currently buying) or placing
Stingers on helos (which is also a contemporary effort). This
restricts the player to only creating unit variations which do not
change the overall nature of a unit (such as from an APC to a
SAM platform).
Typing the fire control rating to the platform also results in the
complete exclusion of FOG-M from the European Theater since
no FOG-M platform is made available.
Reactive Armour: The game allows small arms fire to eliminate
reactive armour boxes. While reactive armour would be affected,
to a degree, by small caliber, rounds the equal weight given to an
M-16 and a 120mm gun is not realistic.
Command and Control: As in Panzer Strike, once a formation
HQ is destroyed, the rest of the formation is on their own. While
this may (or may not) be true of Soviet, Warsaw Pact, and some

Arab forces, it can hardly be considered fact among western armies. In actual combat, command and control would be re-established by the next unit down in the formation's chain of command. A much more realistic method would be to have a random
delay before control was re-established, rather than jut chopping
off the head.
Movement: Units in a formation will slow down if other members of the unit are fired upon. While this is realistic when units
are closely grouped, it occurs here no matter how dispersed the
formation is. One APC does not slow down just because another
APC 2000 yards away takes some fire.
Tanks being given individual orders do this
even less. I had an ABRAMS killed while
repositioning it because its partner was
giving covering fire and receiving fire itself.
It should have taken cover like I ordered it
to at full speed (it was not heavily suppressed).
Missile Fire: Missiles can only be fired on
the third pulse. This is my most serious objection to Overrun!. Limiting the time of
firing totally negates the incredible utility of
these weapons, especially ATGMs, by allowing the direct fire units to clobber the missile units. As a turn is supposed to simulate 60 seconds, it is unrealistic to assume that target acquisition and weapons loading
take forty of those sixty seconds. A good ATGM team can fire
very quickly indeed (or else they DIE)! A ATGM-equipped vehicle
such as the M-901 ITOW, with its two ready rounds, can easily
fire sooner than 40 second after target selection, not to mention
the abilities of the Apache or Cobra! This, in my opinion, should
have received more attention, even if it had meant delaying the
release of the game. Finally, the SONGSTER gun/missile system
of the T-64B and T-80 is not provided, although it is probably
deployed.
Optics: Overrun! incorporates the advancement of thermal
sights. However, not enough units have them (compared with the
data to be found in standard references such as JANE'S). Nightfighting would have been nice, also, reflecting the challenges of
the 24-hour battlefield. If the designers wanted to keep the distribution of thermal sights down in order to portray different eras,
they could have included its selection in the construction set
routines.

Combat Support
When I discovered the various anomalies in Version 1.0 of Overrun!, I provided SSI with a listing. They immediately set to work,
seeking answers to my questions and investigating my findings.
This is a credit to the professionalism of SSI's staff. Instead of
hemming and hawing, SSI investigated each and every issue and
provided a reply, both written and oral.
All of the documentation problems will be corrected in the next
production run. SSI will exchange your original documentation
once they have the new edition in stock. Likewise, Version 1.1 of
the software will correct most of the problems/gripes and will also
be available for exchange by sending the ORIGINAL disks in. The
release dates for these updates are pending.

After-Action Report
All things taken together, Overrun! gives you your money's
worth. I would heartily recommend buying a copy. None of the
problems addressed above keep it from being a challenging,
rewarding, and immensely enjoyable game. Veterans of Gray
Grigsby's other games will find Overrun! to be on, or above, the
level of Mech Brigade, a member of the CGW Hall of Fame. Raw
recruits to the arena of computer wargames will quickly learn the
ropes. Overrun! has my vote for Wargame Of The Year!

Game Hints

S

o, here we are in the middle of
summer again (doesn't it seem
that this year is moving by rather
quickly?). As usual, Fred is counting the
days to next month's annual Grue Convention, so he's a little absent-minded
right now. Wake up, Fred!
We have some thirsty customers here! That's better.
And now that you're settled
in with refreshments at hand,
we can delve a little into a
mystery.

writing obituaries . . . provided, of course,
the Courier stays in business (which is
doubtful).
At the moment, all London is buzzing
over the murder of one Geraldine Tracey,
found stabbed to death in her bungalow

Scorpion's
Tale

"The Scoop" is a murder
mystery, set in the 1930's,
and based on a novel written
by members of the London
Detection Club (an association of mystery writers, of course,
headed by Agatha Christie). Since I
don't have the book, I can't say how
closely the game follows the novel or if
reading it will be of any help in solving
the game. However, from the way the
adventure is set up, it's very likely that
reading the book wouldn't be of too
much assistance.

That's why you want to go to bed
early on Monday night. You can't afford to miss the inquest at Brighton
on Tuesday morning. You meet
several important suspects and get to
hear their evidence in regard to the
Tracey murder. This also opens up
some new areas to visit, as you can't
go anywhere until you have learned
about it while playing the game.

The Apple graphics, by the way, are
done primarily as black and white drawings, with some color on the close-up
pictures of people when you talk to
them. Although simple in design, the
close-ups manage to convey a surprising amount of personality.

Okay, so here you are, hot-shot crime
reporter for the London Daily Courier.
Well, actually, maybe not so hot-shot,
since you were just elevated to your new
position from the cheery task of writing
obituaries. Things are not good for the
Courier these days. They've been losing
too many good stories to the rival Morning Star and its top reporter, Denis Oliver.
You are the Courier's last hope. If you
can bring in a big "scoop," the paper will
be saved. If not, well, you can go back to

You also need to sleep, and
this can be frustrating at
times. The game will not let
you go to bed before midnight, however much you
may want to. Since you always sleep for seven hours,
this means you can't get up any earlier
than 7 AM. It also means that, if you
go to bed later, you will get up later,
and may miss something important in
the game.
Characters in this game move
around, they do not always stand in
one spot waiting for you to show up.
Also, certain items may or may not be
in a certain location, depending on
the day and time. Obviously, then, you
will be doing a lot of running around
hither and yon, so keeping an eye on
the clock is of extreme importance.

This is a graphic adventure, totally
menu driven. You manipulate either a
male or female figure (your choice) on
the screen and use the available menu
commands to perform actions such as
examining objects, taking or dropping
them, listening in on conversations (always fun!), etc.

Talking to people is also menudriven and somewhat limited in form.
You can ask what's on their mind, where
they were on certain days, what they
know (or think) of other people in the
game, or you can show them an item
from your inventory to see what their
reactions will be. There is no way to bring
up any other subjects or to question
them on anything specific (new items do
not appear on the menu as a result of
conversations).

The game is heavily time-dependent in
many ways. Travel, for example. You can
take trains or buses to various destinations, but they always leave on the hour,
and take one hour to reach wherever it is
you're going. So if you arrive at Victoria
Station at, say, 2:01 PM,
you'll have to wait until 3 PM
to catch the next train, which
in turn will not arrive at its
destination until 4 PM.

in the suburbs of Brighton. Her husband,
as well as the murder weapon, are suspiciously missing. Hmmm.
Nevertheless, this death is overshadowed by another. It seems the Morning Star sent a reporter to cover the
story, and now he has just been found
stabbed to death in a phone booth at Victoria Station. This is where the game
begins.
Your boss, Mr. Wrightwell, sends you off
on Monday night to see what's going on
at the station. This is where you first
meet Denis Oliver, as well as the Scotland Yard man in charge of the case, Inspector Smart.
Because of various time constraints
(more on that in a bit), there isn't much
you want to do here now except listen to
the conversation between Smart and
Oliver. After that, a quick trip home and a
good night's rest are in order.

For a game of this nature, with its
multiple lines and dynamic aspects (those
characters really do move around!), it's
impossible to give any specific hints
without giving a lot of the mystery away.
So instead, I'll run down a list of tips and
caveats to help you keep moving along
(read the manual, too . . . it also has
some handy hints).
It is good to save the game after the inquest. You are pretty much on your own,
then, with many options as to where to
go next. Some avenues of investigation
are worthwhile, others aren't. Since you
could easily miss something interesting
or important, it's better to have a save
position to return to, rather than having
to replay the game.
In fact, you should try to make saves at
various strategic points in the game, just
so you aren't forced to replay from a
much earlier position. Of course, the trick
(Continued on page 37)

Survey

S

ome garners want to
have state of the art
systems and other
garners want to play on the
least common denominator
system. Most IBM software
publishers are still supporting
the CGA (Color Graphics
Adapter) card as the bottom
end of the spectrum, but the
top end continues to expand.
EGA (Enhanced Graphics
Adapter) cards and monitors are relatively
standard in the entertainment software
market, but VGA (Video Graphics Array)
and MCGA (Multi-Color Graphic Array)
offer more colors (256 in the palette) and
higher resolution than its predecessors
(usually a minimum of 640 pixels x 480
pixels, but VGA only provides 320 x 200
resolution when more than 16 colors are
used).
The question most garners are asking
is, "Will it really enhance my enjoyment of
computer games that much to purchase
a VGA board and analog monitor?" The
answers are somewhat more complex.
The larger color palette certainly enriches
the artwork utilized in the game and the
higher resolution makes IBM compatible
games look comparable to the Amiga or
Atari ST for the first time, but the price
tag is relatively hefty. CGW looked at two
multiscanning monitors, both priced near
$700 retail (the Compaq VideoGraphics Color Monitor and the Mitsubishi XC1429C). By the time a gamer
adds a VGA card to take advantage of
that monitor (we looked at the Willow
Peripherals VGA-IV card, priced at
$699, and Video Seven Vega VGA,
priced at $499), that can cost upwards of
$1400 to enhance an IBM compatible.
Further, until recently, many games
which advertised their VGA compatibility
actually ran in EGA mode. Now,
Electronic Arts is supporting MCGA, a
subset of VGA, which allows for a 256
color palette, with approximately six
products by the end of 1989; Activision
has approximately seven to eight VGA

Is VGA
Worth It?
products under development for release
in 1989 (not all will make full use of the
available palette, but most will);
Microprose is experimenting with VGA
graphics on F-15 Strike Eagle 11 and
Sword of the Samurai, Microillusions
will offer Questmaster 1 with VGA
graphics by mid-summer, and Spinnaker has already released Quadralien
and Stargoose in VGA format (they look
great!).

Monitors:
The Compaq Video Graphics Color
Monitor has a lower dot pitch (.31 mm.)
than the standard IBM PS/2 Color Display
Model (.41). Since the lower pitch (which
measures the space between pixels)
provides for higher resolution, the Compaq is an excellent selection for garners.
The colors tend to be more pale than the
Mitsubishi we compared it to, but this
made for an advantage in viewing the sky
in F-15 Strike Eagle 11, as we were able
to see more of the variation in the color
palette used in the sky. On the other
screens, however, the colors were not
quite as rich as those on the Mitsubishi
monitor. There was no problem with
ghost images due to persistence of
screen phosphors and the inclusion of a
tilt and swivel stand as standard equipment was a welcome bonus. (Circle
Reader Service Card #16)
The Mitsubishi XC1429C is a sturdy
monitor which displays very rich colors.
The .28 mm. dot pitch makes for particularly precise on-screen resolution and

there is no trace of ghost images when the screen
refreshes. This monitor particularly shines on darker
palettes like the screen from
Budokan, an Electronic
Arts release currently under
development. The tilt and
swivel stand is optional.
(Circle Reader Service Card
#17)

VGA Boards:
The Video Seven Vega VGA board offers excellent value at a suggested retail
price of $499. Garners who use their
machines for Windows/386 applications,
as well as entertainment, will find that the
Vega VGA not only supports those applications, but is also fully compatible
with CGA, EGA, MDA, and Hercules
programs. Under some circumstances,
the board supports 720 x 540 or 800 x
600 resolution with a 16 color palette intact. We observed no visible flicker or persistent eyestrain when using this card.
(Circle Reader Service Card #18)
Willow Peripherals VGA-TV is unique
in that it not only supports VGA
monitors, but offers an NTSC output that
enables players to run VGA color on a
standard television monitor. This feature
explains the higher price tag. To use VGA7V with a television requires some pin
movement on the board itself, but once
the adjustments are made, it works like a
"real" monitor. The highest resolution is
the standard 640 x 480 screen. Our only
reservation revolves around a slight flicker due to the way the board handles interlacing. Some of us at CGW quickly became used to the flicker so that we didn't
notice it, but others were continually
bothered by it. (Circle Reader Service
Card #19)
De gustibus non est disputandum.
(Translation: You have to decide for yourself or more literally, "With regard to
taste, there is no argument.")

Review

allistix is a sport played in a tiled arena, surrounded
by a wall of skulls. The audience is a raucous band of
demons, skeletons, and undead. All are seeking their
brand of excitement. It is the player's job to provide the action, maneuvering a lightning-fast mirrored marble about the
arena, blasting it with silver balls, and avoiding obstacles
until the perfect shot can knock the marble (termed a
"puck") into the goal.

B

While the basic idea is an old one, Psygnosis has done an
excellent job of providing a fast-paced, pure action game.
The concept is simple, but the game and its execution are
not. As usual for this company, the graphics are extremely
well-rendered, fast, and engaging. The colorful and
humorously macabre arena background scrolls quickly and
smoothly, although it can only be spared a few glances in
the heat of the action.
The feel of the game is a mix of billiards, marbles, pinball,
hockey, and similar sports. In the basic game, the player controls a small arrow, which can be moved about the game
field. There are goals at either end of the arena, one to be
defended and the other as a target. By pressing the button
on the joystick, small balls are shot from the arrow in the
general direction of the puck. Through careful maneuvering
and aiming, it is possible to knock the puck into the opposing goal. Adding some spice, the floor tiles of the arena are
sometimes transformed into targets, providing bonus points,
goal shields, or other surprises. To further add to the challenge, there are 130 levels of game play (50 for the oneplayer game, 80 for the two-player version), each representing a different arena, complete with its custom
obstacles. There are rubber bumpers, explosive mines, pools
of acid, tunnels, and other hindrances to the player's
progress.

Doubles, Anyone?
The one-player and two-player games offered in the program are markedly different, both in their rules and in the
focus of the action. The one-player game most resembles
pinball. There is no computer opponent and the player is
forced to work against gravity and the arena itself. If left
alone, the puck will gradually pull itself directly into the
player's own goal. While the lack of a computer opponent
may be initially disquieting, the realistic movement of the
puck and the difficulty of victory over gravity soon make up
for this. Such a manner of handling play removes any need
for chancy artificial intelligence and allows the player to play
directly against the arena.
In the two-player version, there is no gravity. If the puck
isn't fired upon, it will eventually slow and stop. Instead, the
opponent is another human player. While there are
obstacles in the two-player levels, they are usually evenly distributed in the arena so that neither player gains an immediate advantage. In addition, the balls must be shared between
the two players. If one player shoots too rapidly, the balls he
has fired will wind up in his opponent's possession. Further,
if a player does not fire after several seconds, all his balls are
given to his opponent. This is a good device to insure that
game play keeps a rapid pace and, at the same time,
rewards a player to fire carefully and not waste all his balls.
In addition to choosing between the one and two player
games, the player may change how the balls are fired at the
puck. For those who find the "fire from arrow" play too easy,
the balls can be shot machine-gun style from the goal itself,
with the arrow becoming a target sight. This option requires
excellent timing and more strategy. It is not quite as fastpaced as the "fire from arrow" game, however.

Marbles
From Hell
by Douglas Seacat
Goal Shots
(Good Points)
The game is extremely well
programmed, not
only in its look
and sound, but
in the way it
feels. The action
is fast and engaging, yet can be
mastered quickly
and enjoyed almost immediately. The different types of
games offered, as
well as the attention to detail give
the game tremendous replay
value. Ballistix is
most addictive;
playing just one
game is virtually
impossible. This product offers more
nail-biting excitement and a stronger
sporting atmosphere than most real
sports simulations now found on the
market.

Ballistix
TITLE;
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, Atari ST
# PLAYERS:
-2
PRICE:
$29.95
DESIGNERS:
Reflections
PUBLISHER: Psygnosis, Ltd.
P.O. Box 483
Addison, IL 60101

Another point in the game's favor is
the number of options it allows the
player to work with. The player can quite easily change the
number of balls available, the speed of the game, the "lifespan" of the balls, the goals needed to win, and what level
the play is started on. This allows the player to handicap himself and make the game more difficult as he learns and
masters it.

Ricochet (Bad Points)
While game play is virtually flawless, one cannot say
the same for the way the
game handles levels. A
higher number of levels
should have gone to the
one-player game. After all,
in the two-player games, the fun and challenge comes from
the opponent, not the arena. Conversely, in the one-player
game, the arena is the opponent. Therefore, a larger variety
should have been more important. On the same note, there
(Continued on page 47)

(Continued from page 30)

The
Scoop

from you if you give them the chance,
and rarely, if ever, will you get these
things back.
Another reason to have multiple saves
is that your time to solve the murder is
limited. If you don't manage it by Saturday afternoon, you lose. Thus, you have
only about four and a half days to get
everything done. When you add in the
travel time, you soon discover that the
four and one-half days go by very quickly.

is to decide where those strategic points
are, which isn't always easy.
One place in the game where it is usually good to save is when you're trying to
decide between two destinations. For example, if you're wondering whether to go
to Southampton or Brighton. Just save
and go to one or the other. If nothing interesting comes of it, restore and try the
other.
This trick is also handy when you want
to follow people around and see where
they are going (and if they're meeting
someone, so you can listen in on their
conversations ... hehe!). Speaking of
conversations, these generally begin
about one minute after the participants
arrive.
It is inevitable that you will be doing a
lot of saving and restoring, since the first
time you play, you can't really be sure
what's important to follow up on (or

when). Therefore, you really need to take
good notes and keep track of where you
actually are in the game. Otherwise, you
can easily become confused and not realize, until too late, that you don't have all
the evidence you thought you had.
One thing you should always do when
entering a new location is "Search." You
may find something important. Even if
you don't, come back another day and
try again. Sometimes, an item that wasn't
there before will be there now. Likewise,
some items that were there before may
not be available later on.
Always save the game before you show
an object to someone. There are a few
people who will grab important items

As the game progresses, you will find it
actually splits out so that you are actually
investigating three crimes at once: the
murders of Johnson and Tracey, a jewelry theft, and a drug-smuggling ring. All of
them are interconnected in one way or
another, so you can't afford to neglect
any of them.
The theft is quite important, as eventually you will discover within its clues the
one person who can identify the
mysterious Mr. Tracey. Of course,
whether or not he actually had anything
to do with the murders is another matter
(it should become obvious early on who
Tracey is, but you have to prove it).
(Continued on page 38)

(Continued from page 37)

The
Scoop

they were on a particular night, it's a
waste to ever ask them again, since they
are always consistent. Thus, once you've
made the round of all the suspects, your
future options are generally limited to
finding out what's on their minds or getting their reactions to the various objects
you show them.

No one in the game locks their doors,
which is very convenient for you. This allows you to walk into anyone's home
(best when they aren't there) and snoop
to your heart's content. It's a good way to
find all sorts of interesting and, possibly
incriminating, objects. Once in awhile,
you can even search when another character is present. Don't be afraid to try.
The game will tell you if it's possible or
not, at no penalty to you.

Another reason to avoid repeated chats
is that they eat up precious time on the
clock. The minutes pass with each conversation, so asking people about the
same things only hurts your chances (not
to mention the additional time spent in
tracking them down again). Take good
notes the first time you talk with anyone.

The major characters always have something on their minds, and it's not always
the same thing (major characters are
those whose names show up when you
ask the "tell me about someone" question). Whenever you talk to one of them,
make sure to ask what they're thinking
about. You can pick up all sorts of valuable information this way.
However, once you've asked someone
to tell you about other people or where

Whenever you're in a particular area, be
sure to take a moment and pop into any
stores, hotels, or taverns that may be
there. Someone could be inside. Remember, this is a dynamic game and the characters move around just as real people
do. On the other hand, in some locations, characters may not be willing to
talk to you. If that's the case, you'll just
have to catch up with them somewhere
else for a conversation.
The game does tend, after awhile, to become rather automatic. You search each
location as you visit it, run through the

gamut of conversational possibilities with
any characters present, and exhibit your
collection of items, etc. The main trick in
the game is knowing when to be where
for what, and this is learned over time
(and many restores) through trial and
error. Eventually, you put together
enough threads so that you can then
play the game along the true path that
leads to successful completion in the
time allowed.
Well, that seems to be it for now.
Remember if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the
following ways (please folks, be specific
with your requests; just saying "I'm
having trouble finishing game X" isn't
enough to allow me to help you):
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie:
Stop by the Games Roundtable (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). On The
Source: Send SMail to ST1030. By US
Mail (enclose a self-addressed stamped
envelope if you live in the United States):
Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station,
New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

I

Review

Uponahiltop,
The game ends when
not far from the
the player either dies or
castle, you halt
captures all 19 Castles.
the march and consider
Either way, at the conyour strategic options.
clusion of the game,
Your scouts report
players will see a
back, the Princess is
montage showing their
here!
ratings (25 possible)
You send your
and depicting the batsecond with a note
tles that they fought.
demanding surrender.
The character's life
The Taira Clan refuse.
By Michael Chaul
literally flashes before
With a sharp wave of
their eyes. The ratings
your war fan, you sigdepend on the levels of
nal your army of solbattle skills earned, the
diers to form into a
number of generals
long column. Taking
commanded, the numyour Sacred Sword
ber of territories
TITLE:
LORDS OF THE RISING SUN
from its sheath you galSYSTEMS:
Amiga; Soon: IBM, Atari ST
owned, and the leaderPRICE:
$49.95
lop to the front of the
ship abilities built up
Doug Barnett
DESIGNER:
line and personally lead
during the game, as
PROGRAMMER: David Todd
your troops in the
well as how many
PUBLISHER:
Cinemaware
Siege. "TAKE THE
Westlake Village, CA
pieces of the Imperial
CASTLE!! FIND THE
Regalia have been colPRINCESS!!" The men
lected.
surge towards the
defiant gates with you
WARNING: This secleading the assault.
tion of the review conAs one begins to play
tains specific hints
Lords of the Rising
on game play.
Sun, Cinemaware's
Readers who prefer a
latest release, he/she is
more general briefing
thrust into war-torn
should avoid this sec12th century Japan as
tion.
a member of the
The Player should
Minamoto Clan. The
save the game regulargame presents the
ly. One never knows
player with a unique
when a error in judgeblend of arcade action
ment will cause the
and strategic posloss of an entire army.
sibilities. As the game
Due to the fact that the
opens, the player is
programers neglected
asked to choose beto provide for a
tween an interactive ar'permanent' save game
cade version of the
feature, if a player utilgame or a strategic verizes the Preserve Hission.
tory (save game) OpAs the player moves
tion from within a prethe cursor over his batviously saved game,
tlefield banner, the optheir original game will
tions change in the
be replaced, furthermessage window so
more, if a player is
that the banner funckilled or starts a new
tions as a menu. Once
rebellion from within a
the Home Castle is entered, the player will be in the Council
saved game, their saved game will erased from the disk. In order
Room. Moving the cursor over the Seppuku (hara-kiri) Sword and
to insure permanent storage within the Preserve History Option, it
the banners hanging on the wall will reveal the choices that are
is necessary to completely exit the game and to copy the
available at this juncture of the game. The five banners on the
'Savedgame' file from the Lords directory (for hard drive players)
center wall are replicas of the banners of the other generals in
or Reel 2 (for floppy disk players) to an additional floppy. Then
the war: the remaining brother's banner, the Taira banner, the enand only then can the Player be sure to have a 'permanent' copy
signs of the three independent generals, the Ronin (Note: The
of their saved game. This gives the Player an easy method to
Ronin generals have armies that may or may not join up with you
backtrack. It may be very time consuming to exit out to the 'Cli
during your campaigns. The equation is dependent upon your
and to copy the 'savedgame' file, however, it is better than startsize, strength and overall power rating at the particular time of
ing the game over from the beginning.
contact and can only be learned through trial and error.).
When sieging a castle, if you hack at a door three times (using
When the player exits his Home Castle and selects "Prepare to
the left mouse button) you can shoot arrows through the door
March," he is presented with a vast map of feudal Japan in all its
(using the right mouse button) inflicting damage and be
splendor. The game interface allows the player to use the map to
protected from the onslaught of enemy soldiers from the other
move generals from one location to another, gather information
side.
about a specific location or general, and determine the outcome
If you siege castles in the interactive mode, castle difficulty levels
of encounters between opposing forces (i.e. form an alliance,
and floorplans are determined by the skill levels of the besieger.
demand a surrender, engage an enemy in battle, take or attack a
Therefore, sieging a castle with a low skilled general will reduce
city, and siege a castle).
(Continued on page 45)

Sunrise, Sunset

Japanese History in Cinemaware's
"Lords of the Rising Sun"

resupply and get more men regularly. Also, try not to let them
get much more powerful than you, they may then try to overthrow you.
The best place to resupply your armies are at castles although
cities and monasteries can also be helpful. Since in real life, ports
have a higher influx of men and supplies, so do those of the
game. Therefore, port castles are the absolute best source for
resupplying your armies. The number of troops at a single location will determine the time it takes to resupply. The season of
the year will also have its effect on the resupply speed as well as
travelling costs (i.e. during the winter months, supplies will
replenish more slowly and travelling great distances will be more
costly in men and strength.)
(Continued on page 46)

the difficulty of the castle being taken. Once a floorplan is set, it
remains set for that particular castle for the entire game. One particular tactic would be to use a low skilled general to enter the
castle in a siege attempt. After an unsuccessful siege or quick
retreat, a high skilled general could be used to go in and take the
castle with little or no trouble.
It can greatly enhance a Player's 'power status' to retrieve all
four of the Imperial Regalia. The Emperor at the Palace in Kyoto
holds the Sacred Scroll and the Sacred Sword. In order to convince the Emperor to bestow these honors upon you, Players
should try space their visits to the Palace at least one year apart.
The Shrine of Hachiman is located within the Castle at Kamakura
(Yoritomo starts out with this object) and initially the Princess is
being held within one of the seven Taira Castles, although she
can be moved as gameplay advances.
New generals are extremely dangerous, so always make note of
the messages that appear in the message windows. Specifically,
as new armies are formed. Although your own generals start out
with a 100% loyalty to you, those not kept well supplied and
"happy" they may be influenced away. If a general leaves you,
they will take with them all of the property that they have acquired and own. Therefore, treat your generals well. Let them

CONCLUSIONS
As this reviewer watched the opening procession of graphics the
only thing that came to mind is "It's really like a movie!"
Throughout the game the designer has obviously taken
measures to insure this 'movie like' arena. In most cases, this is
beneficial to the gamer, however, the inability to govern the transfer troops was definitely noticed. The arcade sequences are some
of the most realistic this reviewer has encountered. David Todd,
the wizard programmer of the game, gives the player the ability to
take part in sieging or attacking castles, fighting enemy armies,
horseback pursuits, fending off would-be castle take-overs and

ninja attacks. All of the arcade sequences are presently operated
through the mouse with no joystick support. Although mouse control is accurate, joystick support
was sorely missed; at least in the
arcade sequences. If you are one
who has not had a lot of dealings
with the mouse, it will take some
getting used to.
An accelerated time mode is
provided for, although this
reviewer felt that maybe an additional level would have been
preferable, as well as an onscreen notification that the accelerated mode was activated.
From whispering winds to
screaming samurai, the original
music and sound effects for the
game are "outrageous!" The scrolling 3-D graphics are outstanding. This reviewer felt as though he was playing an animated
Risk game. This program's unique approach provides a different
fulfillment to each kind of player (i.e. strategists get strategy, arcade masters are put to the test, and the people that fall in between get a little from both worlds).
This reviewer particularly enjoyed the mixture of arcade and
strategy elements. This mixture not only allows the player to become part of the movie as it unfolds but really lets one feel like
he or she is participating in the story. Lords of the Rising Sun is
highly recommended.

(Continued from page 11)

(Continued from page 37)

Tracon
back to DOS. While this may appear a grievous penalty, given
the situation, it is justified.
The mouse allows quick access to the planes. However, one will
discover that adjusting their heading and altitude is more accurately done by keystroke. Combining both mouse and keyboard entry minizes player error.
In Version 1.0, vectoring of aircraft was complicated by a distinction between true and magnetic north. Vectoring required a 15degree correction either left or right (depending on whether the
scenario was western or eastern). However, Version 1.5 has corrected the radar screens to a magnetic-alignment, wherein Ox is
now vertical (a much-appreciated refinement).
This reviewer spent much time on the DCA scenario. The radar
screen appeared very accurate; the Montgomery airport (GAI) is
actually the Gaithersburg Airport, which is currently under pressure to close because of the housing developments built in the
vicinity. Be that as it may, it yielded an additional sense of reality
to vector in numerous aircraft in own's own "backyard", so to
speak.
While the game has a "pause" key, utilization of such yields an
immediate 10,000 point penalty (the documentation refers to this
as "cheating." This may be true, but when the phone rings, one
answers it or pays the consequences in the "real" world.

Final Approach
This reviewer's initial impression was muted, in that the simulation appeared to be too much simulation and not enough game.
However, repeated play has shown that Tracon can be a very enjoyable pastime. It is definitely not for the arcade set. If one finds
intellectual challenge appealing, Tracon is heartily recommended.

Marbles
From Hell
should have been a different set of levels for the "fire from goal"
method of play, since it is so different from the normal mode.
Finally, many of the levels did not seem particularly creative. A
construction set could also have been included with the game in
order to allow the player to make his own arenas.

Final Score
(Conclusion)
Despite the lack of
entirely adequate
levels, this writer
thoroughly enjoyed
Ballistix and it is to
be strongly recommended. The graphics
and sound are great and the ability to freely alter the game options make it a game that can be played many times without loss
of enjoyment. The game provides fast, primal, addictive action,
well worth traveling to "Hell" to enjoy.

R.I.D.

