October 1987
Number 40

FEATURES
Russia: The Great War ...
SSG's Russian Front Campaign Game / M. Evan Brooks

10

Ultima V and Wizardry IV
Sneak Previews / Wyatt Lee

16

Outfoxed In The Desert
SimCan's "Rommel At Gazala" / Johnny Wilson

20

The Lurking Horror
Scorpion's Tale Gives Playing Tips

22

E. O. S.
A New Space Game From EA / Gregg Williams

26

Guderian
Avalon Hill's New Eastern Front Game / William H. Harrington

30

Rebel Charge at Chickamauga
The New Civil War Game From SSI / M. Evan Brooks

32

The Best Educational Games of 1987
An Annotated Bibliography / Bob Proctor

36

The Name Game
Origins of Company Names / Johnny Wilson

41

Sports Scoreboard
Street Sports Baseball and California Games / Rick Teverbaugh

42

The Eternal Dagger
A "Wizard's Crown" Adventure / Scorpia

46

Goodbye "G" Ratings II
Part Two of Our Adult Software Report / John Williams

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek
4
Letters From Paradise 51
Reader Input Device
63
Game Ratings
64

52

Applied Computer Consultants
Pentagon Tower Box 36186
Edina, MN 55435
BATTLE COMMAND: Fought
over a 40 x 20 map grid, this game is
a challenging two player game with a
multitude of options. Most importantly, it offers a play-by-modem option (supports 300/1200 baud). C64/128 ($21.50). Circle Reader Service #1.
Avalon Hill Game Company
4517 Harford Rd.
Baltimore, MD
NBA: In this product licensed by the
NBA, the designers of Super Sunday
offer the first statistics-based basket-

ball game to feature animated
graphics. The game comes with
twenty great professional teams of
the past (including five different Boston Celtics teams). Apple II, C-64,
IBM ($39.95). Circle #2.
Britannica Software
185 Berry Street
San Francisco, CA 94107
MILLIONAIRE II: Remember Jim
Zuber's classic Millionaire stock
market simulation? This new release
is even better. Now, more than one
player can compete in the same
market environment, purchases on
margin are allowed and "selling
short" has been added. Apple II
(128K), IBM ($59.95). Circle

Reader Service Card #3.
Campaigns & Elections
1331 Pennsylvania Ave., NW, #12E
Washington, D.C. 20004
ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL:
The most detailed election simulation marketed to date, the only thing
missing is a newspaper reporter in
the shrubbery. This senatorial election game allows up to two players
to compete with five total candidates
in an attempt to get your candidate
elected in the fictional state of Tarragon. The documentation is excellent. Major review coming. IBM
($29.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #4.

Datasoft
19808 Nordhoff Pl.
Chatsworth, CA 91311
ALTERNATE REALITY-THE
DUNGEON: In this sequel to The
City, your character can continue
his/her adventures begun in the City
of Xebec's Demise. This game is bigger than the original and offers more
role playing challenges than the earlier game. C-64 ($34.95). Circle
Reader Service Card #5.
VIDEO TITLE SHOP and
GRAPHICS COMPANION: These
two products offer tremendous versatility in creating titles and/or
credits for one's video productions.
Users select from four different
pens and 16 different colors. Apple,
Atari 800, C-64 ($29.95 for VTS,
$19.95 for GCI). Circle Reader Service Card #6.

Firebird Licensees, Inc.
P.O. Box 49
Ramsey, NJ 07446
THE GUILD OF THIEVES: For a
game that's a real "steal," you can
join the Worshipful and Partially
Honourable Guild of Professional
Nocturnal and Surreptitious Entry
and Removal Operatives in this new
hybrid text/graphic game. Technically a semi-sequel to The Pawn, it is
set in the kingdom of Kerovnia.
Nevertheless, you don't have to have
played The Pawn to play this highlyhumorous adventure. Amiga, ST,
Apple II (text only), Atari, C-64,
IBM, and Mac ($39.95 for 8 bit
machines, $44.95 for IBM and 16 bit
machines). Circle Reader Service
Card #9.

Infocom
125 Cambridge Park Dr.
Cambridge, MA 02140
NORD AND BERT COULDN'T
MAKE HEAD OR TAIL OF IT: In
a "Manor of Speaking," all the rooms
can literally talk (I suppose that
would floor you!) and one adventure
can make you "Eat Your Words"
(sounds like "foot-in-mouth disease"
to me!). Those are two of eight adventures based on cliches,
spoonerisms, homonyms, and playful
alliteration. This product will be punfull to solve. Apple II (128K), C-64,
($34.95), Amiga, IBM, Mac, and ST
($39.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #10.
PLUNDERED HEARTS: Harlequin's romance style has arrived at
Infocom in this new game. A 17th
Century gentlewoman sails to visit

her ailing father in the West Indies.
Before she can even reach the Bermuda Triangle, she is whisked off by
a dashing pirate captain. What happens to her chest? Apple II, C-64
($34.95), Amiga, IBM, Mac, and ST
($39.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #11.
Interstel
P.O. Box 57825
Webster, TX 77598
EMPIRE: The publishers of Star
Fleet I and II have introduced this
game as a companion game dealing
with planetary surface combat in the
Star Fleet universe. Imagine a
strategic level wargame with a
similar interface/command structure
to the tactical space games and you
have a good idea of the game. IBM
($49.95), Amiga and ST ($55.00).
Circle Reader Service Card #12.
Krentek Software
P.O. Box 720081
McAllen, TX 78502-9990
BORODINO: 1812: This game is
noteworthy for format, subject matter, and playability. Napoleonics
buffs will love the historical detailing
reflected in this game based on
Napoleon's "Russian Campaign."
Atari, C-64 ($59.95). Circle Reader
Service Card #13.

MW Software
1035 Dallas SE
Grand Rapids, MI 49507
BATTLE GROUND: This tactical
squad level game simulates combat
on the western front of World War
II. The maps are attractive and functional, but the individual soldiers are
merely represented by white
squares. Note that it takes two to
tango (there is no AI) in this game.
IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service
Card #14.
FACING THE EMPIRE: This
game plays like a cousin to the early
Andromeda Conquest by Avalon
Hill. It is played solitaire, however,
and offers more sophisticated
decision points and combat resolution. Can you guess whether the
Lyrans or the Morte Star Empire is
the peace-loving culture in this
strategic space campaign game?
IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service
#15.
Mindscape, Inc.
3444 Dundee Rd.
Northbrook, IL 60062
BOP'N RUMBLE: With the basic
system familiar from Bop'n Wrestle,
this new arcade game takes your
wrestler out on the streets in order

to save "Granny" from the vicious
punks and mongrel menaces who
have gone wild. Watch out, though.
"Granny" is about as helpless as the
one on "The Beverly Hillbillies." C64 ($29.95). Circle Reader Service
#16.
Paragon Software Corp.
600 Rugh Street
Greensburg, PA 15601
ALIEN FIRES 2199 AD: This space
adventure game uses two disks on
the Amiga to give the player an opportunity to become a TimeLord (a
la Dr. Who?). The game makes outstanding use of Amiga graphics and
sound throughout. The characters
one encounters are true works of
art. Amiga ($39.95). Circle Reader
Service #17.
MASTER NINJA: SHADOW
WARRIOR OF DEATH: Chuck
Norris lives, as it were, in a martial
arts/action adventure game with 20
combat moves, 25 screens,
numerous opponents, and plenty of
weapon choices, as well as that
which is missing from many action
games - a story line. IBM ($34.95).
Circle #18.
Continued on page 56

protected by locking zones of control
while offensives are characterized by
seeking the weak point for the schwerpunkt.
This is not true in Russia. Units are
employed in superior formations with
a tendency for such units to mass
around the headquarters. Cohesive
lines will NEVER appear after the initial turn. Even stranger, assaults will
be made against the strongest unit in
the axis of advance, and not the
weakest as usual wargaming standards
prescribe. Zones of control do not
exist, and railroad movement (handled
completely by the computer) allows
units to move by rail ADJACENT to
enemy forces.

Review by M. Evan Brooks
NAME;

SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
PLAYERS:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

RUSSIA
(The Great War in the East
1941-1945)
Apple, C-64
$40.00
0-2 (or more)
Roger Keating
Ian Trout
Strategic Studies Group
Australia
Walnut Creek. CA (USA)

he lure of the Steppes, the roar of
Tthe
Panzers ... such is the stuff of
wargamer's dreams, and Strategic
Studies Group has attempted to fulfill

the fantasy. The Eastern Front (or the
Great Patriotic War) holds a deep fascination for military simulationists.
Despite what is learned in U.S. high
schools, one has to acknowledge that
the Eastern Front was the decisive
straw that razed the Thousand Year
Reich, since over 60% of the German
war effort was always devoted to the
East, and the normal percentage was
75.
SSG's Russia is a fascinating product.
While it has problems, the sheer scope
and playability of the product render it
one of the more interesting computer
games released in recent memory.

The mechanics are easy to learn, but
mastery of the system is difficult. In addition to a normal review, this
reviewer hopes that his experiences
may save the consumer a rather long
learning curve.
Rather than a true descendant of
SSG's Battlefront, Russia may be
more properly described as a cousin.
This reviewer was seemingly one of the
few consumers not to have been awed

by Battlefront. Its implementation of
subordinate commands and handling
of artillery seemed to render it less
than the watershed design it might
have been (as an aside, the designers
have assured this reviewer that these
problems have been corrected in Version 1.1). Thus, this reviewer's initial
impression of "cousin" Russia was
muted. Continued playings of Russia,
however, revealed subtle nuances that
do make this game a "player" and one
to be seriously considered for inclusion in the "Wargamer's Essential
Library."

The Impressionistic War
Game
The most important lesson to learn
from Russia is that it has little relation to boardgaming or most computer
antecedents. If one is willing and able
to think in new concepts, then Russia
will prove to be rewarding. Implementation of normal wargaming strategy
and tactics will lead one to disappointment and defeat.
While most wargames (both board
and computer) are linear in nature,
Russia can only be described as impressionistic. The simulation (from the
Axis viewpoint) does indeed offer a
sense of historical thrust and
counterthrust, but in a more sweeping
method than heretofore seen. "Normal" simulations require fronts to be

One's initial response of
astonishment and unease must be
tempered by a different gestalt. Historically, armies did not mass from
Leningrad to Sebastopol shoulder to
shoulder, and assaults generally had to
strike the enemy's defensive positions.
This concept requires adjustment and
a willingness to learn ab initio.

Mechanics of Play
The map for Russia ranges from
Rostock-Berlin-Zagreb (west) to
Kazan-Saratov-Stalingrad-Grozny
(east) [cf. map inset]. Various terrain
types, cities and rail lines are easily
recognized.
The basic unit is the German
Korps/Soviet Army. However, chains
of command run from German OKH
(Oberkommando des Heeres [Supreme
Command of the Armies] to Army
Group (North, Center and South) to
Armee (composed of Korps). Soviet
equivalents run from STAVKA to
Theatre (A, B, and C) to Front (composed of Armies). Please note that
Soviet Armies are equivalent in size to
Axis Korps and that Soviet Fronts are
equivalent to Axis Armees.
Although the Korps/Army is the
basic formation appearing on the map,
it is composed of divisions. These are
handled by replacements feeding into
the Korps/Army structure and for further detail, casualties are taken in regi-

ments (equivalent to one-third of a
division). While the structure may appear confusing, it is relatively easy to
grasp once one begins using Russia.
In a scenario, one represents an
Army Group/Theater, while the
Campaign Scenario offers the
player the opportunity to represent OKH/STAVKA and/or subordinate command(s). From
OKH/STAVKA's perspective,
one may issue doctrinal directives
on a monthly basis -- Retire,
Defend, Active and Attack. Army
Group/Theatre may direct between Main Effort, Normal and
Rest. Finally, Armee/Front may
choose between Assault, Probe,
Defend and Retreat (for units in
contact) or Advance, Deploy and
Hold (for other units).
Main Effort consumes massive
supplies and is utilized for major
offensive efforts, Normal orders are
made for units in contact with the
enemy, and Rest allows one to
recuperate and build up a viable attacking force. Most of the lower orders are self-explanatory. Note,
however, that Advance orders the
units to a certain objective, while
Deploy orders these same units to
move within two hexes (80 miles) of
the parent headquarters. Hold allows
a unit to dig into prepared defensive
positions up to an eventual fortification level of three.

Documentation and Other
Problems
he documentation is extensive and
Twritten
in a "folksy" manner.
However, this only serves to conceal a
problem. The problem is not that the
documentation misleads the user, but
rather that so much is left unsaid.
Supply/Railroad lines are the key to
victory. Yet, nowhere in the documentation is there any explanation of
roughly how far one can extend one's
supply lines.
While this is done automatically by
the computer, too much data is withheld from the player. For example, if

one plans an offensive, he should have
some idea of how long it would take
his supply lines to catch up with him.
Granted that such knowledge should
be approximate at best, it would still al-

sider how important such an objective
is before selecting it.
The Siberian army appears as purple
units when one plays the German.
Nowhere in the documentation is this
fact mentioned. While one can assume this, it should have been
mentioned.
Moscow/Leningrad are important objectives. Yet, the documentation is silent as to their effect.
Seizure of Leningrad plays havoc
with Lend Lease aid and seizure
of Moscow plays havoc with
Soviet reinforcements. While
most garners intuitively realize
the importance of these goals,
some documented acknowledgment would have been
preferred.

leviate much concern by the player
Terrain effects are not delineated.
While one can assume that a river line
or a fortified city defense would have
some benefit, the documentation is
again silent.
Combat results are defined in terms
of hits and losses. While losses appear
to be the most important concern, hits
are simply undefined, leading one to
wonder what they in fact represent.
Also, while one can check Korps
status, it is difficult to see whether or
not a unit is on the verge of destruction.
Neither fatigue levels (Fresh, Fit,
Tired and Exhausted), troop quality
(Green, Trained, Veteran and Elite),
nor supply conditions (Excellent,
Good, Fair and Poor) are stated.
While one can obtain this data by
utilizing the design routine, it should
have appeared in the documentation.
"Last Resort" is a message occasionally received when attempting to find an
objective. This is undefined in the
documentation. It sounds worrisome,
but in fact, merely represents the fact
that as an objective, the Last Resort
might well place one's units out of
supply. Therefore, one should con-

Victory conditions are reported
by point totals, assuming an
automatic victory is not achieved.
However, one is not cognizant of what
such points represent. Does a German
victory of 200 points mean tactical or
decisive? (Based upon discussions
with SSG, a differential of 120% yields
a tactical victory, while a differential of
150% yields a decisive victory).
Objective hexes are limited to cities.
It would have been nice to define an
objective as a geographic point not
limited by the city. In that manner, one
could better attempt massive encirclements and limited tactical offensives.

Strategic and Tactical
Guidelines
oviet: From the Allied perspective,
one needs few hints. The initial
Axis onslaught is massive, and
Doctrine should be Retire and retreat
as much as possible. Eventually, the
German steamroller will run out of
steam.

S

Though the Soviet may have only
eight units left on the map and holes
everywhere, the German will be incapable of further exploitation. His
supply lines will render him impotent.
Thereafter, a careful and methodical
Continued on page 14

Continued from page 11
offensive should
serve to throw the
Fascist Beast back to
his borders.
Ahistorically, the
war can be won, in
effect, by February,
1942. The remainder
of the war becomes
a gradual grinding
down of Axis units
while the Soviet Forces become stronger
and wait for supplies
to become available
for other offensives.
As long as Moscow
and Leningrad are
retained, the Russian has little to fear.
Axis: The Axis role
is the primary appeal of Russia.
While the Soviet can
make fifty mistakes
and win, the Axis
cannot afford ANY
mistakes. Initially,
the Axis Offensive is
unstoppable. Therefore, for the first
three months,
CHARGE. Once
the Russian defense
begins to shore up,
the German must assume a completely
different mindset.
never again can the
German assume the
headlong offensive.
Offensives must be
carefully considered
and limited in nature.

1941: Assuming command of OKH plus all Army Groups, this
reviewer began his Drang Nach Osten (Push to the East). The initial
campaign season went reasonably well, although Leningrad did not fall.
By the end of 1941, a reasonable defensive perimeter was established
(cf. map). The Tula-Kursk-Kharkov salient was established because
there were was no visible opposition. The Dnepropetrovsk line was established because of its defensive benefits. A prior Campaign move to
Rostov was met by a winter offensive which destroyed Army Group
South.

to defeat. While Army
Group South may appear unopposed, any
first year offensive
should stop at Odessa
or at the most the
Dnepropetrovsk River
line. While Rostov is attainable, it cannot be
held and any units so
far east prove easy
meat for the Soviet
reinforcements.

1942: Soviet offensives pushed back Army Group North which retired
in disarray.

Army Group Center
should progress to the

Yet, Army Group Center pressed on to Moscow, and battles raged for
the Soviet capital. It held, and German gains in the south were tactical
at best.

Smolensk-Bryansk-Konotop line and hold.

Russia: A SAMPLE GAME

1943: Soviet offensives proved devastating, and the situation looked
bleak.
Army Group North was virtually destroyed, and even Riga looked in
danger of falling. The Moscow salient was pushed back, and Army
Group South reeled back.
The Center held, not because of any master defense, but simply because Soviet Forces were elsewhere.
1944: The Year of Decision! In a daring winter offensive, 2nd SS Panzer Korps (heretofore left on the eastern periphery) found a Moscow
undefended.
Soviet Forces had assumed the offensive and were attempting the
Destruction of Army Group Center. 2nd SS Panzer roared into Moscow, seizing the undefended city.
Soviet counterattacks were uncoordinated and ineffectual, thereby allowing German reinforcement and expansion. As the spring campaign
season opened, German forces assumed the offensive and even
managed several drives on Stalingrad. Note that these offensives were
based on two Korps from Balashov, but every time they approached the
Gates of Stalingrad, Soviet reinforcements rushed in by rail for the
defense (shades of the Marne Taxicab Brigades!).
1945: Moscow was retaken by the Soviets in March 1945. It was too little and too late. The German victory point total of 5100 overmatched
the Soviet's 2700.

Overambition is
the key to ignominious defeat. In
fact, once the initial
offensive is over, German losses per
week must be kept under 3 German
Korps per week at all costs.
Even at this rate, such losses on a
continuing basis will bleed the
Wehrmacht dry.

Try to seize Leningrad or Moscow. A
day without Moscow is a day without
sunshine for the Russian. Yet, do not
bleed yourself dry in attaining the objective.
Overambitious plans hold the route

Analysis of Russian
forces in this AO (area
of operations) may
yield a gradual expansion to Tula-Orelp-Kursk-Kharkov, but
such expansion should
only be attempted if unopposed. Army Group
North should either
seize Leningrad or at
least invest it.
Ground (artillery)/air
support and divisional
reinforcements should
be maintained in the
same percentage as initially shown. While one
would like to maintain
the same quantitative
numbers, such will
often prove impossible.
Therefore, a similar
ratio should suffice. Beware of stripping a
Group's assets; they
may prove impossible
to ever rebuild.

Limited gains can be
made by utilizing the
Hold/Deploy orders.
For example, if a defensive line is
maintained at Mariupol, a Main Effort
may be made to Sebastopol. Yet, since
this city is so far south and generally
undefended (?!), all units should be
given hold orders except for one which

Continued on page 58

As this issue of Computer Gaming World
goes to press, two of
the most long-awaited
fantasy role-playing
games in history are
just reaching the
market. Both games
are technological advancements over the
previous efforts by
their designers and
both efforts use unique plot twists from
earlier games to draw
the player into the
new fictions. Further, both efforts are
designed to affect the player on a
psychological level by offering enough
stimuli to give the player a chance to
study his/her own reactions and
decision-making processes
from a different viewpoint
than is normally taken. It
seems a certainty that these
designs will provoke discussion and debate beyond the
details of gameplay itself.
Since the formidable task
of offering detailed reviews
of these new games will take
some time, this article will attempt to offer a "sneak
preview" of both Ultima V
and Wizardry IV based on interviews
with the designers and demonstrations
of near-production copies. This article
will describe the basic fictions of each
game, the technological advancements, the game mechanisms, the
psychological and ethical implications,
and a sense of first impression regarding each game.

you want to avoid the
Shadowlords, pay attention to planetary
alignments.)
Wizardry IV offers an
even more bizarre plot
twist. Subtitled, The
Return of Werdna, this
new adventure turns
more than a volcano
upside-down. Remember how Werdna, that
evil wizard, was
destroyed in Wizardry
I: The Proving
Grounds of the Mad
Overlord? Remember how the magical
amulet was lost? Well, it seems that
Werdna's body and spirit were indestructible, after all. So, Trebor and
his colleagues imprisoned the "lifeless"
body in the deepest part of a
dungeon. Yet, the player becomes Werdna in this adventure. As Werdna, you
awaken on a cold, stone bier
in a small room with no
egress. Without amulet or
spell book, you have no
magical powers. Further,
you have neither weapons
nor armor to make your survival more tenable. Of
course, there is a way out,
but that doesn't make the player's job
any easier. Instead of fighting one's
way down through a dungeon in order
to confront the villain or gain the artifact, Wizardry IV forces the player to
fight his way up and out of the dungeon/tomb in order to gain revenge
and regain his amulet. The psychological benefits of playing an evil character
will be discussed later in the article,
but the actual dungeon is designed
around ten different themes and
episodes (each on a different dungeon
level) which seek to challenge the
player for different psychological reactions.
That's not all there is to the "mirror"
effect of the dungeon, however. Instead of fighting monsters, the player
(as Werdna) conjures monsters to
fight against more than 500 actual
Wizardry player characters. In fact, if
you have ever sent a character disk
back to Sir-Tech (for repair or to show
you've solved the game), your charac-

A FORESHADOWING OF FANTASY
JEWELS IN A DUEL ARCANE:

The Plots Quicken!
(Blackthorn vs. Werdna)

I

n Ultima V, the world has undergone a dramatic and traumatic transformation. The Council of Wizards has
turned the volcano from Ultima IV upside-down in order to create a shrine
for the "Codex of Ultimate Wisdom."
This action, in turn, created a hollow
shell underground into which all the
previously closed dungeons opened
up. When a river flows into this newly
created "Underworld," this new "fron-

ULTIMA V and
WIZARDRY IV
by Wyatt Lee

tier" is accidentally discovered. Lord
British and his colleagues attempt to
explore the "Underworld," but end up
disappearing (Voice-over Announcer:
"Can this be the end of Lord British?
Play the game and
see!"). With the disappearance of
Lord British , turmoil ensues upon
the surface world.
Blackthorn, once
a worthy questor
striving to become
the Avatar, decides
that martial law is
necessary in order
to restore order.
His goal of restoring order may have been worthy, but
he becomes a virtual Inquisitor in
order to seek that goal. He recruits a
cabal of Shadowlords to aid him, but
the player realizes how low Blackthorn
has sunk when you realize that each
Shadowlord comprises an "Anti-Virtue" (Falsehood, Hatred, Cowardice,
etc.).
The Shadowlords are interesting because they move independently of the
player and influence the towns where
they visit negatively. For example, if
the Shadowlord of Falsehood visits a
town before the player character gets
there, the player will not get honest
answers or information. If the
Shadowlord of Cowardice visits, the
player may find a town full of fear.
Take heart, though. A town is only
tainted after the most recent
Shadowlord travels through. The antivirtues are not cumulative. (Hint: If

ter may be in this game. Further, the
Wizardry characters are joined
together as distinctive teams (like
"Horin's Holy Rollers," sort of the
"God Squad"?), each with their
distinct battlecry.

Atari 800) and after these formats
"catch up," the newer Wizardry releases
will come out simultaneously in all formats, even in Japan. In fact, "Werdna"

Ultimate Technological
Wizardry?
izardry IV is graphically a
positive step forward. It
still has the same 3-D dungeon
corridor atmosphere, but the
combat screen graphics are
much improved over previous
adventures. Each opponent appears in color and the graphics
subtly change to indicate the experience/prowess level of the
enemies. One playtester,
Ronald Wartow, has suggested
that there are more than triple
the number of graphics than in
any prior Wizardry adventure.
There are even atmosphere
screens which depict wide-angle views
at some locations.
Also, since this is an "expert" level
dungeon, the game keeps track of your
progress toward a successful ending
(there are several) by monitoring the
number of keystrokes. This "bookkeeping" feature is potentially useful in
monitoring one's general progress and
aiding one's time/resource management. If one can finish an optimal path
in less than the usual number of
keystrokes, Sir-Tech will grant a
Grand Master Adventurer Certificate.
Most significant, though, is the ability
to "SAVE GAME" when one is actually in a dungeon (one could not in previous adventures). Even here,
however, there is a trade-off, because
the player-characters who oppose
Werdna are reset and must be reconquered after the "SAVE GAME" feature is used.
The bulk of the entire Wizardry series
is now being constructed on a
Japanese MS-DOS machine. Even the
Apple II version was programmed on
this machine and runs on the Apple
via an Apple II Pascal interpreter
emulator. What this means for the consumer is that Wizardry will soon be
available on all formats (excluding

W

is coming out in Japan before the end
of the year. The graphics, on the other
hand, are generated on the Macintosh
Plus at Sir-Tech by using the Mac's
ability to emulate other machine's
graphics. The Mac is able to keep
track of several machines at once via
various windows.
In Ultima V, the ambiance is familiar,
but the technology is new. This is be-

cause Lord British starts from scratch
on the technological design with each
new scenario. In the latest adventure,
there are eight disk sides required to
hold the world data. It is the
same surface of the world for
Britannia, but there are twice as
many towns as before (32 vs. 16)
and an average of two stories
per town. Lord British used a
new operating system (Origin
Systems calls it Dinky DOS) in
this game and it has enabled
several advances to take place.
The graphics are not "blocky"
as in the past. There are softer
edges on the terrain features
and the design utilizes 512 different graphic tiles to create terrain. The shading/color is richer
because the program uses a
flood fill instead of line-of-sight
fill. In all, the program offers
three distinctively different
styles of drawn dungeons.
Beyond these features, other
changes have been wrought, such
as the addition of the sun and moon on
the horizon line to show time passing
(a la Moebius) and the fact that it gets
DARK at night in the game. The "Slow
Movement" command is also different
in that it no longer slows the game
down, but gives the monsters an extra
shot, instead.
The gameplay mechanics in Ultima V
have been made much simpler because the player can designate an ACTIVE character. Until that character
is deACTIVated, that character is the
one searching, opening, unlocking, etc.
No longer does the program have to
ask who is doing what. Further ease of
play is assured by the fact that the commands in the game are banked subroutines, a fancy way of saying that
commands which are generally used
together are stored together for ease
of access.
The latest Ultima uses a new interface by presenting a window with
scroll bars and a running inventory.
Perhaps of most interest is the new
combat system. Like many new adventures, the game will offer ranged
weapons. Unlike most systems, the
combat will use dexterity as a speed
counter and create order out of the
usual chaos of combat. Finally, Ultima

V is like Wizardry IV in that the game
can be saved ANYWHERE, even in
the dungeons.

The Play Is The Thing!
is similar, but more adlay in
both adventures.
In Ultima V, magical potions are
created by means
of the same
reagents (i.e. ash
= energy/ ginseng
= healing) as its
predecessor. Casting spells is slightly
different. Some incantations are the
same as in the earlier magic book, but
some new ones
remain to be discovered. The incantations are built on
syllabic combinations (pseudo-Latin
roots with a little bit of Greek thrown
in) which are added together in a logical way to form a "spell." If anyone is
concerned, these incantations do not
reflect real occultic practices or incantations. They are fiction created by the
designer. For example, Flam = flame,
Vas = big, and In = create. Therefore,
In Vas Flam would mean "Create a
large fireball!"
Further, a new character class, the
Avatar, has been added. Only one
Avatar is allowed in the game and may
be transferred into the game from Ultima IV or created especially for the
new adventure. In order to accomodate the new combat system,
however, all characters transferred
from the previous game will be converted down to a 30 point scale.
Monster-generation is very different
in the new adventure. Now, random
encounters are keyed to time and location. For example, there may be a two
in thirty chance of encounter off-road
in the daylight, but that is doubled to
four in thirty at night. Other refinements include the addition of ranged
combat, the removal of "real-time"
combat because the decisions players
must make are more strategic, the addition of a subroutine where the conGameplay

sumption of alcoholic beverage has an
effect on dexterity, and the use of a
Kharma counter as opposed to the
eight characteristics measured in the
last adventure.
Wizardry IV is advertised, marketed,
and designed as an EXPERT LEVEL
dungeon. Roe Adams, Wizardry IVs

designer, describes the operative rule
in the game's design by stating, "It
doesn't matter how difficult something
is, as long as it's fair." Robert Woodhead, Wizardry IV's programmer, insists that one must "...think sideways to
do well in this game." As in previous offerings in this series, each level in
broken down into three strategic elements: mapping, "hack n' slash", and
puzzle-solving. As opposed to the previous releases, characters increase
strength by means of puzzle-solving
rather than "hack n' slash." Puzzles are
non-linear and multi-level (you may
have to go back to another level to get
something you missed). Don't expect a
great deal of game help in the manual,
either. The manual is almost totally
dedicated to the story line, so you will
need to have the rulebooks from previous Wizardrys.
Additional features include the fact
that there are a fixed number of encounters per level, that the thieves actually steal from your party, and each
level has a distinctive name and theme.
Esoterica is alive and well throughout
the latest Wizardry, especially in terms
of cryptic names and puns. [Ed. - I'll

give an official CGW "no prize" to the
first reader who can identify "The Red S
."] Game balance is carefully
crafted and considered. There are, at
least, 100 special items (artifacts) to

keep players mesmerized. In addition,
an intriguing help feature has been
added. Watch out for the Oracle of
Mron, alleged to be Norm Sirotek's
(one of Sir-Tech's owner/executives)
name spelled backward.
Norm...er...Mron gives hints at the
low, low cost of 10,000 gold per hint
and the program
keeps track of
which hints you've
already purchased
(unless, of course,
you happen to save
the game in between hints - that's
part of the "save
game" trade-off).
Finally, "Werdna"
has a problem that
hasn't ever
plagued Wizardry
players, before. The
monsters which he
(the player) conjures perform on "autopilot," as it were. Combat can be very
exciting when your monsters occasionally hurt YOU when they are
casting their spells.

Ethics: Psychadelics or
Psychometrics?

T

he idea of playing an evil character
in Wizardry IV.- The Return of
Werdna may have a perverse appeal to
some people, but it immediately
causes one to think about the ethical
implications. When asked about this,
Roe Adams chuckled and said, "You
have to understand, Werdna is evil,
but not chaotic!" From there, both
Adams and Woodhead claimed that
there is lots of philosophy in the
product. It seems that the purpose of
the product is not to provide a satisfaction in being and playing an "evil"
character, but to offer a therapeutic
tour de force of the darker emotions
that humans are prone to. Each level,
designed like a different episode of
The Prisoner (a British television series
starring Patrick McGoohan as the
protagonist who attempted to outwit
the faceless bureaucracy of The Company in a world without rules), is in-

Continued on page 62

OUTFOXED IN THE
DESERT
Simulations Canada's "Rommel At Gazala"
by Johnny L. Wilson
NAME:
Rommel At Gazala
SYSTEMS:
Apple II, IBM
# PLAYERS: 1-2
PRICE:
$59.95
DESIGNER:
Stephen St. John
PUBLISHER: Simulations Canada
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia

peration Aberdeen, "Operation
O Buckshot,"
and "The Cauldron"

are names that conjure images of some
of the most fierce fighting during the
North African campaign of 1942.
Simulations Canada's new Rommel At
Gazala (RAG) is a fascinating study of
the "Desert Fox's" Tobruk campaign
(May 26-June 27, 1942). As such, it
simulates some factors well and other
factors poorly.
In appearance, the game physically
resembles other Simulations Canada
games. The packaging, as well as the
cardboard counters, resemble the SPI
classics of boardgaming's past. The
cover makes limited use of color, but is
of interest because it uses Rommel's
own sketch map for flanking Bir
Hacheim. The documentation is succinct to the point of sparseness for the
beginning to intermediate gamer, but
is adequate for those who subscribe to
the SimCan design philosophy. The
burden of research rests on the gamer,
since SimCan restricts their historical
research to their design and shares as
little of the design considerations as
possible with the gamer/purchaser.
Nevertheless, their basic philosophy is
that there is considerably more "fog of
war" in the process of conducting
military operations than garners have
hitherto recognized.

Beauty and the Beast
Heris both part of the beauty of
Here
and part of the problem
with the game system. The beauty is
that "fog of war" played a vital factor in
the Gazala/Tobruk struggle. Accord-

ing to Michael Carver's 1964 work,
Tobruk, Norrie actually had the bulk
of the Deutsche Afrika Korps surrounded with Lumsden's 1st Armored
Division on May 27, but the Allies
neither realized this nor the fact that
they almost captured Rommel during
the afternoon. On the same day, Rommel was sweeping the southern anchor
of the Gazala line (Bir Hacheim) when
a British officer reported: "Looks like
a brigade of Jerry tanks coming."
Later, the same officer realized that
this was a more significant movement,
"It's more than a brigade--it's the
whole bloody Afrika Korps!" The typical SimCan design exploits the uncertainty which both commanders experienced during the campaign. You
can only tell where the enemy is when
they are attacking.
Yet, even though the game effectively
illustrates the confusing feel of this unusual campaign, the "fog of war" in this
product, as in other SimCan publications, may be carried to an unnecessary extreme. St. John has deliberately
abstracted aerial reconnaissance to
the point where it isn't even specifically mentioned in the game. The

documentation does handle the issue
by stating, "Operations and decisions
that these high level officers would not
deal with directly or have direct
knowledge of, will be handled
automatically by the computer. The
results of such actions as might be
known to these officers will be
reported to the players while information not used by officers at this level or
unavailable due to the situation will
not be reported." (1.0). In effect, each
player knows where the other
commander's high level headquarters
units are as a result of aerial reconnaissance. Yet, Anthony Heckstall-Smith
quotes a survivor of the campaign as
saying, "Every day our reconnaissance
planes returned to report rapidly growing concentrations of enemy vehicles
west of Gazala." (Tobruk, p. 204). Except for when the khamsins (dust
storms) came and took out the
visibility of the aircraft, both sides had
a fairly good idea of relative strength.
In RAG, this relativity covers a multitude of tanks and this can be a "beastly" problem to overcome.

The Fox and the Grants
AG offers some valid lessons
bout the struggle with the "Desert
Fox" which have not been effectively
addressed by other games. First, the
game design uniquely demonstrates
the lack of "front lines." Neither side
has sufficient units to establish a contiguous line, so the deployment turns
out to be highly mobile forces opposing a series of forts or "boxes." The
game play discourages consolidation
to fortified positions so familiar in
other theatres of war, since it would
have been so easy to outflank and cut
off supply (as essentially happened at
both Tobruk and Bir Hacheim).
Second, the game design forces the
player/commanders to become cognizant of the power of supply. Supply
levels are highly significant in RAG,
since no supply shipments arrive
during the game. Errors in supply allotment through undue parsimony or
profligate extravagance can easily
decide the campaign's success or
failure. The chances for a successful attack or defense hinge upon good supp-

ly allotments. Unfortunately, this is
also part of the "fuzziness" of the
design. The documentation is not clear
as to how the lines of supply are
drawn. Players can regularly win
decisive battles, only to discover that
the program considers them "out of
supply" and "out of the line of command" after doing so. Of course, the
player cannot even order a
withdrawal, advance, or defense after
this occurs, even if he "relieves" the
units by clearing out the area around
the location.
Another significant lesson to be
learned from RAG is that constant,
even uncoordinated, attacks are more
effective than attempts to concentrate
forces in order to obtain a major objective. General Auchinleck has often
been criticized for his decision to force
the First and Seventh Armored
Divisions to fight as divisions rather
than as an awesome combined force.
The documentation of RAG addresses
this by stating, "In playtests, concentrating the British armour to meet
the D.A.K. with superior numbers
rarely worked. One of two results were
usual: D.A.K. would bypass the British
armour to obtain telling results elsewhere (often by taking Tobruk or
Gambut) or D.A.K. would fight a
defensive battle that left both sides
decimated, ..." (9.5). This reviewer experienced the same results, but would
offer a caveat at this point.
The design of RAG itself does not
take into consideration the possibility
of combined attacks. One can make allowances for travel time, order the assault to take place from the same
direction at the same time by two or
more units, and discover that the
program only figures the results
piecemeal. The First Armored
Division can have the enemy attempting to retreat, but the Seventh Armored Division will receive heavy
casualties and only inflict light casualties on the enemy, rather than combining its attack with the First Division or
finishing the job started by the former.
Since the design does not, in effect,
combine either the numerical strength
of the attacks nor the results of the attacks, it seems to be "begging the question" to make such an assertion. What
the design does accomplish, however,

is a positive appreciation for the difficulty Lumsden and Messervy experienced by being forced to operate
separately.
Finally, the historical wargamer may
find himself somewhat shocked by the

strategy in the desert war and offers
new insights from an emotional
perspective on the problems of command.
There are satisfactions in playing this
hybrid between a computer game and

opening intelligence report with its estimates of enemy strength as opposed
to his own strength. When playing the
Allies, I was shocked at being outnumbered by Rommel's tanks. In actuality,
Rommel had approximately 560 tanks
opposing Ritchie's circa 843 tanks.
When playing the Allies, it was regularly reported to me that Rommel had 97
strength points in tanks as opposed to
my 87 strength points in tanks. It turns
out that this is how the program handles the differences in quality between
the German and Allied tanks. Allied
shells regularly bounced off the superior armor of the German tanks and
the German tanks had a larger effective range than those of the Allies.
Even when the American Grant tanks
arrived with their 75 millimeter guns,
they did not have enough traverse to
be effective against the forces of the
"Desert Fox." Therefore, the superior
numbers given to the Axis represent
superior quality.

"boardgame" which balance out the inherent problems. Though the game
may mitigate against certain tactics by
design, it certainly offers a challenging
strategic opponent. Though the game
lacks graphics, there is a pleasure in
moving cardboard counters across a
game map without having to do the attendant bookkeeping or reference the
"Combat Results Table."
SimCan's designs with their emphasis
on "fog of war" are definitely not for
the beginning or intermediate wargamer. They offer a steep learning
curve and high frustration level until
one is initiated into their system. Once
this orientation has occurred,
however, one can play through RAG in
an hour to an hour and one-half with
ease. Further, their designs offer an advanced and sophisticated challenge
beyond the chrome of other systems.
Nevertheless, this reviewer would like
to know a little more about why certain events occur and to discover more
about what happened in a completed
battle than SimCan's designs usually
share during the turn's debriefing (Intelligence Report).
RAG is a successful utilization of the
SimCan design philosophy, but
whether it is worth the price is dependent upon whether you buy into that
philosophy or not. At least, the specialized requirements of this model fit the
SimCan design better than most of
their land-based games.

Rommel's Steel Skin
ll in all, RAG is the Axis' game to
The tightly organized and
small, effective divisions of the D.A.K.
are superior to the Allies diverse and
inferior forces. Therefore, it is most
challenging to play the Allied side
after one masters the system. The
game is particularly effective as a historical tutorial on armored command

Alose.

A

h, it's that time of year
gain: when the frost is on
the punkin, and ghosties and
ghoulies slip through the foggy
October nights. Of course, I
shouldn't keep you standing at
the door (never know what
might be creeping up behind
you, eh?). Step in and get cozy
by the fireplace. While you're
warming up, we can talk about
term papers and even more unby Scorpia
pleasant things.
Lurking Horror is an authentic horror story, Lovecraftian hitech with Stephen King overtones. The monsters are very real
and very nasty. While there is
nothing shockingly gruesome
(after all, this is Infocom), the
game does have some unsettling
parts (finding a severed hand, for
instance), so be prepared.
One thing you won't find,
however, is a complete explanation for what is going on. There
are some hints and implications,
but they don't really cover everything that happens in the game.
Don't expect it all to be be neatly
tied up at the end because much
will be left shrouded in mystery.
The game begins in a raging bliz
zard. Outside, freezing winds
whip through deserted streets,
blowing heavy snow into huge
drifts. Inside, you hunker over a
computer screen in the terminal
room of GUE Tech, trying to
finish a term paper due tomorrow. Tomorrow may never come.
Somehow, files have gotten
crossed up in the computer system, and what you see on your
screen has nothing to do with your paper. Pages of only partly-intelligible text scroll before your eyes and the readable
parts give you a distinctly eerie feeling. An illustration pops
up that causes you to faint outright and have a nightmare (?).
Fortunately, you wake up from that to find yourself still
(again?) in the computer room, although the screen is now an
illegible mess. A friendly hacker (in the original sense of the
word) does what he can, but it appears that your term paper
file has been lost. Oh well, maybe the people in the Alchemy
Department (whose files were mixed in with yours) can help
you out. Now the fun begins (hehehe).

college before running off to the Alchemy Department. The
elevator and the basement are definitely worth investigating.
There are so many interesting things to find down there. I
hope you have a light source with you (there's one nearby, if
you look in the right place) and are able to hang on to some
of the items you find as you go through the game. Some of
them are useful in more places than one.
During your explorations, you'll probably run into the urchin. He has no business (no legitimate business, anyway) in
the college. You won't be able to deal with him for awhile, so
ignore him when he shows up. Just don't drop anything while
he's around. Later on, you'll be able to give him a hand and
get something in return.
One of the more unpleasant areas down below is the steam
tunnel, which happens to be filled
with voracious rats. They aren't interested in junk food; only fresh
meat (you) will satisfy their
hunger. It'll take some violence
and a quick turn to get rid of them.
Also tucked away underneath
the college is something that looks
very much like an altar. With a
few suspicious stains on it. I
wouldn't recommend either lingering around here or opening anything.
When you're done with the underground for the present, a visit
to the Aerospace Building is in
order. You'll need to stroll
through the Infinite Corridor (not
really infinite, just long) to reach
the Alchemy Department. Unfortunately, that may not be as easy
as it sounds. A rather zombie-like
maintenance man with a floor
waxer seems intent on blocking
your progress.
There's no way around him; he'll
block your every move to get past.
On the other hand, since he's waxing the floor, eventually
he'll start moving away, allowing you to go a bit further down
the corridor each time. But he's still in front of you, and as
long as that's the case, you won't be able to get where you
want to go.
What you have to do here is get his attention. It'll take some
sharp action on your part to accomplish that. Naturally, the
maintenance man will not be pleased, and his reactions are
going to be a trifle violent, possibly even deadly. You'll have
to stay on your toes and move fast; one little slip is all it takes.

The Lurking Horror

Of course, wandering through a nearly-deserted university
in the wee hours of the morning may not seem like fun to you,
especially when you recall certain rumors you've heard. That
paper has to be finished, though. There's nothing for it but to
get a move on and visit the Alchemy Department.
However, I'd recommend some initial explorations of the

When the maintenance man is no longer an obstacle, you'll
have clear passage to other areas of the college. However,
before you go running off, you may wish to investigate the
great dome. Strange, how the ladder up to the catwalk is
nowhere to be seen, but it seems someone left a rope hanging
down that you can climb up. Then again, maybe this isn't exactly a rope. Climb with care.

Luckily for you, what you find up on the catwalk doesn't
stick around. However, you're not up here to sight-see (even
if you have been seeing some pretty strange sights lately), so
keep going until you're out in the cold and
up on the dome (just don't stay too long
out there).
Back inside, it's time for a visit to the
Brown Building, or more specifically, the
weather station on top of it (don't worry,
you'll be getting to the Alchemy Department soon enough). Just walk up to the
roof (sorry, this elevator isn't working, but
it's a quick trip by the stairs) and out yet
again into the cold.
At least it's warm inside the station . . .
errrr ... did you hear something out
there? Uh-oh. Something IS out there, and
it doesn't look friendly. And it isn't staying
out there, either, it's on it's way inside.
Gulp!
Maybe this is not the best place to be at
the moment. Nowhere to run, nowhere to
hide ... you get the idea. Best to make
tracks while you can. EEK! You just ran
right into the thing! You're in trouble now!
You've got to do something about this, quickly. Whatever
the creature is, it isn't natural, and natural means won't stop
it. If only you had something that was supernatural.....
Whew! That was a close call, fer sure! Yet, there must have
been some reason for that thing to be hanging around here.
This calls for another investigation of the weather station.
Finally, it's time to visit (at last) the Alchemy Department.
No, your key won't work on the door, but I'll bet there's someone inside, even at this time of night.
While the professor lets you in, he doesn't seem especially
interested in you. You also notice he's reluctant to allow you
into the lab (why, I wonder?). There isn't much to see in the
office, except for the sign-up sheet. Maybe you should take a
look at that. Maybe you could show the professor something
that would change his attitude.
Then again, perhaps that was not the wisest thing to do. Because now you're in the lab, magically (?) imprisoned in a
pentagram, while the professor stands inside another. He's
not just standing there, either. He's calling for something and
something is definitely on its way. Something much nastier
than anything you've seen yet and you don't want to be here
when it arrives. Trust me.
If you thought you had to move fast before, that's nothing
compared to how fast you have to move now. You can't afford any wasted movements here. You must get out of the
pentagram, and out of the room, before the thing fully
materializes. Breaking the pentagram is the only way, and
only one particular item will do the job. Otherwise, you'll end
up sacrificing yourself, in a very unpleasant manner.
When things have finally settled down in the lab, do go back
and check out what's left. The vat in particular is commended
to your attention. You'll find it a very handy item.
There is, however, some more to be done (as you probably
noticed from the score). The end of the professor does not

mean an end to the horrors. One more part of the underground area needs to be explored. There's just one little
problem, though. Some of the things you have to bring with
you won't pass through the narrow crack in
the wall. Which brings us back to the reinforcing rod in the steam tunnel. What do
you suppose might be on the other side, behind the brick wall? Look at your map, and
see if anything occurs to you. Perhaps
you've heard the sound of machinery from
the other side...what might be operating at
this time of night yet? It could be worth investigating!
Ok, now you're ready for the final confrontation, although you'll have to get by a
few nasty places first along the way. One is
the hatchery. This should not much of a
problem, actually, since the beings here
won't attack. However, you must disable
them to get further, and it's a simple matter of being a cut-up.
Now it's down into the maze of wet tunnels. A very confusing place, where you
could wander lost for quite some time,
without a helping hand. Does that ring any bells?
Moving along, you come to . . . slime. Horrible stuff, slime.
It will eat through anything and get on anything that comes
too close. Good thing you have the means to deal with it.

Look over your inventory for something you haven't used, yet.
Keep your cool, and the slime will cease to be an obstacle.
At last, you
penetrate to the
inner chamber,
and what appears
to be the central
focus of the evil
permeating the
college. As before,
time is again
short. The metal
box is the key to
victory; make sure
you read the
description of the
interior with great
care. The right
connection will
lead to a shocking
experience, and
put an end to the
lurking horror ... maybe ....
Whew! The things you have to do to get a term paper done.
Bet you never thought college could be like this (grin)! Well,
it usually isn't unless you happen to attend George Underwood Edwards (GUE) Tech. Maybe it's time to think of

transferring elsewhere; the Space Patrol is looking for a few
good people (oh, Floyd...).
Well, that about
does it for this
issue. In the meantime, if you need
help with an adventure game, you can
reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi: visit
the GameSIG
(under the Groups
and Clubs menu).
On GEnie: stop by
the Games
Roundtable (type:
Scorpia to reach
the Games RT).
On The Source:
send Smail to
ST1030. By US
Mail: (Remember to enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the United States) Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, NY NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1987 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

TITLE:
EOS
SYSTEMS:
Apple II (C-64 soon)
# PLAYERS: One to four
PRICE:
$34.95
DESIGNER:
Karl Buffer
PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

as possible. If you can anticipate which
sectors of the market will be most
profitable, you can build modules to
meet their needs (and make muchneeded money).

EOS (Earth Orbit Stations) is one of
the most interesting Electronic Arts
games to be published this year. It is a
captivating simulation of space exploration that is a game of logistics, of
making the technical decisions needed
to achieve your goal and the business
decisions needed to keep your fleet of
EOS's alive commercially.

by Gregg Williams

Baby Steps from
Planet Earth
EOS does not simulate
humankind's swaggering
conquest of The Universe. Instead, it speculates about our
first laborious steps from the
cradle of our species. EA says
that the seven replayable
scenarios of EOS take from 2
to 40 hours to finish, and I can
believe them. They range from
Research (short beginner's
game) to Search for Life (explore the solar system with
manned ships and unmanned
probes, looking for life gulp).
All but the first will take many
hours, so be prepared to use
the save-game feature.
An EOS turn, which represents a 3-month period of time, is pretty unstructured. It consists largely of
reading the news and other indicators
of economic activity, buying modules
for your EOS's (up to 32), changing
the prices you charge for your services,
and deciding which modules will
produce income (to support your
EOS's) and research (needed before
you can build advanced modules).
You build each EOS within a complex set of requirements and limitations. Each EOS must have enough
power, human labor, life-support, and
money to support all its modules. You
must also read economic conditions
on Earth correctly and price your services to sell as close to 100% of them

bing, price wars, and so on. However,
I'm not sure how much of that would
actually happen--the simulation is so
complex, I'm not sure I'd be confident
enough to go out of my way just to
befriend or thwart another player.
This brings me to a key question:
how does EOS play as a multiple
(human) player game? I tried it only
once with another dedicated games enthusiast, so my experience is limited.
My experience indicates, though, that
it is not really suited for multiple
players. First, the game has a steep
learning curve, so most people won't
bother. Second, beginners may take as
much as 10 to 20 minutes to
figure out their first moves,
which means a lot of waiting for
the uninvolved players in a fourplayer game.
There may be a solution,
though. Since all the players
need to read through certain
data, you could do one sweep
of the data and allow all the
players to take notes. Then,
they can probably work on
deciding on their moves while
other players are placing theirs.

Design Problems
This brings me to the unpleasant, but important,
task of talking about EOS's
faults. Basically, the game has a
large number of small faults
that are significant only when
taken together. Once you learn
the program's quirks, they don't cause
you much grief--but they do make the
process of learning the game harder
than it should be.
The most important problem is
EOS's human interface. It is versatile
in its ability to be played using either
the keyboard or a joystick, but the
good news ends there. You must
navigate a confusing patchwork of
menus to get the data you need and
make the moves you want to make, it's
a textbook case of how not to design a
window/menu/
graphics interface. Several times, I
remember wanting a certain screen of
data I had seen before and not being
able to find it. For example, the

I

Quadruplets in Space

S

far, I've been talking mainly
about a solitaire game without computer or human opponents. You can
add any mixture of 1-3 human and
computer opponents at any time (one
nice touch is the ability to get the computer to take over a human opponent's
role if necessary). Having more than
one player brings in the problems of
competition--now multiple players bid
to sell their production to a market
that may have a limited need for a
given product. With three or four
human players, you even have some
possibilities for alliances, backstab-

"Life/Power" screen (which shows
resource utilization on a given EOS)
was sometimes visible as an item on
the main "Tools" menu, sometimes not.
I finally discovered that the game
adds or subtracts the menu item
depending on whether or not you have
selected a specific EOS to work on.
Fair enough, but then, I found that
using the "Commerce" or "Research"
items on that menu invisibly kicks you
from being "in" a specific EOS to being
"out" of it, all with no indication you
have changed your mode.
The documentation is cryptic, scant,
and poorly organized. I puzzled over
how to get things done in this game
and often learned by experimentation.
The game allows you to choose options that are invalid for you at that
moment, then does nothing. This forces you to puzzle out why the action
did not go through. In the screen
where you pick which EOS you want
to work in, a message says, "pay loan
and have 250@ for new station," where

"@" is a cryptic symbol that is not
readable even on a monochrome
monitor (obviously a bug). I have at
least a half-dozen small, annoying complaints that I don't have the space to
list here. The author of the game, Karl
Buiter, has an excuse.It's his first commercial game (and it's an excellent

showing as such), but to be truthful,
we have come to expect better interfacing and game flow from EA.
Although it took me a while to get
into this game, once I did, the hours
evaporated. Say, if anybody finds life
out there, let me know, okay?

"Zhitomir, July 28. We occupied
the town some days ago. Perhaps
I am exaggerating when I call it
a town, because all we have seen
are miles and miles of ruins,
and again ruins."
... Peter Neumann, Waffen SS,
The Black March

by William H. Harrington
TITLE:
Guderian
SYSTEMS:
Apple II, Atari, C-64,
# PLAYERS: 1-2
PRICE:
$30.00
DESIGNERS: Dyadic Software
PUBLISHER: Avalon Hill
Baltimore, MD

Briefing:
(The Historical Perspective)
Guderian
uderian recreates the great GerG
drive on the strategic city of
Smolensk in western Russia during
that fateful summer of 1941. At that
point, Hitler's Wehmtacht turned east
and General Heinz Guderian, the
father of the blitzkrieg led the long
black lines of panzers in a race across
the Russian steppes. By mid-summer,
the Soviet Army had been decimated,
the Soviet Air Force had been swept
from the skies, and Stalin's weary soldiers had begun their desperate stand
on the Stalin Line. The easy victories
were behind the Germans, now.
Beyond Smolensk and the Soviet
Army lay Moscow and final victory.
History records that the Soviets lost
the great battle of Smolensk, yet they
won enough time to ensure that as
Guderian's Panzergruppe began the
final drive on Moscow, the leaves had
begun to fall and General "Winter"
and the reinforcements from far-off
Siberia would stand between the Germans and Moscow.

Logistics Report
(The Game
Components/Interface)
uderian comes packaged in the
G
%Jr con ventional Avalon Hill game
box with art work suspiciously reminiscent of Avalon Hill's popular board
game on the same subject. The game
contains a well-written manual and full
color map card to help provide a
strategic overview. The interface allows either keyboard or joystick control, a choice of three difficulty levels,
and optional sound effects. Further,
Guderian does allow use of an accelerator card on the Apple version,
but requires keyboard input when an
accelerator card is utilized. Note also
that while games can be saved to disk,
players have to format their own disks
and only one game can be saved to a
single disk.

G

Reconnaissance Report
(Game Mechanics)
Guderian
u derian is a strategic/divisional
G
game with the system based
on the design used in Avalon Hill's
Gulf Strike. There are twelve turns in
the game, representing the historical
length of the Battle for Smolensk by
having each turn reflect two complete
days of action. Turns are divided into
Movement and Combat Phases. The
battlefield is a 58 x 30 grid where each
square represents 10.5 kilometers. Ter-

rain types include: clear, forests,
rivers, victory squares (actually large
cities which confer victory points in
the game), minor cities, swamps, lakes,
roads, railroads, and rail bridges.
Available units for deployment include: armor, infantry, mechanized infantry, cavalry (Don't laugh, but the
German Cavalry unit in this game
doesn't run out of gas. It runs out of
oats!), and leaders. This last unit type
is only available to the Soviet player
and each unit represents one general,
his staff, and a small, armed, headquarters contingent.
As would be expected, each unit's
movement allowances are affected according to terrain encountered. In addition, all German mechanized units
have an additional movement phase
during game turns to simulate the
greater mobility and command control
enjoyed by the Wehrmacht during the
beginning of the War in the East. The
more rigid Soviet command structure
is simulated by requiring Soviet units
to have a Leader unit within the Zone
of Control in order to launch attacks
and remain in supply.
The most innovative unit feature in
Guderian may be the unknown quality
of Soviet Divisions. This is even true
for the Soviet player! During the initial
German invasion, the capabilities of
the individual Soviet units was
problematic at best. The effects of
Stalin's purges of the Officer Corp in
the 1930's, humiliation of the shortlived Soviet-Finnish War in the previous year, and poor leadership in
general made it virtually impossible to
predict how an individual Soviet unit
would respond to combat. Some
fought with near fanatic devotion,
while others surrendered in vast numbers. Guderian elegantly simulates this
by hiding the attack and defense
strengths of individual Soviet units
until they actually enter combat.
The game system really shines,
though, in the movement system. By
using either joystick or keyboard,
players may select up to three individual units and stack them into a
particular square. That isn't the positive factor. However, players may then
elect to move the entire stack as a
whole. This is not only more conContinued on page 61

Rebel Charge
at Chickamauga
"Make The Right Wing Strong"
by M. Evan Brooks (c) 1987
Name:
Rebel Charge At Chickamauga
Systems:
Atari (8-bit), C-64, Apple
Price:
$59.95
Designer:
Chuck Kroegel
Publisher:
Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

Introduction
Rebel Charge at Chickamauga (hereinafter Chickamauga) is SSI's latest Civil War release, following
Antietam and Gettysburg. The game system is very
similar, with the documentation helpfully pointing out
the differences from its predecessors. For those unfamiliar with
the system, turns represent two
federate player moves and attacks. Then, the Union follows.
Mid-turn recovery is followed by
another series of moves and attacks which complete the game
turn.
The primary changes are in turn
duration (two hours instead of
one), woods movement (attacking
units have a random chance of
achieving a 50% success modifier
while defenders have the same
chance of being "outmaneuvered"), brigade-sized
units (the player now has the
choice of breaking down into
demi-brigades), and retreats
(they now occur after both fire and melee phases).
Chickamauga offers the opportunity to play either
side (or neither, permitting one to observe the computer and learn from its play). With basic, intermediate
and advanced options, the degree of difficulty may be
layered on with respect to the player's expertise.
Historically, the Battle of Chickamauga is noted for
the fact that the South actually outnumbered the North
in manpower. As Northern forces diverged in order to
seize Tennessee, Southern forces under Braxton Bragg
attempted to defeat the Union in detail. Finally, recognizing his weakness, Union General Rosecrans began
to congregate his forces. On September 19-20, 1863,
battle occurred. The first day was a bloody draw. The
South did not achieve a breakthrough, but the North

had been hard-pressed. The second day was critical.
Through a set of misunderstood orders, a divisionalsized hole was left in Union lines just as a Confederate
assault began. Blasting its way through the Union flank,
Southern forces seemed poised for victory. However,
Union XIV Corps Commander, George Thomas,
forged a make-shift defense, utilizing anything and
everything available. Somehow, he was able to establish
a defensive line and permit the Northern forces to
withdraw in good order (and earn the nickname, Rock
of Chickamauga). The South's victory was reduced to a
tactical one and the Confederates would never again be
in a strategic position to threaten Tennessee.
The simulation begins at 0800 on 19 September 1863.
With 13 game turns, the South must either break the
Union forces or seize critical terrain to the north (representing Union supply lines and the road to Chattanooga). However, mere occupancy is insufficient,
since the player must have 3-5,000 troops in the area
without any enemy troops adjacent to gain victory
points for terrain. In effect, a flying column will not
achieve victory. One must fight and seize the terrain. In
Gettysburg, small Union cavalry columns could seize
key terrain deep in the Confederate rear, but this
defect has been corrected in Chickamauga.
hoursdingwcteCTactical
Suggestions
oods squares are the most important terrain conW
siderations in Chickamauga. Most of the battlefield is densely forested and fields of fire are very
limited. The following recommendations are based
upon this reviewer's play of the Confederate position:
(1) Make The Right Wing Strong So important that it
serves as the sub-title of this review, the right wing is
the goal of the South. The quotation, apocryphally
Field Marshal Graf von Schlieffen's dying words,
referred to the German battle plan in 1914. However, it
is true in Chickamauga as well. With three objective
squares worth 5,000 victory points each, the northern
map edge serves as the locus of victory. The problem is
that most of the Army is in the center-south. Therefore,
for the greater part of the first day, a massive shift
should be made north. The right wing should be magnified until it is the schwerpunkt of the army.
(2) Avoid melee combat at all cost Melee combat involves actual hand-to-hand confrontation. Based upon
repeated plays, this reviewer recommends avoidance of
melee combat. Even when successful, the attacking
player is likely to incur just as many if not more casualties than the defender. Even more important, the drive
to surround and annihilate an opposing formation can
be attractive; yet, short-term gains are often defeated
by the positional facing that melee combat demands.
Since units may retreat after fire but before melee, even
well-planned melee assaults often develop into worthless but vulnerable salients. Granted there are opportunities that make melee combat seem beneficial,

however, this reviewer feels that in the wooded terrain
of Chickamauga, fire combat should best be utilized as
the key to victory.
(3) Command Control Note that the Confederate
position is of sufficient difficulty that the default position is pro-Southern (2 on a 1-5 scale). This reviewer
utilized historical difficulty and found that the simulation is indeed difficult. Nothing is more demoralizing
than to employ proper tactics and lose because of
misplaced commanders who become casualties. After
moving all units, one should step through the entire
army structure again, paying particular attention to
corps commanders. While an entire division may be in
the battle line, it is doubtful that an entire corps will be
placed totally in the line. Therefore, insure that the
corps commanders are not in the area of risk. If possible, similar placement of divisional commanders
should be made.
(4) Reconnaissance As the Confederate, one must advance through heavily-forested terrain. It is wise to utilize a unit that is not expected to be in the forefront of
the battle for such purposes. Use such a unit to probe
ahead. When enemy units are found, negate the unit's
move. This will use four operation points, but since that
unit was not going to be in the battleline anyway, the
loss is more than offset by the intelligence gain.
(5) Fatigue Moving through unimproved terrain exacts a toll. It is better to rest units for a turn when their
fatigue exceeds forty than it is to force them into combat wherein their fatigue can substantially abet their
defeat.
(6) Morale When morale is lower than twenty, the
next attack will most likely rout the unit. Therefore, pull
all units with morale less than thirty out of the line in
order to rest them and prevent disproportional losses.
In terms of historical accuracy, Chickamauga does indeed pose an accurate simulation as of 19 September
1863. Then again, this also is the product's largest flaw.
The first day of battle was a confused series of smallunit engagements, with each side pouring in units as
contact was made. However, the historical impact of
the battle was Thomas' defense after the Union line
was smashed. The computer is too smart to permit a
similar debacle, and this reviewer hopes that the player
is of, at least, equivalent intelligence. Thus, one cannot
attempt to simulate either Thomas' superb defense or
alternatively, Longstreet's chance to decisively destroy
the Union Army of the Cumberland. The designer,
Chuck Kroegel, did consider an additional scenario;
however, he felt that the breakthrough would not be an
interesting scenario. This reviewer also queried as to
the dates of the scenario. Too often, the simulation
plays like the Guns of August - one races for the sea
(i.e. north) in an attempt to outflank the enemy. Then,
if success is not achieved, one digs in a la trench warfare. The weeks preceding the Battle of Chickamauga
portray a campaign of maneuver. Similar in concept to
the Napoleonic Ulm Campaign, General Rosecrans
had seized much key terrain without battle. Only when

his corps diverged sufficiently to become targets in
detail did the chance of battle become real. This war of
movement was more strategic in nature than the detail
of Chickamauga. Thus, one can sympathize with the
designer's dilemma. However, this reviewer wishes that
the additional scenario had been offered. It may not
have been a fascinating battle, but it
would have permitted the user to ap
preciate what General George H.
Thomas accomplished at Chickamauga that fateful day.

Grand Tactics and
Strategy

S

trategically, the South may
choose the time and place of the
assault. The Confederate had the
burden of attack historically, since
this was the South's last opportunity
to mass sufficient troops to seize the
offensive. In examining the terrain
map, it is obvious that the Union
has the advantage of interior lines.
The only improved north-south
road axis is securely in Union hands
and permits the North rapid access
to any threatened area. Thus, the
South must mislead the North by
feint attacks or noncommittal of
units so that there is doubt as to
where the main assault will fall.
Based upon discussions with the
design staff at SSI, strategic options
are to assault in the middle or the
northern front ("Make the Right
Wing Strong"). The middle option
permits a heavy assault in the first
day since the Army of Tennessee
can mass against its Union adversaries. The problem is
that the Union can achieve rapid reinforcement and fall
back. This strategic option will cause massive casualties
for both sides and is so very reminiscent of an assault at
Flanders Field.
The northern offensive saves lives and offers a better
chance for victory in this reviewer's opinion. A
coherent battle line is unnecessary. The computer
Union is complacent enough to stand in place for most
of the battle. Only in the latter hours of the second day
does the Union probe eastwards. Demi-brigades stationed at terrain "choke points" should be sufficient to
delay the Northern thrust. It should be noted that the
Northern Offensive can convert the game into a battle
of maneuver for the entire first day. It is optimal to
relieve units at the center-south and simply push the
rest of the Army northwards in its quest. Open areas

Continued on page 35

should be avoided as these yield maximum targets to
the alert Northerners.
When all is ready for the assault, beware of artillery.
The North has some idea of where the attack will be
developing. Therefore, his artillery may be ready. Assaults in the face of emplaced artillery are usually
defeated, and even if successful, they are hazardous to
one's health.
The best assault
against artillery
is via flanking
movements.
Similarly, the
South should
not squander
cavalry units.
Since these are worth twice as much as infantry in
terms of victory points, they should only be utilized for
seizure of rear objectives and not for use in the battle
line. Too vulnerable to hold their own, these units are
simply too expensive to risk!
The SSI design staff notes that the attacker is favored.
Lest one get the wrong idea, this is true, but with the
following caveat. If the South commits himself to the attack, his initial advantage may well be superseded by
Northern counterattacks in later turns which are easier
to reinforce. Thus, the advantage of the attacker is only
true if care is taken to allow a second echelon - the follow-on forces which can relieve a spent division and
press the assault.

Conclusions
User-friendly, Chickamauga is an accurate rendition
of the Battle of Chickamauga as it began. This
reviewer would have preferred the additional scenario
("The Rock of Chickamauga"), but one can sympathize
with the designer.
Playings of the battle often leave one with a World
War I mentality, and one wonders if the terrain were
adjusted and the game entitled "Race for the Sea -1914" if anything else would change. Yet, this reviewer
must admit that his initial feeling of complacency was
shattered by the grand tactical difficulty of the situation.
Chickamauga is not an easy system to beat. Repeated
playings by this reviewer have led to, at best, a Confederate minor victory and it is doubtful if a
breakthrough can be achieved. The armies are too evenly matched. The computer's play may lack the brilliance
of a Thomas or a Forrest, but its consistency can well
doom the human opponent who makes a tactical error.
While this battle does not match the historical significance or interest of Gettysburg, the strategic considerations herein offer this product as an interesting
conundrum to the serious wargamer.
[For additional reading, Shelby Foote's Civil War: A
Narrative (now in paperback!) is recommended, as is
Esposito's West Point Atlas of American Wars]

The Best Educational
Games: 1987
By Bob Proctor
On March 25, 1987, Carlos J. Moorhead, Congressman from California, introduced a resolution in
the U. S. Congress to
designate October, 1987
as "National Computer
Learning Month." The
percentage of U. S.
schools using computers
in the classroom has
grown from 18% to 96%
since 1981. As part of
CGW's participation in
"National
Computer
Learning Month," we offer
the following annotated
bibliography by our
educational game consultant.

and a little about handling money. This game is
colorful and a lot of fun, but requires good coordination.

Kidstime
Great Wave., $50 (Mac), 3-8
This program offers a variety of activities including connect-the-dots, letter recognition,
making up silly stories and listening to the corn
puter repeat them and composing music. The
best title in this category for Mac owners.

Donald Duck's Playground
Sierra On-line, $30 (Amg, App, AST,
C64, IBM), 5-8
Several games within a game teach recognition of colors, shapes, and letters, a little logic,

Perhaps the best of the series is this game that
portrays concepts like high and low, bright and
dark, fast and slow, and off
and on with colorful and entertaining graphics.

Jungle Book Reading
Fisher-Price/Spinnaker,
$40 (App, C64), 7-12
Uses the famous Kipling
stories as a means to practice
reading and comprehension.
You must help Mowgli (the
Boy) collect the clues to find
Bagheera (the Panther). Excellent graphics and some speech
synthesis.

Kidtalk
First Byte, $50 (Amg,
AGS, AST, C64, (Mac),
5-9
At last a program that can
pronounce spelling words! The quality of the
sound varies among the machines but all are
good enough to be an improvement over scrambling the letters. Now you really have to remember how to spell!

Magic Spells
The Learning Co., $35
(App,C64,IBM), 6-12
This is a competent spelling game where
words can be either scrambled or flashed. It has
35 word lists and it is easy to add your own.

Mystery!
Woodbury Software, $25 (App, C64,
IBM), 9-13
This is a good and reasonably-priced program
that dares to be different. A partially complete
mystery story encourages older children to add
plot and characters to create their own individual story.

Preschool

A different subject matter makes this game
stand out. It teaches you to discriminate by
color, shape, and by concepts like "less and
more" or "big and little", using cooking and food
themes. Colorful and entertaining.

Stickybear Opposites
Weekly Reader Software, $35 (App,
C64), 5-7

Language Skills

With all of the educational
programs on the market today,
it's tough to know which are
the good ones. We've tried to make your
decision easier by selecting the best games in a
variety of categories. You still have to pick the
one that best fits your particular needs but ALL
of the games listed below are well done.
Apologies in advance to the good games that
were left off due to ignorance.
The prices shown are "suggested retail prices"
but most of these games are available for less.
Many of the "classics" are now sold for $10 to
$15 which makes them excellent values! The
codes for the different types of computers are:
Amg= Amiga, App= Apple II family (App 128
means 128K required), AGS = Apple IIGS,
Atari = 8-bit Atari family, AST= Atari ST,
CM = Commodore 64, IBM = IBM PC and PC
Jr. (IBM 256 means 256K required), Mac=
Macintosh (Mac 512 means 512K required)

Comparison Kitchen
DLM Software, $33 (App, IBM), 4-6

graphics and good sound. These are the beginning programs in a series that covers shapes,
arithmetic, reading, spelling and typing. They
are all first-class products but other games include several of the subjects for the same price.

Kindercomp
Spinnaker, $25 (App, Atari, C64,
IBM), 3-6
Six games in one provide the usual subjects:
letter recognition, counting, simple addition,
basic keyboard skills. Excellent graphics.

Stickybear A-B-C and Stickybear
Numbers
Weekly Reader Software, $40 (App)
$30 (C64), 3-6
Letter and number recognition with very cute

Sea Speller
Fisher-Price/Spinnaker, $25 (App,
C64, IBM), 5-9
Here's a game for beginning spellers that
blends practice into a beat-the-deadline adventure. Graphics and sound are great.

Writer Rabbit
The Learning Co., $40 (App,IBM) 7-10
A game with many options for many age
levels. The silly sentences generated by mixing
random phrases will keep everybody laughing

while they learn about grammar and the parts of
speech.

Math

Learn about the Solar System while completing 10 missions in this game. You plot your
"course" by eye against a backdrop of stars, so
you learn the major constellations as well as
data about the planets and moons.

Geometry
Broderbund, $100 (Mac), 15 +

The Observatory
Lightspeed., $50 (App), 12 +

An open-ended program for students who are
willing to explore on their own. This program
makes excellent use of Mac graphics to illustrate
concepts. The problems, which are optional, are
mostly proofs and are tough but provide excellent on-screen help when you make a mistake.

Have a planetarium on your desk! The excellent manual has several examples and suggestions, but basically lets you form the questions
and explore the skies on your own. The accuracy
and speed are outstanding.

Alge-Blaster and Math-Blaster
Davidson & Assoc., $50 (App,IBM),
12-16
These new games are the standard of comparison for practicing math. Math-Blaster includes add, subtract, multiply, divide and fractions. Both have several formats, allow good
control over the problems, come with a wide
variety of problems, and allow you to enter your
own.

The Royal Rules
Sunburst, $59 (App), 10+
How are you at deduction? This ingenious
game lets you conduct "experiments" to try to
determine the common characteristic in a group
of objects. After you've tried theirs, make up
your own rules and stump your friends.

Think Quick
The Learning Co., $40 (App,IBM), 714

Stickybear Math
Weekly Reader Software, $40 (App)
$30 (C64), 5-8

Here is a marvelous new game that combines
a room-to-room sense of adventure with simple
logic puzzles. It has two "castles" to explore, plus
a design-your-own feature.

Stickybear goes on an adventure and you have
to help him with correct answers to addition and
subtraction problems. As with all of this series,
the graphics are very cute and the sound is good.

Geography

Success with Math
Mindscape, $30 (App, IBM), 6-15

Balance of Power
Mindscape, $50 (Amg, App 128, AST,
IBM 256, Mac), 15 +

Mindscape now owns the marketing rights to
this series of programs from CBS. No fancy
graphics or sound here, just competent drill and
practice programs that let you control the number, size, and type of problems being practiced.
The series starts with simple addition and includes multiplication, division, fractions and
linear equations.

Science
Chem Lab
Simon & Schuster, $40 (App, Atari,
C64, IBM), 12 +
This program is an open-end chemical
laboratory that won't blow up your house (or
your computer). The lengthy manual provides
problems and answers, but encourages exploration.

Rocky's Boots
The Learning Co., $35 (C64), $50
(App, IBM 256), 1
This is a classic that still impresses after
several years on the market. In this program,
you can build "logic machines" to select certain
objects out of a group. It starts simple, but gets
very challenging!

The Halley Project
Mindscape, $40 (Amg, App, Atari,
C64), 10 +

This game won't teach you the names of mountains and rivers, but socio-economic facts -GNP, literacy, consumer spending, political
stability -- are cleverly displayed on global maps.
You'll need this background to hold your own in
the world of superpower politics. Don't start
World War III or you'll lose!

Crosscountry USA
Didatech Software, $40 (App), 10 +
This game assumes that the best way to learn
about the USA is to drive through it. You are a
truck driver and have to pick up and deliver
various products. The screen shows the dashboard and the view out the windshield; watch
the scenery change in different parts of the
country! Not only do you learn about topography, population and the economy, you must
practice safe driving habits, eat and sleep well,
and keep an eye on the weather.

States and Traits
Designware, $45 (App), 9-14
This is the best for learning "just the facts".
Goes beyond state names and capitals to include historic sites, mountains, rivers and other
landforms. A companion title, European Nations and Locations, covers Europe in the same
format.

Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego?
Broderbund, $40 (App, C64, IBM),
10 +

This is a fun and easy to play mystery game
that zips you from one world capital to another,
following a trail of clues in the form of place
names and facts. The answers are all in the
World Almanac (included) so you learn to use
this reference as well. The newer companion
game, Where in the USA is CS.?, is similar but
keeps the chase inside US borders.

Other Subjects
The Body Transparent
Designware, $45 (App), 10 +
This contains a basic anatomy course. If you
think your humerus is your Funny Bone, you'd
better get this program quick.

Cartels & Cutthroats
Strategic Simulations Inc., $40 (App,
C64, IBM), 12 +
This is one of the oldest games on this list and
aspiring MBA's might prefer the more complex
Venture Business Simulation, but Cartels is still
best for Jr. High and High school level. You can
play against others or against the computer.

Chipwits
Brainpower, $50 (C64; IBM, Mac),
10 +
This one is a fun and ingenious way to teach
the concepts of computer programming.
Program a robot by building a flowchart. Score
points by collecting certain objects and avoiding
others. Compare your creations against the
prefab models in 8 different mazes.

Deluxe Music Construction Set
Electronic Arts, $50-100 (Amg, AGS,
Mac 512), 12 +
While not a tutorial, this program provides a
great environment for exploring the relationship between music and its notation. The
Deluxe version of this classic is capable of
professional quality sheet music.

Millionaire
Blue Chip (now Britannica Learning),
$30 (C64) $50 (App, IBM), 14+
Want to know about investing in the stack and
bond markets? This is the most complete and
realistic simulation there is, except for their new
The American Investor. If you have never invested or don't understand the stock market,
you will want to start with this one.

The Notable Phantom
Designware, $50 (App, C64, IBM), 5-8
For younger folks who need more color and
entertainment in a music program, here's a
good one. Several structured games teach note
recognition and names. Includes a plastic
keyboard overlay to imitate piano keys.

The Oregon Trail
MECC, $20 (App), 10+
Updated in 1985, this version of the old classic
is so improved that its heritage is unrecognizable. Excellent graphics, period music, tidbits

of historical lore; find out just how HARD it
was to get to Oregon in 1848.

President Elect
Strategic Simulations Inc., $40 (App,
C64), 12 +
Newly re-issued with all the potential candidates for 1988, this is just the ticket to make
the upcoming primary battles more meaningful

Wilderness
Electric Transit , $50 (App), 12 +
The good news is you survived the plane crash
in one piece. The bad news is you're going to
have to walk to civilization. The basic game
teaches map-reading and orienteering skills.
Other variants, with help from the lengthy
manual, teach survival and camping techniques

Educational Software Publishers
Want to learn more about these and other
educational games? Here is a list of the
publishers of the above programs.
Broderbund Software
17 Paul Drive; San Rafael, CA 94903
(415) 479-1170
Brainpower
24009 Ventura Blvd.; Calabasas, CA 91302
(818) 884-6911
Davidson & Assoc.
3135 Kashiwa St.; Torrance, CA 90505

(800) 556-6141
Designware
185 Berry St.; San Francisco, CA 94107
(415) 546-1866
Didatech Software
943 Boblett; Blaine, WA 98230
(604) 299-4435
DLM Software
One DLM Park; Allen, TX 75002
(214) 248-6300
Electric Transit
501 Marin St. #116; Thousand Oaks, CA 91360
(805) 373-1960
Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Dr; San Mateo, CA 94404
(415) 571-7171
First Byte, Inc.
2845 Temple Ave.; Long Beach, CA 90806
(213) 595-7006
Fisher-Price
One Kendall Square; Cambridge, MA 02238
(617) 494-1200
Great Wave Software
PO Box 5847; Stanford, CA 94305
The Learning Co.
4370 Alpine Rd.; Portola Valley, CA 94025
(415) 328-5410
Lightspeed
2124 Kittredge St. #185; Berkeley, CA 94704
(415) 486-1165
MECC
3490 Lexington Ave. North; St. Paul, MN 55126

(612) 481-3660
Mindscape
3444 Dundee Road; Northbrook, IL 60062
(312) 480-7667
Scholastic Software
730 Broadway; New York, NY 10003
(212) 505-3501
Sierra On-line, Inc.
Coarsegold, CA 93614
(209) 683-6858
Simon & Schuster, Inc.
One Gulf + Western Plaza; New York, NY 10023
(212) 333-5800
Spinnaker
One Kendall Square; Cambridge, MA 02238
(617) 494-1200
Springboard Software
7808 Creekridge Circle; Minneapolis, MN 55435
(612) 944-3915
Strategic Simulations Inc.
1046 N. Rengstorff Ave.; Mountain View, CA
94043
(800) 443-0100
Sunburst Communications
39 Washington Ave; Pleasantville, NY 10570
(914) 796-5030
Weekly Reader Family Software
245 Long Hill Rd.; Middletown, CT 06457
(203) 638-2400
Woodbury Software
127 White Oak Lane; Old Bridge, NJ 08857
(201) 679-0200

THE NAME GAME
By Johnny Wilson

hen Tom Frisina called to tell us
he was leaving Accolade to form
his own new company, Three-Sixty, we
wondered what the significance of the
name was. Did it represent a complete
turn-around in corporate approach
from what he had attempted elsewhere? Did it mean that the new company would attempt to encircle the entire range of possible software applications? Was it a reference to the
landmark IBM mainframe system
360s? So, we called him back and this
is what he said. He wanted the company to make people think. It turns out

W

was a member (ie. Sid Meier Users
Group Software). They decided that
was too esoteric, so they came up with
Microprose. Microprose was intended
to suggest "Prose for the computer".

of the locations had African names
(Afrikaan, Swahili, etc.). Indeed, there
was a group of merchants in the game
who were known as the Broederbond.
Unfortunately, the use of the Afrikaan
spelling would have implied a support
for the South African regime which
was far from the brothers' actual position. In fact, Gary was ousted from
South Africa because he dared to
teach at an integrated school in
Botswana. Linguistically, the name is
built off the German "bruderbundt"
and/or Afrikaans "broederbond" (perhaps, a Dutch cognate, as well) and
means, literally, "Association of
Brothers." The name was chosen to
emphasize the family aspect of the
business and it accomplishes this task.
In addition, the company used the "0"
to create both a pseudo-Scandinavian
aura and "pun" on the as it appears on
the computer screen. When this
pseudo-Scandinavian mystique is

Additionally, by dropping the "e" the
name would also suggest 'Microprofessionals'. During the first year of
Microprose's existence, they began to
receive informal telephone inquiries
and protests from Micropro,
publishers of Wordstar. Since
Micropro itself was so new, the
that this venture reflected his desire to
"...start a new publishing company,
with a fresh and more diverse approach to the business." Hence, the
name Three Sixty represents a full
circle. The name suggests that Tom
has gone full circle from producing
software products for other people to
producing software which satisfies
him. It also indicates the new
company's desire to provide the full
range of applications for the home
computer market, including some
areas hitherto untapped. This got us to
thinking about what some of the other
company names meant. Here's the
result!
Since Microprose has agreed to
change their name in the next two
years, we wondered where the company name originated. One primitive
idea was to call the company "Smuggers Software". The name reflected the
original user group of which Sid Meier
 Circle Reader Service #40

founders of Microprose were unaware
of its existence, so they did not realize
the potential problem recently settled
out of court (see Computer Game
Forum #1, p. 5).
Then, we got to thinking about

Broderbund. We thought the name
simply referred to a group of brothers.
Gary Carlston told us that when they
were forming the company, the three
brothers wanted a name that was cute,
fun and unique. Doug had completed
a space adventure game on the TRS80 called, "Galactic Saga" where many

coupled with the triple crown symbol
of the Broderbund logo (since the
three crowns are Swedish national symbols), the name has often been erroneously reported as meaning
"Brotherhood" in Swedish. Since Gary
used to teach Swedish and this meaning is incorrect, this misinformation,
still published, is most unfortunate.
Then there is the case of Sierra. We
found out that in 1977, On-line Systems
began as a mainframe communications
company creating interfaces and
patches for mainframes. In 1980, they
started doing software for the micros
and brought over the old name. In
1982, a bigger company in
Pennsylvania threatened to sue them over the
use of the name, so they changed the
name to Sierra On-line (since they
were located in the Sierra-Nevada
Mountains) and that has been shortened to the more colorful Sierra.
Of course, one of the oldest names in

Continued on page 57

SPORTS
SCOREBOARD
Street Sports Baseball
and California Games
By Rick Teverbaugh

Although not to be considered
serious sports simulations, here is a
pair of very fun and quite challenging
sports games from Epyx: Street Sports
Baseball (the first of a Street Sports
series that will also include basketball
and football) and California Games.

Wish They All Could Be
California Games!

L

et ' s stop in California first because
I this entry is both similar to and
nothing at all like the Summer Games,
Winter Games and World Games
programs that are, probably, already
on your sports shelf. Those games
recreated actual Olympic-style events
and all were faithful to the actual competition mode. All used joystick control and were exercises in good judgment, reflexes, timing and, in some
cases, endurance. All of those factors
still come into play in California
Games.
The earlier offerings featured stunning graphics with occasional whimsical features and workable sound effects. Ditto with California Games.
With the previous games, it was possible to compete in some or all of the
events, practice in one or more events
and set records for top scores or
times. The same holds true with
California Games.
So where are the differences?
California Games makes competition
out of recreational activities that are
not limited to California, but certainly
more in tune with that particular lifestyle. A listing of the events should
confirm that statement. For California
Games, we get half pipe skateboarding
instead of skating; we have the foot
bag in place of the log throw; there is

surfing in place of skiing; and there is
flying disk (what a careful way to avoid
saying "frisbee") instead of discus.
Roller skating and BMX racing round
out the events.
All of these events take place in the
natural habitat instead of some huge
arena, but the backdrop further enhances the entire mood of the competition. Should you doubt that there can
be exciting head-to-head fervor in
such a laid-back atmosphere, just boot
up the game and go at it with family
members or friends.
California Games isn't perfect. The
order of the events wasn't thought out
too well. I found the most difficult
event in the entire competition was
skateboarding and where is this competition in the grand scheme of things?
You guessed it. First.
The joystick will get quite a workout

in skateboarding. There is an up and
down motion needed to establish
momentum within the pipe. Then the
joystick must be tapped in the right
direction at the right time to perform a
stunt for points. One false move and
you fall, ending the competition.
My two favorites are next up, foot
bag and surfing. It's impossible to do
anything wrong in footbag that will
end your turn. Moving left and right by
pushing the joystick in that direction
will set up the various kicks that earn
points. Moving the joystick up causes a
jump and pulling the stick down
causes an about face. The joystick button can be used to butt the bag into
the air with your head. Surfing is nearly worth the cost of the program alone.
You can ride the board for 1.5 minutes
or until you wipe out four times. Do
well and a friendly dolphin will swim
past in a tail fin salute, but do poorly
and a shark will come by (with appropriate music) to feast upon your
remains. Steer the surfer left or right
by moving the stick in that direction.
for this event the phrase "no guts, no
glory' really applies. You won't get the
top scores by riding straight near the
top of the wave. You needed to ride
the crest, make the big turns, challenge the tube of the wave to earn the
highest marks.
Roller skating will also give the joystick a workout. It is necessary to roll
the stick around to simulate the thrust
with the left foot and the right. This
isn't a speed contest. You earn points
by avoiding obstacles and remaining
on your wheels. Once you can do it
with some spins, you'll really be ready
for some Hall of Fame material.
BMX Racing combines timing with a
good memory to achieve the best
results. Unlike roller skating, BMX
judges both speed and style for a final
point total. You're allowed one bad
fall or three minor ones before being
knocked out of the race. To make sure
you score points, after a couple of
minor tumbles, try just to complete the
rest of the course without incident,
especially if another competitor has already failed to finish his run.
Flying disk probably simulates the
real sport as good as anything in the

Continued on page 44

Sports Scoreboard

gamers too. I had expected to cover
the Computer Sports Network this
time around also. One of the first
gaming features of the service was to
revolve around Mean 18, allowing
gamers to play that excellent golf game
and then register scores to compete
for prizes. Some bugs have developed
in the system and at deadline phone
calls went unanswered as to the extent
of the trouble or timetable for solutions. Stay tuned here for further
developments.

(Continued from page 42)
program. Two taps of the joystick
sends the disk on its way. Control then
shifts to the person who's supposed to
catch the darn thing. Points are earned
for accuracy and height of the toss and
for style points upon making the catch.
California Games isn't for the diehard sports fan who even thinks that
Australian Rules Football should be
taken seriously. But for those who've
always maintained that the word fun
should always be a part of any competition, give it a try.

Asphalt Diamond on the
Spikes of Their Shoes
treet Sports Baseball is more
reminiscent than whimsical, but it
is no less fun. Remember the sandlot
games where home plate was a garbage can lid and old tree stumps were
just part of the hazards of outfield
duty? Well, all that and more comes
alive in this excellent program.
There are 16 players of the 52nd
Street gang ready to play a game. Two
players can divide them up individually or you can do the same against a
computer. For a series of games, the
sides can be saved to disk and called
up again later. Or the computer can
choose them at random. Far from
being a male chauvinist outing, six of
the players are girls and a couple of
them will be among your first choices.
Almost every kid has strengths and
weaknesses. A good read through
their abilities in the manual is essential
to creating a team that will perform to
your style of managing.
The screen display is divided neatly
into three parts. The top contains the
scoreboard with team names, score,
player at bat, inning and the count.
The left side shows a close-up of the
action, while the right side gives an
overview of the entire field.
One unique aspect of the game is the
control of the ball once it leaves the
pitcher's hand. It is possible to change
speed and direction on its way to the
plate. The batter must always be alert
and the pitcher must always be careful.

S

It is possible to hit a batter and give up
an extra base. A status line below the
screen will tell whether the ball is hit
on the ground or in the air to help position the fielders defensively.
Both California Games and Street
Sports Baseball
were reviewed in
Commodore
configurations.
Both will certainly be released
for other
machines. Epyx
has actively supported the Atari
ST, IBM and
Apple machines
and I would expect that to be
the case with
these games
also. I would
also anticipate
Street Sports
Basketball and
Football to be
ready before
year's end.

Waving The
Caution
Flag!

S

ad to say,
there's some
negative news
for sports

I had also planned coverage for
Share Data's Golf programs. Released
as a Apple/C-64 flippy. My version
never booted on the Commodore side
and the Apple version hung up twice
at hole No.6 and then hole No.7 when
the random drawing element put a
lake over the same spot as the green. It
is a low cost program, but right now a
very low value one as well.
See ya' next time and be a good sport.

Long Play's Journey Into
Light

The Eternal
Dagger

A long the way there will be towns to

by Scorpia

NAME:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

The Eternal Dagger
Apple, Atari, C-64/128
$39.95
Paul Murray
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Mountain View, CA

Twilight of the Tale
onsider Middle World: a land
overrun by demons, undead, and a
host of other inimical creatures; a
beach head for further invasions of
yet, other worlds by these evil beings; a
place where the remaining inhabitants
fight a desperate and losing battle
against time; and a locale where only
the strongest, most powerful, and
courageous of adventurers have any
hope of turning the tide, travelling
across the islands and down into a
sunken city, where they could close the
portal between the Middle World and
the demon world forever ... from the
demon side.
Once more the call for help goes out,
and (not surprisingly) is duly
answered. Since this is the follow-up to
Wizard's Crown, you can transfer your
entire party from that game. They will
come without any of their magical
weapons or armor, but their stats
(ability scores, skills, etc) will be unchanged.
Fortunately, they will be given ordinary weapons and armor to start with,
so you won't need to worry about sending your group out without protection
or offensive capabilities.
The same is true if you prefer to
create an entirely new party or use the
one that comes pre-created with the
game. In all cases, you begin with only
non-magical items; anything better will
have to be looted from defeated opponents or purchased when you can
find a place to buy them (which won't
be for some time).

C

The Island of Dr. "Necro"
fter you've arrived on the island,
Ayour
first task is to locate and
eliminate the Necromancer who has
turned the island's inhabitants into undead monsters. This means you will be
running into roaming groups of undead farmers, along with the usual undead warriors, skeletons, zombies,
spirits, ghosts, etc. Having a couple of
priests in your party definitely comes
in handy here.
There is also a dragon on the island
that you must fight and defeat in order
to obtain a magical weapon that will
help in your confrontation with the
Necromancer. A group of rebels
(when you find them) will provide you
with a magical dragon-slaying sword
that can aid in defeating the dragon.
Hang on to that sword, as it will be useful later on.
Once you've defeated the Necromancer (which will also undo his spells),
your party will be able to travel to the
Elven and Dwarven isles, so you can
find the Eternal Dagger and have it
enchanted. Only the Dagger can close
the portal between this world and the
demon world....and you'll have to do
that from within the demon world itself.

visit, dungeons to explore, and
beings to talk to (sometimes). Information can occasionally be picked up in a
tavern, and there is a great deal to be
learned from a small booklet of hints
and tips that comes with the game
(make sure you read that!).
The game mechanics are pretty much
the same as they were in Wizard's
Crown, although some changes have
been made. Five spells (Magic Bolt,
Wound, Poison, Darkness, Shatter)
have been dropped, and replaced with
new ones: Freeze, Disengage, Fear,
Fumble, and Magic Blast.
Also, the combat maneuvers of Fall
Prone and Stand Erect are gone, while
Throw Weapon and Quickcast a Spell
have been added. In the dungeons,
Alter Active Status of Characters and
Wait have been eliminated, and
Change Active Character has been put
in.
Otherwise, everything is the same as
in the previous game. However, these
changes also mean a change in some
of the letter commands, so make sure
you check out at least the command
summary before starting to play, even
if you're familiar with Wizard's Crown.
One of the biggest (and most welcome) changes in the game is in the
area of dungeon movement. Previously, the whole party moved as individual
characters, which was not only timeconsuming, but often frustrating, as
party members invariably became
stuck behind walls. It took a fair
amount of maneuvering and changing
back and forth of active characters to
get the party together again.
Now, however, only one character is
active, and that character is the only
one who shows up in the dungeon
screens. The rest of the group is there,
you just don't see them (and they don't
get stuck). This makes travel through
dungeons much faster and also easier
on the ulcers. Changing active characters simply replaces one icon with
another, so no additional movement is
necessary.
On the other hand, dungeon combat

has taken something of a nosedive. It
is harder now, due to the placement of
the party when fighting begins. Consider a typical situation: your party
walks down a narrow corridor and
comes to a door. Opening it reveals
monsters on the other side and combat
ensues.
Before battle actually starts, you
have the option of changing the
positions of your party members.
Unfortunately, when everyone is
standing there in a straight line
outside the door, there isn't very
much you can do about it (especially if you happen to be the
poor guy up front, who usually
can't be moved at all).
Therefore, your first priority will
usually be to start moving your
people into the room as soon as
you can. This may not always be
possible, as when a monster or
two are right beside the doorway
and your whole party is stuck
until some room frees up.
Distance weapons can sometimes help in these situations, but
much depends on the placement of the
door relative to the party. Too often,
the angles are too severe, and bows or
thrown weapons can't be used, making
for a great deal of frustration during
dungeon combat and lengthening the
time you have to fight, since a lot of it
is used just to maneuver your members
to where they can get in a blow.
Another problem is that monsters in
Eternal Dagger are much tougher than
they were in Wizard's Crown. Tactical
combat is necessary for all but the wimpiest creatures, and there aren't too
many of those around. When in doubt,
use tactical combat. While time-consuming, you will usually do better with
it.
As an example, one time I used quick
combat against some giant spiders,
which are relatively low-grade
monsters. Six out of eight party members took damage, and three were
poisoned, before the spiders were
defeated. When I used tactical combat, only one person ended up
poisoned, and only a couple had taken
some injury, and that was minor. The
computer is definitely NOT on your
side in quick combats.
Magic is much more heavily used and

needed than before. There are some
instances, in fact, where only magic
will really be able to defeat the creatures you're up against. This means
everyone in the party will have to be
loaded up with as many potions as
they can carry, particularly when fight-

ing Magoomba and his magic trees or
Sri and his high demon friends.
The amount of punishment that
monsters can absorb is amazing to behold. They take heavy wounds to the
stomach and severe wounds to the
head, bleed copiously, and still remain
standing. You begin to wonder if anything can put them down. This is especially true of high demons, who take
only a little less than forever to kill.
When you're ready to take on Sri,
make sure that everyone in the party is
carrying as many fireball and magic
blast potions as they possibly can, and
hope for the best.
Dexterity is a critical factor in the
game, especially as you approach your
goal of entering the demon world. I
recommend a minimum dex of 45 for
each member of your party before
taking on Sri (which is just about the
last thing you need to do before going
to where the portal is). The high
demons with him have an average dex
of 50, and they are fond of casting multiple spells, one after the other.
Don't bother with any protection
spells when going up against high
demons (or regular demons, either).
Dispell magic is one of the first things

they'll cast, and keep on casting
throughout the battle, along with a
number of others. A high demon can
cast as many as five or six spells on his
turn, which can make things very difficult for your party. Essentially, a fight
with demons usually comes down to
who can get off the most spells in
the least amount of time. It's your
magic versus theirs and you'd better have a lot of magic on your
side.
Travel in the outdoors is on
foot, except when taking a ship to
one of the other islands. You
must keep an eye on your fatigue
as you travel, because your party
will tire quickly, especially in
rough terrain such as forests or
hills, and this fatigue will diminish
their fighting abilities. On a one
for one basis: a fatigue of 10 will
lower weapon skills by 10 points,
a fatigue of 20 will lower it by 20
points, and so on. Therefore, you
will usually spend part of each
day simply resting to keep from
becoming too tired.
There is no travel at night. When it
gets dark, the party is automatically
"camped out" for the evening, whether
you want it to be or not. This is also
the time when hunting for food is done
(so at least one party member should
have this skill). If the hunt is not successful, the party must depend on
either pre-purchased rations or a
priest praying for food. Do note that
one ration (as bought in the market) is
sufficient to feed the entire party for
one day. Overall, it's better to have
some rations to backup the hunting
skill, and save karma for more important things, such as healing injuries
and raising the dead.
Daylight varies with the time of year.
There are more day hours in the summer months and less in the winter
months, so try to arrange lengthy expeditions for those summer months.
There are only four towns in the entire
game: Greenbay, on the starting island; Sea Haven and Lotharia on the
Elven island; and Dwarfhold on the
Dwarven island. They are all similar,
each one having a Marketplace,
Temple, Inn, Enchanter's Shop,
Money Changer's, Alchemist Lab, and
Docks.

Terms of Ensnarement

H

owever, the game authors may be
hearing from DADL, the Dwarven Anti-Defamation League. Dwarves in Eternal Dagger are portrayed as
greedy and arrogant, but especially
greedy. They charge double for all

items. Rations that cost 20 coppers in
Lotharia are 40 coppers in Dwarfhold.
It costs twice as much to have an item
enchanted, or to buy an enchanted
item. Even the Temple is not free. You
must pay a gold piece to enter and
pray. All in all, the Dwarves do not
come off looking very well in this game.
One of the newer features is the
ability to spend experience points to increase abilities while out in the field.
In the previous game, you could only
do this in town. Now, however, you
can make camp at any time (even in a
dungeon), and use accumulated experience points to increase skills,
magic, karma, or attributes on the spot.
There are several things to watch out
for. Never, never engage in combat
after you have camped for the night.
ONLY the two party members on
guard duty will be wearing armor, and
you will NOT be allowed to ready
armor during combat. This means, of
course, the majority of the group will
be fighting pretty much naked, except
for any protective items (such as rings
or necklaces) that they might have.
Keep away from plants in the swamp.
These Swamp Things (as they're
called) are exceptionally fast moving
and nasty, and can cause disease as
well. There is little to be gained from
fighting them, so they are best avoided

whenever possible (Belaboring the obvious, dept.: Don't camp in a swamp!).
It's also a good idea to avoid dragonman patrols in the desert. Invariably,
the dragonmen will be accompanied
by Great Wyrms, who pop up from the
sand and are quite difficult to kill
(reminiscent of a book I read once...).
Your party can end up decimated in
no time at all.
Around the fringes of the
desert, you will often run into
Lizardman and their friends,
the Giant (ambulatory) Cacti.
The Cacti are quite capable of
shooting poisonous needles at
the party members, so the first
spell to be cast in these cases is
Missile Protection. Then, go
after any spell-casting
Lizardmen before they can
throw a Dispel Magic. After
that, you shouldn't have too
much trouble with the monsters
that remain.
Always have a couple of potions of Magic Blast, Fireball, or Dispel Magic with your party. Even your
Sorcerer(s) should have some. When
time is critical, they can be a life-saver
(remember, spells cast from potions,
scrolls, wands, or staves are immediate, whereas even quickcasting a
spell may take more than one move.
A word about Alvis' (or Avlis, it's
spelled both ways) Tower is needed,
here. This is a mean place and the trip
is one way. Once you enter, you must
complete the dungeon to get out
again. So, don't go in until you're
ready (you may not want to save in this
particular dungeon, either) and be
prepared for some puzzles to solve, as
well as monsters to fight.
The underwater city that leads to the
portal is likewise a one-way trip. Once
you're there, you can only go onward;
there is no turning back. It's also filled
with a variety of hostile sea-dwellers,
so be prepared to fight every inch of
the way.
The demon world can be especially
nasty, since you must leave behind all
your weapons and equipment before
passing through to it. There will, of
course, be various monsters to defeat
along the way, and you'll be able to obtain some items as you progress
through the rooms. However, don't ex-

pect to find much in the way of magical goodies.
One more thing: when you've gone
through a dungeon, and there seems to
be nowhere left to go, but you know
there has to be more, walk around the
inner walls of the room, and keep your
eye on the direction rosette.
Documentation is the usual superb
SSI job, and along with the regular
manual is a booklet entitled "The Art
of Adventuring in Middle World".
This gem describes all the nasty things
you will be meeting, gives plenty of
good advice on how to survive the
game, and is a definite must-read
before (and while) playing.

Romancing the Crown
Overall, however, I am not as
pleased with Eternal Dagger as I
was with Wizard's Crown. The previous game was better balanced in
regard to magic and physical combat.
Here, spells play far too great a role.
Further, monsters are much stronger
and take more punishment, which in
turn means tactical combats last
longer and are practically required for
most encounters in order for your
party to come out with minimal injuries.
Fatigue is another sore point. You
can only journey so far each day
before needing to stop and rest and
frequent checks are necessary to keep
an eye on how tired the party is. This
extends travel time and slows down
the game. It may be realistic, but there
is a point where realism begins to have
negative effects on playability and
game enjoyment.
This is also true of dungeon combat.
It may be more "true-to-life" to have
the party members strung out in the
corridors instead of inside the room
with the monsters, but it also increases
frustration as you try to maneuver to
best advantage in close quarters
(which is often not possible). Against a
room full of spell-casters, it can even
be deadly.
Bottom line: Despite some improvements, not up to the previous game;
for patient players only.
Copyright 1987 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

Crocked Al To Me!
I would like to take public issue with
you over the contents of an article appearing in Issue 37 (May '87) of the
magazine. The article in question is
titled Kilobyte Was Here, by M. Evan
Brooks.
To get straight to point, I contend
that Mr. Brooks has chosen a double(or multi-) standard set of criteria for
evaluation. Evidence for this assertion
follows. The issue is the mediocre
rating given to SSG's Battlefront because of an alleged failure of the battalion commanders to act as Mr.
Brooks expects. By that criteria, I was
astounded to see SSI's Kampfgruppe
and War in Russia each achieve the
maximum rating. If the performance of
the artificial intelligence is to be the
criteria by which our game was judged,
I maintain that Mr. Brooks should so
judge the other games he has
evaluated.
In Kampfgruppe, every combat formation in a friendly force can be
maneuvered into the same square!
What's more, they can all fight and no
adverse effect is suffered from cramming a full division into a 200 yard
frontage. To top it off, this is the most
effective fighting formation in the
game and the computer, when controlling an attacking force, very often ends
up with most of its men in such a gigantic killer stack! Even the most passionate advocate of the game must
recognize the absurdity of this situation. Yet, Mr. Brooks maintains that
the only defect in this game is " ... the
lack of joystick input."
In War in Russia, the Germans can
take a summer holiday in the north,
while sending all the Panzers south.
Despite the fact that no borders have
been busted, the Russians retreat all

the way to Minsk. Reputation is a
powerful thing! Meanwhile, every
single tank the Germans possess can
annihilate the Russians in the south
and drive unopposed into Moscow
from the south! Unopposed, because
the rest of the Russians stolidly await
their destiny at Minsk, bravely suffering the total inactivity on their front.
Despite this, Mr. Brooks asserts that
the artificial intelligence problems in
the game occur only " . . . in the later
stages."
In Battlefront, we have developed a
generic intelligence structure, a system
which is not peculiar to a particular
battlefield or order of battle. Despite
the fact that it cannot be preprogrammed, but must be applicable
to any situation, it is certainly smarter
than Kampfgruppe or War in Russia.
There are no sucker punches in Battlefront. Naturally, subordinate battalions may not do exactly what you
wanted (the cry of defeated generals
through the ages), but the computer
opponent is consistently capable of
finding and fighting the enemy. To
beat the computer in Battlefront, you
have to fight fair and square.
In most of our competitor's products,
the artificial intelligence module is not
an integral part of the game, but a
module tacked on at the end, providing a very moderate opponent.
Reviews in your magazine recognize
this fact, but do not pan the games on
this account. Why is Battlefront treated
differently? By any account, it both attempts and achieves more than the
competition.
Artificial intelligence is critical to
computer wargames. It is also very difficult to do properly. Make allowances
for this difficulty by all means, but let
us have one standard for doing so.
Ian Trout
Director, Strategic Studies Group Pty.
Drummoyne, N.S.W.Australia

Ed: It is regrettable that Mr. Brooks'
choice of terms suggested a more negative evaluation of the game than was intended. The use of the adjective "ambitious" was designed to reflect the fact
that your design attempted more than
the competition. It was Mr. Brooks'
opinion that the effort did not totally
succeed. Unfortunately, what "came

across" was that Battlefront was a
failure. Emphatically it is not! See the
final paragraph for more on this.
As for your remarks concerning
Kampfgruppe, when presented with
your comments, SSI conceded that
there is no stacking limit in the game.
However, they continued, Gary Grigsby
made a design decision not to have a
stacking limit because he felt it added
an artificiality to the system. The computer opponent does not intentionally
pile troops into one area. Instead, the
computer groups units according to objectives. If there is a large concentration,
it is due to the location of an objective,
not a "sucker punch." It is interesting to
note that the stacking limitation was enforced in Battlegroup (Grigsby's followup to Kampfgruppe), but that game has
never been as popular its predecessor.
As for War in Russia, the designer felt
that Minsk was a reasonable opening
move in order to facilitate consolidation
in the face of superior (at least, normally) Germans. Paul Murray, who
programmed the AI routines established
an auto-retreat in order to establish
such a consolidated line. Nevertheless,
Paul states that the Al does search to
find where Panzer Corps go and the
program will reinforce according to
where the most Panzers are.
By the way, our readers give Battlefront a high rating on our Strategy
game list and our editorial board felt the
product was significant enough to
nominate it for "Strategy Game of the
Year."

Stalingrad Complaint
It has been said that game designers
fall into two categories: those that are
unhappy because their game has not
been reviewed and those who are unhappy about what the reviewer said.
After reading M. Evan Brooks' review
of Stalingrad Campaign, I fall firmly
into the latter. I am upset that Mr.
Brooks made no attempt to actually
review the game. He gives neither a
description of the game system nor
does he seem to appreciate the viewpoint of the game. I can only conclude
that this article should have been subtitled, "What I Don't Like About

Stalingrad Campaign."
Astoundingly, Mr. Brooks criticizes

Continued on page 54

In the first installment of this three part
series, Sierra On-Line Marketing Director John Williams reviewed currently
available and soon-to-be-released computer software titles that contain adult themes and subject
matter. In this second installment, Mr. Williams will
chronicle how the computerowning public, the computer
software industry, and the
world-at-large has reacted to
the release of computer
software that some people
may find offensive.

the store. This store, and the other
60 + stores that are part of this successful chain, are not allowed to display adult-oriented software products

ruling that was made in 1976, the FCC
now prohibits "... language or materials
that depict or describe, in terms
patently offensive to community standards or the broadcast
media, sexual or excretory
activities or sexual organs."
This "generic" decency
statute will allow the FCC
to pull the operating license
of any broadcaster or
broadcasting company that
says something potentially
"naughty" on the air.

Goodbye 'G' Ratings

The scene is a discount
software store in the
heart of California's conservative Orange County. It is a Saturday
and the store's aisles are packed with
customers seeking to peruse the latest
software offerings. Like most software
stores, people are behaving as though
the store were a library. Even children
seem to be on the best behavior while
mom and dad browse the shelves and
the silence is only occasionally broken
by a computer's beep and a disk
drive's whirr. Suddenly, a customer
completely freaks out:
"I can't believe this! It's disgusting!
Even computers aren't safe for my
children, anymore! I want the
manager! I won't shop here, again!..."
The story you have just read is true
(it happened about six months ago)
and the general pandemonium which
ensued after that scene was caused
when one shopper had her first exposure to the coming wave of adult
software. The item which inspired her
outburst was not even an adult
software product. It was a promotional
teeshirt for Infocom's Leather Goddesses of Phobos. The teeshirt carried the
caption "A dirty mind is a terrible
thing to waste." She was offended by
both the caption and the game's title,
since she said the title "...had deviant
sexual overtones and references to
bondage and other unnatural acts." If
you walk into that discount software
store today, you will not find the
Leather Goddesses teeshirt on display.
In fact, Leather Goddesses and other
games like it may only be found on the
highest software shelves in the back of

The New
Wave of
Adult
Entertainment
Software
Part Two

Therefore, it would seem
that this is exactly the
wrong time for a fledgling
software industry to chalBy John Williams
lenge standards of public
decency. However,
on sale racks or include them in spesoftware publishers like Avalon Hill,
cial displays. The software chain will
Sierra, and Infocom have all marketed
not include adult software titles in its
software titles which are very suggesextensive newspaper and radio advertive in nature. To the surprise of altising program and store employees
most no one, most of these titles have
are not allowed to wear their commade a place for themselves on inplimentary Leather Goddesses of
dustry "hot lists" and bestseller charts.
Phobos teeshirts to work anymore.
There are other kinds of reactions to
It is true that this incident could be
adult software, too. A Mindscape exviewed as an isolated act. We have not
ecutive didn't even want to talk about
seen "preachers" picketing the local
adult content in his corporation's
Computerland nor the police raiding
products and asked, "Why make a big
software stores in order to arrest
deal over nothing?" Cynthia Weiss of
employees on pornography charges.
Infocom notes, "When we went out to
Indeed, no software publishers have
sell Leather Goddesses of Phobos, we
been arrested for "contributing to the
got complaints that the game was too
delinquency of a hacker." Neverthetame...." The customer support
less, this single act of protest may be
manager at Sierra reports that she
viewed as the "first shot fired" in a comreceives complaints from parents
ing backlash against adult-oriented
when she refuses to answer their
computer products.
children's requests for hints on Leisure
In the seven years since Ronald
Suit Larry. In spite of those who deny
Reagan became president, the United
that there is a problem or try to miniStates has taken a noticeable swing to
mize public reaction, adult themes in
"the right." The government-sponsored
computer software have garnered the
Meese Commission has linked explicit
wrath of some people.
sexual material to almost everything,
Custer's Revenge, an adult software
including violent crime. Tipper Gore
title from Milkway Productions, has
and her band of senator's wives have
been the target of a protest by Women
brought the recording industry to its
Against Pornography and was
knees with threats of imposed industrypresented with a lawsuit by, at least,
wide record rating systems and airone major computer hardware
wave censorship. On April 16th of this
manufacturer. Sierra's Leisure Suit
year, the Federal Communications
Larry has been banned in South
Commission rewrote its own broadAfrica, but the company feels that this
casting standards on what can and canis all right because they are boycotting
not be said over the airwaves. In addiSouth Africa due to apartheid. Furtion to the infamous "seven words you
ther, the Moral Majority and its ilk
can't say on television or on the radio"
recently targeted a protest at a

Louisiana publisher who was producing a buyer's guide for adult software.
One small adult-oriented software
publisher (who wishes to remain
anonymous) said that he has received
a multitude of "hate mail" coming from
the Bible Belt. Much of the hate mail
is enclosed in the pre-paid envelopes
that he has provided for customers to
use in direct orders. Not only does he
have to wade through this hate mail
while he looks for orders, but he has to
realize that he paid postage on each
one.
In addition, many of the software
publishers that we talked to mentioned
that some of their largest customers
would not take on software with adult
content. I called some of these customers, but most preferred not to comment on the article. Perhaps, these customers are as afraid of being labeled
"too conservative" as they are of being
called "pornographers." Nevertheless,
one major mail order outfit that takes
a public stand against adult-oriented

software and is not ashamed is Protec-

to Enterprises of Illinois. The company "...was founded on Christian principles and ethics and will not sell any
product that goes against those principles." Adult software that contains
adult themes and any game having elements of fantasy-role playing will not
be sold by Protecto.
The latter proscription should
remind readers that the protest against
and banning of computer software is
not confined to software which contains elements of s-e-x. Microprose
Software recently found themselves in
an interesting situation. This top
maker of simulation-style arcade
games opened up a European distribution network, only to find that its offerings were banned from West
Germany's markets due to excessive
violence. The Ultima series of games
and all fantasy role-playing games,
computerized or not, have long been
the target of fundamentalist religious

Whether or not adult software is a
threat to our national morals or a
harmless form of entertainment, it is
coming and due to arrive in a hurry. In
the final installment of "Goodbye G
Ratings," we will look at how makers
of software warn potential buyers of
adult themes in their products and
what, if any, attempts the software industry will make to impose self regulation. We will also look at how computer software could be judged by the
same standards as movies and offer
some personal opinions on how the
adult software industry will grow and
what, if anything, the opponents of
adult software can do to get their
opinions heard.

Continued from page 51
Stalingrad Campaign because its
scenarios follow history! He complains
that "The German must initially take
advantage of his numerical and equipment superiority. No matter how successful his play, the German will eventually be forced to assume the defensive. The Russian offensive cannot be
avoided ...." I must ask, "What does
Mr. Brooks want???" The Stalingrad
Campaign is, after all, a historical
study. If he doesn't want to face the
Soviets, he should play only the Case
Blau scenario (which ends just prior to
the Soviet counter-offensive). I also
take issue with his claim that, knowing
the Soviet offensive is coming, the German player can prematurely "...
suspend his offensive in order to assume the defensive" and thus achieve
victory. In this, he fails to consider (or
even mention) what I feel is a major innovation of the game system. In
Stalingrad Campaign, the computer
has an active role as the player's
Supreme Commander (Hitler or
Stalin). The Supreme Commander sets
the strategic goals and posture (offense or defense) for the player. In this
guise, the computer continually
evaluates the player's performance
and reviews his orders to insure that
the player is following his strategic
directives. If the player is unable or unwilling to follow the Supreme
Commander's guidance, then the
player loses prestige and victory
points. In extreme cases of insubordination (such as what Mr. Brooks suggests), the Supreme Commander may
even countermand the player's orders.
For example, if Hitler has ordered a
general offensive toward Stalingrad,
but the player digs in and assumes a
defensive posture, then the computer
will intervene and direct individual
units to attack. In summary, if the
player wishes to retain control of his
forces, then he should not blatantly disregard the strategic goals of the campaign.
Mr. Brooks denigrates the map for
being dull and states that " ... what appears to be the road network is, in
reality, the supply network." The
reviewer had previously criticized the
game's documentation for its "paucity."
If he had read the game's documentation carefully, he would have noted the

following: "The maps show the locations of major towns, cities, rivers, and
rail lines . . . ." Nowhere do the rules
claim that the map shows road networks. Ever since the U.S. Civil War,
railroads have been used for supply,
not tactical movement. Every map of
southern Russia (from both German
and Soviet sources) consulted during
the design of Stalingrad Campaign
shows the locations of rail lines, but
rarely roads. There were no autobahns
in Russia in 1942. Mr. Brooks'
criticism is the result of his own mistake, not mine.
The reviewer erroneously states that
" ...there is no way to order a strategic
encirclement." This is absolutely false.
The game is very unforgiving of the
player who allows his supply lines to
be cut.
Concerning limited intelligence, Mr.
Brooks criticizes Stalingrad Campaign
because it does not provide the player
with a unit-by-unit statement of enemy
strength. He claims that " ... probes
and battles would reveal [an enemy
unit's strength] within a reasonable
period." In...the encirclement of
Stalingrad during Operation Uranus,
the Soviets believed that 75,000 German troops were in the city. In reality,
there were more than 250,000 there.
Rather than provide the player with a
historically unjustifiable, but accurate
estimate of enemy unit strength or a
uselessly inaccurate (but historically
correct) estimate, it was decided the
limit the player's information to that
which would be relevant to the central
HQ's staff: namely, the identity of
enemy units engaged, estimates of
front-level enemy strengths (engaged
and in reserve) and recent losses for
both sides, enemy intentions, weather
forecasts, etc.
Another "fog of war" feature that Mr.
Brooks didn't like is that units do not
always move as quickly toward their
objectives as he would wish. He states
that "As a staff officer, one would
know how far a corps/army could
move within a week ...." Mr. Brooks
should also know (as a staff officer)
that units hardly ever move as quickly
as HQ expects. That the player should
experience a degree of frustration is
deliberate. Stalingrad Campaign was intended to give the player an exposure

to the trials and tribulations of comman d ....

Mr. Brooks notes that the game's
documentation did not mention that
the East Bank of Stalingrad is forbidden to Axis units. Although I must
admit that the rules fail to mention this
(this detail was misplaced somewhere
between the designer and the printer),
the program does issue a warning
(without penalty) should the German
player attempt to order units to go
there. I find it difficult to understand
how this can be construed as more
than a very minor flaw in the game.
In conclusion, it is clear that Mr.
Brooks did not like Stalingrad Campaign. As a reviewer, though, he has
the responsibility to do more than just
list his gripes. It is not until the last sentence of the review that he mentions
that the game has some innovative concepts. That he fails to describe these
innovations, but instead offers shallow
criticisms such as the above is unforgivable. It seems to me that he has absolutely, positively missed the point of
the game.
Bill Nichols
Designer of Stalingrad Campaign
Silver Spring, MD
Ed.: Then there were these comments.
(I now know what it must feel like to be
Howard Cosell's editor!):
The Stalingrad article is, by far, the
best review ever to appear in CGW.
[Also], Mr. Brooks' evaluation of
WWII games [in Kilobyte Was Here]
was also right on. I have most all of the
games evaluated and agree with him
on almost every point.
J. Dale Hight
Los Angeles
More from Evan Brooks.
R.F. Batchelder
Pembroke Pines FL
Tell Jay Selover (Fiery Ambush) and
Evan Brooks (three articles), "great
workin Number 37. Keep it up. I also
enjoy the work Vince DeNardo is
doing on the art.
J. Dunn
Seabrook, MD

Taking A Peek
Continued from page 6

Sharedata, Inc.
7400 W. Detroit St.
Chandler, AZ 85226

CONVERSIONS
RECEIVED

FAMILY FEUD: This is the closest
you can come to playing the game
without having Richard Dawson kiss
your wife. It's played just exactly like
the game show, but you have to supply your own prizes (and kisses).
Apple, C-64, IBM ($12.95). Circle
Reader Service #19.
JEOPARDY: Based on the most
cerebral of the game shows, trivia
fans will enjoy this faithful adaptation of the television program.
Apple, C-64, IBM ($12.95). Circle
Reader Service #20.
WHEEL OF FORTUNE: If you've
ever wondered whether Pat or
Vanna is most important to the
show, note that this adaptation kept
Vanna and let's the computer perform Pat's job. Apple, C-64, IBM
($12.95). Circle Reader Service #21.
Strategic Studies Group
1747 Orleans Ct.
Walnut Creek, CA 94598
BATTLES IN NORMANDY: Eight
western front scenarios based on a
refined Battlefront system.
Scenarios include: Omaha Beach,
Sword Beach, Utah Beach, Cherbourg, Carentan, Villers Bocage,
Goodwood, and Epsom. Apple, C64 ($39.95). Circle Reader Service
#23.
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
1046 N. Rengstorff Ave.
Mountain View, CA 94043
ROADWAR EUROPA: Don't expect to meet the Clark Griswald
family in this trip to Europe, but you
can transfer your villainous thugs
from Roadwar 2000 into this sequel
to the popular post-holocaust
strategy game. Apple, C-64, IBM
($39.95), ST ($44.95). Circle Reader
Service #24.

For the Amiga:
The Black Cauldron (Sierra)
Hardball (Accolade)
Leisure Suit Larry (Sierra)
Phantasie III: Wrath of
Nikademus(SSI)

For the Apple II:
Aliens (Activision)
Killed Until Dead (Accolade)

For the Apple H GS: _
Silent Service (Microprose)

For the Atari 8-bit:
Ace of Aces (Accolade)
The Eternal Dagger (SSI)

For the Atari ST:
221B Baker St. (Datasoft)
The Eternal Dagger (SSI)
Hardball (Accolade)
Phantasie III: Wrath
of Nikademus (SSI)
Rings of Zilfin (SSI)
For the Commodore 64/128:
Amnesia (EA)
For the IBM:
Mean 18 Famous Course Disk (Accolade)
Robot Rascals (EA)

THE NAME
GAME
Continued from page 41

microcomputer games is Avalon Hill.
Since they published the first wargames that most of us ever played, we
were very curious about the origin of
their name. It seems that Avalon Hill

began in 1958 as The Avalon Company, named after the suburban community where Charles S. Roberts (yes,
the one the award is named after),
founder of the company, resided.
Since, however, the game and hobby
industries work so closely together,
there was some confusion with regard
to The Avalon Company which
published games and The Avalon
Manufacturing Company which made
paint-by-number kits. Therefore,
Roberts changed the name by adding

the designation "Hill" to the name.
This was because Charles Roberts
lives, to this day, high on a hill overlooking the community of Avalon.
We started with Three-Sixty, so we
will also come full circle. Tom
Frisina's departure from Accolade to
form his own company started us think-

ing about whole question of names in
the first place so let's finish with his
former company, ,Accolade name.
Alan Miller told us that the new company was deliberately looking for a
name at the beginning of the alphabet
(for obvious public relations advantages). Alan Miller opened his
Webster's Dictionary and started looking at words which began with "A."
When he came to "accolade," he liked
the fact that the word denoted praise
and felt that this was the image of the
kind of product they wanted to create.

Interestingly enough, other companies
with their roots at Activision have used
the same approach. Garry Kitchen's
new company is to be called Absolute
and another new company is to be
called Acclaim.
"What is in a name?" the immortal
bard asked rhetorically. Apparently,
there is much more than we expected.
We hope to share the history of other
company names in the future.

Continued from page 14
will actually move to seize the objective.
This method of movement is ESSENTIAL. Check your units carefully, and
utilize hold orders to maintain a valid
defensive front. While massive and obvious holes will appear, it is rare that
either side will be capable of complete
exploitation.
Historically, although Germany's
defeat at Stalingrad in 1942 determined that Germany would not win
the war, it was the Battle of Kursk
(1943) that determined that Germany
would lose the war. The player must
be aware of his objectives, and willing
to adjust them depending on the circumstances. Judicious employment
and not headless offensives bear the
fruits of victory.

Observations

Conclusions

he scenarios (Leningrad,
Stalingrad and Kursk) are tightrun situations. They are interesting,
well balanced, and useful as valid
tutorials. Yet, they do not teach the offensive-defensive balance that the
Campaign requires.

Despite its problems, Russia has
to recommend it. Playing
the Soviets is too easy, but the real test
for wargamers has always been the
Axis. Taking command of OKH and
seeking a victory is a true test of skill,
and for that reason, this reviewer considers Russia to carry a high recommendation.
In conclusion, Russia is the most playable simulation of the Eastern Front
on the market. Innovative and interesting, any problems it has are obviated
by its successes. Nach Osten!! (To the
East!)

T

The Campaign is the piece de resistance. Playing as OKH alone, monthly
turns will allow one to complete the
Campaign in four hours. However,
one's computer Army Group commanders are rather dense, and it is difficult to win. The best option is to play
OKH, as well as the three Army
Groups. In this case, a Campaign will
require about 25 hours to play, but offers the most interesting simulation
and the time requirement is minimal
when compared with the period
covered (in comparison, SSI's War in
Russia would require over 200 hours).

POSTSCRIPT: I would like to thank
John Gleason (SSG's stateside representative) for his guidance and explanation of Russia's nuances. While
he never gave solutions, he did point
this reviewer in the proper direction,
and his enthusiasm proved infectious
in the end.

Continued from page 30
venient, but speeds up game play considerably.
The graphics in Guderian are better
than its forerunner in that national
designation, unit types, and terrain are
easy to identify on the screen. This is
particularly true with a color monitor,
but players with monochrome
monitors will have no great difficulty
in identifying terrain as they did in
Gulf Strike. There is no strategic map
available on screen (only a small portion of the entire map is visible at any
one time) since the printed map
enclosed with the game offers that service.
The sound in Guderian serves
primarily to confirm movement orders
(e.g. selecting units). This auditory
confirmation is something of an innovation and we'd like to see more of
it in future games.

Combat Readiness Report
(Game Play)
ith a first rate gaming system
simulating one of the most
decisive battles of the twentieth century, you would think that the game
could not miss. There are, however, a
few "near misses" in this game. First,
the game nowhere addresses the role
of air power in its system. Since close
tactical air support by the Luftwaffe
was critical to the initial German successes, this seems to be a serious omission.
The second and even more serious
weakness lies in the game's combat system. In this system, there are two types
of attacks, Overruns and General Assaults. Units or "stacks" may only be attacked once per turn, however. While
this may sound innocuous enough in
theory, it means in practice that the
player cannot actually use some of the
same tactics which were employed historically by the Germans. The Germans regularly attempted to break
through a line at several points, surround an enemy position with several
strong positions of their own, and
crush the enemy between the assembled forces. In Guderian, armchair
generals will discover to their chagrin
that only one, that is correct, one of his

W

stacks can attack the encircled enemy
per turn! That doesn't ring true.

Debriefing
(Evaluation)
Guderian
uderian is a very playable game
G
options that help gamers

avoid some of the complexity and
lugubrious pace of other products.
Our reservations concerning the combat system not withstanding, strategy
gamers will find this latest offering
from Avalon Hill an Eastern Front
simulation with a difference.

Ultima Versus Wizardry
(Continued from page 18)
tended to evoke a different emotion.
Adams states that the player character
"Werdna's will undoubtedly begin with
a lust for revenge, but feels that the experiences they encounter should cause
that to change. In fact, there are even
multiple endings to the game "...because there are many paths to trod in
the search for power." The sensitive
player may discover that the most
seemingly expedient solution to a
problem or convenient route is not always the optimal one. In fact,
"Werdna" may cause more thinking
about life, right and wrong than any
game since Ultima IV.
Speaking of Ultimas, Lord British
was concerned enough about the
criticism which the fantasy role-playing genre receives to invest thought on
what the game itself does to the
players. He did not want to be guilty of
designing a game which implied that
violence was the answer to all or even

many of life's problems. That is why
he, along with Roe Adams, developed
the eight virtues to be measured in Ultima IV. The purpose of the design
was to challenge the players to be better people after finishing the game
than when they started. That is why
the game begins with the gypsy fortune-teller and tests one's responses to
various situations. If answered honestly, one can create a psychometric
profile of themselves. It is to be hoped
that one doesn't create a worse profile
in the course of the game.
In Ultima V, kharma points take the
place of the psychometric profile used
in IV. Nevertheless, Lord British has
not allowed matters to be measured in
simple blacks and whites. Lord British
is concerned about getting a
psychological response, a personal
emotional involvement, out of the
player. In an adventure which reminds
one of Dostoevsky's "The Grand Inquisitor" in The Brothers Karamazov,
Blackthorn tortures your friend, Iolo
(who has been with
you since the earliest Ultimas. It is a
"no win" situation
which is guaranteed
to infuriate you as a
player and will
probably cause you
to swear revenge
upon Blackthorn.
The irony is that
Blackthorn truly
believes that his
type of "moral" and
"physical" control is
necessary in order
to keep anarchy
and chaos at bay.
Players may actually feel guilty opposing him. Yet, he has
become evil in
order to accomplish a supposed good.
Such literarypsychological
devices to bring the
player into the
scenario are effective on more than
one level. They
motivate the player

to action, but they also force the player
to think about why he/she does things
certain ways. In the Dostoevsky
reference above, Christ returns to
earth during the Inquisition. He wants
to know why His clergy are using ungodly means to persecute His people.
The Inquisitor sentences Jesus to burn
at the stake as a heretic and sadly admits: "We have taken the sword of
Caesar, and in taking it, of course,
have rejected Thee and followed him."
The torture of Iolo may be a literary
warning to those who believe that
might makes right and the ends justify
the means, to those who believe that
they have the right to force anyone to
believe what they believe.
Other themes in the latest adventure
force one to cogitate upon virtue, as
well. The previous adventure taught
the player about the worthiness of
eight different virtues. The new adventure instructs by means of negative examples. The Shadowlords are the opposities of these worthy virtues and
their influence vividly illustrates the
ugliness of their antitheses when found
in human society. If ever a computer
game attempted to inculcate positive
values, it is this series of adventures
designed by a man who still receives
regular hate mail from the Bible Belt.

First Impressions
of these two titles within
T hedaysrelease
[Ed. or weeks?) of each other
is undoubtedly an historic publishing
event in our industry. Both designs follow logically upon their predecessors
and both are technological advancements beyond their antecedents. Both
designs already have a large following
of adherents (although there is a large
overlap, as well) and are virtually assured of being best sellers. Both
designs offer the "biggest" playing environment yet for their playing systems. Both designs will cause
numerous sleepless nights before their
150-200 hours plus of playing time are
finished. It is likely that their relative
merits will be debated and discussed
throughout the next two years. Adventure gamers are in for two unbelievable treats in these products.

RID 40 (Card at pg. 8)
On this page, a number of games and articles
are listed for evaluation, as well as some
general interest questions. Please consider
PRESENTATION (graphics, sound, packaging
and documentation); GAME DESIGN (design,
playability and level of interest); and LIFE
(does the game wear well?). Please rate each
game you have played and article you have
read from 1 (terrible) through 9 (outstanding).
In the 'Comments' space, please answer the
general interest question and/or feel free to
write a letter to the editor (in which case,
please include your name and home town).

Gettysburg continued to hold the high ground on the strategy
side, but attrition dropped the rating to a slightly less impressive 7.97. Kampfgruppe counterattacked past Gunship for a
7.72, giving SSI a formidable position throughout the top
twenty. In the fantasy realm, Ultima IV ascended to its

former glory and Wizardry I regained its bridesmaid's status
while fantasy aficionados wonder if sequels V and IV respectively will dethrone these vintage hits. Starflight soared to
third place, while Might and Magic muscled its way to fourth
position.

