April 1984

Vol. 4 No. 2

FEATURES
SO YOU STILL WANT TO WRITE A COMPUTER GAME . 11
Chris Crawford on Game Design

LEARNING BRIDGE
Goren Computerized

CARRIER FORCE
The Fog of War at Its Foggiest

DIRECTORY OF GAME MANUFACTURERS

16
Bob Proctor
22
Tom Cheche

24

Annual Directory of Companies and Their Games

ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT RESULTS

36

An Incredible Finish

PLANET PHOTON

41

"Live" Sci-Fi Gaming Comes to Dallas

Departments
Inside the Industry

6

Taking a peek

8

Letters

12

Hobby and Industry News

14

Dispatches (M.U.L.E. Designer Notes)

17

Scorpion's Tale (Starcross Tips)

20

Tele-Gaming

32

Name of the Game (Software Superstars?)

20

The Commodore Key

39

Micro Reviews (Parthian Kings, Planetfall, Axis Assassin,
Hard Hat Mack, Oil's Well, Conquering Worlds)

43

Reader Input Device

50

Game Ratings

48

INSIDE THE INDUSTRY
by Dana Lombardy

In the December, 1983 issue we gave
you the results of the survey regarding
how the readers of CGW buy computer
games. Most of you (55.1%) said you buy
fewer computer games now, and that
you're more selective about the ones you
do buy.
Last issue (February, 1984), we published the results of a survey that asked you
what kinds of non-computer games (wargames, role-playing games, etc.) you
played before and after you became involved with computer games. Most of you
(46.9%) still play many of the same noncomputer games as you did before you
became a computer hobbyist, but almost
one-third of you (31.0%) have stopped
playing these other types of games and
now play computer games exclusively.
This time our survey asks you what
types of computer games you play
regularly, and what features you like best
in computer games.
For the purposes of this survey, let us
say that there are roughly five categories
of computer games: adventure (roleplaying; wargame; arcade; abstract; and
sports or other strategy.
Adventure computer games would include such games as Zork; Ultima; Maces
& Magic; Wizardry; Temple of Apshai;
Questron; Suspended; and Castle Wolfenstein (which also has arcade features).
Computer wargames include historical
and science fiction battle simulations,
such as: Robotwar; Cosmic Balance; Warp
Factor; Computer Diplomacy; Eastern
Front; Battle of Shiloh; Computer Ambush; Combat Leader; Close Assault;
Bomb Alley; TAC; Paris in Danger; Legionnaire; Eagles; Operation Whirlwind; and
North Atlantic '86.
Computer arcade games include, as
only a very small sampling: Choplifter;
Lode Runner; Donkey Kong; Pac-Man;
Frogger; Centipede; Zaxxon; Flight
Simulator; Q-bert; Lunar Leeper;
Jawbreaker; Flying Tigers; and various
pinball games.
Abstract computer games include:
Sargon; Fortress; Pensate; and other
chess, checkers, and backgammon style
games.
Sports and other strategy computer
games include: Computer Baseball; Computer Football; Championship Golf; Corn-

puter Facts in Five; Cartels & Cutthroats;
M.U.L.E.; etc.
Some games have features that could
place them in more than one category.
For example, Flying Tigers has both arcade and wargame features.
The above list is meant to provide a
guideline to enable you to answer the
following questions.

Use R.I.D. card in the
back of magazine
to respond to this
survey.
Part I (Questions 1 through 5)
Check each category of computer game
that you play at least five times a month:
1.

Adventure

2.

Wargame

3.

Arcade

4.

Abstract

5.

Sports/Other

Part II (Question 6)
Put the number of the one category of
computer game that you play the most
(your favorite):
1.

Adventure

2.

Wargame

3.

Arcade

4.

Abstract

5.

Sports/Other

Part III (Questions 7 through 10)
Check each type of play you're involved
in at least three times a month:
7.

Solitaire (you against the computer)

8.

Player vs. Player (you against
another player using the same
computer)

9.

Tele-Gaming (you against another
playing or computer in a network
using a modem)

10.

Spectator Mode (you watch the computer demonstrate or play against
itself)

Part IV (Question 11)
Check the one type of play that you do
most each month (your favorite):
A.

Solitaire

B.

Player vs. Player

C.

Tele-Gaming

D.

Spectator Mode

Thanks for taking the time to tell us the
types of computer games you play. The
results of this mini-survey will be published in a future column.

Game Playing Aids from Computer Gaming World
COSMIC BALANCE SHIPYARD DISK
Contains over 20 ships that competed in the CGW COSMIC BALANCE SHIP
DESIGN CONTEST. Included are Avenger, the tournament winner; Blaze,
Mongoose, and MKVP6, the judge's ships. These ships are ideal for the gamer
who cannot find enough competition or wants to study the ship designs of
other garners around the country. SSI's The Cosmic Balance is required to use
the shipyard disk. PLEASE SPECIFY APPLE OR ATARI VERSION WHEN
ORDERING. $15.00

ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT DISKS
Diskette #1 contains the source code for the twelve entrants in CGW's Second
Annual Robotwar Tournament. Diskette #2 contains the seventeen entrants in
the recently completed Third Annual Robotwar Tournament. Muse Software's
ROBOTWAR required to use these diskettes. Please specify which diskette
when ordering. $15.00 each or $25.00 for both.

CGW BASEBALL DISK
Contains the four teams of the All Star League reported on in 3.3 (AL West All
Stars, Al East, NL West, and NL East); the six teams of the 1982 Winter League
(see 3.3), the eight teams of the Greatest Baseball Team of All Time
Tournament, and a reprint of the results of The GBTOAT tournament from
issue 2.3. SSI's Computer Baseball Apple version required to use data disk.
Apple version only. $15.00
Send check or money order to: Computer Gaming World, Disk Order Dept.,
P.O. Box 4566, Anaheim, CA 92803-4566. California residents please add 696
sales tax. Allow 3-4 weeks for delivery.

Activision Inc.
2350 Bayshore Frontage Rd.
Mountain View, CA 94043
KABOOM!: The home video machine
comes to the home computer. Kaboom
is just one of many video cartridge
games that Activision and others have
translated into home computer format. You play again the computer's
mad bomber or a human opponent as
you attempt to catch bombs which are
tossed with ever increasing speed.
Strictly for the arcade fiend. Each of
the Activision games is available (or
will be) for the Atari, C-64, and
Adam/Colecovision systems.
MEGAMANIA: Space Invaders meet
your nightmares. Fight off invasions
of hamburgers, ice cream sandwiches,
radial tires, steam irons and other
unspeakable horrors. Nothing new
here in terms of design, but the
graphics are humorous. If you are a
Space Invaders fan, you will like it.
PITFALL: You are Pitfall Harry searching for treasures in a danger filled
jungle. Much like B.C.'s Quest for
Tires in design elements.
RIVER RAID: Pilot your aircraft up
the river blowing up bridges while
avoiding helicopters, ships, jets, etc.

Atari Program Exchange
1346 Bordeaux
Sunnyvale, CA 94086

EXCALIBUR: Chris Crawford game
set in a fantasy world based on the
legend of King Arthur. The large scope
of the game includes economics,
diplomacy, magic, wars and battles,
friendship, loyalty, treachery, etc.
Atari. $30.00

Avalon Hill Game Company
4517 Harford Rd.
Baltimore, MD 21214

UNDER SOUTHERN SKIES: A
simulation of the exploits and sinking
of the German Pocket Battleship Graf
Spee. Either solitaire (computer is
British) or two player, USS has a
strategic as well as tactical game. Nice
graphics. Look for a future review.
Apple.

SPACE COWBOY: An arcade game
in which you must escape from prison
and pilot your ship to safety. Good
45 ° graphic view. Atari.

Blue Chip Software
19818 Ventura Blvd. Suite 204
Woodland Hills, CA 91364
BARON: Real estate simulation game
which doubles as an educational vehicle for learning about investment
finance. 60 months of real estate
trading is compressed into a one hour
exercise. Many systems.

Cheapsuit Software
P.O. Box 923
Iowa City, IA 52244

STAR FERRY: A strategy game of
passenger travel to the stars. With
limited capital you, as the owner of a
starship company, must build ships,
explore for habitable planets, and
transport emigrants there. Apple.

Davka Corp.
845 N. Michigan Ave., Suite 843
Chicago, IL 60611

SAMSON AND DELILAH: Arcade
game based on the biblical story of
Samson bringing down the Philistine
temple. C-64 (Apple coming). $24.95.

Magnetic Harvest
P.O. BOX 255
Hopkins, SC 29061
GNOSIS VII: Very interesting program. Gnosis is a complex word logic
puzzle set within a role-playing
scenario. Your goal is to discover the
secret names of seven Lords of Power.
Check it out. Apple. $19.95.
PLANETMASTER: You are in charge
of a sanctuary satellite and charged
with selecting and maintaining six endangered alien species. Variations in
the needs of the various species, all
coexisting in the same environment

make for a real challenge. Apple.
$24 .95 .
Maximus
6723 Whitter Ave.
McLean, VA 22101
SAFETYLINE: A software movie narrated by Max the Cat which presents
safety tips to children. Children are
taught how to cross streets safely and
what to do when they get lost. Four
games reinforce the safety tips.
Disk/cassette ($34.95). Cassette only
($29.95).
STORYLINE: Clover the Clown
guides children though the fairy tales

"Rumpelstiltskin" and "The Ugly
Duckling". Four games also included.
Atari. See "Safetyline" for prices.
Microprose Software
10616 Beaver Dam Road
Hunt Valley, MD 21030
MIG ALLEY ACE: A well done split
screen 3–D air combat game. The
split screen allows two players to sit
in separate cockpits (using one computer). Players can fight one another
in F-86's or dogfight cooperatively
against MIG-15's. The simulated aircraft are capable of real jet aircraft
maneuvers. Atari. $34.95.

Micro Lab
2699 Skokie Valley Rd.
Highland Park, IL 60035
CRISIS MOUNTAIN: The original
Apple version of this game was put
out by Synergistic Software. An arcade game that requires strategic
planning. You must face a multitude
of perils as you seek to defuse terrorist
bombs set to blow up the Western
Hemisphere. Atari. $35.00.
MicroSPARC Inc.
10 Lewis St.
Lincoln, MA 01773
HALLOWE'EN: Arcade game in

which you attempt to survive in a
dark mansion on Hallowe'en night.
Apple.

Pryority Software, Inc.
25570 Chiquito Place
Carmel, CA 93923
FORBIDDEN QUEST: Here is
something new. FQ is the first in a
series of Artext(TM) adventures
which combine prose with original
art prints. Each game will include 5
8(/2) by 11 prints which contain clues
that can be used in solving the adventure. Apple.

Superware
2028 Kingshouse Rd.
Silver Spring, MD 20904

AFTER PEARL: A strategic level
simulation of the War in the Pacific.
Scrolling map covers much of the
Central and South Pacific. You fight
for control of bases in the 40 turn
campaign game. Midway and Yamato
learning scenarios included. Players
move task forces, all combat is controlled by computer. Actual combat
resolution is pretty simplistic. Atari.
Continued on p. 46

Chris Crawford

Some time ago I wrote an article for
Computer Gaming World entitled "So You
Want to Write a Computer Game." Since
the article was written, the computer
games industry has undergone many
dramatic changes. The eternal truths of
1981 are the outdated misconceptions of
1984. How have the tumultuous events of
the past 24 months affected the prospective computer game designer?
Some things have not changed at all.
For example, in the previous article I
wrote:
"No great paintings were ever painted
with crayons; no great symphonies
were ever composed with kazoos; do
you really think that you can write a
great program with BASIC?"
It is just as true today. Assembly language
is still the only development language for
serious game designers.
Another constant element is the fickle
nature of fame and fortune. Vast wealth
has descended upon some designers who
were lucky enough to be at the right place
at the right time. I know of several very
worthy game designers whose brilliant
designs just haven't caught on. My own
experience has underlined the quirkiness
of the marketplace: EASTERN FRONT
(1941) has sold very, very well, but
LEGIONNAIRE — every bit as good as
EASTERN FRONT (1941) plods along
with slow sales.
Some of the advice I gave in the original
article is even more applicable today. I
emphasized the importance of polish, adjuring the designer to "polish, polish,
polish" that game until he was absolutely sick of it. Today, I can only add emphasis to the hyperbole of the original article. Computer games have improved in
the last two years, and much of the improvement has been the polish. Games
like M.U.L.E. raise the stakes for
everybody; the market will no longer
tolerate slipshod design or lack of polish.
Another factor that is even more impor-

tant today is originality. Two years ago,
I ranted in isolation against the army of
soulless clones assailing the games buyer.
Now, the consumer has taken up the cry.
The most foolish thing you could do right
now is attempt to sell another PAC-MAN,
SPACE INVADERS, or DEFENDER ripoff. People are utterly sick and tired of
that stuff. Even the VidKid, a youngster
who review video games in a nationally
syndicated column, has taken to complaining about the lack of originality in
the current crop of games. There is no
point in designing a game unless it is truly
original.
Some things have changed a great deal
in the last two years. The most important
change from the point of view of the game
designer is the loss of focus in the
machine base. Three years ago, life was
simple: you designed for the Apple,
period. Two years ago, you had to choose
between the Apple and the Atari Home
Computer.
But the last twelve months have seen a
great deal of confusion. Texas Instruments started coming on strong, then
dropped out of the marketplace. Commodore came out of nowhere with their
Commodore 64, which quickly became
the hottest-selling machine in the
marketplace. Then came the Coleco
Adam and the IBM PCjr, both of which
stirred up intense interest, most of which
has been deflated. As of this writing, the
C64 and the Atari Home ComputerTM are
still the dominant machines in the games
marketplace, but the sense of confidence
has been shattered. Nobody knows what
to predict.
Another big change has been slowly
creeping up on us for years. The 48K diskbased game is finally the standard. This
was always the case with Apple software,
but software for other machines, especially the Atari Home ComputerTM , was frequently designed for 16K of RAM and
provided on either a cassette or a ROM

cartridge. 48K RAM is now a standard,
and the diskette is the best way to
distribute the software for this size.
The final big change is in the nature of
the software development team. Two
years ago, the individual reigned
supreme. The tight coding requirement
of games for 16K machines gave the individual a great advantage over the team.
But the demand for bigger games has
made it more difficult for the individual
to keep up. More and more, we are seeing software produced by teams. Richard
Garriott, Dan Bunten, and Jon Freeman
are examples of notable game designers
who are really team leaders rather than
lonely individuals. Even I, the squawking
exponent of rugged individualism,
resorted to a team effort to execute EXCALIBUR. As we move to bigger
machines, the team may become even
more important.
So where does this leave you, the prospective game designer? We are seeing a
transition from a cottage industry to the
big-time. Three years ago an individual
working at home could revolutionize the
industry. But, times are changing; it's getting harder for that to happen. I believe
that the individual working at home can
create a successful game only by (a) working full-time on the effort, or (b) obtaining
the assistance of a support organization.
Prospective game designers who find this
disheartening should console themselves
that it is at least a measure of the maturation of our industry.
Chris Crawford heads a game
design/research group at Atari, Inc.

Copies of Crawford's original
article which appeared in CGW 1.1
are available for $1.00. Send requests
to CGW, Box 4566, Anaheim CA
92803-4566, Attention: Reprints

Please advise me. I have an Apple Ile with an Apple controller
card and a Quintron disk drive. When I boot SSI's Computer
Quarterback it shows the company's name name and the three
options. But, before I can pick one, it moves on and shows
characters from the program. I have tried to correct the problem
by removing the 80 column card, but have not altered the results.
Cesar Baldemor, Bellflower, CA
The problem that you have had is due to the fact that some early
copies of Computer QB do not run on a IIe. The game has since
been altered to adjust for the problem. If you send back your disk,
SSI will replace it at no cost. SSI wants our readers to know that
they have a technical hotline for such problems: 415-964-1200 during normal business hours (Pacific time).
I would like to see more objective criticisms of games, their
short comings as well as their strongpoints, even if it means being uncomplimentary to advertisers. Also, print more detailed
strategy tips and techniques. Your magazine isn't the only game
in town, but it certainly is the best. How about going monthly?
Lee Bishop, Santa Monica, CA
With the limited space available and the number of titles being
released on the market, we can very seldom justify giving much
space, if any, to games which our reviewers didn't like. The ex-

ception to this rule is in the case of feature releases from one of
the major software houses which, in our opinion, fails to live up
to the quality expected by the game buying public. We would love
to publish more strategy tips articles if good ones are submitted.
Our writers come from our reader base. In addition to strategy articles we are also looking for more reviews of Avalon Hill games
as well as designer's notes articles on the more popular games.
Anyone "listening"?
Your newer readers (such as myself) need access to copies of
CGW before 2.3. How about a book of all articles published
before 2.3?
Lance King, Painesville, OH
That is a possibilty in the future (if there is enough interest. For
now, we will provide a photocopy of any article in our out-of-print
$1.00.
for
issues
Since I subscribed to CGW I haven't been disappointed. I am,
however, a bit concerned about the attitude among some software firms and dealers that the Atari is a game not worthy of
good simulations or business software. Obviously they are
wrong. Although the bucks are hard to come by, I usually buy
at least one item of software per month. Wake up manufacturers
and Dealers!
James B. Phipps, Katy, TX
Have the survey results from INSIDE THE INDUSTRY 4.1 (on
wargamers switching to computer games) been communicated
to the manufacturers and designers in GAMA? [Ed. Note —
GAMA stands for Game Manufacturer's Association of
America. GAMA's membership consists primarily of those companies that design strategy board games, role-playing games and
other paper media games for serious gamers].
I'm a grognard in the wargaming hobby (20 plus years). I have
not bought a board game in 15 months and I have started to
dispose of my 200 plus game collection. I would gladly subscribe
to a magazine that devotes more space to wargaming and less
to fantasy, sci-fi, and arcade material.
James Butters, Rockville, MD
Yes, the staff of CGW meet with members of GAMA at the recent CRAFT, MODEL & COLLECTIBLES show (ex-HIA show).
We shared the information that our survey uncovered (namely that
31% of those that used to play board wargames have given them
up now that they play computer wargames).
Unfortunately we were not encouraged by the general response
from the board game manufacturers. But Avalon Hill has
been into computer games for several years and their 1984 releases
look pretty good. And Task Force Games has released two games
but were more excited about their Civil War game that they expect to release later this year, calling it their "first serious computer wargame".
TSR Hobbies has "discontinued computer games temporarily....
but will be coming back in 1985" according to TSR president Kevin
Blume. TSR Hobbies, which gave us DUNGEONS AND
DRAGONS, released 3 computer games in 1983, none of which
did that well in the marketplace.
Game Designer's Workshop is working on three games. A sci-fi
game based loosely on their board game IMPERIUM, a Civil War
game based on the battle of Chickamauga, and a North Africa Campaign game which is the favorite of GDW's Frank Chadwick.

HOBBY AND INDUSTRY NEWS
Davka Corporation, the Chicago-based
producer of bible and religious software,
announced the BIBLE ACTION
SERIES. Two new games, SAMSON
AND DELILAH and JERICHO, are the
first products in the line. They bring
familiar arcade action to the world of the
Bible. A dozen games in all are planned,
with titles such as FORTY DAYS AND
FORTY NIGHTS, MOSES AND THE
MOUNTAIN, and DAVID AND
GOLIATH.
Avalon Hill is releasing a four disk
space fantasy adventure entitled
JUPITER MISSION 1999. It will run on
Atari home computer systems. The advanced look we had at the Hobby Show
in Anaheim was impressive. No price
listed.
Strategic Simulations will be releasing
50 MISSION CRUSH, a B-17 roleplaying game, for the Apple, Atari, and
C-64 in May ($39.95). The monster game
WAR IN RUSSIA (Apple and Atari) will
be released in May with a whooping
$79.95 price tag. RAILS WEST (Apple &
Atari) will be out by the time you read this.
C-64 conversions (all now available): Germany 85, RDF, Fortress, Cosmic Balance.
Atari conversions for Epidemic and
Broadsides are now available.
SORCERER, the second release in Infocom's ENCHANTER series of adventures in the mystic arts, should be on
dealer shelves by the time you read this.
SORCERER is written by Steven Meret-

zky, the author of the popular game
PLANETFALL.
Infocom also announced that their
Techno-Hotline was now in service. The
number-617-576-3190—will provide
dealers and customers quick answers to
problems of a technical nature, though
not, they emphasised, for hints or orders.
ZORK IN PRINT....Tor Books of New
York are publishing a trilogy of decisionmaking books based on the ZORK theme.
Authored by Infocom's S. Eric Meretzky,
the titles are ZORK: The Forces of Krill;
ZORK: The Malifestro Quest; and ZORK:
The Cavern of Doom. Although the books
will feature some of the characters in the
ZORK interactive adventures, plots will
differ.
Activision, Inc. and Atari, Inc., announced that they have agreed in principle to form a joint venture company to
distribute software electronically to the
home. The venture company's service
would use broadcast technology to
transmit software to a home receiver that
plugs into video computer systems. This
service would be extended later for use
with home computers. The proposed
electronic distribution service would
license software from a wide variety of
suppliers, including Activision and Atari.

Online database revenues will climb
over the $10 billion mark in 1994, according to International Resource Development Inc.

It has been said that if automobile
technology had advanced at the rate of
computer technology over the last 30
years, a Rolls Royce would cost $2.50 and
get two million miles to the gallon. True,
unless the particular technology one had
in mind were that of the GE Fluid Computer, which attempted to use water instead of electrons for switching circuits....or, the Interplex round teleprinter
computer that could multiply 12 x 12 and
never get anything but 143 ... or, the
RCA BIZMAC, a vacuum tube dinosaur
that took so long to build it was obsolete
before it was done (it was so big that its
operators wore roller skates.) These bits
of trivia and other arcane facts about
computerdom are the subject of a new
book entitled THE NAKED COMPUTER, available now in bookstores.
Some samples:
• The first computer "bug" was actually
a moth that met its demise in a relay of

the Mark I analyzer at Harvard. The carcass is still taped to a page in a log book
at the Navy museum in Virginia.
• "Our products now are known/In every
zone"....is just one line from the official
IBM song, "Ever Onward,"not published by the company in 25 years but
reprinted in its entirety in the book.
• The most well-traveled Dungeons and
Dragons player: Han Shan S. Scott, an
18-year-old student at San Jose State College, who racked up 45,000 minutes of
unauthorized computer and telephone
time playing games on computers as far
away as Taiwan and Sweden. He was arrested in May 1981 playing Canyon
Bomber.
• A scientist at Hughes once inscribed
100,000 angels on the head of a pin; he
says that now he could inscribe over 500
million. The original 100,000 were lost
when the pin rolled into a crack in the
floorboards.
• The most famous artificial intelligence
program, ELIZA, was written by an
M.I.T. professor to prove how difficult
meaningful communication between
humans and machines would be to
achieve. He had ELIZA mimic the
responses of a psychiatrist to show how
ludicrous such conversation could get.
Instead, the program was lauded by the
psychiatric community as a boon to
therapy. The M.I.T. professor was so
disenchanted he became a severe critic
of both the psychiatric community and
the computer business.
The hardcover book, 335 pages, is broken
into 20 chapters with subject matter ranging from industry personalities and computer firsts to robotics, artificial intelligence, and computer art. An extensive index is included. It is available in
hardcover only, for $15.95.
More than 170 software publishers expect 1984 to bring good to excellent profits in software, according to a survey of
215 publishers by TALMIS, Inc. Fortyfour percent of respondents stated that
unit sales increased by 100% or more
during the previous twelve months.
Fourteen percent stated that unit sales
increased by more than 150%! And not
one publisher reported decreasing sales.
International Grandmaster and U.S.
Chess Champion Larry Chritiansen, 28,
has concluded an endorsement agreement with CYBER Enterprises, manufacturer and distributor of CYBERCHESS,
chess improvement system compatible
with most personal computers. CYBERCHESS is available for the IBM PC,

PCXT, PC Jr. and most MSDOS compatibles; TRS-80 and Tandy 2000; Apple;
and C-64. CYBER Enterprises, 17517
Fabrica Way -K, Cerritos, CA 90701

Warner Software, Inc., the recently
formed subsidiary of Warner Publishing,
Inc., has acquired a substantial interest
in First Star Software.

Dr. Albert Mehrabian, a prominent
U.C.L.A. research psychologist, and his
research associate, Warren J. Wixen,
have just completed a research project on
video game popularity. Their findings
are explained in the December issue of
Psychology Today magazine. The researchers believe the best way to predict the
commercial success of a game is to examine the emotional impact that the
games have on players. Using the emotional impact the researchers were able
to develop several psychological techniques that allow them to predict the success of a video game. Some of the emotional dimensions that related to the success of a game were arousal and
dominance (feeling of being in control).
When the games elicited a high state of
both arousal and dominance, they were
much more likely to be popular and commercially successful. The aggression or
"Shoot em up" emotion that many games
created was not a factor in the success of
a game. Women, surprisingly enough, enjoyed playing video games more than
men. The researchers concluded that
they do not play as much as men because
the manufacturers have not created
games that appeal to them. Women
desired games that were slightly less
arousing and more pleasant; games like
Frogger as opposed to Defender. The
researchers finally state that manufacturers should design future games with
a much broader emotional appeal.

THORN EMI Video is marketing its
first games for the Apple II and IIe computers. The company released a new
game, LIBERATOR, as well as its bestselling SUBMARINE COMMANDER
on diskette for the Apple computers. In
addition, THORN EMI will release on
diskette for the Atari computers its
popular game, COMPUTER WAR, based upon the film, "War Games."

Xor Corporation has obtained the first
microcomputer software license granted
by the National Football League Properties. The product, tentatively called THE
NFL CHALLENGE, will run on the IBM
PC, PCXT, PC Jr. and other compatible
microcomputers. it will be released at the
start of the 1984 NFL season. The
challenge consists of first allocating
resources to build an NFL team, and than
creating coaching strategies to win NFL
games against the computer, representing any designated NFL team.
ADVENTURE INTERNATIONAL,
headed by Scott Adams, has signed a
long-term licensing agreement with
MARVEL ENTERTAINMENT
GROUP. The terms of the multi-million
dollar royalty agreement specify that
ADVENTURE INTERNATIONAL will
create and market a series of at least
twelve home computer graphic adventure games featuring the entire MARVEL
UNIVERSE. MARVEL will create a
special series of companion comic books
tentatively called Quest Probe to tie into
these programs. Initial release is targeted
for late Spring, 1984.

DATAMOST announced that it was
moving to larger quarters. The new address will be 20660 Nordhoff Street,
Chatsworth, CA 91311.
The NATIONAL CBBS DIRECTORY
is now available to all computer users
who communicate over the telephone.
This directory contains over 1000 computer bulletin board telephone numbers
which are organized in numeric sequence. The directory also contains a key
field which identifies relevant information such as the BBS type, its baud rate,
operation hours, and special comments
specific to each BBS. Many of the bulletin
boards contain programs which you can
download into your system at no charge
to you. The directory is available for $2.00
post paid from: Thomas Wnorowski,
3352 Chelsea Circle, Ann Arbor, MI
48104.
In a departure from the home entertainment computer software upon which
Synapse has built its reputation, president Ihor Wolosenko announced the formation of a new product division. The
first program in a series of personal
healthware titles from this division is

RELAX(TM), a stress reduction system
designed to offer a complete stress reduction system for use with home computers.
Using biofeedback, RELAX allows you to
monitor your stress levels by representing
muscle tension graphically on your computer monitor. The RELAX workbook
that is included with the software helps
you to understand your reactions to stress
and also provides suggestions for managing and reversing those reactions. An
audio tape guides you into deep relaxation. RELAX also allows you to program
in subliminal messages that will reinforce
your relaxation responses. RELAX, from
Synapse's new software division, will be
available in late spring, 1984. It will be
available on diskette, cassette tape, and
cartridge for the Apple, Atari, C-64,
VIC-20, and the IBM PC. No price was
listed, but look for it to be in the $150
range.
As reported last issue, Yaquinto and
Poulos Publications are working on a
joint software venture. The marketing
company name will be FIVE STAR
SOFTWARE (P.O. Box 631, Elk Grove
Village, IL 60007). Their first release will
be The Tarot Teacher which should be
out by the time you read this. Apple and
Atari releases over the next two months
will be Timeship, Murder at the End of
Time:(Apple), Decision—North Atlantic ,Ultimatum, Ironclads:(Atari).

Computer Gaming World is proud to announce the
addition of a new junior editor, Rebecca Michelle
Sipe. Ms. Sipe joined the firm on Jan. 27, 1984,
weighing in at 7 pounds 0 ounces (19 inches). Operations Manager Suzanne Sipe, who was instrumental
in bringing Rebecca into the organization, is quite
pleased with progress so far, but has complained
about the late hours the new employee seems to be
keeping.

BRIDGE:
Goren
Computerized
by Bob Proctor
BASIC INFORMATION
Goren's Learning Bridge
Made Easy
Tutorial
TYPE:
Apple
SYSTEM:
FORMAT: Disk
#PLAYERS: 1
$79.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: CBS Software
Greenwich, CT
NAME:

Here's something different! While not
exactly a game itself, it's a program that
teaches you how to play a game. It is a
good product and unique at this point in
time, but do NOT expect computerbased instruction. What you get is a book
by Charles Goren and a diskette of practice exercises. Whether this is worth $80
to you will depend on how much you
already know about bridge and how
much you enjoy drill and practice.

OPENING THE BOX
Inside, you find the diskette, a 2-page
User's Manual, and a 130-page Player's
Manual. The User's Manual can be ignored if you've ever used a computer
before. The Player's Manual is the meat;
it contains all of the actual instruction.
The first chapter covers the rules of
bridge. The next 9 chapters teach you
about bidding following Goren's system
of counting points for high cards and
distribution. The last two chapters cover
the play of the hand (after the bidding is
over). The style is good but very compact,
thanks to Goren's experience in writing
about Bridge. You'll go quickly until you
reach unfamiliar material and from then
on you'll have to read slowly and carefully. You'll even find it necessary to reread
some sections.
SO WHAT DOES THE COMPUTER DO?
Basically, you read a chapter from the

manual and then practice what you've
learned using one of the exercises on the
diskette. It's important to master each
skill before going on. For example, Exercise 1 lets you count up the point values
of hands, a skill required by all subsequent lessons. Later exercises let you
practice making opening bids or responding to opening bids made by your partner
or opponents.
There are eleven computer-based exercises. The first ten all give you practice
with some aspect of the bidding and generate hands randomly. This means you
can practice as much as you want. The
eleventh exercise brings it all together. It
uses 100 pre-determined hands, so once
you learn them all, you're done. They
demonstrate progressively more complex
ideas and mix elements of both bidding
and play.
The screen display is clear and functional and is useable with either color or
monochrome monitors. The cards are
usually shown in the middle of the
screen — their ranks and suits marked on
the corners. During play, your hand appears at the bottom of the screen and the
dummy's hand at the top. You are never
left guessing about what you are supposed to do and whenever help is available
(with the ? key), this fact is noted. If you
ask for help, the screen shows a summary
of the rules pertaining to the current
situation. This is useful for review.
If you make an incorrect play, the feedback follows one of two patterns. Most

often, the computer will simply say, "No,
there's a better play", and show you. It
never explains why its choice was better,
although it's usually obvious IF you've
been reading carefully. On a few crucial
plays, however, the program will give you
a second chance. If you miss a second
time, a short sentence appears to tell you
why you should make the play indicated.
This is very effective, and almost makes
you feel as if Goren were looking over
your shoulder. Unfortunately, it doesn't
happen very often. For $80, it would have
been nice to have the 100 practice hands
on a separate disk (or the back side) so
there could have been more of this kind
of feedback. If there were enough of it,
you could learn most of the game without
having to resort to the book.
CONCLUSIONS
CBS calls the package a "bridge learning system" and this is a fair description.
The book and the exercises are tools
which you can use in whatever manner
works best for you. If you're an absolute
novice, you'll probably find the going
tough at first. There is nothing to help you
learn the rules of the game except ten
pages in the book. An exercise on scoring
would be a natural, for example, since
bridge is second only to Mah Jong when
it comes to weird scoring.
If you're a good player, you'll enjoy
testing your skill on the practice hands.
However, you may be irritated by not being able to play the hands "your way";
you must follow the book. Still, if you're
willing to delve into the book for explanations, I'll bet you'll learn something.
The program is best, then, for a person
who already knows the rules of bridge but
very little else. They can jump right into
the lessons on bidding and benefit most
from the drill and practice exercises. Just
remember that contract bridge is a complex game. It is unreasonable to expect to
learn to play it well without a considerable amount of effort and practice.
Beware of false expectations, then, there
is just no way to make it really "easy".

DISPATCHES
Insights From the
Strategy Game
Design Front

M.U.L.E. Designer Notes

Dan Bunten
of Ozark Softscape

I am grateful that so many of you have
enjoyed M.U.L.E. and voted it into the
top five on the game ratings list. Several
people have even asked that I explain the
design of M.U.L.E. My purpose in
writing this column has always been to
offer information that would help future
game designers become better than those
of us now struggling. If you are not a
potential designer then I hope I can help
you be a more discriminating consumer
because, in the final analysis, informed
buyers are what will push this field to new
heights. So, with that purpose in mind
and a great deal of humility, I will
describe in as much detail as you can
stand the decisions that were made in the
design of M.U.L.E.
First, let me switch from the singular
"I" to the plural "we", since I am part of
the group Ozark Softscape. This product
was a result of the exciting synergy between myself, my brother Bill Bunten, Jim
Rushing and Alan Watson who make up
our group. We also received considerable
input from Joe Ybarra, our producer at
Electronic Arts. Initially we had decided
to do a business strategy game for multiple players. This was going to be similar

to my previous game, CARTELS & CUTTHROATS. The new game was going to
have more graphics and better playability than Cartels. An element from a game
I had written in 1978 called WHEELER
DEALERS was going to be the new twist
for this product. Wheeler Dealers was a
16K cassette program for the Apple
whose main feature was a four player
"real-time" auction. Although Wheelers
had only sold 150 copies (it included a
kludgy hardware device and sold for the
outrageous price of $54 in 1978), it had
always seemed fun to me because of its
auction. So we decided to try something
similar.
Since this new game was going to be an
interactive multi-player game, we looked
around for a model for a successful game
of this type. The quintessential model was
Monopoly. Our first step, therefore, was
to discover some of the elements that
made Monopoly such a successful game.
Bill said it was the "tokens" (the battleship was always his favorite)! We all
laughed, but as you can see in the final
version of M.U.L.E., we included
something of the flavor of the tokens in
the form of "species selection". The main
point we came up with that made
Monopoly different from most other
board games (and from all computer
games) was the fact that it isn't "ruledriven". Its rules are just the framework
for a social interaction with other players.
People playing Monopoly do a number of
things outside the game system like swapping property, special deals, loans, etc. In
addition, players adopt certain styles
towards other players such as the "soft
touch" (in our family, Mom would always
let you off without paying rent), or the
"cutthroat" (who forces you to mortgage
property to pay the exact amount). The
implications for our design in all of this
were that we wanted our game to offer as
much flexibility as possible.
Although Monopoly is a real-estate
development game, we felt that a theme
dealing with pioneering in space was
more exciting in this day and age. (In fact,
"Planet Pioneers" was the original title
for the game.) Thus, acquiring and
developing land was to be one of the main
elements of the game. In Monopoly, once
you own a group of two or three properties you can move to the next phase of
development. In M.U.L.E. we decided to
have a more economically realistic model
that affected your performance. Thus, we
included elements of economies of scale
(adjacent properties doing the same kind
of production) and learning curve (the
more properties doing the same type of
work the higher your per unit production). In this way the computer could
bring something new to the party. Much
greater depth in the game trade-offs is
possible without added complexity for
the players.

At this point, we had the main concepts
laid out. The new game would be a multiplayer land development game with a
real-time auction. However, concepts
alone do not make a game. We needed a
scenario that would allow us to "feel" our
way through the myriad decisions needed to complete the design. Bill and I had
both read a book by Robert Heinlein called Time Enough for Love. One of the
many stories in that book dealt with the
main character's efforts to colonize an
undeveloped world. In the story, there
was a curious paradox in the fact that a
galactic high technology culture would
still develop new worlds much like the
pioneers of the old west. The civilization
would allow settlers to attempt to turn a
"marginal world" into a productive
planet. If the pioneers succeeded, the
world would be accepted into the federation. If they failed then the federation
hadn't lost much. The intriguing point for
us in this story was that a highly
developed civilization would still depend
on the personal drive of a few individuals
with relatively primitive tools to create
new production capacity. This fit with
our own philosophy, that a man with a
dream is worth more than a dozen corporate planners.
We had part of the backdrop for our
design. One of the specifics that came out
of the scenario dealt with something quite
similar to the "40 acres and a mule"
method of pioneering. In Time Enough
for Love a genetically designed
burro/donkey/horse/mule provided the
main non-human energy resource. We
liked that idea but considered a miniature
"Star Wars Walker" more attractive.
Alan's son had a foot high model that
became the first M.U.L.E. From that
point, we simply exaggerated the comic
head-bobbing to create a more friendly
creature. Since our M.U.L.E. was a robot,
we figured he could be programmed to
create different products. This gave us
one of those wonderful flashes of closure
in game design. Instead of having the
player specify a certain production type
for a particular plot using menus or
keyboard entry (as is common in strategy
games on the computer), we were able to
use our animated creature to provide continuity. You get a M.U.L.E. out of the corral, outfit him in one of the shops to make
a certain type product, and then deposit
him on your plot of land. This is the same
thing as telling the computer you want
plot #15 set up for product #2. But it's a
whole lot more fun!
Another element of the world we were
creating was that it would have to be completely self-supporting. This would add
the pressure that would make the game
challenging. Another Heinlein book The
Moon Is a Harsh Mistress provided inspiration for this element. In this book the
Continued on p. 42

STARCROSS

As told by Scorpia

Ah, glad to see you drop in again! This
time, we're off on a hi-tech adventure, far
away from deep and dank dungeons. So,
fasten your seatbelt, and we'll liftoff to
Starcross!
First, you're going to be needing the
map that came with the game. The location of the alien ship changes from game
to game, and without the map, you won't
be able to figure out what the proper coordinates are for getting to it. So, make sure
you don't lose that map!
There isn't too much to do while you're
on your way through space to the mystery
ship, so you might just as well enjoy the
descriptions as you fly along. Eventually, you will be captured by the ship, and
that's where the game really begins. Leaving your own vessel, you will find
yourself just outside the Red Airlock. Getting it open is the first puzzle of the game.
The solution to it is really simple.
Careful examination of the sculpture,
along with a little thought about your
origins, should get the airlock open pretty quickly. This will also provide you with
the first of the twelve rods you will be collecting throughout the game.
Once past the airlock, you will find
yourself in a truly alien world. Much will
be incomprehensible at the start (and
perhaps for much of the game, if not all
of it!), so the best thing to do at this point

is just save the game, then wander around
for awhile, mapping as you go. Once you
have a fair idea of the layout of the ship,
and where you can find certain objects,
you're ready to play the game in earnest.
Now, as you went around the ship, you
probably found yourself running across
various strange creatures (and even one
familiar one .... don't go walking around
in the dark!!). All of them, in one way or
another, will be useful to you; the trick,
as always, is finding the right way of dealing with them.
For example, there are the rat-ants. Not
terribly intelligent, but they do know how
to protect their nest ... and the red rod
that's stuck in it. The answer to this problem is one that you wouldn't ordinarily
associate with an Infocom game, and is
the least satisfying of all the solutions in
the game. But you do need that red rod for
something, so it's best to get it now.
Once you have that, you might also
want to pay a visit to the spider who lives
behind the blue airlock. Unlike the ratants, he is quite intelligent, and even
friendly. He has something for you, IF
you have something for him. Remember
that he's bored; what might you have with
you that could keep him happily occupied
for awhile?

Well, by now you have several rods, and
you're probably wondering what, if
anything, to do with them. Don't worry,
they all have a purpose. What you need
to do now is pay a visit to the Grasslands.
Explore around there, and you should
find a hatch without too much trouble.
Once you open it and go inside, you'll probably get an idea or two about the uses of
the rods. A little knowledge of chemistry
is helpful here, but not absolutely
necessary. Trial and error works pretty
well, too. Remember to take with you
anything you might find here.
Ok, now you need to make your way to
the Yellow Airlock; beyond it will be
another rod. You may find that the door
is a bit harder to open than the others
were, but don't let that stop you! There is
also a basket inside the door; make sure
you pick that up, because it will come in
very handy!
Then it's off to the lab in the Blue Hall,
where you will find a mysterious silver
sphere, and some strange controls. A little messing around shows you that you
can make the sphere larger or smaller by
twisting a dial; when you do that, a blue
rod is revealed inside the sphere! Alas,
you can't just pull it out.
Looking around, you see a red disk and

a green disk. Pick them up, because they
are needed here, and in some other circumstances as well. It will take a little experimenting on your part to figure out
what the disks do, and quite a bit more to
see how they should be used in this situation. I'll just tell you that neither disk
should be put on the sphere, and that you
shouldn't forget what you found in the
Yellow Airlock.
After getting the blue rod (and making
sure you have the disks with you!), head
along to the Computer Room. Investigation of the computer should reveal to you
what needs to be done pretty easily, and
now you have a gold rod to add to your
collection. Don't worry about all the fancy displays here; once you have the gold
rod, you've done everything necessary in
this room.
While you've been moving around, you
may have noticed a little mechanical
"mouse" that collects trash. This
machine is quite important; it will help
you to obtain another rod. It isn't
necessary to follow it around, however;
just be a litterbug. When the item you
dropped has disappeared, you'll know the
mouse has been by. Of course, you *do*
have to drop the right item (does that have
you going in circles?).
Right about now, it's time to pay your
respects to the Weasels. Make your way

to their village, and wait until the chief appears. He will be anxious to trade with
you; feel free to give him what he wants
... just make sure that you get what you
need, so be assertive!
When you have that, hang around.
There is something else the chief can do
for you, so don't let him out of your sight.
Eventually, you will see why that is
necessary, when you reach the Green
Airlock. This is a tricky spot, in more
ways than one. Make sure you check out
everything in the area; you should be leaving with a couple of extra items. Speaking of leaving, you can't just walk out the
way you came in; try doing that, and
you'll find yourself in a whole lot of trouble! There is, of course, another way
ou t ....
Once you've figured out what that is,
you'll want to go to the Observatory.
Here, you'll need to look around very
carefully indeed; pay close attention to
the room description and your inventory.
Don't leave empty-handed.
Which reminds me, somewhere along
the way, you should be sure to pick up the
raygun from the Weapons Deck. It will
come in very handy, in more ways than
one. Now it's time to look at those
mysterious bubbles in the Grasslands.
Getting to the first one should present
Continued on p. 46

CARRIER FORCE: THE FOG OF WAR AT ITS FOGGIEST
by Tom Cheche

Carrier Force
NAME:
Wargame
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
Apple, Atari
#PLAYERS: 1 or 2
Gary Grigsby
AUTHOR:
$59.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

The emergence of the computer
wargame has provided the serious
wargamer with three distinct advantages
over board games. The computer can attend to the minute bookkeeping details
that slow down the play of a board
wargame. The computer can provide an
opponent of varying levels of
competance. And the computer can create
and maintain that most difficult element
to simulate .. the "fog of war."
Military Commanders have always
been forced to make decisions based on
information that was, to one degree or
another, incomplete or inaccurate. The
problem in board wargaming has always
been finding a realistic method of parcelling out that information in such a way
that the opponents experienced a "fog of
war" as close as possible to the actual
situation. The computer wargame
dispenses that information in the most
realistic and playable method available.
Prior to the emergence of the computer
wargame, it was this lack of a true "fog
of war" that detracted from the playing
of board simulations that dealt with aircraft carrier warfare during WWII. One

of the most fascinating chapters in
military history, the carrier battles of
1942 lost much of their tension when
bogged down by the often tedious procedure of airborne search. Search procedures had to be conducted one air
group at a time, one hex at a time with the
success or failure of the search in each
hex being determined by the weather conditions and other factors. It was, at best,
a chore.
But, in the quest for a detailed board
simulation, the methodical search procedure had to occur. Hard-core garners
accepted the monotonous searches as
part of the price they paid for realism, all
the while revealing to their opponent
where they were conducting searches by
calling out the hex coordinates; a most
unrealistic situation.
In all of the board game treatments of
aircraft carrier operations, from MIDWAY, to FAST CARRIERS, INDIAN
OCEAN ADVENTURE, AND FLATTOP the impression left was that while
the feel was close, it missed the mark.
There was always a sense, after playing,
of not quite experiencing the true tensions, the true sensations, the taste of

what it was really like in carriers during
the uncertain days of 1942.
With the release of CARRIER FORCE
(CF) by Gary Grigsby, Strategic Simulations, Inc., takes a giant step towards closing the gap between reality and simulation. Author Gary Grigsby has described
CF as being "about as foggy as a game can
get," and that is a fair assessment. With
only a few exceptions, players know only
what their search has revealed, and even
then the search information is not always
to be believed.
CF is an operational level treatment of
the four great carrier battles of 1942 in the
Pacific. Coral Sea, Eastern Solomons,
and Santa Cruz are contested on a scrolling, high resolution map of the South
Pacific area including the Solomon
Islands, and portions of New Guinea and
northeastern Australia. The map for the
Midway scenario is separate and relatively featureless, representing only the
Midway atoll.
Like all SSI products, CF can be played
between human opponents or the computer can provide a very competent opponent as commander of the Japanese
forces. There are multiple levels of difficulty, and there are provisions for
historic and random starting locations.
During each turn (one hour game time)
players must maneuver task forces,
launch land based and carrier based searches, form attack and patrol missions,
ready aircraft, launch and recover aircraft, move air groups and conduct air
searches, and resolve combat.
In all of the scenarios the initial turns
will find the players creating air groups
in order to get search planes up as soon
as possible. Land bases can fly off longlegged search craft that can remain aloft
Continued on p. 47

I

Directory of
Game Manufacturers
Our First Annual Computer Game Manufacturer's Directory will be helpful in keeping up with the changing marketplace. Computer game manufacturers are hard to keep up with. Although there are new names in the field. 1983 was a year that saw more "players"
drop out of the game than join the game. Additionally many companies moved during the year. This list is current as of April 1, 1984,
although we are are sure that there are companies missing that should be here.
Game titles are listed for each company. Where the company puts out more than 10 games, generally the 10 highest sellers are
listed. The machines that the companies support with entertainment software are also listed.
Anything Software Co.
P.O. Box 60219
Palo Alto CA 94306
Apple
Plain Vanilla Games
Aardvark
2352 S. Commerce
Walled Lake MI 48088
Phone: 313-669-3110
C-64, VIC-20, Coco, Timex,
Labyrinth, Trek Adventure, Derelict,
Dungeons of Death, Pyramid, Mars Quest
Academy Software
PO Box 6277
San Rafael CA 94903
Phone: 415-499-0850
C-64, VIC-20
IFS (Flight Simulator), Typing, Tutor & Word
Invaders
Actioncraft
5753G E Santa Ana Cyn Rd.
Anaheim Hills CA 92807
Phone: 714-998-7117
Apple
Pick-a-dilly Pair, Speedway Classic
Activision
2350 Bay Shore Frontage Rd.
Mountain View CA 94043
Phone: 415-960-0410
Atari
River Raid, Kaboom!, Mega Mania, Pitfall
Adventure International
Box 3435
Longwood FL 32750
Phone: 800-327-7172
Support: 305-862-6917
Apple, Atari, TRS-80, PC, C-64 Coco
Sea Dragon, Preppie, Adventure Series (13
Titles), Stone of Sisyphus, Labyrinth of
Crete, War, commbat, The Curse of Crowley
Manor, Saigon:The Final Days, Eliminator
and others
Anthro-digital, Inc.
103 Bartlett Ave.
Pittsfield MA 01201
Phone: 413-448-8278
PC
Gambling Games I

Apropos Technology
350 N. Lantana Ave., Suite 821
Camarillo CA 93010
Phone: 805-482-3604
VIC-20, C-64
Dr. Floyd, Wordplay, Type For Your Life

Ark Royal Games
P.O. Box 14806
Jacksonville FL 32238
Phone: 904-777-1543
Coco, C-64
Across The Rubicon, Guadalcanal, Bomber
Command

Atari Program Exchange
1346 Bordeaux
Sunnyvale CA 94086
Phone: 408-727-5603
Atari
TypoAttack, Excalibur, Getaway, Kangaroo,
Quarxon, Salmon Run, Galahad and the Holy Grail, Dandy, Bellum, Raid on Gravitron,
and others

Atarisoft
1399 Moffett Park Dr.
Sunnyvale CA 94086
Phone: 408-743-4132
Apple, Atari, PC, C-64, VIC-20 TI
Pac-man, Centipede, Defender, Stargate, Digdug, Donkey Kong, Robot-Ron:2084, Picnic
Paranoia, Protector, Shamus, Galaxian,
Superstorm

Artsci, Inc.
5547 Satsuma Ave
North Hollywood CA 91601
Phone: 213-985-5763
Apple
Draw Poker, Roulette, Craps, Apple 21,
Gomoku, Photar, Starmines, Reversi, Best of
Bishop, Microgammon II, Baker's Trilogy,
Cross Words, Poker Solitaire, Cypher Bowl

Avalon Hill Game Company
4517 Harford Rd.
Baltimore MD 21214
Phone: 301-254-5300
Apple, Atari, C-64, PC, Timex, TRS-80,
VIC-20
Over 50 Titles including Under Southern
Skies, Tournament Golf, Panzer-Jagd, Dreadmoughts, Tac, Paris in Danger, Computer
Diplomacy, Legionnaire, Tanktics, Dnieper
River Line, Telengard, Parthian Kings and
others

Artworx Software Co., Inc.
150 North Main St.
Fairport NY 14450
Phone: 716-425-2833
Atari, Apple, C-64
Alley-oops!, Gwendolyn, Vault of Zurich,
Bridge 4.0, Compubridge, Strip Poker,
Monkeymath, Monkeynews, MonkeyBuilder And More

Avant-garde Creations
P.O. Box 30160
Eugene OR 97403
Phone: 503-345-3043
Apple, PC, VIC-20, C-64, Atari, TI
Hi-res Computer Golf 2, Pro-Courses 2,
Trompers, Lazer Maze, Jump Jet, Word
Scrambler & Spelling Tutor

Atari, Inc.
PO Box 50047
San Jose CA 95150
Phone: 408-745-2000
Atari
Eastern Front (1941), Ms. Pac, Pole Position,
Jungle Hunt, Dig Dug, Joust, Robotron,
Pengo, Moon Patrol, Donkey Kong Junior

Bram, Inc.
18779 Kenlake Place, N.E.
Seattle WA 98155
Phone: 206-486-8428
Atari, C-64
Zombies
Bez
PO Box 19654 Suite 236
Irvine CA 92714
Phone: 714-752-3888
Apple
Bez-mx, Bez-off, Double Trouble
Big Five Software
PO Box 9078-185
Van Nuys CA 91409
Phone: 213-782-6861

California Pacific
757 Russell Blvd.
Davis CA 95616
Phone: 916-756-2921
Briley Software
PO Box 2913
Livermore CA 94550-0291
Phone: 415-455-9139
C-64, VIC-20, TI
Blackjack Tutor, Fur Trapper, High Seas,
Mansion!, Museum!, Pentagon!

Apple, C-64
Lady Tut, Lord British Starter Kit (Ultima &
Akalabeth), Hungry Boy, Bill Budge's 3-d
Graphics System & Game Tool, Cosmos Mission, Bill Budge's Genesis (Trilogy & Space
Album)

Atari
Miner 2049er

Blue Chip Software
19818 Ventura Blvd. #204
Woodland Hills CA 91364
Many
Millionaire, Tycoon, Baron, Squire

Blythe Valley Software
Box I Hwy 41 Silver Crk Cntr
Oakhurst CA 93644
Phone: 209-683-4735
Apple, Atari, PC
The Story Book Series (Hansel & Gretel,
Briar Rose, The Storyteller), The Milky Way
Merchant. Snel'Imanrl'

Broderbund Software
17 Paul Dr.
San Rafael CA 94903
Phone: 415-479-1170
Apple, Atari, C-64, Vic, PC
A.E., Arcade Machine, Choplifter!, David's
Midnight Magic, Drol, Lode Runner, Matchboxes, Operation Whirlwind, Seafox,
Serpentine, and others

Budgeco
428 Pala Ave.
Piedmont CA 94611
Apple
Pinball Construction Set

CBS Software
One Fawcett Place
Greenwich CT 06836
Phone: 203-622-2525
Apple, Atari, C-64, PC, Jr
Goren: Learning Bridge, Murder By The
Dozen

CE Software
801 73rd Street
Des Moines IA 50312
Phone: 515-224-1995
Apple
Swordthrust Series (7 Games), Wall Street,
Mission Escape!

Continued on p. 28

.

,

Cheapsuit Software
Box 923
Iowa City IA 52244
Apple

Data Trek
121 West E St.
Encinitas CA 92024
Phone: 619-436-5055

Star Feery

Apple
Maze Craze Construction Set, Willy Byte

Coleco Industries, Inc.
999 Quaker Ln, South
West Hartford CT 06110
Phone: 203-725-6000
Adam
Broad Range of Titles For Adam
Comdata Computer House
320 Summit Ave.
Milford MI 48042
Phone: 313-685-0113
VIC-20, C-64
Supercuda, Ape Craze, Escape Mcp, Firing
Line, Maelstrom, Pegasus Odyssey, Circus,
Perseus & Andromeda, and others

Counterpoint Software
4005 West Sixty-fifth St.
Minneapolis MN 55435
Phone: 612-726-7888
Phone: 800-328-1223

Dilithium Software
8285 SW Nimbus Suite 151
Beaverton OR 97005
Main Phone: 503-547-2713
Other Phones: 800-547-2713 (Support)
Many

Golden Flukes and Great Escapes: How to
Write Your Own Adventure Games
Dataknight
Normandy Circle
Glenmoore PA 19343
Phone: 215-431-8900
Apple, PC, Jr

Discovery Games
936 W. Hwy.36
St. Paul MN 55113
Phone: 612-488-6843

Grand Slam Trivia (plus Additional Trivia

Apple, TRS-80

Disks)

Chennault's Flying Tigers, Lafayette
Escadrille, and other games

Datamost
20660 Nordhoff
Chatsworth CA 91311
Phone: 818-709-1202

Dolphin Microware
410 Stanford Ave.
Palo Alto CA 94306
Phone: 415-321-6333

Apple, Atari, C-64

Atari

Over 40 Titles Including: Aztec, Bilestoad,
Snack Attack, Mr. Robot

Hexmaster

Apple

Datasoft
19808 Nordhoff Place
Chatsworth CA 91311
Phone: 818-701-5161

Quizagon

C-64, Atari, Apple, PC, Jr, TRS-80

Don't Ask Computer Software
2265 Westwood Blvd., -B-150
Los Angeles CA 90064
Phone: 213-497-4514
Phone: 213-397-8811
Apple, Atari
Abuse

Sands of Egypt, Moon Shuttle, O'Riley's

Mine, Pooyan, Bruce Lee, Genes Is, The
Creative Software
230 East Caribbean Drive
Sunnyvale CA 94086
Phone: 408-745-1655

Dallas Quest, Zaxxon, Lost Tomb, and
others

C-64, PC, Jr, Apple

Dataworks
P.O. Box 236
Deep River CT 06417
Phone: 203-526-9257

Crisis Mountain, Save New York, Moon
Dust, Dragon Hawk, Choplifter, In the
Chips, Bumble Bee, Pipes

Dynacomp, Inc.
1427 Monroe Ave.
Rochester NY 14618
Phone: 716-442-8960
Support: 716-442-8731
16 Systems
Over 90 Game Titles

Apple
Tank Platoon!

Cross Educational Software
PO Box 1536, 1802 N. Trenton
Ruston LA 71270
Phone: 318-255-8921
Apple
Aquarium, Dinosaurs, Spell-a-Vision, Blitzkrieg II

Cyber Enterprises
17517 Fabrica Wy -K
Cerritos CA 90701
Phone: 714-523-8382
Apple, C-64, PC, Jr, TRS-80
Cyberchess Chess Improvement System

Davka Corporation
845 North Michigan Ave., -843
Chicago IL 60611
Phone: 800-621-8227
In IL 312-944-4070
Apple, PC, C-64, Atari, TRS-80

Bible Baseball, Create-a-quiz, Crumb Eater,
Crumb Sweeper, Fuzzball, I.Q. Baseball, The
Lion's Share, The Philistine Ploy, Samson
And Delilah

Designware
185 Berry St.
San Francisco CA 94107
Phone: 415-546-1866
Toll Free: 800-572-7767
Apple, Atari, PC, C-64, Jr
Crypto Cube, Spellicopter, Math Maze,
Creature Creator, Spellakassm, Spellagraph,
Trap-a-zoid

Data Equipment Supply Corp.
8315 Firestone Blvd
Downey CA 90241
Phone: 213-923-9361

Earthware Computer Service
P.O. Box 30039
Eugene OR 97403
Phone: 503-344-3383
Apple
Volcanoes, Star Search, Zoo Master, Black
Belt

Electronic Arts
2755 Campus Dr.
San Mateo CA 94403
Phone: 415-571-7171
Apple, Atari, C-64
Archon, M.U.L.E., Murder On The
Zinderneuf, Pinball Construction Set, Hard
Hat Mack, One On One, Axis Assassin,
Worms?, D-bug, Standing Stones, and others

VIC-20, C-64

Digital Marketing Corp.
2363 Boulevard Circle
Walnut Creek CA 94595
Phone: 415-947-1000
Support & Sales 800-826-2222

Electronic Courseware Systems
309 Windsor Road
Champaign IL 61820
Phone: 217-359-7099

Zarcon, Silly 64, Star Defender, Lazer Com-

PC, CP/M

C-64, Apple

mand, Space Trader

Orbquest, Astrododge

Ear Challenger

Epyx
1034 Kiel Ct.
Sunnyvale CA 94086
Phone: 408-745-0700
Apple, Atari, PC, Jr, C-64, VIC-20, Adam
A Temple of Apshai, Dragonriders of Pern,
Oil Barons, Gateway to Apshai, Silicon Warrior, Mission Impossible, World's Greatest
Baseball Game, Sword of Fargoal, Crush
Crumble & Chomp, Upper Reaches of Apshai, and others
Eti Software
Box 686
Dover MA 02030
Apple
Program X: The Ultimate Puzzle

First Flight Data Systems
Box 555
Kitty Hawk NC 27949
Phone: 919-441-6480
Apple
Bull Run
First Star Software, Inc.
22 East 41st. Street
New York NY 10017
Phone: 212-532-4666
Apple, Atari, VIC-20, TRS-80
Astro Chase, Bristles, Panic Button, Rent
Wars, Flip Flop, and others

Gamestar, Inc.
1302 State St.
Santa Barbara CA 93101
Phone: 805-963-3487
Phone: 805-963-6820
Atari, C-64
Baja Buggies, Starbowl Football, Star League
Baseball, On Field Football
Gamma Software
PO Box 25625
Los Angeles CA 90025
Phone: 213-473-7441
Atari
Hockey, Soccer

H.A.L. Labs
4074 Midland Rd., Suite 23
Riverside CA 92505
Phone: 714-359-8480
Apple, C-64
Super Taxman II, Sheila, Stellar Triumph,
Vindicator

Flexible Software
P.O. Box 5841
Charlottesville VA 22905
Phone: 804-979-0973
Apple, PC, C-64
Portfolio

Hayden Software
600 Suffolk St.
Lowell MA 01853
Phone: 800-434-1218
In MA: 617-937-0200
Apple, Atari, C-64, PC
Bellhop, Crystal Caverns, Final Conflict, Go,
Golf, King Cribbage, Microscopic Journey,
Reversal, Sargon III, and others

FTL
7907 Ostrow St
San Diego CA 92111
Phone: 619-279-5711
Apple
Sundog

Highlands Computer Services
14422 Southeast 132nd
Renton WA 98056
Phone: 206-228-6691
Apple
Oldorf's Revenge, Tarturian, Creature Venture, Mummy's Curse, Cosmic Combat

Homecomputer Software
1307 S. Mary Ave., Suite 209
Sunnyvale CA 94087
Phone: 408-735-8400
Apple, C-64, Atari, Jr
Kids Say The Darndest Things To Computers, Pro Golf, Plaqueman, Tangrams,
Stories Alive! (series)
Homeware
Box 3062
Ruston LA 71272
Apple
Appledowns, Mystic Oracle
Howard W. Sams
4300 W. 62nd St.
Indianapolis IN 46268
Phone: 800-298-SAMS
Support: 800-348-8558
Apple, PC, VIC-20
Ape Escape, Czorian Siege, Reyatta,
Spud/mug Shot, Voyage of the Valkyrie,
Caves of Olympus, Bermuda Race, Music
Games
Human Engineering Software
71 Park Lane
Brisbane CA 94005
Phone: 415-465-4111
PC, C-64, VIC-20, Atari
Attack of the Mutant Camels, Gridrunner,
Pharoah's Curse, Shamus, Lazer Zone, Maze
Master
Hy-Tek
6502 Micro Drive
Dayton MD 21036
Phone: 301-854-0058
Apple
Profit Motive

Ibidinc
179 Allyn St. Suite 607
Hartford CT 06103
Phone: 203-547-0085
Apple, PC, C-64, Atari
The Alpine Encounter
'magic
981 University Ave.
Los Gatos CA 95030
Phone: 408-399-2200
Atari, Jr, TI
Demon Attack, Microsurgeon, Baseball,
Football, Wing War, Quick Step Laser Gates,
Moonsweeper, Fathom
Independent Software
1342 Second St.
New York NY 10021
Phone: 212-772-2960
Apple
Key to the Storm, Socket Wilderness,
Ringside
Infocom Inc.
55 Wheeler St.
Cambridge MA 02136
Phone: 617-492-1031
Many
Zork Series (I, II, III), Starcross, Suspended,
Deadline, The Witness, Enchanter, Planetfall, Infidel
Insoft, Inc.
7833 Southwest Cirrus Drive
Beaverton OR 97005
Phone: 503-641-5223
Apple, PC
Zargs, Grapple, Spider Raid
Island Graphics
PO Box V
Bethel Island CA 94511
Phone: 415-684-2664
Atari
Tax Dodge

Kelcom Management
30 Southampton Drive Sw
Calgary Alb Canada
Phone: 403-253-5397
Apple
The Exchange

Koala Technologies
3100 Patrick Henry Dr.
Santa Clara CA 95050
Phone: 800-227-6703
In Ca: 800-632-7979
Apple, Atari, C-64, PC
Spider Eater, Dancing Bear

Krell Software
1320 Stony Brook Road
Stony Brook NY 11790
Phone: 516-751-5139
Orders: 800-842-8679 (outside NY)
Apple, Atari, C-64, PC, TRS-80
Adventures In Flesh, The Black Death, Botticelli, Plato's Cave, and others

The Learning Company
545 Middlefield Rd. –170
Menlo Park CA 94025
Apple
Bumble Games, Gertrude's Puzzles, Rocky's
Boots, And Others

Learning Well
200 South Service Rd.
Roslyn Heights NY 11577
Phone: 516-621-1540
Support: 800-645-6564
(outside NY)
Apple
Space Math, That's My Story, and others

Jay Gee Programming Co.
7185 Blue Hill Dr.
San Jose CA 95129
Phone: 800-227-1617 X 217
In CA: 800-772-3545 X 217
Atari
Devil's Dare, Attack of The Spelling Bees

Legionnaire Games Inc.
1415 Dillingham Blvd.
Honolulu HI 96817
Phone: 808-845-2527
Apple
Ringside

Jor-And
Box 9180
Glendale CA 91206
Phone: 818-247-6658
Apple
Secret Agent-Mission One

Lor Inc.
Rt. 2 Box 185
Rigby ID 83442
Phone: 208-745-8977
C-64
Ophir, Terrain, Strafe

Mach-ina Strategy Games
161 Aragon Ave., Suite 202
Coral Gables FL 33134
Phone: 305-443-0027
Atari
Chancellor of the Exchequer

Magnetic Harvest
Box 255
Hopkins SC 29061
Phone: 803-783-3151
Apple
Planetmaster, Gnosis Vii

Micro Lab
2310 Skokie Valley Rd.
Highland Park IL 60035
Phone: 312-433-7550
Apple, Atari, C-64, PC, Jr. Adam
Miner 2049er, Dino Eggs, Death in the Caribbean, The Heist, Scraper Caper, Globe Grabber, Crisis Mountain

Micro Magic
908 Memorial Parkway Nw
Huntsville AL 35801
Phone: 205-536-1290
Apple
Boa

Micro Program Designs
5440 Crestline Rd.
Wilmington DE 19808
Phone: 302-738-3798
Apple
Edu-cave

Micromate Software
Box 20245
Tallahassee FL 32316
Atari
Gridiron Glory, Ramblin Gamblin, Asteroid
Artist

Micromax Systems Inc.
6868 Nancy Ridge Dr.
San Diego CA 92121
Phone: 619-457-3131
Support: 619-457-0311
Apple
Cubit

Microprose Software
10616 Beaver Dam Road
Hunt Valley MD 21030
Phone: 301-667-1151
Atari, C-64
Floyd of the Jungle, Hellcat Ace, Spitfire Ace,
Mig Alley Ace, Nato Commander, Solo
Flight, Wingman

Microsoft Corporation
10700 Northrup Way
Bellevue WA 98004
Phone: 206-828-8080
Apple, PC
Olympic Decathlon, Adventure, Flight
Simulator
Mind Games
420 S. Beverly Dr., Suite 207
Beverly Hills CA 90212
Phone: 213-277-8044
Apple
The Desecration
Mind Systems Corp.
P.O. Box 506
Northampton MA 01061
Phone: 413-586-6463
Apple
Airsim-1, Spitfire Simulator, Airsim-3
Mmg Micro Software
PO Box 131
Marlboro NJ 07746
Phone: 201-431-3472
Atari, C-64
Final Flight, Phoenix Lair, Pyramid Run, Rat
Race, Timber!, Chomper, Mmg Music Box,
Trivia Trek
Moxie
2049 Century Park E. Ste 5264c
Los Angeles CA 90067
Apple
The Great Escape Utility (for use with Castle
Wolfenstein)

Muse Software
347 North Charles St.
Baltimore MD 21201
Phone: 301-659-7212
Apple, Atari, C-64
Titan Empire, Advanced Blackjack, Robotwar, Intellectual Decathlon, Caverns of
Freitag, Castle Wolfenstein, International
Grand Prix, Rescue Squad, The Best of
Muse, Abm

Mystic Software
PO Box 536
Lakeside CA 92040-0536
Phone: 619-443-9776
VIC-20, C-64
Sorcerer's of the Amazon, Catacombs of the
Pharaohs, Eerie Mansion, Death Probe of the
Srulizons, Crystals of Killimanjaro,
Monopoly 64

Navic Software
P.O. Box 147270
North Palm Beach FL 33408
Phone: 305-627-4132
PC, Apple, C-64
Jury Trial II

Nexa Corp.
PO Box 26468
San Francisco CA 94126
Phone: 415-387-5800
Apple, Atari, Msx
Delta Squadron, Cybernation,
Captain Cosmo

Odesta
3186 Doolittle Drive
Northbrook IL 60062
Phone: 312-498-5615
Sales: 800-323-5423
Apple, Atari, PC, C-64
Chess 7.0, Checkers 2.1, Odin, Backgammon
5.0, How About A Nice Game of Chess!
Omega Microware
222 S. Riverside Plaza, –2234
Chicago IL 60606
Phone: 312-648-4844
Apple
Nightfalls
Origin Systems, Inc.
1545 Osgood –7
North Andover MA 01845
Phone: 617-681-0609
Apple, Atari, C-64, PC
Exodus: Ultima III, Caverns of Callisto, Car
Wars
Orion Software
P.O. Box 2488
Auburn AL 36831
Phone: 205-821-5113
Support: 800-821-8088
PC, Jr, C-64, Apple
Pits & Stones, Paratrooper, PC Man, j-bird

Phoenix Software
64 Lake Zurich Dr.
Lake Zurich IL 60047
Apple
Sherwood Forest, Mad Rat, Gemini, Masquerade, Queen of Phobos, Bats In Belfry,
Adventure In Time, Birth of the Phoenix
Piccadilly Software, Inc.
89 Summit Ave.
Summit NJ 07901
Phone: 201-277-1020
Apple
Star Blaster, Suicide, Falcons, Warp
Destroyer, Martian Soil, and others
Program Design, Inc.
11 Idar Court
Greenwich CT 06830
Phone: 203-661-8799
Phone: 203-792-8382
Atari, C-64
Moon Base Io, Clipper, Swamp Chomp, Star
Crystals, Shaft Raider, Jerry White's Game
Machine
Programmers Software
2110 N. 2nd St.
Cabot AR 72023
Phone: 501-843-2988
Apple
IFR Flight Simulator

Progressive Peripherals
2186 South Holly, Suite 2
Denver CO 80222
Phone: 303-750-5713
C-64
Gothmog's Lair, Cyberworld, Perplexian
Challanger, Perplexian Challanger/Spanish
Language, Wizard
Pryority Software Inc.
P.O. Box 221959
Carmel CA 93922
Phone: 408-625-0125
Apple, PC, Jr
Forbidden Quest

Palisades Software
2230 Palisades Dr.
Appleton WI 54915
Phone: 414-739-2636
Apple
Video Vegas
Parker Brothers
50 Dunham Road
Beverly MA 01915
Phone: 617-927-7600
Atari, C-64, VIC-20, TI
Qbert, Popeye, Frogger, Super Cobra,
Tutankham
Penguin Software
P.O. Box 311
Geneva IL 60134
Phone: 312-232-1984
Apple, Atari, C-64, PC, Jr
The Coveted Mirror, The Quest, Transylvania, Minit Man, Bouncing Kamungas,
The Spy Strikes Back, Spy's Demise, Ring
Quest, Pensate, Pie Man, and others

Quality Software
21601 Marilla St
Chatsworth CA 91311
Phone: 818-709-1721
Apple, Atari, PC, C-64
Ali Baba And The Forty Thieves, Beneath
Apple Manor, Fastgammon, Qs Reversi, Pro
Poker, Block Buster, Name That Song, Starbase Hyperion, Tank Trap, TariTrek, and
others
Quintech Systems, Inc.
1271 Dundee Rd., Suite 44b
Buffalo Grove IL 60090
Phone: 800-621-0660
Inside IL 800-572-0440
Atari
Down The Garden Path

Rainbow Computing
9719 Reseda Blvd.
Northridge CA 91324
Phone: 818-349-0300
Orders: 800-423-5441

Sentient Software
Box 4929
Aspen CO 81612
Phone: 303-925-9293

Softlore Corporation
8714 Wellesley Manor
San Antonio TX 78240
Phone: 512-691-2800

Apple, PC, Atari, C-64, Epson

Apple, PC

Cyborg, Oo-topos, Gold Rush, Congo

Lordlings of Yore, Traders of the Torrid
Zone, Archyologist

Apple

Sierra On-line Inc.
Sierra On-line Blg.
Coarsegold CA 93614
Phone: 209-683-6858

Spectral Associates
141 Harvard Ave.
Tacoma WA 98466

Stellar Defense

Apple, Atari, C-64, PC, Jr, Adam, Coleco

TRS-80, VIC-20, C-64

Wizard of Id, Prisoner, Sierra Championship
Boxing, Learning Fuzzywomp, Kings Quest,
Wiz Type

Pengon, Lancer, Lunar Rover, Whirlybird,
Cubix, Froggie, Galagon, Ghost Gobbler,
Devious, Beam Rider, Storm Arrows, Androix Attack and others

Rebel Software
1440 Quince
Denver CO 80220
Apple
Pinball Magic
Reston Publishing Company
11480 Sunset Hills Rd.
Reston VA 22090
Phone: 703-437-8900

Silicon Valley Systems
1625 El Camino Real
Belmont CA 94002
Phone: 415-593-4344
Apple

Spinnaker Software Corp.
215 First St.
Cambridge MA 02142
Phone: 617-868-4700

Snapper, Lancaster

Apple, Atari, PC, Jr, C-64, Adam

Apple, Atari, PC, C-64
Moviemaker, Paint, Middle of the Road, Lizzard, Wordworx, Apple Graphics Games,
Multiploy and others

Simulations Canada
PO Box 452
Bridgewater NS B4V 2X6 Canada
Phone: 902-688-2808

Rhiannon (Games For Girls)
3717 Titan Dr.
Richmond VA 23225
Phone: 804-272-7770

Apple
Fifth Eskadra, Grey Seas, Grey Skies, Fall
Gelb

Snooper Troopers 1&2, In Search of the Most
Amazing Thing, Aegean Voyage, Trains, Up
For Grabs, and others
Strategic Studies Group
336 Pitt St.
Sydney 2000 Australia
Phone: (02) 264-7560
Apple, C-64
Reach For The Stars

Apple, Franklin

Jenny of the Prairie, Cave Girl Clair, Chelsea
of the South Sea Islands
Right Stuff Software
904 Berkley
Carpentersville IL 60110
Phone: 312-426-4449
Apple, PC, C-64
Carrier Combat, Word For Word

Sir-tech Software, Inc.
6 Main St.
Ogdensburg NY 13669
Phone: 315-393-6633
Apple, PC
Wizardry: Proving Grounds of the Mad
Overlord, Knight of Diamonds, Legacy of
Llylgamyn, Wiziprint, Police Artist, Star
Maze, Galactic Attack, Rescue Raiders,
Crypt of Medea

Sirius Software, Inc.
10364 Rockingham Dr.
Sacramento CA 95827
Phone: 916-366-1195
Sansoft Plus
Box 590288
Houston TX 77259
Phone: 713-482-6898
Apple, Franklin

Apple, Atari, C-64
Capture The Flag, Escape From Rungistan,
Kabul Spy, Twerps, Type Attack, Wayout,
Blade of Blackpoole, Sneakers, Repton and
others

Strip Blackjack, Pinup Jigsaw, Sex-o-graphic,
Lucky Slot, and others

Screenplay
Box 3558
Chapel Hill NC 27514
Phone: 800-334-5470
C-64, Atari, Apple, PC
Pogo Joe, Asylum, Ken Uston's Professional
Blackjack, Institute, Playful Professor, Dunzhin, Ka ye, Wylde, Ziggurat
Sensible Software, Inc.
24011 Seneca
Oak Park MI 48237
Phone: 313-399-8877
Apple
Quadrants 6112, Cyclotron

Skyles Electric Works
231-E South Whisman Road
Mountain View CA 94041
Phone: 415-965-1735
C-64
Stix, Tank Atak, Lord of the Balrogs, Goblin
Towers, Halls of Death, 3-D Glooper, Crazy
Kong, Xerons, Wildfire

Softdisk
3811 Saint Vincent
Shreveport LA 71108
Phone: 318-868-7247
Apple, C-64

The Chiang Chest, Tmh Disk #1, Dan Tobias
Disk #1, The Best of Larry Selzer, The Right
Stuff

Strategic Simulations, Inc.
883 Stierlin Rd., Bldg. A-200
Mountain View CA 94043
Phone: 415-964-1353
Orders = #800-227-1617, ext 335 or
in CA 800-772-3545, ext 335
Apple, Atari, C-64, PC, TRS-80
39 Titles Including, Combat Leader, Computer Ambush, Knights of the Desert, The
Cosmic Balance, North Atlantic '86, Computer Baseball, Computer Quarterback, Germany 1985, Carrier Force, Guadalcanal
Campaign, Fortress, Questron, and others
Sublogic
713 Edgebrook Drive
Champaign IL 61820
Phone: 217-359-8482
Apple, Atari, C-64, PC, TRS-80
Flight Simulator II, Night Mission Pinball,
Space Vikings, Music Maker, Whole Brain
Spelling, Saturn Navigator

Superior Software
4312 Arizona Avenue
Kenner LA 70065
Phone: 504-468-2273
Apple
The Quest For The Holy Grail, Asteroid Belt,
Doom Valley

Supersoft Inc.
PO Box 1628
Champaign IL 61820
Phone: 217-359-2112
Apple With CP/M-80
Nemesis, Dungeon Master, Analiza II, Star
Jump

Swearingen Software
6312 W. Little York –197
Houston TX 77088
Phone: 713-937-6410

Three Sigma
Box 716
Morrisville PA 19067
Phone: 215-295-3399

C-64, PC

Apple

Pick That Tune

Fireware Pinball, Vegas Video, Secret of
Easter Island, Detective, Game Pak, The
Gene Scene, Space Spikes

Synapse Software
5221 Central Ave.
Richmond CA 94804
Phone: 415-527-7751
Atari, Apple, C-64 And Others
Blue Max, Quasimodo, Alley Cat, Fort
Apocalypse, Dimension X, Rainbow Walker,
New York City, Encounter! and others

Tronix
8295 South La Cienega Blvd.
Inglewood CA 90301
Phone: 213-215-0529
Atari, C-64, Apple
Poker Sam, Chatter Bee, Teletari, Juice, Kid
Grid, Suicide Strike, Motocross, Waterline,
Slalom, and others

Wadsworth Electronic Publ.
10 Davis Dr.
Belmont CA 94002
Phone: 800-354-9706
Apple, PC, Atari, C-64
Algebra Arcade, Survival Kit For Apple
Computer Games (book)
Weekly Reader Family Software
245 Long Hill Rd.
Middletown CT 06457
Phone: 800-852-5000
Apple, Atari

Turning Point Software
11a Main Street
Watertown MA 02172
Phone: 617-923-4441
Apple
Task Force Games
1110 North Fillmore
Amarillo TX 79107
Phone: 806-376-6229

Pentapus

Fat City, Chivalry, Stickybear Basketbounce,
Stickybear Bop, Old Ironsides, Beach
Landing
Windcrest Software, Inc.
Monterey Ave.
Blue Ridge Summit PA 17214
Phone: 717-794-2191

Atari

Apple, C-64, Atari

Survival, The War of the Worlds

Panzer War, Baseball's Best Analogies

Telephone Software Connection
Box 6548
Torrance CA 90504
Phone: 213-516-9430
Apple
Go-moku, Chess Connection, Lunar Lander
II, Tele-gammon, Wall Street Journey, Keno
Master, World Currency Trader, Computer
Concentration, Apple Anguish, Picture Puzzle Program Note: Programs Delivered By
Modem

Ultrasoft
24001 SE 103rd Street
Issaquah WA 98027
Phone: 206-392-2317
Apple

Wolffware
2004 E. Kensington Blvd.
Shorewood WI 53211
Phone: 414-332-1360
Phone: 414-332-2892
Apple
Sports Complex

The Mask of the Sun, The Serpent's Star

TG Products
1104 Summit Ave., Suite 110
Plano TX 75074
Phone: 214-424-8568
Atari
Nightstike, Droids, Ozzy's Orchard,
Abracadabra

T.H.E.S.I.S.
PO Box 147
Garden City MI 48135
Phone: 313-595-4722
Orders: 800-354-0550
Atari, Apple
Big Math Attack, Smart Shopper, Number
Blunder, Word Scramble, Hidden Words,
Guessword, Cribbage, Casino I, and others

Thorn Emi Video Programming
1370 Avenue of the Americas
New York NY 10019
Phone: 212-977-8990
Atari, Apple, VIC-20
Submarine Commmander, Jumbo Jet, Pilot,
Soccer, Kickback, Computer War, River
Rescue, VIC Music Composer, Major League
Hockey, Fourth Encounter

Versa Computing
3541 Old Conejo Road, 104
Newbury Park CA 91320
Phone: 805-498-1956

Zapata Microsystems
PO Box 461483
Garland TX 75046
Phone: 214-494-4433

Apple

Atari, TI, Apple

Meet The Presidents, Globe Master II, Solar
System, Alphabet Squares, Color Me, Here's
Hollywood, Battle Sight

Games Pac I, Games Pac II, Games Pac III

Victory Software
1410 Russell Rd
Paoli PA 19301
Phone: 215-296-3787
Adam, C-64, VIC-20
Adventure Pack I, Adventure Pack II, Annihilator, Bounty Hunter, Creator's Revenge,
Galactic Conquest, Grave Robbers, Kongo
Kong, Labyrinth of the Creator, Metamorphosis and others

PLEASE
TAKE TIME
TO FILL OUT
READER INPUT
DEVICE

TEL-GAMIN
FANTASY ROLE-PLAYING
Patricia Fitzgibbons

Fantasy role-playing. The phrase evokes
a myriad of images: lean-jawed swordsmen arrayed in plate armor; pious
monks raising holy symbols heavenward;
lithe elvish maids, their ears attuned to
every forest sound; enigmatic mages hurling fire balls across a dungeon chamber.
Ancient runes and abandoned ruins.
Treasure beyond imagining. Inconceivable danger and ... glory.

Players who have conquered the computerized worlds of Wizardry and Ultima
look for new and even more exciting
"character development" schemes. Fantasy role-playing games, such as
Dungeons & Dragons, Traveller, and
Runequest capture the imagination. Can
these complex gaming systems be played
via computer and modem? They can, and
are.
In this issue and the next, I'll report on
the growing availability of online fantasy
role-R) playing games ("FRPGs"). FRPGs
of all types — from medieval conquests to
futuristic space operas — may be played
in real time on multi-user telecomunications systems or by messages on electronic bulletin boards. To participate in
these adventures, all that a tele-gamer
needs is an interest in fantasy role-playing
and an online "playing field."
One such locale is the multi-user conference area ("CO") on CompuServe's
Gamers' Special Interest Group
("GameSIG"). Almost immediately after
GameSIG was created in late 1982, the
first of many subsequent FRPGs began.
A DungeonMaster, or "DM," who was an
experienced FRPG'er, gathered together
a group of GameSIG members who
agreed to meet online once every week to
play. The DM prepared several short text
files which described the game, and
uploaded them into GameSIG's database.
These files contained basic information
about the gaming system used, the rule
modifications made by the DM, which
character classes were to be allowed, and
an overview of the "world" in which the
game was to be set.

After studying the rules, the group met
in the CO area and, using the online dicerolling function, "rolled up" the random
numbers which generate their alter egos'
attributes (such as strength, intelligence,
and dexterity). At the scheduled game
time, they met in CO to commence their
adventure. Somewhat ironically, the little band of comrades embarked on their
fantasy quest by using computers and
online communications — the seemingly magical creations of modern
technology.
One of GameSIG's most active DMs is
Al Williams, a thirty-eight year old software manager from Concord,
Massachusetts. Al played or DM'ed
FRPGs for ten years before joining
GameSIG. He quickly organized groups
of other members to play Runequest and
Bushido. Both games have run for almost
a year. Here is an excerpt from an online
Runequest episode:
DM: As you approach closer, the
features become clearer. It is a
human form, surmounted by an
enormous bull's head.
Elmond: Tie feet together with rope.
Lagos: Excellent precaution, young
man! Shall we explore these chests?
Elmond:: And tie the hands.

DM:: You may do so, but the hands
are braced half a meter apart on the
axe handle, and you cannot force
them closer.
Elmond: Either this is a live
minotaur or it is a statue. Or, even
worse, there is a medusa nearby. Tie
the arms to the body then.
DM:: That can be done, at the
elbows. The forearms are unbound
in that case.
Elmond:: Okay, check for traps on
the casks.
DM:: Like to try "spot hidden?"
Elmond: Yes.
DM: Go ahead.
***DICE*** 4/10
Elmond: Boo!
DM: Hard as you look, you can see
no traps on any casks. You may try
a couple of times more if you wish.
Did Elmond find any traps? If so, could
he disable them? What was in those
chests, anyway? Operating just as a
"regular" DM would in a face-to-face
game, Al set up the scenario for his
players and stated the results of the die
rolls. The players, who attempted to "stay

in character" throughout the game, made
instant decisions about their choices of
action as the story unfolded.
I asked Al about the advantages of
online FRPGs. "There's more opportunity for imagination in online gaming," he
replied, "letting you picture settings exactly as you want them. Players are also
somewhat easier to get." Al's views were
reinforced by another GameSIG DM,
Marc Robertson of St. Louis. Marc is a
twenty-five year old programmer/analyst
who feels that " ... the garners here are
dedicated. I moved to St. Louis about ten
months ago, and as yet I haven't found
anyone here who is willing to meet
regularly for Runequest, AD&D, or any
other FRPG. On GameSIG, I can get
together a group that will meet regularly.
That's important for a good FRPG
campaign."
Many FRPG'ers begin playing while in
high school or college. Then, they
graduate, move away, get jobs, and have
difficulty forming a new gaming group.
Online games, however, attract players
from cities all across the United States. If
a player from Tulsa drops out, the DM
can replace her with a Seattle resident.
Thus, these games can continue for
months, even years.
Although several GameSIG DMs
recruit only experienced players — one
game, in fact, is for "adults only" — most
encourage novices to join. GameSIG
members who have little or no familiarity with fantasy role-playing are invited to
silently observe any gaming session.
Members may also read the transcripts of
past games; these files are stored in a
database.
Perhaps the most enjoyable aspects of
online FRPGs are the opportunities they
provide for players to meet new friends
and experiment with various playing
styles and strategies. Tom Woolley of
Dallas, Texas started playing FRPGs in
college. Now twenty-four years old, he
runs an AD&D campaign on GameSIG.
Tom likes to inject new ideas as well as
"new blood" into his games. "I have the
good fortune to DM a group of people that
have each learned to play in a slightly different manner," Tom said. "The
challenge becomes greater because you
are not sure of what a person will do in
a certain situation. Through online gaming I have seen and developed many new
and interesting methods of dealing with
situations that, with a static group, were
constantly handled one way by the player
characters."
Online gaming isn't cheap. Most FRPG
groups commit to two hours per week of
connect time which adds up to about $50
monthly on CompuServe. Besides the expense, telecommunications problems —
such as slow system response time — occasionally occur. Al Williams elaborates:
"Player turnover is high. System glitches,

slow periods, and "drops" are frustrating
obstacles to game flow. Disadvantages
notwithstanding, I'm hooked!" Tom
Woolley expressed similar sentiments: "It
is quite difficult to explain a rather complex mapping problem or to explain
something to a player who simply doesn't
understand what you are talking about.
However, these disadvantages in no way
detract from the game as far as I am concerned. This is due to the fact that the difficulties are far outweighed by the advantage gained through meeting people from
other areas of the country."

Meeting people. Those words seemed to
crop up constantly in my conversations
with online FRPG'ers. Of course,
GameSIG members aren't actually seeing
their new friends, and everything they
learn about each other comes from a
series of typed sentences that appear on
their monitor screens. Nevertheless, according to Tom Woolley, the lack of inperson contact may very well promote
friendship. "The online games are an
added bonus for people who won't play
face-to-face because of their perceptions
of themselves or their personalities.
Someone who cannot express himself
due to shyness or even because of a
physical handicap has free rein to do as
he pleases online without silly prejudices
getting in the way."
A five-foot tall teenager with a poor
complexion can become a courageous
fighter, broadsword flashing in battle, or
a daring starship captain, navigating the
perimeter of a black hole. An overweight
housewife with a sink full of dishes may
be transformed into a sylph-like minstrel
or a cunning sorceress. Even a young student at the Alabama School of Fine Arts
in Birmingham can take on the deified
role of the DungeonMaster: "Don't tell
my players how old I am! Good players,
much older than myself, take me seriously here." (I won't, I promise!)
Next time, we'll look at the ways in
which fantasy role-playing games are run
on electronic bulletin board systems
("BBSs"). Until then, here are several
modem numbers to get you started with
gaming BBSs:
Cyberon — 201-226-0341
(West Caldwell, NJ)
Dragon's Lair — 213-595-9346
(Long Beach, CA)
Crystal Castle — 313-856-3804
(Toledo, OH)
Mines of Mori a — 713-871-8577
(Houston, TX)
The Game Grid — 818-701-6380
(Reseda, CA)
For more information about CompuServe, call (voice) 800 - 848 - 8199.

CONQUERING WORLDS (Cont.)
seconds to get to zero.
When the game begins you control only
one planet of a particular star system. The
computer displays a representation of the
star system with the orbiting planets and
uses colors to show who has control of
what planet. (The planets revolve in realistic orbits).
Each planet has a limited number of
natural resources that can be extracted.
At the beginning of each player's turn
these resources are used to construct new
ships. More materials are available for
shipbuilding if the star system is completely under your control.
Ships travel from planet to planet under
impulse power, using warp power for interstellar flights. Sometimes travel won't
be possible due to random gravitational
fields. This must be kept in mind when
the enemy is closing in for the kill.
The supreme commander is always
located in his base. This base can travel
just like ships, however bear in mind that
if your base is captured you lose the game.
The scenario for CONQUERING
WORLDS is not new, and only slightly
different in overall concept from other
games. It is similar to GALACTIC ATTACK and TITAN EMPIRE. If you own
either of the two games, you will find
CONQUERING WORLDS to be similar.
James A. McPherson

Ladies and Gentlemen ...

WE HAVE A DRAW!
Robotwar Tournament Results

Rarely have we seen as exciting a finish
to a gaming event as took place in the 3rd
Annual CGW Robotwar Tourney. After
an incredible 14 hours of play (using four
computers) and 360 battles, there was a
dead tie for the championship!
DRAGON4A and MUSTANG will
share the Co-Championship and split the
$100.00 cash prize. Stanley Chen
(MUSTANG) of Bridgeport CT and Doug
Hogg (DRAGON4A) of Los Angeles will
each receive a check for $50.00 from
Muse Software who gracious provided
the case prize and trophies for the winners. Muse Software will also be sending
ROBOTWAR T-Shirts to each participant. Doug Hogg, Frank Krogh
(OMNI-2B), and Robert Hogg (SERPENT)
attended the tournament. With four computers running at once, you can imagine
what a basket case Doug was as he watched Dragon4A and Mustang go nip and
tuck right down to the wire.
Twenty contestants (17 entrants and 3
fill-in robots) fought through 60 battles in
the round robin. The five high scoring
robots that went on to the finals were
MUSTANG, DRAGON4A, NORDENIB
(Richard Fowell of Palos Verdes Estates
CA), SABOTUR (Pat Bachelder of An-

drews TX), and BUCWEAT (Tom Schai
of Roseville MN).
In the 50-battle finals Dragon had pulled into a 6 point lead after 40 battles. But
in the space of 4 battles Mustang caught
him. Dragon again pulled ahead only to
be caught in #48. In #49 Mustang went
ahead by a single point. Then, in an incredible finish (in battle 50) Mustang
helped pummel Dragon to 63% damage
while only having 12% damage himself.
It was looking good for Mustang. All
Mustang needed was to have Dragon be
eliminated in the battle before himself.
After a near collision between Mustang
and Norden and a few more hits Dragon
had 77% damage to Mustang's 44%
damage. Then Dragon scores a direct hit
on Mustang (D:77%/M:60%). At this point
Norden is eliminated. Sabotur and
Bucweat are throwing their two cents in
here and there.
Then the incredible finish which took
about 10 seconds. Dragon is hit
(D:93%/M:60%), but before Mustang can
relish his lead he scans backward at
Dragon and runs into Bucweat who is sitting near the upper right hand corner of
the battlefield (D:93%/M:86°%). One second later Bucweat scored a direct hit on
the errant Mustang and Mustang was

gone! All Dragon4a needed to do was survive until Sabotur or Bucweat bit the CRT
dust. But in a true Hollywood style finish
Sabotur or Bucweat (we don't really know
which) put a final fish, bullet, sword,
what-have-you, into Dragon's creaking
side and down he went. A "dead" tie
(literally); 117 to 117.
********

ROBOTWAR is an Apple computer
game available from Muse Software. In
RW you use limited programming space
to design a robot that will go onto the "battlefield" and fight against other robots.
The 4th Annual Tourney will be here
before you know it. Start designing now!
If nothing else, the 3rd annual RW
tourney proved that the best RW robots
are being designed by members of the
POSTAL ROBOTWAR CLUB OF
AMERICA. All five finalists are active in
that group. If the one tourney per year
that we run is not enough for you, or if
you want to get involved with other people who love Robotwar, contact Frank
Krogh (Box 5337, North Hollywood CA
91616).
The seventeen contestants in the 3rd
Annual Robotwar Tourney are available
on disk for $15.00. See ad elsewhere in
this issue.

obstacles and aliens wishing to do you
harm. Your goal is to pickup power
crystals which must be delivered to your
star bases while passing through 13
checkpoints using less than three ships.
A short version of the game is also
playable with only six required checkpoints. One or two can play and the high
score is displayed but not saved for future
reference. The game display is outstanding with vertical scrolling of your flight
path.

THE
COMMODORE
KEY

Roy Wagner

PERPLEXIAN CHALLENGER by
Steven Luedders from Progressive
Peripherals & Software is a
shot-emupinac(qolrthemay).
You sit looking out into space with gages
at the bottom of the screen displaying the
energy, fuel, and laser power available.
Alien craft attack you, some of which
release energy, fuel, or laser pods that you
can attempt to pickup to boost your own
supplies. One to four players can participate selecting one of four possible ship
configurations. The top 20 scores with
ship type and player initials are displayed
between games and saved to disk. Some
of the graphics and sounds were exceptional and very creative.
THE ATTACK OF THE PHANTOM
KARATE DEVILS from Phantom Software is a game of karate revenge (ala
Bruce Lee). Your task is to destroy the
army of phantom karate devils (you only
see their eyes and hands), reach the Control World and destroy the bombs located
there. It is quite a challenge and your
joystick provides you with all the
movements necessary (walking, jumping,
kicks, and punches). You must fight off
much of the enemy's army and dodge
oriental stars while passing through
several different screens. The actions is
exhausting but function key 1 lets you
freeze the action.
These games showed good use of the
capabilities of the C64 (sprites, sound,
and hi-res graphics). They did not offer
much variety, but lots of challenge.

FOR THE COMMODORE 64 ONLY
Last time I promised to tell you about
some games that are only available for the
C64. Most software companies now produce software for the big three (C64,
Apple, and Atari) so that they can hit all
of the big markets at once. I did find some
software out there that, so far, is only
available for the C64. Of them,
NEUTRAL ZONE and BEACH-HEAD,
from Access Software have been
previously mentioned by this column.
POWERSTAR by Barry Kurtz from
Datamagic is a space game wherein you
travel down a space corridor destroying

Recently I have enjoyed playing BC'S
QUEST FOR TIRES, a regular computer
cartoon wherein you try to get THOR
over all sort of adverse terrain to help
CUTE CHICK. It is a lot of fun and the top
10 scores are saved to disk. I have also
been enjoying the latest adventure from
Infocom called INFIDEL in which you
seek to find a pyramid lost in the Egyptian
desert and obtain all its treasures. If you
can figure out the hieroglyphs on the
walls, they will serve as clues/hints to the
many puzzles and predicaments of the
pyramid. As usual for the adventures
from Infocom, the dialogue can be very
humorous and the images formed in your
brain are certainly the closest thing to
reality.

ORIGINAL PROGRAMS, COPY
CLONES, or BASED ON A THEME
Our industry is currently deluged in a
flood of new games, some of which are
original ideas, some are based upon
popular themes, and others are copies
(authorized and not) of other games.
Many of the successful computer games
have come from games that have stood
the test of time and come from classic
board games (checkers, chess, and
backgammon) or card games (blackjack,
poker, and cribbage). Still others have
come from role playing games like
DUNGEONS AND DRAGONS, from
statistical simulations of sports, and from
simulation of historical/fictional combat.
The most successful, of course, have
come from arcade games (SPACE INVADERS, PAC-MAN, DONKEY
KONG, and FROGGER). A few,
however, were original computer games
(STAR TREK, ADVENTURE, and
LUNAR LANDER).
The number of truly original ideas has
been quite small. Most of the games we
see are copies or imitations of previously conceived ideas. Many of these are
disappointing because they were quickly coded to make money on an idea that
was making money. The games look very
much like the originals when you first see
the screen, but generally do not perform
anything like the original. They typically are slow moving and have few of the
options contained in the original.
There are also versions based on the
original idea that are worth buying. In
these the idea has been expanded upon
and made better. The fact that it is a lot
like another game doesn't really bother
you. Many of this group are "authorized"
by the company that produced the
original. (These should be good bets it you
liked the original.) Atarisoft has gotten into this business, producing versions of
their popular games for all major brands
of home computers.
By the time these authorized versions
are available, however, I am usually tired
of the original from playing it at the arcade. This is where I really like the variations on the original theme. I'm tired of
DONKEY KONG now that Atari finally
has it available for me, but I enjoy having
JUMPMAN, MINER 2049er, and HARD
HAT MACK. Q-BERT and its close
clones don't interest me, but POGO JOE
I want.
In the final analysis there are no short
cuts to creating a good game. The oldest
of ideas can be made fresh and enjoyable
by the addition of some original thought
and a lot of hard work.
Special thanks to Dennis and Rob at
Gamesmanship and Bob at DES for their
help.

THE NAME OF
THE GAME

puter community, we tend to get no more
respect than Rodney Dangerfield. Sales
clerks at computer stores still regularly
ask if Free Fall is involved with skydiving.
Mention Lord British's real name in conversation, and the most likely response is,
"Richard who?"
Some of this is likely to change.
SILICON, SI — SILICONE, NO

SOFTWARE SUPERSTARS?

Jon Freeman

There has been a good deal of talk of
late regarding the existence of
"superstars" in the software business.
What is a software superstar? Are there
any? Will there ever be? Is this a case of
much ado about nothing, or is there some
long-term significance to "stardom?"
I confess at the outset to a substantial
aversion to the term "superstar" in any
context. It's a prime example of linguistic
inflation: i.e., the devaluation of language
through absurd hyperbole (whence the
term "hype"). However, it suits our present purposes admirably, because it suggests both the image we're going to examine and the degree of accuracy we're
likely to find.
As far as I can tell, software superstars
belong in the same category as Bigfoot
and little green men from Mars. The
closest thing the computer field has to a
superstar is Steve Wozniak, who's even
inspired a character in a TV series ("Boz"
in Riptide), but he's known for his hardware expertise and the US festivals, not
software — and how many people would
recognize him on the street, anyhow?
Who else is there? Bill Budge? Lord
British? Anne (the other half of Free Fall)
and I? I don't think any of us even qualify
as "stars" ... yet. Admittedly, we've all
been written up at least once in a largecirculation periodical (Free Fall in USA
TODAY, Bill in the WALL STREET
JOURNAL, and Lord British in —
ahem — the NATIONAL INQUIRER),
but by and large the Real World has never
heard of us. No groupies, no mention in
the gossip columns, no guest spots on the
Tonight Show, no mansions in Bel Air.
In fact, even in the much smaller com

Resistance to software "superstars"
seems to stem from two causes: taste
(disliking the idea) and judgment (finding
the notion unlikely).
Some of the most vocal critics of the
idea are software publishers who view
bylines for designers and programmers
with the enthusiasm of King John for the
Magna Carta. The resulting mixture of
wishful thinking and heel-dragging is on
a par with the self-serving arguments of
the established that newcomers (any
potential competitor entering the market
more than a week after whoever is making the statement) just can't make it
anymore. Unless you are a publisher of
similar inclination, it is hard to sympathize with someone whose idea of a
generous royalty is 2.2%.
More universal — and more reasonable — is a distaste for the star syndrome:
arrogant, egotistical behavior elevated to
an art form; greedy agents and sycophantic hangers-on; conspicuous consumption; a senseless devotion to the minutiae
of a star's private life; a glaring discrepancy between perceived value and apparent
reward.
Fortunately, such Tinseltown customs
are likely to remain alien to Silicon Valley.
It is hard to take seriously "Bill Budge's
Bits & Bytes" or "Garriott's Guerillas" as
prime-time network fare, Yankee
Stadium filled for an Andy Greenberg lecture on PASCAL, or nude photos of Steve
Dompier in a gossip magazine called
SILICON SECRETS. Amusing, yes; likely, no. This does not mean we will never
have software stars, however; it only
means computer programmers are not
going to be viewed or treated as rock stars
or matinee idols.
WHO WAS THAT MASKED MAN?
A far better analogy, it seems to me, is
that between the software business and
book industry: i.e., the programmer or
designer as author. A novelist's work goes
on "behind the scenes;" it is the end
product — the book — that counts. So it
is with software. We want a good game;
most of us don't care who the programmer is dating or what brand of toothpaste
the designer uses.
This does not require best-selling
authors — or software developers — to
labor in anonymity. Stephen King and
Charles Shultz, for instance, are certainly famous in their way; yet you would probably not recognize either one — or Dan
Gorlin, for that matter — in the super-

market. In the long run, a popular game
designer is as likely to appear on Johnny
Carson — once — as the writer of next
season's "Passion's Torrid Torrent" and
as likely to return, afterward, to the same
relative obscurity the rest of us enjoy.
Even if we don't have to put up with
superstars and superstardom, you may
still wonder why anyone would — or
should — bother turning programmers
into software "stars" at all.
For one thing, if programmers work as
hard and bring as much pleasure as
writers or musicians, they deserve similar
rewards. More importantly, recognition
of individual achievement goes hand in
hand with increased awareness of the difference between the work produced by
the best designers and programmers and
the junk thrown together by hacks and
plagiarists. If you think I've belabored this
point elsewhere, consider the recent letter writer who swore the Atari 800 could
not display more than eight colors at
once. If a CGW reader and a long-time
computer owner knows so little of the
computer's capabilities, consider the ignorance of the novice computerist. With
inexperienced teenagers in fly-by-night
magazines giving rave reviews to the
latest Pac-Man clone, it's little wonder
most of us get stuck with second-rate software and hopeless hardware.
COMES THE REVOLUTION ...
It doesn't have to be this way.
Software stars can offer their
audience — those who play the games
and purchase the software — the same
thing that well-known authors offer their
readers: quality, consistency, the satisfaction of expectancy. Readers of Robert
Parker's detective stories know the new
Spenser novel will be a treat; Stephen
King fans buy each new King chiller as
soon as it appears. Why should software
be different?
Some publishers — Infocom and Electronic Arts are obvious examples — work
to instill a similar sense of brand loyalty
in their customers, but publishers in
analogous fields have not been particularly successful at it. Few readers remember
who published the latest best-seller, and
even fewer people watch Magnum, P.I.,
because of the channel it's on. For software publishers, the presence of
recognized stars can bring a measure of
predictability to an industry dominated
by uncertainty. Software stars will not
eliminate all the bad software on the
market, but they will keep some of the
good stuff from being lost in a morass of
mediocrity.
The key is simple enough: if designers
and programmers can achieve and maintain consistent high quality, they will
become true software stars, and the
unpleasant crapshoot that is software
buying may become the real pleasure
we'd all like it to be.

PLANET PHOTON'
"Live" Sci-fi Gaming
Photon is coming. What is Photon? It is
an alien planet located in Dallas Texas. It
is also the first of a new futuristic kind of
high-technology, life-sized "living video
game." Players wield light phasers that
win (or lose) them points in a computercontrolled contest of wiles, wits and agility, competing against themselves and
against time in a spacious, other-worldly
setting of experimental electronic music,
pulsing lights, swirling fog and alien
planet props.
"For our customers, we believe this will
be the ultimate fantasy-like, space age experience," says George A. Carter III, the
38-year-old innovator of Photon. Slated to
open in Dallas in late March, Planet
Photon's players will find themselves:

• Doing battle in a surrealistic
8,000-square-foot "extraterrestrial
territory".

• Wearing the components of space-age
warfare that include helmets with highfrequency radio transmitters and
receivers; laser-like "guns" that trigger
sensors when their bursts strike their
targets; high energy battery belts and a vest
that contains a microprocessor to analyse
and report on its wearer's activities.

• Joining one of two teams of 10 players
each that begin the Photon game on opposite sides of a heavily carpeted and
catacombed playing area and seek to battle their way across the floor to the other
team's home base.

• Seeking to avoid the momentary, 10 second computerized disarming of their
own gun which occurs when they are
struck by photon beams of the opposing
team or by narrow light beams that
occasionally erupt from the alien planet itself.

• Hoping to build their own point scores
two or three points at a time by "stunning"
members of the opposing team and
avoiding being stunned themselves—and
by pushing through, during the six
minutes or more that the game is in progress, to to opposing team's home base,
which is worth bonus points.

The idea for Photon assumed shape in
Carter's mind over several months after he
first witnessed the laser gun battles in
"Star Wars". "At first, I had a survival-like
game in mind but soon realized that what
I envisioned needed to take place indoors," recalls Carter. "After all, we are
dealing with combinations of microcomputers, radio frequency equipment, light
sensing mechanisms, video display electronics and experimental music that
often pushes the state of the art."

DISPATCHES (Cont.)
moon became a penal colony where convicted criminals were sent but no supervision was provided. Heinlein postulates
a society where everything is made and
sold (even water and air) within a completely unfettered free-market economy.
The main credo of this society was
"there's no such thing as a free lunch"
(TNSTAFL). Even justice was a commodity to be bought. When two people
had a disagreement, they would hire a
judge who would decide the case. (One
common decision was to throw the offender out the air-lock.) Thus, our initial
design for the new game was to have absolutely no "government intervention" or
external authority.
With our main design concepts as the
skeleton and our scenarios to "flesh out"
our ideas, we began to design the way the
game would look and work. Our world
would have three kinds of terrain: river
valley, mountains and plains. Each of
these would affect the production of commodities. The commodities would be
food, energy, Smithore and Crystite. Food
was generic for all things needed for personal survival (air, water, food & shelter).
Only a minimum amount of food would
be needed each "turn" and once that was
met there would be no incentive for more
production. Energy would reflect all of
the "variable costs of production" for the
other commodities. Energy would be
needed to produce any other item.
Smithore was to be a mining product that
was available everywhere but in variable
quantities (based on the number of mountains in a plot). This commodity would be
the basic "cash crop" of the planet and
would have an average price that was better than food or energy. Thus, we would
create a friction where players would
prefer to produce Smithore because of its
higher return but if everyone did ti, they
would all starve or run out of energy to
produce anything. Crystite (the raw
material for "Dilithium Crystals") was the
most profitable product. Its price would
fluctuate randomly from Smithore's
average price to three times that value.
Crystite deposits were not apparent to the
player and would require assays to determine its underground "contours".
Shortages and surpluses of the
necessities would occur and these would
be "resolved" in the auctions. Thus, we
felt we had the makings of a very dynamic
process. During play-testing we added
even more pressure to the system. We
made food needs increase significantly at
predictable points. (We invented a rationale that said some of your relatives
had arrived from home.) Smithore was
hooked into the supply of M.U.L.E.s so if
no one produced it the supply of
M.U.L.E.s would run out. Also, the price

offered for Smithore would shoot up to
twice the average price of Crystite if there
was a shortage of M.U.L.E.s so that
Crystite production was not always the
optimum strategy. All of these conflicting
pressures created a lot of action in the
auctions. Prices for food could even exceed all other commodities in times of
famine but would plunge immediately
when a bumper crop came in.
In the first implementation of
M.U.L.E., all land was sold in competitive
auctions. However, this led to a runaway
game where the player with the most
money would get the most land and then
make the most money. Thus, we had to introduce a "land authority" that provided
each player with a free plot each turn. I
wrote a routine that moved the cursor
across the available plots from left to right
as a temporary test to see if land grants
would work. We got so used to it that I
never go around to replacing it with some
more elegant mechanic.
As we went along we developed many
of the details that made the game flow better. We made the town explode up from
a single plot among 45 on the map to a full
screen when you entered it. This gave
more resolution where we needed it
while still making the town seem part of
the map and not a non sequitur screen.
We made the bar charts (that tell players
their status in each commodity) animate
through the phases of usage, spoilage and
production. This helped people understand the flow better. We made production occur on the map screen as a process
that builds suspense rather than giving
the final results that the computer already
knew. We added "ticking timers" (which
get faster as the time is running out) that
both inform the player and build excitement. Some items were a result of
mistakes that looked neat. On the summary screen, a character was accidentally made double size and we decided to use
it on the last turn to denote the winner.

Many things were also taken out as the
design was executed. Depletion of
Crystite as it was mined, claim jumping,
loans between players, and bankruptcy to
mention a few. Overall, we discovered
that the best option was usually the
simplest one. It is often difficult for a
designer to prevent "creeping complexity". You want to keep adding things that
will make the game more interesting.
However, the more separate items you
add the more likely you are to dilute the
design rather than enhance it.
The last pieces written into the game
were the best as far as I am concerned.
Random outcomes (earthquakes, pirates,
fires in the store) added the unpredictability needed in any game. "Chance
cards" that affected individuals added a
personal touch while also adjusting
player standings somewhat. (The winner
can one get bad luck and the loser can only good luck.) Collusion in the auctions
allowed players to make private deals to
help each other or to thwart an opponent.
This provided the flexibility we were
after. The worst part of the game design
was the solitaire play. But we took refuge
in the fact that M.U.L.E. was a multiplayer game. (Single player M.U.L.E. is
considerably better than single player
Monopoly!)
Curiously, the single element of
M.U.L.E. most often noted has nothing at
al to do with the game! It's the original
"rock theme" that we commissioned Roy
Glover to write. It used to bother me that
out of the 300K of source code and the 18
man-months of work the thing people
noticed most was the thing that took the
least effort. But now I've resigned myself
to the point that anything that makes people enjoy our product sounds good to me!
Dan Bunten is the author of COMPUTER
QUARTERBACK, CARTELS & CUTTHROATS, and CYTRON MASTERS.
He is also the lead designer of the Ozark
Softscape group that wrote M. U.L.E. and
SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD.

Parthian Kings
NAME:
Strategic/Fantasy
TYPE:
Apple II
SYSTEM:
David W. Bradley
AUTHOR:
#PLAYERS: 1 to 4
$25
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Avalon Hill
Baltimore, MD
The King is dead, and the kingdom is in
chaos. Who will gain control of the fallen
crown? Will it be you, or one of your less
worthy opponents? Only you can decide
the issue, with your decisions turning the
balance for or against your cause. The
King is dead! Will you be the next to
mount the throne?
In PARTHIAN KINGS (PK), each
player must make several early decisions
which may press him to an early victory,
or condemn him to an inevitable defeat.
This is due to the fact that the players control many factors not usually given to
manipulation. These factors include in
order of their occurrence: the name and
characteristics of their army's units, the
selection of their capitol from the
available towns, and the make-up of their
armies from the previously designed
units. The players must also decide on
several factors which concern them all
equally. These include the map's terrain,
the number of towns and their features,
the number of players (up to four, with the
computer being able to control up to three
of these), and whether or not magic is to
be used.
One of the two most important decisions that the player must make is the
design of his army's units. Each unit type
is first named, then assigned hit points,
attack strength, long or short or no range
fire, armor factor, and a movement
allowance. The computer will then, using
the information specified, determine the
unit's cost and give you the option of accepting the created unit type or rejecting
it and trying again. As you are limited to
creating only five unit types, their design
is critical and will either help or haunt
you throughout the game.

The other decision that you need to
consider carefully is the selection of your
capitol. If you are the third of fourth
player, then you may be faced with the
least of evils for a choice. It is for this
reason that the last player(s) should be
given the task of placing all or some of the
towns. This caution is justified due to the
fact that if your capitol falls, you then lose
the ability to raise taxes or create new
units.
There are two different army designs to
consider based on the choice to have
magic or none in your game. If the game
is without magic, then it is best to have a
well balanced design for your army's
units, as both the weakest and strongest
possible units have their uses. This is
changed considerably by the introduction of magic. Due to a spell which your
wizard will normally gain early in the
game (OSCARDE, which randomly adds
to the number of one of your five types of
units), it is advantageous to have one inexpensive but balanced unit and four
maximum units. This would mean that
the successful casting of this spell would
give you an 80% chance of gaining units,
each of which would normally cost an entire turn's income early in the game. This
can give you a great advantage at a point
when you can reap the greatest benefit.
It can, however, be turned against you
should you allow an opponent to bring his
wizard within range of your capitol, due
to the reversed effect this same spell has
when cast upon enemy towns.
One potentially weak point of PK is its
lack of a save game option. This is largely made up for, however, by the inclusion
of an option which allows the players to
specify a long or a short game. The long
game continues until there is a sole King.
With the selection of the short game, the
number of turns in the game is determined by the players (five turns being suggested for a short game).
Other features of PK include very good
solitaire play, a well written and clearly
laid out rule book, and the ability to save
your army designs and scenario maps on
a separate disk (actually this latter ability is required). One wonders why, considering the mandatory saving of these
factors on disk, the game itself could not
be saved to disk. Just another of life's little mysteries.
Parthian Kings is a very challenging
game due to the large role the player has
in developing the factors which determine his starting position. The play goes
smoothly once the dynamics of unit
movement is mastered and combines
with the setup options to give you a

tremendous feeling of control. As a good
example of the new crop of military
games with a fantasy setting, PK has those
features which should insure that you
will continue to play it for a long time to
come. The King is dead, and the Kingdom
waits to find out who will next mount the
throne.
Curtis Edwards

NAME:
Planetfall
S.F. Adventure
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
Many
#PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
Steve Meretzky
PRICE:
$49.95
PUBLISHER: Infocom Inc.
Cambridge, MA
Planetfall is a text adventure game that
begins with you, a lowly ensign, scrubbing the decks of the Stellar Patrol Ship
Feinstein. Your life has never seemed
worse, and your future looks very bleak,
boring, and uneventful. Right about this
time your ship is rocked by an explosion.
In order to save your life you rush to the
nearest escape pod and are jettisoned out
into space. By using your wits, you are
able to ride the escape pod down to the
nearest inhabited planet. There you are
marooned on one of two islands on the
planet.
Your mission, besides finding food and
a safe place to sleep, is to get rescued from
the planet. But your first order of business
is survival. Finding a safe place to sleep
is not difficult but you must find food
before your emergency ration kit runs
out. Once you have the food supply and
know where it's safe to sleep you can
begin your real adventure (Watch out! In
this adventure you can even get sick and
dream while you sleep.)
On the island you will find two huge
deserted complexes which must be mapped (Kalamontee and Lawanda). In your
wandering through the first complex you
will meet a robot named Floyd. In the
beginning, Floyd might be a nuisance
because of his incessant babbling, but as
you have probably already guessed he

plays an important part in the completion
of the game. Floyd's interaction is a very
unique concept in this game. It adds
animation to the game without relying on
graphics. (In certain parts of the complex
I had already mapped I found myself hurrying through the rooms. As this left
Floyd far behind, I ended up slowing
down to wait for Floyd to catch up.)
There are more than 100 rooms in
Planetfall and each one has its own very
detailed description. Part of the enjoyment to these games is just reading these
descriptions. I found myself wanting to
know more about the complex — why for
example, it was deserted, and where all
the people went.
The puzzles in Planetfall involve
special access cards, tools, and the fixing
of machines that have broken down. I
found the solutions to be logical with just
enough depth to give me problems but not
enough to cause me aggravation.
The documentation is almost as enjoyable as the game itself. With the software you get a diary, post cards, an I.D.
card, and a manual. The diary looks handwritten and is on Stellar Patrol letterhead,
it tells about a few days of the Ensign's
boring life. The post cards are very funny. The manual as always should be read
carefully. Often the problems you run
into throughout the game can be made
easier with the help of some clues or explanations from the manual.
For those of you that are text game or
NAME:
Conquering Worlds
TYPE:
Space War Game
SYSTEM:
Apple II
FORMAT: Disk
#PLAYERS: 1 to 3
AUTHOR: Walt Hochbrueckner
$29.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Datamost
CONQUERING WORLDS is a space
wargame with both strategic and arcade
action. As the Supreme Commander of
your civilization you must conquer and
capture planets from the enemy(s)
civilization(s).
There are two types of games that you
can pick from; you can either choose to
defeat all of your opponents or to conquer
all of the planets. There doesn't appear to
be any difference in the way the game is
played under either type. It just makes a
difference as to how the game is scored
in the end. Whichever is picked, when the
end occurs the computer will calculate
your score, and keep a record of it.
You are able to play against the robot
(computer) alone or you can also have up
to two additional human players. Depending on the size of the game you
desire you can also choose from 4 to 32
star systems where each star has 2 to 8
planets in orbit.
Each turn of the game covers a period
of 10 years. During these 10 years (120

Infocom fanatics this is another excellent
adventure to add to your collection. The
addition of Floyd the robot as your partner is a unique boost to the interactive
nature of these games and I hope to see
more of this type of creative innovation
in future games.
For those of you who have never played
these types of games before, Planetfall
would be a good place to start.
James A. McPherson

months) you can move your ships between planets or between stars as well as
change the location of your base. Since
you can only get detailed information on
the star system where your base is you
have to move your base to get new information. You have to be careful here
because, when you move your base between star systems, there is a random
chance that the star system you warp to
will be completely controlled by the
enemy and you will have to battle it out
to the end. If you lose, you not only lose
your ships but your base as well.
When you warp to a new star system or
planet and attack you enter the arcade
mode. If you do not care to do the arcade
game you can preset the game parameters
and have the computer determine the outcome. (The arcade portion became repetitious and uninteresting after a few
rounds so I changed over to the automatic
mode, with no real loss). The arcade
shoot-em-up results are based strictly on
who has the last ship still flying around,
so I always tried to attack with around 7
to 9 ships. This way the screen is not too
crowded with my ships, which would increase the chance of a random hit, but
would also be of a substantial quantity so
that I would have at least 2 chances to attack. Each attack wave is a countdown of
100 time units which typically takes 30

imagine Pac-Man on a tether that you can
retract with the touch of a button. He
enters at the top center of the maze and
snakes his way at right angles munching
up dots (oil pellets) and avoiding the touch
of his foes (Oozies and Land Mines) who
continuously glide across the screen.
Clear out one screen and you get another,
tougher one. Essentially that's Oil's Well.
You can select three speeds for the
Oozies and Land Mines. The speeds are
cutely named Regular, Unleaded, and
Premium. Regular is reasonable, and
Unleaded is tough. Premium, though, is
so fast that it might have been more
appropriately named Rocket Fuel.
In the more difficult mazes there's less
distance between some turns and there
are fewer easy routes — a feature which
makes it more challenging for you to get
to some of the Oil Pellets. After you mine
an oil field, your refinery (located at the
top one-fourth of the screen) appears
closer to completion. If you clear out all
eight of your fields you can retire or select
a higher speed and start over.
The cast of characters in OW is wellbalanced; there aren't so many bad guys
that you feel hopelessly overwhelmed.
And, getting ahead isn't too easy. You feel
like you gain points the old fashioned way
... you EARN them.
At the beginning of each game you get
three Drill Bits which last about a minute
and half each. The drill bit and pipe
retraction is, perhaps, the most amusing
feature of the game. By just slightly
touching the trigger button you can partially retract them. This maneuver allows
you to get out of danger's way in a hurry
while staying deep within the
underground maze.
While clearing screens you rack-up ten
points for each Oil Pellet you munch and
1000 points for each super-charged
deposit called a Goblet. This makes the
Goblets important since every 10,000
points you get an extra drill bit. Another
element on your side is the Petromin, a
sort of power pellet located deep within
each maze that slows down the Oozies for
a few seconds and allows you to gobble
up deeply buried Oil Pellets.
The bad buys in this game prey on your
two weak spots: your pipe and your drill
bit. The Land Mines detonate when your
Drill Bit touches them; though they pass
right over your pipe without damage. The
Oozies work just the opposite of the Land
Mines, destroying your pipe just by
touching it while your Drill Bit can
munch them right down (and get 20 to 170
points each for doing it.)
Oil's Well is a very good game. But for
a few minor flaws it might have been a
great game. OW lacks a few of the standard features that many hard-core home
arcaders have come to expect; high score
save to disk and two-player competition
mode. Also, the underground creatures

Continued on p. 35

Continued on p. 46

NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Oil's Well
Arcade
Apple, Atari, C-64,
Coleco
FORMAT:
Disk or Cartridge
#PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
Thomas Mitchell
PUBLISHER: Sierra On-Line
Coarsegold, CA
Oil's Well (OW) develops the old "clean
out the maze" concept in a fun, new way.
To see OW in your mind's arcade do this:

AXIS ASSASSIN

Trip Hawkins, President of Electronic Arts says he wants EA games
to be simple to learn, hot (full of action) and deep (they grow with you).
Axis Assassin definitely meets all
these criteria.
You, the famed Axis Assassin, can
fire forward or, by reversing direction, behind you, and can move in
any of four directions. With only
three ships, you are engaged in a
fierce fire fight with a whole slew of
deadly enemies. Your battle ground
is a geometric shape suspended in
space and infested with Hunters,
Spinners, Drones, Spores and Mutant
Guards. For each successful traverse
of a web (one of the geometrical
figures) you gain a thousand bonus
points and the dubious honor of moving on to a different and more dangerous design of web.
For each web you have a single
Pulse Bomb which, when set off, will
disintegrate every fighter in the web.
If you time it perfectly, and detonate
your pulse bomb just as you are prepared to blast your way on to the next
web, you can instead blast your way
into The Nest for a deadly encounter
with The Master Arachnid. Be careful, though, for this may only be a
more sure way to die. Should you
actually survive your encounter with
the Master, you will emerge back onto another segment of the web having gained another Assassin to help
in your quest.
When you've completed twenty
web sweeps, you'll be elevated to the
even more deadly environs of Zone
Two, where the battle becomes, if
anything, more intense and challenging. At the ultimate levels you'll eventually run across the yellow Xterminators, who never die except in
pairs. Good Hunting!!

Axis Assassin is strongly reminiscent of the arcade game Tempest.
You score points for blasting web
strands, fighters, and for surviving
web sweeps. The most frustrating
part for me was having fighters slip
sideways across the web to zap me.
The hardest part of the game itself,
at least to this poor finger twisted
writer, was trying to survive the encounters with the Master Arachnid.
In just about a month of playing
the game, I've come back from the
nest only three times. Usually, I find
it no more than a spectacular way
to suicide.
This game is definitely fast moving
with very nice graphics. From a
design point of view, my only complaint is that the joystick controller
gives you a little too much mobility.
Many many times I found myself
shooting completely across the web
when I really only wanted to go a
strand or two. In using your pulse
bombs, try to be patient. Remember
that you only get one per web sweep,
so hold off until the whole bloody
web seems filled with fighters, then
zap them all into oblivion. Don't hold
off too long, though, since a pulse
bomb at the precise instant of transfer to the next web will detour you
into The Nest. And, as stated above,
even if you're not ready for it, the
nest will be ready for you.
As suggested on the game package,
try to hug the bottom and sides of the
web as long as possible, and really try
to avoid looking at your score while
playing. It's a sure way to bite the
dust . . . stardust, that is.
David Long

HARD HAT MACK

Hard Hat Mack (HHM) is another
arcade game by San Mateo based
Electronic Arts. HHM requires you
to complete three distinct construc-

tion duties while avoiding Vandals,
OSHA Inspectors, and a variety of
other on-the-job hazards.
Level one involves picking up four
sections of girder and placing them
in four gaps found in the building.
You automatically pick up the girder
sections, and just as automatically
put them down in the holes when
you cross them. You can jump over
the holes and can also jump off the
edge of the construction area. Jumping off of the left edge is suicide, but
at the bottom of the right edge lies a
springboard which, when you time
your jump correctly, will usually
bounce you back up to the level just
above where you jumped off. The
only exception to this is when you
jump off of the very top level, which
then lands you back on the lowest
level. You can also move up and
down by climbing the chains between levels, and through utilization
of the elevator which runs along the
left edge of the building. The elevator
is normally found at ground level, but
by jumping up and ringing the bell
at the top you can call the elevator up
to you. The catch at level one is the
bouncing rivet. This lovely bouncing
beauty falls, with semi-regularity,
across the screen, and, in spite of
your hard hat, will wipe you out if it
hits you. At any rate, in between the
rivet, the vandals, and the OSHA inspector, you have to lay all four sections of the girder in place, and then
grab the rivet gun (not to be confused
with the bouncing rivet) and rivet
them in place. When you've finished
this, you'll receive a bonus (the faster,
the better) and move on to level two.
At level two your task is to gather the
lunch boxes which are scattered
about, while still avoiding the various
job hazards. These include the
crusher, the pinchers, the heater, and
the dynamite keg. Once you've
touched all the lunch boxes (when
you touch them they disappear), you
must ride the moving girder to the
top. From there, you must jump to
the conveyor belt with perfect timing
to avoid the blast furnace and have
the magnet lift you up on to level
three. The hardest part of this level,
at least for me, was avoiding the
crusher and the pinchers.

Level three is, in my opinion, the
easiest. You use the twin springboards at the bottom and a moving
elevator / conveyor belt to collect
metal ingots and drop them into the
rivet making machines at the bottom.
Here, as at all other levels, you must
watch out for the vandals and OSHA
inspectors, but most of the other
traps are fairly easily avoided.
After level three, you have the
pleasant duty of going on to level
four, which is a more difficult version of level one in that there are two
bad guys after you instead of one.
Again the bouncing rivet is the worst
danger to your continued career, but
you should also be careful not to get
caught between the two vandals /
OSHA inspectors.
HHM appears to me to be a brand
new concept in arcade action. In the
first place, nobody has ever made
a game out of the construction industry of which I've heard. Secondly,
although at first glance this might be
taken to be similar to Donkey Kong,
Apple Panic, or Miner 20 49er, the
resemblance ends there. Thirdly, you
can continue virtually forever, or as
long as your supply of HHM's hold
out. You start the game with three
and get only one additional man at
7000 points with no further reinforcements. One minor anomaly
does exist. Your bonus points count
down from the time you begin working on a level, but they reset to the
maximum when you loose a Mack.
For example, at level two you can
successfully gather all the lunch
boxes and see your bonus drop down
to around 2000 or 1500. If you then
suicide, the bonus will jump back up
to 5000 and you will make it to level
three with at least a 4500 bonus. So,
in the short run, you can score higher
by selective suicide. In the long run,
however, with only one bonus man,
you'll have to find a better tactic. I've
been playing HHM for nearly six
weeks, and it isn't getting old yet.
Remember to pick up as many
bonus objects as you can, and watch
out for the bouncing rivet . . . and
when you break 100,000 points, do
write in and let us know.
David Long

TAKING A PEEK (Cont.)
DAWN OF CIVILIZATION: Strategy
game for 1 to 4 players which abstracts
the spread of man at the beginning of
civilization. The object is to have the
largest number of tribes on the board
at the end of play. Players build
legions, cultivate farms and manage
food and land resources for their
growing populations. Atari.

Strategic Simulations
883 Stierlin Rd. A-200
Mountain View, CA 94043-1983

QUESTRON: If you liked Ultima, this
is the game for you. Similar enough to
Ultima that SSI has a licensing agreement with Richard Garriott, Questron
takes you into the Empire of the same
name. You must find Mantor and steal
his Book of Evil Magic. Questron is a
circumnavigable world of some
57,000 squares that contains a large
variety of interests. However, as we
can tell you from experience, don't run
to the nearest gambling hall after each
"find". Kirk, you have got to be more
conservative with your money!
Review coming. Apple, Atari. $49.95.

Sublogic Corp.
713 Edgebrook Dr.
Champaign, IL 61820

FLIGHT SIMULATOR II: To put it
simply, every Apple owner should
have a copy of this program. It is an
outstanding example of what can be
done in 48/64K. Not to mention the
fact that it does an excellent job at
simulating small aircraft flying. Over
80 airports are included in four
scenery areas: New York, Chicago,
Seattle, and L.A. Other scenery areas
are available separately. Sublogic is
pursuing the possibility of FAA approval of FSII as a training device. Apple 48/64K. (IBM Flight Simulator by
Microsoft is same program). Atari and
C-64 versions coming.

SCORPION'S TALE (Cont.)
no problem at all; getting in should be
equally easy. What's that? You say you
don't have a silver rod? Sure you do, you
just don't realize it yet! Its location will
become obvious after the great shake-out;
just think about that for awhile.
Now, the other bubble is a slightly different matter. You can't just walk over to
it, or climb up to it. However, as you
might have suspected, there is a way to
get there. If you recall your physics, for
every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction.
Once you arrive at and enter the other
bubble, you will find a use for all the remaining rods. Here you are on your own,
as what needs to be done can be determined only by trial and error (although again,
if you know some physics, part of this will
be easier). But, when you figure out the
exact sequence of moves, you will bring
the game to a triumphant conclusion!
Well, that seems to be about it for "Starcross". Next time, we'll talk about a game
that is much different and full of magical
happenings: Enchanter. 'Till then, happy
adventuring!
* * * NOTE! * * *
Just after the February issue went to
press, I was notified that my mailbox
place would be closing at the end of
January. They continued to hold mail for
current customers until about midFebruary; after that, all mail was returned to sender. Since CGW was already
printed, there was no way to get a notice
in about the change. My apologies to any
of you who had letters returned because
of this problem. Of course, I have a new
mailbox, and you can now write to me at
the following address: Scorpia, 207 E.
85th St. Suite 240 New York, NY 10028.
I would also like to remind correspondents that, if you want a personal
reply, you MUST include a selfaddressed, STAMPED envelope
(however, this does not apply to readers
living in foreign countries where
American stamps are unavailable)!
For those of you who are online, I can
be reached on the Source at ST1030, and
on CompuServe on page GAM-310.
OIL'S WELL (Cont.)
lack internal animation. (These criticisms
aren't meant to imply that the game's not
fun — it's lots of fun.)
The action's well-paced, the difficulty
progressive. While getting to a higher
level is somewhat dependent on getting
the right breaks — good eye-hand coordination, timing, and strategy are essential. Oil's Well offers an exciting treatment of a maze-munch game that you
won't grow tired of after ten or twenty
plays.
Dave Stone

CARRIER FORCE (Cont.)
all day long. All other aircraft would do
well to be back on the ground by nightfall,
since operational accidents increase at
night.
Depending on aircraft type, planes can
travel a certain number of hexes each
hour (hexes are 50 miles wide). As each
plane or group of planes passes through
a hex, search occurs. The quality of that
search can be improved by "spending"
more of that hour's movement points
searching the same hex more intensively. For example, an aircraft capable of
traveling 150 miles in one hour could:
— travel the full 150 miles, expending
one movement point in each of the three
hexes in the course of a cursory search.
— spend two of the three available
movement points in hex, then after
locating nothing, move on to another hex
and spend the last point searching in the
new hex.
— spend all three points searching in
the same hex.
Once air groups are created, all the
player must do is decide the direction in
which the group will fly. As each movement point is expended the computer
conducts searches, and if something is
spotted the player receives a report of the
sighting and a symbol is displayed on the
map noting the location of an enemy task
force.
This simple act of computer-mediated
search is the glue that holds CF together.
It is swift and exciting, and it can be
frustrating. Search planes are unarmed,
and if they are jumped by CAP they
always get shot down. And it is here that
one flaw surfaces.
Whenever air combat of any kind takes
place, the location of that combat is
shown on the map. Whenever a search
plane is jumped by CAP the searching
player is notified that the plane has been
shot down, and the hex in which it happened is indicated on the map. Common
sense tells you that if a search plane is
jumped by CAP over a certain hex, then
there must be something of consequence
steaming along on the surface in that hex.
Essentially, what this means is that a
search plane that is jumped by CAP will
always manage to get off a radio message
of the sighting and location before he goes
down.

Picture yourself sitting in the Combat
Information Center aboard the Lexington
at Coral Sea, watching air groups inching
across a map towards the marker that
denotes the last known position of a
Japanese task force.
Whether or not the enemy TF has been
spotted by a search plane during the hour,
attacking air groups, logically enough,
must also spot the target TF on their own.
And the farther from home an attacker

flies, the greater the chance that he will
fail to spot the enemy. Weather conditions can also prevent spotting a target.
So there you sit, having shot your bolt,
waiting for the Lexington's SBD
Dauntless dive bombers, now approaching the end of their tether, to arrive
over the target. On the map the air group
marker moves onto the target hex, eclipsing the symbol denoting a Japanese task
force. The SBDs have less than an hour
before they must turn around, otherwise
they will fail to make it back to their
carriers.
The SBDs are directly over the IJN task
force, but in the deteriorating weather
they cannot spot their target. One movement point is used. Only one more
remains.
You order the bombers to continue the
search and they do, with still no ships
spotted. The SBDs have failed to find the
target. Faced with the prospect of losing
the entire squadron to ditching, you
reluctantly steer the bombers back
towards the Lexington, and steer a course
for "point option" where you will retrieve
your aircraft.
There is another side to that coin,
though. On more than one occasion my
radar has detected an incoming raid, my
CAP has intercepted incoming attackers,
that, and the weather meant that the
Japanese were unable to spot and attack
my ships. The weather is impartial.

Task force movement is accomplished
in an effective manner. Each hour, task
forces accumulate movement points,
which are then expended through such
things as changes in headings, and air
operations. When a task force has accumulated 50 movement points, it moves
into the next hex on its current heading.
Aircraft carrier operations are
hampered by insufficient wind across the
flight deck, so it is necessary to turn a carrier into the wind for most major air
operations. In addition, the deck capacity
of carriers is extremely important, and
the management of flight deck space is
clearly the most important skill to master.
Maintaining a smooth flow of air operations is a complex task. CAP and search
planes must be launched and landed. Air
strikes, combining fighters, bombers, and
torpedo planes must be launched, formed up overhead, and sent on their way.
Meanwhile, there are aircraft returning
and circling overhead, waiting for the
chance to land. And you, in overall command, must keep track of wind direction,
heading and traffic on the flight deck. Not
surprisingly, a task force that is busy with
air operations, frequently moving into the
wind to conduct those operations, will
make little headway in any direction but
directly into the wind during a period of
extended air operations.

Gary Grigsby aptly describes the computer opponent as "not terribly creative
tactically, but his staff is superb." And indeed it is. While you are grappling with
the problem of having been too aggressive, having launched so many
bombers that you must watch an entire
squadron of fighters in the landing circle
ditch for lack of available deck space, you
will be chagrined to realize that the
Japanese computer opponent does not
make that same kind of mistakes.
There are some limitations to the structure of the program that make it rather
unforgiving, and thus, give the computer
opponent an edge. For example, once an
air group has been placed in the Landing
Circle the group cannot be "waved off"
... it must land in the next hour, and it
must land in the task force in which it was
designated to land during the previous
hour. If you have a one carrier task force,
even if it occupies the same hex as
another carrier task force, and if there are
no air operations left for the designated
carrier, there is no way for you to safely
land those planes on an alternate carrier.
The lesson then, is to always be aware of
your aircraft situation.
CF lends itself to having two human
players share duties in a game against the
computer opponent. It is a handful to plot
and log effective search patterns without
either missing an area or duplicating
searches. It is also a chore to keep track
of aircraft operations such that returning
aircraft have a place to land. And, it is a
chore to make sure that attack aircraft can
reach their targets and still get back to
their carriers, especially if those carriers
must zig-zag into the wind to launch or
retrieve planes while the strike is enroute
to its target.
Dividing those duties among two or
more players, so that one player is the
overall TF commander, and the other is
either an individual carrier commander
or the overall group commander, will
allow for more people to participate
without slowing down the game. It will
also reduce the likelihood of a bookkeeping foul-up that could strip a carrier of
many of its planes. In initial playings of
CF, I have found more of my plane losses
coming from such foul-ups than from
Japanese actions.
CF has been exhaustively researched,
and beautifully produced. In many ways
it is the kind of game that we had in mind
several years ago when we were
daydreaming about where the wargaming hobby was headed now that the computer had arrived. The tedium of bookkeeping is gone, replaced with the real
feel of the "fog of war."
Tom Cheche provided historical research
in the development of CARRIER FORCE.

R.I.D. was prepared with the help of SPEED STAT by SoftCorp International, Westerville, OH 800-543-1350

See page 50 for details on the Reader Input Device

There were 253 RIDs turned in by press time for this
issue.
Newly rated games and updated game ratings are
listed with bold type in the table on page 48.
GAME RATING
The table on page 48 includes games evaluated by our
readers. For a game to he included in this listing it must
first have been offered for rating in our regular RID
rating system. Games offered for evaluation are those
covered in the magazine and/or those having a good
sales record during the time of evaluation. Once offered
for evaluation, the game must have been evaluated by
a sufficient number of readers to be included in the
results. Any game not evaluated by at least 10% of the
respondents was not included in the results.
Games were rated on a scale of 1 (terrible) to 9
(outstanding). Respondents were asked to consider such
things as PRESENTATION (graphics, sound, packaging, documentation); GAME DESIGN (design, playability, interesting?); LIFE (does the game wear well?)
RID #13 (Use card provided)
On this page a number of games and articles are listed
for evaluation. Please take time to evaluate these games
and articles. Use the guidelines above for game evaluation. Leave blank any game which you have not played
enough to have formed an opinion.
Please rate articles on the basis of the article itself,
not your opinion of the game being reviewed. Enter a
zero for any article that does not interest you.

INSIDE INDUSTRY SURVEY
Questions 1 through 11 relate to the INSIDE THE INDUSTRY survey questions as detailed on page 6 of this
issue. Part I of that survey requires that you check mark
the appropriate numbers (1 through 5). In part II (question 6) mark the number of the appropriate category.
Questions 7 through 10 require checkmarks as per Part
III. Question 11 (Part IV) requires a letter of designation.

