January 1988
Number 43

FEATURES
Into The Eagle's Nest

10

Mindscape's New Action-Strategy Game / Trade Forman Hines

Bullets For Breakfast

12

SSI's New Shiloh Game / Jay Selover

Airborne Ranger

18

Action-Strategy From Microprose / Kevin Rohrer

Border Zone

20

"Scorpion's Tale" Gives Playing Tips / Scorpia

Mech Brigade

24

Offensive and Defensive Tactics / Roger E. Bohn

The Universal Military Simulator

28

Sneak Preview of an Exciting New Product

High Seas

31

Charting The Course of Garde's New Game / Bob Proctor

Darkhorn

32

Avalon Hill's Multiplayer Fantasy Wargame / Johnny L. Wilson

Empire

40

A Wargame From Interstel / William "Biff" Kritzen

Inside Trader

44

A Stock Market Game with "Cosmi"c Overtones / Jasper Sylvester

Legacy of The Ancients

46

An Adventure Game From Electronic Arts / Scorpia

Goodbye "G" Ratings (The Perils of "Larry")

48

Part Three of Our Adult Software Report / John Williams

Blackjack Academy

54

A Casino Blackjack "Simulator" Roy Wagner

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek
Reader Input Device
Game Ratings

4
55
56

Accolade
20813 Stevens Creek Blvd.
Cupertino, CA 95014
APOLLO 18: "One quick flip of the
joystick for man, another challenging
action game for Accolade." Eight
scenarios await prospective mission
control specialists and astronauts
from Launch, En Route, Lunar Landing, Moonwalk/ Lunar Blastoff, Docking Maneuver, Return Route (with
Spacewalk), Re-Entry, and Splashdown/Recovery. Each sequence requires a different style of timing and
skill and they must be successfully
completed in sequence in order to
win the game. C-64 ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #1.

PROJECT: SPACE STATION: With
NASA finally taking the gamble of
authorizing expenditures for the
space station project, this re-release
of the former Human Engineered
Software design is a very topical
game. There is plenty of depth to the
product, but it lacks the multi-player
challenge of EOS and the management verisimilitude of Space
M+A+X. Apple, C-64, IBM ($14.95).
Circle Reader Service #2.
Broderbund
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903-2101
SEARCH AND DESTROY: Players

take command of a World War II era
ASW equipped Fletcher-class
destroyer. The graphics are not as impressive as those in Destroyer, but
the game feels more realistic because the player sees essentially
what a captain would see in the CIC
(Combat Information Center). IBM
($14.95). Circle Reader Service #3.
SUPERBIKE CHALLENGE: Racing
aficionados will enjoy this arcade
style motorcycle game which contains twelve International Grand Prix
courses (Anderstop, Assen, Bugatti,
Hockenheim, Jarama, Misano, Mugello, Rijika, Salzburgring, Silverstone,
Continued on pg. 6

Taking A Peek
Continued from pg. 4
Spa, and Suzuka). Each course is
scenery specific and players may
control their cycles via keyboard or
joystick. IBM, ST ($19.95). Circle
Reader Service #4.
Cheapware
Robert L. Nicolai
4038 N. Ninth St.
St. Louis, MO 63147
20TH CENTURY FARO: Join the
ranks of gamblers from the age of
Louis XIV in this latest computerized
card game from Robert Nicolai.
During the 18th Century, Faro was
the most popular gambling game in
England. In the "Wild West" era of
the United States, few saloons did
not have a Faro table. If you like
"luck oriented" gambling games
such as Roulette or Wheel of Fortune, you will enjoy the 19th Century
feel of this fast-playing game. IBM
($30.00). Circle Reader Service #5.
Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Dr.
San Mateo, CA 94404

DEMON STALKERS: An action
game in its own right, this product
also features a construction set for
creating original arcade adventures.
Players attempt to gather relics,
scrolls, amulets, bells, chests, and artifacts while avoiding traps and
defeating monsters throughout the
100 level dungeon called "Doomfane." If one is successful, he is
ready for the final confrontation with
the evil demon, Calvrak. C-64
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #6.
DRAGON'S LAIR: The animation
isn't even close to the interactive
laser disc version, but there are
some beautiful screens in this home
computer version of the coin-op hit.
The familiar characters (Dirk the
Daring, Princess Daphne, and Singe
the Dragon) are all here in two different adventures, the original
"Dragon's Lair" and its sequel, "Escape from Singe's Castle." C-64
($24.95). Circle Reader Service #7.
Epyx
600 Galveston Drive
P.O. Box 8020
Redwood City, CA 94063
SPIDERBOT: The plot for this arcade adventure revolves around

three runaway chemical reactors approaching meltdown and a "SpiderDroid," a one-legged robot which
uses nets to capture the creatures in
the vicinity, must attempt to find the
reactors and stop the process. In the
tradition of Gobots and Transformers, the "SpiderDroid" can transform into "Spiderbot," a two-legged,
ceiling crawling robot that can fire
radioactive bolts in self defense (sort
of a schizophrenic robotic Spiderman?). Apple, C-64, IBM ($24.95).
Circle Reader Service #8.
Sierra On-Line, Inc.
P.O. Box 485
Coarsegold, CA 93614.
POLICE QUEST: This new threedimensional adult oriented animated
adventure is more "Police Story" than
"Dragnet." Written by a retired California State Highway Patrolman, this adventure is reality-oriented with a capital "R." Players are expected to follow
strict police procedures and everything in the game is based on actual
experiences. IBM ($49.95 in both
5.25" and 3.5" formats). Circle
Reader Service #9.

SPACE QUEST II: VOHAUL'S
REVENGE: He's back! From the
pages of "Space Piston Comics"
comes Roger Wilco, mild-mannered
space janitor who sweeps to new
heights of glory in his new adventure. Yes, Sludge Vohaul has devised
a new plan to rule the universe (hordes and hordes of bore to bore, er,
ah door-to-door insurance salesmen). IBM ($49.95 in both 5.25" and
3.5" formats). Circle Reader Service
#10.

Simulations Canada
P.O. Box 452
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia
Canada
LONG LANCE: Grand tactical naval
combat in the Pacific during 1942 is
the subject of this simulation. The
game includes five scenarios from
the Guadalcanal campaign and a
capacity to "build your own"
scenario. In a departure from
SimCan's previous format, the playing aids are now coated maps and
grease pencils instead of paper
maps and cardboard counters.
Apple, C-64 ($60.00). Circle Reader
Service #11.
TO THE RHINE: As a sequel to the
popular "Operation Overlord," this
product is part two of a four part
series on the Western Front of World
War II. This command-oriented study
picks up where "Overlord" left off
and sets up "Counterpunch," the Battle of the Bulge simulation which is
yet to come. More detailed than
"Overlord," this design adds airdrops,
unit transfers, replacement units,
and more detailed supply rules.
Apple, C-64, IBM, ST ($60.00). Circle
Reader Service #12.
Sir-Tech Software, Inc.
P.O. Box 245
Charlestown Ogdensburg Mall
Ogdensburg, NY 13669
SEVEN SPIRITS OF RA: Based on
the cosmic battle between Osiris and
Set in the ancient Egyptian mythos,
this graphic adventure involves combat and puzzle-solving based on ancient philosophical writings and Egyptian hieroglyphics. The adventure
takes place in the "Duad," the Egyp-

tian Land of the Dead, where Osiris
must defeat the "Master" (a "devourer
of the spirit") of each animal species
and survive to experience the Passage of Rebirth. IBM ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #13.
Spectrum Holobyte
2061 Challenger Drive
Alameda, CA 94501
FALCON: This product is a flight
simulation of General Dynamics' F16 Fighting Falcon. Dogfight
scenarios allow player/pilots to fight
up to three MiGs at a time (remember the movie, "Iron Eagle"?). here
are twelve different air-to-ground missions to choose from, as well. A
bonus feature includes the ability to
dogfight against a friend via a null
modem connection. IBM ($49.95 in
both 5.25" and 3.5" formats). Circle
Reader Service #14.
SOKO-BAN: Tired of those mazes
with gruesome ghoulies and other
vile villains chasing after you? This
strategy maze game is different! In
this game, players are
warehousemen who must move
boxes from one area of the maze to
another in the least number of
pushes (moves). The game includes
50 levels of increasing difficulty.
Workers arise, you have nothing to
lose but your maze! IBM ($29.95).
Circle Reader Service #15.

Please fill out
Reader Input
Device on Pg. 55

A regular contributor for Questbusters, Trade introduced
herself to CGW's adventure game enthusiasts with her
review of Shadowgate (November, 1987). This issue, she
zeroes in on a popular action-strategy game.

points? What are we coming to?], and these rooms often
contain goodies like treasure and medical kits.
A word about the medical kits and food rations should
be in order here. While it may be tempting to grab the
prizes as you go, keep an eye on your damage points and
With the growing popularity of fantasy role playing
only use as much medicine and food as you need. In your
Wgames, it is almost surprising to find a new actiontravels, you are sure to take plenty of damage (especially
strategy game—and a good one, at that. Into the Eagle's
since you cannot see or hear the guards' shots and can
Nest is reminiscent of the old hit, Castle Wolfenstein. The
only keep track of your health by watching your damage
premise is very similar: your mission is to penetrate a fourmeter), so leave enough medicine to see you back to
level Nazi fortress and defeat all corners in a quest to reshealth when you really need it. Backtrack to food and
cue a prisoner hidden somewhere inside. Survive three resmedicine caches when you are down to 25 hit points
cues and you get some new orders:
(halfway to death, as it were).
to assemble a four- part bomb and
The same point can be made with
blow up the castle once and for all.
An Adventure Gamer regard to ammunition. Your soldier
Along the way, you will find a number
can only carry 99 rounds, so picking
Looks "Into The
of items that help ensure your survival:
up more is not only useless, but foolish
extra rounds of ammunition, treasures
since excess rounds disappear when
Fade's Nett"
such as artworks and jewels that add
you pick them up. It is better to leave a
points to your score, elevator passes
pile of ammo safely behind, where you
that allow entry to new levels of the
can go back for it, than to grab it all
fortress, keys that open locked doors,
and find out later that you desperately
and most important, food and medical
need it. Ammo is especially important
kits to heal some of your fighter's
when you find walled rooms blocked
wounds. You might also find bombs
with green orbs that must be shot
hidden in the boxes that sometimes
through to gain entrance. It is a good
house treasures. Be careful, however,
idea to blast a path straight through,
when shooting these boxes open,
then wait for the guards inside to apsince hitting an exposed bomb
proach the cleared area. That way, it is
detonates it and the game automaticaleasy to eliminate the guards without
ly ends.
placing yourself in much danger.
Upon entering the fortress, you will
I found that it is crucial to keep extra
find yourself presented with a bird'skeys on hand, since you can get all
eye view of a passageway patrolled by
the way to the prisoner only to lose the
Nazi guards. Be alert and take cover as
game for the lack of a single key to
much as possible, since the guards
get through that final door. Once you
TITLE: Into The Eagle's Nest
SYSTEMS: Amiga, Apple II, C-64/128, IBM
can attack you from all sides. Each
find him, coaxing him out can be the
PRICE: $29.95 (Amiga $39.95)
guard must be shot twice in order to
PUBLISHER: Mindscape, Inc.
hardest part of the game. The prisoner
Northbrook, IL
eliminate them and getting caught in a
is highly disoriented and follows you
crossfire causes you to suffer far more
blindly, even going so far as to trap
by Tracie Forman Hines
damage than the enemy does.
you in a corner in his anxiousness to
Each level of the maze remains the
please. Sometimes, you have to fire a
same from one game to the next, so you will soon
warning shot in his direction (don't worry, I haven't aclearn the best way through each level. Doorways
cidentally killed him yet) to get him moving in the direcbarred with yellow barriers can be opened if you
tion you want him to go.
bump against them, but be prepared to retreat to relative
Once you have led the prisoner safely to the main floor
safety and blast away at the guards inside as soon as the
(using elevator passes) and out the main gate, it is on to
door is opened. Gray doors require keys (which can only
the second rescue. This, frankly, is where I have the only
be used once per door). Fortunately, once a door is open,
problem with this game. Each fortress is exactly alike,
it remains that way as long as you stay on that level.
down to the types of treasures found in each room. After
Note also that the guards are incredibly stupid, so it is
having so much fun exploring and mastering the first
easy enough to manipulate them into attacking you one
fortress, players rightfully expect to face brand-new chalat a time. Just lure a group of them around a corner and
lenges as a reward for their derring-do. It was very disapstay hidden until a single guard appears. Then, blast him
pointing to find the same series of rooms as in the first
and repeat the maneuver until all the guards have been
castle.
destroyed. A few rooms even contain drunken officers, unAside from that, Into the Eagle's Nest was some of the
conscious slouchers who sit with their heads on their
best fun this jaded critic has had in ages and it is a game
tables. They can be killed with a single shot for a lot of
that most people will go back to time after time. Strategic
extra points [Ed. Note: Killing drunks give you extra
shootout fans will find this one a blast.

BULLETS FOR
BREAKFAST
The
Battle
of
Shiloh
Review by Jay C. Selover

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Shiloh: Grant's Trial In The West
Apple, Atari 8-bit,
C-64, IBM
1-2
$39.95
Chuck Kroegel
David Landrey
Brian Hermundstad
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Mountain View, CA

Dr. Jay Selover, editor of Fire &
Movement magazine, is a frequent
contributor to CGW. For "The Grand
Age of Warfare" issue, he has
evaluated the American Civil War
series from Strategic Simulations,
Inc., reviewed the latest release in
this series, and offered strategic
notes for both sides.

The Bottom Line:
The ACW System
I Let's get it out of the way right
from the start the "bottom line."
Shiloh locks up SSI's position as
the producer of the finest operational level American Civil War system to
date. Why? Frankly, it is not so
much any one feature of the game,
as it is the evidence that the design
team at SSI continues to be sensitive to the voice of the public. Someone at SSI is obviously reading the

feedback cards and looking for ways
to incorporate suggested changes
into each of the releases. [Ed. Note:
Jay has not had an opportunity to
see SSG's new American Civil War
game that is mentioned elsewhere
in this issue.]
With that out of the way, let's go
back to the beginning and take a
brief overview of the SSI Civil War
system. Shiloh is the fourth release
in a series which has included
games on Antietam, Gettysburg,
and Chickamauga. It covers the twoday battle (April 6-7, 1862) using
hour-and-a-half turns. Map squares
represent 200 yards and the units of
maneuver are brigades (though
each brigade can be broken down
into two separate units for independent maneuvering). Physical
components are standard SSI fare
(very good); the game disk, a sixty
page rules booklet, and a laminated
player aid card/map representation.

The rule book includes eleven pages
required to play the "basic" game,
sixteen pages required for the "intermediate" and "advanced" games,
complete orders of battle along with
organization tables, several pages of
data on how the computer calculates various functions, and an excellent 13-page historical account of
the battle (with four situation maps
showing where the historical forces
were on the game map at various
points in the battle). All of these features have become standard with
the system, but that does not
diminish their value. The amount of
information given the player to allow
for both historical understanding
and efficient play of the game can
be held up as a standard for other
computer wargame producers.
The game system itself involves
standard player turns where Confederate forces move and attack,
Union forces do the same, and
then, each side repeats their move
and attack sequence one more
time. Units include infantry and
cavalry brigades, artillery batteries,
and two individual Union gunboats
on the Tennessee River. Units are
rated individually for manpower (and
number of guns for artillery units), efficiency, fatigue, morale, weapon
type, ammunition level, mode (line
or column), facing, fortification level,
command control level, rout status,
and disruption status.
The heart of the system involves
the "operation points" (Op Points)
that each unit receives each turn.
These are used for movement, reorganization, mode changes, building
fortifications, resting, fire combat,
and melee combat -- if you want to
do anything with a unit, it will need
to have enough Op Points. The two
features which really come into
sharp focus in playing the game are
fatigue and command control. Units
gain fatigue when moving, fighting,
taking casualties, and building fortifications. It is amazing how quickly
fatigue mounts up when you force a
unit into continual combat for a
couple of turns (remember, two
turns represents three hours of fighting). Fatigue is much more likely
than sheer casualties to cause a unit

to rout and routing units simply run
away from the battlefield, useless for
anything until you can get them to
reform (some routed units become
useless for the rest of the game).
Command control has been a key
feature in the SSI system since the
first release. Although brigades are
the units represented
on the map, the division
and corps commanders
are also present, assigned to particular
units of their command.
Units near their commanders will get the
most Op Points to use
each turn, while those
whose divisional and
corps commanders are
a distance away will
have their movement
and combat capabilities
much reduced. Keeping
your leaders up front in
the thick of the fighting
will get the most out of
your troops, but unfortunately, it will also
probably get a considerable portion of
those leaders wounded
in combat (or, even
worse, captured), and
the cost in victory
points for wounded
leaders is very significant. If you have not
seen or heard about any of the previous releases, take my word for it
that just about anything you could
hope for in terms of the factors influencing warfare during the Civil
War is included. Also, with the inclusion of the "basic" game, you can
just as easily opt for a bare-bones,
quick and easy game.

Specifics in Shiloh

W

hat, then, is new in Shiloh?
First of all, the battlefield is
new and the size of the battle is
refreshingly small. Both Gettysburg
and Chickamauga involved very
large forces and large maps, but
Shiloh seldom requires the strategic
map view (though it is still available)

The terrain present in Shiloh is
similar to Chickamauga (lightly to
heavily wooded in most areas), but
in this case the playing area naturally constricts towards the primary
Confederate objective at Pittsburg
Landing. Imagine the Confederate
army attacking down a funnel (from

change relative to efficiency is that
units with starting efficiencies of less
than forty will never rally if they rout
(they will sit out the entire rest of the
game, useless, in routed status).
These two new rules do a great job
of presenting you, the commander,
with the problems which occurred
when so many new
troops got their first
taste of combat. The
Union commander must
be very careful to avoid
a reenactment of the
historical scene of
thousands of troops
cowering at Pittsburg
Landing throughout the
battle.

Tips On Play

M

ost of my tips
apply to solitaire
play against the computer. When dealing
with overall strategy,
you can take advantage
of tendencies the computer opponent consistently exhibits (humans
tend to be much less
likely to stick to the
same plans game after
game!).

the wide end down towards the
mouth) and you will have a feel for
how tough it can be to capture the
final victory squares.
In all, some fourteen new features
have been added to the SSI system
for Shiloh. A few are specific for this
battle (such as the Union gunboats
Lexington and Tyler), but most represent additional system refinements.
Premier among these is the inclusion of "untried" units. All units
begin the game without an assigned
efficiency rating; they are simply classified as "Green" or "Regular"
(depending on whether that particular unit had ever seen combat
before). During a unit's first exposure to combat, an efficiency is
assigned (randomized each game,
but within set limits). Another

The Confederate
player obviously needs
to attack hard during the first
day of the battle. He should take
to heart the suggestion in the
rulebook that he concentrate on
chewing up Grant's army and forget
about capturing Pittsburg Landing
(it simply can not be done unless all
of the "fudge factors" are set strongly in one's favor). The initial set-up
has Bragg's two divisions (Ruggles
and Withers) behind and on either
side of Hindemann's (the only
division in Hardee's Corps). If
everyone just starts advancing northeast, one ends up with Bragg's
Corps split (Ruggles tends to end up
west of Shiloh church and it is very
tempting to send Withers looping far
around the right flank towards the
Peach Orchard). Resist the temptation and take the extra time to form

up Bragg's Corps on the left flank
and advance through Widow Howell
Field into the Union right flank
(probably Sherman's feeble division).
This leaves Hindemann in the center and no one on the right during
the first few turns. Hindemann's
division should advance immediately
and try to nail Prentiss' division
during the first turn in Rhen Field
(Peabody's brigade often routs in it's
first combat, never to be seen
again!). After that, the center becomes an area of advancing
square-by-square against a variety of Union
units. Polk's Corps should be committed to the center as it becomes
available; supporting and then,
taking over for Hindemann.
What, then, about the Confederate
right flank, so much discussed historically as a wasted opportunity?
The problem is that the computerled screening force (Miller's and
Stuart's brigades, plus some cavalry)
is good. Though they give up
ground easily, they slow the advance
somewhat and generally do not take
heavy casualties. They simply will
not stand still and take it on the
chin. Instead, they retreat back to
the Sunken Road, where consolidated Union forces make a pretty
strong stand. Hence, leave the right
flank for Breckinridge's reserve
division. When they finally activate,
one can practically road march
them to the Peach Orchard before
they will see any Union Troops (the
computer will retire the Union left
flank if pressured with a mere cavalry brigade). They enter the battle
fresh and are set to crack the left
end of the Union defense on the
Sunken Road. Here, then, is my suggested Confederate disposition with
a line from Crescent Field through
Review Field to the Sunken Road by
about 11:00 A.M. From left to right,
the line includes: a couple of cavalry
brigades, Ruggles, Withers, Clark,
Cheatham, Hindemann, and Breckinridge (with more cavalry). During the
midday, crack the defense at Crescent Field and the Sunken Road by
encirclement (the Sunken Road in
particular is tough to assault head
on). An attack up the middle
towards Duncan Field by Polk's

Corps and a flanking move around
the Peach Orchard towards Wicker
Field by Breckinridge (both of these
should be the fresher formations in
your army) can bag a lot of captured
Union troops. Finally, remember
that any breakthroughs or openings
will pay more dividends if turned

had their fun on the first day. All of
the infantry will probably be needed
on the line, but the cavalry can be
well utilized as reinforcements
spread out in the rear. Their extra
movement lets them jump around to
bolster weakened sectors and cover
the retreats of exhausted troops -kind of like Civil War kampfgruppen!
For the Union player, the first day
is mostly a matter of responding to
Confederate moves, giving ground
while minimizing losses (the territory
can be retaken tomorrow, but the
dead and captured cannot be
brought back!). Prentiss and Sherman take the brunt of the initial attack. All they can do is fall back in
as orderly a fashion as possible. I always try to get Stuart's lone brigade
pulled all the way from the left flank
over to the rest of Sherman's
division immediately. Their absence
can be covered with cavalry and the
computer does not press that flank
initially. They can usually arrive just
in time to keep the rest of the
division from completely falling apart
in front of Crescent Field. As
Hurlburt's and McClernand's
divisions activate, move them to the
Sunken Road and Crescent Field
(respectively) where the Union can
make its first stand with what
remains from Prentiss and Sherman.
W. Wallace's division will probably
be used in the center (when they
finally get forward) and the later arrivals (L. Wallace and the first elements from Buell) can be assigned
to the weakest areas as they enter
the battlefield.

into isolations of Union forces than
by sending troops forward towards
Pittsburg Landing. Confederate
players can feel comfortable if evening finds their line running from
Sowell Field over to Cloud Field.
Use the night to straighten up the
line and fortify (there is no reason to
retire back to the Union camps as
the Confederates did historically!).
During the second day, confederates should hold on as well as
possible and remember that they

Tactically, the Union forces must
avoid localized encirclements at all
costs, even if one must cut and run
with the entire line for a couple of
squares. Having good command
control (maximizing the Op Points
for each unit) is important. Failure in
this area is often a reason that
Stuart's men get gobbled up on the
left flank when a human opponent
attacks there in force. It is also easy
to get the Union artillery units into
very sticky situations if one is not
careful. When they fire, they gain
fatigue (very quickly). If they are on
(Continued on page 16)

The Battle
of Shiloh
(Continued from page 14)
the line and fire in all available
phases during a turn, they may only
have six Op Points when it is time to
retire. Unless one likes the idea of
leaving them all behind, Union artillery should probably occupy only
two positions during the first day.
The first should support the Crescent Field to Sunken Road line and
the second should overlook the
Perry Field to Cloud Field area.
The Union player can take heart,
even if the first day finds his forces
pushed all the way back to the
Chambers Field/Pittsburg Landing
area, if he has conserved the bulk of
his army. He will be ahead on points

(after discounting the Confederate
points for victory squares which he
can recapture on the second day). If
he isn't ahead by this calculation,
there is nothing to be done. If he is,
the following applies. During the

second day, territory is
more important than it
was for the Confederates on the first
day. The Union must
recapture most, if not
all, of the victory point
squares. Fortunately,
the superior number
of Union forces for
the second day allows
for deep penetrations
with plenty of units to
feed through the gaps
and reinforce the
flanks of the spearheads. Of course, the
Confederates are likely
to respond to any
breakthrough by retiring the entire line. The exact moment to break off an advance and
turn it into an encirclement is an art
which generals throughout the ages
have struggled with. Now, it's your
turn!

NAME:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Airborne Ranger
c-64/128
$35.00
Lawrence Schick
Scott Spanburg
Microprose
Hunt Valley, MD

tice Ranger and Veteran. In Practice
mode, parachute landings cannot
go wrong, but scores cannot be
saved to the "high scores" list,
either. Points are scored for enemy
killed, fortifications destroyed, and

Kevin Rohrer is one of our most
vocal and long-term readers. His
"Reader Input Device" card is usually one of the first to arrive for every
issue and invariably has a comment
on it, be it critical or complimentary. In his first review, he looks at
Microprose's new action-strategy
game.

T hroughout

U. S. history, it has
been the mission of the U. S.
Army Rangers to seek out the
enemy, wherever he may be. From
the time of Roger's Rangers, a unit
used by the British to patrol the
American wilderness during the
French and Indian War, Ranger
units have upheld a proud tradition
of versatility, independence, and
toughness. The primary mission of
the Rangers is patrol. Indeed, they
are trained and equipped to reflect
that mission. Combat is left to
larger, more conventional units,
while Rangers fight only when necessary. Stealth is both their major
strength and greatest ally. When a
fight becomes necessary, however, it
is swift and deadly to the enemy.
Microprose's new arcade/strategy
game, Airborne Ranger (AR), gives
you the chance to perform twelve different missions that Army Rangers
might perform or have already performed somewhere in the world
(e.g. Destroy a Munitions Depot,
Capture an Enemy Officer, or
Liberate a P.O.W. Camp). When
play begins, however, players will
probably be reminded of an earlier
arcade game entitled, Commando.
Both games use the same basic
premise (i.e. an individual soldier
which must move from point A to
point B, dodging or killing enemy
soldiers and destroying fortifications). Have no fear, however, AR is
not a simple rehash of Commando.
It is an entirely new product with
much depth and versatility.
There are two modes of play: Prac-

by Kevin Rohrer
missions accomplished. Veteran
Rangers that successfully accomplish their missions (and live to
tell about them) will receive promotions and awards. They can also be
saved to a separate data disk and
saved for future use.
Movement and weapons are controlled by the joystick and keyboard.
To start, one of twelve missions may
be selected. Missions are rated for
difficulty from one (easy) to nine
(suicide). Within these base ratings,
the difficulty can be increased by
using the joystick to move a sliding
scale depicted on-screen. Increasing
the difficulty rating adds enemy fortifications and makes enemy soldiers
smarter, faster, and better
marksmen. Any mission played at
five or better is tough to accomplish.
Actual play begins by flying over
the randomly generated mission

area in an Osprey V/STOL aircraft
and dropping three supply pods
along the way. When the green
jumplight flashes and the buzzer
sounds, one must "hit the silk" and
maneuver his parafoil to a safe landing.
Upon landing, the scene changes
to an aerial view of the ranger in
enemy territory. One must use the
joystick to crawl, walk, and/or run
him toward his objective, picking up
supply pods as he goes. Your ranger
carries an M-16 rifle, grenades, light
anti-armor rockets (LAW), a knife,
and time bombs. Unlike Commando, one does not have an inexhaustible supply of weapons and ammunition, so conserving ammunition
is a must. Speediness is also necessary, since one is racing against an
on-screen clock. If one does not
complete the mission and arrive safely at the pick-up point before the allotted time elapses, the character
dies or experiences imprisonment.
The game includes a map of the
mission area which can be accessed
at any time. Utilization of this map allows one to plan the safest route of
approach to the objective. It also serves as a game pause to enable one
to cope with life's little distractions.
The game's graphics are colorful
and interesting. The animation is
smooth and the sound is excellent.
For example, one can hear enemy
soldiers walking towards one's position before they become visible.
Also, gunfire from enemy soldiers
outside of fortifications is qualitatively different in sound than enemy fire
from inside a fortification. These are
all welcome features.
Further, unrealistic situations do
not occur in AR. For example, concrete pillboxes cannot be destroyed
with gunfire or a grenade. A LAW
(light anti-tank weapon) or time
bomb is necessary in order to blow
them up.
With its fast play, as well as great
graphics and sound, this game is
certain to appeal to both youth and
adults. The twelve missions and variable difficulty levels will also mean
that garners should not grow tired of
it very quickly. Microprose is sure to
have a winner with AR.

Scorpia's
regular hint
column examines
Infocom's
latest release
and updates
readers on
"bugs" in
another Infocom game.

mutters that you will have to deliver
the information while he leads his
pursuers on a merry chase elsewhere. Exit the agent, leaving you
with an unreadable paper written in
Frobnian and not much time before
the searchers arrive.
The major focus of this mini-adventure is keeping the police from discovering the document. You don't
really get into much trouble yourself

B rrr!

Those icy January
winds can really get to you!
So, don't just stand there in the
doorway (it's cold out there!),
come inside and warm up by
the fire. Fred is mixing up a little
something to warm your insides,
too (just sip it first; Fred's been
dipping into the Alchemy books
again). When you're a bit
thawed out, we can talk about
something contemporary this
time: spy stuff, intrigue, and all
that cloak-and-dagger kind of
thing.
Border Zone, Infocom's first
venture into spy/intrigue and
real-time action, turns out to be
something of a disappointment.
This is due in part to having
three small games instead of
one large one on the disk and
also, because most of the puzzles are trivial in nature. In fact,
only the ticking of the gameclock brings any difficulty to the
games. Further, few people are
likely to have much trouble completing Border Zone, as clues are
provided within the scenarios themselves via a "Hint" command, the
same as is found in Nord and Bert.
All three mini-adventures are set in
the mythical Eastern Bloc country of
Frobnia, although each is played
from a different point of view. In
scenario #1, you are an American
businessman, thankfully on his way
out of Frobnia, heading for the border of a neutral country.
At this point, in the best tradition
of British spy novelist E. Phillips Oppenheim, an American spy barges
into your train compartment, dripping blood all over the floor. He
thrusts a document into your hands,
pins a carnation to your suit, and

if they do find it; you'll be detained a
few days, and then released. In the
meantime, however, the American
Ambassador to a foreign country will
have been assassinated. So, there is
some incentive to passing on the information to the agent's contact.
A quick look around the train compartment does not yield any good
hiding places. It's a pretty bare
room. You certainly can't just stick
the thing in your pocket or briefcase
(interestingly, you have no luggage,
just the briefcase). It would be found
there without any difficulty at all. No,
I wouldn't recommend under the
seat, either. It would be just a trifle
obvious, even folded up.
The solution to the document puzzle is slightly more subtle than that.

Still, if you look over what you have
with you, you might get an idea or
two. There is a fair amount of time
in this scenario to try different
things, as the clock ticks slower
here, giving you more leeway. Nonetheless, that clock is ticking away,
and events are moving forward,
even though you may be doing nothing at all (except staring at the
screen and thinking).
Eventually, the police will reach
your compartment and subject
both you and it to a thorough
search. The blood on the floor
will not go unnoticed, either, although you can probably talk
your way out of that one.
Presuming that the paper
hasn't been discovered, your
next (and final) task is to deliver
the information. This is fairly
simple. When the train reaches
the next station (the one just
before the border), everyone is
ordered off, so the train can be
searched more completely. It's
while wandering around on the
platform that you have the opportunity to pass over the information. As long as you aren't obvious about your actions, you
should be able to manage this
without being spotted. That pretty much takes care of the first
scenario.
In the second one, you are the
wounded American spy,
codenamed Topaz. The action
picks up after the document has
been handed to the businessman
and you have jumped from the train
near the border. Your task is to get
safely across into neutral territory.
This one is tougher, as you have
more to do, and the clock is now
ticking on fast time. If that's too fast
for you, you can always enter a command and make it slower. You will
also need the map that comes with
the game, so you know where
things are and how to get to them
quickly. After all, a pack of dogs is
on your trail, too.
From the map, you can see that a
small house and shed aren't too far
away. Of course, you wouldn't
dream of trying to hide out there,
since all buildings in the area likely

to be searched. On the other hand,
you jumped off the train with very little in the way of possessions, so you
might, at least, find a few useful
items to help you out.
Getting inside the house will take a
certain amount of timing, but it isn't
hard. The shed is even easier, as no
one is around. The difficult part will
be getting past the border checkpoint. You can't simply waltz past it;
there are guards and
watchtowers with searchlights
that must be evaded, and two
fences that must be passed.
Once you reach the area of
the checkpoint, your attention
should be concentrated on
the guards and the lights. You
will soon notice some patterns there, and reaching the
first fence is only (!) a matter
of careful timing. However,
that clock is still ticking, and
the guards are still making their
rounds, so you must do something
about the first fence pronto.
Now, you're under the watchtower,
between the two fences. A good
look at the second fence tells you
that this one is a much tougher nut
to crack. In fact, you probably won't
be able to get through it the same
way you did the first one. I'd even
venture to say that nothing you have
with you could get you through that
fence directly. There are some indirect ways, though. This is a pretty
tall tower. Think about it. Once over
the border, the second scenario
ends.
The final scenario puts you in the
role of Viper, the KGB agent who
was searching for the document on
the train. However, Viper isn't merely
an enemy agent; he's actually a
double agent, working for the
Americans. Not many people know
about that (not even Topaz), and
Viper would like to keep it that way.
Viper has a problem: now that he's
set up the assassination of the
American Ambassador, he has to
find a way to stop it, without allowing himself to become directly involved.
Time in this scenario is shortest of
all. Not only is the clock ticking
away in fast time, you have barely

an hour to find out where the assassin is hidden and prevent him from
killing the ambassador. To make
things even more difficult, Topaz is
in the area, too.
Your best bet here is to first save
the game after entering the
scenario, then move around the
area learning where things are. The
tiny map on the business card can
help you to orient yourself.

Once you've found out where the
assassin is and how to get there unnoticed by the hordes of police in
the vicinity, you can restore and get
down to the matter at hand. The assassin is always in the same place,
so you don't have to repeat the
steps necessary to locate him.
The major difficulty at this point is
that, although the assassin will let
you into the room with him (you
know the right password), he is extremely nervous and doesn't trust
you very much. If you try to pull a
gun on him, or interfere with him in
any way, he'll just blow your head
off. Since this is not exactly what
you had in mind to happen, you
must find some other way of stopping him.
Remember that you don't want to
get your own hands dirty in this matter. If you could get someone else to
do the dirty work for you, you would
have scotched the assassination,
while still not becoming involved to
the extent of blowing your cover.
This means, of course, that you
can't just walk up to the nearest cop
and tell him about the assassin.
Your superiors back home might get
the wrong ideas about you. You
can't tell anyone else, either, but .. .
perhaps you could trick someone
into doing the job for you. All you

need is to be in the right place at
the right time and then, run like hell.
There's nothing like a brisk game of
follow-the-leader to get the blood
moving (or perhaps that should be:
flowing). The death of the assassin,
and the exit of Viper from the scene,
ends the final scenario.
One problem with these Border
Zone scenarios is that they are all
stand-alone adventures. What happens in one has no effect
whatsoever on any of the
others. For instance, if you fail
to deliver the information in
scenario #1, it means nothing
at all in scenario #3, which
begins with the assumption
that the information was
properly delivered.
Even worse, a careful examination of the first and third
scenarios shows that delivery
or non-delivery of the document is totally irrelevant to the action. Viper doesn't need that document, as it was stolen from him in
the first place by Topaz. Viper already knows about the assassination, and is out to stop it however
he can. The document is really superfluous, which in turn pretty much
makes scenario #1 superfluous, too.
All this makes for an unsatisfying
experience. Who cares if the information is delivered or not or
whether or not Topaz gets across
the border? Everything is just fine in
scenario #3, where all has already
happened as it should.
Border Zone would have been far
better as one single, combined
game, where the events in one area
had a true and important effect on
events in a future area. Even allowing for this in the individual
scenarios would have improved the
game greatly. As they are now, the
scenarios are excruciatingly linear in
design, with only one right way to
do them, and have no real interconnections among each other.
The real-time aspect is only partially so; you can, in fact, pause the
game almost any time you want to.
This is necessary for reading long
text passages on the screen, but you
(Continued on page 23)

BORDER
ZONE
(Continued from page 21)

can also use it to stop the action
while you take out time to think. The
necessity for giving you a chance to
read also defeats the purpose of the
real-time clock.
What sharpens the disappointment
is the fact that Border Zone was written by Marc Blank, the man (actually
one of them) who gave us Zork.
Had I not seen his name on the box,
I would never have believed this was
one of his products; the game does
not come across as a top-notch effort.
So, there you have Border Zone,
one of Infocom's weakest games to
date. This is not to say that some

people won't enjoy it, but at least
you know what you're getting into.

Fred Warms Your Cup
With "Beyond Zork" Bug
Problems

After

my original article on
Beyond Zork went to press, I
was advised of some flaws in the
game that may prevent people, especially Mac users (and perhaps of
other versions as well) from completing the game. First, under no circumstances should you open the
Shady Wall. If you have opened that
Wall, make sure you close it again
before going to the other wall. Otherwise, you will not be able to finish
the game. A bug in the program
prevents a certain item from lasting
long enough if the Shady Wall door
is open.
The second problem is in the
Fields of Frotzen. If you hear the

farmhouse come down, but you go
to all the accessible areas and don't
see it anywhere, restore the game to
the point before you entered the
Fields, and try again. The
farmhouse came down behind the
corbies (where it isn't supposed to),
and you'll never be able to reach it.
Well, it's that time again. As always, if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in
the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG,
under the Groups and Clubs menu.
On GEnie: Stop by the Games
RoundTable (type: Scorpia to reach
the Games RT). On The Source:
Send SMAIL to ST1030. By US Mail
(remember to enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope with
your questions): Scorpia, PO BOX
338, Gracie Station, NY NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright © 1988 by Scorpia, all
rights reserved.

Offensive
and
Defensive
Tactics in
Mech
Brigade
by Roger E. Bohn
Roger Bohn teaches operations
management and is currently
working on a project utilizing Final
Frontier's Space M+A+X as a case
study for operations management in
a Research and Development environment. In this issue, he offers a
statistical analysis of tactics for
Mech Brigade and by happy coincidence, for_ Kampfgruppe, its
predecessor.

M

ech Brigade, like
Kampfgruppe, has virtually
everything in a tactical land wargame: hidden movement, ammunition, indirect fire spotting, delayed
movement, command and control,
unit facing, and sophisticated formulas for determining unit effectiveness. Unlike many computer wargames, the documentation of Mech
Brigade gives us information about
these formulas. It describes precisely
the algorithms used for calculating
the effects of fire. These involve matters such as: range, armor thickness, smoke, movement of the firing
and targeted units, and whether the
firing unit has had time to range the
target. Nonetheless, figuring out the
implications of the rules and algorithms is a challenge. I resorted to a
Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet to figure
out the effects of different variables
on kill probabilities. Some of the
results were surprising. Therefore, I
have isolated a set of useful tactics

from those results and the documentation in general.
I will discuss the firing algorithms
first, beginning with direct fire
against armored targets. Then I will
show how to modify the analysis
and conclusions for anti tank
guided missiles (ATGMs) and infantry. In the second half of the article I will discuss some useful tactics growing out of the analysis. I
originally intended to provide tips on
playing the computer opponents,
but have decided not to spoil your
fun by telling you its weak points.

Part 1: The Basic
Formulas for Firing

The

probability of scoring a kill
when one unit fires at another
separates into two components.
One depends on the range, muzzle
velocity of the firing weapon, and
armor thickness of the target. A
good rule of thumb is that it will be,
at most, 1.3 units destroyed per
pulse of firing, depending on circumstances. The other component
is a set of factors which are independent of the range, and simply
multiply each other. Since this component is much more straightforward, I will start with it.
Range Independent Factors:
Terrain and other adjustments
If the firing unit and the target are

stopped and in clear terrain with
nothing between them, then the
second (range dependent) component is the only one which matters. However a variety of other factors, such as cover terrain, can further reduce the effectiveness of fire.
These factors simply multiply the
range component, which greatly
simplifies calculations. They are:
a) Number of firing units: All units
in a platoon are considered to be
identical and the effect of a
platoon's fire is multiplied by the
number of units in the platoon. For
example, ten tanks will destroy twice
as many units as five tanks given
identical circumstances (Since many
Soviet platoons have ten tanks, compared with four or five for NATO,
this is a major factor!).
b) Movement: If the firing unit is
moving very slowly, divide kill probabilities by two; at 10, divide by
three; and at 20, divide by four. The
same adjustments apply if the target
vehicle is firing and all of these adjustments are cumulative. Thus, if
one unit moving at 20 fires at
another unit moving at the same
speed, the effectiveness of the fire is
reduced sixteenfold. Even at close
range and with overwhelming fire
power, therefore, you could only expect to knock out about .1 vehicles
per pulse of firing. (1.3 divided by
16.)
c) Terrain: If the target is in protective terrain (woods, town, or
entrenchment) and stopped, divide
by three. If there are two blocking
points between the firing unit and
the target (e.g. a woods square),
divide by two. For four blocking
points-, divide by three.
d) Silhouette: The kill probabilities
are proportional to the silhouette of
the target. Thus an Abrams (silhouette 4) will be about 1.33 times
more vulnerable than a T-80 (silhouette 3) under identical circumstances.
Range Dependent Factors:
Range, armor, and weapon
This component is based on the
range, the number of pulses fired,
the adjusted maximum penetration,
the armor strength, and nothing

else. These relationships are quite
complex and, therefore, I have
graphed them. The graphs will be
presented and discussed later.
Under the best possible circumstances (e.g. range of zero and a tank
firing for several pulses at a lightly armored vehicle), the maximum kill
probability is about 130 percent per
firing vehicle, per pulse of firing.
(The 1.3 is for a target with silhouette 3. It is about 1.7 for silhouette 4, such as an Abrams tank,
and about .8 for silhouette 2.) For
example, a weakened platoon of two
tanks would destroy about 2.5 APCs
per pulse of firing. A platoon of
more powerful tanks would not
change this. Presumably this reflects
the idea that under optimal circumstances the probability of a hit is
100%, and with a powerful enough
weapon one hit will destroy the target. The maximum of 130 percent
instead of 100 percent is a minor
anomaly.
Interpreting the graphs: Although 1.3 is the upper boundary,
things go downhill from there.
Armor thickness, weapon MP (maximum penetration), and range all interact nonlinearly. The graphs
presented in this article are based
on an analysis using Lotus 1-2-3 to
graph the kill probabilities for different combinations. Each graph
shows the kill probability (more

precisely, the expected number of
kills per pulse fired), for one unit, in
clear terrain with both target and
firing unit halted. For example,
graph #1 shows a heavy tank (M60,
Abrams, Leopard2, T-72 or T-80)
against any moderately armored target such as an APC, or even the
rear armor of most tanks. This is the
simplest case, because the APF
(penetration factor, adjusted for
range and armor) is always exactly
equal to 2. The top line shows the
results when 4 pulses have been
fired. Let's start with that. At close
range the maximum probability is
125 percent. This falls to 75 percent
at maximum range. The next line
shows 3 pulses of firing. The bottom
line shows 1 or zero pulses fired, i.e.
the kill probabilities for the first pulse
of firing. The distance between the
lines is determined by the ACCuracy
rating of the firing unit; units with
high accuracy (e.g. tanks) are much
better after 4 pulses than when they
start firing. The downward slope of
each line reflects the effects of
RANGE. Now, let's look at graph
#2, for an Abrams firing at the front
armor of a T-80. Here the maximum
penetration is 48 and the armor is
36. These are within a factor of two
of each other. Hence the APF is less
than 2, and the graph looks radically
different than graph #1. The maximum effectiveness of fire is only

100%, and that is only reached on
the fourth pulse. Furthermore, fire at
a range above 6 (one third of the
Abrams' maximum range) is much
less effective, and beyond range 14
is almost useless. Most graphs of
direct fire weapons against armor
will fall into one of these two patterns. As long as the maximum
penetration (MP) is more than about
2.5 times the armor, graph #1 is the
one to use In fact as long as you
scale it to the maximum range of
the firing unit, graph #1 is almost
precisely correct.
ATGM Adjustments
All of the above apply also to
ATGM weapons fired at vehicles, except that:
a) The maximum kill probability for
a single firing unit is about 30% instead of 1.3.
b) Movement of the target does
not reduce the kill probabilities.
Movement of the firing vehicle still
does.
c) If the unit firing the ATOM is
suppressed greater than 25 (which
is quite often the case) divide by
four. The latter two changes have a
lot of implications for the best ways
to attack with and defend against
ATGMs, which I will discuss in the
second half of this note.
Infantry
The rules for fire at infantry are

rather different, and very
situation specific. Basically, infantry in protected
terrain is extremely hard
to knock out or even to
suppress. Moving infantry
in open terrain is very vulnerable. Infantry suppressed to level 200 is
also very vulnerable,
regardless of where it is.

Part 2: Tactics

Now

that we understand what factors
determine the effectiveness of firing, we can
look at some tactics for
causing as much
damage as possible,
while minimizing the
damage to us.
Managing Ammunition
One of the features of the game is
that it tracks ammunition levels of
each unit on the board. Most units
have 40 pulses of ammunition.
Depending on the scenario, running
out of ammunition can be a big factor near the end. This is especially
true for main tanks near the end of
assault scenarios, which last 20
turns. It is possible to manage one's
own ammunition by not firing in
situations where it will have very low
effectiveness (see below). Pull back
units when their ammunition level
gets low. This enables commanders
to entice enemy units into wasting
ammunition by giving them a lot of
unattractive targets, such as infantry
in reinforced squares, rapidly
moving units, and units which are
only visible for a few pulses, then
hide (Note: To make infantry visible,
have it fire at anything.).
Do not, therefore, waste fire. Since
firing when you are moving or when
the target is moving reduces effectiveness, makes your units visible,
and wastes ammunition, such actions should be avoided. Other examples of situations with low effectiveness include: a) firing for only a
few pulses, especially for weapons
with high ACCuracy rating; b) firing
at long range (in some cases; see

the graphs); and c) firing through
heavy smoke or trees. Sometimes,
however, these will be unavoidable.
In fact, there are cases where they
are desirable. When enemy units are
closing rapidly, you can select targets and fire a few pulses at them.
Then, when they stop, you will already be on the top line of the
graphs where your fire is much
more effective.
Pitfalls of Automatic
Target Selection
In between turns, your units will
select targets automatically if their
present target is destroyed. There
are some predictable patterns in this
which you can exploit, especially
when playing a computer opponent.
Once selected, a unit will stick with
a target unless you manually assign
another target. If you do make a
manual assignment, you lose the
pulses of firing accumulated so far.
Closer units will be selected first.
Hence, you can use unimportant
units as "cannon fodder" while other
units approach. With luck, you can
keep them moving and pull them
out before they are destroyed. The
unit in the "top" of a stack will be
selected first. (It appears that position in the stack depends on the
unit ID number. For example B2,
B3, CO, C2, EO. This is unfortunate,
since it means that several of your

units may all target a
single enemy unit. When
that hapless unit is
destroyed, as will quickly
happen, all of your units
have to start over from
zero pulses at once. Furthermore, other enemy
units in the stack will not
have received any suppressing fire. Therefore,
when assigning targets
manually, generally avoid
the top unit in a stack
and spread fire among
the available choices. (All
too often, the enemy
seems to have five or six
T-80 platoons of ten
tanks each in one target
stack.) As units destroy
their assigned target,
they will pick out the top
unit. The decision to switch targets
for one of your units is an important
one. Examine the graphs and the
ACCuracy rating to see how much
you will give up. ATGMs lose nothing when they switch targets (unless
the target is at their minimum
range), but for tanks the effect is
dramatic. On the other hand it is
usually pointless to let a weak unit
flail away at the front armor of a
tank. At least, if it holds its fire, it
may not be spotted.
Targeting Priority
Usually, each of your units will
have several possible targets. In
making these choices, the first
priority is to target the units causing
you the most trouble. Second, keep
firing at same unit. Third, fire from
sides or rear to maximize armor
penetration. Fourth, a penetration
MP number which is three times
greater than the armor value of the
target will almost always be successful. Finally, fire at moving units only
if you expect it to stop.
Optimal Use of and
Avoidance of ATGMs
a) When being fired on by ATGMs,
try to shoot at each ATOM unit with
a minimum of one of your units,
even if you have no chance of
(Continued on page 38)

a

a

Sneak Preview:

The Universal
Military
Simulator
O

Name:
Systems:
Designer:
Publisher:

ne's first impression of UMS is that of awe.
The computer generated topographical battlefields, the highly playable nature of the game, and
the very flexible nature of the construction set come
together to give us the impression that UMS is
definitely a breakthrough product. However .. .
This initial sneak preview is being written literally at
the 11th hour of production on
Universal Military Simulator
this issue [Ed.: Actually it was
Atari ST, IBM (soon)
D. Ezra Sidran
written at 6am on the day we
Firebird Licencees
went to press].
Ramsey, NJ
In the past three days the
phone lines between the COW offices and Ezra
Sidran (designer of UMS) have been humming.
When the "final production" copy of UMS arrived
less than a week ago we were simultaneously elated
and frustrated. Elated, because this is an "awesome"
product. Frustrated, be, cause there were some
serious problems in the execution of the program.
Most of these have been
cleared up in the past
three days and the version
we have just received
seems to have successfully
addressed the problems we
saw. We feel we must mention those problems here
since the very earliest
copies of the Atari ST
programs still have these
problems. To summarize
them: the retreat rules did
not work properly; moving
across hilltop squares
caused movement penalties even if the "intersections" were of uniform elevation, such as terrain on
top of a mesa; artillery had no line-of-sight restrictions (O.K. for WWII and modern scenarios, but unrealistic in earlier periods); and units that lost an initial round of battle were almost always eliminated
before players could regain control of the units and
retreat them.
To determine if you have one of the early copies

of the game, try moving a unit on a hill to another
map point on the same hill (i.e. no change in elevation). If the computer accesses a movement penalty
for "hilly terrain," you have the defective version. A
replacement copy of the game can be obtained
from Firebird. Call them at 201-444-5700 for information. Note: the problem only exists on the early
copies of the Atari ST version. The IBM version has
all the corrections.
Now that we have dealt with the problems in the

early ST copies, we want to say that this is a cutting
edge product that all computer wargamers will want
to play. First of all, the three-dimensional
topographical views of the battlefield offer a unique
perspective in computer gaming. The ability to look
at the entire map from eight different compass
points is, to our knowledge, unique. Further, playercommanders may either observe the entire bat-

tlefield from one of these compass points or zoom
in on critical portions of the map. This may be done
by means of easily accessible pull-down menus.
Also, moving units across the screen in UMS is akin
to moving miniatures across a table-top of lavishly
constructed terrain. It may not be as colorful, but
neither is it as expensive and the commander's viewpoint is quite similar.
Second, the use of "click and drag" movement
and targeting speeds the game considerably over
some earlier command structures. Players do not
have to worry about remembering what they ordered each unit to do, since the program draws an
arrow for each unit's intended route. Some players
may be suspicious that the program allows unrealistic criss-crossing of units over each other when they

their own maps, orders of battles, and objectives,
but players who feel that certain units are too
strong, too fast, or too experienced can adjust those
with the powerful editor. If players think the artillery
has too large a melee factor, they can adjust the
melee factor downward. Further, the editor includes
six "wild cards" in which the player can design one's
own weaponry.
With the "wild cards," as well as the light infantry,
heavy infantry, light cavalry, heavy cavalry, archers,
elephants, chariots, knights, catapults, pikemen,
field artillery, horse artillery, headquarters units,
armor, armored cavalry, airborne units, and assault
units , the program truly does allow almost any historical, fantasy, or science-fiction battle to be
recreated.
see these arrows. The computer acts as a traffic
director, however, and does not allow illegal stacking or logistically impossible movement to occur.
Third, the fact that commanders order their units
toward objectives and only enter instructions for approximately every hour and a half of simulated time
makes the game a legitimate command study, especially for periods earlier than this century. The
frustrations of command control are certainly there
and that is part of the appeal of the game. Fourth,
miniatures garners will appreciate the program's inclusion of elements such as terrain, elevation,
weaponry, morale, status (defending, attacking,
maneuvering, or held in reserve), and unit efficiency
in its combat calculations. Both miniatures and
board wargamers will appreciate the fact that the
program allows the player to view the computer's
battle logic and observe how it calculates the
battle's resolution. Viewing the logic is optional,
however, and those who want a "limited intelligence" approach do not have to access this information.
Finally, the program's constructability allows for
tremendous flexibility. Not only can players design

This product should generate lots of excitement.
CGW plans to publish a major review, a designer's
article, a comparison of UMS with SSI's Wargame
Construction Set, and various scenario articles in future issues.

Name:
System:
# of Players:
Price:
Designer:
Publisher:

High Seas
Apple w/64K, C-64
1-2
$49.95
Ralph Bosson
Garde

iaHgmehbosSut
Age of Fighting Sail. It's not
the only one; SSI's Broadsides and
Avalon Hill's Clear For Action have been around for
awhile and Broderbund has
just released The Ancient Art
of War at Sea (though only
for IBM at the moment). [Ed.:
It is also worth noting that
Avalon Hill is expected to
release a computer version
of "Wooden Ships and Iron
Men" in 1988.] High Seas
emphasizes the period 1750
to 1810 or, roughly, from the
Seven Year's War to the War
of 1812. It is possible to
recreate both the single ship
duels fought by the young
U.S. Navy as well as the
larger battles fought between
the British and the French
during the Napoleonic
period. The game slows
down considerably as more
ships are added, however, so
there is a "patience limit" that
dictates how big a battle you
will want to play. You can
save games to disk, though,
so you don't have to finish it
all in one sitting.

action is better; you interrupt play
only when you need to give or
change an order. When playing with
a friend, however, you may find it
works better to have an automatic
order phase every 10 minutes of
game time. You can plot your ship's
moves out ahead or else give
general orders to pursue or evade

sider changing your mind whenever
a tempting target presents itself).
There are three viewing modes in
High Seas. Chart view shows you
the entire playing area (usually 21
miles square but it can be smaller)
and is used to find out where you
are in relation to land or enemy
ships. The second view—Map
screen, also shows you a view
from above, but in more
detail. You see your ship and
any others within a couple
thousand yards or so, long
range for the cannon of the
period. You can tell which
way ships are moving relative
to the wind and it is in this
mode that you plan your
moves.
Finally, Battle view is what
you would see from the deck
of a ship. This view is used
for selecting targets and viewing the results of combat. In
Battle view, there are "blind
spots" where a ship approaching you will not show up on
either the side or rear view
until it is quite close. Also, all
ships look alike whether they
are 28-gun single deckers or
110-gun triple deckers, but
there is a big thrill in seeing
your enemy minus a mainmast after a heavy broadside!
Battle view has the potential
to really make you feel a part
of the action and I was
tempted to play an entire
game in this mode for
realism's sake. Alas, the
game reverts to the Map
screen automatically for orders.
Orders are given using pulldown menus and sub-menus
that are reasonably similar to
those used on Mac, GEOS, or
Apple IIGS software but there
does not appear to be any support
for mice. You will probably find the
keyboard superior to a joystick for
precise control, but there is no accounting for taste, so choose
whichever you like. Some options
are less than intuitive the GET A
SCENARIO command is hiding on
(Continued on page 34)

Charting the
Course of Garde's

High Seas

Of all the games on the
topic, High Seas is the most
flexible. You can play either
side against the computer or
another player. You can control all of the ships on your
side or concentrate on commanding one or two while
the computer handles the
rest. You can even have fun
chasing and capturing merchant
ships and eluding (or sinking) their
escorts.

Sextant Sighting
(The Game System)

H

igh Seas can be played with
either turns or continuous action. In solitaire mode, continuous

by Bob Proctor
the enemy and allow the computer
to take care of the details. Some actions, like adding or reducing sail or
reloading guns, take time and keep
the crew busy so that further activities must wait. In battle, you can
use conditional orders like "don't fire
until you get within 200 yards" (or
whatever distance you choose) or
hold fire completely (in which case
your officers ask you if you'd con-

is true of Darkhorn.
Galaxy was open-ended
because of the random
map capability. Darkhorn
comes equipped with 16
pre-generated maps and
the random map generator, too. Galaxy forces
players to consider their
resources as a significant
portion of their strategy
and this is even more
critical in Darkhorn. In
short, Darkhorn is
vintage Cleaver and more
playable than ever.

DARKHORN
OF PLENTY
by Johnny L. Wilson

D arkhorn

is a real-time, multi-player fantasy wargame with almost unlimited potential for quick
gaming sessions or all night campaigns. Once again,
the name Tom Cleaver is associated with an extremely
playable multi-player game. Please allow the writer
some brief reminiscences. I remember sitting in a
semi-circle with six other players
TITLE:
Darkhorn
around a 48K Apple II console in the
SYSTEMS:
Apple, C-64
# PLAYERS:
1-4
basement of the New Albany Indiana
$30.00
PRICE:
Public Library back in 1978. Armed
DESIGNER;
Tom Cleaver
PUBLISHER:
Avalon Hill
with graph paper in hand and
Baltimore, MD
anxiously awaiting my chance at the
keyboard, we enthusiastically played the predecessor
of Galaxy, Tom Cleaver's first published computer
game (Avalon Hill), and my very first computer
gaming experience. On another occasion (a couple of
years later) I remember the light in Russell Sipe's eyes
as Tom offered a guest lecture on computer gaming
during Sipe's "History of Gaming" class which he
taught at the University of Louisville's "Free University." That light may
have been the spark
that eventually birthed CGW. Then, as
recently as a year
ago, I remember the
night that four CGW
staffers gathered,
amidst tens of
thousands of dollars
of computer games,
and once again played an old favorite, Galaxy!
Yes, this really does make a difference to the review.
The first two reminiscences remind us that Tom has
never been satisfied with games which are only for
one person and it is his desire to spread the joy of
computer gaming to as many as possible. He has constantly sought to have human-to-human interaction
refereed by the computer rather than settling for the
standard (primarily solitaire) designs. In Galaxy, there
is considerable waiting to input one's orders. In
Darkhorn, up to four players can input their orders
simultaneously, using a combination of paddles, joysticks, and/or keyboard. Galaxy stretched the limits of
the Apple sound box to make terrific alarm and laser
sound effects. Darkhorn goes even further by using
the melodic themes from Wagner's "Ride of the
Valkyrie" and Beethoven's "Ode to Joy," among others
to indicate combat results. Galaxy has a short learning
curve and doesn't have to be a long game. The same

Both Auras
In The Water

The fiction of Darkhorn revolves around a cataclysmic battle (or series of battles) between four
major races. A la Tolkien, these races are Dwarves
(Grum), Elves (Aura), Humans (Balt), and Changelings
(Dred). All have their advantages listed in the
documentation, except for the Changelings. It appears
that this race has the characteristics of the other three
in a random fashion and all the recruiting bonuses,
but this is not certain.
Players who do not like the representative names
given to the races may change them to their own or
their enemies [Ed.: how about ex-girlfriends?]. Dwarves have a combat advantage over elves, but are
weaker than men. They receive a combat bonus of
ten points when they are in hilly terrain. Elves have an
advantage over men due to magic, but have difficulty
with dwarves due to the latter's magical resistance.
They receive a terrain bonus in woods areas. Men easily defeat dwarves, but need to avoid elven magic. As
social animals, men receive the terrain bonus in
towns. All races receive a five point combat bonus for
each friendly fort in the area (up to four per area) and
for having parties of mixed races (combined arms, as
it were). In addition, each elf in the party gets a bonus
of two points representing a ranged weapon effect.
Although these bonuses are listed in the documentation, they must be constantly kept in mind by successful players.
When playing with less than four human players,
one should note that the computer opponents are extremely proficient at resource management. Since
each party earns action points (the resource units)
simultaneously, it is advantageous to have as many
parties as possible. Computer players practice this
reproductive mitosis to maximum efficiency. Human
players who tend to think in terms of consolidating
parties into large task forces will fare poorly in this
game. Furthermore, it is extremely profitable to fortify

one's home quadrant as expeditiously as possible.
Those who fail to do this find themselves backed into
a "last ditch" defense effort at their home castles.
The real-time aspect adds an exceptional dimension
to the game. Players find themselves anxiously awaiting the addition of the next action point in order to
add a recruit prior to a vital attack and gain numerical
advantage or a combined arms bonus. The computer
"intelligence" is adept at switching from party to party
in order to minimize this wait. Human players must discipline themselves to switch from party to party, even
when battle seems imminent. (Note: There is a
"pause" command for those unexpected phone calls
and the like.)

Dark Hordes to Darklord

P

layers who tire of fighting one scenario at a time
have the option of playing the campaign game. In
the campaign game, players conquer eight provinces
(maps) in a row in order to face the "Final Trial"
against the Darklord. Winners of this final battle/trial
hold claim to being the new Darklord.
In summary, Darkhorn is a fast-paced strategy game
which is ideal for getting the gang (or the family)
together for an evening's entertainment. Challenge,
depth, and interest level make this a product to contend with for many years.

High Seas
(Continued from page 31)
the SAVE GAME sub-menu, for example. Once you get used to them,
the menus work pretty well. They
could be made a bit faster by putting the most used command,
CLOSE (which returns you to a
higher level menu), at the top instead of the bottom.

(You don't without trying to fire
them.) What do you do if your ship
gets stalled pointing into the wind
("in irons")? (Order a turn in either
direction and wait for the ship to
drift around.) What do you do if you
are "in irons" and also fouled with
another ship? (I've never found an
answer to this one, the ships foul
each other repeatedly and drift
forever.)
Indeed, some of the commands
themselves are given short shrift.

Charting a Course
(The Manual)

M

y first impression of the
High Seas manual was
favorable. It has forty-three
pages of text, an index, a glossary, a bibliography, and uses
graphics well. So much for first
impressions, after reading it and
trying to find the answers to sub
Sequent questions, I feel it is
woefully incomplete.
The "Tutorial," a page and a
half long, is really just a "How to
get Started Quickly" piece.
You've seen them; "First do this,
now do that" and after one turn you
are left in the middle of the game
knowing a few commands but with
only a vague idea of what your other
options are or how to use them.
The reference section of the
manual goes through the menus in
order, explaining each command in
detail. This sequence makes no
sense as far as playing the game
goes. You get scenario editing
before anything else and an explanation of the different views doesn't
come until page 15. The jumbled
order, combined with murky text,
will leave you confused and force
you to return frequently to the
manual with the uncomfortable feeling of having missed something.
In fact, you probably have! Many
aspects of the game are not covered
at all or are buried away with no
index reference. How do you interrupt to give orders when you are
playing with continuous execution?
(Hold an arrow key down until you
see an acknowledgement.) How do
you know when guns are reloaded?

other; and discusses some of the options for each captain. Nevertheless,
the whole section on FLAG
MANEUVER is inadequate. In several
scenarios, ships start in line, bow to
stern, and almost any attempt to
turn will result in multiple foulings.
Some advice on how to avoid this
should be included. The term "close
hauled" is also misused to mean
some form of reduced sail (less sail
than Battle Sail which is less than
Full Sail). I would suggest either
"Reefed" or "Reduced" instead.
"Close hauled" means that a
ship is sailing as much into the
wind as it can. In game terms,
that means 45 degrees off the
wind.

Opening
Dispatches
(The Scenarios)

I

For example, I quote from the
paragraph on the FLAG MANEUVER
command, "...COLUMN and LINE
are flag ship only orders (See FLAG
SHIP CONTROL in the MOVEMENT
AND TACTICS chapter...)". Okay so
far, but when we turn to that chapter we learn only that the FLAG
MANEUVER command "...brings up
a standard maneuver sub-menu, but
with two new commands added,
COLUMN and LINE, which are
group formation orders." This is an
explanation? Even if you are experienced at naval matters and you
figure out that LINE means all ships
turn at the same time and COLUMN
means ships turn one after another
at the same place, wouldn't you like
to know if there is any delay for
FLAG commands or if there is a possibility that a ship will miss a command?
The chapter on MOVEMENT AND
TACTICS is helpful as far as it goes.
It provides some useful data on ship
speed under varying conditions of
sail and wind; shows an example of
two ships sailing towards each

n the back of the manual are
descriptions of the 11
scenarios that come with High
Seas. These are stored on a
separate disk so that game and
scenarios can be available at the
same time (if you have two disk
drives). They are:
1. Constellation (44 guns) vs. Insurgente (38 guns) Date: 2/9/1799
2. Constellation (44) vs. Vengeance
(52) 2/1/1800
3. Constitution (44) vs. Guerriere
(38) 8/19/1812
4. Constitution (44) vs. Java (47)
12/29/1812
5. United States (44) vs.
Macedonian (38) 10/25/1812
6. Chesapeake (44) vs. Leopard
(44) 6/22/1807
7. Battle of Lissa c.1811
(4 British vs. 6 French & Italian)
8. Battle of Cape Verde (modified)
c.1780
(5 British vs. 5 French)
9. Raid on Merchantmen
(hypothetical) c.1800
(1 French vs. 2 British and convoy
of 4)
10.Convoy Intercept (hypothetical)
c.1690
(4 British vs. 3 Dutch and convoy)
11.Battle of Ushant c.1795
(8 British vs. 7 French)

(Continued on page 36)

High Seas
(Continued from page 34)
The first six scenarios take an
average of 15-20 minutes each,
depending on how aggressive you
are. (Hint: being aggressive does not
improve your chances of winning, it
merely forces a quick conclusion.)
The multi-ship scenarios, 6 through
11, take much longer, say a couple
of hours. Scenario 9 is not too bad,
but number 11, with 15 ships, including 100-gunners on both sides,
can take all day. It is easy to modify
these scenarios, changing the crew
size or quality or adding damage to
a ship, and you can also design
your own scenarios from scratch.

The Gazette (Conclusions)
he two new games on the topic

T

easily outclass the older titles.

High Seas will inevitably be compared with "The Ancient Art of War
at Sea" and I prefer High Seas for
fighting the frigate duels typical of
the War of 1812.
When it's one ship against one
ship, you are concerned with adding
and reducing sail, playing for the
weather gauge (wind advantage),
loading different kinds of shot and
maneuvering for a rake. High Seas
does this better than any other
game I've seen. "Ancient Art" may
have better animation for boarding
but it is no more realistic. Besides,
grappling and boarding is a last
gamble for a ship which has lost
other advantages.
For fleet actions, however, High
Seas is not so hot. It is so slow that
an accelerator card is almost mandatory (for Apples anyway). Having
128K does not help this much since
we're not waiting on the disk drive.

There are also bugs that surface in
multiple ship melees. One is that
you can fire at targets that are completely hidden behind other ships
without damaging the ship in front.
This is good when the nearer ship is
on your side, frustrating when it is
an enemy, and unreal ALL the time.
When you select such a target, it
gets redrawn on screen in FRONT
of the nearer target. Another
problem was that, from time to time,
one of my ships would turn right
when ordered to turn left. A few
turns later everything would be all
right again. Neither of these "bugs"
appears at all if you are playing one
ship against one ship.
The overall design and flexibility of
High Seas are excellent. The level of
simulation and the graphics are satisfactory, but the problems with the
manual and the glitches during
multi-ship actions prevent me from
giving it a hearty recommendation.

!

Mech
Brigade
(Continued from page 26)
knocking it out. Chances are you
can raise its suppression above 25
and cut its effectiveness to a relatively low level (Kill probabilities divided
by four.). Keep it suppressed and
wait for it to run out of missiles.
(ATGM carriers have 16 missiles, but
units such as APCs only have 4.)
b) When you are firing ATGMs, use
them against moving targets, since
unlike normal weapons, movement
of the target does not reduce their
effectiveness. Note also that range
does matter (see the graphs), so in
most situations set range at less
than the maximum. Remember that
your unit will probably not be
spotted until it fires (unless it is
moving). Try to fire, though, before
the targets reach your minimum
range (either one or three squares)
since effectiveness is reduced at
minimum range and eliminated entirely at less than that. The most logical way to avoid being suppressed
by counter fire is to use your ATGMs
after enemy units have already
selected other targets. Sometimes,
they can be pulled back out of sight
so their adversaries lose the accuracy effects of accumulated pulses (ATGMs do not increase their accuracy as they fire more at one target, so you lose only one pulse of effective fire when you do this).
Use of and Avoidance
of Helicopters
Helicopters are effective for a
variety of missions, as discussed in
the Strategy Notes of the rules. The
only weapons which counter them
effectively are the self propelled SAM
systems and the British Rapier,
which have long range, high accuracy, and high destructive power.
However, each SAM unit carries only
4 missiles and if these are wasted,
helicopter units will be essentially untouchable (The shoulder SAMs and
self-propelled flak units such as the
infamous Sergeant York are better

than nothing, but can be neutralized
easily.). A good tactic for the owner
of helicopters is, therefore, to keep
them constantly in motion until all
SAMs have been located. While you
are moving, SAM fire effectiveness is
low. Equally important, enemy SAM
units may get off one or two shots,
at low accuracy, and then have you
move out of range. The remaining
missiles will probably not be a
problem when you reappear. Once
SAMs are located, you can stay
away from them, devote a few tanks
or artillery barrages to knocking
them out, or concentrate your
helicopter units to destroy them.
As a defender against helicopters,
you should grit your teeth and set
your SAM target selection range to a
very low number. Keep your SAMs
under cover and stationary enough
to reduce the chance of being
spotted. In this way, you can force
your opponent to remain cautious in
his use of helicopters. Eventually, he
may stop them within your range,
and you can then attack (Do not
waste missiles firing at moving
helicopters, unless you are
desperate and want to suppress
them temporarily.). If he keeps them
moving, they will be less effective.
Use of and Avoidance of Infantry
Infantry's most potent weapon is its
LAW's, which have a range of zero.
Therefore, infantry used well can be
extremely effective, while used poorly the same unit can be wiped out
with impunity. I once lost two
platoons of Abrams tanks to a single
platoon of infantry! As a user of infantry, the goal is to get friendly infantry units into a square with
protected terrain which also has
enemy armor in it. This accomplished, one can probably
destroy the armor with ease. It is
greatly preferable to have already accumulated several pulses of firing at
the armored unit, using small arms.
This will make the first shots of your
LAWs more effective. As the
defender, you can do this by luring
the attacker into an adjacent square
with protective terrain, then moving
your infantry. If you are the attacker,
you can do it by bringing your in-

fantry up in APCs, with heavy smoke
cover. Unload adjacent to the
armor, preferably in protected terrain, then, send your APCs into the
enemy square. Enemy units will target the APCs since they are in the
same square. By the time your APCs
are destroyed, your infantry will have
had time to move in, and will have
several pulses of firing accumulated.
Infantry can be very effective on the
attack if used in this way, provided
the terrain has lots of cover and
protected squares. If you have armor
and are trying to avoid infantry, the
best approach is simple. Stay away.
On the attack, send in reconnaissance units and keep them moving
to spot infantry. Then, bypass
squares which contain it. If infantry
enters your square, keep moving.
When defending against infantry,
have some units target enemy APCs
while still loaded. Try to position
yourself so that assaulting infantry
must move through unprotected terrain, where it is very vulnerable. If
you must assault infantry, have your
tanks (or other high SS weapons, including self propelled artillery in
direct fire mode) accumulate a full
four pulses of firing before entering
the enemy square. If you can get the
enemy infantry past 100 suppression before entering the square, you'
can probably destroy it. However,
your tanks are vulnerable in the
meantime to light ATGMs and other
fire. Notice that these tactics require
good command and control, since
you will have to constantly change
your movement orders, depending
on where enemy units move. If you
have units which are not in command and control, use them for supporting fire.

Conclusion
These are the tactical algorithms
which determine combat results in
Mech Brigade. It is up to you to
choose, deploy, and use your forces
to take advantage of them. Good
luck! [Ed: The same basic algorithms and strategies work in
Kampfgruppe, CGW's 1985 Game
of the Year.]

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

W

Empire
Amiga, ST, IBM
1-3
$49.95
Walter Bright
Mark Baldwin
Interstel Corporation
Webster, TX

playability of an already successful
system has been significantly enhanced. In fact, it has been made
too user friendly. The game flows so
smoothly that it is hard to break
away when needed, such as when
the phone rings, nature calls, or the
boss says,"Quit playing that game
and get your review written!"

hile Empire is the latest
release from Interstel, it is
not entirely a new
game. The history
of this game is
rooted in the history of computers
themselves. It is a
mainframe game
that has found its
welcome way to
the personal computer. Many
people are aware
of this game from
the public domain,
but the game was
not really supposed to be public
domain. Walter
Bright created the
game while he was
at Cal Tech
(California Institute
of Technology)
By William "Bill' Kritzen
and completed a
version for the
VAX which has
been distributed by DECUS since
1980. Dr. Trevor Sorenson of InterBataille A Trois
stel saw a mail order version of the
public domain game in 1984 and app to three players, in any comproached Bright in 1985 about
bination of computer or human
publishing a personal computer veropponents, can play and computer
sion of the game. Bright's hands
players can be rated standard or exwere tied because Epyx had originalpert. There is also an efficiency
ly signed to do a commercial disrating that can be used to handicap
tribution of the game for home comany of the players by varying either
puters. Fortunately (for Interstel)
the rate of production or the combat
Epyx backed off the project so that
efficiency rating applied to the
Bright got the rights back from Epyx
player. Both can be adjusted upward
in 1986. At that time, Bright conor downward in any combination, so
tacted Interstel and an improved verit is extremely simple to customize
sion was published.
one's opponent(s).The game even
has a play-by-mail setting.
Those who played the public
domain version will be impressed by
Once the players are set, players
the addition of escorts, patrolling,
choose the map to be played on.
click and drag interfacing, capacity
The program contains a number of
for cruisers and battleships to bompre-set maps that include: the Caribbard, and increased destroyer
bean, the Mediterranean, S.E. Asia
speed. As in previous Interstel
or any of several configurations that
releases, a la Star Fleet I, the
come with names like Weird I, Weird

The Rise
and Fall
of Random
Empires

U

II, etc. The most popular map,
though, is the randomly generated
one that changes with each game.
These randomly generated worlds
are composed mostly of islands and
contains numerous sea lanes to
defend. With a rectangular map grid
that is 98 squares by 58 squares,
there is a lot of world to conquer!

Veils From
The Darkside
with the
knowledge of the
total number of
cities there are to
conquer, usually
65-70, and the
screen shows the
player's starting
position. This is important because
that is all the
player sees. The
computer neatly
handles "fog of
war" by showing
only the eight
squares surrounding the active unit.
As units move through new territory,
the areas become known and stay
visible while the surrounding
squares remain black. The term,
"left in the dark," really fits.
There are many user-friendly commands in the game such as: setting
patrolling patterns for ships; establishing flight paths for planes, etc.,
that really make the game play
smoothly. This is fortunate because
this is a long game. We set up threeplayer games on several occasions
and, each time, we spent an evening before we even came into contact with each other. "It's a big world
out there, kids!" The game goes
much quicker in solitaire mode, but
it is still a long game.

Guns or Butter?

Next,

comes the production
phase. This is actually the heart

of the game and it is here that the
game is won and lost. Each conquered city can produce a unit of
varying types. Cities that are inland
can produce armies or fighters,
while port cities can, in addition to
armies and fighters, produce
transports, destroyers, subs,
cruisers, battleships, and aircraft carriers. Knowing
what to produce
and when is the
key to victory. Each
unit requires a different duration to
produce. The
spectrum runs from
the minimum six
turns to produce an
army to the maximum sixty turns to
produce battleships.
Additionally, once a
city has produced a
unit, it requires less
time to produce
more of the same
types. Armies only
take five turns to
produce and battleships take fifty
thereafter because
the city's industry
has been tooled up.
The variety of
units in this game is
impressive. Armies
are the slowest
moving units with a
range of one
square. Fighters
can move five
squares (with a total range of twenty
before having to refuel). All the ships
move two squares with unlimited
range, except for destroyers which
move three squares. As ships take
damage, their speeds are adjusted
downward. (See Table #1 for a complete summary of unit capabilities.).

War is Swell

C

ombat is conducted by moving
into the square of the opposing
unit. The computer then takes all
the appropriate factors into consideration (damage previously taken,

unit combat strength, vulnerability of
target and luck) and eliminates the
loser. It really hurts when a transport
with six units on board gets sunk by
a defending army that was waiting
in one of those undiscovered black
squares. Cities are attacked as if
they were enemy units and, once
captured, are immediately adjusted

for production. Battleships and
cruisers can bombard any coastal
square and are invaluable for supporting any invasion that might
meet resistance onshore.

T he

game has three phases to it.
First, explore your home territory and build transports to launch
your initial explorations/invasions.
Then, after you have met enemy
resistance, (sometimes immediately;
but hopefully, not until after you
have had time to conquer a few is-

lands and build up a decent industrial base) you need to formulate
a plan of attack and defense. The
game will be won or lost during this
second phase. What you build and
where you build it will determine
whether or not you proceed to the
third or mopping up phase.
There are several philosophies to
playing Empire. I
favor the
army/cruiser/battleship approach. I
initially build armies
to explore my
homeland and capture cities. Some
people prioritize
fighters because
they can cover
more ground for exploration. They
can't participate in
assaulting cities,
however, and they
take twice as long
to build. This seems
questionable to me,
since speed is of
the essence in this
phase of the game.
Then, I build one or
two transports to
get my armies off
the home islands.
When the
transports are completed, I change my
home base production to building
cruisers and battleships. As I explore a new island and capture
cities, I build armies. That gets the
troops to the front lines quickly. I
don't build destroyers because they
can't bombard, and will die when
they come up against anything
heavier. I build subs when I don't
know what else to build. I've found
that a fleet of cruisers and battleships can handle any sea invasions from the other side, can easily sink any carriers or subs they run
up against, and most importantly,
can support invasions, defend
beachheads and protect the approaches to cities that are being
counterattacked. I've played Empire

solitaire a dozen times, have pushed
both computer players up to expert
level with increased production of
one and a half times my own, and
this approach has worked every
time. I haven't been able to try this
strategy to completion in any face-toface games because they have
taken way too long to complete, although you can save the game after
any turn.

Ten Commandments (not
necessarily etched in stone)
1. When using transports to unload in an invasion, move as close
to a city as possible and attack it
from the sea. If you move overland,
you're more susceptible to attack
from enemy units. Once you capture the city, build armies in it. You'll
probably need them for reinforcements.
2. Use your cruisers and battleships to clear the landing area of

enemy units. Better yet, land where
there aren't any enemy units and let
the battleships and cruisers pick off
enemy troops that move against any
of your invading units. Choose an
area for your ships that you can position your units behind. As the
enemy moves towards your land
units, your ships can pick them off.
3. In a situation where you want to
circumvent enemy armies in order
to attack a city, do not attack the armies. Simply move past them (after
all, there are no zones of control)
and let them attack you. Land units
seem to defend much better than attack. At sea, I haven't noticed this
trend.
4. If you find an enemy carrier,
send a cruiser or battleship right for
it. Carriers go down very easily and
they usually have a full squadron on
deck when they go. Planes can
chew up infantry pretty well, so keep
some ships around at all times.
5. Always watch your back door.
The computer uses seapower very ef-

fectively and will continually try to
slip transports into your rear areas. If
you haven't left a garrison or two on
any of your islands, or kept some
ships patrolling the sea lanes you'll
find some previously friendly islands
becoming hotbeds of rebellion.
6. Fighters and cruisers work extremely efficiently in tandem. Use
the fighter to sweep the area and
act as reconnaissance. Then, bring
the cruiser in for the kill. This particularly works well in "Search and
Destroy" missions where elusive
transports are the targets.
7. Repair ships in forward ports. It
takes too long to travel to rear areas
and redeploy. After all, you might
need to pull a ship out of repairs
early in order to protect the port. A
cruiser/battleship in port, under
repair or not, can defeat anything
that tries to attack the port except a
transport. This is a good way to
defend a port from invasion, just
watch out for any unfriendly
transports.
8. Keep updating your production
cities. As you conquer forward islands, readjust your rear-area cities
to produce ships and fighters. Use
the newly conquered, frontline cities
to produce armies. Your transports
won't have so far to go to reload
and you will have lots of troops up
front when the enemy counterattacks.
9. Don't butt your head against the
wall. If you don't have enough
troops or support ships to take an
area that's heavily defended, avoid it
until you have built up enough of an
invasion force.
10. Finally, don't accept an enemy
surrender, crush him totally. Given a
chance, he would do the same to
you. Normally, I would not be such a
cold, heartless bleep, but after investing forty or more hours in one of
these games, and suffering two or
three humiliating, crushing defeats
in a row, the computer's got it coming. Lose this game a couple of
times and you'll know what I mean.
If there were an eleventh commandment it would be: "buy this
game!" It's addictive, a tough challenge, and most importantly, fun to
play!

1

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Inside Trader
IBM
#24.95
Soft Serv
Cosmi Corporation
Wilmington, CA

I nside

Trader is fun, fast,
and fascinating, but it is
not "The Authentic Stock
Trading Game" it is billed
as. Nevertheless, it is interesting enough for prospective stock market
manipulators of simulated
securities environments to
pay attention to. Players are
given $30,000 dollars in
seed money. Like the
panicked stock broker
caricatured in Doonesbury a
year ago who was worried
about losing his job if he
didn't make a million dollars
before he was thirty years
old, players are expected to
turn that thirty thousand
into millions before the play
session is over.

THE "COSMI"C
STOCK
EXCHANGE:

generator. This capacity
ameliorates somewhat the
most important criticism
listed below.

Portfolio
of Problems
(Critical Remarks)

T he

Tale of the
Ticker Tape
(Game Overview)

T his

is not a static game.
The screen is constantly moving. On the right
hand side of the screen, a
window displays a real-time
ticker tape which is perpetually being updated.
Most of the screen functions as a wire service window where news stories related to the various industries are frequently being
typed and where players are
approached by informants
with the "inside information"
necessary to make highyield investments which pay
off rapidly. Below the wire
service window is the command entry window where
the real action (i.e. buying,
selling, viewing portfolio holdings,
and getting instant quotations)
takes place. The program is
friendly in its use of function keys to

game suffers with
regard to realism,
however, in several minor
areas and one major consideration. Minor areas include the lack of a sales
commission assessed in
securities purchases and
sales, the absence of taxes
charged to a profitable sale,
and the fact that the market
does not discount earnings
reports as much as actually
occurs on the Big Boards
(NYSE and ASE). The major
problem, which can also be
a remarkable opportunity
once one is aware of it, is
the random event generator. The minor events like,
"Oxychem's Audrey II plant
food found to increase carnivoracity in house plants,"
are humorous and useful
with regard to their effect
upon individual stocks. The
major events, however,
make the game fun, but
cost it realism. After all, if
Jesus returns as he
promised in the book of
Revelation and declared all
stock brokers to be sinners,
it would have decidedly
more impact on the world
than to reset every stock's
value to $1.00 per share as
happens in the game. Indeed, one would be hardpressed to convince this
reviewer that even an AIDS
virus which only affected
stock brokers would reset
any national securities
market to $1.00 per share for
every stock. Yet, this is what happens in the game. The same would
be true if "Companies in the Inside

A Review of and
Strategy for
"Inside Trader"
by Jasper Sylvester
speed up purchases and sales. Further, the program allows the player
to customize both the corporate
data base and the random event

Trader game" were ". . . to be indicted for inside trading."
Of course, since this means that
securities are never reduced below
$1.00 per share, it means that it is
advantageous to buy all the shares
one can when
these cataclysmic
market shake-ups
occur. Since these
cataclysmic events
occur with uncomfortable regularity,
it also means that
players need to
learn to make their
profits in a hurry,
liquidate their
portfolios as soon as possible, and
keep large cash reserves on hand
whenever possible. This way, players
will not be hurt by these fantastic
events

Inside Information (A
Strategy That Works)

B esides

regular news reports
available to the players (such as
found in most stock market games)
this game goes a step further and
has informants which approach investors with: "a little information
about;" "some information about;"
and "some reliable information
about" a certain industry or a particular corporation (hence the title of
the game). Of course, "reliable information" is better than "a little information" and "some information," so
the fee (bribe) which the informant
wants is priced significantly higher.
Now, the more one pays for information, the more profit one is going to
have to make just to break even.
Further, all of the information is not
accurate. Therefore, the challenge is
to make the profit without having to
pay the informants.
In order to accomplish this, one
must know which corporations
belong to which industry group. It
takes too long to find each corporation in the master list included with
the documentation in the game and
time is of the essence, so it is suggested that one use the table included with this article. Then, when

an informant approaches the player
with "some information about" or
"some reliable information about" a
particular industry, the player can
use his cash reserves to purchase
the securities of every company in
that industry rather
than purchasing
the information
from the insider.
Note: more often
than not the industry in question
will experience a
gain (although it
can go the other
way on occasion).
This accomplishes three objectives within
the game's parameters. First, there
is usually a coattail effect within the
industry and other corporate stocks
go up when a merger (often the subject of the proffered rumor) is consummated. This may be unrealistic
in the "real world," but it works in
this environment. Second, it enables
the player to get in on the action
without shelling out money for infor-

mation. Third, it allows the player to
trade on inside information without
running the risk of being investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission (and this does
happen in this game).
After quickly purchasing all the
stocks available in the industry
group, the player should hold the
stocks until a major announcement
is made regarding the designated industry. If the announcement is a
merger or new product announcement, almost the entire
portfolio will be profitable. If the announcement is bad news, the player
will lose some money before he liquidates the portfolio. Nevertheless, the
probabilities for good news outweigh
the bad. In either event, the player
needs to liquidate that portfolio
soon enough to get his profits and
maximize cash reserves for the next
tip. This system may sound simplistic, but it has always worked for this
reviewer and seems sound enough
to help others turn their nest eggs
into millions. If only it were this real
on Wall Street.

CGW's resident adventure expert
takes us on a tour of a very bizarre
museum in this review of a popular
product from Electronic Arts.
TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Legacy of the Ancients
Apple II, C-64/128
$29.95
Chuck and John Dougherty
Electronic Arts
San Mateo. CA

enter this otherwise-inviolable building and
why you are there. The major quest is to nullify the power of the leather scroll, which is actually a compendium of spells of great evil
(no, you won't get to use any of those spells
during the game).
Before you can do that, however, there are a
number of minor missions (relatively speaking) that you must undertake first, which involve using the various Museum exhibits and
travelling across the length and breadth of the
land, as well as other less-savory places, such
as dungeons.

I

t sits in the desolate northeast of
Tarmalon, far from the prying
eyes of the primitive natives.
Erected centuries ago by strange,
alien beings, known only as The Ancients, it is a place of both education and amusement: The Museum.
For uncounted years, only the Ancients walked its long, winding corridors, depositing gem-like coins to
view the exhibits of this minor
world. Then one day, an innocent
Tarmalon peasant stumbles across
the body of a strangely-garbed
man, clutching a scroll in one hand
and an odd onyx disk in the other.
For this peasant, a new role in history is about to
begin . .

Legacy of The
Ancients

Legacy of the Ancients may
remind people somewhat of
Questron, which is no surprise,
since it has the same authors. The
graphics have been changed, but
one can still see echoes of the previous game, particularly in the matter of the character you maneuver
through the adventure.
Unlike most games of this type,
your alter-ego is always pre-set and
possesses the same attribute values
in each game. There is no option to
create your own unique, individual
character. It is, at least, a great
time-saver and gets you right into
the thick of things from the start.
There are only six attributes for
your character: Strength (the
higher, the more damage you do), Endurance
(the higher, the less damage you take), Dexterity (the higher, the more often you hit, and
the less often are hit), Intelligence (the higher,
the more successful you are with spells),
Charm (the higher, the lower the prices on
merchandise), and Hitpoints (the higher, the
harder you are to kill).
These attributes are raised in various ways
throughout the game: by training at the
Weapons and Armor schools, by playing the
Stones of Wisdom, by successfully completing
quests, etc. Hitpoints go up only when you
achieve a new level of experience, granted to
you by the Museum's Caretaker.

Trails from the Black Museum

Y

such as weapons and armor or possibly, a
Museum coin.
Some encounters, however, need not end in
battle. Once in awhile, you will be met by creatures with something for sale: weapons,
armor, Museum coins, potions to restore hitpoints, food, etc. It's up to you to decide
whether or not you want to buy whatever is
being offered. If you refuse, the creature will
simply leave, often with the cheery remark,
"You passed up a good deal!" What you have
to watch out for is: (a) some of the monsters
you fight will also be the same type who occasionally offer to sell something and
(b) what you buy may not be worth
what you paid for it.
Farmers, Striders, and Pixies are
non-hostile; they will always offer
something for you to buy. All the
rest, however, are very chancy. One
time an Eaton Warrior may want
nothing more then to sell you a shoddy leather hide (while proclaiming it
to be excellent), another time he may
simply want to bash your head open.
Of course, there will also be those
creatures who are just totally hostile,
with nothing to offer but a quick
death. After playing for awhile, you
should have no trouble distinguishing
which are which (grin).
Also in the outdoors are a number
of towns. Not all towns have all
facilities, but among them you will
come across healing shops, food
stores, magic emporiums, training
arenas for endurance and dexterity,
armories, banks, loan associations,
gambling dens, buy-back shops, purveyors of rafts and climbing gear,
and fortunetellers.
The fortunetellers, for a small fee,
will give you some hints and clues
regarding the quests in the game, or
reveal what weapon is most effective
against which type of creature (good
idea to carry several different ones),
or give you the old con job ("I see
you winning a fortune at blackjack!").

ou begin inside the Museum itself, after
first reading about how you managed to

By Scorpia
After completion of each task, your character becomes stronger and more powerful,
going up in level and attributes, better able to
fight, and more proficient in spell casting, until
(at last!) he/she is ready for the final confrontation (yes, as usual, there is a main bad guy to
defeat).
The major continent of Tarmalon is fairly extensive, and you will be doing a lot of travelling outdoors. Transportation is limited to
travelling on foot and by raft; there are no horses (except at the very end) or other means of
getting around, although you can buy a spell
that will teleport you back to the Museum
from wherever you may be in the wilderness.
Naturally, as you travel, you will encounter a
number of unpleasant beings, mostly
monsters. Killing them does not help your experience level, but it does provide you with
money and, occasionally, other items as well,

The University of Dexterity

T he

training arenas (there are four
altogether) are actually arcadestyle games. The Weapons Schools
(in Alanville and Laingsburg) put you in the
center of a rectangular room, then send
fireballs at you from different directions. Your
job is to shoot them with your crossbow
before they hit. The better you do, the greater
the increase in your Dexterity when the session ends (this happens when you are hit five
times total).
Armor training (Grand Ledge and
Thompson's Crossing) is somewhat similar, although in this case slightly easier: you need
only block the fireballs with your shield. Again,
when you've been hit five times, the session
ends.
The only thing to be careful about is a poor
performance, which could cause a LOSS of
Dexterity or Endurance. The game keeps
track of your attribute levels, and as they increase, the training sessions start at higher

levels of difficulty. Eventually, you will come to
a point where your own skill with the joystick
(or keyboard; joystick recommended for this)
has reached its limit, and that's when you
should stop, since you'll never get any better,
and may actually begin to lose points (it's a
good idea to save the game before you try the
arenas, even though you do get practice if you
want it).

Adventures at an Exhibition

T

he heart of the game, however, is the

Museum and its exhibits. Some of these
exhibits actually transport you to different places on Tarmalon (such as
dungeons) or provide you with
weapons, money or other items. It is
perfectly safe to stroll through the corridors of the Museum itself. There are
no monsters roaming the passageways.
In order to use the exhibits, you
need coins. Not the ordinary gold
coinage of Tarmalon, but special gemlike coins, of varying types: jade,
topaz, sapphire, amethyst, turquoise,
ruby, and diamond. Each of these is
usable for one or more exhibits.
You start with two jade coins and acquire the rest in various ways, usually
by purchasing them from merchants
in the towns. When a merchant will
offer a coin seems to be randomly
determined, and you don't know
which one you have until after you've
bought it. Typically, jade coins will be
offered early in the game, and other
types later on.
The exhibits are in a rough ascending sequence, and you have to finish one set before
you can go on to the next, making the game
rather linear in nature, for all the wandering
you may do in the wilderness. For instance,
you have to complete all three jade exhibits
before you can move on to the topaz ones.
The exact order in which you do each exhibit
in the set isn't important, so long as you do
them all.
It is of VITAL importance that you view each
exhibit, as viewing exhibits is part of the level
advancement scheme. One exhibit, the
Tapestry, serves no real purpose in the game.
While it is a map of the continent, it shows no
useful information. Since an amethyst coin is
needed to view it, and amethyst coins are also
needed for the truly important Stones of Wisdom, some people may be tempted to skip
the Tapestry entirely. Don't do it! That exhibit,
like all the others, must be activated.
The three jade exhibits are Thornberry,
Weapons, and The Fountain. The Thornberry
exhibit will actually send you there, and even
give you a little cash to spend. Weapons will
provide you with a decent, if primitive, weapon
and The Fountain will give you money in exchange for a promise to locate and return a
stolen magical flower.
Once you've seen those three, you will start
to pick up topaz coins, allowing you to use the
next set of exhibits: Pirate Treasure, Herb of
Life, and Native Currency.
As you might expect, Native Currency
provides you with a nice chunk of cash. The

Herb of Life, after you've opened it, will allow
you to buy herbs of life at the healing shops.
Pirate Treasure is the first of the three dungeons you must visit in the game. At the bottom is the sapphire coin that will open the
way to the Lost Exhibits, a second series of exhibits, ordinarily hidden away from casual
visitors.

getting out will automatically return you to the
Museum!
Four Jewels, as you might expect from the
name, has four jewels scattered around its bottom level for you to find. Reaching the lowest
level is a bit tricky, so make sure you map accurately here. This one is just as nasty as The
Test, so do come prepared.

Spelunking for a Spell

Castling Out of Check

T he

side from the dungeons, there are also
two castles. One sits in the middle of an
inland lake, the other is the endgame sequence, which you won't be able to
reach until you've obtained the
diamond coin (and the diamond coin
won't be available until you've achieved
seventh level).
The first castle (two levels) contains
the magic flower and several other
items of interest. You can walk
anywhere along the first level, and so
long as you don't open any chests, the
guards won't bother you. Be alert for
secret doors in the walls; they're important.
The second level is private and if any
guards see you up there, they will
come to attack. Fortunately, there is a
way around this, if you've gotten the
right hints from the fortunetellers. By
the way, the castles do not reset when
you leave them: once you've looted a
chest it stays looted, so you can't use
the castle as an endless supply of
money.
Since you're going to have to open
some of those chests scattered
around, it's best to go into the castle
prepared. Spells in general will not be as effective here as in the dungeon, so much of your
guard-elimination procedures will have to
depend on weaponry. Make sure you have
plenty of healing herbs with you before you
embark on any chest-opening expeditions.
The second castle is nastier by far. It is the
domain of the evil warlord who is in possession of the scroll (for those who may be
wondering, somewhere early in the game you
will be ambushed by bandits, severely beaten,
and the scroll stolen from you; this is built-in
and can't be avoided).
Guards in this castle are not at all friendly,
they are tougher to kill, and they are not as
dumb as their counterparts in the first castle.
You can't sucker them into following you to a
narrow entry where you can take them out
one at a time. Instead, they have assigned
areas and will not move out of them under
any provocation. So, you're just going to have
to wade in there full tilt and start swinging.
On the other hand, this has one advantage:
if you're getting low on hitpoints, you can
back off (if not surrounded), munch some
healing herbs, and then return to the fray. So
bring lots of healing herbs with you; you'll be
needing them.
After you locate the scroll (no easy matter),
you have to fight it out with the Warlord. Fortunately, he isn't quite so bad as the guards.
Unfortunately, his guards are also very dedicated. Once you kill the warlord, the castle will

dungeons (all three of them) are not
especially difficult in terms of mapping, although the third one (Four Jewels) does have

a trick or two to it. All are eight levels deep,
and naturally there are monsters lurking on
each level. These critters are specific to the
dungeons; you won't find them anywhere else.
Some have rather nasty abilities, such as
breaking your weapons, eating your armor, or
reducing attribute points, so you want to get
rid of them as soon as possible.
For that reason, you should always go into a
dungeon armed to the teeth with spells, as
many as you can afford. While the selection is
limited (there are only six spells in all), the
ones available can do the job. Magic Flame,
Firebolt, and Kill Flash are the best ones to
have. You can purchase up to a hundred of
the first two, and twenty of the third.
Of course, you will find treasure (mostly
money) in the dungeons, as well as little boxes
that, when opened, restore hitpoints. A few of
the boxes are trapped, however, and will explode upon opening. There is no way to distinguish good boxes from bad boxes, so opening
a box or chest is a little chancy.
There are other traps in the dungeons, too,
so make sure to examine every stretch of tunnel or corridor for hidden dangers before you
walk down it. Once a trap has been discerned,
you can safely walk past it without worry.
Traps made visible this way will remain visible
until you leave the dungeon.
The remaining two dungeons are found in
the Lost Exhibits; they are The Test and Four
Jewels. The Test is a tough one: you're placed
at the bottom of the dungeon (a mean one)
and must find your way out. Good thing that

(Continued on page 50)

In the first two parts of this series, John presented his
case for the place of adult software in our hobby (CGW
#39 and #40). In this summary article for the series John
takes a more subjective look at the question.

I

Dear Sierra,
Please drop that purile, obviously immature
slimeball John Williams [Marketing Director, please!]
into a greasy brown wrapper and drop it in the
nearest trash compactor . . . .Please remove my
name from your customer list. I don't need trash, I
can get that anywhere.

n my last two articles for Computer Gaming World, I
spent significant time writing about the origins of adult
Dear Mr. Williams,
software and what attempts governments and people have
Recently, I purchased your HomeWord Plus program.
made to hinder or stop its release. Most of the material in
I am very happy with it, but I am returning it bethose articles was gathered in the early summer of 1987,
cause I cannot tolerate your behavior . . . . I have
before or very soon after the release of Sierra's Leisure
read your little
Suit Larry in the Land of
"editorial," where you
the Lounge Lizards, a
trumpet the arrival of
game openly marketed as
filth and perversity in
an "adults only" product.
computer gaming . . . .
By late November,
I will not do business
Leisure Suit Larry had
with any company that
been shipping for over five
would give a job to
months. There had been
someone like you . . . .
reviews, protests about the
product, and hate mail.
I consider these two letMy first two articles on the
ters to be fine represubject of adult software
sentations of the "fan"
have been published and
mail that I received after
some of the readers don't
Larry shipped. Both cuslike the subject at all. This
tomers were fairly abusive
last article in the threeto me personally and both
part, "Goodbye G Ratings"
notified me that Sierra had
series will detail some of
lost their business. While I
the more interesting
question some of what is
episodes that have come
said in these letters (My acabout from the release of
tions should not affect the
Leisure Suit Larry.
royalties going to the
by John Williams
I will apologize in adwriters of HomeWord Plus
vance for the rather perand I am not purile), I had
sonal and "unprofessional"
a feeling that I might
style this article displays. I tried to keep up the "industry
receive some of them.
pundit" style of writing evident in my last two articles, but
I expected a few negative reactions from the consumers
the events in this article hit a little too close to home.
(you can't please all the people, etc.). What I, and Sierra,
did not expect was the reaction that we received from the
Dear Sierra,
industry itself. Our largest customers were very noncomI read with regret in your recent newsletter that you
mittal. A few, that must remain nameless (they pay the
intend to go into the porno software business. How
rent), wouldn't handle it at all. Some of the major chain
any company with your fine products and reputation
stores would stock the product, but refused to advertise it
can make such a poor decision is beyond me .. .
(which represents a significant cut in sales volume). One
The glorification of loose moral behavior has caused
distributor that publishes a very influential bestsellers chart
a rise in social disease and divorce and a general
would not list the product although it outsold most of the
decline in the quality of American society. The
products listed (including a few Sierra products that made
money you make from this venture into filth comes
the chart). An independent dealer from North Carolina,
at a high price . . . .
who was sent a demo copy for evaluation, sent the
sample back, cut smoothly in two with a hacksaw (no letI lifted this text from one of the first letters that Sierra
ter accompanied this item). At the same time, the sales
received regarding our release of Leisure Suit Larry.
numbers for the product skyrocketed. Obviously lots of
Despite its occasional lapse into self-righteousness and
retailers were selling lots of Leisure Suit Larry, but no one
ridicule, it made a great attempt to tell us why the publishwanted to admit it.
ing of Larry might be a mistake (Not that I agree, but I appreciate an argument well presented). It was one of only a
Inside Sierra, equally interesting things were happening.
very few to arrive until my first article for CGW appeared.
One of our finest customer support people quit because
Then the deluge began .. .
she refused to answer questions on Larry. A highly

GOODBYE "G"
RATINGS

The
Perils
of "Larry"

The New Wave of Adult
Entertainment Software: Part Three

respected prospective applicant for our quality assurance
(debugging) area had to be bypassed because he told us
up front he would refuse to work on Larry conversions
and planned sequels (good computer-knowledgeable
people aren't easy to find in Coarsegold, CA). My own
boss, originally very excited that I had been asked to write
some articles for CGW, began pressuring me to bury the
project and work on something else. As the IIGS version
went into production, our President demanded that all
jokes based on "gay life" be removed from the product,
even though we had not received a single complaint on
the matter. In short, as the product gained sales momentum, the company was seeming to grow embarrassed by it
The computer magazine reviews of Larry also gave
reason for pause. There were many good reviews, but
mixed with these were many pieces by writers on a soapbox. The highly influential MacWorld magazine panned
the game by saying that the "game contributes nothing to
enlightened male attitudes toward women" and Info
blasted both Sierra and Electronic Arts (distributor of the
Amiga version of Larry) for treating women as sex objects.
CGW, perhaps worst of all, published a quick and simple
way to bypass the trivia test in the product that was
designed to keep youngsters out of the game. [Ed: The
original intent of giving the bypass tip was to allow our
readers (most of whom are over 18) to avoid some nonessential preliminaries. In looking back, we probably
should not have published the tip.]
Although I have never felt like it was the responsibility of
computer entertainment software to promote enlightened
attitudes toward women, I should point out that we have
received a number of letters from women who played and
enjoyed our game. Many of these women seemed to think
that Leisure Suit Larry exposes macho, chauvinistic men
for the jerks they really are. I believe that Larry provides
humorous shock treatment for those males that aren't yet
"enlightened toward women" by showing chauvinism as
the stupid prejudice that it is.
Which brings us to the point of social responsibility. In
the motion picture industry, it is the responsibility of the
movie company to submit each finished product to the
MPAA for evaluation. Each product is given a G, PG, PG-13, R, or X rating (the triple X rating on some movies is
strictly a marketing ploy). Through this system, the motion
picture industry has circumvented the threat of government controls and given concerned citizens a way to steer
clear of those titles that offend them. The MPAA is a socially responsible organization that works.
Should such a system be put in place for computer
software? For an expert opinion, I asked Ken Wasch, Executive Director of the Software Publishers Association of
America.
"Adult computer software is nothing to worry about. It's
not an issue that the government wants to spend any
time with . . . . They just got done with a big witchhunt
in the music recording industry, and they got absolutely
nowhere . . . ."
Ken's job is to protect the interest of computer software
publishers in Washington, so he would hardly be expected

to advocate the initiation of a ratings standard that would
cost software developers millions each year to enforce.
Ken is a genuinely great guy, however, and in later parts
of our discussion (parts that didn't lend themselves to
quotation), Ken did advocate voluntary uses of warnings
on adult-oriented software packages and pointed out that
if it ever did get to be a problem, the government would
get involved. Ken was also very helpful with the wording
on the warning labels (he practically dictated the warning
used on the present Leisure Suit Larry box and the
soon-to-be-published Police Quest boxes). [Ed.: the warning on
Leisure Suit Larry simply reads: "This game contains
adult subject matter. Parental guidance is suggested"].
His overall opinion seems to be that as long as we attempt
to let the buyer know of anything possibly offensive inside
a box, we have done our jobs as members of society.
I agree with this opinion, but a recent phone call put my
resolution to a test. A woman from southern Illinois called
to complain about Larry. It seems her son got a copy of
the game from his friend at school and she caught him
playing with it one night. It wasn't an authentic copy and
the pirate that had "liberated" the disk of its protection had
also laid to waste the opening warning screen and the
trivia test designed to keep kids out of the product.
Is Sierra at fault because it originated the product that
fell into the hands of her child? It would be very easy for
me to say no. The child was using a pirated game. I
wonder if she even chastised the child for receiving stolen
property. The disk had been altered so that any child
could get hold of it. Did the pirate feel any social responsibility when he put the altered software on a bulletin
board system? On top of it all, Leisure Suit Larry contains
no real nudity and doesn't get "rowdy" with the user unless he/she inputs some nasties of their own, first. We
made every attempt to be socially responsible.
In summary, the whole issue of whether adult software
should exist comes down to freedom versus censorship.
Should Sierra stop making software that liberated adults
enjoy because it might offend some other people or because, despite our best efforts, it might land in the hands
of the young? In this country, there is a system of government that states "one man (or woman) - one vote." There
is a capitalistic system that says, "If you don't like the
product, don't buy it." Working within these two systems,
Sierra and other software companies will learn whether
adult-oriented software is a good idea.
If Leisure Suit Larry and its coming sequel continue to
sell well (to date, Larry has been our most successful
product launch, second only to King's Quest III), Sierra
will continue to market adult games. If we do not continue
to do our part to keep these products out of the hands of
those that will be offended, concerned citizens will put
their one vote to work and the government will attempt to
put an end to development of "adults only" entertainment
software (or, at least, make it difficult).
You, the consumers, cast your votes each day with dollars and opinions. In reality, the long term success of the
adult-oriented software segment lies in your hands, not
ours.

Legacy
of the
Ancients
(Continued from page 47)
self-destruct in five minutes. This is rather
nerve-wracking, since the way you came in is
not the way you can go out.
Therefore, you have to go running through
an unfamiliar part of the castle, looking for an
exit that hasn't yet been closed. As you might
expect, there is only one, and of course there
are guards in the way. You'll have to fight
through them to get out alive. Let's hope you
have some healing herbs left for this.
When you return to the Museum, you
receive your final rewards: ascension to level
ten, and another that I won't mention here. In
some ways, it's not as fancy as the ending of
Questron, but it is certainly more enduring.

low. Most of the time, it's safe to use the
monsters as food, although now and then
what you eat won't agree with you, and you'll
take some loss in hitpoints. Fortunately, there
is no poisoning as such, so this is more in the
nature of temporary indigestion than anything
else.
I liked the idea of using a museum and its
exhibits as the focal point of the action. It's a
fascinating concept that I hope the author will
develop further in future games; there is much
potential here. On the other hand, there isn't
much in the way of interaction in the game.
You can't really talk or hold conversations with
anyone. Most of the people are merchants,
and your dealings with them are fairly mundane: buying and selling items. Even with the
fortunetellers, it's merely a matter of paying a
sum and receiving a clue in return.
Once you get settled into the game, you'll
find it has a very even tenor to it. Monsters
and other beings you encounter don't change
as your level increases, although in the outdoors, you may find yourself facing several at
once. By that time, you should be able to
handle them without much difficulty.

Remember that prices are not the same in
every town, so keep notes on which places
have the lowest prices on which items.
Surplus weapons and armor can always be
sold at an armory or buy-back shop. Check
the prices of new equipment first, so you can
get the best deal possible.
The manual that comes with the game is a
slim one, but tells you pretty much everything
you need to know to get started, and has
some clues (printed upside-down) in case you
become stuck here and there. Read it carefully
before you begin the game.
Overall, Legacy is not an especially difficult
game. Puzzles are few, and its linear arrangement makes it fairly easy to get through, once
you have the hang of things. One minus is the
endgame: once completed, you're stuck. This
makes reaching level 10 rather a hollow victory, since you can't do anything with your
character afterwards, such as save it. Obviously, if there are going to be any follow-ups to
this game, your character won't be transferred
over. So if you want to enjoy your level 10
status, make sure to save the game before
going to view the final exhibit.

Recipes for Monster Hash

Bottom line: Legacy is a moderate RPGstyle game, with some interesting touches;
suitable for beginner and intermediate-level
play.

Monster Hash
Legacy has some interesting features,
among which is the ability to use the
bodies of slain monsters as a food source.
This can really come in handy when you're
low on cash and your food supply is running

C

ombat is spell-oriented in the dungeons
and weapons-oriented everywhere else,
so save spells for dungeon expeditions.

Copyright © 1988 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

1

Name:
BlackJack Academy
Systems: Amiga
Coming for: C64,Ap2gs, IBM)
# of Players:
1-5
Price:
$49.95
Designer:
Dennis Saunders, PhD.
Publisher:
Microillusions
Distributor:
Activision

Blackjack Academy is more an environmental simulation than a
true tutorial of blackjack. This is not
to say that one does not learn how to
play blackjack with this program, but,
rather, that a fixed set of lessons is
not utilized. One learns by playing
blackjack in a casino environment.
The sound of the chips being
played on the green felt table,
your choice of five possible
seats, and the sound of the
cards being shuffled and dealt,
help to create a realistic casino
ambience. Only the sound of
clinking beverage glasses
being delivered to the table
and an occasional slot
machine jackpot is missing.
The small manual introduces
the novice to the basics of
blackjack in four pages and an
additional four pages give instructions for program
specifics.
The Help menu options explain the various blackjack play
options (insurance, double
down, split pair, surrender,
and hit/stand) in greater text
detail. Hard/soft card counts,
rule variations, and some
simple techniques of card
counting and money management
are succinctly discussed. These
methods are easy and avoid the complex schemes of many other blackjack systems.
The Setup menu options let you
modify the conditions of game play to
your particular preferences. You can
choose one or more seat positions
specifying player name, starting
amount of money and whether to display card point totals. (Very nice if
you're not in the mood for low level
mental gymnastics.) From one to six
decks of cards can used. The minimum ($2, $5, $25, $100) and maximum ($100, $300, $1000, $3000)
betting limits for the table can be set.
The rules of the table can be set for

major gambling centers (Las Vegas
Strip or Downtown, Reno, or Atlantic
City), liberal rules, or even custom
rules.
The Strategy menu options provide

by Roy Wagner

you with general play and betting
strategy. At any time, it will provide
the optimal play for the current hand.
This compares the dealers hand with
yours and explains the best action to
take. The hands of other players are
not discussed. The card deck count
display is only updated at the end of
each round of play. So, if you want to

seriously use this program's counting
system, you must do it mentally for
each player preceding the play of
your hand. The number of cards
remaining to be dealt and the current
rules can also be displayed from this
menu.
The default program startup uses
Las Vegas Strip rules, one player in
the third seat (middle), and $500 in
chips. The only time the keyboard
(rather than mouse or joystick) ever
needs to be used is to modify the
player's(s') setup.
I found this program/
game/simulation both
enjoyable and educational. I
liked to fill all seats with "different" types of players ($2 betting conservative, $10 betting
with no plan, $15 playing the
system, $15 checking the optimal play, and $25 wild shot
betting). I start each seat with
the same amount of money
and watch the totals vary. Winning is great, but losing it all
only drops the player from his
spot at the table. You can easily establish the player again
with a new bankroll. Where is
that pit in the stomach, emptiness in the wallet, and slow
walk from the table? How do
you simulate that without real
money?
The program play is so
smooth that it is easy to keep
playing on and on. If you do
notice the sun rising, you can
save the game to disk and come back
to it again. A small quick reference
chart on blackjack play comes with
the program which can sit right near
your computer or be easily carried in
your pocket when you decide to head
for Vegas. The Amiga interface is fully
used and this does include letting you
multi-task. The game disk is copy
protected.
This program is a good example of
software that can be used for recreational fun, serious study, and possibly
financial profit (or loss). The graphics
and sound are at a quality level. The
user interface is excellent. If you like
playing blackjack or want to learn
more about the game, this program is
for you.

#43 (Use card
opposite pg. 4).
RID

On this page, a number of games
and articles are listed for evaluation, as well as some general interest questions. When evaluating a
game, consider such matters as
PRESENTATION (graphics, sound,
packaging, and documentation);
GAME DESIGN (design,
playability, and level of interest);
and LIFE (does the game wear
well?). For each game which you
have played or each article which
you have read, place a 1 (terrible)
through 9 (outstanding) next to
the appropriate. number

"Gettysburg" continued to hold the high ground on the strategy side of
our readers' Top 50, but "Ancient Art of War at Sea" is attempting to take
the wind gauge by sailing into third place in its initial engagement. The initial strong showing by 'Wargame Construction Set" appeared to be premature as it dropped from the top 10 completely off of the chart. The "Rebel
Charge at Chickamauga" dropped off from third place to eighth, but that
still left SSI with five out of the top 10.

On the Action/Adventure side, readers sailing under the Jolly Roger
reefed the mainsails of "Pirates" enough to allow the original "Wizardry'
and "Might and Magic" to sneak ahead of it "Might and Magic" enchanted
its way to a hard-fought third place. Expect it to stay in the top 10 for a
while due to a resurgence of popularity with its two new conversions. "The
Eternal Dagger" sliced onto the top 10 ahead of its predecessor, "Wizard's
Crown," in its first ratings test

