"Covering Interactive & Multimedia Entertainment SEPTEMBER 1994 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD THE #1 COMPUTER GAME MAGAZINE MASTER OF MAGIC Spellbinding Strategy Game SAMES Sneak Preview Panzer General Feature Reviews Harpoon 11 Tigers On The Prowl Theme Park Serf City In-Depth Strategies X-COM 1942 Kingmakery Hot Hits Cool Pix From Summer CES "


"FormGen INCORPORATED New! New Super CD Pack! spear of Destiny\"Game, 2 New Missions, 3 Hiat Books & Game Generator! 11111 LIVES FLOOR SCORE 16 225800 9 HEALTS AMISO 90% 97 FLOOR SCORE LIVES 5 300600 9 HEALTH ANNO 62% 619 THE FLOOR SCORE LLUES 17 220800 9 W EALTH AM 3 100999 You get it all... in the complete Spear of Destiny CD collection-enjoy the original ground-breaking virtual reality game, then conquer two brand new Nazi fortresses in two allnew missions. We include hint books for all three games, and a terrific game generator that you can use to make a variety of new missions for your enjoyment, Return to Danger... as an Allied commando, fighting your way into the enemy HQ to seize the prize that he must not be allowed to keep! Battle the best the enemy has to offer, taking the Spear from the megalomaniac Axis leader. See why its stunning first-person perspective, and digital stereo sound made this the Game of the Year. Mission Disks were not developed or produced by id Software. Spear of Destiny is a trademark of id Software, FormGen Inc. 7641 East Gray Road, Scottsdale, AZ 85260 (800) 263-2390 (905) 857-4141 FLOORSCORE LIVEST 10 304400 9 REALTH AMMO 17% 88 Circle Reader Service #65 "


"REMEMBER THAT GAME YOU PLAYED SO MUCH YOU LOST YOUR GIRLFRIEND... YOUR JOB... YOUR CAR... GOOD NEWS... IT'S BACK. LODE RUNNER THE LEGEND RETURNS AREN LIELOLETTE TIL ALFLUTTU 21E BE It's more addicting than ever. With all new graphics and sound effects, plus 150 new levels of non-stop action. Play alone or head-to-head. Use the lightning-fast Game Generator to create torturous worlds of your own. See your retailer or call 1-800-757-7707 (Ask for offer D845). SIERRA red. Available for DOS, Windows, MAC, DOS CD-ROM, LODE RUNNER is a registered trademark licensed exclusively to Douglas E. Smith. 1983. 1994 Douglas E. Smith. Sierra On-Line Inc. All rights Circle Reader Service #181 "


"\"Leading horror adventure game of the year!» Chuck Miller, InterActive Gaming \"Takes players on a heart-racing roller coaster ride of terror.\" Russ Ceccola, Electronic Games ROF NIA WILLIAM PIANTASMAGORA ERRA An experience in tortor like nothing over seen or heard before on PC. Phantasmagoria's stunning setting was created using the most advanced cinematography and computer graphics techniques ever for a computer game. The fate of a young woman rests in your lands in this shocking cinematic tour-de-force. SIERRA "


"PRAY IT'S ONLY A NIGHTMARE ROBERTA WILLIAMS PHANTASMAGORIA MULTIMEDIA CD COMING SOON Circle Reader Service #120 "


"F E ATURES $102 Grease 'em and. fleece 'em in THEME PARK CEL 18 MAGICAL MYSTERY FUROR CGW's Alan Emrich conjures images of Sid Meier's Civilization, MASTER OF ORION and MAGIC: THE GATHERING in this sneak preview of the latest collaboration between SimTex and Micro Prose, MASTER OF MAGIC. Find out the latest on the metamorphosi: from MOO to MOM in this exclusive first look at the upcoming grand strategic game. 22 FASHIONABLE GAMES The Summer Consumer Electronics Show is the place for entertainment software publishers to show off their fall line-ups. In this 12-page report, we examine the dominant trends in entertainment software and provide a genre-by-genre summary of upcoming games. BING RUBBE ADVENTURE / ROLE-PLAYING 62 Starship bloopersstrange spacefaring in INCA II COMPUTER 41 SCORPIA'S STING During the doldrums of summer, CGW's resident prophetess was ensorcelled by something old (The 7th Guest) and something new (Hexx: Heresy of the Wizard). 46 RETURN TO RINGWORLD Charles Ardai tells readers that the RETURN TO RINGWORLD is not as painful as the original voyage. 62 INCA I When the future meets the past, Charles Ardai is there to report on a new Inca-nation for Sierra's latest French import. SEPTEMBER 1994 ACTION Robobabes model fall gameware at Summer CES 66 NEW MISSIONS FOR SPEAR OF DESTINY Some products never die-they just generate add-on disks. Paul Hyman takes readers on a RETURN TO DANGER and into the ULTIMATE CHALLENGE. SIMULATIONS 77 BOGEY'S BAR & GRILL Tom Basham reflects on the tendency for some gamers to judge simulations before they've mastered the learning curve. 80 PREVIEW! FLIGHT UNLIMITED What would happen if a design team decided to model the physics of the atmosphere in addition to the physics of the airplane. Johnny L. Wilson suggests that you would get a more realistic flight model. What would happen if a flight sim offered the most photo-realistic terrain possible? Looking Glass Technologies hopes that you'll get the most satisfying simulation experience ever. 84 DRIVING FORCE Gordon Goble reports that the Thrustmaster driving controls are a turn for the better. 86 STRATEGY! 1942: THE PACIFIC AIR WAR Michael Rymaszewski Zeroes in on some useful tactics for winning WWII dogfights in the MicroProse air combat simulation. "


"STRATEGY WAR GAMES Conjuring conquest in MASTER OF MAGIC 95 BROADSIDES & GRIPESHOT Give us e-mail or give us depth! Alan Emrich pleads with wargame publishers to provide PBEM options for all phased movement games. 97 PREVIEW! PANZER GENERAL Strategic Simulations' new wargame should add a new element of satisfaction for gamers looking for an interesting and flexible campaign game. Alan Emrich tells readers that this one has the right amount of glitz and go. 102 THEME PARK Electronic Arts and Bullfrog team up again to present a different style of computer game. Join Randall Black on a strategic merry-go-round as he grabs for the ring of critical truth. 104 SERE CITY This innovative strategy game will have you chuckling as you information sert\" through a medieval economy. Robert L. Hayes acts as burghermeister in offering the key to the system for CGW readers. 110 D-DAY Jeff James takes readers back 50 years in his description of Impressions' new D-Day game. 114 REMEMBER THE ALAMO! Alan Emrich takes gamers to a \"whole 'nother country\" in examining this surprising new game. 118 HARPOON II Tim Carter tells readers that the sequel to the classic game is more than HARPOON, Too. Here's the latest intelligence on the Three-Sixty release. 124 TANKS: WARGAME CONSTRUCTION SET II Norm Koger ambushes wargamers with an intriguing and flexible sequel to Roger Damon's original Wargame Construction Set. CGW's Josh Bruce takes on the role of war correspondent. 128 TIGERS ON THE PROWL Terry Coleman provides valuable reconnaissance on the latest Scott Hamilton creation. The graphics may be as dingy as desert camouflage, but the game play is ready for a Veteran's Day parade. 132 STRATEGY! X-COM Jeff James offers an alternative Project Blue Book for computer gamers who not only believe that there are aliens on their monitor screens, but need help in fighting them. 140 STRATEGY! KINGMAKER Readers of both the Lancaster and York persuasions should wake up and smell the roses in this \"Tudorial\" from M. Evan Brooks. Pushing the Panzers around in PANZER GENERAL DEPARTMENTS 6 EDITORIAL Revisionist History 8 INTERFACE Letters From The Gaming Elite 12 READ.ME What's The Buzz 154 HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL Game Technology 160 AD INDEX Where To Find The Games 80 FLIGHT UNLIMITED reaches new heights of realism 166 UNDER THE HOOD Hardware Tips 168 NOW PLAYING What's Actually On The Shelves 173 HALL OF FAME Best Games Of All-Time 174 SCORE Readers Rate The Top Games 176 PATCHES Game Files To Kill Bugs Dead 178 THE RUMOR BAG Vinum Temeculum "


"Rants & Raves Revisionist Computer Games by Johnny L. Wilson One of my favorite scenes in Star Trek VI: to be accused of being pro-Nazi (though, I behavior which is and was abominable. The Undiscovered Country was the one suppose every wargamer has been accused This reminds me of the film at Mount where the Klingon emissary observes that of that at one time or another) and, since Vernon where the narration explains that one cannot fully appreciate Shakespeare the historical orders of battle hadn't been Washington abhorred slavery, so he left unless the lines are spoken in the original tampered with, I thought I could live with wording in his will so that, upon his and Klingon.\" Most of us laughed warmly be that compromise. Martha's deaths, his slaves would be freed. cause it was not only strange to think of Second, we began reading some on-line To me, that's tantamount to saying, \"I'll hearing Shakespeare in anything but Elizdebate about Origin's PACIFIC STRIKE. correct this immoral practice as soon as it abethan English, but it was also an unexMany gamers seemed to be offended by doesn't cost me anything anymore!\" pected twist on the revisionist history often the racial slurs with regard to the JapanIt is obvious that George didn't find it propagated by Ensign Chekhov in the ese. We asked Origin about the language economically viable to be moral in that cirtelevision show. Yet, it underscores the and were told that, on both sides, the epicumstance. So, if slavery was such an imtruth that you don't have to stray too far thets were authentic to the time period portant facet of the colonial economy that from the facts before the entire issue is and the theater of war. The design team even the \"father of our country\" couldn't muddled. felt that anything less would be untrue to figure out how to build a successful busiThat's what worries me about the curthe period being simulated. Frankly, we ness without it, how do we expect to unrent crop of computer games. One reason had to agree with and even applaud the derstand the period in which he lived I like computer games is that they are ofdesign team's choice. without having the same simulated tools at ten an incentive to learn more about histoThird, we heard that MicroProse was our disposal? Maybe we would have some ry. Unfortunately, we have entered a removing the entire Waffen SS from their belated appreciation for those early slaves realm of revisionist history. Though it upcoming Across THE RHINE game. Now, if we didn't try to ignore the fact of their started on a pretty small scale, it has besuddenly, the historical orders of battle are existence. gun to escalate. being corrupted due to revisionist think Of course, we know what the answer is First, simulation publishers were removing. Of course, we all know why they did going to be. The game designers will say ing Nazi symbology from their digitized it. The historical record is clear on the that they \"only put in the cool parts\" of German war machines in order to allow number of atrocities perpetrated by the history. We hear that. Yet, while there is export to Germany. Germany currently SS. Yet, the fact is that there are villains in nothing wrong with emphasizing the most outlaws Nazi symbology as part of their atreal life, and you can't make everything entertaining aspects of a historical situatempt to put the atrocities of World War II better or even learn the lessons of history tion, there is a danger in misrepresenting behind them. Unfortunately, hiding the if you are simply going to erase the \"bad that historical situation. Maybe it doesn't unpleasant past does not usually exorcise guys\" in order to create a \"feel good\" simadd credibility to the revisionist argument its demons, and Germany is currently faculation. that Auschwitz never happened when we ing a significant neo-Nazi problem even But that's not all. Two upcoming games remove the Wallen ss from a computer without the legal presence of the swastika. on the colonial era will excise slavery from game, but what happens when someone My concern has always been that when the reality they are simulating: SID MEIER's removes Auschwitz from a map? What you hide the horror under the table in one COLONIZATION from MicroProse and Imhappens when it is removed from the hisgeneration, the next generation may find pressions' HIGH SEAS TRADER (working titory books? itself fascinated by the distorted view of tle). Both design teams find the idea of Removing the horrors of history from the horror which they have inherited. slavery, much less the institution of slavcomputer games may not be a grand conYet, symbology seemed such a simple ery, to be repugnant, and both teams respiracy to whitewash history, but it may thing. I said nothing because I didn't want sist the idea of \"rewarding the gamer for well be a dangerous first step. 6 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"SEPTEMBER 1994, NUMBER 122 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Take the Challenge Publisher Associate Publisher Editor-in-Chief Editor On-Line Editor Managing Editor Technical Editor Assistant Editor Art Director Graphic Artist Production Assistant M.I.S. Manager Advertising Manager Advertising Sales Coordinator Account Representative Contributing Editors Russell Sipe Jonathan Lane Johnny Wilson Chris Lombardi Alan Emrich Ken Brown Mike Weksler Terry Coleman Susan Zurawik Jack Rodrigues Christine Kloss Gene Allen Lee J. Uniacke Kathy Garcia Marci Yamaguchi Scorpia (Adventure Games), M. Evan Brooks (Wargames) Contents are copyrighted by Zifl-Davis Publishing Co., 1994. Subscription Rate: The subscription rate is $27.94 for a one year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $11.00 for postage. Airmail subscriptions are $78.00 per year. Canadian GST registration number is R123669673. Payment must be in U.S. dollars made by check or money order drawn upon a U.S. bank. Visa, MasterCard, AMEX accepted. Subscription Services: For subscription service questions, address changes or ordering information, call toll free (800) 827-1450 within the U.S. and Canada. All other countries call (303) 447-9330 or fax to (303) 443-5080 (international subscribers only) or write to Computer Gaming World: P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167. Back Issues: For back issues (subject to availability). $6.00 per issue ($8.00 outside the U.S.), send check, money order or credit card information to Back Issues Dept., Zill Davis Publishing Co., P.O. Box 53131, Boulder, CO 80322-3131. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe (76703,622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B Genie: CGW Internet: 76703,622@compuserve.com Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 289-3444 For advertising information only, call: Lee J. Uniacke, (714) 283-3000 x41 U BOTREBE TANAMAN DATE SUBORDIR 2600 marina 3329012A12R mm ZIFF-DAVIS PUBLISHING COMPANY Chairman: Eric Hippeau Consumer Media Group President: J. Scott Briggs Executive Vice President: Mike Edelhart Vice President: J. Thomas Cottingham Vice President, Editor-in-Chief Computer Life: John Dickinson Vice President, Marketing: Ruth P. Stevens Director of Electronic Publishing: Sherry Huss Business Manager: D. Ian McKinnon President, Business Media Group: Ronni Sonnenberg: President, Computer Intelligence/InfoCorp: Bob Brown; President, Information Access Company: Robert Howells: President, International Media Group: J.B. Holston III; President, ZD Expos: Bill Lohse; President, Zifl-Davis Interactive: Michael Kolowich; President, Zif Technology Group: Ken Jeffers; Senior Vice President. Circulation: Baird Davis, Senior Vice President: Rachel Greenfield: Vice President, Assistant to the Chairman: Tom McGrade; Vice President, Circulation Services: James F. Ramaley: Vice President, Controller: Howard Sckolnik; Vice President, Creative Services: Herbert Stern: Vice President, General Manager: Bruce W. Bourne: Vice President, Human Resources: Rayna Brown; Vice President, Procluction: Roger Herrmann, Vice President, Research: Rolf M. Wulfsberg: Vice President, Strategic Planning: Robert Ziff, Vice President, Technology: Bill ne: Chief Information Officer: Wellington Y. Chiu: Internal Marketing Consultant: Paul H. Chook; Editorial Director: Lewis D'Vorkin; Executive Director, Information Systems: Owen Weekley: Executive Director. Marketing Services: Jim Manning: Production Director: Walter). Terlecki: Director of Licensing: Jean Lamensdorf Director of Public Relations: Gregory Jarboe ZIFF COMMUNICATIONS COMPANY Chairman and CEO: Eric Hippeau Senior Vice President & Chief Financial Olicer: Bruce R. Barnes Senior Vice President: Steven C. Feinman Vice President, General Counsel and Secretary: J. Malcolm Morris Vice President, Business Manager: IL. Thompson Vice President, Controller and Treasurer: Timothy J. Mitchell Chairman Emeritus: William B.Ziff, Jr. Circle Reader Service!#77 "


"Interface LETTERS FROMC GW READERS DESIGNING torial recommendation on the well understand the logic expressed and I read it cover to cover. I VENOM game. In conclusion, I think therein. However, many readers thoroughly enjoyed not just the addition of ratings was a asked for the ratings and many the well-thought reviews, but As expected, our new redesign big mistake to add to your alhave told us that they find them use the profiles of programmers, has stirred up strong responsready magnificent adult gamful. We certainly don't think that as well. I don't know what your es on both the pro and con ing magazine. the ratings tell the whole story. They old format was, but I like the sides of the coin. Here are William Mannering are simply a quick reference for the look of the magazine a great some of the first responses. Rio Linda, CA overall impression from the editorial deal. I enjoyed reading about staff, taking into consideration the games I would ordinarily pass As usual, the middle of the I've read some of the new isreviewer's recommendation. We cerover, and may even buy a few. month rolls around and I race sue. The magazine looks great, tainly encourage readers to read the Timothy J. Sayles to my mailbox every day to see and it's still the same editorial reviews in full to get the full picture. Mundelein, IL if the postman has delivered content we know and love. Es Some have suggested that our my copy of CGW. Imagine my pecially Scorpia! I'm sure Oriredesign is a sign that CGW is I love the new look. I especially surprise when I opened up the gin isn't too happy about that changing its focus. This is simply like the new rating system, current issue (July, '94). On one! And there was no rebuttal not true. We are using the same particularly for games I may the surface, the changes from Johnny this time, either. writers, the same editors, and have not otherwise consider-but if looked great. I like the new The mini-reviews don't the same commitment to serving it gets a good rating, I give it a colors and breakdown-a topbother me much, and, if they the mature gamer with distinctive, second look. notch job. However, I then bebring in a few more readers, hard-hitting coverage of computer Chris Morse gan reading your \"Rants & great. I just hope that editorial guming. If those readers who've Mukwonago, WI Raves» column. Before I even doesn't mean there will be had a negative initial reaction to finished the two and a half some \"dumbing down\" in the the redesign would look beyond the The new format works! columns of smoke blowing, I future. I like an intelligent superficial changes and look at the S. Ashby knew you were going to begin publication that covers all of content, we believe they would find Colorado Springs, CO posting ratings on the game PC gaming with the respect it this to be true. reviews (gag). deserves. Remember your core Here are some other opinions: WRITE THINKING I really don't know where to audience, CGW. There are First, thanks for your excellent begin. First off, I think it is a enough SEGA/Nintendo/etc. This was my first issue of CGW publication. Contrary to your slap in the face to your reviewbooks out there. ers. They work hard and deJim Bush The 5th Wave By Rich Tennant serve to have their entire GEnie Subscriber column read. I regularly read every reviewer's column, even Some of the worries ex15th Wave Game Tip: To increase CD-ROM access speed, the ones on games I have no pressed here and on-line punch the Enter Key over and over and over as real interest in. I appreciate about \"dumbing down the rapidly as possible. The computer will sense your their writing skills and who editorial content remind us impatience and move your data along more quickly knows, they may convince me of the old programming than if UOU just sat and waited. Hint: This also works into trying out the game they joke, \"Real programmers on elevator buttons and crosswalk Signals. review. Every \"kid\" magazine don't comment their code. Il CHPLATTENNANT dealing with game reviews on was hard to program, it the planet uses ratings. All you should be hard to underhave to do is read their reviews stand.\" By making the and you'll see why. They are magazine easier to naviusually cheap gloss-overs of gate, we haven't made it the game. You state that it will any less useful. Our two be easier for some readers to and a half columns of alsee at a glance whether a game leged smoke were actually a is worth it or not. I have been sincere attempt to show why reading CGW for almost two our philosophy has shifted. years. If I want to get a quick Dr. Wilson's own misgivlook at a game, I read the lastings about adding a ratings one or two paragraphs of the system have been adequately review, which almost always summarized in these letters contains a conclusion and edifrom our readers, and we 8 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"OBIER BOTOSANI Side view North 3 Realm Summer AD 1281 A message from The Baron Welcome It is a shame we meet as foes. I trust we both hold to our pows of chivalry. Fields This summer Medieval England 1268 A.D. 10 Start of Sunner, Harvested Sown Eaten Fertility excelloni Stolen Men needed in AWWALL Destroyed Labour 95 Farm 191 119 Bought Herd 1387-1185 End of Summer 485 Sowing vimes Loss of -39 Ubu6 Sold in this time of castles and conquests the throne sits empty. Serfs are restless; rebellion is in the air. The Lords of the Realm invite you to join their ranks: Build your castles. Marshal your resources. Test your troops in siege and battle. Behold! Your lands grow and your serfs prosper. Your armies swell and your castles dot the hilltops. On bended knee, your knights swear eternal fealty. Go for the Crown. Impressions Impressions Software, Inc. 222 Third Street, Suite 0234, Cambridge MA 02142 Circle Reader Service #78 "


"July editorial's implication, alplayer when readers may arwant to convey sexual vampires, better than she did in her rethough I'm one of those newrive at a text section after travyou describe it as being like Rice. view of ULTIMA VIII. comers (having only played eling different paths would tax You want to convey modern horAhmed Sahet computer games and read any author, no matter how ror, you call it King-like or BarkNew York, NY CGW for three years), I devourable. Unfortunately, I get the erish. The media shorthand the magazine from cover to sense that often when skilled doesn't make it so. CALLINGA cover monthly. I appreciate writers are involved, they are Unfortunately, simply adding SPADA SPAD your unwavering commitment brought in later in the process professional writers who are used the sneak preview of WINGS OF to objectively and critically covto polish a nearly completed to working in a linear medium GLORY had some inexcusable ering the field, and especially product. doesn't make for the automatic upfactual mistakes: your incessantly prodding the Yet, companies need to realgrade in pacing and atmosphere 1) The gyroscopic effect of a industry to reach for quality in ize that hiring skilled writers to which you allude, either. Prorotary engine is due to the entheir game designs. will make more money, not justjects which have used professional tire crankcase and cylinders roThis prodding has included please the English teachers. Inwriters have not exactly had stertating around the crankshaft, recurring jabs at those who volving writing professionals to ling success. Douglas Adams folnot to the firing sequence. emphasize technology over aid designers from the beginlowed up the best-selling 2) You did not hold the stick gameplay. I feel a related ning will ratchet quality up anHITCHHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE all the way back to fly a Camel. problem has often been overother notch, as story boards GALAXY by talking Infocom into Actually, the plane was tail looked: the underutilization of move past art and branched publishing the ill-fated BUREAUheavy and in level flight, it regood writing to enhance gametree plotting to be influenced CRACY, even though they wanted to quired forward pressure. In play. As an example, I'll cite by composition and flow. As publish RESTAURANT AT THE END turns, it needed left rudder to the author of Victorian horror, this quality improves, games OF THE UNIVERSE. Adams worked counter the nose up (left) and H. P. Lovecraft. Lately, with get more entertainment bang with at least, four designers on the nose down (right) engine products like ALONE IN THE for the same technical buck: ill-fated program. Science fiction torque effects. DARK and THE 7TH GUEST on better rhythm for jokes' punchauthor Harry Harrison spent 3) The Sopwith Pup did not the scene, Lovecralt's name lines, better maintenance of more than a year writing an have poor performance, nor bas cropped up in reviews. He mood and atmosphere, and adaptation of STAR SMASHERS OF was it anemic. It was very nimdeserves far better than service profoundly better suspension THE GALAXY RANGERS and even ble and its light wing loading as an icon for scary games in of disbelief. Better games programming the graphic look for gave it superiority over Albaold houses. Without graphics means more fun, means better a computer game, only to have the trosses at high altitudes. R.F.C. and with no sound card, Lovesales. As none other than Sid company fold because of its lack of pilots named it as the most decraft used nothing more than a Meier said, \"The best experisuccess with other big name scilightful WWI flying machine. writer's craftsmanship to create ence is when the games leave ence fiction authors. Larry 4) The Spad S.XIII was not a worlds of pure terror in the the screen and enter the playNiven's RINGWORLD did not use bomber. It was a fast, tough imaginations of his readers. er's imagination.\" Writers like Niven's expertise sufficiently to fighter. Careful attention to nuances H. P. Lovecraft have ably satisfy his fans, and Harlan El5) The S.E.5A was hardly like word choice, meter and demonstrated that language, lison's I HAVE NO MOUTH AND I anemic and its top wing rhythm, and pacing is just as not technology, is the most reliMUST SCREAM has taken considmounted gun was not its sole powerful today, but the creable way to \"interface\" the erably longer to reach the market virtue (nor was it used for balators of computer games often imagination. His example than expected. So, adding even the loon busting). It was one of the fail to use this power. While could have great impact on the best professional authors is not a best fighters of the war, over some authors of games are industry. guaranteed formula to ratchet up 5,000 being made (compared clearly also wonderful authors David Morris success. to only 320 Fokker DR.Is), and of words, not all gifted designSandusky, OH Nonetheless, we would definitewas favored by the top British ers are so doubly blessed. With ly like to see continued improveaces Mick Mannock (73 kills) these notable exceptions, deWe would have been remiss to ment in story, characterization, and Billy Bishop (72 kills). signers now seem to be gamers have avoided mentioning H. P. and atmosphere. We definitely J. \"Snake Eyes\" Hamilton and programmers first, and Lovecraft in connection with think the addition of professional, San Francisco, CA (other than crafters of the notALONE IN THE DARK. The techif not famous, authors al an early yet-dead text adventure) writnology was developed while the point in the process would improve I guess this means you won't be ers a distant second. Even if we French developer, Infogrammes, the chances of attaining this imbuying our upcoming book, All I overlook the embarrassing was working on a CTHULHU liprovement, Needed To Know About WWI Air grade school products, poor censed product (eventually SHADCombat I Learned From Snoopy word selection and emphasis OW OF THE COMET). So, it was LONG LIVE And The Red Baron. Seriously, unnecessarily dilute the punch very much inspired by LovecraftTHE STING one of the virtues of the Interface of many adventure game ian lore. THE 7TH GUEST referMy compliments to Scorpia for column is that it gives our readers screens. Additionally, the ences are a typical example of the seeing through all the glitz and a chance to correct occasional erbranching chain nature of media trying to telegraph almoshype and telling it like it is. Berors. We sincerely hope you won't modern games increase the phere in a few words. You want ing an ULTIMA fan since I have to write again when the actuwriting challenge severalfold. to convey horror in a bygone era, came out for the Apple II, I al review comes out on WINGS OF Maintaining pacing for each you label il \"Lovecraftian.\" You couldn't have said anything GLORY. 10 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"Slow moving, \"choppy\" graphics cost lives. NEW LOWER PRICING & 10 Free CD-ROMs with each MACH V! \"if you want to go all out for games, the Falcon is the best bet for your money.\" -Computer Gaming World If this guy owned a MACH V, he'd still be here. It's a cruel fact of computer gaming: better graphics demand more computer power. Smoother animation requires a higher frame-rate. Your eyes can see 30 frames every second. If your computer is doing anything less, your aircraft won't roll smoothly, your axe will miss the dragon right in front of you, and your shotgun won't put a dent in the demons. And if you think today's games are demanding, just wait until you see tomorrow's! The Falcon MACH V and MACH Vp are not your average computers. They were specifically designed with the needs of gamers in mind: extreme frame-rates, brutal amounts of CPU power, unreal hard disk transfer rates, and all of the multimedia and gaming extras that you'd normally have to add yourself. Sure, they're great for spreadsheets, word processing, and general business -any computer can do that. When you're ready for something more, you're ready for a MACH V. The MACH V $1,995 45 VGA frames per second! Featuring an Intel 486 DX/2-66T CPU, 4 megabytes of RAM, and a 255 megabyte hard disk The MACH Vp Pentium $2,995 59 VGA frames per second! Featuring an Intel 66 MHz PENTIUM CPU, 8 megabytes of RAM, and a 425 megabyte hard disk Optional 15\" monitor shown Each MACH V system comes standard with our VESA Local Bus graphics and hard disk controllers, 1.2 & 1.4 megabyte floppy drives, mini-tower case w/ 250 wall power supply, 101 key keyboard, 250ms double-speed CD-ROM, Creative Labs SoundBlaster PROM, Labtec multimedia speakers, CH Products FLIGHTSTICK PROTM and dual high-speed joystick ports, licensed Microsoft DOS 6.2x and Windows, 3 button mouse, and CTX 14\" non-interlaced fullscreen SVGA monitor. Many upgrades are available, please call for pricing and availability. THE FALCON MACH V: THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE FALCON NORTHWEST To Order Call: 1-800-258-6778 See us at Fall COMDEX! Booth #M7658 COMPUTER SYSTEMS 263 South Bayshore Dr. Coos Bay, OR 97420 Ph: (503) 269-0775 Fax:(503) 267-2575 VISA & MasterCard Accepted Financing Available On Approved Credit. Circle Reader Service #141 "


"READ.ME THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE GAMING WORLD Wing Commander $3 Million High Profile Sequel Spawns Big Budget WING COMMANDER III is rehis approximately good guys. Finally, Ginger ported to be nearing the $3 three weeks of filmLynn Allen, the seductress of million mark. Informed ing. Bernard's agent many an adult film, was only sources indicate that Origin reputedly figured that paid $10,000 for one of her projected sales estimates at cirthree weeks of filming first \"legitimate\" film credits. ca 80,000 floppy disk, 200,000 was roughly equivaAdd to these costs those asCD-ROM and 60,000 3DO lent to three episodes sociated with manufacturing versions of the game in order where Bernard plays the Kilrathi puppets, the for it to break even. If industry Mr. Bracken on Hernearly $15,000 spent to purSTAR LORE CGW Publisher Russell Sipe discusses the man's Head. Bracken observers believed that comchase and process 16 millimeart of interactive film production with WING COMMANDER puter games were a hit-driven makes $20,000 per ter film (only to discover that Ill protagonist, Mark Hamill. industry before, setting such episode. videotape served their digitizan aggressive budget virtually Other salaries are ing needs better) and extenguarantees that the computer received $153,000 up front and not as spectacular. Malcolm sive programming resources game business has entered a an escalator clause for 1.75% of MacDowell's $50,000 for playused by the project. These new era of product planning, the net from CD-ROM sales ing the admiral pales beside the and other expenses pushed financing and marketing. past the 175,000 mark. In other $100,000 sought by Charlton the budget to the $2.8 million One reason for the expensive words, Hamill's contract calls Heston's agent to have \"Moses\" where it currently stands. If, budget was reputed to be the for royalties even before Origin play the same role. Indeed, as has happened with other extra expenses incurred in recoups their initial investment. Tim Curry is alleged to have WING COMMANDER titles, the signing a cast full of Hollywood Jason Bernard is reputed to made nearly $40,000 for doing project slips, the budget could professionals. Sources close to have made $60,000 up front the voice-over for Hobbes, the even eclipse the $3 million CGW indicate that Mark Hamill with no royalty agreement for Kilrathi pilot who flies for the mark. -J. Wilson Old Games Shine Like New Origins Highlights The Convergence Of Board and Computer Gaming At the recent Origins Game of the board version are easily ZOBERRANZAN, the Convention in San Jose, the handled by the computer, with game developed by world of gaming showed that it pull-down menus and a floating DreamForge about was moving beyond its board toolbar. A 3-D terrain model in the Dark Elf city dewargame roots to embrace com256 color VGA) with a variety of scribed in the bestputer games in a multitude of isometric views showcases rows selling novel, The ways. The trend of paper games of animated spearmen. WarLegacy. On the 3DO, COULD BE GREAT GMT'S THE GREAT BATTLES OF ALEXANDER \"going digital\" was a central gamers should appreciate the they showed SLAYER, takes crash and bash to a new level of sophistication. theme at the show. GMT's Gene realistic game system, which a first-person hack Billingsley, who entered the stresses unit cohesion and comes and slasher (a la Doom) where lease Third Reich for the boardgame industry from a with a strategic campaign game gamers can play as one of the IBM, the mining of computer computer background, is work designed for those who think basic AD&D character classes. gold from the rich lode of ing with programmer Dan MasAlexander was lucky at Arbela. With rumors of Mayfair's strategy boardgames will conterson (GEnie's HUNDRED YEARS' SSI used Origins to unveil EMPIRE BUILDER being retinue to increase. WAR) on THE GREAT BATILES OF their last AD&D titles. They leased by QQP and Avalon T. Coleman ALEXANDER. The complex rules showed scenes from MENHill finally preparing to re12 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"Readers' PLAYING LATELY? Murder On The Modem Express Simutronics TOP O Here are the titles that gamers are spending the most \"quality time with. Let us know which game you've been playing lately, by writing the name of your current addiction in the \"Playing Lately?\" section of the CGW Top 100 poll card. Results for CGW #120, July 1994 Doom (id Software) Collaborates With 2. 3. 4. 5. 6 . 7. Mysterious Press For On-Line Gaming Mystery fans will soon be able to collaborate with Watsons around the world in solving murder stories on-line across different networks. TimeWarner Electronic Publishing and Simutronics (CYBERSTRIKE) are developing MODUS OPERANDI, a text-based mystery set on an island resort riddled with murder and mayhem. Using the Interactive Fiction Engine from GEMSTONE III, players will interact with the environment, a team of writers and with each other in \"a kind of never-ending Columbo episode on-line,\" says Andrew Lerner, Director of Time Warner Electronic PubMaster of Orion (MicroProse) X-COM: UFO Defense (MicroProse) The Elder Scrolls: Arena (Bethesda) X-Wing (LucasArts) SimCity 2000 (Maxis) Harpoon 2 (Three-Sixty) Privateer/Righteous Fire (Origin Systems) 1942: The Pacific Air War (MicroProse) Ultima 8: Pagan (Origin) 10. Notable Quotes X-COM is an excelwith Raymond Feist Wit, wisdom and caustic quips lent all around game. I and release a follow-up! have not been able to from gaming's harshest critics T. Verpoorten, Plover, WI go back to MOO. Now this is high praise. I don't get what the Nameless Space Grunt, X-COM Base, U.S.A. big deal about Doom is. The graphics are great, but it is too monotonous. All you do is X-COM! X-COM! X-COM! It's taken over run around blowing away bad guys that are as my life! (well, what there was of one...) dumb as mud. David Goolsby, Sacramento, CA Steve Bodnar, Ambridge, PA lishing. BETRAYAL AT KRONDOR is one of the best RPGs released in the last 3 years. Dynamix should realize that a good story is more important than a dungeon crawl. Kiss and make up WARLORDS 2 is a great game! It's so great that I often dream of what it would be like with modem play. Sigh... Rick Perry, Belcamp, MD In MODUS OPERANDI, a player takes on the role of a detective who can choose to be affiliated with police agencies or operate independently like a private eye. Detectives will have unique skills and sleuthing methods, depending on their age, sex, background and experience. Their reputations will develop over time, and inhabitants of the island will react to each other in character. Scripting and storylines for MODUS OPERANDI will be written by authors and editors of Mysterious Press, a Time script special plots for players mately 1,000. Considered the Warner book publishing subeach quarter according to says first game to offer player intersidiary. The team will add new Neil Harris, VP of Simutronics. action across multiple services, areas and new crimes into the Harris says MODUS OPERANDI is the game will enter beta testgame, and will interact with being moved from a maining later this year and is explayers on-line. In addition, frame to Unix to increase the pected to go live early in '95. Major mystery writers will number of players to approxiK. Brown SEPTEMBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 13 "


"READ.ME How To Make War warfare, where a set of targets was a complete database of the was selected and suppressed, armed forces illustrating basic followed by another set of tarconcepts and employments of gets, etc., until the enemy sureach service (e.g. the carrier Air Force Hosts Gaming Conference rendered. Today, air power battle group, the armor divican strike all essential targets sion, etc.). A strike plan preThe largest concentration of Sponsored by the Air Comsimultaneously — overwhelmsentation showed how each military strategists and mand & Staff College (ACSC), ing the enemy and compelling aircraft is employed and apwargame designers outside of the conferees review commera quicker resolution. In World propriate armaments for varithe Pentagon met recently for cially available games to see if War II, it took 900 bombs to ous targets. Perhaps the most the Second Airpower Educathey can be adopted by milistrike a one-mile deep target; unusual project was air warfare tion & Commercial Wargamtary planners. by Vietnam, it took 300 to hit a as symphony. Colonel Warden ing Conference at Maxwell Air Colonel John A. Worden III, target of several hundred feet. has a chapter in his book entiForce Base, Alabama. Like the ACSC Commandant, deToday, a 10 foot target retled «The Orchestration of laser-guided missiles, wargame veloped the concept for the air quires a single bomb. While War\"; a student used quotadesigners zeroed in on the war in the Gulf (1990-1991). fewer aircraft are needed for tions from Beethoven and the conference, including: Jim His book, The Air Campaign: effective strikes, technological makeup of a symphonic work Dunnigan (HUNDRED YEARS Planning for Combat, is the superiority becomes essential. in order to illustrate the analoWAR), Larry Bond (HARPOON), contemporary Command of The Conference offered gy of theater strike planning. Mark Baldwin (EMPIRE/EMPIRE the Air, and in many respects, demonstrations of both civilian The Airpower Conference DELUXE), Charles Moylan Colonel Warden is a contemand military games and simugave both the military and (FIGHTER COMMAND). They porary Billy Mitchell-type adlations. The ACSC requires its civilian worlds the opportuniwere joined by dozens of repvocate of air power. He noted students to prepare multimety to see how a more efficient resentatives from the military that we now have the capability dia presentations rather than use of computer simulations and \"think-tank\"-type comto wage parallel war. This difwritten theses. Among the can be made in the future. mercial institutions. fers from the traditional serial more interesting presentations M.E. Brooks ALLETTI CRURI gentlemen's agreement for production, Mystic Towers. controlling time compression. The villagers are counting on If it turns out we get too much you to use Baron Baldric's abuse, we'll start growing con\"Wolf Magic\" to rid them of trols into the software.\" the evil monsters in the Harpoon Targets GEnie, Butler noted it will be possiLazarine Tower and, you Apogee Towers Over ZiffNet ble to launch a missile strike guessed it, restore peace to and speed up time, eliminatthe valley. The Lazarine staff Would-be fleet commanders as simple as beating AI. ing any possible defense. \"If fires both weapons and tactishould keep scanning their Unless players crank up the people do that to you,\" he cal spells—but you have only sonar screens for multi-player game's time compression, that says, \"our position basically bea few lives to overcome the HARPOON coming soon to GEis. Ariel Butler, software engicomes, 'Why are you playing traps, dark forces and waves nie. Fans of the Larry Bondneer for Kesmai, which is develwith that person?\" of creatures out to throttle designed NATO-USSR navaloping the game for GEnie, Genie's HARPOON is currentyou. Less violent than other war simulation will be able to admits that time compressionly in beta testing and is expectApogee games (rated 'E' for take the helm of a single ves«can be used for nefarious pured to go on-line by the end of Everyone), this game won't sel, group of ships or an entire poses\" in multi-player HARthe year. put you in the doghouse when task force, controlling subPOON. \"We have left (time Also on GEnie, AIR WARRIOR you play it on Labor Day. marines, surface ships, naval compression) alone. We'd has been upgraded with light Mystic Towers is located in liand land-based air power. The rather think of this as a coopersourcing and smoke. Also, the brary 7, Shareware Sizzle, of PC game's fans will be happy ative game. You collect a set of AI has been improved for flak. the \"Computer Gaming Wrld to learn that the on-line ver people you want to play with. And if you're not already a Forum\" on ZiffNet. The file sion will resemble the earlier You're playing with a small cirlate night player, you might name is MYSTIC.ZIP. All you game, but defeating human cle of people, like bridge. Let's become one when you check have to do to have an affair in opponents promises not to be see if you can come up with a out Apogee Software's latest the cyburb is unzip it. 14 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"ESTIMATED RELEASE DATES BASED ON THE LATEST INFORMATION FROM CAME DEVELOPERS NAME OF GAME, COMPANY RELEASE DATE ACES OF THE DEEP DYNAMIX ...10/94 ACROSS THE RHINE MICROPROSE .9/94 ALL-PRO FOOTBALL ACCOLADE ..10/94 ARMORED FIST NOVALOGIC ......9/94 BATTLEDROME DYNAMIX ........1/95 BIOFORGE ORIGIN ............11/94 BRETT HULL HOCKEY ACCOLADE .10/94 CARRIER WING EA............11/94 CELTIC TALES KOEI ............9/94 COLONIZATION MICROPROSE ...10/94 COMMAND & CONQUER VIRGIN ...1/95 CYBERIA INTERPLAY ..........11/94 DAGGERFALL BETHESDA ........1/95 DARK FORCES LUCASARTS .....11/94 DUNGEON MASTER II INTERPLAY 11/94 EARTH SIEGE DYNAMIX ........10/94 FRONT LINES IMPRESSIONS .....9/94 FPS: FOOTBALL '95 DYNAMIX ...11/94 FULL THROTTLE LUCASARTS 12/94 HAMMER OF GODS NEW WORLD .10/94 HARDBALL 4 ACCOLADE .......11/94 HEROES OF M&M NEW WORLD ..10/94 HIGH SEAS TRADER IMPRESSIONS11/94 IRON CROSS NEW WORLD .......9/94 JAGGED ALLIANCE SIR-TECH .....9/94 KING'S QUEST VII SIERRA ......11/94 LEMMINGS 3 PSYGNOSIS .......11/94 LORDS OF MIDNIGHT DOMARK ...9/94 MAGIC CARPET EN/BULLFROG...12/94 MASTER OF MAGIC MICROPROSE 9/94 NOCTROPOLIS EA ......... PHANTASMAGORIA SIERRA......9/94 SIMANT CD INTERPLAY ........11/94 SPACE SIMULATOR MICROSOFT ..9/94 STAR TREK TNG SPECTRUM ......9/94 STONEKEEP INTERPLAY ........11/94 SYSTEM SHOCK ORIGIN .........9/94 WING COMMANDER 3 ORIGIN ...11/94 WINGS OF GLORY ORIGIN .......9/94 WORLD CIRCUIT 2 MICROPROSE ..2/95 ZEPHYR NEW WORLD ......... 10/94 Ultimate Football ven though '94 seems to be Year of the Baseball Short takes on games undergoing beta Sim, football fans still testing and soon to be released. have plenty to cheer about, as MicroProse Litil Divil has completely reven the arcade sequences done their approach in LITIL DIVIL (to be spoin ULTIMATE FOOTken reverently in an Irish BALL, Reacting to criticism that The Pure Wargame accent) look like animated cartheir CC FOOTBALL was graphitoons. Putting this five level accally inferior to other football The folks at QQP are detion/adventure on a CD-ROM sims, MicroProse has convert veloping THE PURE has enabled Ireland's Gremlined the graphics, adapting tech WARGAME, which focuses Graphics to enchant gamers niques used in the hit flight sim on paratroopactions with very fluid and humorous 1942: PACIFIC AIR WAR. The throughout WWII. Relive the animated sequences like: players are much more three confusion of Crete, the tenjumping from ledge to ledge dimensional and are fully texsion of Kaney and the surwhile avoiding bones being tured, with more realistic and prise assault on the thrown at you by nasty skelefluid movements. The statisti\"impregnable\" fortress of tons, negotiating rocks sinking cal approach is similar to that Eben Emael in but a few of in sludge as giant fish try to inof CC FOOTBALL, with each the historical scenarios. If you player individually enjoy solidly designed \"whatrated for speed, il\" scenarios, it's hard to pass blocking, stamina, up Folkestone, a hypothetical and a host of other Operation Sea Lion battle, athletic abilities. modeled on the actual GerThe designers have man plans to invade England corrected the data in 1940. The AI looks good, 2966 errors from the priand the order of battle reor product, and search has an authentic feel, they also signed an especially for a game deagreement with signed to be playable in an vite him for dinner, or having Fantasy Sports Products to evening. Even though the into exterminate poisonous download NFL stats on a weekterface is still being tweaked, arachnids with a can of insectily basis. Injuries, trading and the ease of use combined with cide. Even losing can be enterspot players can now be emdigitized sound, message detaining as the game features phasized much more realistilays, and many other wargamanimated sequences where the cally, making ULTIMATE ing perks, should make this wicked Entity drags the proFOOTBALL a serious challenger one of the most anticipated tagonist demon into a diabolito the dominance of Dynamix wargames in the pipeline. cal torture chamber. Mutt, the FRONT PAGE SPORTS FOOTBALL Projected release: October. title character, may not be very PRO. MicroProse is so powerful as demons go, but confident in the prohe's the one who has been sadgram, they have signed dled with the mission of negoMary Levy to endorse OAKOAREENDED tiating the deadly Labyrinth of the product, and will be Chaos in order to recover the advertising on ESPN'S FB Mystical Pizza of Plenty. (AvailPrime Monday grognard able on CD-I and IBM CDfootball pregame show. A ROM) Projected Release: Projected release: SepSeptember tember October 5025 ML AIR VARIE CAREER Si SEPTEMBER 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 15 "


"You're not the first human to battle the ancient alien legacy But if you lose. LOU'll be the last STATUESE Bridge Audio Geal t elead a ploration team captan TA fure it be able to find les our rewar pitors and certainty our robots Pants methim on Me and is controlling the attacks of the Diota.se must find out who or at least the tre forms and destrogit Loan ENERGY Explore space, build Colonies, invent techinologies and battle àliens to save humanity. Consult your officers for tactical advice nem Fly over detailed planets in search of essential resources and clues. * 10 10 COLONIES LEAVE Construct planetside and orbital colonies lo generate needed resources The silent planets of a distant sun glimmer and swirl before you. You command the interstellar seedship U.N.S. Calypso. Your mission: Explore and colonize as a means of discovering a faster-than-light propulsion device. But beware! The blackness around you is teeming with ancient mysteries. Decide the Fate of Humanity. OSIERRA Available for IBM PC/compatibles. See your local retailer or call 1-800-757-7707 [offer 0843]. and TM Indicato trademarks of, or licensed to, Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. Sierra On-Line, Inc. 1994. ASIERRA Circle Reader Service #98 "


"mit BATTLE BUGS tit WILL FIGHT IN THE PIZZA. WE WILL FIGHT IN THE COOKIES. WE WILL FIGHT IN THE COLESLAW. WE WILL NEVER GIVE UP. WINSTON ANTHILL pimento loaf. While mental toughness and tactical savvy will serve you well, you must first visit the nearest retail store or call 1-800-757-7707 to enlist your battle ready troops. ANTENNAE STRAINING, the warriors raise the flag above the carnage. A stink bug lets a big one rip, and yet another falls victim to the horrors of chemical warfare. Welcome to Battle Bugs.\" With over fifty strategically demanding levels, you command the field of battle. On your IBM or compatible, plan campaigns and give orders SIERRA' to 22 different bugs each with different tactical abilities and armaments -who will storm junk food targets like cheesecake, ploptarts and Will your armada of spiders cross the cola lake in time to save the flag? Will the suicide run of a kamikaze mosquito take out the praying mantis? At what cost? What price victory? 1994 Sierra Online Inc. Hartle Bugs is a trademark of Epya. Circle Reader Service #111 "


"Your MOM Wears Magic Boots! Now That MOO (MASTER OF Orion) Has Gone Forth To Milk The Milky Way For All It Is Worth, SimTex Comes Home To Find That MOM (MASTER OF MAGIC) Has Redecorated The House In A New Milieu by Alan Emrich with Petra Schlunk IKE ALCHEMISTS BLENDING BASIC ELEMENTS IN SEARCH OF A FORMULA FOR GOLD, ARCHMAGE STEVE Barcia and his college of conjurers at Sim Tex Software are laboring over a cauldron of code that they hope will coalesce into the next hit strategy game. Their current project, MASTER OF MAGIC (lovingly known as MOM), is being cast in the spirit of their previous hit strategy game, MASTER OF ORION (MOO). Fans of the award-winning science fiction game are likely to be as enchanted by MOM and her wizards as they were mesmerized by MOO's alien hordes. At its core, MOM is another 4-X strategy Notice The \"Civilarities\" runs much deeper. game (eXplore, eXpand, eXploit and eXter. With one look at the main map display, Since the map designs are similar, the minate) of world conquest in a fantastic land strategy fans will be smacked in the face by style of exploration is very similar. As with filled with monsters and magic. Following MOM's graphic similarity to Sid Meier's CIVILIZATION, the early version of MOM others in this genre, from SSI's SWORD OF CIVILIZATION. Rather than re-invent the has crudely drawn units that blink away ARAGON to SSG's WARLORDS II, wheel (that's CIVILIZATION's thing, madly as they await the player's movement MASTER OF MAGIC is filled with a after all), and with considerable order. When they do move, blackened lot of conceptual promise. How(sh urging from their publisher, Mi\"tiles» overlaying the nearby unexplored ever, innovation is not the driot the driDevelopment croProse, Sim Tex agreed to use a terrain are removed, revealing familiar ving force behind what might look-and-feel already familiar to leland types and special resource squares. make MOM great. Instead, it is the mastergions of CIVILIZATION players. While most Fortunately, MOM also provides several ful synthesis of several proven strategy game of these «Civilarities» are apparent in the new mineral types and mana \"nodes» to elements that gives this game its magic. graphics, the kinship of these two games discover (so many, in fact, the map apHow(SNEAK PREVIEW Game Still lo 18 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"IncroSSE population SHOHIN rate. Che Mainlet of Wintergrccu rectly deleterious cepts in that game have evolved a level Darbariana effect on growth further for MOM. as taxes are inIn particular, MOM's diplomacy enRALDURCES O B RERAS Enchantemente creased!), and a gine is an enhanced version of the excelmagic mirror lent one developed in MOO. Wizards that tells you can form pacts, alliances, trade spells, about your own threaten, cajole, etc., just as they did in Buildings character. MOO. Clawing your way to the top will Finally, the be no casy feat, as the personality-filled city displays will computer players can align against you. make a lot of Whereas MOO featured a vast array of Product players feel right technologies to discover, and each had a at home. New substantial influence on the game (often buildings are shifting production and combat strategies Housins. CHANGE LOK constructed in an instant), MOM offers an even more when enough loextensive list of \"technologies\" in the form HAMLET, SWEET HAMLET Wintergreen looks a lot like a town from CIVILIZATION, cal resources of spells. More importantly, a single unit until you notice that pentagram on the front lawn. have been accuin MOM can be under multiple enchantmulated. Most ments while simultaneously using several pears almost cluttered with them). Also, buildings can be upgraded to higher levdifferent magic items (not to mention the MOM features a second map that must be els, each adding another special ability to units' various inherent special abilities!). conquered-an \"alternate plane\" of a that city (i.e., collecting mana faster for The matrix of possibilities for a single unit darker nature where six races and some the wizard, adding a new unit type that it is mind-boggling! Players may find each new resource types reside. Players move can build). The little population symbols individual spell easy to understand on its between these planes either by casting a along the top of the city screen can be own, but the possibilities presented by spell of planar travel or via the Towers of converted between worker types by clickcombinations of spells and Wizardry found on both maps. ing on them, just as in CIVILIZATION. innate unit special abilities Traversing MOM's map seems a bit MOM, however, features a simplified urwill only be grasped as your easier than it is in CIVILIZATION. Since you ban economic system. For instance, there skill and experience with can usually conjure up a flying creature are only two kinds of people in the cities: MOM increases. fairly quickly, there is no long wait to disworkers and farmers (having a surplus of Another outstanding elecover boats to expand your horizons, food is required to support units on the ment of MOO was its interthough you can build seafaring vessels in map). There are no Einsteins, Tax Collecesting tactical any developed coastal city. Settler units tors or \"Elvi\" representing specialized combat system. can found new cities, although there are workers as there are in CIVILIZATION. Also, plenty of neutral cities to conquer, proplayers cannot place workers in the fields viding an alternative to raising new ones and, thus, optimize the local economy as from scratch. Replacing CIVILIZATION'S they can in CIVILIZATION. Instead, the comcivil engineering settlers are special engiputer does this chore and, further, the rules neer units that not only build roads, they prohibit cities from being built too close toalso destroy city walls. New cities in MOM gether, so there are no overlapping rebegin as worthless outposts, teetering on sources or terrain squares. Finally, there is the brink of extinction for many turns una simplified trading mechanism that allows til they build up to their first full populacities to convert production directly into tion point and grow into a real city that gold instead of establishing trade routes as can be managed by the player. in CIVILIZATION. Again, like CIVILIZATION, MOM offers a battery of advisors to provide you with the Milked from MOO information you'll need to manage your If you're going to empire effectively. These advisors are esgraft various gaming sential to your success, and include a surideas onto your latest veyor (who identifies the various terrain game project, you types on the map), the cartographer (who should only steal presents the strategic overview maps of from the best. Fortuboth planes), the apprentice (who holds nately for SimTex your spell book and keeps track of this Software, vast area of the game for you), the asamong the trologer (who keeps you updated on the best is their other wizards competing with you), the tax previous game, collector (who allows you to adjust your MOO. Some of tax rate in increments of 5%-with a dithe finest conSEPTEMBER 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 19 "


"HAITRESS MOM also features a tactical combat dissign your wizard charac Gate Speis Armies Cities tagic Info Planet play, though with a slight change of view. ter at the start of each Up to eight units from each side can fight it game. While several preout in an arena viewed from an overhead, fab wizards are available, 45-degree perspective. Units move and being able to mix the fight individually in their initiative order. right amount and type Plenty of graphic flare has been added to of spell books with spethe battle sequences so that each spell and cial abilities such as each unit's special ability has its own pyalchemy, infernal power, rotechnic counterpart. Players will have sage master and fame Sprites Summoned plenty to ponder as major battles unfold. allows you to impact the type of game you will DOW*4 IOONE PATROL Magic: The Smattering play even before the first Since MAGIC: THE GATHERING, the cult fireball flies. trading card phenomena, is very popular The individual units OTHER-DIMENSIONAL TROOPS Conjuring sprites on your screen takes on with the crew at SimTex, it is only natural in the game give MOM a whole new meaning in MASTER OF MAGIC. that the card game should influence the a lot of her personality, design of MOM. The five colors of magic, too. Your minions gain experience over to cast spells to influence its outcome, eiblack/death, white/life, red/chaos, time, or more quickly if they survive batther by raising new units or helping/hindergreen/nature and blue/sorcery, form the tles. Furthermore, they can be enchanted ing those already on the battlefield. cornerstone of the game's fantasy environand influenced by heroes, and heroes can Conserving mana for protracted campaigns ment. Naturally, both games feature many be further enhanced by any magic items is an important strategic consideration. of the same generic spells (lightning bolts, they possess. You can even create custom Gano Spells Armies Citic Magic Info | Plane 1 artifacts for your heroes! On That Magic Touch top of that, cach race's units Like CIVILIZATION and MOO, MOM will have their own unique abilionly provide solitaire play. Even if the easties (the Dark Elves are realiest multi-human player feature were Bolo Paco killers, the Dwarves make added to the game (play-by-email), it great engineers, and would have to be done by sacrificing the Halflings are unbelievably tactical combat element and making severgood farmers). al changes to the diplomatic game to account for human-to-human player A Drake's Eye View interaction. Although disappointing (mulof Combat ti-player play is the most requested enDONE FORTROL While MOM uses a fairly hancement for both CIVILIZATION and standard integration of fantaMO0, according to MicroProse), the DIPLOMATIC ALCHEMY Your negotiating skills are sorely tested as sy gimmickry in its combat strength of the solitaire play should more you strive to gain power without offending neighbor magicians. system, it does spice it up with than compensate for the multi-player lack. several new flavors. Since only Though still only a vaporous image in eight units can stack together the realm of development, MOM is no ilcreature summons, etc.), although many (and a unit can be anything from a legion lusion. There is nothing here to dispel spells in MOM are quite specific to it of troops to a single hero), putting togeththis simple truth: when MOM is re(some even destroy the map over time!). er \"hit teams\" of elite units is an important leased, it will very likely be a game worth One important similarity, though, is tactic (as it is in WARLORDS II). However, summoning. that some spells in each color of magic are when in doubt, quantity is Common, others are Uncommon, some more important than quality Select Wizard are Rare, and the ultra-powerful are very in most battles. merli 556033 Rare. The ever-changing assortment of what sets MOM apart, spells from which you can choose (spell though, is the ability to cast Ravenn a choices are influenced by the areas of magic in battles. Sure, heroes PRESEN 0 2 Frog magic in which your wizard is specializing) will have magic items that 10 Pin Hortus will so mix the batter from game to game might do this or that, and you that the replay value of MOM may prove may even have a lesser wizard Ariel to be limitless. in the battle pitching in some GBUM Thou support, but it is your overBall MOM'S Apple Pie shadowing presence that can There is more to MOM, however, than turn the tide of any combat. Custom its many similarities to other popular stratEach turn, a certain percentWIZARD WHEEL OF FORTUNE Different mages, from the reptilian egy cames. Many elements, in fact, are age of your mana can be Sss'Ra to the mysterious Lo Pan, make the world tremble at your quite original. The most important of \"saved\" to your \"wand.\" In a command, so choose your wizard carefully. these elements is the ability to custom debattle, this mana can be used BRITAGE Scide 20 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"ACTION GAMES ADVERTISEMENT BARRETT Lagistication \"Codie\" award, given to Apogee's blockbuster hit, Wolfenstein 3-D (developed by id Software). Apogee games have earned over 100 international honors. «More importantly,\" says Miller, \"they're fun to play.\" \"Apogee represents one of the most remarkable, if unheralded success stories in the entertainment software industry.\" Electronic Games Recent and upcoming releases such as Raptor, Wacky Wheels, Hocus Pocus, Rise of the Triad, Mystic Towers and Planet Strike have more than fortified Apogee's position as the leader in PC action entertainment. cu o EEUU R X2 X04 In Wacky Wheels, it's wild kingdom meets formula one racing, with 3D first person graphics and head-to-head modem play! Price $24.95 A scene from Rise of the Triad, an action-packed 3D game coming soon by Apogee. Price $34.95. \"Apogee does not make the best games!» \"hese are the words of Scott \"The way the Apogee Model Miller, President of Apogee works,\" explained Miller, \"would Software, Ltd. \"Our games don't not work for many retail games have Hollywood actors, they don't because they absolutely must be have five minute cinematics, and they fun or no one will buy them. The don't have TV quality, full-motion Apogee Model allows potential video that requires a CD-ROM drive. customers to try our games before Quite simply, those elements don't they fork over their money. When improve the actual gameplay.\" players buy games from retail \"What we do make is superb stores, they don't have this opporaction games,\" said Miller. \"In fact, tunity. Instead, retail games are our slogan is: Apogee means Action! mostly sold by advertisements, Every one of our 20 plus games hype and magazine reviews. We deliver nonstop, undiluted action. at Apogee, on the other hand, It's a market hole left wide open by have pioneered an approach that the big game publishers, most of allows players to sample our whom have the mentality that games first.\" every game needs to be huge in size, with a bulky manual and a complex interface.\" Apogee started it all Apogee is the innovative game developer/publisher that pioneered the shareware approach now known by those in the industry as the \"Apogee Model.\" Apogee's revolutionary marketing approach is to \"Raptor's voracious gameplay eats other release one part of a game as share shooters for lunch!\" Computer Gaming World Price $34.95. ware, and sell the remaining episodes directly to their customers via 1-800-GAME-123 or by mail order. Action games win awards, too! Even though Miller has said his The amazing rise and success of company's games are not the best, Apogee is a two-part story, based on their focused attention on Apogee has racked up more than pure action games and on their their share of awards, including the try-before-you-buy shareware industry's most prestigious award, marketing system. the Software Publisher Association's Circle Reader Service #43 Try Apogee's games for free Try An The huge Software Creations BBS, voted the most popular BBS in North America by readers of Boardwatch Magazine, has developed an alliance with Apogee to bring you all of Apogee's shareware games for free. Anyone with a modem can call Software Creations, sign on as a nonpaying member, and download Apogee's games from file section #1. The BBS numbers to call: 508-365-2359 @ 2400 baud 508-368-7036 @ 9600 14.4kv.32bis 508-368-2032 @ 16.8-21.6kHST/DS 508-365-4035 @ 28.8k v.fast (v.fc) If you're looking for genuine action games with boundless energy and playability, look into Apogee. As their slogan says, \"Apogee means Action!\" A "


"Fashionably Late.. he aisles at the Sum Yet, both types of you usually dont get to mer Consumer Elecshows have one similar try out software before tronics Show are drawback At a fashion you buy it. somewhat like the fashshow, you can see how At Summer CES, ion show runways that particular attire CGW's editorial staff is where leading designlooks on a model, but it literally bombarded ers unveil their fall takes an educated guess with hundreds of Sfashions. Both_types of to consider how it will thetic impression shows are media events look on your loved one sound bytes, marketing where every nuance once you get it home. cliches and interviews and innuendo is anaAt CES, you can see demos. We work hard lyzed and commented some of the graphics, to sort out the value upon. Both types of hear a few sound effrom the fashion show shows are surrounded fects, learn the game aspects of CES and try by enough energy and concepts and watch a to provide you with the excitement to power demo, but you don't information you need their respective indusknow how it will play as Fall approaches. So, tries through the next until months later. Unhere is the CGW stall's few months of laborifortunately, where you take on the technologious effort necessary for can usually try on cloth-cal, design and marthose products to be oning before you have to keting trends for the sale in the Fall. make a buying decision, rest of this year and 22 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"DRESSED TO KILL Both gamer and game sport the latest in graphic fashion. On the left an attendee dons the Astounding 2001 goggle and headphone combination. The 'mech-adonna grapples with supernatural phenomena in Take 2 Interactive's adventure game, BUREAU 13. or Software Stylish? our summary of the where live actors are sets eated via comproducts we expect to juxtaposed with digi-py graphics would see between now and tized sets) were to be pays look like comnext summer's CES. found in abundance ater graphics. So, (UNDER AKILI chey filmed their FLASH ELS Moon from Access, TRAFFIC: CITY OF AN(Digitized Video Sierras PHANTASMAGO GELS game at actual 10Showing the versatility RIA, Mediavision's THEcation settings. of their technology for DALDALUS ENCOUNTER, Interaction, in this FBI handling digitized Ocean's CENTRAL INvs. the terrorists techvideo were numerous TELLIGENCF Trilobyte's nothriller, will primariproducts trying to THE TITH HOUR,ly consist of branching mprove that their graph Philips M edia's responses within conICs were dressed for the BURN:CYCLE and versations, but there Christmas sales season. Merit's PSYCHOTRON), will be some action seChromakey and Ulti. but some games will quences to change the matte techniques (the use video more extenpace. Three different blue screen/green sively. For example, storylines are interwoscreen techniques Tsunami decided that ven within the game. wideo were numero to THE 11TH Wadia's response Chicag's Consumer Electronics Show Models Computer Gaming's Fall Season SEPTEMBER 1994 O COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 23 "


"BLIR SEG MediaVision's THE DAEDALUS ENCOUNTER (with Tia Carrere) and Sierra's PHANTASMAGORIA are two of this year's products that show how the \"New Hollywood\" is learning to use \"Old Hollywood tricks like Chromakey and Ultimatte for their purposes. THE KILL compressed onto CD) and terplay hosted an impressive preview of WILD BLUE YONDER: 50 YEARS OF GS CYBERIA, a new product from Xatrix InterAND JETS (a multimedia encyclopeactive Design. This dark future adventure dia of combat flight, complete with alternates between three-dimensional acinteractive cockpits and historical tors moving through rendered environcombat footage), as well as Maris ments and fast-moving vehicles cruising WARPLANES: MODERN FIGHTING over pre-rendered 3-D terrain. In addition, AIRCRAFT (a multimedia encycloInterplay is using SGI machines to rework pedia which contains more many of the graphics in their long-awaited than an hour of live video plus STONEKEEP game. three mission-oriented flight European products abound with this simulators: an A-10, SU-27 and technology. In addition to Delphine's unC130 Hercules). The Discovery named product being developed for ElecChannel is also planning a multronic Arts (see The Rumor Bag), Ocean is timedia encyclopedia based on hard at work on INFERNO, Time Warner their popular Wings television Interactive is revamping Mirage's RISE OF series. Called WINGS OVER EUTHE ROBOTS, Sales Curve Interactive is ROPE, it features 40 minutes of polishing CYBERWAR (its sequel to LAWNvideo and additional animatMOWER MAN) and Psygnosis is readying ed sequences for the flight NOVASTORM and ECSTATICA. buff. There is even a multimeINFERNO is a space opera handled with dia flight encyclopedia prodlots of cinematic cut scenes, 3-D actors, uct for children that features plenty of action, and a very impressive almost an hour's worth of soundtrack. CYBERWAR uses three CDs film clips. Called DARING TO worth of ray-traced graphics to lead FLY! FROM ICARUS TO THE gamers through multiple levels of cyberRED BARON, the product is space as they try to destroy the weapons published by Arnowitz Stuleft over from the last game. RISE OF THE dios. ROBOTS, as noted in last year's European trade show A new Three-Piece Suits player in the industry. Motion Picture As(3-D Rendering) sociates, is bringing PUMPKINHEAD 2 to the Rendered 3-D characters and computer screen. Though most of the ships will continue to be the game play takes place in an ULTIMA UNrage with many cutting edge DERWORLD-style dungeon, there are a lot of products. Silicon Graphics MPEG film clips from the «B» movie (and machines and powerful modsequel to the cult film). These are not simeling tools like Alias have takply filmed scenes to be watched, however. en their place alongside What makes this product interesting is Autodesk's near-benchmark that the screen has been \"hot spotted.\" So, 3-D Studio and the graphics if you see an object in the film clip that programs from Microsoft's you think you might be able to use in the newly acquired Softimage. game, clicking on the object with the In addition, both Timehand-shaped cursor will place it in your Warner Interactive and inventory for when you enter the pure inAtari Jaguar developers teractive portion once again. It was excitannounced that they would ing to see that someone was creating video be using the GameWare Dyclips where you could do something rather namation (3D graphics), than simply watch cinematic cut scenes. GameWare Paint softTwo strategy games, New World Comware/hardware, and Gameputing's MULTIMEDIA CELEBRITY POKER Ware Composer (2D and Interplay's BRIDGE DELUXE II WITH graphics) from Wavefront OMAR SHARIF, use video to enhance the Studios as a major part of playing experience. The former allows their graphics toolsets for you to play against filmed opponents and SGI machines. The influthe latter provides tutorial film footage. ence of these high-powNeither is just another card game. ered graphics programs Of course, full motion video is also be has touched nearly every ing used in such products as Spectrum company's product line. HoloByte's FALCON GOLD (with ART OF At this year's CES, InTHE THIRD DEMENTIA 3-D rendering techniques in games such as Take 2's Hall: A CYBERPUNK ADVENTURE and Psygnosis ECSTATICA will enable gamers to visit weird and wonderful worlds with new perspective. 24 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"LULL HROBLEM Bombarded with flashy graphics, sound bytes, marketing cliches, and demos, the CGW staff must filter the finest gameware from the merely fashionable. using Alias to revamp UNLIMITED from Looking Glass TechSTAR CONTROL II for nologies are tres chic in this regard. In adthe 3DO platform, dition, the delayed MECHWARRIOR 2: THE and Westwood StuCLANS from Activision and next year's dios is using 3-D StuMETALTECH: BATTLE DROME from Dy. dio to create the namix are both expected to feature mobackgrounds for dem-to-modem support, if not additional KYRANDIA 3. Though modem support. the plot for the latter is still a guarded secret, we were told that Malcolm will return sans magic. In addition, Sierra's PHANTASMAGORIA uses SGI-generated interiors for the sets upon which their digitized actors per NET VICTORY The drama of human competition will form. Software hit the wide, wide world of network gaming later this Toolworks is year as products like New World Computing's ZEPHYR also nearing and Merit Software's FIGHTER WING swing into action. completion on THE DRAGON'S TALE, a 3-D Studio-designed (ECTS) report, is basically a horizontally fantasy role-playing adventure, as scrolling fighting game with some very imwell as U.S.S. TICONDEROGA: DEFENDpressive 3-D robot warriors. NOVASTORM IS ER OF LIBERTY, a simulation of the a fast moving REBEL ASSAULT-style game modern missile cruiser which uses 3with SGI-rendered graphics. ECSTATICA is D modeling to portray both crew similar to ALONE IN THE DARK, but features members and action stations. Finally, more puzzles, better graphics and an ineven though Software Sorcery wasn't teresting concept where the gamer tours ready to show FAST ATTACK BOATS, the subconscious of a comatose young girl they did unveil PHOENIX FIGHTER, and faces the demons of her dreams. their space combat game complete On the U.S. side, Take 2 cordially inwith, you guessed it, 3-D Studio-created vites gamers to the theological locale of ships and weapons. Different views eternal punishment in HELL, a cyberpunk from the cockpit are available, but it wasBoth ZEPHYR and METALTECH: BATTLEgame with Dante-esque imagery where the n't entirely clear from the demo whether DROME are futuristic sporting events based government literally sends malcontents to the game is free-form a la TIE FIGHTER on combat vehicles. The former offers fuan infernal locale full of robotic demons. and WING COMMANDER or more hardturistic tanks in a world where megacorpoLess diabolical but also with robotic overwired like REBEL ASSAULT, SHOCK WAVE rations sponsor talented hovertank pilots. tones, Take 2's BUREAU 13 boasts the pretand CYBERIA. The latter offers a Solaris-style world as in tiest 3-D rendered mechamatrix since the Battle Tech novels, Japanese animation Sigourney battled the alien queen in Business Apparel or the Robotjox movie where 'mech pilots Aliens. The player controls a cast of charac (Network Games) battle it out for big money in a bloodters who must solve puzzles to investigate Many games are dressed to kill for the thirsty version of spectator sports. Activimysterious phenomena and exterminate work environment. Networkable games sion's newest MECHWARRIOR game supernatural entities. are making more appearances than ever features the huge robotic engines of deSpeaking of killing, most gamers are before. New World's ZEPHYR, Merit's struction in a full combat environment, as aware of Merit's HARVESTER, a 3-D interacFIGHTER WING, Spectrum Holobyte's FALdoes the non-modemable/non-network tive slasher flick with some of the goriest CON 4 (working title), Accolade's HARDMETALTECH: EARTHSIEGE which is expectgraphics ever to splatter computer BALL 4, Blizzard Entertainment's ed to ship in the Fall from Dynamix. screens. Meanwhile, Crystal Dynamics is WARCRAFT: ORCS AND HUMANS, and FLIGHT Combat light simulators have worn SEPTEMBER 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 25 "


"TOP10 Sayings Overheard At CES 10. Where's the EA (or Sega) booth? 9. Where's the party? 8. Why do I have to pay for drinks here, when they're free at the CGW party? 7. I think we're undergoing a paradigm shift. 6. We're planning to ship in the Fall, but don't hold me to that. 5. It has to ship by Christmas or we're fried. 4. And it has Silicon Graphics-rendered backgrounds! 3. Who's going to buy Ziff? (Immediately followed by the questioner's pet theories.) 2. What's the hottest thing you've seen? (Once asked only one hour after the show opened.) 1. It's like DOOM, but better! Three Things Not Heard At The Show 3. We know it won't make any money, but we had to do combat and recruit new soldiers. Software Toolworks' METAL MARINES FOR WINDOWS (a cross between BATTLESHIP and SIMCITY) and Accolade's BATTLE ISLE 2200 with its 3-D animated battle sequences will both feature futuristic combat via modem or network. Sports gamers won't be left out of networking, either. HARDBALL. 4 still features the play-by-play of Al Michaels, but now features SVGA graphics in 640x480 with 256 colors and, best of all, modem /network support. Statistics are dynamic throughout the season, and league play features limited trading (there is no real GM utility). Spectators will enjoy the 28 detailed stadiums and the computer-determined highlight reel. RUNNER: THE LEGEND RETURNS. Not only does the game have luscious graphics and some nasty new traps to spring on the AI baddies, it also has an extremely versatile utility for creating custom levels. Indeed, Dynamix is shipping the same toolset they are using to create the levels for the new game with the new game, so gamers should be able to create commercial quality levels from the start. Maxis is trying something completely different with CLICK 'N PLAY. Why are we not surprised? The software toy publisher is now producing a powerful object-oriented construction set that will enable gamers to create all sorts of games pinball games, racing games, platform games and more. It's easy to use compared to earlier products such as Broderbund's ARCADE CONSTRUCTION SET and Electronic Arts early ADVENTURE GAME CONSTRUCTION Ser, and it offers commercial quality graphics, as well. Finally, Viacom presented a multimedia toy/toolkit called NICKELODEON DIRECTOR'S LAB. Although it is not a game, it is an interesting product that brings together a paint program, some audio mixing utilities, a video clip library and a multimedia it! 2. It's like MORTAL KOMBAT, only better! 1. It's got mediocre sound and graphics, but incredible game play. LINDGRENSTRUMIROR \"Power to the Players\" is a subtle motto in this year's fall crop. Action gamers can create their own levels in LODE RUNNER: THE LEGEND RETURN from Dynamix, and wargamers will be able to make custom wargames using Impressions' FRONT LINES. real-time multi-player capability for a long Work Uniforms time. FALCON 4 will not only fly in its pre(Construction Kits) decessor's famous contrails, it will also alFor the gamer who wants to create low networkable campaign games where his/her idea of fashion, construcplayers can enter and leave the campaign tion sets seem to be coming back. at their own convenience. FIGHTER WING In addition to SSI's recently rewill allow up to 16 pilots to participate in a leased TANKS: WARGAME CONmassive networked «furball,\" and up to STRUCTION SET II, a game that three players can compete against the allows players to create their own computer Al in three Iraqi-based missions. scenarios for WWI-WWII arFLIGHT UNLIMITED (see this issue's Sneak mored conflict, there are several Preview) is expected to support up to 64 new games which come with aerobatic pilots in a networked mode. construction sets. Impressions Of course, strategy gamers won't be left Software announced an as yet unclothed in the world of networks. WARuntitled game which enables CRAFT: ORCS AND HUMANS is a real-time wargamers to create their own strategy game based on fantasy warfare. A hex-based wargames. Our early two-player game that works equally well \"impression\" was that it looked over modem or network, the game offers a lot like an AIDE DE CAMP with play mechanics reminiscent of DUNE II. built-in AI. Novalogic is also Since Westwood Studios hasn't indicated, including a battle creation as yet, whether COMMAND AND CONQUER utility in their long-awaited (the sequel to DUNE II) will feature netARMORED FIST game of arworked or modem play for sure, Blizzard's mored combat. unveiling of WARCRAFT is a welcome revelaLong-time computer tion. Gamers build barracks to train solgamers will remember the diers and temples to train shamans. Then, construction set in Broderthey put together their combined arms for bund's original LODE assaults on the dreaded opposing race. RUNNER. Dynamix, through The game even has a dungeon exploration its Jeff Tunnell Productions element where gamers can engage in extra group, is now releasing LODE 1 AB COV TATTACI LEADER   BORBENE ICAVY ANG 26 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"Here Are Four Good Reasons to Try Epic Pinball Today. Space Journey Cyborgirl Pangaea Toy Factory 00000 JOURNES TIEDE Desk Shoot Again Award-winning Epic Pinball offers realistically fluid ball movement, a high-quality sound track and ultra-smooth scrolling graphics. It's all here: ramps, sink holes, kickbacks, drop targets, multiple-ball play, jackpots, skill shots and scoring rules just like real pinball tables. The four tables shown above make up Pinball Pack #3. Individual packs are $29, two packs are $49, all three packs are $59 or get the CD-ROM with all three packs plus an exclusive new table for only $64. Epic Pinball combine great pinball action with great gaming value. \"Epic Pinball rings up a high score\" Computer Gaming World \"Up there with the best of the commercial releases\", rated 91% PC Format \"Perfected to the peak of playability\", rated 5/5 PC Power Here's How To Try It. SHAREWARE On CompuServe, GO EPIC. You can download an Epic shareware game virtually free every month and visit the TRY IT TODAY! Epic forum for hints, tips, technical support and to download our other shareware games. From GO EPIC you can also buy and download Epic games, like Epic Pinball, instantly. For a free CompuServe sign-up kit, call (800) 5243388 and ask for representative #536. EXEC-PC, the world's largest BBS, let's you download Epic shareware games on your very first call. Call (414) 789-4360 (V.32bis). Or, check your local BBS. No modem? Call our toll-free line with your VISA or MasterCard ready and for $5 we'll send you the shareware version. You may also be able find the shareware version at your favorite software retailer. Super Android, the upgraded shareware version, now with stereo surround sound! EPIC TO ORDER CALL EPIC MEGAGAMES 1-800-972-7434 VISA, MasterCard and Checks accepted. MD residents please add 5% sales tax. Please add $4 shipping and handling to above prices. Each order includes a bonus shareware game. In the U.K. or Europe please call Epic MegaGames UK at 0767 260903. Epic MegaGames 20 Courthouse Square, Rockville MD, 20850. Phone (301) 983-9771 . Fax (301) 299-3841 MEGA GAMES 1 . "


"editing room where you can create soundin last issue's sneak preview, however, the ominous adventure. Also, for those who tracks, lay in video and add titles to your hybrid adventure-role-playing game is are not superstitious, there is even a new own multimedia products. done strictly for laughs. Speaking of supergraphic adventure game based on the heroes, EA wasn't at CES to show NOCTROPScottish play. Simon & Schuster InteracTravel Apparel OLIS, their graphic novel noir approach to tive is publishing MACBETH: THE GAME as (Adventure/RPG) superherodom which uses digitized video a Macintosh CD-ROM adventure, and Color the futures dark in most of the ad and backgrounds similar to Frank Miller's they're not afraid to call a thane a thane. venture/role-playing ensembles being asart, but the game should ship by November The present also has its elements of the sembled for this season. Philips Media's at the latest. fantastic. Perhaps, we should actually say, BURN:CYCLE is a cyberpunk adventure If the adventuring future seems dark, so \"Phantastic,\" since Roberta Williams where the player assumes the role of Sol is the past. I-Motion's ALONE IN THE DARK PHANTASMAGORIA is Sierra's tale about the Cutter, a data thief who picks up a deadly 3 moves its hero, Edward Carnby, through modern owner of a house that used to be virus called \"Burn:Cycle\" and has it downtime to the Old American West (a favorite owned by a prestidigitator/illusionist. Evil loaded directly into his brain. The player of the game's designers). Gunfights, threatens the young woman who must, has two hours of real-time game time to rustlers, saloons and ancient Indian tribal struggle to discover the dreaded secret of solve the puzzles and get rid of the virus. myths are but a few of the elements awaitthe old manse. LucasArts' FULL THROTTLE is a graphic ading horror fans. Enhancements to the Even younger gamers get a taste of deventure by Tim Schaefer (DAY OF THE TENgame system include player control over lightful horror in Viacom's AFRAID OF THE TACLE) that has graphic novel-quality camera angles and smoother 3D moveDARK. Based on the Nickelodeon television graphics and a plot that reads like a cross ment. The same company plans to release series of the same name, this CD-ROM between The Fugitive and Marlon Brando's the second CALL OF CTHULHU game, PRISgame has the player \"tell\" a scary tale as The Wild One. The player takes on the perONER OF ICE, for those who prefer the part of his/her initiation into the Midnight sona of Ben, the leader of a motorcycle frightening universe of H.P. Lovecraft in a Society. The production values make the pack, who is framed for a murder and must purer form. PRISONER OF ICE takes player game look like a cross between THE 7TH clear his name. As mentioned earlier, Take characters to the Mountain of Madness GUEST and Myst, even though it was de2's HELL is a world of bureaucratic control where Arctic adventures with evil Nazis, signed especially for younger gamers. gone awry where nightmares come true. submarine rides, and the all too familiar Modern police and detective adventures Empire's CYBERSPACE uses the Iron multi-tentacled beings converge into an will also have their place in this year's adCrown Enterprises role-playing system to depict a world of megacorporations and high-tech crime, but the light palette STYLE COUNTS Graphics are becoming progressively and crude polygon-filled screens that rival theatrical productions. Lucasmore important in the adventure and role-playing Arts' FULL THROTTLE offers a rich graphic look using graphics can't match other genres. Publishers are using everything from cel their traditional tools. Merit Software uses several offerings. Empire's animation and 3-D rendering through digitized video 3-D rendering techniques to build the Clive BarkerDREAMWEB, however, has a to take gamers to new and different worlds. (Clockesque world of HARVESTER. Tsunami filmed all of its convincingly grim graphic wise from top left) Sierra's KING QUEST VII: THE scenes on location for FLASH TRAFFIC: CITY OF ANGELS. look, plenty of violence and PRINCELESS BRIDE uses cel animation to create a wild plot involving a force called the DreamWeb. Players have to discover what the DreamWeb is and how to stop the evil forces that are trying to use it for nefarious goals. Merit's HARVESTER doesn't take place very far in the future, but The Order of the Harvest Moon (an elite secret society that controls everything in the game's world) is not an organization that anyone would want to meet outside of the on-screen world, and the graphics are both eerie and gory as the plot necessitates. SUPERHERO LEAGUE OF HOBOKEN, the latest from Steve Meretzky and Legend, also takes place in a post-apocalyptic future. As noted 28 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD "


"URED FIST Scope out the terrain. Slew your turret. Lock on target. And brace yourself for a fire storm! Encounter startlingly realistic prebuil missions or construct your own Dig trenches, lay mines, even plant trees. You're in the heart of an advanced fighting machine. Peering through the thick smoke billowing off your last victim, you feel you're being watched. Switching to thermal shows something hot behind the trees ahead. Advanced optics zoom in and reveal a Soviet T-80 tank turning its turret toward you. Now is not the time to hesitate... Lock and load. FIRE! Choose American M1A2 Abrams main battle tanks, M3 Bradley IFV's equipped with thermal sights, Russian T-80 tanks, or BMP.APC's equipped with image intensifiers. Forge ahead on the digital battlefield of the future in this modern tank simulation from NovaLogic (the creators of Comanche, WolfPack and Ultrabots). Engage your enemy in accurate battle environments where you encounter translucent smoke, explosions and grenades. Strap on your helmet for the ride of your life! Command multiple tanks over 3-D, Voxel Space (patent pending), terrain and call in remote artillery or tactical air support to ensure victory. Suggested Retail Price $69.95 Available for PC 3.5' and PC CD-ROM 15888 beda TUVOS we Andrea F. Comancho Work Utratos Von Space, loval NovaLogic Logo Hartemarks of Novalogic Inc arren moes Circle Reader Service #218 "


"CITRITAGE LLYLL / I AWrm TITAA HALILLI FEMALE CIVIL TORTIVE ries' universe. Conversations are handled via emotional compass points and is delivered by voice actors. No text are displayed on screen. Naturally, the traditional fantasy genre has not been ignored. Bethesda Softworks will re09 lease the second product in their ELDER SCROLLS saga with next year's DAGCERPALL. The 3-D enkine is better, the conversations will be richer, and the world will hang together more realistically. As good as ARENA is, DAGGERFALL has the sequel THE ELDER SCROLLS: DAGGERFALL, the art and the potential to eclipse it. ROLE EM OUT From the animated excitement of action is getting progressively better. Fortunately, Another 3-D fantasy Interplay's KINGDOM OF THE FAR REACHES (top left) and the adventure and role-playing genres have gone role-playing game is Psygnosis DiscwORLD: THE PROBLEM WITH DRAGONS from famine to feast in a few short months, Domark's LORDS OF (clockwise) through SSi's last AD&D-licensed assuming all of the products ship on time. MIDNIGHT. The game product, MENZOBARRANZAN, to Bethesda's ARENA uses real-time action and boasts the capacity to fight entire wars trom a first-person e perspective. As noted earlier, Interplay has venture/role-playing crop. Tsunami's encounter. LucasArts has also worked with raised the ante on their 3-D workmanship FLASH TRAFFIC: CITY OF ANGELS and Merworld-famous Industrial Light & Magic in on the long-awaited STONEKEEP, and they it's THE PSYCHOTRON are interactive order to create several special effects for will also publish the sequel to the awardmovies dealing with terrorists and spies, the game and expects this to be the first of winning DUNGEON MASTER — DUNGEON respectively. Interplay's VOYEUR is a direct many successful collaborations between the MASTER II. port to IBM and Macintosh of the Robert game division and the special effects Several fantasy games will feature quality Culp film developed for CD-i. Culp plays house. Sanctuary Woods will be distributanimation reminiscent of traditional cela powerful capitalist turned politician who ing the sequel to the well-received JOURbased animation. Most impressive was the finds himself embroiled in the kind of NEYMAN PROJECT BURIED IN TIME. Disneyesque movement and backgrounds conspiracy H. Ross Perot may have only Mediavision's THE DAEDALUS ENCOUNTER of THE PRINCELESS BRIDE, Sierra's KING'S imagined. The gamer gets to watch the is a kindler, gentler Alien where the salvage QUEST VII. Fans of animation will also enentire soap opera unfold through a comcrew working on an alien spacecraft finds joy Interplay's KINGDOM: THE FAR puterized Rear Window perspective. that they need a non-violent solution to REACHES, a point-and-click adventure with Two different styles of adventure games their problem. Legend's MISSION CRITICAL very fluid animation that draws gamers into will also appear during the latter part of places the player in the position of having a world of dark magic and ancient prophethis year. Cyberflix will take gamers into to repair his cruiser and counter-attack thecies, and Psygnosis' DISCWORLD: THE PROBthe wild west in their new interactive enemy, even though the rest of his crew is LEM WITH DRAGONS, a delightful adventure movie, DUST: A TALE OF THE WIRED WEST. dead. The adventure features strategic and featuring full-screen animation and a virtuNext, LucasArts, Sanctuary Woods, Legtactical combat elements in addition to typally transparent interface. end, Mediavision and Paramount Interical adventure game puzzles. Of course, Strategic Simulations, Inc. will wind active will take gamers into the far future Paramount will publish an adventure down their relationship with TSR by pubof science fiction adventure. LucasArts has game based on their DEEP SPACE NINElishing the next DARK SUN game, DARK worked with Steven Spielberg on THE DIG. property. Like many adventure games in SUN: WAKE OF THE RAVAGER, and a roleLoosely based on an original Amazing Stothe present crop, Deep Space Nine will be playing game dealing with the dark elves of ries television script, the game has been conversation-driven. Gamers will play one MENZOBERRANZAN. The latter is a creation through several designers and iterations of four different characters, each from one from Dream Forge, the developers of on its way to its upcoming extra-terrestrial of the four major races in the television seRAVENLOFT and DUNGEON HACK. It is based 30 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"ZEPHYR ! RE CULQUETE UNDE MANP -D rendered tanks nd obstacles. ntense combat action. asy to use keyboard, use, or joystick nterface omplete network and modem pport allow up to six human 7d/or computer players. POATS 290 OOTATI TCOMETVOROS HET WAKE SPEED DRIVE PHYR is the ultimate 3-D, futuristic tank simulator from W World Computing. Strap yourself behind the control panel a state-of-the-art Zephyr battle craft and blast the mpetition to atoms. Pilot your Zephyr through subway stems, under water, and over alien Landscapes as you vie r fame, glory, and corporate sponsorship. NEW WORLD COMPUTING. INC P.O. Box 4302, Hollywood, CA 90078 ilable at your local software retailer or order direct from New World Computing 1994 New World Computing, loc. Zephyr is a trademark of New World Computing New World Compiling -800-325-8898 (818-889-5650 outside the U.S.), or by mail: P.O. Box 4302, and its distinctive logo are registered trademarks of Now World Computing, Inc. All rights reserved ywood, CA 90078-4302. Circle Reader Service #151 IBM ons shown Actual cons may vary. "


"Mutt More WHAT'S WORSE: BEING ELECTROCUTED, SCALDED. CLUBBED and TORMENTED pun Sue S IN THE BOWELS OF HELL BY FIRESPITTING DEMONS, OR GOING THROUGH LIFE WITH THE NAME \"MUTT\"? Nature so * Meet Mutt. He's grouchy. He's grumpy. But hey, let's face it, a little time in the underworld can make anyone a little edgy. And 2ifit Sivil now now Mutt has a problem. You see, he was chosen to get the Mystical Pizza of Plenty for his friends. And with all due respect to the eternally damned, the service in the underworld really sucks. In \"Litil Divili\" you can help Mutt as he makes his way through five soul-repenting PHILIPS MEDIA levels in the Labyrinth of Chaos. Along the way you'll encounter gigantic spiders, demonic fish, and a few other things your priest never warned you about. All in a search for a double pepperoni with cheese. A few hours with Mutt, and you'll really appreciate that 30-minute-free-delivery thing. PC CD-ROM CD-i PC FLOPPY Optional Digital Video Cartridge required for CD-IL Div. 1993 Gremlin Graphics Soltware Limited. We apologize to anyone whose name actually is Muttat, for that matter any fite-Spitting demons we may have oltended. 1994 Philips Media. All rights reserved Circle Reader Service #195 "


"Now You DON'T HAVE 10 SELL YOUR SOUL TO PLAY CDon the best-selling novel, The Legacy. Ancalled FAST ATTACK BOATS. Aficionados of other best-selling fantasy novel, Death Gate, naval combat shouldn't be disappointed, will be brought to the computer screen in however, since Dynamix is nearing comglorious SVGA color from Legend. DEATH pletion of their WWII U-boat simulation, GATE will feature the XANTH interface with ACES OF THE DEEP, which was described in the best art yet seen from the company. earlier reports, and Software Toolworks Another venerable player in the fantasy announced a modern simulation called role-playing market is Sir-Tech Software. U.S.S. TICONDEROGA, based on the modTheir WIZARDRY series is about to get a ern missile cruiser. Matthew Stibbe, the face-lift, due to their new venture with EuOxford historian turned designer of Inrope's Delphine Software. The new, as yet PERIUM (the classic space-ploitation\" untitled WIZARDRY, is graphically a cross game from Electronic Arts), has assembetween ULTIMA UNDERWORLD and DUNbled a team to develop the product. GEON HACK. We especially liked the auModern air warfare will also be simulated lowalk feature and the intriguing in TORNADO: OPERATION DESERT STORM. aboriginal theme. We also like the new This is a campaign version on CD-ROM of Cartographer and Beast Master skills, as a simulation originally distributed in the well as the expanded roles for thieves. FiU.S. by Spectrum HoloByte. Acclaimed in nally, STAR TRAIL is the sequel to REALMS the original release for its extremely realistic OF ARKANIA. It sounds like the game will approach to mission planning, this new edifunction much smoother in combat and tion will be distributed by Trimark Interacthat skills will mean more than they did in tive and features 18 Desert Storm missions the first game of the series. in addition to 54 generic European combat missions. Those who prefer air-to-air comFlight Suits (Simulation) bat may be more interested in Mission StuAs usual the field of simulation games will dios' JETFIGHTER III. The latest in the \"dress right\"— military style. Software JETFIGHTER series, JETFIGHTER III will allow Sorcery wasn't quite ready to show their you to pilot F-14s, F-16, F-18s and F-22s, follow-up to AEGIS, but they did tell us it as well as simulate training missions out of was to be California's Miramar Naval Air Station and Nevada's Nellis Air Force Base. Those looking for more modern warfare on the ground will need to turn to Novalogic's ARMORED FIST, the near-future game of arinored combat using voxelgraphics to depict such vehicles as the M1A2 Abrams, M3 Bradley IFV, T80, and BMP. The graphics are similar to those in the company's COMANCHE: MAXIMUM OVERKILL and, as noted earlier, the game allows you to create your own battles with the built-in construction set. Domark is focusing on WWII with their next two simulations. WORLD WAR II enables DOS gamers to fly missions during D-Day and the Battle of Midway, and OUT OF THE SUN allows owners of the new Power Macintosh to fly in Midway or the Battle of Britain. In addition, the former allows owners of FLIGHT SIM TOOLKIT TO add improved AI to their dogtighting routines. THE MAGNAVOX 450 CD-I. Now you can experience NOW $299.99 BULIMIEUR EILOSRESOLDomark continues their FLIGHT SIM TOOLKIT Saga with FST: WORLD WAR II, with everything from B-17s to Buzz bombs at your command. Meanwhile, Empire Software has imported a graphically appealing flight sim for aficionados of WWI air combat, entitled DAWN PATROL. all the thrills of CD-i with out having to sacrifice a lot of dead presidents. Just buy the Magnavox 450 CD-i, starting at $299.99. and you'll be able to torment your nervous system with hundreds of interactive games, audio CDs, photo CDs, and movies. Plus, each 450 CD-i comes packed with Compton's Encyclopedia and 2-player International Tennis Open (that's a $200 TENNIS value, free). So, pick uits up the Magnavox 450 CD-i. Because just COMPTONS INTERACTIVE ENCYCLOPEDIA sitting there coveting it can't be good for the soul. WILMU OD-i \"Suggested retail price. International Tennis Openo 1992 Philips Interactive Media France and Pathe Interactive. Compton's Interactive Encyclopedia o 1992 Compton's New Media, Inc All Rights Reserved.  1994 Philips Media. All rights reserved Circle Reader Service #196 "


NA


"QUARANTINE If you ve got the RAM. we ve got the pedestrians Circle Reader Service #228 "


"BRE Turu: Normal thomi xoz os O see 2 0000365524 2023, and as addictive as the original. There is also a new LEMMINGS game coming out from Psygnosis. LEMMINGS 3 will feature much larger animated characters and, like LEMMINGS 2, some new types of lomb Shi lemmings. Even EREES 3 those looking for a FLPHIFI:18 more socially acceptable form of horizontal scrolling combat than that found in MORTAL KOMBAT will enjoy SKULLCRACKER from Cyberflix (which has monsters going after each other no 04 00 MORE 00 AIA and creating lots of blood and gore inSIEGE will allow gamers to train in the MetalTech stead of realistic lookCALL TO ACTION Action games are becoming system before going human-vs. human in next ing people) and RISE increasingly sophisticated in terms of graphics, year's METALTECH: BATTLEDROME. Bethesda Softworks' OF THE ROBOTS from game engines and interface. (Clockwise from upper DELTA V lets pilots challenge the elements in a Time-Warner (where left) Psygnosis' NovASTORM continues the trend toward fictional cyberspace world. From Sierra, Al Lowe's robots go at each othmore detailed 3-D rendered space ships in far future, CAPITOL PUNISHMENT is a series of satirical arcade er instead of people). combat games. Dynamix' METALTECH: EARTH games based on modern politics. Another group of releases that will fit into the action set will include games that aren't quite simulations (since they don't Since WWII wasn't purely won in the tures a gecko lizard with an attitude in model anything real in our experience), air, MicroProse is releasing 1944: ACROSS place of the bobcats, hedgehogs and Italbut use similar technology (physics models THE RHINE. MicroProse continues to comian plumbers usually seen in these games, and polygon-filled graphics with attendant bine the best elements of strategy gaming and a lot of \"B\" movie satire not usually texture maps and gouraud (sic) shading). and simulation in order to create fascinat seen in this style game. 21st Century EnBoth the METALTECH series from Dy. ing, playable products, but see this issue's tertainment's PINBALL. ARCADE FOR CDnamix and Activision's MECHWARRIOR 2: editorial for some comments on their hanROM features eight different pinball THE CLANS are examples of this genre, dling of historical orders of battle. games to play and more than 100 classic and both are taking longer than expected. Empire Software goes back to WWII machines to \"explore\" via a built-in multiThese games owe their inspiration to with their upcoming simulation, DAWN PAmedia pinball museum. Those looking for Japanese animated videos with giant roTROL. The new challenger to Damon Slye's space combat games reminiscent of STELbots and powered armor. METALTECH: classic RED BARON will allow gamers to flyLAR 7 and STARGLIDER will find them comEARTH SIEGE will arrive in the marketplace 15 different aircraft in a nice looking, texplete with 3D rendered ships and this year and METALTECH: BATTLEDROME Lure-mapped 640 x 400 resolution. controller-breaking action in Psygnosis' won't appear until 1995 (largely because NOVASTORM and Crystal Dynamics' TOTAL of its modem capability). Activision is cauActive Wear (Action) ECLIPSE (3DO). In addition, Bethesda Softtiously optimistic that MECHWARRIOR 2 will The action category will showcase both a works' DELTA V offers something of the reach store shelves in late November. Softtraditional and non-traditional look during same feel in a cyberspace motif. Jeff Tunware Sorcery's PHOENIX FIGHTER will feathe fall season. First, there are plenty of nell's THE INCREDIBLE MACHINE is even imiture 3-D Studio-rendered weapons and games that will remind you of old favorites. tated in a real-time puzzle game from space combat from a first-person perspecAs noted earlier, Dynamix' LODE RUNNER: Merit Software called SINK OR SWIM. tive. Velocity Software's SKI OR DIE is a jetTHE LEGEND RETURNS, the quintessential A new TETRIS-style game from Specski racing game with an emphasis on fast platform game on personal computers, has trum HoloByte will be called BREAKTHRU action and fun as competitors jump from been reincarnated with new traps and gorand will launch a new line of such games. one jet ski to another, frantically dodging geous SVGA graphics. The original AI was in this one, gamers try to destroy the wall civilians and sharks. Like the two games so good that some of it was kept for the of colored bricks that fills the \"well\" by Velocity wasn't showing, QUARANTINE (a new incarnation. GEX is a 3DO platform clicking on adjacent bricks of the same futuristic game of armored infantry versus game from Crystal Dynamics which feacolor. It is a very flexible real-time game (continued on page 146) 36 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"DOOMed To Repeat Ourselves 3 3D Action Fad ccording to the old wisdom, if mission-based game features five differyou build a better mousetrap, ent missions of increasing difficulty, the world will beat a path to uses full-motion video for the cinematic your door. The new wisdom segues, and is being developed for SSI by has modified the adage with DreamForge, those nocturnal folk who a warning: beware those who will set up brought you RAVENLOFT. shop along your path and sell imitations SSI'S SLAYER for 3D0 is a next generaof your trap. This CES the new mousetion DUNGEON HACK. The random dungeon trap was DOOM, and the 3-D full generator creates billions (the company scrolling, intense action games aka DOOM Toos of terrorists that have taken over the U.N.Towers. claims four billion) of possible dungeons and were out in force. Some were good imitations, Your team will climb 40 floors of booby-trapped comes equipped with tools to customize the numsome pretty mediocre by comparison, many trying hallways and fire-bombed rooms as you make your ber of levels, monsters, traps and puzzles. Also, to add new innovations to the 3-D action concept way to the hostages held on the top floor. BODY gamers aren't stuck with one character type, since but all described as \"like DOOM, but better.\" Count will support modem and network play, but they can create AD&D characters to use in several On the silly side of the DOOM Too! games is THE even when playing solo you'll be accompanied by different dungeons. FORTRESS OF DR. RADIAKI from Merit Software. This 3-D three computer-controlled squad members. We'll One DOOM Too! game is even going to be DOOMbloodfest has some great texture-mapped walls have to see how the Al works out on that feature! like in its distribution plan. Interplay's DESCENT puts and 3-D Studio rendered baddies that include a Tired of demons, terrorists, samurai, and gamers in a vehicle that travels in a true 360 degree sword waving Samurai, a slithering lizard creature. lizardmen? SSI'S CYCLONES takes gamers to 3-D environment. The interplanetary mining vehicle and a toaster-headed robot that spews overly-crisp Belleville, WI. Belleville is purported to be the not only flies horizontally through the levels of the toast when destroyed. Dr. Radiaki's fortress will \"UFO Capitol of the World,\" so the game is, natu mines of Pluto, but it has to travel vertically through have 15-20 levels and will only allow a single playrally, a science-fiction DOOM where players face mine shafts as well. It even has Al that learns from er under its roof. invading aliens in a 3-D environment. For those the player as the adventure continues. Although the One of the more exciting Doom Too! games is who tend to get dizzy and lose their sense of di graphics are only VGA, the 30 levels of 3-D alien coming your way from LucasArts. Dark Forces is a rection, the game includes an interesting isomet blasting are designed to work on 386DX-33 and up. first-person trek into the Star Wars universe ric auto-mapping using polygons. The As for the future, we also saw some Macintosh where waves of StormTroopers will graphics from Sage Technology. take the place of DOOM's imps. The 3Frankly, they blow the DOOM graphics D texture-mapped and gouraud shaded away. We particularly liked the realenvironment of the Empire's base time expanding and contracting wall looks terrific, and the world mechanorifices and the ability to edit worlds ics enable you to look up and down, on the fly from within the 3D perspecjump and duck. It will even support the tive! Lighting, perspective, and color new Forte helmet for those who really palatte can all be changed instantly. want to be seduced by the Dark Side Again, this was a technology demonof the digitized Force. Unfortunately, stration and not a game, but we can't Rebel soldiers will only be able to batwait to see their DOOM Too!. Unfortutle the Dark Side alone no multinately, upcoming titles or subjects player option. have not been announced. Capstone will be following up its We'll leave it to our readers to deWOLFENSTEIN-like CORRIDOR 7 with a new termine if any of these DOOM Too! 3-D scroller, Body Count. Here, you play games will actually be a better mousea member of a special forces team as(Clockwise from top) CYCLONES (SSI), THE FORTRESS OF DR. RADIAKI (Merit), GIOCK trap-or, more accurately, time trap. and DARK FORCES (LucasArts). signed to eradicate the ungodly horde @ 123 SEPTEMBER 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 37 "


"DELTA It's not a Game. YOUR MISSION: You control the most agile racer known to man as you fly down the 256 color, 3-D, polygonalshaded landscape at speeds where thought and action are one and mistakes are paid for in blood! If you and your Trace Vehicle survive, use your bonus points to modify its armor, firepower or speed to suit your style, then jack back into the Net for another Run! In Delta V, a new type of Virtual Reality has been brought to the PC! "


"ERCE: 02: 23 FLPHIFI:P P et TOTAPED arba DEEP HOTE() Sepatu Normal View Hortal View 4240 250 2526 ERDC: 01:30:09 FLPHA:126 DESTROY: 0/5 LASERS  PEDO Normal jpg L6 12-09-2147 17H34.48 \"So chummer, you want to know about runnin? \"The Net's the most dangerous cyber-dream you'll ever have, 'cept it's not a dream. You gotta, be ruthless and quick, huggin' the lattice like an Olthan lungworm on a Borian air-grazer. Once you jack in, it's just you and your Trace. \"Like I always said, Netrunnin' is like a drug, the speed gets you higher than a 'ject of Cephilene Blue, but a mistake'll leave you deader than a jacked out straightliner. \"That chum, is as permanent as it gets ... END -GROTHAN JHIR, ex-Netrunner. 229 ...It's a State of Mind Currently Available on IBM PC VGA, minimum 386/33 processor (486/33+ really cooks!), minimum memory 590K Ram, 2MB EMS memory and high density disk drive required. Supports: RolandTM SoundBlaster and Gravis Ultrasound. Copyright 1994 Bethesda Softworks. All rights reserved. Bethesda Softworks and Della V are trademarks of Media Technology Limited. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #47 "


"SA man of war is the best ambassador» Cromwell RIN EURO VESTERN ne Cartographie se MPIRE DELUXE (MASTERS EDITION Ogr «Nominated: 1993 Strategy Game of the Year». -Strategy Plus Magazine Prop Ten Wargames) 015 Coinpute, January 1994 Compiesne AISNA Drein l leville TO-CD-ROM (Plug-and-Play Excerpts and strategy tips from the Empire Deluxe Strategy Guide Exceptional value: contains Empire Classic, Empire Deluxe DOS and Windows and Empire Deluxe: Scenarios ead your troops through the trenches in historic, modern, and futuristic battles. Declare war on up to 6 of your friends and fight via modem, E-Mail, network, or serial port connection. Empire Deluxe Masters Edition has everything you ever wanted in a war game, and more, PWAR DEPARTME, Jet RECORDS JA Available at your local software retailer or order direct from New World Computing at 1-800-325-8898. (818-889-6070 outside the U.S.) or by mail: P.O. Box 4302 Hollywood, CA 90078-4302 1994 New World Computing, Inc. Empire Deluxe is a trademark of New World Computing. New World Computing and its distinctive logo are registered trademarks of Now World Computing, Inc. All rights reserved. IBM screens shown. Actual screens may vary, hts reserved. IBM screens shown. Actual scroons may vary. P.O. Box 4302, Hollywood, CA 90078 Circle Reader Service #217 NEW WORLD COMPUTING, INC "


"ADVENTURE/RPG Something Old, Something New AS WE ALL KNOW toy, and the first thing I bought for it was a IN A MONTH OF BY NOW, IT HAS game I had been eager to play for a long time, BEEN A RATHER THE 7TH GUEST. I was only going to fool with it dismal spring for an hour or so before getting back to HEXX. DROUGHT IN SUMMER summer in the Then I looked at the old invisible clock on the area of adventure wall and noticed it was tea time, and tea time is and CRPG games. usually about 7:30 in the evening. Somehow, GAMING. SCORPIA IS Releases have been few that one hour had stretched into six and half. and far between, though the situation will probAs it turned out, I finished THE 7TH GUEST ably be very different once the usual Holiday but not Hexx. So this month, the Sting is a look HEXXED BY AN rush begins. at both games. I can't do a full scale review of Things were looking a bit grim for this issue, Hexx since I haven't finished it (yet), but I got with no new product for me to talk about, when far enough to get a pretty good feel for it. UNEXPECTED GUEST. Psygnosis released HEXX: HERESY OF THE WIZHexx is a typical dungeon crawl in the DUNARD. It showed up near the end of the month (of GEON MASTER/EYE OF THE BEHOLDER mold. course), which didn't leave a whole lot of playing Your party of four hacks its way through various time, but I jumped into it, fairly confident of towers using the age old principle, \"if it moves, getting it done in time for the column. kill it.\" The only interaction with NPCs is in the Then I took a little detour: I finally got a CD shops, and that is restricted to simple buying ROM drive! Naturally, I had to try out my new and selling. The shops are in the dungeon; there are no outdoors, towns, etc. An evil wizard captured the spirits of the four gods The crystal ball is pretty dim, but the clouds have thinned enough for of magic and imprisoned us to see that Silicon Knights, the development crew who created CYBER them in crystals, which were EMPIRES, FANTASY EMPIRES and DARK LEGIONS for Strategic Simulations, Inc., scattered amongst four towers. Your job is to recover is currently working on a fantasy role-playing game for Crystal Dynamthe crystals, freeing the gods. ics. The working title is PILLARS, but no other details are available yet. Instead of creating a charThe picture is a little clearer on Electronic Arts' LITTLE BIG ADVENTURE acter, you choose from a (working title). The new product being developed by Delphine Software pool of pre-created charac(OUT OF THIS WORLD, ALONE IN THE DARK) will feature their best 3-D rendered ters, comprised of four lightcharacters yet, and a wild world that has terrain tiles like SYNDICATE and ers, four mages, four rangers and four assassins. You are a universe that functions something like THE PRISONER. Characters begin not bound to take one of the game as inmates in an insane asylum where escape is the first prioreach; the party may be comity. Unlike many action-adventures, however, there is more than one posed of all four mages or way to escape. The spirits say the game will feature 12 chapters of vary two rangers and two assasing themes and incorporate 40 locations and 150 buildings to explore. sins, or whatever. Everyone can use magic, by Scorpia S CRY SIGHT SEPTEMBER 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 41 "


"DRAGON (120XD HIU FOIRTS 16/16 MAGIC AURA SI/S1 SGK 11 26 DOY GOLD 100 19 send off any readied spells. found here and there that heal the living Spells are for one round only; and bring back the dead. to cast more, you have to right The most annoying aspect of the game click or hit the space bar again. is the need for food, and plenty of it. You Spells can also be cast indiwouldn't believe how fast the characters vidually by bringing up the go from being led to being starving. Havreadied spell of one partying enough food on hand is a major conmember. Any spell of whatever cern, especially once you get into the type can be cast at any time. towers (where the crystals are hidden), beZother RuRECASTER To some extent, this makes cause there is no place to buy any, and fighting easier; you don't have you don't find a lot of it lying around. to whip the mouse around You want to be well stocked with edibles clicking on individuals to before venturing into those places. CONFUSION IN THE RANKS While everybody has magic potential make them fight or cast spells. The game has a nice auto-map, alin Hexx, use a professional mage-if only because they're Since all fighting is real time, though it can't be written on or printed deadly with Terror and Confusion spells. that's a big advantage. off. You can scroll through any dungeon However, even with that, you've been in, whether you happen to be although mages are naturally best at it. matters become complicated after your there or not at the time. Each character is dedicated to a particular characters have learned a few spells. Try There are five save positions, and a magic school (one for each of the four ing to maneuver the party in a light while sixth «RAM save\" spot; the RAM save is gods), but can learn spells from any of the flipping through spell books is not easy. good only for your current session and others. New spells can only be learned My own experience so far is that it is disappears when you leave the game. This from the gods, and only after gaining a best to have someone ready with either is handy for quick saves when you anticinew experience level. Mages get a new Terror or Confuse spells. These spells pate dangerous times immediately ahead, spell every level, rangers every two levels, cause your opponents to move away from or are fooling around with one of the puzassassins every three, and lighters every you for a time, thereby allowfourth level. ing you to beat on them withThe perspective is standard 3D, youout resistance. In all lights in are-there, but with the full motion of an which I didn't use that spell, ULTIMA UNDERWORLD rather than the my party had a hard time and step-by-step of DUNGEON MASTER. Moveoften lost the combat. Somement can be made with either the key times even with it, the party board (which allows for all motions) or was trashed, because these opthe mouse. I found the mouse to work ponents (all more or less huwell for continued fast movement, and manoid to this point; I the keyboard better when the party had haven't run into any slavering, to move carefully or slowly. beast-type critters yet) are SANGAZZIXMATEN DEFLECT 1722. Combat is simple and automatic. By very tough. left-clicking on the fight icon when an opThey have a lot of hit points. STEADY AS A ROCK Since critters tend to pound on the right ponent is near, all characters with ready In one combat, I watched as front fighter, your point man better be able to sustain a heap weapons will attack and will keep attack my assassin backstabbed a reof damage. ing at targets in range. A right click (or treating target, hitting three the space bar) will begin combat, and also times for 90+ damage points per shot, zles (they've all been pretty simple and and the thing was still going. Monsters hit mechanical up to now). Saving and restorHexx: LEGACY OF THE WIZARD hard, too. The two characters up fronting is very quick, whether you use the have well over 200 hit points, but those RAM save or the regular one. Price: $49.95 System: IBM points melt away pretty fast. So far, the game has been no more Requirements: The front line takes a lot of damage, than the usual dungeon crawl, with some 386-20 or and whoever is in the front right position nice features and some annoying ones. It better, 1 MB seems to get hit the most. My ranger is in is fairly mediocre, and a little boring, in RAM, VGA that spot, and I've lost track of the numfact, which is why I had little inclination to graphics, 3 MB ber of times he has died and died first. go back to it after I started 7TH GUEST. hard drive The monsters just seem to pick that spot space, mouse; supports AdLib. as the target of choice. THE 2ND QUEST Gravis, Roland, Fortunately, resurrection has no negaNow, THE 7TH GUEST has been around and Sound Blaster sound cards. tive consequences. Characters are revived for over a year, which makes it an old Protection: Documentation Check with full hit points and stats; the only loss game by industry standards. On the other Designer: Tag, Pete James sullered is the experience points for the hand, it is a CD-only game, and the CD Publisher: Psygnosis combat in which they died (which is reaCambridge, MA audience is growing every day. Many peo(800) GET-PSYG sonable). There is a resurrection spell, ple with new drives are looking for someand also restoration chambers can be thing to play that isn't just a port over 42 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"FEAR. EXHILARATION. COURAGE. MADNESS. BRAVERY. EVIL. LORDS MiDG T DI MARK Spectruan Holobyte All in one little box. COMING IN SEPTEMBER '94. DOMARK For order information call 800-695-GAME today. Circle Reader Service #132 "


"from floppy. So while THE 7TH GUEST you can find by moving the cursor around. This is a good game for people who may be \"old news\" in one sense, for a lot. The interface is quite simple, with the enjoy puzzles of manipulation and posiof gamers, it's still very new. cursor changing to different forms astion rather than, say, jigsaws and anaTHE 7TH GUEST is one of the most visuyou move it around the screen. Beckongrams. There are little games where you ally beautiful games I've ever seen. The ing skeletal hands show in which direcexchange the positions of black and graphic presentation is stunning, and tions you can move; a skull with a white bishops, or black and white that, along with good musical scores and pulsing brain indicates the puzzle spot; knights, and even that old chestnut, the the background story, is the secret of the the drama mask indicates a ghostly viEight Queens problem, is there, too. game's success. gnette; chattering tecth are for little surSorry to say, you'll have to traverse a Puzzle games genernasty little maze to get to one puzzle. ally don't do all that There is a map for this, although you'll well in the marketplace. have to transcribe it to a sheet of paper They show up, linger a for use when the time comes. while, and then vanish One puzzle I didn't do involves microbeneath the sea of titles scopic amoebas. This is an Othello varion the shelves, however ant where you try to get your critters to good or ingenious the engulf the enemy. I have no talent for puzzles may be. strategy games and, after a few hours of THE 7TH GUEST esembarrassing results, resorted to the licapes that fate by wrapbrary book for the solution. Fortunately, ping the puzzles up in a UNEXPECTED GUEST Scorpia's feeling a lot less lonely since she this one lapse on my part didn't affect mystery and visual dra dropped by Stauf hof to visit some spirited friends. the ending ma that plays itself out The game ran flawlessly on my double as you progress through the game. You prises; and a pyramid (cursor to the speed CD drive, using the Gravis Max don't know who you are, or why you're screen top) brings up the control panel. card and MegaEm to emulate Roland there, except that you must go through in the puzzles themselves, you manipuSound Canvas (music) and Sound all the rooms of a creepy old house and late a little eyeball and click it on the Blaster (effects and voices). This is the solve all the puzzles in them. various pieces to do things. first time in quite a while that I haven't The house was built back in the '30s by The puzzles range from simple to diaexperienced a technical problem. Henry Stauf, a toymaker who was some bolical, and a large part of the game is Overall, I enjoyed THE 7TH GUEST more thing worse than mad. He invited six figuring out what you're supposed to do than many so far this year—not only as a guests one night, and after that, none and what the rules are. If you get really change of pace from the endless dungeon were ever seen again. The house has stuck, there is a book in the library that corridors, but because it's a beautifully stood deserted (of the living) since then. provides hints of varying helpfulness, crafted piece of work. The fancy graphics When you enter a room for the first and (nice feature!) can transport you alone, or the puzzles alone, wouldn't have time, you see a ghostly re-enactment of right back to the puzzle. Reading the made it. Together, they create a satisfying some event that happened in the past. book a third time solves the puzzle for whole. Anyone with a CD drive, who is When you finish the puzzle, you generally you automatically, but this is not recomlooking for puzzles outside the usual adget another little drama, and there may mended, as using the book too often venture game fare, should certainly considbe others yet lurking about the room that could change the game ending. er THE 7TH GUEST. Screen boredom annihilated!!! THE STAR WARS YOU'VE NEVER SEEN Beyond screen savers: film secrets revealed You meet ALL kinds here. Nobody asks what's your sign at the Cantina. WARS SCREEN E AN   \" For Windows and Macintosh  At your favorite software retailer or call 1-800-STARWARS 91301 WDC Awaluddin N The r RC e was and has 44 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"The complete collection of Falcon 3.0 flight simulations plus Art of the Kill, the ultimate dogfighting trainer, on one CD-ROM! Never before MiG-2 has such aweHORNET some firepower and excitement FALCON30 come together. Falcon Gold combines the FALCON newest versions of Falcon 3.0, deadliest MiG-29, jet aircraft. Over 630,000 square miles Hornet: Naval Spectrum Motyle of rulistic terrain in REUNIONOBSERT Seten different thaters Strike Fighter of war. Solitaire, ru-player bal-to-bead and Operation and six-player\" neturk play. run . Only Falcon Gold has so much action. Fighting Tiger\" plus Art of the Kill\"-a tremendous value! Experience nonstop action with updated flight models of MiG and Hornet. Face real-world tactics as you lead your squadron to victory. Enjoy explosive air COTIDat as you combat as you Learn the secrets of air-to-air combul from dogfight and bomb the pros with Art of the Kill. your way through seven fully-animated war zones. Your gameplay decides the outcome of every battle. Art of the Kill is the hottest live-action training ever. Learn from a pro how to maneuver and attack—then fly your own training missions. Nothing gives you thrills this real. Experience deadly air-to-air and Nothing shines like air-10-grawnd combat with fully realistic ainuaft. Falcon Gold. FALCON GOLD: THE BEST-SELLING COMBAT FLIGHT SIMULATIONS OF ALL TIME NOW IN ONE HANGAR. flight models of MiG ART KILL FALCON MG-29 FRORNET TALLINN ARIEKIEL FALCON Spectrum HoloByte 2490 Mariner Square Loop, Alameda, CA 94501 For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week: (800) 695-GAME. Circle Reader Service #109 Copyright 1994 Spect r e Altered Allamate e property owners "


"REVIEW It Has A Familiar Ring Tsunami Returns With RETURN TO RINGWORLD by Charles Ardai JODAY'S LESSON, CLASS, FALLS UNDER is big and difficult in what I regret to was an ordeal in itself), I found that I THE HEADING «BE CAREFUL WHAT report are some very annoying ways. had to go back and forth through the ice You Wish FOR, YOU MIGHT GET When they get their first assignment, I village yet again. 'Tedium' is too kind a It.\" Back when the first RINGthink all game designers should be tatword for this sort of thing-it's torture, WORLD game came out, I was one tooed on the forehead with the motto, pure and simple. of several reviewers who griped that \"It's fun or it's nothing.\" That way, any It's also a shame. Though by no Tsunami had pretty much missed the time they find themselves unsure of means a great game, in all other repoint of Larry Niven's classic SF novel, what to put the player through next and spects RETURN TO RINGWORLD is a much which was that the say to themselves, better game than its predecessor. It's got eponymous RingRETURN TO RINGWORLD \"Hey, I know, a more compelling storyline, better world was huge Price: $69.95 how about anothgraphics in its movie scenes, and a coumany millions of Systems: IBM er maze?\" they ple of very clever puzzles, plus some extimes the size of the and IBM with would catch sight cellent voice acting in the CD-ROM Earth-and home CD-ROM of their reflection edition. (The game will be a dream to an almost (reviewed) in the monitor come true for Niven fans who have alRequirements: unimaginably varCD Version: RETURN TO and force themways wondered how to pronounce words ied and extensive 386-25 or selves to come up like \"kzin\" and \"tnuctipun.\") There is population. RING better, 2 MB with something even a little card game thrown in as a WORLD, the game, hard drive a better. RETURN TO bonus and, as computer card games go, was strictly episodic space, VGA RINGWORLD could it's not bad at all. and most of the graphics, CD-ROM: supports Covox SMIL, certainly have But plenty of gamers will never get to half dozen episodes PAS 16, Roland, Sound Blaster (4 Pro) sound cards. benefited from enjoy all that is good about RETURN TO it contained were Protection: None that sort of sanity RINGWORLD, simply because they won't fairly brief; as a re Designer: Ken Allen check. All it would have the superhuman patience required sult, the game con Publisher: Tsunami Media have taken is for to wade through all the padding. In a veyed none of the Oakhurst, CA someone to have well-intended effort to do better the sec(800) 482-3766 Ringworld's imsaid, \"When playond time around and to give gamers mensity and of ers realize that what they asked for, I'm afraid that fered too little content to satisfy an they have to backtrack through 25Tsunami has just managed to shoot itself experienced adventure gamer. screens of snow and ice, will they be exin the other foot. Taking this criticism to heart, Tsunacited or disgusted?\" mi has gone out of its way to make the I won't leave you guessing as to my reTHREE FUGITIVES sequel, RETURN TO RINGWORLD, roomy action: I was disgusted, not the first Having blown up a spaceship to save the and dillicult-for which they deserve my time, when I made the frosty trek as huPuppeteer race from extermination, our thanks, and the thanks of the legions of man explorer Quinn McQuarry, or even heroes-Quinn, Seeker, and engineer gamers who bought RINGWORLD only to the second time, when I covered the Miranda Rees-are now fugitives, on the find themselves breezing from start to same ground as Quinn's furry Kzin corun from all three of the major species finish in a single session. However, they hort, Seeker of Vengeance, but the third in Known Space. What they need is a also deserve some fresh criticism. The time, when, having just plowed through place to hide; where better than on the new game is big and it is difficult; but it a hundred-screen vampire lair (which colossal Ringworld, where, if they're 46 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"256-color VGA displays No, we're not talking about twisters that wipe out trailer parks in the Midwest. We're referring to Cybernetic Clones, deadly creations of an alien race bent on Earth's conquest. To add insult to injury, these CyClones are actually captured humans transformed into fleshsteel monstrosities! As Earth's defender armed with hi-tech weaponry, you're dying to jump into action. Especially when this futuristic adventure promises some of the most spectacular full-motion video * MEET CYCLONES HEAD-ON you've ever seen. Plus an advanced smooth scrolling, head-on perspective. Incredible cinematics. And state-of-the-art digitized voices, sizzling sound effects and breath-taking music. Cyclones Catapulting you into a total multimedia experience! TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call 1-800245-4525 with Visa or MasterCard (U.S. & Canada only, please) On CD-ROM and 3.5\" disks for IBM & Compatibles 201 This ad uses actual images from the game, a preview of Cyclones' awesome graphics. SEL 1994 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. "


"FLEET OF WORLOS JINX -K2014 lucky, they might even turn up some ev\"Revenge? Such an ugly word. I prefer «Beauty and the Beast.\" Gordon Moore idence that will clear their names? So, divine retribution'.\" The other charachas the thankless assignment of deliverafter effecting repairs on their stolen ters' lines are no better. It's all rathering Teal's lines, and he does better with ship, they set a course for their old embarrassingly melodramatic, all the them than most actors would. stomping ground. more so by comparison to the source On the downside, Cindy SchoonmakNo sooner have they arrived, howevmaterial; Larry Niven may not be the er's Miranda is whiny and nasal, and has er, than they stumble a habit of emphasizing the across another plot, wrong words in each sentence. GaLii Coral this one even more sinDOWN The Ringworld natives, primiister than the first. HARTU tive but oh-so-noble, can simiAgents of the interstellarly be a trial to listen to, lar United Nations UNEXPLOREO especially Fred Bologna's orSPACE have been slaughtering phaned alien ghoul, whose draKNOWNinnocent aliens and SPACE matic line readings call to mind laying waste to the a different luncheon meat. landscape while huntDONE ing for more samples WITH THIS RING... of the powerful, anRETURN TO RINGWORLD has othcient technology er shortcomings as well, includQuinn turned up at the QUINN ing some of the usual ones for a end of the first game. Tsunami game. For instance, I Psychotic U.N. General found three persistent bugs, Carson Teal is out to NIVEN MANIA From the exploding galactic core to the farthest unexplored one of which crashed my system conquer the universe, reaches, all of Larry Niven's Known Space is accessible for fans and novices alike. repeatedly in the endgame. you see, and with the Also, it's clear that Tsunami is secrets of the Ringworld at his disposal, best writer in the world, or even in scistill unwilling to hire a proofreader, he might just be able to pull it off. It's ence fiction, but his dialogue is Shakesince the package contains numerous erup to you to stop him. speare compared to the stuff that writers rors that a competent editor would have Like the first game, RETURN TO RINGKen Allen and Susan Frischer have caught, such as my personal favorite, a WORLD can be divided into roughly half cooked up. line from the game's box: \"Explore a dozen segments, though not as neatly, Working very hard to keep the player countless virtual environments, includin part because this time the characters from erupting into peals of hyena-like ing...the denizens of the Vampires.\" split up and have to be controlled sepalaughter over the overripe dialogue are (Perhaps they mean the \"den\" of the rately. Miranda is captured and thrown the game's voice actors, who for the Vampires? The \"demesne\"? A denizen, in the U.N. brig; her job is to escape. most part are quite good. Quinn, as after all, is an inhabitant.) Seeker is stranded on an icy mountainplayed by Paddy Myers, speaks in a There is also the matter of what vamtop and has to carry out a quest pires and ghouls are for the natives before he can get doing in a science down. Quinn, who is still the fiction game to becentral figure, has to do all sorts gin with. Niven of things, from jumping off a could get away with ledge with a helium balloon it in a novel, bestrapped to his back to concause he'd construct structing a spaceship out of a rigorous scientific spare parts when he and Seeker explanation and get stranded on the Ringworld's then a primitive outer wall. The various semythological overquences dovetail nicely, and the lay: here, thrown in chance to switch from character with little explanato character makes the game tion, they seem a feel somewhat less rigidly linear QUINN peculiar choice at than RINGWORLD. PE best, at worst a desIf there is a weakness to the perate attempt to game's writing, it's not in the DETERMINED DUO After crossing several screens of arctic wasteland, Quinn and find something, anyplotting, but in the dialogue. Seeker aren't leaving without some answers. thing, to fill up the which is as cheesy as can be. game. General Teal doesn't have a mustache, satisfyingly world-weary, self-assured Still, the biggest problem is that in but you imagine that if he did, he'd twirl brogue. Seeker is gruff but seductive: trying to flesh out the Ringworld enviits ends like a villain in a silent movie, Dan Clarke conjures a voice somewhere ronment, the designers have expanded he's always storming around being omibetween LL. Worf's from «Star Trek: The the space unreasonably. It is fine that nously polite and saying things like, Next Generation\" and the Beast's from Seeker has to climb down three or four 48 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"The Dark Sun Rises Again! Advanced Dungeons & Dragons COMPA204 Edition DAVRARSON e HOLD OG en Osirist D ave sa cars US ELISA testi SELY DO Goeders USAT repare for the dawn of a new day in AD&D role-playing: The sequel to SSI's mega-hit SHATTERED LANDS is here! WAKE OF THE RAVAGER hurls you back to the scorching DARK SUN\" game world to battle the minions of the mighty Dragon of Ur Draxa! The sensory extravaganza of sights and sounds will overwhelm you: ever more spectacular full-screen graphics and cinematics plus digitized character voices and sound effects. It's going to be one hot summer when the Dark Sun rises again! On CD-ROM and 3.5\" disks for IBM & Compatibles TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call: 1-800-245-4525 with Visa or MasterCard (U.S. & Canada only, please).       SIM ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS AD&D DARK SUN, the TSR logo and all TSR characters, character names, and the distinctive likenesses thereot are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR. Inc, Lake Geneva, WI USA 1994 TSR nc 1994 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. 256-color VGA displays "


"maze, and a mainhave licensed a different novel to turn tenance tunnel into a game. maze, and an iceI do know that they could have taken city maze, and a greater pains not to bore the player\"Ilup tube\" maze; that's the cardinal sin of computer game and when you have design, as it is of filmmaking, novel writto cross emptying, and any other part of the entertainscreen after emptyment business, and Tsunami commits it screen to get where egregiously here. RETURN TO RINGWORLD you are going solereminds me of a bowl of raisin bran: the ly because the deraisins are tasty, but unless you have the signers listened to stomach to digest all the bran surroundpeople like yours ing them, you're probably better off ortruly who foolishly dering something else. complained that GALACTIC JURY-RIGGING Quinn attempts to repair an alien device in THE EDITORS SPEAK the first game was timeless adventure game style—where does this wire go, anyway? too small, you just RETURN TO RINGWORLD give up. Life's too screens of empty elevator shaft before short; it's not worth spending several reaching his destination not that hours of it sending a little man across an RATING  watching these screens go by is fun, empty computer screen. PROS Strong, hard SF puzzles feamind you, but it does convey the size of What could Tsunami have done in turing lots of odd alien technology. the place and is tolerable. But when you stead? I don't know. Maybe they could Decent voice acting, and a good deal have to go past screen after screen in a have included a feature that would let of \"Niveniana\" for the hard-core fan. high-speed train before you even find you just jump to the location you wish to CONS Lots of empty screens and too the elevator; when you have to canvass a reach after you have been through a giv many mazes, and you've got to cross 600-screen section of the Ring wall to en maze once. Maybe they could have (and re-cross) every last one. l'ind the spaceship pieces you need; devised mazes that had exits at both when you have to go through a duct ends, not just one. Or maybe they could THUNDERSEA Feedback System Used in Real F-16 Simulators Now Available to the Public \"VIRTUAL UTOPIA!\" Marc Dultz, STRATEGY PLUS \"It made me feel like I was IN THE COCKPIT.\" Alfred Poor, COMPUTER SHOPPER \"A DOUBLE MUST-HAVE. Anyone who plays computer games will want this AMAZING CHAIR!\" Marc Spiwak POPULAR ELECTRONICS \"A QUANTUM LEAP in realism!\" P.C. GAMES HOW IT WORKS A 100 watt subwoofer built into the base generates low frequency sound that resonates through the wave chamber hidden inside the chair. Thus you not only hear but FEEL your simulation. Paired with your amplifier, the ThunderSeat makes your favorite flight sim as realistic as it can be without a motion simulator! OPTIONAL SIDE CONSOLES put your favorite joystick controls and mouse at a convenient position. Add a keyboard holder and you have the perfect setup for both flight simulation and office work. Shake Rattle and Roll for as little as $159.95! For a FREE CATALOGUE CALL 1.800 8-THUNDER Whether its the whine of your Formula 1 Race Car the clang of Sword against Sword or the rumble at your Jet Engines at full after bumer the ThunderSeat lets you take off to a new level of realisml Compatible with all sound cards and CD-ROM'S ThunderSeat Technologies 6330 Arizona Circle Los Angeles, CA 90045 310  410-0022 FAX: 310  410-1569 Circle Reader Service #185 50 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"Open your mind to Alien LOGIC. me Arctoir sero os LIENSLO HO Map Leave your world behind. Step into a whole new reality of ancient mysticism and futuristic technology. It will blow your mind. ALIEN LOGIC A SKYREALMS OF JORUNE Role-Playing Adventure Of 30 swe MSV WLMND TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call: 1-800-245-4525 with Visa or MasterCard (U.S. & Canada only, please). On 3.5\" disks and CD-ROM for IBM & Compatibles SkyRealms of Jorune and \"letve Your World Behind\" are trademarks of SkyRealms Publishing Alan Lonic Batrademark of Celidus Software Inc, Illustration 1992 SkyRealms Publish 1991 Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved 256-color SVGA displays Memories Tracker "


"Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10099 PO Box 234 Dept 10099 Rochester, VT 05767 SIMULATION 1942 ACROSS THE RHINE 'SUPERHERO LEAGUE OF HOBOKEN' Lead a band of mutant superheros into battle in the postnuclear wasteland of Hoboken, NJ. Your party includes Captain Excitement and Tropical Oil Man. Your archnemesis is Dr. Entropy, determined to thwart the rebirth of civilization. $34 THRUSTMASTER F-16 FLCS' A stick with almost unlimited programmability.It looks and feels like it was ripped out of the jet. The ultimate edge for a flight sim. A grip modeled after the F-16 Fighting Falcon, four 8-way hat switches, a dual stage trigger and 3 strategically placed buttons. $119 *ACROSS THE RHINE' Control famous tanks or entire companies & experience the fierce combat & tough decisions that gripped WWII tank commanders. Offers multiple command levels and 3D graphics. Blast your way through enemy units across wartorn Europe. $48 HOBOKE MICROPROSE FREE Una Feodal SHIPPING! Place an order for an out of stock item and recieve FREE overnight shipping when product becomes available. Handling $2 per shipment. 'SERF CITY: LIFE IS FEUDAL Use thousands of serts to create a kingdom that can overtake opposing settlements Offers a complete economic system. Fill your kingdom with 24 building types, feed serfs from five food staples, and make use of five natural resources. $39 STEST \"HEIRS TO THE THRONE' Your mission is to conquer the continent and become King of your empire. You must control your armies' supplies and morale as well as fend off multiple attacks from your enemies. $19 IBM HARDWARE IBM HARDWARE IBM HARDWARE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE $19 $19 $12 Teac Qud Spd CD Drv S595 Thrustmst Driving Sys $111 Thrustmaster FCS Pro $99 Thrust FC9 Pro UProm $14. Thrustmaster FLC Sys $119 Thrustmst Flight Systm $59 Thrustmst Game Card $25 Thrustmst Rudder Sys $99 Thrustmaster WCS 2 $94 Thrust WCS2 UProm $14 Universal Cockpit $219 VFX 1 Virt Ally Hdgr $949 Video Blaster $299 Virtual Pilot $65 Virtual Pilot Pro $84 Voice Blaster $39 $32 $42 IBM ADVENTURE Acoustic Resrch P 22 572 Acoustic Resrch P 42 $159 Acoustic Resch P570 $319 Acoustic Resrch P622 S239 Adlib Sound Card $34 Advncd Gravis Ultrsd $129 Advncd Grvs Ultrs Mx $185 Altec ACS 100 Spkrs $69 Altec ACS 150 Subwf $109 Altec ACS 200 Spar S209 Altec ACS 3 Spkr Sys $169 Altec ACS300 Sp wSb $249 Altec ACS 50 Speakrs $79 Auto Cockpit $169 CH Weapons System $69 Cyberman $79 Flight Cockpit $219 Flight Control Stand $18 Flight Slick $35 Flight Stick Pro Game Card 3 Automtic $25 Gravis Analog Joystck $29 Gravis Anolog Pro Jysk $34 Gravis PC Game Pad $19 Jet Stick $24 Labtec CS-1000 Spkrs S75 Labtec CS-1200 Spkrs $84 Labtec CS-1400 Spkrs $99 Labtec CS-150 Spkers $14 Labtec CS-550 Spkers $24 Labtec CS-700 Spkers S32 Labtec CS-800 Spkers $30 Labtec CS-900 Spkers $69 Mach 3 Joystick $27 Maxx Cobra Flightstick $59 Maxx Control Yoke $54 Media Cncpt Sbist Clon $39 MS Flit Sm 5 Givs Jysk $49 MS Flit Sim 5 Grvs Pro S56 NEC 3XE EX CD Drive $549 NEC 3XI Int CD Drive $459 Notebook Gameport S42 PC Symphny Adlib Cpt $29 PC Virtual Golf Club $129 Pilot Control Stand $19 Pro Audio Spct 16 Bas $104 Pro Audio Spect Plus $89 Pro Audio Studio 16 S169 Reel Magic CD Upgrd $599 Reel Magic Lite $289 Reel Magic Vid Upgrd $359 Sony SRSO Speakers $14 SBIStr 16 ASP SCSI-2 $214 SBlaster 16 Basic S119 SBlaster 16 MCD ASP $179 Snd Blaster 16 Value $109 Sound Blaster 32 AWES263 Sound Blaster Deluxe $79 SBlast Discury CD 16 $299 SBlastr Gmblst CD 16 $379 SBlaster Omni CD Drv $209 Sound Blaster Pro Dlx $79 Snd Blaster Pro Value $85 Sound Blaster Value $59 SBlast Vid Spigot WIN $199 Snd Blastr Voice Assist $42 Snd Galaxy BX2 wSp $49 Snd Galaxy NX2 wSp $59 Snd Galaxy NXPRO S109 SGIxy NXPRO16 Mmd $299 SGIxy NXPRO Md Kit $249 Sound Machine $94 Snd Machine Pro 16 $139 Sound Man Wave $188 Sound Star Snd Enhncr $9 SoundMan 16 $99 Bloodnet CD S43 Blue Force: Next of Kin $35 Blue Forc: Next Kin CD $39 Brain Dead 13 CD $35 Buccaneers CD $48 Cadillacs & Dinosrs CD $46 Cast Wolfnsin 3D MD2 S24 Cast Wolfnsin 3D MD3 $24 Cast Wolfenstein CD $42 Cast Wolfstn-Spr Dest $29 Chaos Continuum CD $44 City 2000 CD Companions of Xanth $32 Companions Xanth CD $33 Conan CD S26 Conqust Robin Hd VGA $24 Conquests of Camelot $15 Conspiracy CD $39 Corridor 7 $28 Corridor 7 CD Covert Action S6 Creature Shock CD $48 Crime Does Not Pay S12 Critical Path WIN CD $48 Cruise for a Corpse $19 Curse of Enchantia CD $23 Cyberia CD $46 Dark Forces CD $48 Dark Half $9 Dark Seed $36 Dark Seed CD $39 Darkseed 2 $42 Day of the Tentacle $35 Day of the Tentacle CD $42 Death Gate CD $35 Don't Go Alone $6 Doom $45 Doom CD S48 Doom 2: Hell on Earth $45 Doom 2: Hell Earth CD $45 Doom Episode 1 Dracula S32 Dracula CD $35 Dracula Unleashed CD $47 Dragon's Lair 2 $34 Dragonsphere $25 Dragonsphere CD $48 Dreamweb $36 Dune CD $49 Earth Invasion WIN $24 El Grito D Jagr CD WIN $46 $24 Epic $32 Eric The Unready CD $35 Eric the Unready $24 Escape Dead Zone CD $48 Evolution $29 Evolution CD $29 Fascination CD $39 Flashback $19 Fortress of Dr. Radiaki $48 Fourplay WIN $19 Fred P. Frontier Pharm $24 Fred P. Frntr Phrmc CD $33 Fred P. Frnt Phrmcst 2 $44 Free DC $9 Freelancer 2120 $42 Freelancer 2120 CD $42 Full Throttle CD $42 G-force $19 Gabriel Knight $39 Gabriel Knight CD $45 Gamma Force $6 Gateway 2 CD $32 Gateway 2:Homeworld $32 Gateway Collct 1&2 CD $36 Gobliiins CD Gobliiins 2 CD Goblins 3 CD $19 Guy Spy CD S29 Hand of Fate $29 Hand of Fate CD $39 Harvester CD $46 Heart of China EGA $34 Heart of China VGA $19 Heaven and Earth $32 Heimdall $17 Hell Cab CD $46 Hired Guns $36 Hook Horde $44 Horde CD $49 In Extremus Inca $19 Inca CD S19 Inca 2 $24 Inca 2 CD $24 Indy Jones Fate Atlantis $29 Indy Jones Ft Alintis CD$42 Inherit the Earth $32 Inherit the Earth CD $32 Innocent Until Caught $34 Inspector Gadget Gadaet $34 Iron Helix CD $56 Isle of the Dead $31 Jack the Ripper $39 Jagged Alliance S48 Jonny Quest $26 Journeyman Project CD 546 Journeyman Prict 2 CD $52 Jurassic Park $36 KGB $17 King's Quest 5 VGA $32 King's Quest 5 WIN CD $41 $29 7th Guest CD $48 7th Guest 2:11th Hr CD $54 Advent Will Beamh VGAS24 Advent Will Beamish CD$24 Alone in the Dark $34 Alone in the Dark CD $48 Alone in the Dark 2 $34 Alone in the Dark 2 CD $41 Alone in the Dark 3 CD $48 Altered Destiny $29 Amazon $16 Animation Classics $39 Beneath Steel Sky CD $39 Beverly Hillbillies $19 Bioforge S48 Bioforge CD $52 Blake Stone Episode 1 $9 Bloodnet $39 CGW SEPT 1 "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR, HI. AK, APO, FPO Sa per order. Worldwide airmail $6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment Visa. MC and Discover Accepted. Checks Held 4 Woeks Money Orders same as cash COD $8 Delectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Ship ping times may vary Price availability may change. All sales final. Call for details. FREE GAME OFFER* STRATEGY UFO DEFENSE 'HAND OF FATE' is the second title in the Fables and Fiends series. Follow Zanthia an offbeat young mystic, who must voyage to the center of the world to undo a curse. Contains hours of fun for all fans of Legend of Kryandia with unforgettable characters. $29 \"X-COM: UFO DEFENSE'You control X-COM; formed by the world's govemments to fight the aliens. Shoot UFO's down and investigate the site. Make the crucial decisions, complete ground missions to help scientists, and tackle the aliens with rifles CESTORANASER CE SECURED CASSIUS \"LINKS PRO CASTLE PINES' Golf Club designed by Jack Nicklaus is set in beautiful Colorado. Offers 7,495 yards of golfing challenge, the longest PGA Tour course, and realistic graphics. $19 MICROPROSC and rocket launchers. CD $39 *FREE GAME OFFER Spend the specified amount on any in stock IBM software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Oller subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from August 1st through September 30th or while supplies last. SPEND $60 GET 'CONQUERED KINGDOMS Plunge into a me. dieval world to conquer Cascatia. Invade castles, fly over mountains, and use the forests to your advantage. Features human and fantasy combat troops, 21 levels of difficulty, modem play, and complete game scoring history. $12 'INCA 2 Set 500 years in the future, aboard a Lost City afloat in space they fly ships cut from stone and forged from brass and tin. They fight against evil conquistadors that navigate the heavens. An asteroid brings danger to the empire. Prepare for battle at the helm of a stolen spaceship. CD $24 Playmaker Football Combo, Cardinal of Kremlin 3.5, Darkhalf 3.5. Trump Castle 2 Data Disk 1 or 2 3.5 or 5.25, Gunship 5.25, Pirates 5.25. Star Legions 5.25. Magic Candie 25.25, MacArthurs War 5.25. Crime Does Not Pay 5.25. Warlords 5.25, X-Men 5.25 SPEND $100 GET www DEALER Airborne Ranger 5.25. Tegel's Mercenaries 5.25. Command HQ 5.25, F15 SE 25,25, M1 Tank Platoon 3.5, Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25. Red Storm Rising 3.5, Battles of Destiny 3.5 IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ADVENTURE IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING $39 $48 Ultimate Domain S39 Ultimate Domain CD $44 Under Killing Moon CD $55 Uninvited S6 Universal Neverlock $39 Voyeur CD $46 Walker $32 Warriors of Legend $18 Where Space Crmn Dix $39 Where in USA Crmn Dix$45 Where in Wrld Crmn Dix$44 Where in World Dix CD 554 Who Killd Sam Rprt CD $24 Wing Comm Uitm 6 CD $29 Wrath of Gods CD WIN 544 Yserbius $26 Zombic Dino CD $41 Zorro $39 $16 $49 $12 King's Quest 6 CD $39 King's Quest 6 Upg CD $24 King's Quest 6 VGA $45 King's Quest 7 CD $49 King's Ransom King's Ransom CD Kronolog : Nazi Paradx $36 Labyrinth of Time CD $47 Lands of Lore 2 Lands of Lore 2 CD $46 Laura Bow 2 $24 Laura Bow 2 CD $24 Leather Goddesses 2 $39 Legend of Kyrandia $32 Legend of Kyrandia CD $32 Legend Kyrandia 3 CD $39 Leisure St Larry 1 EGA $16 Leisure St Larry 1 VGA $19 Leisure Suit Larry 5 $34 Leisure St Larry 5 VGA $24 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $42 Leisure Suit Larry 6 CD $39 Loadstar CD $38 Lost Eden Lost Eden CD $48 Lost Files Sherlck Hims $26 Lost Treasrs of Infocom $32 Lost in Time $19 Lost in Time CD $19 Lunicus CD S42 Magic Death CD $26 Magic Pockets S18 Man Enough CD $35 Manhole $24 Maniac Mansion $18 Mario is Missing CD $44 Martian Memorandum $24 Mixd Up Faery Tle EGA $14 Mixd Up Faery Tle VGA $29 Mixd-Up Mother Goose $29 Morph Man CD $29 Myst CD $46 No Mouth & I Mst Scrm $44 No Mth & I Mst Scm CD $44 Noctropolis $48 Noctropolis CD $52 Nomad $35 Nomad CD $36 Out of this World $19 Out of this World 2 CD $45 Pepper's Adv Time VGA$29 Phantasmagoria CD $49 Police Quest 1 VGA S19 Police Quest 3 VGA $24 Police Qust 4 DOS/WIN $39 Police Quest 4 CD $39 Prince of Persia $25 Prince of Persia 2 S42 Quantum Gate WIN CD $45 Quest for Glory 1 $18 Quest Glory 1 VGA CD S39 Quest for Glory 3 $24 Quest for Glory 4 $38 Quest for Glory 4 CD $44 Red Shift WIN CD $44 Return To Zork CD S44 Return of the Phantom $34 Return of Phantom CD $38 Return to Zork $44 Riftwar LegacyVGA $39 Ringworld Ringworld CD $38 Robinson's Requiem $35 Robinsn's Requiem CD $35 Robocop 3 S32 Robot City CD $48 Cobra Mission S34 Curse of Azure Bonds $15 Cyber Space Cyber Space CD $38 Cyber Judas CD $48 Cyclones S46 Cyclones CD Daemonsgate $28 Daemonsgate CD $32 Dark Sun $47 Dark Sun CD Darklands $39 Daughter of Serpents $19 Demon Hunter S42 Disciples of Steel S34 Dragon Strike Dragon Tales CD $38 Dragons of Flame $9 Dungeon Hack $38 Dungeon Hack CD $39 Dungeon Master $29 Dungeon Master 2 $37 Dungeon Master 2 CD $48 Elvira 2 Jaws Cerberus S16 Eye of the Beholder 1 $14 Eye of the Beholder 2 $19 Sam & Max Hit the Rd $34 Sam & Max Hit Rd CD $42 Screen Antics WIN $19 SDI $6 Secret Monkey Island 2 $21 Secret Monky Isle VGA $23 Shadow Caster Shadow of Como CD $47 Simon the Sorcerer $32 Space Quest 1 VGA Space Quest 4 CD $37 Space Quest 4 VGA S28 Space Quest 5 VGA Spawn $44 Spellcasting 101 $19 Star Reach $36 Star Trek 25 Annivrs CD$54 Star Trek 25th Annivrsry $26 Star Trek: Judgmnt Rits $33 Star Trk: Str Fit Acd CD $52 Starship $29 Stellar 7 CD $24 Superhero Lg. Hoboken S34 Superhero Hoboken CD $34 System Shock $48 System Shock CD $52 Terminator 2029 $29 Terminator 2029 Op Scr $19 Terminator Rampage $42 Terminator Rampge CD $45 Terror of the Deep $36 Terror of the Deep CD $36 The Dig $40 The Prophecy $19 Touche $39 Trance Mission CD $36 Treasure Huntrs, Inc CD$48 Tuneland CD $48 Hunters of Ralk CD 954 Intrplay's 10 Yr Anth CD $48 Jorune CD Kingdm Far Reachs CD $44 Knights of Xentar $46 Knight Xentar CD 548 Knight Xentar Adit Upgd $5 Lands of Lore $34 Lands of Lore CD $41 Legacy: Realm Terror $39 Lord of the Rings 2 CD $38 Lord of the Rings CD $45 Lord of the Rings V1 $32 Lord of the Rings V2 $15 Lord of the Rings V1&2 S19 Lords of Midnight $44 Lords of Midnight CD $44 Loremaster S19 Magic Candle 2 Magic Candle 3 Masters of Magic S41 Masters of Magic CD $48 Matrix Cubed $9 Mega Traveller 2 S12 Mega Traveller:Zhodani $6 Megatraveller $18 Menzoberranzan $39 Might & Magic 3 $19 Might & Magic 4 $37 Might & Magic 5 $36 Mines of Titan S9 Pirates Gold $39 Pool of Radiance $15 Pools of Darkness $38 Protostar $39 Ravenloft CD $51 R avenloft:Strahd's Pssn $48 Realms of Arkania $25 IBM ROLE PLAYING $42 All Character Editors $16 ADD Collectors Editn 3 $19 Al-Qadim CD $39 Al-Qadim:Genie's Curs $42 Amberstar Arborea Journy Inr Snct $34 Arena: Elder Scrolls $39 Bard's Tale Constructn $29 Black Crypt $32 Blackmoore CD $46 Bloodstone S27 Captain Blood $9 Celtic Legends $32 Challenge of 5 Realms $39 Champions $37 Champions of Krynn $12 Eye of Beholder 3 CD S42 Fire King $24 Flames Freedm MWII $24 Forgotten Castle $49 Forgotten Castle CD 555 Four Crystals Trazere 516 Gateway Savge Frontr $32 Gods $16 Hero's Might & Mgc CD $45 Heroes of Might & Mgic $45 Hexx: Heresy of Wizard $32 Circle Reader Service #54 CGW SEPT 2 "


"CHIPS & B TS Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10099 PO Box 234 Dept 10099 Rochester, VT 05767 hely 2-383-9058 Fax source 1009 theme PARK REALMS OL ARKAN STAR VYRAI wind commandes. \"WING COMMANDER ARMANDA' You are now the sole commander, responsible for heading up a strike against your enemy. Pit yourself against a friend or fly with a friend against the computer via modem. Explore, fortify and mine up to 2,000 planets. $48 STAR TRAIL: REALMS OF ARKANIA' An ancient feud fueled by a millennia of hatred exists and you must choose wisely for the fate of Arkania is in your hands. Features smoothscrolling 3D movement, fully animated combat and over 350 weapons. S41 'THEME PARK Can you design the greatest amusement park in the world? Control ev. ery aspect of running a profitable amusement park, from staffing to research and development. Select from 21 rides and attractions, and 11 varieties of shops and concession stands. $42 GIR-TECH serien BENIGSTEST FREE COMPUTER GAMES STRATEGY PLUS! Recieve an issue of Strategy Plus magazine FREE with every IBM Software order. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from August 1st to September 30th or while supplies last. 'MYST', The surrealistic adventure that will become your world. Journey to an island world tinged with surrealistic mystery, where only your wits will unlock an ancient betrayal of the past. Features 3D photorealistic graphics, original soundtrack and non-linear gameplay. CD $46 \"MAN ENOUGH Five women and you. They want it all. But its not going to be easy. An interactive social adventure, Man Enough features almost an hour of liveaction video, stimulating dialogue, which comes to life through digitized speech and 320 x 400 enhanced VGA graphics. CD $35 The currealistic Whenture That Will Become Your World CDEO IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS $39 Ultima 8: Pagan $48 Ultima 8 Speech Pack $17 Ultima Uworld 1 & 2 CD $32 Ultima Uwrld 2 Labyrnth $48 Ultm Uwrld Stygn Abys $21 Uncharted Waters $42 Unlimited Adventures $19 Veil of Darkness $29 War of the Lance Waxworks $14 $42 Wizardry 4 $19 Wizardry 6 Cosmic Frg $22 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $29 World of Xeen CD $9 Witch World $40 IBM SIMULATIONS Red Crystal $21 Return to Ringworld CD $48 Riftwar Legacy CD $23 Rome: Pathway to Pwr S29 Secret Silver Blades $15 Sentinel Worlds 1 $9 Shadow Castor CD $45 Shadow Sorcerer $9 Sherlock Holmes 1 CD $36 Sherlock Holmes 2 CD $36 Sherlock Holmes 3 CD $51 Skyrealms of Jorune CD$50 Skyrim Jorune: Aln Lgc $48 Sleeping Gods Lie S6 SpellJamer:Pirates Spc $16 Spellcraft:Aspect Valor $19 Star Trail $46 Star Trk Dp Space 9 CD$52 Star Trek Deep Space 9552 Star Trek Next Gen CD $56 Stonekeep CD $46 Stronghold $36 Summoning $16 Sword of China $42 Syndicate $39 Syndicate Plus CD $41 Tales Magic:Prophc Shd$16 Terran Envoy $9 Treasures Savg Frontier 59 Ultima 4 Quest of Avatar$35 Ultima 5 Warriors Dest $38 Ultima 6 False Prophet S19 Ullima 7 Black Gate $47 Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue $16 Ultima 7 Series CD $42 Ultima 7.5 P 2 Silver Sd $20 Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle $48 Ultima 8 CD w/spch pk $47 Air Duel $33 Air Warrior 2 $34 Air Warrior 2 CD $34 Air Warrior SVGA $34 Armored Fist $44 Armour Geddon $32 Army Air Corps: 1942 $48 Art of the Kill $24 Assignment Miami $19 B17 Flying Fort Classic $19 B17 Fly Fort WSS2 CD $37 Backroad Racers CD $29 Battle Command $6 Battle of Britain $34 Battlecruiser 3000 $44 Cardinal of the Kremlin S6 Chopper Pack CD $38 Chopper Strike $48 Coaster $32 Combat Classics 2 $19 Conqueror Multi Tank $6 Cyber Race $19 Cyber Race CD $39 Delta V S42 Elite Plus $19 European Racers CD $29 Evasive Action $34 Evolver $38 Eye of Storm Flight Sim S29 F117A Stih Fighter VGA $29 F15 Strike Eagle 2 $15 F15 Strk Eagle 3 Acs PK$52 F15 Strike Eagle 3 CD $48 F15 Strike Eagle III $34 F40 Pursuit Simulator $29 FA 18 Hornet $54 FA 18 Hornet CD Falcon 3.0 $46 Falcon 3 S1 Fightg Tigr $24 Falcon 3 S2 MiG 29 $32 Falcon 3 S3 FA 18 Hrnt $32 Falcon 4.0 $59 Falcon AT $16 Falcon Gold CD $54 Fast Attack CD $48 Fighter Duel Pro 2 $33 Fleet Defender CD $48 Fleet Defend F14 Tomct $45 Fleet Defender Sc Dk 1 $32 Flight $52 Flight Light $19 Flight Light CD S19 Flight Sim Toolkit $58 Flight Sim Toolkit CD $54 Flit Sim T-kit Out of Sun $34 Flight Unlimited CD $48 Fly the Grand Canyon $32 Flying Circus $39 Formula 1 $24 Frontier Elite 2 $36 Grand Canyon Scenery $18 Grand Prix 5002 S14 Great Nav Bat Ships All $19 Great Naval Battles CD $52 Great Naval Battles 2 $44 Great Naval Batt 2 CD $42 Gunship 2000 VGA S34 H.A.W.C. $32 Harrier Assault S19 Harrier Assault SVGA $47 Harrier Assult SVGA CD$44 Heatwave Hell CD $48 Hyperspeed $16 Indy Car Racing $31 Indy Car Racg Add On 1522 Indy Car Rac Add On 2 $22 Inferno $39 Inferno CD Iron Angel $39 Iron Angel CD $39 Japan Scenery Disk $12 Jet Pack CD Jet Fighter 2.0 $39 Jet Fighter 3 $44 Jump Jet $39 Jump Jet Aces Pack $46 Jutland CD $44 Killing Cloud $6 Lawn Mower Man CD $39 Life and Death $19 Life and Death 2 $24 Lightspeed $9 Loderunner Loderunner CD $39 Lunar Command S24 M1 Tank Platoon 2 $44 M1 Tank Platoon Cisc $19 M4: Sherman Tank Sim $34 Mantis Exp Speech Pk $19 Mantis Experm Fir VGA $28 Maximum Ovrkli Bdi GD $56 Maximum Overkil MD 2 S32 Mech Commander $38 Mech Commander CD $38 Mechwarrior 2 $46 Mechwarrior 2 Add-on $19 Mechwarrior 2 CD $46 MegaFortress $12 Megarace CD $39 Metal Tech: Battledrme $36 Metal Tch2: Earthsg CD $47 Metal Tech 2: Earth Sg $45 MiG 29 (Stand Alone) $44 MS Flight Sim 5.0 $44 MS Flit Sim 5 Las Vegs $29 MS Flit Sim 5 New York $29 MS Filt Sim 5 Paris $29 MS Flil Sim 5 San Frnc $29 MS Flit Sim 5 Portland $32 MS Flight Sim 5 DC $29 MS Flight Sim Flit Shop $32 MS Space Sim 1.0 $44 Mig 29 Fulcrum $29 Mig 29 Gold CD Nascar Racing $39 Nascar Racing CD $39 New Facilities Locator $9 Operation Airstorm CD $42 PT Boat Simulator $16 Pacific Strike $49 Pacific Strike Spch Pak $17 Pacific Strike wSpch CD$48 Pheonix Fighter CD S48 Privateer $48 Privateer CD Privateer Special Op 1 $19 Privateer Special Op 2 $22 Privateer Speech Pack $17 Power Politics WIN $12 Rally S33 Reach for the Skies $19 Real Weather Pilot $29 Red Brn A10 Tnk Kll CD$39 Red Baron M Dk Buildr $18 Red Baron VGA $29 Red Baron wMsn Buildr $29 Renegade $39 Road & Trck Grand Prix $19 Sailing Sim 3 East Cst $32 Sailing Sim 3 West Cst $32 Sailing Simulator 3 $42 $48 ATP 2.0 $29 ATP Flight Sim 1.00 $12 A320 Airbus $29 AH-64 B Longbow $54 Aces Europe Msn Dk 1 S27 Aces Europe Msn DK 2 $27 Aces Over Europe $39 Aces Pacific Missn Disk $19 Aces of the Deep $44 Aces of the Deep CD $47 Aces of the Pacific $44 Aces of the Pacific CD $39 Aces over Europe CD $39 Across the Rhine $48 Across Rhine Ex Set 1 $32 Across Rhine Ex Set 2 $32 Air Cmbt Pac 1942 SD 1$32 Air Combat Pacific 1942$48 Air Cmbl Pactc 1942 CD$48 $6 $54 CGW SEPT3 "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US S4 per arder. Mail to Canada, PR, HI AK APO, EPO 54 per order Warldwide airmail So per item. Handling $2 per shipment: Visa, MC and Discover Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weaks Money Orders same as cash COD $8. Detectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shig. ping times may vary Price availability may change. All sales final Call for details FREE GAME OFFER* MITTLUN INDYCAR RACING 'INDYCAR RACING' Experience the thrill of racing against the world's best drivers. No other simulation gives you IndyCar driving this real. Coax your car through an outside pass, drop through the corkscrew at Laguna Seca or slide through the groove at 220 mph. $31 \"UNDER A KILL ING MOON Transports you to the world of the feisty detective Tex Murphy. Features allow you to save and splice scenes together. Digitized voices and an amazing level of detail & freedom of movement make this game visually & aurally stunning. CD $55 7th GUEST: 11th HOUR' Sequel to 7th Guest except the stakes are higher, the puzzles more clever and the retum visit more unsettling. Solve puzzles and investigate clues that take you through Stauf's haunted house with movie-like plot twists, special effects and music soundtrack. CDS54 *FREE GAME OFFER GO Spend the specified amount on any in stock IBM software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from August 1st through September 30th or while supplies last. SPEND $60 GET INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT' the world's first CD MAG, is an episode of interactive television for your CD Rom. Devoted to entertainment software, IE features full-motion reviews, multimedia hints and tips, and interactive video interviews with key figures in the gaming industry, CD $9 'BATTLES OF DESTINY' In order to conquer the world you must seek out and destroy up to three opponents. Features modem play, air, ground and naval combat; 22 units to construct; 20 worlds to conquer, and a complete player history $19 Playmaker Football Combo, Cardinal of Kremlin 3.5, Darkhall 3.5, Trump Castle 2 Data Disk 1 or 2 3.5 or 5.25. Gunship 5.25. Pirates 5 25, Star Legions 5.25, Magic Candle 2 5.25, MacArthurs War 5.25 Crime Does Not Pay 5.25 Warlords 5.25, X-Men 5 25 FERTA WILLIAU VILVA SPEND $100 GET Airborne Ranger 525, Tegel's Mercenaries 5.25, Command HO 5.25, F15 SE 25.25, M1 Tank Platoon 3.5, Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25. Red Storm Rising 3.5. Battles of Destiny 3.5 IBM SIMULATIONS IBM SIMULATIONS IBM ARCADE IBM ARCADE IBM WAR GAMES IBM WAR GAMES $43 $39 $6 $26 Silverball $29 Sink or Swim $19 Sleepwalker $24 Space Ace $32 Space Ace CD $42 Space Ace 2 $34 Street Fighter 2 $34 Super Tetris $29 T2:Arcade Game $29 Take-A-Brk Pinball WIN $19 Tetris $15 Tetris Gold CD $32 $29 Tristan Pinball $19 Welltris $15 Who Shot John Rck CD $34 Wild Streets $24 Wrath of the Demon $21 $29 Titan $29 Scenery Colitn California $9 Scenery Collt Grt Britain $9 Sea Wolf $44 Sea Wolf CD $44 Seal Team S26 Seaworthy CD $18 Secret Weap Ex He162 $18 Secret of Dinosaurs CD $44 Semper Fi $44 Shuttle Shuttle CD $24 Silent Service 2 $21 SimCity Cisc Grph 182 $14 Space Clipper S42 Space Racers CD $44 Spectre VR CD $45 Spectre Virtual Reality $35 Speed Racer $26 Star Crusader CD Starlord S39 Stim Slum $42 Strike Commander $26 Strike Commander CD $55 Strike Commor Sp Op 1 $22 Strike Commdr Spch Pk $19 Sub Battle Simulator $19 Sub Battle Simulator 2 $39 Sub Batt Sim 2 Win CD $39 Sub War 2050 $33 Syndicate S1 Amer Rvit S22 TFX CD $39 TFX: Tactical Fitr Expr $35 Task Force Admirals Pk $45 Team Yankee 2 $19 Team Yankee 2 CD $29 Tost Drive 2 $12 Test Drive 3 Test Drive 3:Road & Car $9 $48 Test Drive 3: Passion $19 The Big One CD $29 Theme Park S42 Theme Park CD Thunderhawk Tie Fighter $45 Tie Fighter Missn Dsk 1 $24 Tie Fighter Missn Dsk 2 $24 Tornado $48 Train Engineer U-Boat 2 $36 Ultrabots Sanctn Earth $26 Vette $15 Voice Commander Bndl $18 WC 2 Operation 2 $22 WC 2 Speech Mod $13 WC Secret Mission S20 WC Secret Msn 1& Bdi$20 WC Secret Mssn 2 HD $20 Wing Commander $21 Wing Commander 2 Bdl $29 Wing Commdr 2 Dix CD $29 Wing Comm 2 wSph Pk $26 Wing Commander 3 $52 Wing Commander 3 CD 852 Wing Commdr Acadmy $24 Wing Commdr Armada $48 Wings of Glory $49 Wolf Pack CD $33 Wolfpack $26 World Circuit World Circuit CD $34 World Circuit 2 $42 World Circuit 2 CD $44 X-Wing $39 X-Wing Mission Disk 1 $19 X-Wing Mission Disk 2 $19 Zephyr $45 500 CC Race Bike $29 Alien Breed Aliens Ate My Babysittr S27 Breakthru WIN $35 Capitol Punishment $37 Capitol Punishment CD S29 Crazy Cars $25 Creepers $34 Dragon's Lair CD $34 Dragon's Lair $34 Dragon's Lair 3 $34 Eight Ball Deluxe $38 Fire & Forget $24 Gobliiins 3 $19 Gobliiins VGA $16 Guy Spy $24 Incredible Machn 2 WINS29 Incredible Toons Innocent $38 Jump Raven CD Jurassic Park CD $36 Loderunner WIN $38 Mad Dog Macree 2 CD $35 Mad Dog Mcree CD $35 Magnallux Runner $29 Metal & Lace NR13 $29 Metal & Lace NR18 Upg $5 Microcosm CD $45 Microsoft Arcade WIN $29 Mirage Thunder $39 Mortal Kombat $36 Oxyd Magnum $36 Pinball Fantasies $29 Prehistorik $29 Raiden S32 Raiden CD $36 Rebel Assault CD $44 Rise of the Robots $45 Battleship Bismark $26 Beyond Squad Leader $45 Blitzkrieg Ardennes $19 Blue & the Grey $38 Blue & The Grey CD $39 Borodino Napoln Invds S24 Bravo Romeo Delta $24 Campaign $32 Campaign CD $35 Campaign Mission 1 $18 Carrier Strike $39 Carrier Strike Exp Pak S19 Carriers at War $32 Carriers at War 2 $39 Charge of Light Brigade $12 Civil War No Getr Glory $21 Conflict: Korea $19 Decision at Gettysburg $18 Dreadnoughts $29 Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Dreadnoughts Deluxe S59 Dreadnoughts Ironclads $29 Drums of Glory Fall Gelb $36 Fields of Glory $37 Fifth Eskadra Fifth Fleet $39 Fifth Fleet CD $39 Fleet Med $27 Gary Grigsby Pact War $44 Gary Grigsby Wr Rssia $45 German Raider Atlantis $26 Gettysburg: Intr Batt CDS42 Gettysburg: Turning Pnt $24 Golan Front $36 Grey Seas, Grey Skies $36 Halls of Montezuma $24 Harpoon Battle Set 4 S19 Harpoon Chalingr Pak $19 Harpoon Designer Srs 2$25 High Command 534 Kampfgruppe Kriegsmarine $36 Kursk Campaign $36 Line in the Sand $12 Long Lance *MacArthur's War $9 Main Batt Tank C Grm $36 Main Batt Tank MidEst $36 Main Batt Tank N Grm $36 Malta Storm $36 Man of War $36 Mare Nostrum $26 Marianas Turkey Shoot $12 Midway Moscow Campaign S36 Napoleonics $34 Northern Fleet $36 Operation Crusader $39 Operation Overlord S36 Pacific Strm Midwy Cpn $36 Pacific Strm Simn Cpgn S36 Panzer Battles $24 Panzer General CD $39 Patriot $12 Patton Strikes Back Point of Attack $32 Prelude to Jutland $24 Red Sky Morning $36 Return to Falklands $28 Rising Sun $24 Rd Sumter to Appomtix $45 Rommi Batt for N Africa $24 Rommel at El Alamein $36 Rommel at Gazala Second Front $21 $42 IBM WAR GAMES $44 $36 $14 $29 Action North Atlantic $26 Action Stations Scen 1 $3 Action off River Platte $26 Aegis: Guardn Fleet CD $53 Air Raid Pearl Harbour $22 American Civil War V1 $24 American Civil War V2 $24 American Civil War V3 $24 Banzai $9 Battle Stations $20 Battle Tank Barbarossa $36 Battle Tank Kursk $39 Battle of Austerlitz $24 Battle of Leyte Gulf $24 Battle of the Atlantic Battles of Napoleon $18 Circle Reader Service #54 CGW SEPT 4 "


"CHIPS & BITS Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10099 PO Box 234 Dept 10099 Rochester, VT 05767 DECIDE THE FATE DE IMAJOTY TORCIE FRATRESSERTS I BASEBALL \"FRONT PAGE SPORTS BASEBALL' With over 500 statistics per player, you'll have all the information needed to manage a team. Develop your own team dynamics, using 1994 Major League Baseball Players View replays with VCR-like controls and multiple camera angles. $44 'ALIEN LEGACY Trillions of miles behind you are the shattered remnants of Earth. Command the seedship U.N.S. Calypso. Explore space. colonize, and battle aliens. Build colonies to generate needed re. sources. Features detailed fractal graphics. $38 'D.R.A.G.O.N. FORCE' They're the Drastic Re. sponse Assault Group Operations Network Force an elite international strike force against terrorism. Lead your team of top-secret trouble-shooters on special operations to the hottest hot spots worldwide. $12 CALIEN LEGACY interstel FREE INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT! 'HANNIBAL AS Hannibal, you experience the life and times of one of history's most controversial heroes. Based on the actual history of Roman and Carthaginian campaigns. Offers over 700 towns, go to market to equip your army, and negotiate peace or siege. $29 \"WARLORDS 2 The excitement of the first Warlords with better graphics, a map option, and new Alsystem Features random mapping for infinite replayability, troop transports for amphibious warfare, & a diplomacy option that provides the framework for backstabbing. $29 Scen Editor S29 Receive an episode of Interactive Entertainment, the world's first CD MAG devoted to entertainment software, FREE with every CD ROM software order. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from August 1st to September 30th or while supplies last. IBM WAR GAMES IBM SPORTS IBM SPORTS IBM SPORTS IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY $39 $29 Seventh Fleet $36 Stalingrad $39 Stalingrad Campaign $36 Storm Across Europe $12 Task Force 1942 $36 The Great War $39 Third Reich S34 To The Rhine $36 Typhoon of Steel $21 UMS 2 $12 UMS 2 Planet Editor $9 Under Fire $12 V Victory Market Gardn $19 V Victory: Gld, un, Swrd $34 V Victory: Utah Beach $19 V Victory: Velikye Luki $19 Victory at Sea $43 War in the Falklands $24 Wargame Cnst S2: Tnk $39 Warpoint Warship Changd Histry $26 Waterloo $19 White Death $19 WW2 Batt of S. Pacific $21 $32 $38 Bball Chall 1988 Teams S9 Bball Chall 1989 Teams $9 Blood Bowl $39 Brett Hull Hockey $42 CD-ROM Baseball CD $24 Empire Soccer '94 $29 FIFA Internatnal Soccer $39 Front Pg Football Pro $29 Front Pg Fball Pro '95 $44 Front Pg FB Pro '95 CD $47 Front Pg Sport Bsball $44 Front Pg Sprt Bsball CD$47 Frnt Pg Sprt FB Pro Up $29 Goal $18 Greens $34 Hardball 3 $19 Hardball 3 Collection $39 Hardball 3 Players Disk $16 Hardball 3 Stadium Dsk $16 Hardball 4 $34 Hole In One Mini Goll $6 Hole In 1 Mini Gif Crs Dk $3 International Sports Chall$6 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art S3 Jack Nicklaus Crs Disk 1 $6 Jack Nicklaus Crs Disk 3 S6 Jack Nicklaus Crs Disk 5 $4 Jack Nicklaus SE Crs 1 S4 Jack Nicklaus Signat Ed$27 Jack Nicklaus SE Crs 2 $16 Joe Montana Football $46 Joe Montana Fball CD $54 Joe Montana Football 2 546 Links Crs 2 Firestone $17 Links Pro 386 Golf $32 Links Pro 486 CD $42 Links Pro C1 Mna Kea $19 Links Pro C2 Pinehurst $16 Links Pro C3 Banff Spr $19 Links Pro C4 Belfry $19 Links Pro C5 Innisbrook $19 Links Pro C6 Firestone $20 Links Pro C7 Pebb Bch $24 Links Pro C8 Cast Pines$19 ML 1950s World Series $17 ML 1960s World Series $17 ML 1970s World Series $17 ML 1980s World Serios $17 ML Baseball All Stars $12 ML Baseball Manage Ch$12 ML BB 4 USAT Fan Mn $25 ML BB 4 USAT Gen Mn $19 ML Bsball Pro Tms ea. $20 ML Football 2 $12 ML Personal Pro Golf $28 MicroL 82 Bsball Ssn $17 MicroL. 83 Bsball Ssn $17 MicroL 84 Bsball Ssn $17 MicroL 85 Bsball Ssn $17 MicroL. 86 Bsball Ssn $17 Microl. 87 Bsball Ssn $17 MicroL 88 Bsball Ssn $17 MicroL 89 FB Season $17 MicroL. Bsbil 4 USA Tdy $28 MicroL bsball Seattle 13 $12 Microsoft Golf CD $48 Microsoft Golf Windows S48 NFL Chall Col Almn Tms $9 NFL Chall Pre Season 90$9 NFL Chall 91 Pre Season$9 NFL Chall All Star Team $9 NFL Chall Dream Teams $9 NFL Chall Premium Ed $59 NFL Coaches Club S34 NFL Cchs Club Ex Dk $19 NFL Cchs Club Fball 2 $44 NFL Proleague Fball $12 NHL Hockey $43 PGA Tour Golf Course 1$17 PGA Tour Golf Ltd Ed $32 PGA Tour Golf WIN $26 Pga Tour Crs 1 WINS17 Picture Perfect Golf CD $42 Planet Soccer $29 Playmaker Football $12 Pro Tennis Cup Proleague Football '94 $29 QuarterPole $26 Road to the Final Four 2$41 Serious Soccer 518 Tie Break Tennis $9 Time Out Sports Bsball $22 Time Out Sports Bsktbil $39 Tom Landry Football $29 Tom Landry Fball Dix $29 Tony LaRussa BB 1990 $12 Tony LaRussa BB 1991 $12 Tony LaRussa Baseball $9 Tony La Rss BB 2 CD $46 Tony La Rss BB2 92 Tm$14 Tony La Rss BB2 Fn Mn$14 Tony La Rss Baseball 2 $35 Tony La Rss BB2 Stad $18 Tony LaRs BB2 2 '94 $39 Tony LRs BB2 2 '94 CD$48 Tony LRss Classic Stad $12 Tony LaRussa NL Stad $15 Tony LaRs BB2 Tm '93 $16 Troy Aikman Fball CD $49 Ultimate Football $48 Ultimate Football CD $48 Unnecssary Roughnss $33 Wayne Gretzky Hcky 3 $42 Weaver Commsnr Dk 2 $16 18th Air Squadron $36 A Train $34 A Train Construction St $9 A Train wConstructn St $36 Advanced Civilization $35 Air Force Commander S9 Airbucks 1.2 $33 Alien Legacy $38 Ancient Art of War Sky $26 Archon Ultra $34 Arctic Baron Arctic Baron CD $29 Armada $22 Battle Isle $32 Battle Isle 2 CD $45 Battle Isle Scenario Dsk $22 Battle of Chickamagua $38 Battle of Chickmgua CD $42 Battles in Time Battles of Destiny $19 Black Beard $35 Breach 3 $34 Buzz A. Race Space CD$54 Buzz Aldrin Race Space $26 Caesar $24 Campaign 2 $36 Cannon Fodder Cannon Fodder CD $34 Capitalist Pig WIN $19 Carriers at War Cnst Kit S34 Castles $19 Castles 2 S19 Castles 2 CD $48 Castles Northern Cpgn S12 Celtic Tales: Balor Evil $39 Chsmst 4000 Trb WIN $36 Civilization $44 Civilization WIN $48 Clash of Steel Cohort 2 $18 Colonization $48 Colonization CD $48 Command HQ $19 Command HQ Classic $18 Command and Conqur $42 Conquer for Windows $19 Conquered Kingdoms $12 Conquered Kingdom 2 $36 Conquered kgdm Sc 1 $12 Conquest S36 Conquest of Japan $36 Crime City $12 Crisis in the Kremlin Darklegions Darklegions CD $38 Dead Zone CD $52 Detroit $39 Discovry Stp Columbus $34 Dominion: 1 King's Life $41 Dominus Dragon Force Dragon Lord Dune Dune 2 El Fish Empire Builder Empire Deluxe Empire Deluxe 2 $38 Empire Dix 2 WIN CD $39 Empire Dix Mstr Ed CD $24 Empire Deluxe Scen 1 $21 Empire Deluxe WIN $35 Even More Incred Mach $28 Even Mr Incrd Mch WIN $28 Fantasy Empires $39 Fantasy Empires CD $42 IBM SPORTS $32 APBA Baseball $24 APBA Bsball Innovator $34 APBA Bsball Statmt 2.0 $29 APBA Bowling $14 APBA Micro Manager $32 Accolade Sprt Collct CD$29 All Amer Coll Fball '94 $42 Barkley: Shut Up & Jam $42 Baseball for Windows $46 Bball Chall 1987 Teams $9 CGW SEPT 5 "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING TA US $4 per order Mail to Canada PR. HI AK, APO. FPO $4 per ordar Worldwide airmail S6 per item Handling $2 per shipment Visa, MC and Discover Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weeks Money Orders same as cash COD $8. Detectives replaced with same product Most items shipped same day. Ship ping times may vary Price availability may change. All sales final Call for details. FREE GAME OFFER* Balanseprospichy MASTER Dreadnoughts 30 GAID \"DREADNOUGHTS DELUXE' Includes Dreadnoughts and the Bismark and Ironcalds scenarios. Models the looks and tactics of fighting fleets during the great age of the battleship. Features menu interface, external 3D view and hidden movement. $59 \"MASTERS OF ORION' is a fascinating game of space exploration, combat, and strategy set in the future. You must conquer over half the known star systems. Includes 10 different alien races with which to trade, battle and negotiate. Build a powerful fleet of spaceships. $39 'BATTLECRUISER: 3000 AD' You command a mighty Battlecriuser in or der to thwart the attack of the power hungry Gammulan Empire who hover on the brink of galactic conquest. Of fers advanced 3D modeling, texture mapping, interaction with 12 alien species, and extra credits earned by trading $44 MICROPROSE VIEDS. *FREE GAME OFFER Quest fort Every day you survive Is a victory... COUTPOST The Anal Sud Spend the specified amount on any in stock IBM software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from August 1st through September 30th or while supplies last. Oto SPEND $60 GET INHERIT THE EARTH'A fantasy adventure that will take players to a world of breath tak ing scenery...Earth. Accompany Rif as he attempts to uncover the mystery surrounding an ancient human artifact. Features intuitive interface. puzzles and overhead perspec$32 OUTPOST' You only get one chance to destroy civilization. Explore worlds, research technologies and colonize planets. Based on NASA research. Outpost is a realistic simulation of the complexitles involved in building a self-contained colony on a hostile planetary surface. CD $44 Playmaker Football Combo, Cardinal of Kremlin 3.5, Darkhalf 3.5, Trump Castle 2 Data Disk 1 or 2 35 or 5.25, Gunship 5 25, Pirates 5.25, Star Legions 5.25, Magic Candle 2 5.25, MacArthurs War 5.25. Crime Does Not Pay 5.25. Warlords 5.25. X-Men 5.25 SPEND $100 GET Airborne Ranger 5.25, Tegel's Mercenaries 5.25, Command HQ 5.25, F15 SE 25,25, M1 Tank Platoon 3.5, Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25, Red Storm Rising 3.5. Battles of Destiny 3.5 tive. IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM STRATEGY IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM EDUCATIONAL $29 $29 $39 $17 Qurky Qys Trb Sci VGA $29 Reader Rabbit 2 WIN $29 Scooter's Magic Cast $32 Scootr's Magic Cast CD $34 Secret Islnd Dr. Qundry $29 Slater & Charlie CD $42 Slatr & Charlie Go Cmp $29 Softwr Toolwks Rfr CD $79 Stckybear Parts of Spch$32 Stickybear Roading $24 SSlvr: Gizmos & Gdgt $26 Wacky Funster $9 IBM HINT BOOKS Fantasy Fiefdom CD $48 Fighting for Rome S12 Fort Apache $19 Front Lines $39 Gemfire $37 Genghis Khan 2 $34 Gettysburg $29 Gettysburg: Turning Pt $18 Global Domination $34 Gobliiins 2 Princes Bfin S16 Gold of the Americas $24 Grandest Fleet $35 Grandest Fleet CD $35 Great Nav Batt Adml Pk $19 Hammor of the Gods $42 Hannibal Harpoon 2 $42 Harpoon 2 Battle Set 1 $26 Harpoon Challenger Pk S24 Heirs to the Throne $21 High Seas Trader $39 High Seas Trader CD $39 Hollywood Mogul $39 HUMANS $24 Humans CD $28 Humans: Insult to Injury $9 Incredible Machine 2 $28 Incredible Machn 2 CD $39 Jagged Alliance CD $48 Jagged Alliance Sph Pk $22 Kingdoms of France $34 Kingdoms of Germany $34 Kingdm Far Reachs CD $41 Kingmaker $34 Koshan Conspiracy $36 Koshan Conspiracy CD $48 L'Empereur $37 Lemmings Datadisk $19 Lemmings 2: Tribos $29 Lemmings 3 $39 Liberty or Death $37 Lords of the Realm $39 Lords of the Realm CD $39 Lost Admiral $19 Lost Admiral 2 $39 Lost Vikings $15 Maelstrom $32 Master of Orion $39 Medieval Lords $12 Mega Lo Mania $19 Merchant Prince $39 Millenium S6 Millenium Auction CD $48 New World Order $38 Nobunaga's Ambition $37 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 $37 Objection $19 Operation Combat $12 Outpost $39 Outpost CD Outpst Pint Add On CD $33 Paladin 2 $34 Patrician Patrician CD $36 Pax Imperia $42 Perfect General $21 Perfect General 2 $36 Perfect General 2 CD $36 Perfect Genrl Sc 2 20th $24 Perfect Genrl SD WW2 $12 Populous 2 $28 Populous 2 Challenge $19 Power House $39 Power House CD $39 Powermonger $19 Project USA $29 Project USA CD $29 Protostar CD $39 Rags to Riches $36 Railroad Tycoon 2 $39 Railroad Tycoon Classic $19 Rampart Reach for the Stars $24 Realms $16 Red Ghost $39 Red Zone $32 Robo Sport WIN $34 Romance 3 Kingdom 2 $39 Romance 3 Kingdom 3 $39 Romance 3 Kingdom 4 $39 Rules of Engagement $9 Rules of Engagement 2 $39 Rules Engagt 2 Con Dk $19 Second Conflict WIN $34 Serf City: Life is Feudal $39 Seven Cities Gold 2 $19 Sid Meir's Civil War $58 Siege S12 Siege With Exp Disk $19 Sim Ant $29 Sim Ant CD $41 Sim Ant Windows Sim City 2000 Sim City 2000 CD Sim City 2000: Grt Distr $14 Sim City 2000 Window $42 Sim City Sim City WIN $29 Sim City CD $47 Sim City Classic $26 Sim City Classic Win $26 Sim Earth CD $47 Sim Earth $29 Sim Earth WIN $29 Sim Farm $29 Sim Life $29 Sim Life WIN Sim Town $44 Sim Town CD $44 Smokin' Gun WIN $28 Space Hulk $19 Space Hulk CD $39 Space Miner $36 Space Raiders CD $42 Spaceward Ho! $36 Spaceward Ho! WIN $36 Spaceword Ho 3 WIN $29 Star Control 2 $39 Starship: Rgrn Agnd CD$39 Strike Squad $39 Stronghold CD $36 Sub Version $36 Tank $36 Task Force 1942 $36 Tegel's Mercenaries 2 $44 Terminator 2 Chswr CD $27 The Complete UMS $44 Theatre of War $16 Ticonderoga $46 Unnatural Selection $29 Victory or Defeat WIN $42 Viking Conquest $36 Vikings 2 Vikings Fields Conqust $19 Visions of Aftermath $12 Walls of Rome $39 Warlords 2 $29 Warlords 2 Scen Editor $29 When Two Worlds War $24 Worlds at War $19 X-Com: UFO Defense $39 X-Com: UFO Defnse CD$41 Aesop's Mmdia Fbls CD$30 Alge Blaster Plus $32 Annabi's Anct Egypt CD $52 Auto Insight Auto Map Body Insight $29 Boom Box $12 Castle of Dr Brain VGA 519 Children's Write/Publish $42 Clock Works $19 Dinopark Tycoon $34 Dinosaurs CD $48 Don Quixote CD $24 Dyno-Quest S29 EcoQust Srch Cetus CD$29 EcoQuest VGA Fatty Bear's Bday Surp $32 Fatty Bear's Funpk CD $34 Fatty Bear Wrld Gm CD $44 Fatty Brs Bday Surp CD$38 Island Of Dr. Brain VGA $29 Island of Dr Quandry $26 Last Chnc See WIN CD $38 Mario Teaches Typing $24 Mario Teaches Typg CD $48 Mavis Bcn Tchs Typg $29 Mavis B. Tchs Typ WIN 534 MS Gallery: London CD $45 Microsoft Dinosaurs CD $42 Multimdia: Vvid WIN CDS24 Orbits: Voyage Sir Sys $24 Oregon Trail WIN S 34 Oregon Trail WIND CD $39 Print Shop Deluxe $49 Print Shop Dix Bs Grph $26 Pult P. Goes Moon CD $44 Putt P. Joins Parade CD$48 Putt P. Funpack CD $34 $34 $34 $39 A-Train $16 Aces Over Euro Strat $16 Advent Willie Beamish $10 Al Qadim $12 Alone in the Dark2 $10 Arena S10 Bioforge $12 Blue Force: Next of Kin $10 Castle Wolfnstn 3D Spr $10 Castle of Dr Brain $10 Champions of Krynn $10 Civilization $16 Colonization: Off Strat $16 Comptr Adv Game Scrt $16 Conquests Robin Hood $10 Conquests of Camelot S10 Curse of Azure Bonds $10 Dark Queen of Krynn S10 Dark Sun $10 Doom Battlebook $14 Dracula Unleashd Strat $16 Dungeon Master $10 $36 $27 Circle Reader Service #54 CGW SEPT 6 "


"CHIPS & BITS Hotele cose Parede Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10099 PO Box 234 Dept 10099 Rochester, VT 05767 ReelMagic INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT' the world's first CD MAG, is an episode of interactive television for your CD Rom. Devoted to entertainment software, IE features full-motion reviews, multimedia hints and tips, and interactive video interviews with key figures in the gaming industry. CD S9 \"V FOR VICTORY VELIKIYE LUKI takes you to the Russian Front dur ing WW 2. As the German commander, you must rescue your encircled forces that are hold up in Velikiye Luki. Offers 9 types of combat choice of German or Russian command, and 7 scenanos. $19 11TH HOUR PREVIEW THE FIGHTER INTERVIEW HEROANELOOOSTORE \"REEL MAGIC Provides a complete package allowing full playback of video & stereo sound. Includes CD-ROM disk with a demonstration, premiere entertainment titles and the Reel Magic controller. Board $359 FREE SHIPPING! \"AMAZON' recaptures the fun & excitement of the 1950's drive-in movies. Travel unexplored regions of the Amazon, fight 10 foot ants and find emeralds. Amazing cinematic effects such as multiple camera angles, flashbacks, pans & fades. Fully digitized voices & sound effects. $16 BE Place an order for an out of stock item and recieve FREE overnight shipping when product becomes available. Handling $2 per shipment. \"LEISURE SUIT LARRY 6' As a dating game show contestant, you have won a 2 week vacation at a posh resort Surrounded by luxury & girls, you mingle, schmooze & work your way up to a grand encounter! CD $39 IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS IBM BUNDLES IBM BUNDLES IBM BUNDLES $29 China $39 Dynamix Grt War Plans $16 EcoQust Search Cetus $10 Eye of the Beholder $10 Eye of the Beholder 2 S12 Eye of the Beholder 3 $12 Flights of 13 Mike $16 Fred Phrks Fron Pharm $8 GEN Secrets of Game $10 Gabriel Knight $10 Gateway Savg Frontier $10 Global Conqust Bk w/dk $21 Gobliiins $10 Gunship 2000 S16 Hand of Fate $10 Harpoon 2 Strategy Gd $16 Heart of China $10 Inca 2 $10 Indi Jones 4 Fate Allnts $10 Indy Jones Grfx Adv $10 Inherit the Earth $16 Jetfighter 2.0 S16 King's Quest 1 $10 King's Quest 2 $10 King's Quest 4 $10 King's Quest 5 $10 King's Quest 6 $10 Laura Bow 2 HintBook $10 Leisure Suit Larry 1 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 2 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 3 $10 Leisure Suit Larry 5 $9 Leisure Suit Larry 6 $10 Lemmings /disk $18 Loom $10 Lord of the Rings V1 S12 Lord of the Rings V2 $12 Lost Files Sherlck Hlms S14 LucasArts Advent Bk $16 $10 LucasArts Air Cmbt Strt $16 Manhunter San Franc S10 Master of Orion Off Strt $16 Menzoberranzan $12 Might & Magic 1 & 2 $10 Might & Mgc 3, 4or5 ea $16 Might & Magic Cmpndm S16 Off Bk Lsr St Larry 2nd $14 Off Bk Ultima 2nd Edith $16 Off R. Wilco Space Adv $14 Off King's Qust 3rd edt. $16 Outpost Strategy Guide $16 Pacific Strk Playtstr Gd $12 Police Quest 1 $10 Police Quest 2 $10 Police Quest 3 $10 Pool of Radiance Pools of Darkness $12 Populous 1 & 2 Off Strt $16 Power Monger Strategy $16 Powermonger $10 Privateer Playtstr's Gde $16 Protostar $8 Quest For Clues 2 $21 Quest For Clues 3 $21 Quest for Clues 4 $21 Quest for Clues 5 $16 Quest for Clues 6 $16 Quest for Glory 3 $10 Quest for Glory 4 $10 Quest for Glory Strat $19 Questbstr 2: Key kgdm $18 Questbusters: Bk Clues $18 Ravenloft Realms of Arkania $14 Rebel Assault Insdr Gde$16 Return to Zork $9 Return to Zork Advt Gd $14 Rise of the Dragon $10 Rise of Dragn SEGA CD $9 Sam and Max $10 Sea Wolf Strategy Gde $16 Secret Monkey Island $10 Secret Monkey Island 2 $10 Secret Silver Blades $10 Shadow Caster $18 Sherlock Hlms Strat Gd $16 Simcity 2000 Strategy $16 Simearth Simfarm Strat: Almanc $16 Simlife Official Strategy $16 Simon the Sorcerer Gd $10 Sky Realms of Jorune $12 Sonic Strategy Guide $16 Space Quest 2 Pace VUOSI < $10 Space Quest 3 $10 Space Quest 4 $10 Star Trek 25th Aniv $12 Star Trek Judgemnt Rts $10 Strike Commder Off Bk $14 Stunt Island $16 Summoning $16 System Shock $12 Tie Fighter Strategy Gd $16 Treasures Savg Frontr $10 Ultima 6 $10 Ultima 7 $12 Ultima 7 and Uworld Bk $16 Ultima 7.5 Balancg Scls $16 Ultima Avatar Advent Bk $16 Ultima U Slygian Abyss $12 Ultima Uwrld 2 Wild Lb $12 Wizardry 6 Cosmic Frg $12 Wizardry 7 $16 X-Wing Official Strt Gd $16 $12 Space Quest Bndle 1-4 $42 Spellcasting Bundle $29 Spellcasting 101, 201, 301 Spellcasting Bundle CD $32 Task Fre 1942 WRSR CD $35 The Victory Pack $39 V for Victory: Utah Beach, Velikiye Luki, Mrkt Garden Top 50 Games DOS CD $26 Top 50 Games WIN CD $26 Turning Point Gellysburg, Spanish Armada, Waterloo Ultima Bundle 1-6 CD $32 Ultima Trilogy Ultima 1-3 Ultima Trilogy 2 $48 Ulrima 4-6 Wing Commander 1 Dlx $48 Wing Commdr 1 Dlx CD $29 Wizardry Trilogy $32 Wizardry 1-3 Wizardry Trilogy 2 $33 Wizardry 4-6 7th Guest Dune Bdi CD $48 Air Combat Classics $39 Their Finest Hour Battle Hawks Secret Weap of Luftwaff Allied Forces $9 M 1 Tank Platoon, Gunship Award Bundle $44 Kings Quest 5, Red Baron, Rise of the Dragon Award Bundle CD $44 Combat Classics $19 F15 Strike Eagle 688 Attack Sub Team Yankee Dynamix Bundle 1 $24 A-10 Tank Killer 1.5 Heart of China Stellar 7 Eye of Beholder Collect S49 Eye of Beholder Tril CD $51 Falcon 3.0 wThrstm FCS $99 Gateway Collectn 1 & 2 $36 King's Quest Antholy CD$54 Land Sea Air 2 $19 Command HQ Red Storm Rising F15 Strike Eagle Legnd Vair Vail Dkns CD$29 Lemming's 1 & 2 CD $28 Lost Treasr Intocom CD S39 Infidel, Lurking Horror. Deadline, Witness, Suspect, Ballyhoo. Hitchhiker's Guide Galaxy Suspended, StarCross. MoonMist, PlanetFall. StationFall, Enchanter, Sorcerer, SpellBreaker, Zork 1-3, Beyond Zork, Zork Zero Lost Treasrs Infocom 2 $29 Lost Treasr Infocm 2 CD$29 Border Zone, Plundered Hearts, Bureaucracy. Cutthroats, A Mind For Voyaging. Hollywood Hi Jinx, Seastalker, Sherlock Holmes: Riddle of Crown Jewels, Wishbringer, Nord and Bert, Trinity Lucas Classic Adventrs $36 Indiana Jones, Secret Monkey Island 1, Maniac Mansion Magnetic Scrolls Bundle $16 Fish, Corruption, Guild of Thieves Max Pac $16 Star Control, Hoverforce, Test Drive 3 Maximum Ovrkill W Dsk $44 Megafortress Mega-Pk $38 Megafortress Megafortress Mis Disk 1 Megafortress 3-D Editor Perfect General Trilogy $34 Perfect General Greatest Battles of 20th C WW2 Battles Power Hits: Battletech $32 Battletech 1, Battletech 2. Mech Warrior Space Quest Anthol CD 548 IBM TRADITIONAL $10 3 D Pinball $12 Acquire Armada Villa Crespo S9 Baseball Card Collector $6 Baseball Facts Battle Chss 4000 SVGA $26 Battle Chess 4000 VGA $19 Battle Chess CD $45 Battle Chess WIN $19 CGW SEPT 7 "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per arder. Mail to Canada, PA, HI, AK, APO, FPO S4 per order. Worldwide airmail S6 per Hem, Handling $2 per shipment Visa, MC and Discover Accepted. Checks Hald 4 Weeks. Money Orders sarne as cash COD 58. Detectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Shp ping times may vary. Price/availability may change All sales final. Call for details. FREE GAME OFFER* FALCON \"V FOR VICTORY MARKET GARDEN' takes you to Southern Holland on Sept. 17th, 1944. Full scrolling map of the EindhovenAmhem area, 500 military units, 9 types of combat, assume either Allied or Germancommand, extensive campaign analysis, & historical variants. $19 \"V FOR VICTORY UTAH BEACH thrusts you into the role of military strategist during the Normandy invasion. As an American commander you must overcome Ger man resistance. Features realistic weather effects, 8 types of combat, and 6 different scenarios. $19 FALCON 30 \"FALCON 3.0 Pilot the West's most proven dogfighter, the F16 Fighting Falcon. As the commander you'll lead a flight of up to eight jets through three explosive campaigns. Offers instant action mode for arcade, varied skill levels and unique weapons. $46 C MTC *FREE GAME OFFER 2050 Spend the specified amount on any in stock IBM software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from August 1st through September 30th or while supplies last. SPEND $60 GET THE UNDERWATER COURAT SIMULATON SUBWAR 2050 Oceans have become a vital source of food, en ergy, and minerals. Corporations have turned the the sea into the world's most lucrative industry. Explore thousands of miles of 3D seascapes, pilot four submarines, and engage in simulated combat. $33 Playmaker Football Combo, Cardinal of Kremlin 3.5, Darkhalf 3.5. Trump Castle 2 Data Disk 1 or 2 3.5 or 5.25. Gunship 5.25. Pirates 5.25, Star Legions 5.25, Magic Candle 25.25, MacArthurs War 525, Crime Does Not Pay 5.25, Warlords 5 25, X-Men 525 SPEND $100 GET 'AIR COMBAT PACIFIC 1942' Dodge relentless gunfire of Japanese Zeros. Defy gravity execute attacks on enemy bombers in a desperate fight. Virtual Cock pit allows viewing in all directions. $48 MICROPROSE Airborne Ranger 5.25. Tegels Mercenaries 5.25, Command HO 5.25, F15 SE 25.25, M1 Tank Platoon 3.5, Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25, Red Stor Rising 3.5, Battles of Destiny 3.5 IBM TRADITIONAL IBM TRADITIONAL IBM TRADITIONAL IBM ADULT INTERACTIVE IBM ADULT MOTION IBM ADULT MOTION Beat the House $29 Blackjack $9 Bridge 2: wOmar Sharil $28 Bridge 2: wOmr Shri CDS52 Bridge 7 $24 Bridge Baron Windows $34 Bridge Olympiad $29 CD-Romix 1 Hardcase $16 CD-Romix 2 Prime $16 CD-Romix 3 Free X CD $16 Casino Game Pak WIN $32 Casino Master Gld WIN S43 Checkmate WIN $36 ChessManiac 5 Bill & 1 $39 Chessmnc 5 Bill & 1 CD $34 Chessmaster 3000 $29 Chessmaster 3000 CD $46 Chessmaster 3000 WIN S35 Chess Net WIN Classic 5 Classic 5 WIN $24 Classic Casino WIN $16 Classic Solitaire WIN $16 Clue CD $19 Coffee Break Collct CD $29 Combination Lock $9 Demon Blue $9 Dr Floyds Desktop Toy S14 Dr Thorp's mini Blackick $9 Dr Wong's Jks/Vid Pkr 5 $9 Even Mr Incrd Mach CD$39 Faces Tetris 3 $15 Gambit, Kasparov's $35 Game-Maker Ver 2.0 $48 Go Master Jr Ver 5 WINS19 Go Master Tool Kit $26 Go Master Ver 4 WIN $39 Gofr Wnkl Adv CD WIN $12 Grandmaster Chess CDS32 Hanna Brbr Anmt Wksp $39 Hard Day's Night CD $25 Hearts $12 Hong Kong Mh Jng Pro $32 Hoyle's Book Games V3S29 Hoyle's Bk Games Cisc $29 Jeoprdy Dlx WIN wAlex $34 Jeoprdy Dix wAlex Trbk $34 Joseki Genius Lexicross $24 Lucky's Casino Advent $38 Monopoly Deluxe $27 Monopoly Deluxe WIN $29 Oligopoly Omar Sharif Bridge WIN$19 Omar Sharil on Bridge $19 Omar Shrf Brdg Dix CD $46 On Target $9 Origamo $29 Pictionary $12 Pinball Dreams $33 Positronic Bridge Power Poker Windows $39 Puzzle Gallery 1 $9 Risk $28 Risk WIN $26 Russian Six Pack Russian Six Pack WIN $19 Sargon 5 $13 Scrabble Deluxe Scrabble Deluxe CD $25 Scrabble Deluxe WIN $19 Shanghali 2 Shanghaii 2 Windows S24 Solitaire WIN $19 Solitaire's Journey WIN $38 Solitaires Journey $34 Solitaires Journey 2 $36 Sorry $12 Space Vegetables $9 Spot $6 Stan Wongs Video Pkr $19 Star Wars Chess $38 Star Wars Chess CD $44 Swap $29 Tactical Wizard $39 Take-A-Brk Crswrd WIN $19 Terminator 2 Chss War $37 Tetris Classic Tetris Classic WIN $26 Videogame Solutn CD $29 Trivial Pursuit CD $35 *Trump Castle 2 DD1 $4 *Trump Castlo 2 DD2 $4 Trump Castle 3 $29 Trump Castle 3 CD $29 Vegas Entrinmt Pk WIN $21 Vegas Games Pak WIN $21 Video Cube CD $45 Virtual Reality Studio 2 $59 Wheel of Fortune Dix $34 Wheel Fortune Dlx WIN $34 Wrath of Demon CD $29 Zig-Zag $29 $9 Dream Girl CD $29 Dream Machine CD $59 Fantasies Interactive CD$35 Fox Pack CD $39 Girlfriend Suzie $44 Girlfriend Teri $49 Hot Slots CD $39 Intract Adit Spl WIN CD $12 Intract Ad Semr But CD $54 Intrct Ad Chlsea Mr CD $39 Intract Ad Semr Butts 2 $69 Interactive Lovers CD $45 Internatnl Strip Poke CD $34 Ladies Clb Pkr Nght CD $35 Maddams Familly CD $49 Midnight Stranger CD $59 Neurodancer CD $59 Nightwatch Intract 2 CD $59 Nightwatch Intractv CD $44 Paradise Club CD $69 Penthouse Intractv CD $75 Scisrs N' Stons WIN CD$59 Secrets Interactive CD $35 Sexual Obsession CD $34 Strip Poker Professional$34 Surfer Girls CD $39 Virtual Vixens CD $59 Winner Takes All CD $39 Animated Fantasies CD S34 Baby's Got Butt CD $32 Bare Assets CD $39 Best Debutantes V1 CD $49 Best of Inferno CD $39 Best of Vivid CD $36 Best Barlow Affairs CD $39 Best of the Best V. 1 CD$19 Best of the Best V.2 CD$29 Best of the Best V. 3 CD$34 Best of the Best V. 4 CD$34 Betrayal CD $36 Beverly Hills 90269 CD $39 Beyond Explicit CD $28 Big Bust Babes CD $28 Blond Justice CD $25 Bodycello CD $12 Bra Busting Babes CD $29 Busting Out CD $39 Buttman's Euro Vctn CD$39 CD Rom Collectbles CDS26 Cafe Flesh CD $29 California Daydrmer CD $29 Camp Double D CD $29 Cat and Mouse CD $48 Cheating CD $25 Condo Cuties CD $34 Curse of Catwoman CD $26 Dangerous Blondes CD $34 Dobby Does Dallas CD $38 Deception CD Deep Throat CD $36 Deep Throat Girls CD $29 Digital Dreams 2 CD $22 Digital Seduction CD $34 Dirty Debutantes CD $28 Dirty Adult Cartoons CD $38 Doors of Passion CD $36 Dungeon Dominnc CD $36 Ecstacy CD $34 Endangered CD $29 ErotiCafe CD $48 Frat Girls of Dble D CD $39 Girls Doin' Girls CD $25 Girls From Big East CD $39 Girls of Mardi Gras CD $39 Girls with Girls CD $39 Hidden Obsessions CD $32 Hollywood Scandal CD $39 House of Dreams CD $24 Hs Sleepg Beauties CD $39 Immortal Desires CD $25 Insatiable CD S32 Kama Sutra CD $38 LA Strippers CD Leather & Lace CD Legends of Porn 2 CD $25 Loads of Fun CD $32 Main Street USA CD S26 Mark of Zara CD Mask CD Model's Memoirs CD $48 Murphy's Brown CD $39 Mystique of Orient CD $34 New Wave Hkers 1 CD $29 New Wave Hkers 2 CD $32 Night Trips CD $29 Nova Collection V 3 CD $24 Pandor....AAAH'S CD $27 Parlor Games CD $25 Pink Lady CD Pixis Adult Sampler CD $12 Pretty Baby CD $19 Racquelle Releasd CD $34 Rimfire Pacific Vid CD $32 Sakura CD S24 83 $38 $30 $25 $15 IBM ADULT INTERACTIVE IBM ADULT MOTION S19 $29 Asian Palate CD $34 CD Brothel CD $29 Centrids & Covrgris CD $32 Come Play With Me CD $36 Desktop Mistress CD $54 Desktop Voyeur V 1 CD$54 Digital Dancing CD $36 Adult Movie Almanc CD 569 After Dark Trilogy CD $33 Amateur Models 2 CD S34 Amateur Video WIN CD $22 Amorous Asian Gris CD $32 Animatd Fantsies 2 CD $34 Circle Reader Service #54 CGW SEPT 8 "


"Call 800-699-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10099 PO Box 234 Dept 10099 Rochester, VT 05767 MEGA RAVELLER 1 PAX THE ZHODANI CONSPIRACY Galactic Empire Sintex 219 Bites \"MEGA TRAVEL LER 1: ZHODANI We left the Starship Races feeling pretty arrogant. Jurgen's flying eamed him a Ion of Imperial credits. Now someone has pinned us down on a floating chunk of rock. Of fers 70 talents and abilities, 28 worlds to explore, and over 30 weapons and weapons skills. $12 IMPERIA \"LOVE BITES' Twelve gorgeous creatures that are hunger driven by animal Instinct with only one desire, to quench their thirst. Offers menu driven interaction, com: plete user friendly interface and full motion. S26 \"PAX IMPERIA' Economy, research, defense, espionage, exploration and diplomacy are your tools. Ol fers 16 empires, tactical combat, communication with other emperors and selectable universe size. $42 PRO LEAGUE FREE NFL FOOTBA INTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT! 'NFL PROLEAGUE FOOTBALL' hits you like a 240 pound fullback with the goal line in sight. Choose from 198 plays or create your own. Features full detailed, color animation, NFL teams, players & stats, full rosters with substitutions, instant replay and true modem play. $12 IT CONUT ( LANCE We linea fatin super Receive an episode of Interactive Entertainment, the world's first CD MAG devoted to entertainment software, FREE with every CD ROM software order. Offer subject to change or cancella tion without notice. Valid from August 1st to September 30th or while supplies last. \"LINKS PRO 386 COURSE DISK 2 PINEHURST is recognized as one of the finest golf resorts in the world. Its Super VGA graphics stretches over rolling terrain, tree-lined fairways and undulating greens. $16 IBM ADULT MOTION IBM ADULT STILLS IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET IBM BUDGET $12 S6 $9 $9 Secrets CD $34 Seductions CD $29 Sex CD $25 Semr But Insd Shan CD $36 Semr But Paradise CD $36 Sinfully Yours CD $29 Steamy Windows CD $25 Supr Modis Go Wild CD $34 Superstars of Porn CD $24 Temptation CD $28 The Coven CD $25 Devil in Miss Jones CD $34 Fisherman's Wife CD $38 Other Side Chelsea CD $29 Touch Me, Feel Me CD $34 Toy's Not Boys CD $29 Treasure Chest CD Ultra Sex CD $29 Urotsukioji CD $39 Volcano CD $34 Wanda 2 CD $28 Weekend at Ernies CD $26 Wickd Q-Tm Movie CD $42 Womn Who Lov Mn CD $32 $12 American Girls CD $32 Asian Hot Pix CD $19 Bodacious Beauties CD $36 Busty Babes 2 CD $36 College Girls CD $36 Creme de la Creme CD $29 Double Play Vol 1 CD $36 Double Play Vol 2 CD $36 Erotica CD $34 European Erotica CD $34 Exotic Girls 3 in 1 CD $24 Expose CD $24 Extreme Delight CD $28 G.L.F.s keep Giving CD $27 Girls Steven J Hicks CD $29 Girls of Vivid V. 1 CD $29 Girls of Vivid V. 2 CD $32 Girls, Girls, Girls CD S29 Glamour Girls 1943 CD $36 Heavenly Bodies 2 CD $39 Heavenly Bodies 3 CD $39 Heavenly Bodies V.1 CD$39 High Volume Nudes CD $28 Hooter Heavens CD $36 L.A. Lust CD Local Girls V. 2 CD $22 Lovely Ladies II CD $39 Massive Mellons CD $39 More Northrn Delght CD$34 Northern Delights CD $32 Nova Collection V. 1 CD $26 Nova Collection V.2 CD $24 Overexposed CD $39 Sexiest Women on CD $24 Southern Beauties CD $34 Super Smutware CD $26 Sweet Dreams CD $29 Women of Venus CD $22 S24 3D Pinball S12 Acquire $9 Air Force Commander $9 Armada Villa Crespo $9 ATP Flight Simultr 1.0 $12 Banzai Baseball Card Collector S6 Baseball Facts Battle Command Bball Chall 1987 Teams $9 Bball Chall 1988 Teams $9 Bball Chall 1989 Teams S9 Blackjack $9 Blue Max Aces Grt War $9 Captain Blood $9 *Cardinal of the Kremlin $6 Castles Northern Cpgn $12 Champions of Krynn $12 Charge of Light Brigade $12 Chess Net WIN $9 Combination Lock $9 Conquered Kingdoms $12 Conqueror Multi Tank S6 Covert Action $6 Crime City $12 *Crime Does Not Pay $12 Dark Hall Demon Blue Dr Doom's Revenge $9 Dr Thorp's mini Blackjack $9 Dr Wong's Jcks/Vid Pkr 5 $9 Dragon Force $12 Dragon Lord $9 Dragon Strike $12 Dragons of Flame $9 Don't Go Alone $6 EMotion Fighting for Rome $12 Finale $3 Free DC $9 Gofr Winkl Adv CD WIN $12 Gamma Force $6 Harpoon Designer Series $7 Hearts Heatwave Hole In One Mini Golf S6 Hole In 1 Mini Golf Cr Dk $3 Humans: Insult to Iniury $9 International Sports Chall$6 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art $3 Jack Nicklaus Crs Dsk 1 S6 Jack Nicklaus Crs Dsk 3 $6 Jack Nicklaus Crs Dsk 5 $4 Jack Nicklaus Crs Dsk 5 S6 Jack Nicklaus SE Crse 1 $4 Japan Scenery Disk $12 Killing Cloud S6 Lightspeed Line in the Sand $12 \"MacArthur's War $9 *Magic Candle 2 $9 Magic Candle 3 S9 Marianas Turkey Shoot $12 Matrix Cubed $9 Medieval Lords $12 MegaFortress S12 Mega Traveller 2 $12 Mega Traveller:Zhodani $6 ML Baseball All Stars $12 ML Baseball Managr Ch$12 ML Football 2 S12 Madden Playr Stats '89 $8 Microl, bsball Seattle 13 $12 Millenium $6 Mines of Titan $9 Never Mind $9 Tesserae WIN $12 Test Drive 2 S12 Test Drive 3:Road & Car $9 The Tinies $12 Thunderhawk Tie Break Tennis Tony LRss Classic Stad $12 Tony LaRs BB 1990 Tm $12 Tony LaRss BB 1991 $12 Tony LaRussa Baseball $9 Top Gun Danger Zone S12 Treasures Savge Front $9 Turn-n-Burn $9 UMS 2 S12 UMS 2 Planet Editor $9 Under Fire Uninvited S6 Vaxine $12 Visions of Aftermath $12 War in the Gulf War of the Lance \"Warlords $12 Weaver Tm/Playr Stat 89 $3 Wheel of Fortune Wheel of Fortune 3 Xiphos New Facilities Locator $9 NFL Chall Col Alumni Tm $9 NFL Chall Pre Ssn 90 $9 NFL Chall 91 Pre Ssn $9 NFL Chall All Star Teams $9 NFL Chall Dream Teams $9 NFL Proleague Football $12 NFL Video Football $12 Obliterator $6 Oligopoly $9 On Target Operation Combat $12 Patriot $12 Playmaker Football $12 Pick'n Pile $6 Pictionary $12 Power Politics WIN $12 ProFball Anlyst 92 Ed $9 Punisher $12 Rotox $9 Rules of Engagement $9 S.C. Out $12 Scenry Collt California $9 Scenry Collin Grt Britain 59 SDI $6 Sentinel Worlds 1 $9 Shadow Sorcerer $9 $12 Sleeping Gods Lie S6 Sorry $12 Space Vegetables $9 Spot Sporting Triangle $3 Storm Across Europe S12 Taking of Beverly Hills $6 Teenage Mut Ninja Turt S12 Tegel's Mercenaries $9 Terran Envoy $9 $9 $6 IBM ADULT STILLS Siege MACINTOSH $6 101 Sex Positions 2 CD 339 101 Sex Positions CD $39 3D Beauties CD $19 3D Darling CD $34 3D Dream Girls CD $36 94-95 CDX Calendr CD $29 Adult Reference CD $29 Amateur Allstars CD $29 Amateur Models CD $22 American Girls 2 CD $34 Jack Nicklaus CrDk 1-3ea$6 Jack Nicklaus Crs Dk 5 $6 Lexi Cross $19 Omar Sharif Bridge Dix $19 Shadowgate $19 Sim Ant $19 Test Drive 2: CA Challng $6 Test Drive 2: Super Cars $6 S6 CGW SEPT 9 "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada, PR HI, AK, APO, FPO S4 per order. Worldwide airmail $6 per item. Handling $2 per shipment Visa, MC and Discover Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders same as cash, COD 58 Defectives replaced with same product. Moglitatis shipped same day, Ship ping times may vary, Price availability may change. All sales linal Call for details. FREE GAME OFFER* FIGHTER THOOT 'PACIFIC STRIKE is a World War 11 flight simulation that allows you to change the course of the war in the Pacific Theater. Fly a wide variety of expertly modeled aircraft in all the major theatres, including Pearl Harbor and Midway. Plan your own missions and earn promo tions. S45 *TIE FIGHTER Sequel to X-Wing. players fly under the direction of the Dark Lord himself, Darth Vader. Dety the Rebel Alliance in training, combat missions & tours of duty that strengthen the Emperor's hold on the galaxy. Six Imperial starfighters to fly under the the Empire. $45 'HOLLYWOOD MOGUL' Control all phases of movie development, production and marketing. Buy scripts and best-sellers, develop ideas or make sequels to your hit movie. Give each movie the green light to move into production De cide what theaters to release your movie. $39 MALIN *FREE GAME OFFER COOTE Spend the specified amount on any in stock IBM software and choose a free IBM game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from August 1st through September 30th or while supplies last COS SPEND $60 GET CYBERRACE CD' You are Clay Shaw, forced to represent the Terran Empire on the cybertrack. Cyber Race uses voxels, latest in landscape rendering technology, digitized actors and dialogue, and cinematic 256-color between race sequences Floppy Disk $19 CD ROM $39 'MAGIC CANDLE 2' 30 characters will join your hero, for specific quests or as long-term companions. Fight the forces of darkness. Sail to the farthest comers of the continent of Gurtex, lose yourself in the intrigue and face the horrors of the dungeons, catacombs and dark towers. Playmaker Football Combo, Cardinal of Kremlin 3.5, Darkhall 3.5, Trump Castlo 2 Data Disk 1 or 2 3.5 or 5.25, Gunship 5.25 Pirates 5.25. Star Legions 5.25, Magic Candle 25.25, MacArthurs War 5.25. Crime Does Not Pay 5.25. Warlords 5.25. X-Men 5.25 SPEND $100 GET Dan Airborne Ranger 5.25. Tegel's Mercenaries 5.25, Command HQ 5.25, F15 SE 25.25, M1 Tank Platoon 3.5, Megatraveller Zhodani 5.25, Red Storm Rising 3.5, Battles of Destiny 3.5 $9 AMIGA 3DO NEO GEO GAME GEAR GAME GEAR JAGUAR Fast Break Heatwave $3 Jack Nicklaus Course 1 $4 Test Drive2:Muscle Cars $3 Super Bike Challenge $32 Tazmania:Escape Mars $32 True Lies $36 Volt $34 WWF: Raw $36 World Cup USA $32 World Series Bsball 95 $36 X MEN 2 $36 3DO $54 $54 $56 $52 JAGUAR $54 Off World Interceptor $52 Out of this World PGA Tour GA $52 Pataank $52 Pebble Beach Golf $52 Real Pinball $52 Red Baron $52 Rise of the Robots $49 Road Rash Robinson's Requiem $49 Rock & Roll Racing $49 SHADOW:War Succssn $52 Samurai Showdown $52 Sewer Shark $52 Shadow Caster $52 Shock Wave $56 Shuttle $46 Slayer $52 Soccer Kid $49 Space Ace $49 Space Pirates $52 Star Control 2 Star Trek Next Generin S54 Star Wars Chess $52 Stellar 7 $49 Syndicate $52 Theme Park $52 Total Eclipse $52 Trance Mission $56 Troddlers $49 Twisted $49 VR Stalker $52 Vikings $46 Way of the Warrior $52 Who Shot Johnny Rock $52 Wing Commander $49 World Cp Gif Dordo Bch$52 WorldBuilders, Inc $52 3 Count Bout $189 Art of Fighting 2 $199 Baseball Stars Pro 2 $149 Baseball Stars Pro $139 $129 Fatal Fury 2 S199 Fatal Fury Fatal Fury Special $199 Karnov's Revenge $199 King of Monsters 2 $169 King of the Monsters S99 Last Resort $149 Neo Geo Gold Systm $569 Ninja Combat $99 Riding Hero $129 Robo Army $99 Samurai Showdown $199 Sengoku 2 $199 Spin Master $199 Super Sideks Soccer 2$199 Survivor $199 Thrash Rally $129 Top Hunter $199 Top Players Golf $119 Windjammers S199 World Heroes 2 Jet $199 World Heroes 2 $199 3DO System S499 11th Hour $59 Burning Soldier $49 Claytighter 2 $46 Doom $52 Dragon Tales $46 Dragon's Lair $49 Dragons Lair 2 $52 Duelin' Firemen $52 ESPN Baseball $52 Escape Monster Manor $52 Family Feud $52 Flashback $52 Flying Nightmares $52 GEX $52 Gridders $49 HUMANS Horde Incredible Machine $52 Iron Man S49 Jurassic Park $52 Kingdom:Far Reaches $46 Lemmings $49 Lost Files Sherlck Hlms $49 Mad Dog McCree 2 $52 Madden Football Megarace $44 Microcosm Night Trap $52 Oceans Below $44 Donald Duck $32 Dragon $32 Ecco Dolphin:Tides Tm $36 Fatal Fury $32 Formula 1 GA $32 Incrdible Crash Dumies $28 Incredible Hulk GA $34 Itchy & Scratchy Jurassic Park $36 Lemmings 2:The Tribes $32 Lion King $38 Marco's Magic Soccer $42 Mega Maze $32 Mickey Mouse Lgnd Ills $34 Micro Machines $32 Monster Truck Wars $32 Mortal Kombat 2 S39 Ms Pac Mar $28 NBA Bsktball Dave R $32 NBA Jam Session GA $38 NFL FB 95 Joe Montna $36 NHL All Star Hockey $36 PGA Tour Golf 2 S32 Pac Attack GA Power Rangers $38 Pro Action Replay $49 RC Grand Prix $29 Robocop Vs Terminator $32 Samurai Showdown $32 SeaQuest DSV $34 Shining Force 2 $39 Sonic Spinball $34 Sonic Triple Trouble $36 Speedy Gonzales $32 Spidrmn:Arcad Revng $38 Star Trek Movie $34 Star Wars $34 StarGate $36 $52 Dune $54 Dungeon Depths S54 European Soccer Chall $56 Evolution:Dino Dudes $44 Flashback $54 Galactic Gladiators Gunship 2000 Hardball 3 S52 Highlander CD Horrorscope $54 Hosenose & Booger $54 Iron Soldier $52 Jack Nicklaus Golf CD $52 Jaguar Formula 1 Racg $54 Kasumi Ninja $54 Legions of the Undead S52 Lester the Unlikely $54 NFL Football $54 Pinball Dreams $52 Pinball Fantasies $52 Ray Man $54 Return to Zork S54 Rise of the Robots $54 Robinson's Requiem $54 Soccer Kid Space Wars Star Raiders 2000 $52 Syndicate $54 Theme Park $54 Tiny Toon Adventures $52 Troy Aikman Football $58 Ultimate Brain Games $56 Ultra Vortex $54 Valus Force $54 White Men Can't Jump $54 Wild Cup Soccer $54 World Cup Kckil Soccer $54 Zool 2 $54 $29 Jaguar System $249 Jaguar CD System S199 Air Car Wars Arena Football $54 Assault S54 BIOS Fear $54 Barkley Basketball CD $52 Battle Morph CD $52 Battle Wheels $54 Blue Lighining CD S52 BrainDead 13 CD $49 Brett Hull Hockey $58 Brutal Sports Football $56 Bubsy $44 Cannon Fodder S54 Car Wars $54 Castle Wolfenstein 3D $54 Chaos Agenda CD $52 Checkrd Flag 2 Rd Line $58 Creature Shock S52 Demolition Man $52 Doom S58 Double Dragon 5 Dragon $52 Dragon's Lair Dragon's Lair CD $52 $52 $52 $54 $52 GAME GEAR $34 $49 Akira Aladdin GA $32 Baby Boom $36 Bart Smpsn Space Mut $26 Break Thru $38 Choplifter 3 GA $32 Desert Demitn Rd Runr $29 Desert Strike GA $32 $52 $52 $54 Circle Reader Service #54 CGW SEPT 10 "


"REVIEW Inca Nations of Immortality More Baffling French Sensibilities In Sierra's INCA II by Charles Ardai HE INCA GAMES ARE LIKE SOMEONE's steals the ship, and heads into orbit to another. These scenes are as good as the NUTTY UNCLE. THEY LOOK ODD, check out an asteroid that has mysteriouscomputer-generated sequences from the THEY TELL STRANGE STORIES THAT ly turned up in the neighborhood. TV series Babylon 5 or the film The Last no one quite gets, they behave unThe ensuing space combat sequenceStarfighter, which says a lot, considering predictably and sometimes embarone of several in the game is almost the relative power of the computers used rass you, but they also fascinate you, good enough to make you forget the to create and display them. almost in spite of themselves. Imported goofy movie and puzzle sequences that Unfortunately, the spaceships eventualfrom France, the original INCA told the preceded it. Soon enough, though, you're ly have to land and disgorge their passenstory of an ancient, star-faring Incan civiback in la-la land, when Sonny Boy blows gers and, once on-screen, the passengers lization, with the player cast in the role of up and Eldorado has to come to the rescan't resist the urge to open their mouths. a warrior named Eldorado who had a cue. The remainder of the game follows Once they do that, there's no hope. When mystical prophecy to fulfill. Along the Eldorado and new pal Kelt Cartier, a it starts to talk, INCA II makes the films way, Eldorado had flight goggle-clad skewered on Mystery Science Theater 3000 to battle conquista INCA 2: NATIONS OF IMMORTALITY Indiana Jones look like high art. dors in outer-space Price: $34.95 wannabe, as they galleons, more than System: IBM hop from planet DON'T KNOW SQUAT one sword-waving Requirements: to planet in an ef\"I bet,\" says Eldorado to Kelt Cartier nemesis, and the 386-25MHz or fort to stop rival upon entering a cave and snifling around, queasy feeling better, 4MB warlord Aguirre \"that some gold prospectors have squatRAM, VGA brought on by soarfrom harnessing ted here.\" graphics, CDing through too ROM, mouse; the power of the Yes, it's the glory of translation, with all many swooping, supports Pro asteroid to rule the potential for unintended absurdity trippy animations. Audio and the universe. and embarrassment you might expect. In the sequel, El Sound Blaster What sort of adNot only are all the characters in the dorado is back for sound cards ventures do they game obviously speaking some language more interstellar adProtection: None have? Plenty of other than English since their lips keep Designers: Coktel Vision venturing, though Publisher: Sierra On-Line first-person outermoving long after the overdubbed Engthis time the next Coarsegold, CA space dogfights lish audio track stops, but the lines they generation gets to (800) 757-7707 and the chance to speak, which probably were not gems of take the helm of the repulse a raid on a literary expression to begin with, have ancestral cheese-wedge spaceship: moving locomotive, for starters. There are been turned by the translators into dreck Atahualpa, Eldorado's son, who looks like also numerous traditional adventure of the first order. Dialogue this stiff and Buster Keaton on a particularly depressgame puzzles for them to solve, though cliché would be laughed off a movie ing day and sounds like Gilbert Gottfried these tend to be pretty simple, and a maze screen; even the deliberately crappy films with PMS. (Most of the male characters for them to navigate. In between each produced by such direct-to-video distribusound like Gilbert Gottfried, strangely pair of game sequences, short movies tors as Troma or Prism are better written. enough, but more on that anon.) bring the player up to date on the latest What's more, Troma and Prism films The game begins when Dad, now an plot developments. have a sense of humor about how bad Establishment Conservative who has to The kindest thing you can say about they are, something the very serious-ofthink of how he looks to the war council, INCA II is that it looks great most of the purpose INCA II lacks utterly. The voice refuses Atahualpa's pleas to let him take time, particularly in the movie sequences actors are, without exception, depressingthe family spaceship out for a spin. Junior that feature the game's various spaceships ly awful, but they seem to think that they bonks a guard on the head with a log, gliding through one confrontation after are Master Thespians who have been INCA II 62 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"ERRE Coming This Fall on IBM CD-ROM. Capstone THE PINNACLE OF ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE To order call: (305) 591-5900. (800) 468-7226. BBS (305) 471-8962 Software Creations BBS (508) 365-2359, 2400 Baud . (508) 368-7139, U.S. Robotics. (508) 365-9352, 14.4-28.8K Zorroland 1994 Zona Productions, Inc Licensed by The Imagination Factory Circle Reader Service #207 "


"82004 Buta aiming at the center offer? The answer is its art, and very little of the screen and else. Jaded starfighters will gape right shooting blindly is the along with the novices when the computer best way to carry the cuts away from the first-person view of a day. But if you write battle to show a gorgeous side-view clip of this scene off, too, the ships in action. what's left to enjoy? Whenever Eldorado brings the tumi in Two things, basically for a landing, the graphics are breathtakthe dogfights and the ing. A thunderstorm outside an Arctic great animation. Just lamasery is genuinely thrilling, as is Kelt's Auto how good are the climactic entrance at the head of an armadogfights? They're enda of boomerang-shaped tri-planes. The joyable...but no more same \"anything goes\" quality that makes than that. There is a the storyline so incoherent adds vitality good variety of and excitement to the visuals. You never TUMI-ACHE The artwork is gorgeous, but it's still no proof against the weapons at the playknow what you'll next see zooming across tedium of the lackluster space combat. er's disposal and opthe screen, and the anticipation as each ponents on whom to new sequence loads is exciting. To the exhired to perform Shakespeare. The pontest them out. The player's \"tumi,\" a shiptent that INCA II is worth any attention at derousness is oppressive, the hair-tearing that looks a little like a stone doorstop, all, this is why. and breast-beating just plain silly. There handles well, and the sensation of flying in INCA II contains some of the best animais more ham on display in this game than the vacuum is successfully conveyed. tion ever seen in a computer game. But in a Boar's Head factory tour. Problem is, despite some dart-andthen it doesn't do anything with this aniOf course, even good actors would have chase activity as foreplay, when the battles mation, except attach it to some dreadful a hard time with this material. It is never get hot and heavy, they frequently end dramatic scenes, some utterly minor adentirely clear who these Incas are that we with the tumi barreling down on an essen venture gaming, and an action game are watching. Similarwhich, though tolerable, is far from being ly unclear is the the best of its kind. INCA II is fun to watch, \"where\" and \"when\" but it isn't all that much fun to play. The of the story. At one designers tacitly acknowledge and heightpoint a character en this imbalance by including a \"video\" mentions Earth, but feature that allows players to replay their none of the planetfavorite movie sequences and a \"demo\" hopping appears to feature that displays some of the best take place in our solar scenes, but not a \"save game\" feature or system, judging by any real, storyline-altering interactivity. the appearance of the I applaud Sierra's decision to give this planets themselves. unique and occasionally stunning title a So where does an shot at the U.S. market, but I urge them Earth-style locomoand their French counterparts at Coktel tive come from, on a SPEAKING IN TONGUES Badly lip-synched characters open doors for you, Vision to give their next game a better planet far from both figuratively and literally, as you attempt to delve deeper into INCA II's shot, by the simple expedient of making it Earth? Don't ask patchwork quilt of a story. a better game. That's just one of the THE EDITORS SPEAK many disjointed pieces INCA II offers in its tially immobile foe, guns blazing. Even rambling tableau. Nothing is attached when three bad guys go after you at once, INCA 2: NATIONS OF IMMORTALITY logically to anything else. It all reminds they tend to attack politely, one at a me of a child who, unable to find the time until the endgame, anyway, when it RATING ** pieces that actually go together, forces is more like fifty-against-one. PROS Gorgeous animation makes two jigsaw puzzle pieces to join in a Novices may find themselves enjoying disharmonious but firm union, and prethese space battles, but those whose light the so-so space combat simulation look better than it actually is, and sents the result to you with a look of enortraining has included WING COMMANDER gives you a reward for playing mous satisfaction. Alas, what is satisfying or X-WING are more likely to find themthrough the low-grade adventure to the budding artist who has managed, selves yawning and turning on their interby force of will, to link the unlinkable is mal autopilot. Even gamers who find the game sequences. CONS Unless you like watching ballling to the viewer who has to make scenes challenging at first will no doubt Frenchmen in weird get-ups and heads or tails of the picture that results. have mastered them (and tired of them) by the ninth or tenth repetition. hearing untalented voice-over actors deliver hokey lines worse than the BLOOD RED INCA If INCA II's dogfights are fair, the advenTo the \"not much fun\" list you can add ture game elements limp, and the acting post oflice delivers your mail, this the locomotive battle sequence, where dismal, what does the game really have to game will get on your nerves very fast. 64 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"A TIME WARPING ADVENTURE OF DINOSAUR FACTS & FUN! ZAMKIE VIWILI TM FROM PLANET ZELTOID I COULD USED he world as we know it is about to be destroyed by zombie dinosaurs from prehistoric times! Zapped by Brain Blobs from the planet Zeltoid, innocent dinosaurs are being time-warped from the past as part of Harry the Harrier's very uncool plot to control the world. Only you and Dexter the awesome Dinodroid can stop him and save the earth! SOME COM HELP HERE! DINOSAUR XL ENCYCLOPEDIA @GO MAP DOO HTQ 2400 MAN PHILIPS INTERACTIVE     INTERACTIVE IBM CD-ROM Conversion  1994 Interplay Productions, Inc. All rights reserved.  1992 Philips Interactive Media Inc Circle Reader Service #175 Interplay Productions Inc. 17022 Fitch Avenue Irvine, CA 92714 10.553-6678 "


"REVIEW AThornin Hitler's Side Blazkowicz Hurls The Spear Of Destiny Once Again by Paul Hyman HEN WE LAST LEFT \"B.J.\" much you enjoyed the original game machine gun-wielding vampire bats. A BLAZKOWICZ, HE HAD NABBED and how anxious you are to tackle more new cast of bosses will challenge you, led THE SPEAR OF DESTINY FROM of the same. by the lobotomized Submarine Willy, Adolph Hitler and all was Although the battle takes place not in mad scientist Professor Quarkblitz, Maright with the Allied Forces. Castle Wolfenstein but in Hitler's new jor Hans \"The Axe\" von Schliefen sportWhile his name may not be instantly atomic research laboratory, the look of ing his dual chainguns, and more. The recognizable, the popular hero of the new SPEAR levels will be instantly rectrick to survival is saving your game freWOLFENSTEIN 3-D and its sequel, SPEAR ognizable. Each level begins with B.J. in quently before enemy bullets do their OF DESTINY (SPEAR), has returned via two an elevator, the door slides open with a worst. new mission disks from FormGen, the clank, and all hell breaks loose. Gamers will notice immediately the folks who published the original game As in the earlier games, the task at improvement in the graphic details as for id Software. SPEAR OF DESTINY MISSION DISKS well as the greater variation in Legend has it that musical themes and sounds. The the Spear was the Price: $39.95 per mission disk, growls of the killer Dobermans, weapon used to $79.95 for CD-ROM with both mission disks and SPEAR OF for example, are more menacing, pierce the side of DESTINY and the soldiers no longer just Christ when he was System: IBM shout \"Achtung!\" but \"Alarm!\" nailed to the cross, Requirements: 386 or better, VGA (\"Danger!\"), \"Gluck gwhabt!\" and that no man graphics, 8 MB hard drive space, (\"You were lucky!\"), \"Mammi!\" can be defeated mouse: supports AdLib and Sound (\"Mommy!\"), and \"Au! Das tut with the Spear in Blaster sound cards weh!\" (\"Ow! That hurts!\"). Protection: None his possession. It is, Designers: Speedy Pete, The Axe, Chuck Archer and Ken Reiser Another development suggest of course, left to Publishers: Formgen, Inc, Scottsdale, AZ, (800) 263-2390 the game designers' took pity on you to wrest this allfrustrated players. In previous powerful weapon from Hitler and his hand is to scout out the corridors and versions, to find and open hidden doorhenchmen, who (as dastardly villains are rooms for keys, \"one ups,\" weapons, ways, it was necessary to \"feel\" along wont to do) have managed to procure food, and ammo—anything that will every wall. Now, more times than not, a the Spear once again. keep B.J. alive while he searches for that dead rat laying next to a wall is a clue The first add-on disk, MISSION 2: REnext elevator. There are prizes that that the wall is worth further investigaTURN TO DANGER, has 21 levels, but that award points along the way, but survival, tion. According to the manual, when the only takes you halfway to the Spear. rather than point counting, is the ultiNazis enter a secret area, a rat occasionDon't expect to complete the mission mate goal. While most of the baddies ally gets splattered when the wall moves. until you've blasted your way through 21 are the same as in the original game, Purists who would rather find secrets more levels on the second disk, MISSION there have been some changes. There without the aid of squashed rats may 3: ULTIMATE CHALLENGE. Whether are still plenty of armed-to-the-teeth also resent the detailed floor plans in you're up to another 42 levels of WOLF guards, officers, and the infamous SS, the manual which can make winning 3D-like action really depends on how but the mutants have been replaced by SPEAR a breeze. At least, the manual can 66 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"FORGET READING INTERACTIVE EMTERTAINMENT EPISODE 1 In Windows Program Manager choose Run from the File menu and enter DANSTALL where Diis vain MAG JIM CHECK THIS OUT. IT HAS PLAYABLE DEMOS FULL MOTION REVIEWS TALKING PREVIEWS MULTIMEDIA HINTS VIDEO INTERVIEWS ILLING MOON PAGAN REVIEW MAGIC CANDLE 1 INFERNO. ALONE IN THE DARK 2 EFENDER. MEGARACE MYST T. THE HORDE. NBA JAM ONIC 3. BATTLE CARS BATTLEDROME the USA ITS ONLY $9.95 OH, AND A FREE GAME TOO! PINTERACTIVE ENTERTAINMENT The #1 Education and Entertainment CD MAG Interactive TV for your CD ROM 12 episodes $59.95 1 episode $9.95 800 283 3542 or 802 767 4622 isa & Mastercard accepted. Make checks payable to: Interactive Entertainment PO Box 21 Hancock VT 05748. Fax: 802 767 3382  1994 Chips & Bits, Inc. Circle Reader Service #209 "


"be ignored. as satisfyingly violent and But one thing never changes for B.J., is still voluntarily rated and that's the violence. When WOLFENPC-13 for \"profound carSTEIN was first released in 1992, parents nage,\" and parents should were horrified. Not only were their kids still use their best discreshooting Nazis (which wasn't so bad) but tion with the youngsters. also guard dogs (which was bad), and Owners of less-thanthe screams and blood were too much. leading edge PCs will apAdding to the realism was the game's preciate one more aspect unique 3D, first-person perspective. of SPEAR. The game moves Some players got so caught up in racing like lightning, even on a FLOOR SCORE LIVES HEALTH  down the hallways that they reported lowly 386SX machine. If 8 206400 8 727 96 symptoms of seasickness from the illuthat doesn't impress you, sion of rapid movement. Thankfully try playing the currently GOING SPELUNKERING Here, the cave-dwellers turn out to be Nazis none of that has changed; SPEAR is still popular DOOM on the with chainguns. same machine. While DOOM may have a superior look to SPEAR, it moves like quickTHE EDITORS SPEAK sand on older machines. SPEAR OF DESTINY WOLFENSTEIN and SPEAR MISSION DISKS have been widely imitated, but, for our money, only RATING *** 1/2 Doom has improved on PROS Great for action gamers the thrills and excitement whose computers are not up to FLOOR SCORE LIVES HEALTH AMMO of the originals. This set is DOOM's tough standards. 17 220800 9 100% 99% well worth spending quali CONS MOTSSS-More of the same ty carnage time on, at least SS soldiers and graphics which are ACHTUNG! MY @&# Better be healthy and (weapons) wealthy while we're waiting for beginning to look dated. before you crash the German heavy-water experiments party. DOOM II to be released. FHUNG! ACHING No More Hassle. Tired of fumbling with joystick cables behind your computer? Are you spending more time changing joysticks than playing your favorite games? You need a JOYSWITCH controllers (rudder or gas / brake pedals) to your computer. Maximize your performance by switching to the \"right\" joystick for each game, instead of using whichever one happens to be connected to your computer. Get greater value from your expensive, specialized controllers. The hassle-free alternative: the MULTIPORTJOYSTICK DATA SWITCH OFF Joyswitch At last you can jump from joystick to man JOYSTICK FOOT CONTAOLLER joystick, game to game, with the speed and ease of turning a switch. Connect up to four devices (flight sticks, yokes, steering wheels, game pads, etc.) and two sets of foot Joyswitch works with most IBM PC compatible controllers. Joystick extension cable included for FREE! Order TODAY!! Only $49.95. VISA To order call: (714) 362-8698 OR e Order on Check Six BBS (714) 362-8299 (8-N-1 1200-28.8kb) 1994 Lead Pursuit, Inc., Joyswitch is a tradernark of Lead Pursuit, Inc. For more information call or write to Lead Pursuit, Inc. 27068 La Paz Rd, 3466, Laguna Niguel, CA 92656 Phone: (714)362-8698 FAX: (714)831-4334 Circle Reader Service #211 68 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"NR 13 WARNING! NOT RECOMMENDED FOR PLAYERS UNDER 13 For centuries, war has raged among the demons and fairies, devastating this mystical land. Two young knights, separated at birth and raised by mortals, chosen for the ultimate battle that will decide the fate of heaven and earth. Never knowing their true relation or their own dark destiny they are fated to meet and duel each other to the death. As Desmond, the Knight of Xentar, you will be striving with many a winsome enchantress to overcome menacing foes and perhaps in victory, become the ruler of all. MEGA TECH System uirements: IBM TO 386-SX compatible 180 recommended), VGA graphics, no extusled memory required, Sound BlasterTM tund Pro Audio Spectrum compatible, CD-ROM or diskette version available So the challenge is on! An incomparable role playing fantasy game for your PC, with stunning, hand sculpted graphics throughout, humorous script and thrilling plots. But be warned — with its romance and intense action, Knights of Xentar is not for kids nor the faint hearted. Available at finer software dealers everywhere or call 1 800 258 MEGA. Visa/Mastercard accepted. Download the FREE demo by calling our 24 hour BBS 310 539 7739 (8 data bits, no parity, 1 stop bit, filename kxdemo.exe) or send $5 for the demo on diskette to Megatech, PO Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510. ENTER THE WORLD OF DEMONS ECSTASY OR EXTINCTION AWAITS Based on the Killi77 0 1 0 luc Japanese hit The Roc movie and Playing ith the best #1 game, Game Dragon 22 tc Will thrill you with t in Japanese Anime ! ES Knight III KNIGHTSof XENTAR Circle Reader Service #86 "


"FALCON GOLD DREAM WEB Dream Web COMPUTER Express Never bolore has such awosome krepower and excitement come together, Falcon Gold-for the first time, the completo Falcon 3.0 collection on 1 convenient CD ROM The newest versions of Falcon 3.0 MIG 29. Hornet: Naval Strike Fighter plus Operation Fighting Tiger and Art of the Kill dogfighting video. More challenging combat among the widest variety of air, land and sea forgets 7 compoigns and over 630,000 square miles of real terrain. Spectrum BMCD Pat 34740 Dreamweb throws together the elements of science fiction and adventure in compell ing game of pure style. In a city in the future, one force controls the lives of people. Not the once E emples powerful government and city officials weakened by rampant capitalism, but the force of the Dreamweb, Powers of good and evil wrestle in the subconscious of every person. A strong stomach is what you'll need to be hard and unscrupulovs-the end justifies the means. Emplo BM CD, DOS POT #32967 Since 1985 $50 $35 800-228-7449 EXT TOLL FREE ORDER LINE \"FORMERLY PRINCE« INTERACTIVE MARTUM VEGAS ALIEN LEGACY OCCIDE TIC PATE This stunning OF HUMANITY now science fiction discovery game from Dynamix weaves your favorite game olements adventure, strategy. andsimu lation, into ono bold, captivating storyline Command the seedship UNS. Colypso, in search of o lost humon colony that preceded you to the Beta Coili stor system. Explore and colonize as a means of discovering a faster than light propulsion device. But beware! The blackness around you is foeming with ancient mysteries. Slena: DOS Part 134695 AUJ MEGARACE CD A wild, on LEGASPACE the edge virtual SEAD THAT ALLE driving ANTENOLORE experience through the landscape of a futuristic Mego lopolis Radical head to head competition combining speed, Cunning, oggression, RM and all out combat, moke Megoroce o one of a kind goming challenge Players pit themselves against one of five computer generated drivers as they navigate through three dimensional Obstacles to take the lead using any means necessary Solware Toolworla: BM CD Pan 433310 VIRTUAL VEGAS Virtual Vegas Inc. welcomes you to the future of The First Wonder of the CyberWorld. casino gaming enter fainment, Come to virtual vegas and wander through a stunning cyterano with beautiful blackjack women becoming you to the tables. Your goal win big, her goal; steal your heart and empty your wallet! The more you play the move playful it gets. Written by the editors of National Lampoon Magazine and packed with 600 mogs of stunning 3D rendered graphics and video Becomedia: BMC Pat 33816 $20 Take a grand video tour of the exciting domain of the artist formerly known as Prince. Use a funky mixer to create your own version of his new song, \"Race Play the instruments and hear his various vocal stylings. Or you can sing lead vocal to \"Kiss Look further and find more curiosities beyond your wildest imagining. Rock the house with music videos and audio tracks from his whole CD Library. You'll witness his past work in a dynamic 3D environment Compton's BMCDMAC CD Part 135509 $37 IBM CD-ROM  IBM CD-ROM Flight ATP w/East & West Flight Simulator Toolkit Fortress of Dr. Rodiakl... Freddy Pharkas Freelancer 2120 Front Pago Sports Baseball Front Page Sports Football 95 Gobtiel Knight Gateway Il Geltysburg Giga Games Shorowaru CD Global Explorer Great Naval Bamles il Great Naval Battles Pack Hond of Fate .. Harvestor Hell Cab Horde IBM CD-ROM King's Quest VI Upgrade King's Quest VII.... Knights of Xenlar Labyrinth of Time Lands of Lore Lawnmower Man. Leisuro Suit Larry Anthology Leisure Suit Larry VI. Links Pinehurst Country SVGA Lode Runner Lord of the Rings Lost Eden Lost in Time IBM CD-ROM MPC Wizard Diagnostic 195.2 Sentury Video Alminac 58 LOOIK Privateer Reserve your copy of Castles F%ari   Manioc Sports Mech Commander MechWarrior !! Mogo Race Melaltech: Earth Siege Microcosm .. Microsoft Baseball Microsoft Golf Mig-29 Gold Might & Magic World of Xeon Millennium Auction ... Monopoly Deluxe More Incredible Machine Morphmon..... Mysl. Nomad Outpost Pacific Strik & Spouch Pack Police Quest IV Porky Pig Psychotron MPC Quantam Gate Quest for Glory IV ROMIX Comics Freex #1 ROMIX Comes Hardcase ROMIX Comics Prime #1 Raiden Rampage Ravenloit... Rebel Assault ...... Red Baron/A 10 Tank Return of the Phantom Return to Ring World Return to Zork SSN 21: Sea Wolf SVGA Harrier Som & Max Hit the Road Sautus . . Scrabble Deluxe ..... Secret of Monkey Island Shadow Coster... Shadow of the Comel SimAnt Enhanced SimCity Enhanced .. SimEarth ... Sitting on the Farm .. PREORDER TODAY! DOOM II 54 10-Year Anthology Classics ...... 11th Hout 3 Balloons 7th Guest AD&D: Dark Sun Shattered lands AD&D: Dungeon Hack ... AD&D: Eye Beholder Trilogy AD&D: Genie's Curse Aces of the Deep Aces of the Pacific Aces over Europe Aegis: Guardian of the Fleet Ait Warrior Super MPC AlrWorks Alien Legacy Alone in the Dark Artic Baron Babylon 5 Battle Chess Battledrome... Beneath a Stoel Sky Bicycle Collection BioForge Interactive Movie Blood Net Buzz Aldrin's Space Capitol Punishment Celebrity Poker MPC Championship Pinball ChessMaster 4000 Turbo MPC Comanche w/Mission Disks 1&2 Command Starship Companions of Xanth Conspiracy ....... Cowboy Casino Crime Patrol Critical Path Curse of Enchantia CyberRace CyberSpace , Cyberjudas Cyberploim Formula D&D: Fantasy Empiros D&D: Stronghold D-Day: Operation Overlord Daemonsgate .. .. Dare to Fly ... Dark Legion Dawn Patrol Day of the Tentoclo . Deathstar Arcade Baules Dracula Unleashed Drogon's Lair DragonSphere ESPN: Let's Play Baseball. ESPN: Let's Play Soccer ESPN: Let's Play Tennis Empire Deluxe Masters Edition Evolution F.15 Strike Eagle III Folcon Gold .... Fighter Wing Firefighter *** Five on 5....... ... 1 S44  Release date: 38 CALL Part #35719 48  Release date: Oct. 94  We never charge your credit card until your order ships! CALL CALL 36 MPEO Lord of the na MPEG Man Enough.. Hand of Foto Harvester Hell Cab.. DS 45 18M.CD-ROM IBM CD-ROM IBM CD-ROM IBM CD-ROM CALL Pacific Strike & Speech Pack MPEG20h Century Video Alminac MPEG-Dragan's Lair... MPEG Hordo MPEG. Lord of the Rings MPEG-Man Enough MPEG. Outpost MPEG. Police Quest IV MPEG Psychotron.. MPEG Return to Zork MPEG. Soundtrack MPEG Space Ace.... MPEG Sporting News .... MPEG Video Cube Space Mad Dog McCree...... Incredible Machine 2 Incredible Toons Indiana Fate of Atlantis. Inherit the Earth tron Holux Journeyman Project Jump Roven... . Jutland King's Quest Anthology King's Quest VI..... CALL Space Hulk Space Gunst Anthology Space Quest IV.. Space Shulle . .. , Spear of Destiny Super CD Pak Spectre VR Spellcasting Party Pok ... Star Crusader Star Trek 25th Enhanced Star Trek: Collectibles Guido Star Trek DSN The Hunt Star Trek: TNG Tech Manual Star Trek: The Next Generation Strike Commander/Tactical Superhero: league of Hoboken "


"WARLORDS II SCENERIO BUILDER BRIDGE X-COM: UFO DEFENSE STRATEGY You are the controller of XCOM, O covert organization formed by the world UFO DEFENSE governments to inves: tigate and defeat the flying sovers which have begun terror Izing Earth Command ing groups MICROPROSE of scientists, engineers, and soldiers, you must develop a strategy that will ensure human survival. At the same time, you can give direct orders to men in units under your command, os they explore alien boses and do battle with the invaders. Micropro BM DOS, Pat 434202 S40 BRIDGE OLYMPIAD Take part in the world renowned \"Bridge Olympiad Tournament right in the comforts of your own home Bridge masters are calling this game the most challenging ever. The @OP. computer will test bridge masters' abilities while being the mentor for the novice players. Practice slams, defensive play, and how to play na trump hands. Choose the type of partner you want to play with largest number of bidding conven tions on the market. QGP, DOS Pot 134935 PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL America's Notional postime. With the warmth of springtime, sports fans witness o new birth every year, I comes with a feeling of excitement and that excitement means baseball Enjoy baseball excitement year round with Pro Loogue Baseball Supports true modem play with chat mode. Includes both simulation and arcade play modes. Completo statistical printout capabilities. League leaders maintained for all major categories Micro Spon: DOS P 34455 Following your legendary cenaues in Warlords comes a new power Power to create worlds Power to populote them with fierce races and mythical herpes Power to build  weapons of war and to use them in opic battles. This easy to use Scenario Builder lets you invent your own Warlords il scenarios Design maps, armies and cities. Become the sculptor of worlds Explore 24 new scenarios with exciting army, city and terrain sets 5SG: DOS Part 125222 Scenarto Builder $30 $35 $30 DRAGONS LAIR CD Dragon's Lair delivers full motion video that's virtually indistin guishable from the original laser dise. Become Dirk the Daring a valiant knight on a quest to rescue the fair princess Daphne from the clutches of Singe the Evil Dragon. You control the actions of a doring adventurer lighting his way through the castle of a dark wizard who has enchanted it with treoch orous monsters and obstacles. Lead on bravo adven. turer... your quest awaits Road BM Pout 31493 $47 CORRIDOR 7 The latest in 3-D arcade games has arrivedi Featuring an enhanced Wolfenstein 3-D engine, this game features full screen action as you challenge four levels of a moze like series of hallways NUDISTU and test chambers covering 30 floors. Included morphing aliens, advanced military weapons, proximity mapping, intro rod & night vision, and stereo sound. M-4 TANK SIMULATION Command your own M4 Sherman tank. Try to slay olive day by day. avoiding German Tigers and 872 Panther Your engine roars to life as your tank pivots out of its hiding place in the HEXX: HERESY OF THE WIZARD An evil wizard known only as the Nameless One-has embarked upon a reign of Chaos Only you con woge wore on the wizard in on epic clash of combot and conjuring Guide four adventures through a texture mopped labyrinth in this action packed first person perspective role playing game. Features: Three different 3D viewing modes, including fullscreen. RAM Save instant save game function. Up to 1,820 different character combinations Paygrou: DOS Por 035725 The familiar Squeak of the track links echo in your cars as you move slowly down the road one more day closer to Germany. hoCap: DOS Pat 635658, Pat 135658 533 Deadly Game: DOS POT 833501 MC Part #31684 $35 $29 Syndicate Plus Terminator: Rampage Terror of the Deep Tetris Gold Compilation The Patrician ... EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 335 FAX:508-443-5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 *O**I O +-*#*4! E * FAX:0011-508-443-5645. XI. CompuServe ID: 70007, 15340 W A DUT  SHIPPING & HANDUNG: IBM CD-ROM MACINTOSH Detroit. UPS $5 PER AIR $7 PER Three Stooges. Tony LoRusso Baseball ll 2.0 Ultima I. V Ultima Underworld I & II Ulimo VIII: Pogon w/ Speech Ultimate Domain ..... Under a Killing Moon , Vegas Games Deluxe .. Video Cube Space ... Video Cube Sports Viper: Assault on the Outit Warren Miller's Skiing Safari Who Shot Johnny Rocks Wild Blue Yonder... Wings of Glory 1917.1918 Wolf Pack ..... World Circuit Grand Prix World Cup Interactive .. Wrath of the Gods ... Zephyr GROUND SHIPMENT BORNE SHIPMENT NO HIDDEN CHARGES HI, PR, AK, APO SENT BY US MAIL FOR $5. INTL ORDERS WELCOME. *** Ali Warrior Alone in the Dark Astrochase Axis the Gamecheater Caesar Caesars Palace. Carriers At War .. Castles II Citadel of the Dead Civilization ... Cyber Roce.. Dark Soed   Evolution F-117A Stealth Fighter Flight Commander Flight Simulator 4.0 Flying Nightmares Freelancer 2120 G-Netis Gabriel Knight ... Harpoon .. Incredible Toons.. Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis Inherit the Earth: Orb Quest Jeopardy Sports Edition.. Jeopardy with Alex Trebeck King's Quest VI. Legend of Kyrandia..... Leisure Suit Larry VI... Links Pro w/ Harbortown Course Links: Pinehurst Country Lode Runner MA Sherman Tank .. Moe Aack Mac Full O'Humans . More Incredible Machines Oxyd Magnum PGA Tour Gollll... Pathway into Darkness Police Quest IV Populous II ... Powermonger Prince of Persia 11 Quest for Glory IV Raiden Royal Flush SimAnt .. SimCity 2000 SimCity 2000: Great Disasters SimCity Classic SimCity Classic Graphics SimCity Graphics: Ancient City SimCity Graphics: Set 11 Simlife MACINTOSH TacOps Terror of the Deep Theme Park   Football Train Engineer U-Boot Valkyrie Vegas Games Entertainment Pack Virtus VR Wheel of Fortune w/Vanna White .. World at War: Operation Crusader Planetary Toxi Police Quest IV Rebel Assault Redshift Return to Zork SimTown. Sitting on the Farm Soft Kill &9999& ACS 100 Speaker Pait ACS 300.1 Speakers w/Subwoofer AR Partner 570 Speaker System Koss HD 1 Speakers Koss HD 4 Speakers ... Koss HD6 MPC Speakers Labtec CS-1000 Speakers Labtec CS 800 Speakers ... Labtec CS 900 Speakers Labtec S5700 Speakers MACINTOSH CD-ROM SPEAKERS Spectre VR 74 62 ARI ..122 392 4PLEX Quad speed Internal Drive 468 Aztech CDA268 O1AFP INT w/Ctrl ....142 Azlech Sound Galaxy Orion 16 Aztech Zeta INT CD ROM w/Cul. .151 CDU33A/L CD Completo Kit .........471 CDU33A/LCD Starter Kit 230 DoubleSpeed+ Ext Upgr. Pro Audio 16 556 Family Deluxe Multimedia Kit 349 Fusion Double CD Internal Kit... 308 Game Blaster CD 16 Memphis Multimedia Upgrade Kit.. MultiSpin 3XE External 195ms MultiSpin 3XI Internal 195ms MultiSpin 3XP Portable 195ms.. MultiSpin 4X Pro External OmniCD Upgrade Kit OmniCD Upgrade Kit External Premium Deluxe Multimedia Kit Pro 16 || Multimedia Kit... Pro 16 ll Triple Speed Kit Pro Deluxe Multimedia Kit Reelmagic CD ROM Kit Reno CD ROM Portable Player ... Sensory Starter Upgrade Kii........ 366 Sensory System IINT. Multimedia Kit ...440 Super Deluxe Multimedia Kit .........417 Star Trek: DSN . The Hunt Star Trek: TNG Tech Manual Syndicate Theme Park Total Distortion. Viper: Assault on the Outfit Virtual Tarot Warren Miller's Skiing Safari Wild Blue Yonder World Cup Interactive Wrath of the Gods. Xplora 1 Peter Gabriel World Dream Girl Girlfriend Lisa (PG-13) Girlfriend Teri Knights of Xontor NR18 .. Knights of Xentor NR16. BM CD Metal & Lace NR18 Penthouse Interactive CDBM/MAC Playboy Electronic DateBook Strip Poker Pro #01 Data IBM/MAC Strip Poker Pro #O2 Dota. IBM/MAC Strip Poker Pro #03 Data IBM/MAC Strip Poker Pre #04 Data IBM/MAC Strip Poker Pro 805 Doto IBM/MAC Strip Poker Pro #06 Data IBM/MAC Strip Poker Pro #07 Data Disk Strip Poker Pro BOB Dato Disk Strip Poker Pro #09 Data Disk.. Strip Poker Pro #10 Data Disk... Strip Poker Professional. IBM/MAC 11th Hour 3 Balloons 7th Guest Castles I:Siege & Conquest Chessmoster 3000.. Cyberplasm Formula Dare to Fly . . Dark Seed Dracula Unleashed Evolution Firefighter Flying Nightmares Freelancer 2120 Gabriel Knight Hell Cob Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis Inherit the Earth: Orb Quest Iron Helix JourneyMan Project .. Jump Raven Labyrinth of Time . lawnmower Man tunicus Madness of Roland .. Maniac Sports Might & Magic World of Xeen Mys! No World Order... Thontact IBM CD DRIVES MACINTOSH CD-ROM MAONTOSH ADULT 294 Solitaire Antics Space Word Hol IV . Spectre VR Star Trek 25th Anniversary Star Trek: DSN . The Hunt Strato Matic Basketball.... Sword of Sodon ....... 2 Circle Reader Service #56 "


"11TH HOUR COMPUTER Express PETER The Eleventh Hout is the engorly awaited sequel the HEUR best selling CD ROM ever. In the seventy desolato years since the horri fying murders chronicled in The Seventh Guest, the rolling mansion of evil toy maker Henry Stauf, has been ominously silent. Only when reporter Robin Morales vanished while investigating the house do events resurrect the malignant post, As Morales' colleague and lover, you explore the ravaged estate to look for her. Brochurdund: BM CD Part 33204 $57 B STAR WARS: TIE FIGHTER The rebels think the force is with them. Explode the myth. Now you can experience Star Wars from a new point of view. From the creators of X-Wing comos TIE Fighter, the sequel that lets you fly for the Empire. Rips through the rebel front in six unique Imperial Starfighters, New heart stopping interconnected boules will envelop you. Enhanced ultra realistic 3D graphics and gameplay. The dark side of the force beckons...dore you respond? luento: DOS Port 32152 Since 1985 $45 800-228-7449 EXT, TouL FREE ORDER LINE RALLO GUMP SILVERBALL PLUS 2 Two Now ilveu plus Pinball Machines, plus the Origional Rallo neods your help to free his friends, family, and follow cilizens from the evil clutches of Glump and Glumpites. Jump over doodly pits COMMAND ADVENTURE STARSHIP Buy a slock starship to explore regions unknown and extract untold riches from distant galaxies. Avoid pirates and bloodthirsty alien beings who wunder the universe, randomly attacking ships like yours. Never the same game twice. Completely regenerate the universe at will, Custom configure more that 50 ships to your requirements, with more than 80 weapons, shields, and engine systems. personal performance machines for your PCII you love pinball, welcome to its next level. Silverboll is a collection of 6 pinball games destined to be classics. each with graphics so real you can almost get glass. Now, your PC brings you all the excitement of a full size table and then some, as old-time pinball meets the 21st Century. Fluid ball movement. Superior music and sound. Smooth full screen vertical scrolling. Micrologu: BMDOS Pat 135596 MORPHMAN CD SOS You are the super hero Morphmon and it's your job to rescue a kidnapped Professor destroy scientific experiments and blow up a rosearch fortress. The world is depending on you and your Morph technology to accom plish this task before the oxperiments reach civilization. Your only weapons are your wit and the molecular sampler on your sleeve that allows you to alter your own molecular structure and that of objects around you. Features realistic 3D animation with Windows Dynamic Dimensiona: BMCD and vach with great brings you all old time pin obstacles. Swim thru dark and ca WORLD dangerous waters. Fly above the clouds in search of secrets. Batle big bosses and weird creatures. Over 100 levels with more than 30 Enemies. Over 20 soundtracks with 100 digitized sound effects. 25 fully animated cinematics. Nearly 300 Megabytes of game, Just Schworo: IBMCD Part 35841 Mert BMCD Pat #34031 $32 $29 CALL ANSSON JOYSTICKS/GAMECARDS 389338 SEGA/SNES/3DO Star Trek: TNG Future's Past SNES Street Fighter ISEGA . Street Fighter IISNES. Super NBA Basketball SEGA Super Off Road Bujo SNES Super Street Fighter II . SEGA Super Street Fighter II -SNES Super Wing Commander 3DO Tomcat Alloy . SEGA CD .... Virtuo Rocing .SEGA Virtual Pinball-SEGA... X-Men SEGA ..... AD&D: Dark Sun Shattered Lands 8. Dungeon Hack ..... S e of Beholder Trilogy Jo Curse IBM RECREATION Air Warrior Allen Legacy All Pro Football ... Alone in the Dark II. Archon Ultra Arctic Boron... Arena Elder Scrolls Art of the Kill Axis the Gamecheater.. Barkley Basketball.... Battle Chess 4000. WINDOWS Bane Cruiser 3000AD Battle of Britain WINDOWS Battledrome Bicycle Bridy INDOWS Bicycle py INDOWS Big Jows ivo Movie WINDOW IBM RECREATION Caesars Palace. WINDOWS Campaign Il Cannon Fodder Cupitol Punishment Carrier Strike Carriers at War II...... Costles II: Siege & Conquest Celtic Toles: Balor Evil Eye Civilization Clash of Steel: WWII 1939-45 Classic 5. WINDOWS Coaster Comanche & Mission Disk 1 Comanche: Mission Disk! Camanche: Mission Disk 11 Command Starship ... Command and Conquer Companions of Xanth. Corridor 7........ Cyber Race ...... CyberSpace ....... D&D: Fantasy Empires D&D: Stronghold ... D Day. Operation Overlord D Day The Beginning of End Daemonsgate Dark Legion Down Patrol Day of the Tentacle: Maniac .30 AN LL Acas Acesa Aces av PREORDER TODAY! .64 STAR TREK: THE NEXT GENERATION A FINAL UNITY 998 Air Air Wa Flight Stand Flight Stick Flight Stick Pro Flightstick PROMAC.. GForce Flight Yoke. Game Zapper GameCard III MCA Automatic Gameport 2000 Up to oa Genovation Porellol Game Port Gravis Analog Pro Joystick Gravis Eliminator Card Gravis Flight Pack Pro Gravis Gamepad MAC Gravis Mouse Stick II MAC.. Gruvis PC Gamepad PC Golf System Thrustmaster ACM Game Card..... Thrustmastor F-16 FICS... CALL Thrustmaster Flight ControlIBM/MAC 59 Thrustmaster Formula TI 111 Thrustmaster Pro Flight Control ........101 Thrustmaster Rudder Pedals IBM/MAC 101 Thrustmaster Weapon Markl MAC Thrustmaster Weapon Markil Virtual Pilot Yoko Y Coble for 2 Joysticks Aladdin SEGA ... Art of Fighting SNES.. Clothonger. SEGA Dragon's Lair 3DO Dungeon Master SNES Escape from Monster Monor 3DO Eternal Champions SEGA Hardballll! SNES Horde 3D0 Incredible Toons SEGA CD John Madden NFL '94. 3DO Jungle Strike -SEGA Jurassic Park SEGA Kombo! Cors .SEGA Leathal Enforcers SEGA CD Lemmings 3DO.. MLBPA Baseball. SNES Mad Dog McCro. 3DO Micro Machines SEGA Mortal Kombat SEGA. Mortal Kombat SEGA CO Mortal Kombat SNES NBA Jam . SEGA NBA Jam SNES NBA Showdown 94 SEGA NHL 94.SEGA. Normy's Beach SEGA Oceans Below . 3DO Out of this world. 300 Pele II SEGA Pelel Soccer SNES Road Rash. 3DO Shadowrun SEGA.. Sonic the Hedgehog 3 SEGA Space Shuttle. 3DO Star Control II-3DO... Star Trek: TNG. Echoes SEGA Alien leg All Pro Footh Alon Part #34568 Axis  Thanksgiving Release Barkley Be> Spectrurn Holobyte hos finally Battlecy signed the entire cast of Star Trek:  We never charge Borio ING for their upcoming TNG game. your credit card until Baby CGW, Aug '94 your order ships! 8 Compo 99 Detroit ... .... Dimension... Disciples of Steel Doom Episodol. Doom II: Hell on Earth DreamWeb Dunel. Dungeon Master Earth Invasion Arcade WINDOWS Empire Deluxe . DOS/WINDOWS Empire Deluxe Scenario Eternam... Evasive Action Even More Incredible Machines Evolution.... . F-117A Classic F-14 Fleet Defender F.15 Strike Eagle Ill... FIFA International Soccer Falcon 30 Falcon 4.0 Falcon: FA 18 Hornet Falcon: Mig 29/Deadly Adversary Fields of Glory .... FlashBack Float Defender: F-14 Scenario Flight Light Flight Screen Saver Flight Sim: New York Scenery Flight Sim: Paris Scenery ... Flight Simulator 5.0 Flight Simulator Guido ... Flight Simulator Toolkit.. . Banlodrome WINDOWS CALL SEGA/SNES/3DO Ono . WINDO Biofarga Interacting BlackJack 3.0V Bloke Stone Blitzkrieg AD&D: Dark Sun Shattered Lands AD&D Dungeon Hock AD&D: Eye of Beholder Trilogy AD&D Genie's Curse .. APBA Baseball. WINDOWS Acos Over Korea ......... Aces of the Deep Acos over Europe Acos over Europe: Mission #1.. Aces over Europe. Mission #2... Across the Rhine Across the Rhine Scenario Advanced Civilization.. Adventure Pack Air Combat Classics... IBM RECREATION Corridor Cyber Race ... CyberSpace .... D&D: Fantasy Empires Banle of Britain 2-WINDOWS Bicycle Bridge . WINDOWS Bicycle Poker WINDOWS Big One . WINDOWS Biologo Interactive Movie Blackjack 3.0 WINDOWS Bloko Stone ..... Blitzkrieg Blood Net Blue & the Gray Body Blows Breach 3. Bridge Olympiad Brutal Sports Football IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION Flat Tops CALL CALL CALL "


"MORTAL KOMBAT/GRAVIS GAMPAD BUNDLE KNIGHTS OF XENTAR 4PLEX QUAD SPEED DRIVE ADVANCED GRAVIS PC GAME PAD INSIDE! ALL-STAR SPORTS COLLECTION           Sport Accolade hos MIL-STAD combined three best selling sports titles onto one CD ROM TO create an All Star Sports Collection Now you have a sports game for every season of the year. Tee it up in Jack Nicklaus Golf & Course Design: Signature Edition Go out to the ball game in Al Michaels Announces HardBall, or dodge tackles in Unnecessary Roughness SPORTS COLLECTION RATED PC-17. NOT RECOMMENDED FOR AUDIENCES UNDER 17. The arcade hit now explodes onto the PCI Execute bone shattering combos and ferocious finishing moves. Defeat the four-ermed half human dregon, Goro, and the shape-changing wizard, Shang Tsung, to become the Supremy Mortal Kombat Warrior. Play even better with the Gravis PC Gamepad, the ideal solution for arcade gaming. Supports left and right handed button configurations Vegie: WCDMCCD Pot 34658 546 For centuries, was hos roged among the domons and faries, devastating this mystical land. Twin brothers, born to mortals, oro soporated of birth, chosen for the ultimato battle that will decide the fate of heaven and earth. They later moet, never knowing their try rolation of their own dark destiny. Faled to dvel your twin to the death, you must fight to stay alive and rescue lovely, innocent maidens from the clutches of menacing loos. And perhaps, become the rule of all Mayatsch MCD,DOS Pot # 35209 $40 Plextor's 4Flex quad speed CD ROM drive brings a stunning new level of performance to your computer This vltro fast, wate-of-the-art drive makes nearly all CD ROM applications play in a smoother, more natural manner, Its IMB buffer will help you whiz though the increasing demands multimedia video, graphics, and animation software place on your system. With a 4Plex CD ROM drive, you finally can see multimedia software the way its authors imagined it. Accolade. BMCD Fat #35527 $23 Podor IBM Pot 35103 $468 SPORTSTER 28.8 EXT. FAX MODEM GRAVIS ULTRASOUND MAX REELMAGIC LITE OMNI CD CREATIVE OMNICD ReelMagic NEW! BUNDAI ULTRASOUND Elanlar 23 Pantat    Icc W ASH Brings today's fastest available transmission speeds to the small business and home office usor. Transmit data at 28,800 bps with V.FC and at 14,400 bps with V.32 bis and lax at 14,400 bps with V.17. Includes hardware based V.42/MNP 2-4 error control and V.42 bis/MNP 5 data compression. Will soon be upgradeable to true ITU-T V.32 28.800 bps via chip swap. CREATIVE Add state of the art CD ROM technology to your PC, Creative OmniCD Upgrade Kit provides everything you need to expand your general computing horizons into the realm of multimedia. Features a convenient front loading tray, a front panel headphone jack and volume control for playback of audio CDs, and supports all PCs and sound cards. Includes CD ROM interface card, high-speed CD ROM drive, and all the cables necessary to connect the drive to your PC, Creative Labs: &M Pand31800 $208 UltraSound Max incorporates 32 voices of true Wavetable Synthesis, a process used by today's top studio synthesizers. Sounds are created using digital recordings, ar samples, of actual musical instruments or sources. 16 Bil, 48 kHz stereo playback and recording Expandable 192 General MIDI Instrument Set, CD ROM Interface for single or double speed Mitsume, (LU005, FX001), Sony (CDU 31A, CDU33A), or Panasonic (523, 562 563) CD-ROM Drives Advard Grows BM Po 26292 S 182 D ESIGMA No more jerky video. Thanks to the MPEG standard, you'll enjoy full motion, full-screen playback on your PC. ReelMagie Lite brings a dazzling array of entertainment and interactive learning software to your desktop. Use ReelMagic Lite for a variety of applica tions, including entertainment, Video CD, interactivo learning, Karaoke CD, business presentation and training software. Thirty frames per second video playback gives you TRUE full motion Signa Design: BM Pate 34615 US Rebata: Pat 35432 $239 $293 IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION Formula One Grand Prix 2.. Fortress of Dr. Rodiaki. Four Play Freelancer 2120 .. Front Page Sports Baseball Front Page Sports: Foot. Upgrd.. Front Page Sports Football 95 Front Page Sports Football Pro Frontier Elite II ... Game Maker 2.0 .. Genghis Khan II Gettysburg WINDOWS Global Dominations Global Response.. Gobliuins Gobliiins ll ... Goblins III Golf. WINDOWS Grand Slam Bridge II WINDOWS Grandest Floot... Great Naval Bottles !! Great Naval Battles Pack Great War Gunship 2000 Classic HAW.C. Hammer of the Gods Hannibal HardBall IV. Harpoon II Harpoon Il Bahtloser #2 Head Coach Football WINDOW Heavy Hockey Heirs to the Throne .. Heros of Might & Magic Hexx Heresy of the Wizard High Command 800-228-7449 335 FAX:508-443-5645 EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 B O R NO -y-* *1 FAX:0011-508-443-5645. XI. CompuServeID: 70007, 15340L BMDtT1).  SHIPPING & HANDLING: UPS $5 PER AIR $7 PER GROUND SHIPMENT BORNE SHIPMENT NO HIDDEN CHARGES HI, PR, AK, APO SENT BY US MAIL FOR $5. INTL ORDERS WELCOME. Kingmaker Klotski. Kye Deluxe Leisure Suit Larry VI lemmings Lemmings Il Links 386 Pro Links: Banff Springs SVGA Links: Belfrey Course SVGA Links: Firestone Course SVGA Links: Innsbrook Course SVGA Links: Mauna Kea Course SVGA Links: Pinehurst Country SVGA lode Runner DOS/WINDOWS Lord Of The Rings/Two Towers Lords of Midnight Lords of the Realm Lost Treasures of Infocom I. Lucas Arts Classic Collection Lucky's Casino Adventure M4 Sherman Tank Mogicion's Castle Master of Magic Master of Orion MechWarrior II....... MechWarrior II Add On Merchant Prince .. Metal & lace PG13.... Metoltech: Earth Siege Metamorph . .. Microleague Timeout Sports WINDOWS Microsoft Arcade . WINDOWS Microsoft Space Simulator Mig 29 Stand Alone Version... Might & Magic Clouds of Xeen Might & Magic DarkSide of Xeen . Mighty Morphin Power Rangers .. Monopoly Deluxe . .. More Vogos Gomes. WINDOWS Mortal Kombor/GamePad Bundle NASCAR Racing NFL '94-DOS/WINDOWS NFL Coaches Football NFL Pro League Football. IBM RECREATION IBM RECREATION A&AMPANAR CALI 30 Pool Shack . Prince of Persia 1 ... Privateer Privateer Operations 2 Privateer Righteous Fire AddOr Privateer Speech Pack Pro leogue Baseball .. Pro Tennis Cup.... Quarter Polo ...... Quest for Glory IV .. Rally The Final Round Raptor: Call of the Shadow Ravenloht . .. Realms of Arkania .. Red Baron w/ Mission Builder Red Crystal Return of the Phantom Return to Zork Romance Three Kingdoms Royal Flush Rules of Engagement Il Russian Six Pack. WINDOWS SSN 21: Sea Wolf .. SVGA Harrior Sam & Max Hit the Road Sensible Soccer Serf City Serious Soccer Shadow Caster Shadow of the Comet 2 Shanghai I WINDOWS SimAnt-WINDOWS SimCity 2000. DOS/WINDOWS SimCity 2000: Great Disasters ... SimCity 2000: Groat Disasters.WIN SimCity Classic DOS/WINDOWS SimCity Classic Graphics .. SimFarm Simfarm WINDOWS SimHealth Human's. Insult to injury.... Human's: Like You've Never Seen Inca Incredible Machine 2 Incredible Toons WINDOWS Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis IndyCar Racing IndyCar: Circuits Expansion Pack IndyCar Indianapolis Speedway Inforno .......... Inherit the Earth: Orb Quest... Isle of the Dead . Jack Nicklaus Signature Goll Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 1. Jack Nicklaus Signature Tour 2.... Jogged Alliance.... Jeopardy Deluxe DOS/WINDOWS Jeopardy Sports Editon.DOS/WINDOWS 26 Joe Montana Football ..... Jonny Ques! Jurassic Park Kasparov's Gambit King's Quest V ... King's Quest VI. King's Ransom.. Kingdom of Germany... CALL Sleepwalker Smokin' Guns... Soccer . .. ++ Solitaire WINDOWS Solitaire Anties WINDOWS Solitaite's Journey WINDOWS Space Hulk Space Quest V. Spaceward Hol lll.. Spear of Destiny Spear of Destiny Mission 2 Spear of Destiny Mission 3 Spectre VR Spirol Arm Squad Leader Star Crusader Stor Reach Star Trek: 25th Anniversary Star Trek: DSN . The Hunt Star Trek: J.R. Movie & Sound Star Trek: Judament Rites Star Trek: Starfleet Academy Star Trek: The Next Generation Star Wars Chess Stonekeep.. . Stral-O-Matic Baseball Strato-Matic Basketball Street Fighter il Strike Commander Strike Commander Spoech Pack Strike Commander Tactical #1 Strike Squad Subwar 2050 ..... Super Skill Superhero: League of Hoboken Syndicate .... Syndicaly: American Revolution System Shock Toc Ops WINDOWS Toskforce Classic Terminator 2029 Terror of the Deep RECREATION IBM IBM RECREATION Nana Tank Noctropolis... . Nomad Open Dialogue WINDOW Operation Combat 2 Origama. Outpost .... . Oxyd Magnum Pacific Air War: 1942 Pacific Air War: 1942 Scenario Pacific Strike Pacific Strike Mission Disk Pacific Strike Spooch Disk Pacific Wor Perfect General Trilogy Phantasmagoria... Pirates! Gold Pirates! Gold WINDOWS Police Quest IV. .. CALL IBM RECREATION BM RECREATION 22 999 Simlife WINDOWS Circle Reader Service #56 "


"PRINCETON SAT REVIEW TINTORER VIEW SAT CARMEN SANDIEGO CD Carmen and her original gang of ten villains, plus ten new recruits are stealing the treasures of the world Deluxe edition includes 45 WHERE IN THE WORLD IS countries, 62 anima tions, over 2,500 clues, and 130 CD-ROM, new digitized photoreal location graphics originating from slides provided by The National Geographic Society. Learn even more obout world geography, facts and research skills. Includes user's manual, Kingfisher Reference Atlas. three world map representations Broderbund: BWCDMACOD Put 135516 551 ZINDIEGO? Express Since 1985 SAT Computer Diagnostics help remove the fear and uncertainty from taking the SAT (Scholastic Assessment Test). This educational software helps students prepare for this important college admittance exam. This program not only gives students the ability to take computer based sample tests and be scored, but also analyzes their test taking skills and pinpoints their strengths and weaknesses lytic: WN, MAC Part 134461 $24 800-228-7449 EX TOLL FREE ORDER LINE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF STAMPS BUG ADVENTURE Smithsonian Iostitution Stamps The Eleventh Hour is the eagerly Owoited sequel the best selling CD-ROM ever. In the Sevenly dosolato years since the hori fying murders chronicled in The Seventh Guest, tho ZOWED HER rolling mansion of evil toy maker Henry Stauf, has been ominously silent. Only when reporter Robin Morales vanished while investigating the house do events resurrect the malignant past. As Morales' colleague and lover, you explore the ravaged ostale to look for her. 20BMCDMACOD Pot 33832 $25 TRAIN ENGINEER Ground-breaking Design layouts and cab-view simulation! run them from the viewpoint of the train's engineer The program also allows simulated cab-view running of both Train Engineer and Design Your Own Railroad track layouts. Design a layout with the dozens of track and sconery objects provided. Easy design strategy features state of the art, template-styled, drag and drop operation with Undo, Prints completelayouts. Fastclock and real train sounds provide a real model railroad feel. Abracada WN, DOS, MAC Pot 25480 This program is crawling with bugs! Creepy ones, slimy ones, honging. filying. flopping ones. Did ENTURE you know that for every human there are at least one million insects. Find out all you would ever want to know about them. Pick from ants, bees, beetles, butterflies, flies, or spiders. Young readers can even improve reading skills with a Talking Storybook. Find out which bug is the loudest, the longest, the fastest, and more amazing fach! Krowlodge Adventure: MPC, DOS Pot 032144 SMITHSONIAN'S DINOSAUR MUSEUM Travel back to prehis Botic times DINOSAUR MUSEUM as you tour the Dinosaur Museum, presented in cooperation with the Smithsonian Institution with contro butions from 24 of the world's great museums. In this gallery of extinct giants, explore three unique rooms, each with special exhibits that bring the primeval world to life. Throughout, you'll lind such special features os: 3.0 Exhibits with viewing glasses included. You'll find the mighty creatures of the Mesozoic world waiting for you. Schwar Mahating: WN, DOS, MAC $30 $26 $35 385 157 142 IBM RECREATION SOUND CARDS ReelMagic Multimedia Playback .... Roland RAP.10 Audio Producer ++++ Roland SCD-10 DB Sound Canvas Sound Blaster 16 MCD Sound Blaster 16 MCD ASP Sound Blaster 16 SCS-2 Sound Blaster 16 SCS2 ASP Sound Blaster 16 Valve Edition Sound Blaster AWE32 Sound Blaster DigitalEdge 3x Sound Blaster Pro Value Ed. Sound Blaster Value Edition SoundMan 16 ... SoundMan Wave..... After Dark 2.0. WINDOW AutoMap 3.0. WININ Bubu BM PRODUCTIVITY Lotus 123 Release 4 Upgrade ........100 MS-DOS Upgrodo 6.22... Norton Desktop 3.0. WINDOWS 114 Office Standard 4.2WINDOWS .....468 Ploolt Paradise . WINDOWS.......30 Print Shop Deluxe 1.2 DOS/WINDOWS.46 Print Shop Deluxe Comics DOS/WINDOWS24 Print Shop Deluxe Companion DOS/WIN 35 Print Shop Deluxe Sampler DOS/WIN ..27 Procomm Plus 1.02. WINDOWS.....104 Publisher 2.0. WINDOWS QEMM 386 7. Remind Mel WINDOWS ... Scones Impressionists Collection WIN Collection. WIN IBM EDUCATION 08 LOOR Roberta William's PREORDER TODAY! Phantasmagoria CHIANTASMAGORIA CALL 46 The Dig The Patrician Theatre of Death Theme Park Third Reich Tony LaRussa Baseball i Tony lakussa Baseball || 2.0 Tornado. Train Engineer.DOS/WINDOW Tunnel Rot... USCF Chess. Ultima Underworld ... Ultima Underworld Il Labyrinth Ultima VIII: Pagan ...... Ultima VIII: Pagan Spooch Pak Ultimate Domain Victory at Soa Video Poker for Windows Vikings: Fields of Conquest Virtus VR. WINDOWS Wargame Construction Set il. Tanks Warlords ll. Warlords Il Construction Kit .. Wheel of Fortune Deluxe DOS/WIN When Two Worlds War . Wing Armada Wing Commander Academy Wing Commander I w/Spooch... Wing Commander lll... Wings of Glory 1917.1918 Wischwald. Wizard Wizardry Trilogy V/V/V) Wolfpack World Circuit Grand Prix World War It: Bolo Pacific X-COM: UFO Defense X Wing To Fighter X-Wing: B-Wing Tour of Duty X-Wing: Imperial Pursuit .. Zephyr Zig Zag DOS/WINDOWS 1 Audio Magician 16CD Audio Magician Plus Audio Mon.. Aztech Sound Galaxy Nova 16 Aztech SoundGalaxy Nova16Extra Digital Sound Pro 16 Digital Sound Pro 16 Plus Gravis Ultrasound... Gravis UltroSound Max Gravis Ultrasound Midi Adapter Jazz Soundcard SCSI Port Able Sound Plus Premium 3 D Multi CD Premium 3-D SCSI2 . Pro 3-D SCSI2 w/ Wavetable Pro Audio 16 Basic... Pro Audio Studio 16 Pro Audio Studio 16XL Pro AudioSpectrum 16 Reel Mogic lite CALL CALL  Release date: Oct. '94 Part #34085 . We never charge your credit card until your order ships! Basic Spelling. Berenstain Bears Fun LunchPak Borenstain Bears Junior Jigsaw Borenstain Bears learn Al Homo.. Biology Studyware 24 Body Illustrated BodyWorks Human Anatomy 3.0 Bug Adventure Calculus Studyware.. Chemistry Studywato. Chemistry Works DOS/WINDOWS Children's Writing/Pub Center Computer Carnival Cruncher WINDOWS Cute 'n' Cuddlies ...... DinoPark Tycoon Dinosaur Museum 2.0 WINDOWS.. Dinosaurs Multimedia Windows 1.0 Dinosoft Addition & Subtract Dinosolt Multiply & Divide Dinosoft Phonics Discover Space Discovering America Dr. T's Sing Along WINDOWS EZ Cosmos 4.0 Early Moth. WINDOWS Earth Treks. Ecology Treks ..... Expert Maps .. Fatty Bear's Fun Pack Fatty Bears Birthday Surprise Fisher Price Classics .. Forever Growing Garden w/ SEEDS GMAT W/ Cliff Notes GRE W/ Cliff Notes Ir. High Grade Builder 3 Pack Jurassic Dinosaurs WINDOWS Kap'n Korooke . WINDOWS Key Dictionary Plus Kid Cad. WINDOWS Kid Desk Kid Desk. WINDOWS Kid Keys ........ Kid Pictures Kid Pix 2.0DOS/WINDOWS Kid Pex Fun Pack.DOS/WINDOWS Kid Rhymes Kid's Typing . WINDOWS Kid's Zoo DOS/WIN ISAT W/ Cliff Notes.. Lon Words . WINDOWS Language Assistant:French. DOS/WIN Language Assistant:German.DOS/WIN Longvogo Assistant.lloliun. DOS/WIN language Assistant:Spanish. DOS/WIN 57 Learn About Computer Programming.....15 Learn About Fructions .... Learn About the Human Body Learn to Add and Subtract . Learn to Multiply and Divide Lenny's Music Toons. WINDOWS Lold's Math Planet... Lost Tribe ...... STARS  Kid McGee scenes impressionists Collection WIN . Scenes Outer Space Collection. WIN....23 Scenes Sierra Club Collection. WIN... Star Wars Screen Saver WINDOWS Winfex Pro 4.0 WINDOWS...... Windows Upgrade 3.11. Word 6.0 WINDOWS  SOUND CARDS IBM PRODUCTIVITY Scene Scenes Sierra Club Collection. WIN.. After Dark 2.0 WINDOWS... Auto Mop 3.0. WINDOWS Bubsy TM: Screen Saver . WINDOWS Charles Barkley: Screen Saver .WIN Creative Writer. WINDOWS Disney Collection Screen Saver-WIN Fine Artist Get Wired. WINDOWS HAM Radio 3.0 .. Hanna-Barbera's Animation Shop... Holy Bible King James Version IBM PC DOS 6.3 . IBM PC DOS Upgrade 6.3 InfoNation Rating USA to Z Lion King Print Studio WINDOWS Lion King Screen Scenes IBM EDUCATION IBM EDUCATION 145 ACT W/ Cliff Notes Advanced Spelling Tricks WINDOWS Aladdin Print kil.. Alge Blaster 3 DOS/WINDOWS Algebra By Example Alphabet blocks. WINDOWS American Heritage Dictionary  Barney Bear Goes to School ... . "


"AUDIO MAGICIAN 16CD PERFECT RESUME FREE MIT ITERT SOUND CA Career Develop ment Expert Tom Jackson presents 3 easy to use modules that help build a job winning resume, writo cover loters that PERFECT get noticed, and follow up on leads letters, and interviews. Perfect Dash Resume interactively creates a targeted resume based on your rosponses and automatically formats resumes into a variety of professionally dosigned layout stylos. Creatos professlonal looking resumes from any printer, Exports formatted files to popular word processors, Davideo: WN Pat #34244 LINKS 386 PRO Champion ship golf at your fingertips. Featuring Harbour Town Golf Links with Super VGA 256 color graphics for breathtaking views. Over 345 different combinatons of viewing windows Features o club selection, \"saved shot, and a \"profile view Male or female golfers with 10 different shirt colors to choose from. Statistics recorded for each player and game with optional print out. Supports SoundBlaster and compatible sound cards Accesowe DOS Pat 127600 $39 SIM CITY 2000 The ultimate city simul olor. This morning. you approw ed a new solar power plant, designed on underground transportation system, and jumped five points in the polls. Then you raised taxes, road two local newspapers, built a zoo, and pushed your education bill through the city council It's time for lunch-unless, of course, there's a fire, fornado, earthquake or alien invasion SimCity 2000 really brings your city and its resident sims to life. Mada: WN Fan #31457 LINKS (386 True 16 bit card w/16 bit stereo soundIntegrated 16-bit A/DD/A converters. Builsin joystick port with 2 joystick capabilities. Four operator 20 voice FM Music. Int. CD ROM Audio interface. Microphone jack and amplifier. Sound Blaster & Adlib Compatible. Compatible CD-ROM Drives: Panasonic CR-5238 / CR5626, Sony CDU-31A / CDU33A, Mitsumi CRMC LUOO5S / CRMC-FX0010, Wearnes CDD-110. Includes 3.5\" disk for Wolfenstein 3D Colypeos Bit Pat 126433 981 $35 $40 STAR REACH UNDER A KILLING MOON CD FIFA INTERNATIONAL SOCCER You are the commander in-chief on a quest to conquer and colonize a galaxy of alien worlds. But first you mus! overcoma hostile climate conditions, ward off cunning enemies, wight critical information, calculate the risks, and make tactical decisions...al at the speed of light, Because in this mind bending, real time universe, there's a fine line between galactic suecess and dismal failure FREEPHONE look up all 800 numbers in AT&T's Toll free directory Listings indexed under separate business classifica tions for easy reference Eliminates 800 directory assistance charges Cuts long distance costs Perfect for general infor motion and service calls. Savo on long distance 1,000 separate business headings. Fost lookups. Plan business trips. Explore vocation options, Provide print ouls, product and service inquiries for office. ProCD. BMC fot 433129 Interactive movie tokes ILUTIL you to the streets of post World War III San Francisco into a Virtual World full of people and places so richly Alond detailed you'll feel like you're actually thore. Hollywood stars add credibility and the necessary talent. Create a personalized Tax Murphy movie which can be replayed at any time. Rich, original music, high quality digitized voices and sound effects make this interactive movie as exciting as it is visually stunning Acom: EM CD Pat 432937 EA sports hos teamed SPARTA up with FIFA, the governing body of international Soccer, lo bring you a more realistic Soccer simulator for the PC. A sophisti cated game engine lets you control every aspect of the game from team formations and strategies to the non-stop field action. As with the real sport, the combination of detailed strategy and acrobatic ball control is essential for success. Select one of 48 international teams and enter the fourney Bedronic Art: DOS Part 035283 SOCCER toplayDOS Part 33245 $35 $25 $56 $36 ga IBM EDUCATION IBM EDUCATION Time Treks Treasure Cove Treasure Math Storm DOS/WINDOWS Typing Tutor 6.0 DOS/WINDOWS Ugly Duckling WINDOWS... Undersoo Advonture. WINDOWS Vocabulearn French ! WINDOWS Vocabulearn German 1. WINDOWS Vocabulearn Hebrew WINDOWS Vocabulearn Italian 1. WINDOWS Vocabulearn Japanese I WINDOWS Vocabulearn Russion 1. WINDOWS Vocabulearn Spanish I WINDOWS...41 Webster's Dictionary DOS/WINDOWS 61 What's My Angle. Whore in America's Past is Carmoni ... Where in Space is Carmen? Deluxe Where in Time is Carmen?... Where in World is Carmen? Deluxe Where in the USA is Cormen? Deluxe Wild Science Arcade w/ T-SHIRT Word Attack 3.. Word Munchers..... World Atlas 5.0. WINDOWS Yobi's Spelling Tricks WINDOWS Zookeeper .. . Zugs Dinosaur World Zugs Race Through Space EXT. VOICE:508-443-6125 800-2220-/ 444 335 FAX:508-443-5645 31 Union Ave., Sudbury, MA 01776 EROW O -* ! #11 FAX:0011-508-443-5645, XI. CompuServeID:70007.1534TH & vattTV.  SHIPPING & HANDLING: UPS $5 PER GROUNDSHIPMENT BORNE SHIPMENT NO HIDDEN CHARGES HI, PR, AK, APO SENT BY US MAIL FOR SS. INTL ORDERS WELCOME. AIR $7 PER Mario Preschool Fun.. Mario Teaches Typing. Mario's Fun with letters . Mario's Fun with Numbers.... Mario's Time Machine Math Blaster Spol/Kid Works II Math Rabbit DOS/WINDOWS Mavis Beacon Typing 3.0 Mega Math Mentol Math Gomes 2.0 Mickey Mouse Mousepad Mickey's 123's Enhanced Mickey's ABC's Enhanced Mickey's Jigsaw Puzzles Millie's Math House .. Miracle Piano Syslom Mixed Up Fairy Tales .... My Computer Diary. DOS/WINDOWS Mystery at Museums w/ T-SHIRT No. 11 Downing Street Odell Down Under . WINDOWS Once Upon A Timell ..... . Operation Neptune ..... Orbits: Voyage the Solar System Oregon Trail Deluxe PC Crayon ..... ... PC Globe Maps & Facts Peanuts: Yearn to learn. WINDOWS Pepper's Adventures in Time Peter Pan: Story Painting Adventure Phonics Plus Physics Studyware Playroom 2.0. Puti Putt Fun Pack Putt Putt Goes to the Moon Puls Pult joins the Parade Quarky & Quayroo's Science Reader Rabbit . WINDOWS Reader Rabbit ll. WINDOWS Reader Rabbit Ill. WINDOWS Reading Adventures in Oz Ready, Set, Read WINDOWS Rusty & Rosy Volume 1 WINDOWS Rusty & Rosy Volume 2 WINDOWS SAT NEW Personal Trainer 2.0 School House: 30 Programs. Science Adventure 2.0 Score RX for ACT at Home .... Score RX for GRE ct Home Scoro RX for SAT at Home Show & Tell for Kids .... Sloter & Charlie Go Camping Snoopy's Game Club Space Adventure Speed Reader WINDOWS Spell it 3 StickyBear Math Tutor StickyBear Reading Tutor ... Stickybear Preschool Super Solvers: Ancient Empires. Super Solvors: Midnight Rescue Super Solvers: Out Numbered Super Solvers: Spellbound .... Tolking Phonics Plus MAC EDUCATION 40 Stormation 2 Super Solvers: Out Numbered Super Solvers: Spellbound.. Treasure Moth Storm Troo House Typing Tutor 6.0.. Ugly Duckling ...... Vocabulearn French ! Vocabulearn German Vocabulearn Hebrew Vocobulearn italiani Vocabulearn Japanese Vocabuloarn Russion Vocabulearn Spanish! Where in America's Past is Carmen Where in Space is Carmen Deluxe Where in Time is Cormen Where in the World is Carmen? Deluxe Word Atack 3. World Atlas 5.0 Zookeeper... IBM PRODUCTIVITY AutoMap 3.0 Better Homes Health Cooking Bibles & Religion Bookshelf Windows '94 Budget Guide USA '93 Cinemania Movie Guide Windows 9452 Corel Draw 5.0 ...... 452 Gifs Galore Shareware... 18 Mayo Clinie Family Health 1 2 Mayo Clinic Family Pharmacist Mayo Clinic Total Heart 1.0 Multimedia Starter Pok Photo CD Access Plus... Photo CD Fireworks .. Photo CD Sailboats Photo CD Wild Animals PhotoEdge Color Print Shop Deluxe CD Ensemble ProPhone's DirectPhone .89 Prophone's SelectPhone .... Publisher 20 97 46 MAC EDUCATION Advanced Spelling Tricks Algebra Blaster Plus Alphabet Blocks ... Amazon Trail American Civil War lil Basic Spelling ........ Body Works Human Anatomy 3.0 Colculus Studywaro.. Deluxe Music 3.0 Early Math ..... Fotty Bear's Birthday Surprise Fatty Bears Fun Pack Fine Artist Kap'n Karaoke Kid Desk Kid McGee Kid Pix 20 Kid Pix Fun Pack Kid's Art Center Kid's Studio Kid's Typing .. . loid's Moth Planet.. Mario Teaches Typing Millie's Math House Multimedia Workshop Odell Down Under ..... Oregon Tial Peter Pan: Story Painting Adv Ping & Kooky's Cuckoo Zoo .. Playroom 2.0 Put Pult Goes to the Moon AT I Studyware ...... Sticky Bear Reading Room 28 35 28 VISA IBM EDUCATION Mastercard Our order lines are open 8am-10pm M-F, 10am-6pm. Sat-Sun. ET. Business offico hours are 508443 6125, M F 9am-5pm ET. -Credit cards are not charged until orders ship No surcharge is added to credit card orders. -In-stock orders placed by 6 p.m. ET ship same day. Temporary shortages usually filled in 3 days. VISA, MC, Discover, AMEX, PO's, wire transfers, cash, and cashiers checks accepted. Upon receipt and approval, personal and company checks clear within 14 days for immediato shipment. Products covered by manufacturer's warranties Detective software replaced immediately. Detective hardware repaired or replaced at our discretion Books, memory chips, and some electronic compo nonts not returnable. Returns require authorization # and are subject to 15% restocking fee. Roturns accepted only within 30 days. All items offered for sale are subject to availability. Some products are not available outside the U.S. Wo are not responsible for typographical errors. + Airborne charges: $7 up 10 6 lbs: $1 per lb. over 6 lbs. Actual freight charges apply to large items To protect customers from fraudulent credit card claims, each credit card purchase is ventied and shipped only to billing addresses. Circle Reader Service #56 "


"The Only Way to Bring These Four Generations of Jet Aircraft to Life. 1046 YF-22 SOL Episode 1: 50 Years of Gs and Jets High-performance jet aircraft as only multimedia can deliver. are Yeager's trip through the sound barrier, hear an F-117 pilot's perilous mission over Baghdad and witness disastrous incidents in the quest for speed. Discover 20 of the most celebrated aircraft of the past 50 years. Meet the aces and designers that made them history. Only Wild Blue Yonder brings this awe-inspiring family of modern jets to life for you. Become a part of the adventure through interviews, videos, official reports, combat photos and personal mementos! perience interactive cockpits plus period music ranging from Charlie Parker to Robert Cray to the Scorpions. Wild Blue Yonder brings it all to life. No collection is complete without it. It's the only place you can have this much fun without a G-suit. Illustrated stories chronicle the triumph and tragedy of flight, with 1,000 dazzling photographs, many recently declassified. deo segments put you in a dogfight with a MiG, a stratospheric test flight and through wild aerobatics. Visit your local retailer, or call 24 hours 1-800-695-GAME (USA and Canada). Macintosh CD-ROM Windows CD-ROM Spectrum HoloByte O 1994 Spoctrum HoloByto. Inc. Wild Blue Yonder is a trademark of Digital Ranch and Spectrum HoloByto, Inc. DIGITAL RANCH Circle Reader Service #224 "


"SIMULATION | This Column Sucks BOGEYS I WAS SITTING AT Alter about another hour I'd deciphered most RANTS ABOUT MY DESK MINDING of the arcane messages and strained a few musMY OWN BUSINESS cles in my left hand learning new, convoluted when a co-worker key combinations, but I found myself moving GAMING IN A ONEwalked in my ofsemi-intelligently through various news groups. fice. \"Have you Success at last! It took a couple of hours, I had to BAR & GRIL heard? We have unlearn a few things and change a few expectaHOUR-PHOTO to use a different tions, but I finally beat the unruly creature into system to access submission. I won't say I liked the new program Internet news groups. Here are the new instrucbetter than my trusty, well-proven news reader SOCIETY tions.\" He handed me a small piece of paper list of the bygone era, but the new program was not ing commands and directories I'd need soon. totally inept and did show a few remote signs of Using the new information, I signed on to my being rather useful. (Honest, I'm building tonew computer. Everything was dillerent. My old wards a point). news reading program was long gone, replaced promptly \"bopped\" (highly technical Interby what could no doubt be a better, more adnet jargon) over to one of my favorite news vanced successor. I executed the new program, groups, comp.binaries.ibm.pc.games.flight-sims and after about an hour of beating unfamiliar where I found a massive discussion of the fledgkeys, deciphering cryptic error messages, and ling 1942: PACIFIC AIR WAR that had hit store rereading the same exact message about a dozen shelves mere hours before. The subject lines times I finally exclaimed in finest Beavis and were brief, direct, and generally binary in naButthead fashion, «This sucks!\" (Bear with me, ture: \"PAW is cool\" or \"PAW sucks.\" I'm building up to something.) Naturally, the message threads surrounding these subject lines were more complex and diversified: a few results of initial exploration, some complaints regarding Fans of campaign-oriented combat flight sims will enjoy the intelli hardware ails, questions over gence coming in concerning CARRIER WING, the new Iverson/Grace real-world operations, and a minority who had totally writteam-up at Electronic Arts. The new sim will feature a built-in camten the product off as paign with very detailed custom Al for each of the campaign scenarios garbage. One poster gleefully plus the capacity to create random scenarios with a more general Al exclaimed, \"I played this by using the mission creation utility. The campaign will emphasize re thing an hour, I hate it, and source management by giving the player a limited supply of weapons I'm taking it back to the store and aircraft to get through the campaign. If the player fails, he could tonight.\" (Wake up, we're hitend up having to use the default reinforcements of A-7s for the rest of ting that big point now!) Unable to believe my eyes, I the game. The campaign takes place in a fictional near-future where began a ranting dissertation dithe U.S. is allied with an independent Ukraine. So, gamers will have a rected at no one in particular. chance to fly F-14s, F-18s, F-22s, A-7s and SU-27s. Our imaging An hour? A whole whopping technology indicates that pilots will usually fly two missions per day hour? How much can you realduring the campaign, and the game will feature video debriefing sely find out in an hour? I re(Continued on page 78) member discovering surprises by Tom \"KC\" Basham ON THE RADAR SEPTEMBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 72 "


"m. U describes their product \"unprecedented,\" etc. in FALCON 3.0 after flying several hundred only lead to disappointment. many cloned items that approximate (but hours. Why, I recall having flown FALCON Now, I'm not saying we should embrace not duplicate) functionality that it is im3.0 for several weeks when I stumbled on a every product that comes our way. Some possible for simulation publishers to pretarget I couldn't radar lock. I closed to viproducts do suck, or more accurately, pare for all eventualities. Most simulation sual range and saw two black dots moving some products completely fail to meet the publishers are trying to squeeze every below the horizon. Curious, I moved in needs of a given user. I'm simply suggestminute drop of performance out of the closer and my jaw nearly hit the floor when ing that we not be too hasty in passing PC through less-than-standard means. I recognized the faceted shape of two Fjudgment. A well-designed program will The potential for failure always lurks in117s! You can't even explore all facets of a have many layers and hidden aspects that side your PC awaiting the right software Night envelope in an hour, how could you take time to explore. I flew FALCON 3.0 for package. Fortunately, most of these probpossibly condemn the program? Why, it months before I found the backpackers in lems are solvable, although they may take took longer than an hour for me to figure the Grand Canyon or saw the soldiers time. I'm not suggesting you shouldn't get out this stupid news reader... leap from burning tanks. Simulation users angry in this situation; just understand I had to stop and ponder what I had just that the odds are you will suffer a hardsaid. In a mere hour, I'd condemned the Every publisher ware/software conflict someday. new news reader as total garbage. I only OK, so what about the product that just proceeded with it because my favorite sysdoesn't work or just isn't what you like? If tem was nearing extinction and I was the product really doesn't meet your forced to learn the new reader or give up as «revolutionary\" or needs you have three options: 1) provide Internet news groups. I began to rational \"ground breaking\" or constructive feedback to the publisher ize how a flight simulator was significantly about your likes and dislikes, 2) return the more complex than a simple news reader product, 3) put the product on a shelf and and that a sim justified longer learning forget it. I fully support anyone who says, curves, but that argument was far from Nobody is going to \"I don't like this product so I'm taking it sufficient to get me out of the contradicadvertise their product back,\" as long as they've spent enough tion I found myself in. time with the product to make that deterThe new news reader irritated me be as \"average\" or mination. How long is enough time? That cause it did not conform to what I knew. It varies with each individual and each prodtook significant thought to perform tasks I \"about the same as uct. In general, though, I'd say one gamused to do automatically with little or no ing session is not enough. thought at all. The new news reader clidn't FALCON 3.0.\" Ultimately, cach user must determine meet my expectations and that was a their own threshold and tolerance for source of unending and intolerable grief. continue to demand bigger, more comcomputer-induced pain. Just remember Only after considerable digging did I linalplex, more realistic products which like that ground breaking revolutions in simuly realize the depth the new news reader wise lengthen the learning curve and lation software usually force a new way of offered. I then remembered when I tried a require more exploration time. thinking on the user. Those generally beta version of MicroProse's F-14 FLEET What about the product that won't run willing to adapt to the new system often DEFENDER. Beta versions rarely include when you bring it home, can't communifind creative new worlds awaiting them. comprehensive documentation since the cate with QEMM, doesn't recognize the manual is still being written. After strugjoystick, or doesn't work with the video RADAR (continued from page 77) gling for a few hours with a foreign menu card? I'll be the first to admit I don't deal system and keyboard layout, I walked away well with these types of situations. My wife quences after each. from the program with a headache. The says I'm just impatient, but I prefer to see For those who want to rub shoulders next day I played some more and was it as having a very low tolerance for fail with real people in addition to pixel pilots, hooked. Soon I boasted FLEET DEFENDER' S ure. You lay out your hard earned bucks our early warning system indicates that triumphs all over CompuServe. and your hopes skyrocket on the drive there will be a 1994 Air Warrior ConvenSo here's the big point: First, every new home, only to be crushed like a gameproduct gets tons of hype before it ships. playing worm beneath the booted heel of tion from September 1 through September Every publisher describes their product as the game-publishing establishment, or at 4 at the Hyatt Fair Lakes in Fairfax, Vir\"revolutionary\" or \"ground breaking\" or least that's how it seems at the time. Who ginia. The conference costs $100 (in addi\"unprecedented,\" etc. Nobody is going to wouldn't be angry? tion to room charges) to cover food, bus advertise their product as \"average\" or Unfortunately, hardware and software trip to the National Air and Space Museum, \"about the same as FALCON 3.0.\" That's conflicts are a fact of PC life. If you head-to-head competition, presentations not what advertising is about. Second, huhaven't encountered one yet, you will. It's man nature causes us to stick to what we just a matter of time. I work hard to keep by CH Products and Thrustmaster, and an know and to exorcise anything even remy gaming machine in peak condition, awards dinner for the tournament winners. motely different. So, we wind up imaginbut invariably find myself pondering in For more information, contact Gary Cooper ing a magnificent breakthrough in home terrupt requests, memory managers, and on the Internet at cooper@digex.com. For entertainment technology that somehow device drivers. There are so many differroom reservations, call (703) 818-1234 or conforms to the friendly, familiar strucent hardware configurations out there, so (800) 233-1234. ture we're used to. Such expectations can many different software packages, so 78 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"NO MORE GAMES Tx You're finished with training... Had your fun and games. Now TACTICAL FIGHTER EXPERIMENT it's time to face reality in the most sophisticated aerial combat simulation ever created for your PC-TFX: Tactical Fighter Experiment. Equipped with ASRAAMS, Mavericks, M615, laser-guided GBUS...you're fully loaded to tackle more than 200 «realworld\" campaigns, based on today's geopolitical realities. And to keep you sweating bullets, from Somalia to Sarajevo, the skies are swarming with Al-programmed bogeys that'll make you pay for your mistakes...with your life. Log on and engage in TFX. This time, you're not just playing games. Grab the controls of any of three USAF-spec flight models and spread democracy over five million square miles of topographically accurate landscape. DS Oceasta este res Ocean of America 1855 O'Toole Avenue, Suite D-102 San Jose, CA 95131 (408) 954-0201 TFXO 1993 Ocean of America. All rights reserved. Ocean is a registered trademark of Occan Soltware Limited, Circle Reader Service #97 WIN the TFX Contest. «Be A Real Fighter Pilot\" See Package for Details. "


"PREVIEW 0More Than Atmosphere The Flight Plan For Looking Glass Technologies' FLIGHT UNLIMITED by Johnny L. Wilson Frank B. Mermillo S A PILOT, PHYSICIST AND PROGRAMThe good news for hot rod computer twice the speed of the rest of the sim. MER, SEAMUS BLACKLEY BRINGS AN users is that powerful machines will be (Check out the frame rate meter in the alIDEAL MIX OF SKILLS AND INTEREST able to fly in a hi-res mode (1024 x 768) pha version cockpit pictured below. It is to the world of flight simulation. that features photoreWith FLIGHT UNLIMITED, Looking alistic terrain with reGlass Technologies will both launch their lief; the bad news is first product under their own label (they that the program slows previously developed the ULTIMA UNDERdown so much in that WORLD series and SYSTEM SHOCK for Oriresolution that most pigin), and simultaneously offer an entirely lots would consider it new approach to simulated flight. Not unacceptable for doing only will FLIGHT UNLIMITED feature the anything other than most photo-realistic terrain ever seen in a ground gazing. Those PC flight sim, it also offers a new apwith 486/50s can take proach to modeling flight, and the most heart that the program transparent interface that the designers is being developed on could possibly imagine. that performance level, When Blackley and his Looking Glass but it is primarily deflight crew started working on FLIGHT UNsigned and optimized LIMITED, it was their goal to produce, \"Not for high performance a game, but a playground.\" Their stated Pentiums. Because of goal was to model the flight experience, this, the program's THIS IS FOR REAL Ground detail shows surpassing realism in 640 x 480 as the Sukhoi SU31 carves riverine canyons near Sedona, Arizona. as opposed to merely replicating the performance requireplane itself. Further, they wanted a proments are steeper than gram that would be totally accessible to a power climb in an F-15 with both burnthe dial on the far left.) The bad news for novices, because it didn't rely upon a ers lit. Even on a Pentium 90, headset users is that the upcoming wave complex interface with keythe unfinished FLIGHT UNof headsets only provide 240 x 180 pixel board overlays or require LIMITED flew below 8 frames resolution, so it has to subsample the curwould-be pilots to infer that per second at the optimal rent video mode and adapt it for the lesspolygons represented terrain. 640 x 480 resolution with er resolution. Fortunately, the simulation Instead, computer pilots detail set at the highest levoffers incredible suspension of disbelief in would get the opportunity to el. While code refinements may any mode. Why? Let us count the ways. work with full-screen or split improve that rate, gamers with 486s will screen views (the latter offering peripherprobably need a 486/66 with local bus LOOKS COUNT al perspective) on a standard monitor and video just to fly the sim smoothly in 320 x Instead of building polygon-based terrain a real 3-D cockpit (built off six angular 200. Regardless of machine or res mode, from geographical survey data, the team perspectives) for users who have Cyberthe sofware manages to update instrudecided to work off aerial photographs to max goggles or the Forte headset. ments on the cockpit panel at a frame rate build their photo-realistic world. The rea SNEAK PREVIEW Game Still In l Development 80 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"M C e trick is to find enough color aerial photos stuff, in the air. Airplanes imaneuver started J!!! so that they can stereo-match the photos expected to appear in the and create texture maps based on the final product include the: nose up a little highest level of detail possible. As a result, Bellanca Decathlon, Pitts the game doesn't look like a lot of simulaSpecial S-2B, Extra 3005, roll right tors. The only time it really looks typical Sukhoi SU31, P-51 and Etal is when buildings pop up close to the Grob 103 Aerobatic plane and the program uses a shaded Sailplane. voxel technology to represent the 3-D shapes, or when a pilot flies beyond the PHYSICAL detailed 13-mile square regions of stereo EDUCATION matched photography. Then, the proWhere most llight simulagram must use data to build polygontors work off a basic flight filled terrain that \"Cakes it\" until the plane model built from the perreaches the next detailed area. formance characteristics of The painstaking details are more than the aircraft, FLIGHT UNLIMjust \"eye-candy\" for computer pilots. All ITED factors in more than STUDENT FLYER Driver's training was never like this, as 25 of the terrain in the 13 mile squares is acone physical model. Many interactive lessons will have you off the ground and pulling Gs in tive. This means that simulated emerflight simulators simply no time. gency landings can take place in fields, on gather the available data on mesas, and along highways if you so dea plane from measurements taken in a way we've modeled the air around the airsire. Thus, the simulated world seems wind tunnel. However, such measureplane, as well as the plane, this may very more real than in simulator's where you ments do not take into consideration the well be the first acrobatic flight model in can only go from one airport \"hot spot\" fluid dynamics of atmospheric behavior the world.\" in the program to another. and their relationship to a given maneulTo get the feel of the atmosphere, The interface also looks a little differver or angle. Blackley observed that such Blackley performs some very in-depth ent. All lights begin in what Looking models do not take radial Gs, control rephysics calculations. The computer sets Glass calls an E.B.O. (Fixed Base of Operversal, pitch oscillation, and other pheup some boundary conditions for both ations). These are rendered 3-D environnomena into account. Not only does the the airplane's performance and the atments where you walk and look around simulation figure in the performance mospheric model. Then, the program using the mouse and joystick. Initial characteristics of the aircraft, but it also checks all the maps for changes in elevapoints of embarkation (Yucca and Semodels the fluid dynamics of the atmostion, as well as such man-made terrain efdona, AZ, as well as Aspen, CO, graced phere around the aircraft and the G fects as parking lots. Modeling updrafts the alpha version we examined) and up to forces which affect the pilot's head. Black and wind convergences for mountain 25 different flight lessons can be accessed ley explained that, \"Flying is about feelpasses and valleys may seem relatively eleby looking at a 3-D bulletin board, moving the atmosphere and reacting to it. By mentary, but the program assumes that ing the joystick to highlight a desired nonot simulating the actual atmosphere, parking lots full of metal cars will give off tice, and pressing a button. The flight other flight simulations left me feeling heat which rises and creates turbulence. lessons include: rolls, loops, half-loops, cold. As a pilot, I knew that there were the turbulence then affects the atmosImmelmans, Cuban Eights, Reserve aerobatic maneuvers that I wanted to tryphere around the plane and, in turn, by Cuban Eights, hammerheads, spins, snap on a computer sim that just didn't act like adapting the boundary conditions for the rolls, tailslides, inverted spins, vertical my experiences in the air. Because of the atmosphere, impacts the performance of rolls, knife-edge flight, hesthe aircraft. Other flight models work off itation rolls, square loops the idea of the \"angle of attack\" (where and rolling circles. the air hits the structure of the plane), but The airplanes are selectFLIGHT UNLIMITED models the atmosed by a different means. phere so that even a lawn chair would There is a 3-D desk in each function realistically within the atmosF.B.O. with model planes phere according to its inherent aerodyrevolving on the desk. In namics (or lack thereof). fact, each one of these As Blackley told us. \"We'd rather set up models is being rendered the world so that it runs itself and is really on the fly as it rotates. As cool, rather than trying to hack some spethe desired plane is bathed cial situations all the time.\" The bottom in a light-sourced highline for gamers is that would-be pilots can light, a simple click puts now do acrobatic maneuvers such as tail you in the cockpit and, slides, where the plane is positioned in a more importantly, if you vertical stall and allowed to fall backward, want to skip take-offs and A DETACHED VIEW It's hard to be objective about the beauty of the and the plane will act as it would in real landings and get right to photo-realistic terrain, regardless of the perspective. life (eventually nosing over to recover the the entertaining acrobatic stall). Computer pilots will even be able to SEPTEMBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 81 "


"Eexperience knife-edge expeiences, there is more good news on flight where the wings act as the horizon. Even though there is no rudders and the rudder imcombat, the game is networkable and alpacts altitude adjustments. lows up to 64 planes to share the same In fact, to illustrate his game world. This allows head-to-head point that the simulator is aerobatic competition and friendly onean aerodynamic playupmanship to take place on the network. ground, Blackley did a full Network play also enables dedicated combackwards tail slide and puter pilots to set up two extra monitors shoved the rudder full in for their peripheral vision so they don't one direction in order to have to use the split-screen view. see what would happen. So, the way I see it, two big questions Naturally, an actual pilot remain. First, how realistic is the simulawouldn't do this because tion and second, how soon will there be a the maneuver would rip the combat version of the game? The sim is rudder completely off, but getting high praise from real pilots. Patty it was interesting to see the A REAL HEAD RUSH A separate physics model causes the pilot's Wagstaff, three-time U.S. Aerobatic program deal with this situhead to move in response to the amount of G-forces being placed Champion, and another aerobatic pilot ation. on the aircraft. are consulting on the program, but BlackEven the sounds for the ley has little difficulty in getting more simulation are defined by the physics. The ing all the calculations being handled to mainstream pilots to look at the program. team used digital audio tape (DAT) to model the physics for atmosphere, plane As for the combat game, Looking Glass record the engine sounds of airplanes at and pilot, is the fact that only 1% of would love to do it. Blackley quotes a various speeds, then added digitally processor time is used to perform the combat veteran named Jeff McChaney as recorded wind sounds. In the game, the physics algorithms. The rest is spent renstating, \"Combat is about getting the enengine sounds are modified by wind dering the terrain. That says something ergy out of the airplane in order to do sounds according to wind speed, as opabout the cost of realism versus aesthetic. maneuvers.\" If FLIGHT UNLIMITED can posed to being strictly based on the pass the civilian tests, the military version plane's air speed. PERFORMANCE CHECK should be right behind it. It looks like it Perhaps most amazing of all, consider For gamers who thrive on multi-player should fly high on both counts. The Serious Wargamer Knows His True Allies Tigers On The Prowl Aide De Camp Point Of AttackTM SIMULATIONS HPS Simulations P.O. Box 3245 Santa Clara, CA 95055 (408)554-8381 The WARGAMER'S Computer Company 82 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"FLY THE BEST! THE BEST GAME CONTROLLERS FOR YOUR SYSTEM CH Products offers gamers quality joysticks, flight yokes, gamecards, and trackballs for all games and simulations. We've taken our line of IBM peripherals and expanded into Macintosh and 300.\" From advanced computer pilots and auto racers to those just taking off, CH Products has the right controller for you, all Made-in-the U.S.A. PRODUCTS Pro CH Products lets you fly higher, move faster, reach farther! CH Products/970 Park Center Drive /Vista, CA 92083 Phone: 619.598.2518 Fax: 619.598.2524 Circle Reader Service #190 "


"HARDWARE Desk Top Racers -ES Behind The Wheel of Thrustmaster's Formula T1 Driving Hardware by Gordon Goble . T'S BEEN QUITE A JOURNEY FOR THE PC ing the latter option means RACER. IN JUST A FEW YEARS, WE'VE baving Velcro strips permanently GONE FROM KEYBOARDS, TO TEENY TINY allixed to the desktop whether the unit is joysticks, to big durable joysticks, to in use or not. Adding to the complicamornflight yokes, to steering wheels, to tions, but understandable considering its ing's test sessteering wheels with pedals, and now to elaborate nature, the FORMULA TI will not sion and road steering wheels with pedals and gearshifts. work with anything but a dual joystick test comparisons, the So, what's next? Horns? Cigarette port (in order to engage foot pedals). Ah FORMULA TI was found to perform better lighters? Authentic roadkill? A little device well...such is the price of realism. than most other wheeled devices. WORLD that drops from the ceiling and smacks Yet once the FORMULA TI is up and CIRCUIT presented little problem for the you around every time you get in a collirunning, its advantages begin to shine unit, but several devices (including Sunsion? through. The wheel is a bit thin for my com's G-FORCE, and the CH VIRTUAL PIThe next step in the evolution of driliking (same wheel as Colorado Spectrum LOT and FLIGHTSTICK) scored marginally ving hardware is the FORMULA TI, a comused for its less than impressive MOUSE better on INDYCAR tracks. Lap time disbination of wheel, gearshifter, and WHEEL.), but it turns smoothly and accuparity was most noticeable (although still gas/brake pedals from veteran input derately while operating in absolute silence in the tenths of seconds) on INDYCAR vice builder, Thrustmaster. If the physical The gearshift lever is located just a couple courses, where absolute precision is world of computer racing wasn't encomof inches from the right side of the wheel, mandatory, and the FORMULA TI was not passing enough for you, it should be now. permitting easy \"on the fly\" shifting, and quite as adept handling heavy traffic arFor the most part, the FORMULA TI unit the pedals are...well, what can you cas. Yet the natural feel of real foot pedals has a professional look to it, with all comsay...the pedals are really there! That the was welcome, and kept the simulation test ponents being encased in sleek black metFORMULA TI incorporates one of the first score close. A good joystick remains the al cabinets. The wheel and gearshift are pedal units to actually make it to market is preferred method of control for quick remounted together in a base that can be in itself a step in the right direction. flex arcade-type racing games, but most clamped or allixed with Velcro to a desk, Yet, the pedals (a curious, yet functional assuredly this was not the use envisioned and the pedals are housed in a box that solution involving rollers on the end of by its creators for the FORMULA TI. sits on the floor. In application, the FORlevers) feature an overly large throw with Over the course of the last year, several MULA TI is an interesting mix of the good no discernible stop. Mounted side by side, similar products have been announced, and the bad. From initial setup onward, they are perhaps set a little too close to put on hold, and fallen through. Actually, there are a number of little obstacles that gether for lengthy competition, and that just getting a stand-alone pedal unit on stand in the way of an otherwise total combined with a similarly large steering the shelves has proven to be a nightmarpackage. wheel arc and a minuscule gearshifter ish task for those brave enough to try. Mounting is awkward, to say the least throw could result in a grumbling gamer Thrustmaster is to be congratulated for Control devices of this size and complexiover the long haul. Then again, each perbeing one of the few companies to follow ty require more than the non-skid feet son has his or her preferences, and none through on its promises, and the FORMUwe've become accustomed to with joyof this may matter to some drivers. LA TI is a great start on a new era in realsticks, and most do indeed come with those sincerely interested in advanced ism. Who knows what lies around the next table clamps. But the FORMULA TI somedigital driving products such as the FOR corner? how skips that technique, and opts instead MULA TI will undoubtedly be partaking in For more information on the FORMULA TI, for suction cups and Velcro strips. Unforthe genre's top games, and the Big Twocontact: Thrustmaster, 10150 S.W. Nimbus tunately, the suction cups do not render INDYCAR Racing and WORLD CIRCUITAve., Suite E-7, Tigard, OR 97223. Tel: the unit completely immobile, and choosare at the top of the list. Following a hard (503) 639-3200. 84 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"En eam Web LOCATION FORESTIER Dreamweb draws you into a world of greed and corruption, draws Lou into a civilisation teetering on the brink, draws you into an audio-visual experience like nothing else. I A perfect fusion of the true elements of sciencefiction and the dark musteries of adventure gaming! invento Stunning new oraphics contribute to the black mood of this compelling new over-head view adventure! bilirsi Explore over 200 rooms spread over 30 locations at your own peril! Sparkys Exciting combat sequences choreographed to precision! ********  Realism not to be equalled with the atmospheric music and superb sampled sound effects! LG \"...Awesome. 1« \"....Breath Taking.1«. ...Heart Stopping.\" A game to die for! empire SOFTWARE ENTERTAINMENT INTERNATIONAL (USA) Inc. 4 Professional Drive, Suite 123, Gaithersburg, MD 20879. Voice: (301) 216 9706 FAX: (301) 216 0117 Circle Reader Service #136 "


"STRATE Short Bursts, Short Lives How to Survive The Many Planned and Unplanned Challenges Of 1942: THE PACIFIC AIR WAR .. by Michael Rymaszewski O Roger MacGowan = HERE WAS ONCE A SIM PILOT WHO EXschool: Carrier Battles. Fighting a Carrier self on the carrier deck or the landing CELLED AT EVERY NEW GAME WITHIN Battle in 1942 is as thrilling as a rainy strip. Wherever you take off from, you'll A FEW HOURS. HE DECIMATED THE weekend in Reykavik, and won't be intereither do it manually or through autopievil Nazis trying to invade Britain, esting to anyone who has ever played a lot. And here we come to the game's and tauglit Japanese pilots who good strategic war game before. All you biggest flaw: the autopilot in 1942 crashes dared grapple with him that they could be can do is locate the enemy quickly, keep planes. Try to switch on the autopilot and unwilling kamikazes. At the mention of his changing the course and speed of your accelerate the time frame while in the 3-D name, 'Johnnie Johnson spilled his tea, carrier forces, and send out the appropriworld and you're asking for it. If you're Galland muttered dark things in German, ate number of lighters with each strike. taking off using the autopilot, make sure while Sakai mopped his sweating brow The outcome of each encounter is deteryou're in the normal time frame. and, with characteristic Eastern forbearmined by statistical formulae. What's more, the game's AI crashes ance, said nothing.... The bright point of Carrier Battles is other planes too, so don't be too alarmed I rather wished I was this imaginary that you can actually jump into one of the if you see planes flying into each other or character when I first sat down to Microattacking airplanes. If you get shot down hurtling down in suicidal dives for no apProse's 1942: THE PACIFIC AIR WAR, but or crash, you'll be moved into the next parent reason. It's part of the game. many a pilot was dropped in the drink beplane. You can also change planes yourIl you do take off with the autopilot, fore I mastered the game's idiosyncrasies. self by pressing a key. It's the best way to make sure you're in the normal time Coming to terms with 1942's quirks is quickly familiarize yourself with a variety frame, then switch to the map right away. what this article is all about, and we'll look of aircraft in combat situations without The autopilot seems to work all right in at the various ways and means in which having to takeoff and fly to the target, the map mode. you can consistently outscore the historiwhich can be a very lengthy process. The map will show you plane icons repcal characters featured in the 1942 Halls resenting the flights in your group. This is of Fame. MISSION MECHANICS your first chance to find out how many There are three basic steps involved: Flying missions can also be a risky planes are flying with you, and what they the first is understanding the flight modprocess, for 1942 has design flaws that can are. Move your cursor over the icons and el; the second is discovering ways to sideeasily kill your pilot. So, before discussing you'll get a window listing individual step some of the game's design flaws and how to become the top ace in the simulatflights and specifying the number of glitches; the third is re-learning aerial ed history of the Pacific War, let's discuss planes in each. How do you find out gunnery. how to avoid getting killed by one of the which flight you're in? If you're flying a glitches. fighter, you're in the first fighter flight on CARRIER BATTLES Each mission starts with a briefing, the list; a bomber, in the first bomber OR FLIGHT SCHOOL? where you are shown a map and told flight, and so on. The flight model in 1942 is one of the where you'll be flying, and why. It doesn't The mechanics involved in using the more advanced on the market. In other tell you what other units will take part in map are as follows: if you switch it on and words, flying a plane in a straight line is the mission. It doesn't tell you the disthere are enemies around, the game pausquite difficult. If you haven't yet learned tance to the target, the briefing map does es; if there aren't, time is running. If you that operating the throttle constantly is not have a scale, and the manual does not haven't switched on the autopilot before the only way to fly a plane in combat, you specify maximum range for any of the switching to the map, and there are no will in 1942. planes. If you want to put bombs on your enemies nearby, you'll crash. Like most sims, 1942 features a selecfighter instead of a drop tank, think twice. The map does not show your position tion of training missions, but there is a After you're done with the briefing and unless your plane is the only one remainmore interesting way to attend light have armed your plane, you'll find your ing from the whole flight. Otherwise, 86 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"HARD DRIVE TAKES ON A WHOLE NEW MEANING. INDYCAR. ALUMAX Get a grip-and hang on tight. IndyCar Racing is real-world, 3-D racing! Check out the reviews: \"Phenomenal»Computer Gaming World. \"Scary\"On Track \"Fast, furious, brilliant»— PC Gamer. \"Nirvana for car racing fans»Game Bytes. T. PAPYRUS TV TV 1 NEW NEW TOYOTA ALC INOYGUR ICONS DI PADA P ETER M.RO he feel. It's almost too real. Cream down the straight. Crest a I and your stomach's in your roat. Corner too fast and it's anic. Brake? Gas? Flick the wheel? you have to think, you're toast. Don't worry, you'll learn. But is is a win you earn. 2. KUU The look. You're there. Cars, tread marks, terrain, billboards even paint schemes and decals on real IndyCars accurate in obsessive 3-D detail. The experience. Tinker with chassis and engine set-up. Fiddle with turbo boost, wing angles and tires. Factor in tire wear and fuel load. All play a part-all can help you go faster. Add on 7 new tracks. With our IndyCar Circuits: Expansion Pack, you can race at seven new tracks from Phoenix to Mid-Ohio, Detroit to Queensland, Australia the challenge always stays fresh! Each track has been painstakingly constructed to match the true dimensions of the actual speedway. And now, Indy, too! Our engineers have mastered the feel and thrill of \"The Brickyard\" so you can, too, with our new Indianapolis Motor Speedway: Expansion Pack. Plus, with this addon package, you get a Customizing Paint Kit to update colors and decals, or just do your car your way. OFFICIALLY LICENSED FENDYCA RACING Visit local retail stores, or call: 1-800-836-1802 Please ask for X500 Distributed OLDEN COMPUTE exclusively worldwide TAD AWARD by Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. 1993 INTERMCTIVE 18061 Fitch Avenue VTER GAME ME VIEW entertainment Irvine, CA 92714 anapolis 500. Indy. and The Brickyard\" are registered trademarks of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway Corporation, IndyCar and the helmet are trademarks of The Indianapolis Motor Speedway Corporation, under exclusive license to Championship Auto Racing Teams, Inc. Papyrus is ademark of Papyrus Design Group, Inc. Virgin is a trademark of Virgin Enterprises Inc. IBM PC screens shown. Actual screens may vary Circle Reader Service #153 PAPYRUS -Now, New Expansion Packs: IndyCar Circuits, plus CHOICE ACTRD NEARD PREMIER FILTER The Indianapolis Motor Speedway! "


"1900 you'll be informed where your friends are, enemy and at a respectable altitude. mode until many, many dogfights later. but not where you are. It's irritating, to Then, whisper a quick prayer, switch the Also, the number of missions you can fly say the least. autopilot on, see what it's doing to your in the newer planes is limited. So, most of plane, and if things are okay, switch to the your American lighter or bomber pilot's THE MOST DANGEROUS ENEMY map. career will be spent flying the inferior maWhen the enemy is sighted, the map will Occasionally, whenever you attempt to chine. switch off and return you to the cockpit. turn on that dreaded autopilot to get After you've chosen a side, you'll be Pause the game instantly. Switch on the home, you'll get the message that you presented with a list of pilots. The Ameriexternal view and find out where your can't, because you're over the target. Press can list features fame-hungry MicroProse plane is in relation to the others. Then the 'quit' key. Often, you'll find out that personnel. The Japanese list features hisswitch on the action, and instantly dive you've completed the mission. If not, you torical characters, and this is where you away from the formation, returning to have a choice: fly manually until death put your thinking cap on and come up take position behind and slightly below it. from boredom, or bail out. I bailed out with authentic-sounding Japanese names, It's that autopilot-you just never know. unless of course you want to You can risk the autopilot if there are go the Jakel, Bill 2, Jim 3 no enemies around, and the planes in route. Why? Because, conyour formation are flying straight and levtrary to established pracel. But the only way to be sure that your tice, both Halls of Fame are pilot stays alive is to fly manually until you filled with names of historisee the enemy. cal pilots. Consequently, if So, you've clashed with the enemy, the Saburo Sakai on your done what you could, and you're on your available pilots' list does way home. You switch on the autopilot, well, you'll end up with two there are no other planes around. It Saburo Sakais in the Hall of seems safe... Fame. It isn't. The autopilot will always atAfter you've confirmed tempt to link you up with the other planes BENEATH A STEEL GRAY SKY Zeroes clash with F4U Corsairs the name of your pilot, in your flight. If the rest of the flight is flydefending Munda airbase. you'll choose the type of ing at sea level and you're high up, there's aircraft-fighter, bomber, a chance that the autopilot will tear the twice, and got picked up by friendly or torpedo. The manual says you should wings off your plane in an attempt to reforces, even though on both occasions the choose with care, because each plane calls join the flight. At other times you'll be friendly forces were much more distant for different battle skills. Quite frankly, I running for home without any ammo, and than the enemy's. Thank goodness for don't agree. The most important skill the autopilot will promptly return you to those Allied rescue dolphins! here is being a good pilot. If you're good, the danger zone. you'll do well in any of the categories. If The safest policy is to pause the game CHOOSE YOUR WEAPON not, then you won't. And anyway, since when all that remains is the flight home. Having dealt with all this, let's turn to the there is only one type of aircraft in each Switch on the map, click on the icon repplanes you get to fly, and the tactics you category, you'll want to try your hand at resenting your flight, and tell them to go can use to outshine all those historical heall three. home even if they already appear to be roes. What each category does involve is difdoing so. Then, to make sure everyone First you'll have to choose to fly for the ferent tactics. Because most of the action keeps climbing, reset the cruise altitude to Americans or the Japanese. The Japanese takes place in 1942, I'll limit myself to the at least 5,000 feet higher. Continue flying pilots get to fly better planes, while the planes available in that period. If you do manually until the map tells you your Americans get to be decorated at the drop well with the Wildcat and survive till 1943, flight is at a respectable distance from the of a hat. There are bound to be some you can be sure that when the Corsair and raised eyebrows at this, so the Hellcat come along, you'll do even let me explain. The Ameri better. The same goes for the new Zero cans start off with the Wildand the Helldiver (as long as you don't try cat, the Dauntless and the carrier landings). Devastator. The Devastator is superseded by the ACES IN THE MAKING Avenger in August, 1942; Basically, there are just three ways to the Wildcat and the Dauntshoot down an aircraft. One is from dead less soldier on till the beastern; second, head on; and the third, ginning of 1943 when they and most common, is deflection shooting. are gradually replaced by In 1942, shooting down planes from Corsairs, Hellcats and Helldead astern is dead easy. Line up the divers. The vast majority of sights, press the button, and wham! TIGHT FLIGHT Flying in formation is a snap with the virtual cockpit the missions take place in that's another scalp on your fuselage. in 1942, as this group of F6F Hellcats demonstrates. 1942, and you won't get to Even the vaunted Flying Fortress does not fly a Hellcat in the career require more than a two-second burst 88 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"2.5 MILLION FORMER ADDICTS CAN'T BE WRONG! LODE RUNNER THE LEGEND RETURNS TITUT BETTI It's more addicting than ever. With all new graphics and sound effects, plus 150 new levels of non-stop action. Play alone or head-to-head. Use the lightning-fast Game Generator to create torturous worlds of your own. See your retailer or call 1-800-757-7707 (Ask for offer D844). RUNNER THE LEGEND RETURNS SIERRA Available for DOS Windows. MAC. DOS CD-ROM, LODE RUNNER is a registered trademark licensed exclusively to Douglas E. Smith. 01983. 1994 oglas E Smith, Sierra On-Line Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #222 "


"Log Inu BTT / 1800 from your Zero's 20mm cannon. Head-on attacks are more dicey. The trick here is to find out whether the enemy pilot is after you, or someone nearby. If it's you, duck. If it's someone else, go for it. Deflection shooting is another story. What seems to matter is not the distance to the plane you're shooting at or its speed, but the angle between the planes. If your target is 500 yards away, doing 250 knots, and turning gently, you can give him the standard deflection and you'll get him. If he's 50 yards away, flying at 100 knots, and traveling at a 45 degree angle to you, things get tricky. The best tactic in this situation is to get in as close as you can, at most 50 yards, preferably less. Get the enemy plane in your sights, turn in the same direction until it slides out of view under the nose of your plane, then fire. Unlike most other sims you won't crash into your victim, provided you break away promptly. The Zero outperforms the Wildcat on every count. My Zero pilots (flying at maximum difficulty level) score an average of 2.0 victories per mission; the Wildcat flyers score 1.3. I've always believed one of the Wildcat's greatest assets was that it could outdive a Zero, thus getting away at leisure for another one of those sive maneuver: a steep climbing turn. famous hit-and-run attacks. It can't, not in Slam on the power and follow it, using op1942. However, it can outmaneuver it. posite rudder to gain height. As soon as I can hear gasps of horror all around, your Wildcat starts to falter, lower your but it's true. The Wildcat tends to slow nose and go into a light bank with full down dramatically whenever you turn rerudder. You can turn quite tightly in this manner flying at low speed. You'll often see the Zero you're hunting before you've completed a full circle, just as it's about to turn in the opposite direction. That's your chance for a couple of seconds, the deflection angle is very small, and you ought to get him. The Zero's superior performance means that, ironiAECEPUT cally, it is better suited to hit-and-run attacks than the LONG DISTANCE RUNAROUND Without maximum ranges listed for Wildcat. One option is to aircraft, think long and hard before you trade those drop tanks for dive on the American fightbombs. er, fire, and roll away for another pass. Another is to ally sharply. When that happens, let the go in slowly, cutting your throttle and lownose drop to pick up speed, and keep ering your llaps if necessary, following the turning. Soon, your adversary will be cirWildcat through its inevitable stall turn, cling above you, not knowing where you firing at close range. are. The Zero does have a major disadvanWhen you find yourself behind a Zero tage: it tends to explode when hit, and and fire, you'll find it has a standard evayou have to exercise extra care when tackROCHET Interface Dynamics Brackets Convert Your Desk and Office Chair Into a Realistic Cockpit Interface Dynamics Corp. 294 Forest Road Wolfeboro, NH 03894 MasterCard PH: 603-569-4638 FX: 603-569-8038 90 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 Call, Write, or Fax for a Free Brochure MC VISA or C.O.D. VISA $89.00 Pair of ARBs $59.00 Pair of KTBS $6.00 Shipping Charge Circle Reader Service #166 "


"ling bombers—the rear gunners in 1942 are lethal. Keep jinking and dodging, especially on your way out. 11 VIRTUAL COCKPIT: IS IT ANY USE? The fighters in 1942 feature the first worthy attempt to deal with a common problem. Instead of hitting several 'F' keys to get the various views, you can press Alt+F1', hit and hold the second button on your joystick, and your pilot's head will move the way you move the joystick. While you're in the virtual cockpit mode, you can also choose to keep a chosen plane in view by pressing the 'I' key when it is in your sights. Every time you press the second joystick button, your pilot's head will turn to look at that particular plane. It sounds great, but it has its drawbacks. Because the view is controlled by the joystick, you can't control your plane while you're looking around. Flying a plane in 1942 is difficult, and letting go of the controls even for a couple of seconds is not a good move. If you're in a vicious dogfight right above the waves, it invites disaster. The l' key option is good when you're flying against a single enemy, with no other bandits around. However, that's rare, and you'll find that while you're chasing I've ever come across, and the stark uglione particular plane, others will be shootness of the cockpit in the virtual mode reing down the bombers you're supposed to ally turned me off. What's the point of all be escorting, bombing the ships you're this beautiful detail when your cockpit resupposed to protect, or-worst of all sembles a crooked cage? shooting at you. I designated two fighter DIVE BOMBERS, OR HOW TO HIT A RUNNING ANT If you've ever wondered how a swarm of bombers could dump their loads all around the target without damaging it, this is where you find out. The truth is, hitting a ship that's taking evasive action is extremely hard. WELL-TIMED BURST Two seconds of gunfire is plenty of time for this When you're flying a Hellcat to score a kill. dive bomber, you'll want to play follow-yourpilots to fly in the virtual cockpit mode leader. Detach yourself from your flight with the I key option, and it quickly be on the way in (never fly in on autopilot-if came apparent that they did not do as you don't crash, the defending fighters well as the others. In dogfights, it simply will probably get you). Keep close behind doesn't pay to get fixated on one enemy, the planes from your flight, and follow all you'll be missing out on both your duties their maneuvers. The computer-conand other enemy planes that might make trolled planes always go for the most valueasier targets. able target, and all you have to do is dive The second thing that discouraged me after them. is that 1942 is the best-looking flight sim The manual recommends attacking NEW PRODUCT What Do PC Jet Jockeys Want? NEW PRODUCT The Mark II WCS (Programmable Throttle; Also Allows you to Program your Joystick) Hair-Raising Sorties Death Defying Maneuvers Heroics Victory Realism HOTAS\" And... FCS (Joystick) TrustMast Controls RCS (Rudder Pedals) 10150 SW Nimbus Ave. Portland, OR 97223-4337 PHONE (503689-3200 FAX (503)620-8094 Circle Reader Service #161 SEPTEMBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 91 "


"from the side. Don't. Approaching from knots, then drop your flaps and give it 60you've survived all those missions on the behind offers the best chance of making 70% power. You'll mosey along at the reDevastator, you simply can't fail. some hasty last-moment corrections, and quired speed, and you'll still keep control. The Kate is a much better plane than you'll be making plenty of those. Beware of being hypnotized by the target; the Devastator, and you can drop the torDon't attempt to climb after you've keep the rate of climb indicator in view. pedo from 400 feet while traveling at dropped your baby. You want to get the When you're required to bomb land speed, which helps. It's more fragile, hell out of there, and you'll do it faster if targets, remember that the Devastator and—as far as I can tell it has no rear gunyou dive to the deck on maximum power. can't dive. It starts to shake at around 180 ner in the Career mode. Beware of fighters. Keep twisting and turning on your way out. knots, and loses its wings not long afterBefore you drop your torpedo, rememBoth the Dauntless and the Val can dogwards. Indeed, you'll see that happening ber that both American and Japanese torfight enemy fighters. You not only have to the other planes in your flight. Descend pedoes travel at just a shade below 50 double machine guns up front, but you on the target in a fast glide at minimum knots (according to historical sources, also have your trusty rear gunner, and as power (press 'T', then press once), and this information isn't supplied in the I've said before, the rear manual). Go to the map to check on the gunners in 1942 are speed of the ships you're attacking, and lethal. The Val is espemake the proper allowances. cially good against Wildcats-I've shot them SCORING, PROMOTIONS, down while still carrying DECORATIONS a bomb load. Don't overIf you play at the maximum difficulty levdo it, though; if there are el, you'll find you only need half a dozen more than one enemy missions to get into the Hall of Fame-as fighters against you, run. little as four if all are big successes. The AUTOPILOT CHABLED As seems to be the ships you hit and the planes you shoot rule with American and clown count less than the overall success of AUTOPILOT IN TRAINING Even novice pilots are advised to perform Japanese planes, the Val the mission as measured against enemy their own takeoffs, unless they enjoy restoring from save games. is more fragile than the resistance. To use the McClusky's SBD atDauntless, but is more tack off Midway as an example: my pilot maneuverable, faster, and has a better use the external view to make sure you're got 9000 points and the Medal of Honor climb rate. At high altitude and without on course. Switch to the bombsight while without hitting anything, but there were bombs, it'll do 270 knots. flying straight and level at between three three Japanese carriers burning by the One final note: if you miss that defense and four thousand feet. When the target time it was over, and the whole flight less transport, you can always strae it. has disappeared from the bombsight, slow made it home. Amazingly, a couple of bursts will set it down to stalling speed, and go into the You can expect to get promoted after a aflame. You won't get points, but it will dive. Release the bombs the moment couple of good missions. Subsequent promake you feel good. This only seems to you've got the target approximately in motions are harder to come by, but I did work for Vals, as I've strafed transports your sights and pull up instantly—your get several pilots promoted for the second flying other planes with no results. plane will be threatening to fall apart by time after four missions. American pilots then. A plus is that once you've dropped receive medals after almost every successTHE DEVASTATING EFFECT the load, the Devastator climbs fairly well. ful sortie. It's harder for the Japanese, OF LOW-FLYING KATES Once the Avenger comes around, and even then, it's not accurate historicalTorpedo pilots face a tough choice. If you you've got it made. It's tough, it bristles ly—they almost never got promoted or choose to fight as an American pilot, with defensive armament, and after decorated. you'll have to start with the Devastator, 1942 is probably the which is a pig to fly. To conduct a successmost engrossing flight ful torpedo attack you'll have to fly below combat sim I've ever 300 feet, at no more than 110 knots, othplayed. However, beerwise your torpedo won't run. Now, the cause it's so close to manual says the Devastator handles really perfection, all its flaws well at low speeds. It doesn't. If you're carreally stick out like sore rying a torpedo, skimming the waves, and thumbs. Don't get your speed drops below 100 knots, it's turned off by the glitchgood-bye Johnny-it goes into a gentle es; hopefully, this artidive to the left and doesn't respond to cle will help you to controls. sidestep most of them, Your goal then, when llying the DevasBOMB RELEASED so that you can truly tator, is to stay alive until the Avenger beenjoy what is a great comes available. It's difficult, so here are a DROPPING MARBLES ON A MOUSE Dive-bombing a carrier is difficult, game. Once the probcouple of hints: but the Akagi is about to receive a special-delivery package from an lems have been fixed, it On torpedo runs, get down to 300 feet, on-target Dauntless. could be the best, ever. get your speed down to the required 110 92 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"GET READY TO BE BLOWN AWAY METALTECH EARTHSIEGEN We had it coming. We created Cybrids with breakthrough Al to perform dangerous tasks with lightning precision. But we should never have taught them to tight. Magnificent light-sourced texture-mapping with fluid 3Space animation One apocalypse later, it's EarthSiege. Your squad of HERCs prowls a target-rich environment, ready to deliver some heavily mechanized payback. But beware-the Cybrids are an intelligent and relentless enemy. You'll constantly have to train new pilots, develop new tactics, and acquire new weapons-like EM Pulse Cannons, optically guided missiles and Electron Flux weapons-to secure an advantage. Or your burnt-jelly remains won't fill a teacup. Dynam EARTHSIEGE-BLAST INTO THE METALTECH ERA! The mission generator guarantees Available at retail for IBM/compatibles or call a restart isn't just a replay 1-800-757-7707  Dynamix, Inc. or indicate trademarks of, or licensed to Dynamix, Inc. all rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #223 "


"OPERATION CRUSADER The Total Combat Experience AVAILABLE! PC NOW WORLD at Crete Beide Derne Lou Tobruk Guld Solut Meanna LIBYA 1 zoom Middle level zoom map of North Afria MEONE 10. UFRERERE Tactical map featuring combat units near Tobruk ECOPRIP V IOLONO Real-time battle reports from the fron FAD Hot on the heels of the industry's first \"Game of the Year\" for a computer wargame, the team that brought you the awardwinning V for Victory series has joined forces with The Avalon Hill Game Company for yet another blockbuster! Atomic Games and Avalon Hill are proud and excited to present OPERATION CRUSADER, the first in the new World at War series covering great campaigns of WWII. Set in the expansive reaches of the Libyan and Egyptian deserts, OPERATION CRUSADER sweeps you into the role of German Field Marshal Erwin Rommel or British General Sir Claude Auchinleck as they commit their nations' finest infantry and tanks in an all-out struggle for the Mediterranean port city of Tobruk. A series of six historical scenarios will show you first hand what open field tactics and desert combat are REALLY like. Experience for yourself the cursed Hellfire Pass and see if you, too, can earn the title, «The Desert Fox\". Time Reference Calendar gives weathe forecasts and reinforcement alerts. The Avalon Hill Game Company DIVISION OF MONARCH AVALON, INC. 4517 Harford Road  Baltimore, MD 21214 If Operation Crusader cannot be found locally, call TOLL FREE 1-800-999-3222 Ask for Operator CGW9 Strategy Plus \"Computer wargamer's rejoice!\" PC Entertainment --\"A sleek, sweet gaming experience.» Computer Gaming World \"Contender for Wargame of the year.. Consumer Electronics Show 1994 Software Showcase Award Circle Reader Service #44 Available on: IBM PC compatibles. Required: Processor 386 or better: Min. 4 MB memory, HD.3.5' Floppy, Hard Drive, SVGA-VESA graphic card & monitor, support Adlib, Roland & SoundBlaster cards. AND Available on: Macintosh Color Systens. 5 MB RAM. HD req'd. "


"STRATEGY/WARGAMES The E-Mail Warriors IN MULTI-PLAYER GAMING, WHICH BROADSIDES This might surprise you, too. PLAY-BY-E-MAIL IS MOST IMPORTANT, REAL-TIME After all, CGW has long been a MODEM PLAY OR Play-By-Electronproponent of multi-human player ic-Mail (PBEM)? A few weeks ago, gaming, and has always extolled GAMES ARE ACUEAD GAMES ARE A CHEAP that's the question that Frank the virtues of modem play. HowHunter of Adanac posed to GEever, each game should be examnie members regarding the next ined separately to see whether SOLUTION FOR (2.0) version of his ROAD FROM head-to-head, direct connect moSUMTER TO APPOMATTOX. The dem play is right for it, or if a cusgame is coming along fairly tomized file generated for transfer LONG-DISTANCE quickly, but he has been holding it up in order to by electronic mail is more appropriate. In the implement both modem and play-by-email case of ROAD FROM SUMTER TO APPOMATTOX, a (PBEM) options. He asked if the GEnie gamers turn-based wargame, PBEM is certainly the best GAMERS really felt the game must include both of these feaway to go. tures, and if not, which would they prefer. Quite simply, games where you would be sitThe players responded en masse and forcefully. ting and waiting with little to do while your oppoEven I chimed in. \"Just give us the PBEM feanent plays don't lend themselves to direct ture!\" we cried. Frank was taken aback. He exmodem play. Turn-based war and strategy games pected the answer would be a solid call for without a fairly interactive sequence of play are modem play. better served by a PBEM feature. For example, THE PERFECT GENERAL, while turn-based, has a sequence where the defender lies in wait to conduct opportunity fire during the attacker's turn, so direct Applied Computing Services, Inc., the original developer and copy modem play works very right holder of computer HARPOON, will be re-releasing all of the HARPOON well for that game. Turnv1.x products through Alliance Interactive under the Arsenal Publishing based games along the label. (Note that Three-Sixty's current HARPOON II project is completely lines of HPS Simulations TIGERS ON THE PROWL or unaffected by this.) The new product will be a version 1.5 of HARPOON Avalon Hill's OPERATION Classic. It will be available on Mac and IBM CD-ROM only, and include CRUSADER are better served all of the original game's support products, plus bug fixes, interface enby their PBEM features. hancements and new scenarios. They're even working on a Windows Play by email also has version. the advantages of being Three-Sixty Pacific, Inc., the original publisher of HARPOON and pre both cheaper (long-dissent publisher of HARPOON II, has filed for Chapter 11 debt restructuring. tance phone bills for long They're reorganizing so as to be able to fully support HARPOON II and their EMPIRE DELUXE games can upcoming IBM version of VICTORY AT SEA. add up fast, believe me!) and more convenient for If you've read this issue's DEFEND THE ALAMO! review, you might wonder busy gamers. Finding a what Incredible Simulations might be up to next with their \"last stand\" time when two gamers are game engine. Apparently, the brothers Lapkoff are working on a free for a modem game can (continued on page 96) be difficult, whereas turns in by Alan Emrich G-2 SEPTEMBER 1994 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 95 "


"S159 195 522 ASTARLITE ELECTRONIC TEL: 800-552-9880 G-2 (continued from page 95) FAX:415-548-1 639 CD ROM DRIVE ,SOUND CARDS Custer's LAST STAND game. This might be folPANASONIC 562,2X, 320MS lowed by the battle of Peleilieu (since their PNASONIC 562 EXTERNAL father fought at that one). So far, we haven't MITSUMI FX001,2X.250MS 159 SONY CDU 334,2X,290MS 159 been able to convince them that a Rorke's PLEXTOR 3028,2x, 240MS SCSI II 255 Drift/Zulu wars game would be well received. NCE CDR-510 3X, 195MS SCSI II 359 WARLORDS II enthusiasts will want to SOUND BLASTER PRO VALUE 75 SOUND BLASTER PRO 16 VALUE 98 check out all of the scenarios being upSOUND BLASTER IOSCSI II 759 loaded on CompuServe of late. With the sceSOUND BLASTER 16 ASP 165 nario editor in the hands of creative gamers, CD SOFTWARE many interesting scenarios, including Ro101 BEST GAMES A HARD DAY'S AND NIGHT man, Aztec and several Tolkienesque games, AUTOMOBILE REGISTRY have been showing up in the Gamer's Forum, AMERICAN PHONE BOOKS Library #3. Note that this is also the library AUTHOR TEACHER TROUBLE CD DELUXE PACK where scenarios abound for games like CHAOS CONTINUUM TANKS!, EMPIRE DELUXE, and others. COMPTON ENCYCLOPEDIA Did someone say TANKS? What will Norm COOKBOOK HEAVEN CRITICAL PATH Koger do now that his TANKS! game has DARK SEED rolled? Apparently, his time machine is DUNE headed back to the 19th Century to visit the FIS STRIKE EAGLE III FAMILY DOCTOR III Mexican War, the American Civil War, the FOREVER GROWING GARDEN Crimean War and the British colonial GROLIERS ENCYCLOPEDIA period. GUNSHIP2000 JUST GRANDMA AND ME And speaking of the Civil War, Robert E. IRON HELIX Lee, Jr. (his real name!) has contracted INCA with MicroProse to do COMMAND HQ II (a KING QUEST IV LEGEND OF KYRANDIA working title). It will feature four-way and MAYO CLINIC FAMILYBOOK perhaps network play versions of this MICROSOFT BOOKSHELF perennial favorite. Naturally, Lee will be inMICROSOFT ENCARTA MEGA RACE corporating all of the latest CHQ 3.x enMAGIC DEATHVIRTUAL) hancements he's already made to the MONKEY ISLAND game, and they are many, including a map MADDOG MCCREE MYST builder and random map generator. QUANTUM GATE . On the boardgame bridge, Scott HamilRETURN TO RORK ton of HPS Simulations has released a new REBEL ASSAULT SEVENTH GUEST version of AIDE DE CAMP (v1.15) that uses SIM CITY in an email game can be made at each THE LAWNMOWER MAN WHO KILL SAM RUPERT player's leisure. WIGGINS STORY LANDS ADULT CDS WE'RE NOT ALL SOCIAL XXX RATED BLOOPER OUTCASTS, YOU KNOW! AMERICAN GIRLS Truly, solitaire-only war and strategy ADULT PLATE games are starting to irk me, and I ASIAN PLATE CAFE FLESH know I'm not the only one. I hear conHIDDEN OBSESSIONS stantly that the most requested feature DIGITAL DANCING for SID MEIER'S CIVILIZATION is multiSYMOREBUTT INTERACTIVE player play with email/modem options. SECRET Our wargame and strategy games of the GIRLS OF J.STEPHEN HICKS year, SSI'S CLASH OF STEEL and MicroHIGH VOLUME NUDE HOUSE OF SLEEPING BEAUTY Prose's MASTER OF ORION would both SUPER MODEL GOES WILD have benefited greatly from the incluNIGHT WATCH INTERACTIVE sion of a PBEM feature. Sure, MASTER DREAMMACHINE INTERACTIVE 42 OF ORION would have to sacrifice its tacCOMPLAY W/ME INTERACTIVE 34 tical combat feature in PBEM mode, but UROTSUKIDOJI(ANIMATION) 34 *CALL FOR LARGE SELECTION CIRS it can't be that much work to save a Circle Reader Service #230 96 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 70K less RAM, leaving more room for larger game sets. It also includes some new features and fixes the sound problem that Pentium users have discovered. Decision Games is in search of playtesters for their Von SPEE'S CRUISERS computer game. You must use Windows and be familiar with their FAR SEAs game included in issue #125 of Strategy & Tactics magazine. Contact them directly on Genie at: DECISIONGAME or by telephone at (805) 943-6832. In this month's Avalon Hill report, we've learned that their COMPUTER THIRD REICH game will not include the boardgame's historical variant options. It seems that it was becoming too much of a task to program the computer to guard against all of the possibilities these variants created. Hopefully, these options will remain for human players to use via the play-by-email game option. Atomic Games is busy outlining Avalon Hill's new COMPUTER DIPLOMACY. The game is slated to be a solid solitaire game, but it will also have a direct Internet server for fast access to a full table of live opponents. A generic message generation system using an iconic interface is being designed. After a player selects the proper buttons, the message will be clearly received by computer players, while a human opponent will get a specially generated text message, complete with the sending nation's \"national overtone.\" Thus, you won't be sure if a message was sent by a computer or a human adversary. game in such a way that it is automatically compressed (both to make it cheaper to send and to keep it from being easily edited by cheaters) and ready for another player to load on his or her computer and do their turn. Granted, this is another challenge for programming teams, but a minor one, I think. After all, Mark Baldwin and Bob Rakowsky were able to give us both real-time modem play and a PBEM feature in EMPIRE DELUXE. We think designers should follow this sound model when possible. When in doubt, however, give us PBEM. It is not only the easiest multi-player solution to implement, but in many cases it is the least expensive option for the gamer, as well. "


"PREVIEW Rock'n Roll Panzer Pushing BESKO SSI's PANZER GENERAL Will Test Your Mettle With Metal For Medals by Alan «King Tiger\" Emrich Roger MacGowen OULD YOU BELIEVE,\" I pany could deny it was a fast and fun doing it. Veteran wargamers, however, ASK IN MY BEST little wargame. From these humble orimight poo-poo the embraceably simple MAXWELL SMART gins, SSI found the inspiration for game play mechanisms and ask imitation, \"that the PANZER GENERAL. \"Where's the beef?» meaning the next wargame from Just to make a good thing better, SSI \"meat\" of simulated history. Strategic Simulations will be a Nintenhas revved up the excellent game enThe historical elements in PANZER do cartridge from Korea?\" Okay then, gine for PANZER GENERAL and, I'm hapGENERAL come into play via a number would you believe it's actually a 16-bit py to report, the playability of of sources that grognards will recogSEGA cart from Japan? No? How about DAISAN-RYKU has remained firmly innize. First, there is the extensive unit a strategic level WWII wargame for the tact. Besides the mouse-driven interface database. Countless ship, aircraft and PC that's inspired by the Japanese car and keyboard commands that an IBM troop types are available for play, and tridge game, DAISAN-RYKU? wargamer expects, several important these can be upgraded during each sceI can see the hard core wargamers enhancements have been added that nario. Numerous historical and a few getting ready to turn the page. Please, have PANZER GENERAL far surpassing the \"what if?\" scenarios are provided with don't do it! Hear me out. Rather than SEGA game that inspired it. reasonably accurate maps depicting a being stereotypically simplistic, DAISANwide variety of terrain features. AlRyku on the SEGA 16 was cleverly deWHERE'S THE HISTORY? though the scenario orders of battle signed to get every ounce of In game play, PANZER GENERAL is probawere in a state of flux in the preview horsepower out of its 16-bit machine. I bly most similar to SSI'S THE GREAT copy examined, I expect that SSI will personally witnessed the veteran War or Ubi Soft's BATTLE ISLE. In all of play a bit fast and loose with them to wargamers inside SSI playing this these games, a core group of diverse ensure better game play. Japanese cartridge game at their office unit types with a wide array of In the early version 1 previewed, (presumably on their breaks, but values (supply level, ammuthere were two scenarios covering the you know how that is) with a nition, experience, initiainvasion of Poland (1939), one for the crude translation of the tive, firing range, German attack on Norway in 1940, (a Japanese manual laying bemovement allowance, de particularly fascinating campaign to side the SEGA Genesis. As ense strength and target play) and others for the overrun of the people kept cycling through type, attack strength vs. soft Low Countries. There were also scenarto take their turns, I asked targets, hard targets, ships, planes, ios for the final moves against France what game they were working on, and etc.) fought over a series of battles. In (1940), Operation Sea Lion (the prothey admitted they weren't really workPANZER GENERAL, you can ponder all of posed German invasion of England in ing on anything-they were just playing these figures, or you can ignore all of September, 1940), Rommel's arrival in this game for fun. However, they were this minutiae and simply push the North Africa, and the German air asso addicted to it that no one in the compieces around, and have a great time sault on Crete. SSI hopes to have about Ying be. SNEAK PREVIEW Game Still lo Development SEPTEMBER 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 97 "


"lu 30 scenarios in the finished version of utilitarian options are acthe game. cessible with a simple click Each scenario can be played solitaire or two of the mouse. from either the Allied or the Axis side, or by two human players sharing the MATTERS OF SCALE same computer. Fortunately, the screen The game scale is a bit is covered between moves, making it amorphous. Turns generaldifficult to get a free look at your oppoly represent one day in the nent's forces during turn changes. At scenarios previewed (each this time, there is no modem or playsimulated about three by-email option under consideration, weeks of campaigning), which is a shame since the game's turn and units appear to be at structure and high playability level about the regimentmake it ideal for e-mail and tournabrigade-division level for ment style play (see my «Broadsides & ground troops, while ar 26th PZIB (9) Gripeshot\" column this issue). tillery and anti-tank units approximate regiments or 26TH PANZERS STOP FOR SMOKE BREAK German tank formations WARGAMING CUSTOMS battalions. Air units seem take horrendous losses as they push towards Paris. Like all good wargames, PANZER GENERAL allows players to cusFormat : 12 ground attacks to make sure that tomize the game a bit. Toggles units advance (and fall back!) in are included for a wide variety of the correct order makes employthings. You can play with enemy ing proper tactics a vital conunits revealed at all times, for incern. stance, or have them hidden if Overall, PANZER GENERAL's clethey are not currently \"spotted\" gant rewarding of proper comby friendly forces (making air bined arms tactics works very units even more valuable). A sepamuch to my satisfaction. To caprate toggle either shows or hides ture a fortified locale, it is wise enemy troop movements that are to send in an air unit to bomb it, not sighted. Likewise, the entire lob in as much long range arelement of logistics can be togtillery or shore bombardment gled off (an important considerafire as can be brought to bear, tion for people like me who loathe then assault with some good insupply rules!). Animated battle DESCENT ON CRETE The strategic overview shows the German fantry units. Likewise, an open displays can also be switched on paratroopers' grandest assault, along with the hodge-podge of field engagement is best hanor off. The ability to temporarily Allied forces. dled with a bit of preparatory remove units from the board to bombardment followed by an arsee the entire map, strategic map to cavort in formations of about 40-60 mored attack. overviews, unit information cursors, opplanes, and individual capital ships and In combat, each unit has an initiative tional weather, different ways to scroll groups of smaller ships abound upon rating. The higher the initiative, the through your forces and many more the seas. more likely that unit will get to shoot Units are moved one first when fire is exchanged, thus damhex at a time. Basically, aging the enemy piece before it gets a only one land or sea and chance to return fire in that attack. one air unit are allowed to Losses reduce a unit's normal 10 stack in a hex, keeping strength points (representing a full everything simple and strength, fully manned and equipped playable. Combat generalformation), and a unit that reaches zero ly takes place between adstrength is simply eliminated. jacent units. Interestingly, As previously mentioned, each unit a unit can conduct its athas a supply and ammunition rating tack either before or after when that option is used. Land units in it moves. This, combined the field can replenish themselves by with the fact that units can doing nothing for a turn when not adjabe moved in any order decent to an enemy unit, while ships must sired, creates many tactisit in port and planes on one of the precal possibilities on the cious few air bases in order to gas up POLISHED TANKS ALL IN A ROW The unit manifest makes it simple game board. The need for and rearm. Units that are adjacent to to find units and count bullets at a glance. coordinating air, naval enemy pieces will only be able to reand artillery strikes with ceive partial supply and replacements. 240 LUCU T5 to JUILO A1 PL) 14 AU Pasett Al TEUR FS Oy WP3/20 Orbon Bir Herr Suutti De Crane 98 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"EE LE32E33 WOOODEN nario limits the unit and historical insights from playing it. Betroop types to those that ing able to use all the sound military were historically available. principles and a few clever gaming The ability to modify your techniques to win is enough for me order of battle at a cost in when a wargame is this downright fun time (this is because it not to play. If SSI can figure out a way to only takes a turn to upadd a play-by-email feature, campaigns grade/build new units, but from the Allied players' sides, and a sceit is done in rear areas at nario builder/editor, then they will friendly cities and air know the meaning of the phrase: \"Tobases) and prestige points morrow, the world!\" is a clever gimmick. It neatly simulates a commander's economic SAY, CAN YOU SEE SEELOWE England's greatest danger since the and political Spanish Armada makes its way across the English Channel. clout, which translates Thus, rotating troops into and out of into his ability to get what the front lines is another element of a he needs from the powsuccessful General's concern. ers that be\" so that he can get the job done. DEUTSCHLAND UBER ALLES PANZER GENERAL has bePANZER GENERAL's beauty, though, lies gun playtesting and in its campaign game. Here, a single should be released later player can play the German side, taking this year. Personally, I his core forces from one campaign to have found this little AIR INFERIORITY Armor \"don't mean a thing, if you ain't got the the next. Units gain experience in batwargame to be truly adplanes.\" as these British tanks find out first-hand from a flight tle (shown by five stars next to their unit dicting, even if I am not of Stukas. designation) and their experience dibasking in any great new minishes as regular replacements are added. Units are even supposed to earn medals and citations from the various campaigns they've fought in, giving each of them their own personality,\" although this particular feature was not in the version previewed. This campaign game element of linked scenarios provides a great system for teaching players the military principle of EconoSend us $2 for our catalog containing full my of Force, because today's troops y descriptions and up-to-date pricing on the must be preserved in order to live and latest and greatest titles for IBM and the Mac. Also comes with a S2 off coupon. fight tomorrow's battles. Perhaps the game's best feature is the We accept advance purchases use of «Prestige Points.\" Garnered by and game reservations. capturing cities and eliminating enemy We sell only unopened. manufacturer-direct games. units, these points are used as a sort of No hidden handling fees. currency for buying and upgrading We can locate hard-to-find titles. units. Instead of giving a unit normal Same day shipping for orders received replacements that dilute its experience before 4 pm ET. Money orders, personal level, you can give it \"elite\" replacechecks, and major credit cards accepted. ments, which costs some prestige but allows you to maintain troop quality and even create oversized (11 or more strength point) formations. Likewise, reinforcements can be purchased and units already in the game One W. Seminary St., Brandon, VT 05733 7am-12pm Eastern Time, Monday-Saturday can be upgraded, usually to add a transport element or change their primary 1-800-247-5447 equipment type. Of course, each sceCircle Reader Service #117 SEPTEMBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 99 Only a Titan could provide mail-order service of such colossal proportions. GAMES DISCOVER VISA "


"Shield Jracu STAR CRUSADER: MALESTRE "


"SURE Y 0.0 COULD. DIE, BUT THAT'S LIFE IWD)) ** The Gorene Empire is at war with the Alien Alliance. The ally you choose and the battle strategy you devise will determine who controls the Ascalon Rift. * Choose your ally from either of opposing sides. Fly eleven different ships loaded with weaponry. Depart for over 100 varying missions. Then switch  sides for unparalleled replayability. Plot strategies, orchestrate battles, fly stealth missions, and conquer territories, with full combat inside nebulas and asteroid fields. Riveting hyper-realistic 3-D graphics, with fully texture-mapped ships, on-the-fly translucency. Gouraud and Phong shading. and cinematic multimedia videos. * Driving music. searing sound effects and on the CD-ROM version, fully digitized speech delivered by professional actors. mi STAR 1 GRUSADERTAKE, Distributed by FOR IBM PC AND IBM PC CD-ROM INTERACTIVE SOFTWARI Circle Reader Service #184 "


"REVIEW The Turnstile HE ME PAS Of The Spew Finding Profit In The Puke In Bullfrog's THEME PARK w : @ O3 OD by Randall Black NYONE WHO'S BEEN TO THE MIDWAY ing machines, you must lure customers to BATHROOM HUMOR OF A COUNTY FAIR CAN RECALL THE the park to support the real moneymak. The existence of food and beverage shops OVERPRICED, UNWHOLESOME FOOD, ers: your shops and sideshows. Admission also demands placement of public facilithe two hour wait in line for a borticket revenue also depends on the variety ties, which at the game's outset consist of ling, two minute ride, and the disand quality of your rides. outhouses-disgusting, odoriferous structurbing aroma of fresh vomit in the night The initial shops and sideshows include tures that can trigger a cascade of vomitair. If you remember that experience with a Coffee Shop, Mr. Whippy Ices, Ballooning among customers. Beginning with fondness, then THEME PARK is for you. World and the Duck Shoot. For every coloans, a la RAILROAD TYCOON, you proFrom Bullfrog, the makers of Popumestible commodity you have the option ceed to lay out sufficient paths, rides, toiLOUS, POWERMONGER and SYNDICATE, of setting some parameter that will affect lets, shops and sideshows to open a small, THEME PARK offers gamers the chance to the customers who ingest it. For example, seedy amusement park. Buses periodicalbuild and manage an amusement park. more sugar in Mr. Whippy Ices makes ly disgorge new waves of guests, the numIn the process, one has the singular opthem more addicting and increases sales. ber depending on your park's reputation. portunity to witness A high level of cafOn opening day, customers stream in to the clean-up of tons THEME PARK feine at the Coffee careen randomly around the park, riding of litter and gallons Price: $49.95 Shop causes cusrides, patronizing shops, and befouling of graphically accu System: IBM therne PARK tomers to sprint your creation with litter and vomit. rate vomit deposit Requirements: around the park. To combat the mess, handymen must ed by park guests. 386-25 or Customers seem to be hired and assigned routes. Without better (386-33 The game begins remain perpetualhandymen, litter and vomit accumulate recommended) with a vacant park EGA and VGA ly hungry and and the park quickly becomes a grim and the ability to in graphics, 21 MB thirsty and will pay place indeed. Other employees include stall four cheap, free hard drive almost any price guards, stern figures responsible for mechanically inferi space required, for food and crowd control and ejecting hoodlums, or, boring rides: the mouse; drink. To keep and costumed entertainers such as Squid supports Ad Lib, Gravis Ultrasound, PAS, Bouncy Castle, Tree Roland MT32, Sound Blaster and general shops stocked, you Man, Chicken Man and Shark Man. House, Merry-goMIDI sound cards must periodically Customers display their feelings about round and Ghost Protection: None order supplies their experiences within the park by way House. The excite Designer: Bullfrog Productions Ltd. from a goods of cartoon-style \"thought balloons\" that ment rating of the Publisher: Electronic Arts menu, an annoytell you their individual happiness level, rides ranges from San Mateo, CA ing task that's easidegree of satiety and emotional reactions (415) 571-7171 \"bad\" for the merly forgotten and to prices and the presence of litter. When ry-go-round, to results in lost reva customer is moved by a particular feel«poor\" for the tree house, to a barely adeenues (but less litter and vomit). The real ing, his or her head also may swell with an quate \"okay\" for the other two rides. The cash cow at the beginning of the game is oversized facial expression, telegraphing rides also possess varying degrees of methe Duck Shoot, a mildly addicting game the mood to the alert player. Because the chanical reliability, ranging from \"very of skill whose price, odds of winning and number of newcomers and the volume of bad» for the Bouncy Castle to «very good\" prize value may be carefully tuned to future business depends on the overall for the Ghost House. When a ride breaks fleece the suckers. Shrubs, trees and happiness of customers, the park's repudown, you depend on mechanics who fences may be installed to increase the tation rides on making customers as haprush to the scene when they're not otherpark's aesthetic appeal. py as possible-a doomed undertaking at wise occupied. With these balky, unsatisfythe game's outset. It turns out that cusINNE DERI M ITE 102 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"Se 7 BING RUBBE . S tomers only are made truly happy by more powerful 486, howevgood, exciting rides. er. Game information, The only way to improve the quality of while abundant, often is rides, sideshows, landscape features and presented in a confusing restrooms is by investing money in the way; for example, individResearch Department. Using a Rube ual shop profits are disGoldberg network of hydraulic valves, you played in total as of their set the amount of money to devote to construction, even though each category. The early discoveries are prices may have changed in on slight improvements on the initial the meantime. The docuoptions. The outhouse eventually is rementation lacks detail, orplaced by the \"boggy crapper\" (the ganization and clarity. game's developers are British) and the Originally written with Britmeager shops and sideshows are augicisms, such as \"tick\" for MONEY IN THE BANK Long lines will continue to form only if the mented by Big Time Fries, Pokey Cola «check mark,\" the manual rides are exciting and well-maintained. and the lucrative Novelty Shop. Rides has been Americanized but gradually improve both in excitement in one spot now says, \"while and reliability as research develops the the seconds check mark away.\" masochistic streak and sufficient patience Plane Flyer and the Rubber Tubing (an to endure years of research, the gamer inner tube water ride). ROUGH RIDES discovers that THEME PARK offers hours of As research continues, new rides apTHEME PARK contains several extraneous absorbing play. Anticipation of new repear with the power to genuinely excite subroutines that add little more than dissearch advances, especially the rides, ofand satisfy customers. The boggy crapper traction from the main attraction. The ers ongoing novelty akin to that in is replaced by the self-cleaning, odor-free game begins with an irrelevant, cheesy CIVILIZATION. Held captive by the latest Super Toilet. Cheap, low-profit shops are video sequence that fails to entertain. Merproblem or opportunity, it was quite possijoined by Toyland, Saloon and Steak cifully, it is sequestered in a separate proble to remain fixed to the screen for more House. Finally, the Roller Coaster and gram that can be circumvented. On the than 12 hours without a break. Ollered the mechanical equivalent of ecstasy, The other hand, the video interlude following the possibility of further ride developDipper, arrive on the scene. Using these bankruptcy is well-done and humorous, at ment, I would still be playing. machines and the proper layout, the playleast the first few times. Excruciatingly anThe graphics are excellent, and watcher becomes capable of making THEME noying, the music begs to be immediately ing the expressions of hapless customers PARK one of the happiest places on Earth. silenced. Occasional labor strikes and trapped in the mechanized nightmare of The simulation continues to run as the goods negotiations are resolved with a an early park caused me to laugh out player inputs commands, and the march somewhat silly arcade sequence that interloud. The sound effects are well done and of time is merciless. The days tick away rupts game flow. Confusing in layout, the include fairly realistic retching sounds that even inside off-screen menus when trying stock market menu seems to offer little ineventually grow tedious. to decide what rides, goods or staff to orterest once the threat of takeover is elimiAlthough frustrating, the game remains der. This real-time interface and competinated through the simple expedient of interesting until all the research advances tion for processor time created real purchasing all of your stock. It's possible have been discovered. Reminiscent of Sim problems on an older 386; the mouse had to buy a majority in opponents' stock and City, once the ultimate THEME PARK is to be clicked repeatedly before a comeven take them over without actually conconstructed, replay value seems limited. In mand would register, and the game had a trolling them. Although you have the opthe meantime, this sometimes funny, frustrating tendency to crash, wiping out tion of selling out and starting over in a sometimes frustrating game grabs the hours of sweat, tears and other bodily flunew location elsewhere, beginning again lapels and won't let go. Engrossing, occaids. These problems disappeared on a means returning to a level of zero research sionally with the emphasis on gross, development and the unTHEME PARK simply refuses to be ignored. pleasant prospect of dragging oneself back out of the boggy crapper. THE EDITORS SPEAK Despite these and other THEME PARK problems, THEME PARK has a number of redeeming RATING*** 1/2 qualities, not the least of PROS Funny, addicting and enwhich is its remarkable addearing. An evil mixture of Walt Disdictiveness. Russian peasney, B.F. Skinner and LEMMINGS. ants are known to entertain CONS Often overwhelmingly dethemselves with slapping tailed. The interface and the confuscontests that go on for ing presentation of data can leave LOOPS, SLIDES & LOTS OF FRIES Don't overeat at Burger Death, if hours, perhaps rewarded by you dizzier than after riding a Tilt-Ayou plan to try the Semicircular Canal of Doom ride. some kind of endorphin Whirl. rush. Endowed with a SEPTEMBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 103 "


"REVIEW I Frolicking CO In The Sert SSI's German Import, SERF CITY, Is LEMMINGS-Cute And Wargame-Tough by Robert L. Hayes, Jr. B3 E THEN I GOT MY COPY OF SERF choose from on the control screen; you you need lumberjacks, quarrymen and CITY, I THOUGHT IT WAS THE can play on a custom world, play a scesawmills. We're almost done, so don't deSTRANGEST GAME I HAD SEEN IN nario, or play one of the six training spair. To get the room to put all this stuff, a long time. It looked like games. Warning to would-be strategists you need guard houses to extend the borSimCity vs. LEMMINGS vs. (oh, it's a strategy game): play the tutorial ders of your serfdom. To man your guard M.U.L.E., with a touch of POPULOUS, as games first. Your heroic reviewer, knowhouses, you need knights. The astute interpreted by methamphetamine-crazed ing his manly prowess was more than a reader will note that we're back where we German programmers who lost as much match for any wimpy game where the acstarted, more or less-the need for sleep writing the game as I lost reviewing tion was performed by cute cartoon charknights. The point of all this is that your it. Even the box art is strange, depicting a acters (oh, it's a...never mind), blew offserfdom requires a more-or-less complete bug-eyed, maul-wielding lunatic in yellow the tutorial games and dug straight into economy to function-pull out any one lederhosen and a similarly daffy inmate the scenarios, resulting in much loss of aspect, and the whole thing falls to pieces. carrying a pig in a SERF CITY: Life Is FEUDAL pride and a This is possibly the most realistic mewheelbarrow. Despite (or deflated mandieval economic model ever built into a perhaps because of this Price: $44.95 ly ego. Lescomputer game. oddness, it is a solid winSystem: IBM son: Play the You start with your castle, a handful of ner and one of the best Requirements: 386-25 or six tutorials. serfs (a serf can hold one of 25 jobs), a games this side of serifaster, 4MB The basic modest stock of tools (all 12 kinds), and ous strategy gaming, RAM, VGA premise of reasonable quantities of the basic building \"Any game with a pig in graphics, 10MB the game is materials. You then begin to build all the a wheelbarrow on the hard drive this: you have stuff mentioned above, while prospecting box is a good game,\" is space, mouse; a castle and for mineral wealth, expanding the serfsupports AdLib, my new Computer Gravis Ultra some subjects. dom, fighting of incursions from the othGame Rule of Life. Sound, General MIDI, and Sound Blaster Your enemies er players, building the transportation Upon first booting up sound cards have castles network, and all the other aspects of serfSERE Criy, those with ap Protection: Documentation Check and some subdom management. Lest the potential prehensions based on # of Players: 1-2 (cooperative, same jects. You player begin to gibber, I should hasten to the box art are not soon computer) need to kill point out that after playing the tutorials soothed. The introducDesigner: Volker Wertich your enemies and reading the manual, all of this makes Publisher: Strategic Simulations, Inc. tory control screen is a Sunnyvale, CA and conquer perfect sense and is quite easy to do. It iscluttered nightmare of (800) 245-4525 the world. n't easy to do well, but that's the point of buttons, graphs, arrows, Very straightthe game. pictures and text. Careful reading of the forward, so far. To kill your enemies, you manual will make all clear, however, and need knights. To get knights, you need ISO-WHAT-TRIC? it is no great task to start conquering gold and weapons. To get gold, you need The world is presented in the now-stanworlds (oh, it's a world-conquering game). gold mines. To get weapons, you need dard 3-D isometric overhead view, with The manual, which one suspects was very coal mines, iron mines, blacksmiths, the limitation being that rotation is not well-written in the original German is foundries, etc. Still with me? To get the possible. This can pose a problem when helpful but not very well organized; any various mines, you need food to feed the trying to build \"behind\" large buildings; would-be resource manager (oh, it's a reminers. To get food, you need fishermen, often you can't see what you're doing, or source-management game) will want to farmers, bakers, etc. To build the buildwhat's causing that roadblock. It soon beread it carefully in the course of learning ings for all these people, you need timber comes second nature to plan buildings so the game. There are several options to and stones. To get lumber and stones, that they won't cause such problems, how104 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"You're Patton. With the right battle plan, you can end this war a lot quicker. 1944: ACROSS THE RHINE\" Fight the epic tank battles of World War II Europe. Command a single tank or an entire division. Fight a single battle or a decisive campaign. As real as armored warfare simulation can get. REPLAY WW II. YOUR WAY. SIMULATION ACROSS THE RHINEARMORDEOMBAT 1994 MicroProse All Rights Reserved. Circle Reader Service #150 MICROPROSE MAPROSE Anything is possible. 1-800-879-PLAY. For IBM-PC/Compatibles. "


"ogists pick at the ground, game can generate seven billion scenarios then joyfully leap into the of a more random nature. air and shout \"yippee\" when they locate a promisTHE PACE OF FEUDAL LIFE ing mineral deposit. The That leads into SERF Cry's biggest potenknights fight with bravado, tial flaw: scenarios take quite a while to acrobatically ducking their play. There's nothing wrong with this, of opponent's blows and wailcourse, but the reason for the length of ing with despair when they each game is the slowness of the game endie. This very cuteness is gine. The game runs with acceptable the major cause of the cogspeed, but within the framework of the nitive dissonance SERF Criy game world, things take a long time to can impart; you find yourhappen. It may take 20 or even 30 minself making serious strateutes for a large building to be constructed gic and resource under good conditions, or hours (literally) MEDIEVAL UNIONS Erect castles with your construction crew, administration decisions if it has been poorly placed or if your serfrather than laying each brick by hand yourself. about cute little cartoon dom has a transportation or raw materials characters. problem. The fact that you can do a great ever. There are two possible resolutions Aside from the serfs, the game graphics number of things at once is helpful in for the world display: a standard VGA resare excellent, especially in the SVGA ameliorating this problem somewhat, as is olution which is somewhat blocky but mode. Buildings are crisply and artisticalthe fact that the computer players do not shows good detail of a small part of your ly rendered, the terrain is serfdom, and a truly breathtaking SVGA inobtrusive and easily interresolution which can show your whole preted, and the building serfdom at a glance. I suggest playing at animations (mine elevators the lower resolution until you know all of working, blacksmiths the building shapes and are familiar with pounding, sawmills cutting) what all the different types of serfs look are smooth and well-done. like, then switch to the higher resolution The game sounds are exand see the big picture. The interface for cellent as well, though ordering your serfs about is a straightforthere were some fairly sigward point and click; the only wrinkle is a nificant static and popping special click (hold down the right button problems with my Soundand click the left one) used to access some Blaster Pro whenever too functions. many things were generatThe serfs themselves are adorably cute. ing sound at once. HowevTransporter serfs walk up and down the er. the sounds are a SATELLITE SERF CITY VIEW The strategic overview is only in VGA. roads lugging goods, or sit at intersecconvenient guide to what's but it does help in acclimating new players. tions scratching their heads and waiting happening on the screen, for more cargo. Construction serfs hamnot a necessary part of play, and most immediately attack your serfdom (at least mer away at buildings, while lumberjack players will shut them off eventually in orin the early scenarios); you can lay out serfs chop down trees methodically. Geolder to be able to think straight. your perfect serfdom, give the orders to SERF Crry can be played start constructing the buildings, and go by two people at once on out to dinner without worrying that your the same machine, a sign of serfdom will be torn apart before you get its European origin. While I back. This slowness of pace also ameliowas not able to test this fearates what I would otherwise consider to ture thoroughly, it seems to be a major flaw—there is no pause conwork well. Head-to-head trol. The only way to pause the game is to play is not supported, howgo into the save menu and leave it there: ever you and your friend workable, but not elegant. Aur T must help control the same Another problem arises in the military serfdom against the comarea. Combat, or at least killing off the puter opposition. This is other players, is the prollered reason for still a unique way to play the whole game. However, the actual however, and I can see how combat sequences themselves, despite the two gamers who cooperated cuteness of the characters involved, are PLOT YOUR PROGRESS One of the friendliest graphs you'll ever see well would have a major advery dull and predictable. A line of shows approval ratings, economics, and how you are faring versus vantage. Aside from the unknights arrives at an enemy building and your enemies. known, but large, number its defenders duly line up to fight; they of regular scenarios, the smack each other for a while, then the B)= 106 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"Strategy Plus, April 1994 \"Microprose has proven with 1942 that you can have it all, when it comes to air combat simulation, and then some. Everyone else is going to be playing catch-up with this one for some time to come.\" REPLAY THE PACIFIC AIR WAR. YOUR WAY. SIMULATION THE PACIFIC AIR WAR 1994 MicroProse All Rights Reserved. MICROPROSE MICROPROSE Anything is possible. 1-800-879-PLAY. For IBM-PC/Compatibles & CD-ROM. Circle Reader Service #171 "


"control; all you can tell the and tasks, and absolutely fascinating to program is how many watch it grow. While the combat portion knights to use in attacking of the game lacks flash, it can be safely left a building, not where they in the hands of the computer-just order should come from or which your attacks and wait to be notified of deknights exactly should atfeat or failure while paying attention to tack. other aspects of your serfdom. SERF Criy Control of serfs is is not for the LEMMINGS fan seeking anprocess-based, not indiother adorable cartoon character game, vidual. That is, you don't and in fact I suspect SSI will lose sales due order a construction serf to people misperceiving the nature of the to put up a building and a game. However, more serious gamers will EE). transporter to bring him find it intriguing, enjoyable, and comthe materials to do it; you pelling in its detail. Some games go on TINKER, EMPEROR, SOLDIER, SPY Whether cute and cuddly or wildsimply order \"put a buildthe shelf and some games stay on the eyed and frantic, all the various inhabitants are important to the ing here\" and the details hard drive; on my hard drive, SERF CITY growth of your SERF CITY. are handled for you. This has found a home. works admirably for conTHE EDITORS SPEAK winner takes possession. There are no tacstruction, but not nearly so well for comtics or options involved; you can't attack bat. Quite often my attack orders have SERF CITY: LIFE IS FEUDAL until you lose a certain number of knights resulted in wave after wave of inexperiRATING**** 1/2 and then run away, it's all or nothing.enced and unhappy troops being Knights do not interfere with the civilian slaughtered by high-ranking defenders, population or buildings at all; warfare is while the elite troops who could have PROS Blends a unique medieval ecostrictly military vs. military, a design decitaken the building with no casualties sit nomic model with elegant design and sion which does make for a \"happier\" in their garrison towers. charming graphics—like leading Lemgame (who likes ordering atrocities?) but Despite these problems, SERF Crry is a mings to war. Replayable. which further reduces the interest level of terrific game. It is challenging and enjoyCON Weak, hands-off combat system. the military part of the game. Combat able to lay out a well-designed serfdom, Game's time scale makes for very long also takes a long time and is difficult to with the proper admixture of buildings games. Congratulations, your orders came in. The Joint Chiefs have finally come to their senses and promoted you to theater commander. You now have control over ALL aspects of Falcon 3.0's campaign theaters. Introducing a new wargaming experience... ONLY Cool, new 'Sim products from Keyboard Commander Corps... ONLY THE $19.95 $19.95 $24.95 0 ACE MAKER\" By Aces Aim, Inc. Strategy Campaign Enhancement for Spectrum HoloByte's Falcon 3.0 # TACTICAL FEATURES: Add, remove or alter any F-16, Allied or Enemy North American TopGun flight, including aircraft type, weapons, waypoints and actions. Add, remove or alter ALL ground forces including types, strength, and paths. Set the temperament\" level of all forces and the skill of Allied or Enemy pilots. Watch as the 'Synchronized Timing Thrilling instructional video tape illustrating Trace' feature retraces all flight routes to verify timing and coordination!! And more! actual WWII aerial combat maneuvers!* STRATEGIC FEATURES: Change the occupation, strength, capacity and 0 Each maneuver demonstrated by pilots of the rate of growth of any site. Alter the quantity and type of specific units at any site. Alter North American Top-Gun flight school flying the site 'structure of the theater and how sites re-supply each other. Move vintage WWII aircraft!! your home airbase. Set the victory and defeat' sites to break through 0 Includes simulation footage from MicroProse's Falcon's basic scenario limitations to 1942: The Pacific Air War highlighting how achieve endless variety of campaigns!! StrategiFALCON each maneuver appears in PC simulator flight! OTHER FEATURES: Place Step-by-step detailed lessons make you the ace an ILS at any base. Set the weather & *VHS format the Ace Maker is a trademark of Aces Aim, Inc. Distributed by Keyboard Commander Corp. Ft. Lauderdale, FL ceiling. Set the current day & time. Reschedule the resupply & replacement dates and times. Set the campaign ERA Why \"Hurry up and Wait\"? Mon-Fri. VISA macro and micro momentum\". Includes 70 page manual! And much, more!! S COTECA Strategic Falcons a trademark of B White Datributed by Keyboard Commander Corp Fakon is a registered trademark of Spectrum Holobyte All written inquiries to: Keyboard Commander Corp. 4839 SW 148 Ave., u504, Davle, FL 334,30-2129 Circle Reader Service #80 108 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 T hes 1942 The Pacific Air War is a trademark of MicroProse, Inc North American Top-Gun is a trademark of North American Top Gun, Inc Call: 1-800-262-6066 9:0esti "


"THE OUTSTANDING DESIGN WINTER CES 1994 GAME BYTES MAGAZINE GRANDESTINE FLEET 99 Auantum Quality Productions Inc Only one fleet will be left afloat in this thrilling masterpiece from QQP. Experience the grueling campaigns, the agony of defeat and the exhilaration of VICTORY!!! Develop cultural resources and manage the growth of your population. Allocate natural resources to build missile sites, radar stations, shipbuilding facilities and SUPERSHIPS. It is up to you to destroy your nemesis.... or end up in Davy Jones' Locker.  MODEM PLAY (A QQP Hallmark)  City Economics-Cultural and Industrial aspects  Campaign Play Player History A wide selection of ship types  Random Maps-unlimited variation A truly challenging Al Battles Include: Falkland Campaign, Battle of Northcape, The Bismark-Tirpitz Connection, Surigao Straight, Yamamoto's Trap, etc. Plus some \"What if\" Battles  A tactician's and strategist's delight!!! \"The Grandest Fleet\" computer game is for IBM PC. It can be obtained through your favorite retailer or call: 1-908-788-2799 or by writing to: QQP-495 Highway 202 Flemington, NJ 08822 Copyright 1994 Q.Q.P. All rights reserved. IBM is a trademark of International Business Machines. Circle Reader Service #180 "


"REVIEW : Eisenhower's : Triumph In Miniature An Impressionistic Look At D-Day, 50 Years Later , by Jeff James Imslans N JUNE 6TH, 1944, THE LARGEST ing conditions of the war. Using this scethis last option, glory-loving commanders AMPHIBIOUS INVASION IN THE nario, you can reduce the economic like General George S. Patton may take HISTORY OF WARFARE BEGAN WITH strength of the Allies, build more German liberties with your orders and attack when the Allied landings on a handful Panzer divisions, or even move the D-Day the mood strikes them. of beaches code-named Utah, landings to a different location. The sec\"The game system used in D-Day is a reOmaha, Gold, Juno and Sword. Less than ond two campaign games, \"Normandyfined version of the one used in Impresa year later, the victorious Allies stood Breakout\" and \"Battle of the Bulge,\" sions' THE BLUE & THE GRAY, with several over the crumbling D-DAY: THE BEGINNING OF THE END model the Allied minor performance tweaks and interface ruins of Hitler's breakthrough enhancements, including zones of control Third Reich, com Price: $59.95 from Normandy and temporary unit disruption. Daily pleting the costly System: IBM in July, 1944 and turns include both day and night phases, Requirements: journey begun that Hitler's last westand take place on three separate map lev286 or better, day on the Western VGA graphics, ern offensive in els. The reinforcement screen is the highcoast of France. The 3MB hard drive the Ardennes forest level interface, and it is here that you release of D-DAY: space, mouse est in December can allocate resource points for the conTHE BEGINNING OF Protection: None 1944, respectively. struction of new planes, troops and tanks. THE END by Impres# of Players: 1-2 Just as in the On the next level, the campaign map, insions Software gives (same computer) \"Race to Berlin\" dividual divisions can be selected and Designer: Ed computer gamers Grabowski scenario, starting moved. Finally, the micro-miniatures levthe opportunity to Publisher: Impressions Software conditions can be el provides the highest amount of detail, recreate those same Cambridge, MA altered in these where groups of soldiers, tanks and arharrowing battles, (617) 225-2042 scenarios if you tillery are moved about the battlefield including the fadesire. much like a digital version of a convenmous Bulge of 1944 and the race towards Regardless of which type of game is setional tabletop miniatures wargame. the heart of Germany in early 1945. lected, D-DAY gives you a wide range of Your job in D-Day is to assume com-control options. Multiple levels of comMOVE OUT! plete command of the armed forces of the plexity allow you to tailor the difficulty to You'll spend most of your time on the Allies or Germany and see your side your ability level. If you're a wargaming campaign map, moving units into posithrough to victory. You can play against tenderfoot, an easy mode limits the stratetion to attack the enemy. Units are reprethe computer or another player, although gic ability of the computer and slows its sented by some 14 unique counters, with modem play is not supported. Two types reactions. Grognards who scoff audibly at Allied units in typical wargame green and of games are available: standard and his such limp-wristed settings may turn on the Germans decked out in feldgrau. Setorical. In the standard game, play begins the fog of war option for realistic sighting lecting and moving units is a point and with a historically accurate setup of Allied and troop reports. For even greater dilliclick process: right-click on the unit to seand German forces on June 6th, 1944. culty, a supply option allows you to perlect it, then left-click on its intended destiUnder the historical play option, three sonally make sure that each of your nation. Movement points for units vary as scenarios are offered. «Race to Berlin\" is divisions is getting beans and bullets, and expected with unit type, but the movesimilar to the standard game, but gives a personality feature imbues your generment rates are unusual: two points to enyou the opportunity to toy with the startals with distinct personality traits. Using ter plains or roads in most games, roads 110 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"EROFS of Might and Magic EROES of Might and Magic Enter an Era of Epic Battles, Warlords and Heroes. 42, A Strategic Quest *NEW Available at your local software retailer or order direct from New World Computing at 1-800-325-8898, 818-889-6070 outside the U.S., or by mail: P.O. Box 4302 Hollywood, CA 90078-4302.  1994 New World Computing, Inc. Heroes of Might and Magic is a trademark of New World Computing. New World Computing and its distinctive logo are registered trademarks of New World Computing, Inc. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #152 WORLD COMPUTING "


"About Events Map Organization Allice lo Move Success Bar Resources Incrcare (Up to 10z) 0 18 Reinforce Division Build Divisions -Aides German Ramlet Divisions 131 Men 702,912 816,912 City Caen g are assumed to provide quicker moveally appear and give Day June 6 1944 ment), with proportionally higher costs you a bit of historical for rougher terrain. Strangely, units canbackground on Dnot be given movement orders that span Day and the events across several turns. Using the current that followed. AcPoints Available 25,000 system, players are forced to select a unit, companied by a polmove the unit manually, end the turn, ished VGA image then repeat the process all over again the and a few paranext time around. A far more playable algraphs of descriptive ternative would be to have each unit retext, these serve to City Resource Details member lengthy movement orders from keep you informed Resource Level 100 2 previous turns, moving towards their obof the historical SIA Live Orders jectives automatically. As it stands, players events that you're may find themselves spending most of recreating. The DONWARD TO PARIS The strategic map gives an overview of force strengths, their time laboriously selecting and movDAY package also unit dispositions, and information on individual cities. ing rear echelon units towards the front, bears a full bombwhich hardly seems an appropriate task load of documentation: four well-written mandy undoubtedly hastened the end of for a theatre commander. manuals are shipped with the package, inWorld War II by opening up a two-front After maneuvering units into position, cluding an excellent tutorial and a tersely land war in Europe, the vast bulk of you may attack the enemy, initiating comwritten overview of Operation Warlord. Hitler's resources were thrown against the bat by simply moving one of your units advance of the massive Red Army from onto an enemy unit. Any adjacent units WHAT RED ARMY? the east. eligible to join the combat are added, As polished as the D-DAY playing interface then you move to the micro-miniatures appears, its beauty is only skin deep. WinVICTORY CONDITIONS screen and enjoy a detailed close-up view dows users familiar with the visceral, posiShortcomings aside, D-Day does have a of the conflict. As playable as the miniative feedback of clicking on a button and great deal going for it. The computer AI tures system is, it does become tedious afseeing it sink into the screen will find the can be particularly tough with the most restill operation of the Dalistic options activated (supply, fog of DAY interface to be war, personality options), while other opsomewhat disconcerttions make the game accessible to novices. Cherbour ing. Another caveat If you like your games quick and decisive, concerns the design of look elsewhere: D-Day requires too much 06 the game itself. Alof a time investment to be a casual player's OIL TO 00_0 though Western Eugame of choice. However, if you'd enjoy rope is the focus of the orchestrating a perfect tank offensive at . O KF game, D-DAY almost to the close-up miniature level, it's time to tally neglects the imget that ticket to Cherbourg, because Dportance of the eastern DAY should fit the bill nicely. This game is O and southern fronts. arguably the best Impressions microDesigner Grabowski miniatures release to date, and an updid give a cursory nod grade to the program should offer to the importance of support for modem play. With two human HIT THE BEACHES! Allied troops storm ashore in Normandy, backed by a these fronts. The Allied player's painstakingly plotting the course huge support fleet and airpower. player is allowed to of the war, the battle might continue well place new divisions in beyond the 51st anniversary of D-Day. Italy after August 14th, ter a few dozen battles. Thankfully, D-DAY THE EDITORS SPEAK 1994, and the standard game automaticaloffers an autoplay option that quickly rely ends on May 3rd, 1945, when the Russ D-DAY: solves battles, along with a \"Quick Fight\" ian Army reaches Berlin, but these items THE BEGINNING OF THE END option that places units next to each othadd little to the overall strategic picture of er at the onset of battles. Even so, gamers the war. RATING*** without vast amounts of disposable time Playing as the Germans, you can transbe warned: playing the standard camfer every unit to the Western Front, leavpaign in D-Day to its conclusion can take ing the eastern half of the country a PROS Excellent strategic design on a very long time, and you will spend most hollow shell. The omission of even a curthe whole, and a detailed minatures of your time playing shepherd to a large sory strategic consideration by the Gercombat system. Superlative documennumber of units. Fighting out battles in man player of the Eastern Front—such as tation. the micro-miniatures system can increase needing to divert a certain number of reCONS Clunky interface, time-conthe time investment tenfold. source points—would have made the suming game play, and some quesOne unique aspect of the program is a game a more realistic strategic exercise. tionable strategic design decisions (re: historical events feature that will occasion. Although the Allied landings at NorEastern Front). . @ E00060 OSOS 112 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"W Sabre Team 99X 22 W SELECT NUMBER OF ROUNDS TO TINE < 00 V5 challenging missions with multiple difficulty levels. Four hostages are being held at the American Embassy in London's West End. You are in control of the smallest and most secretive fighting unit in the British Army The Sabre Team. It is your duty to infiltrate the embassy, rescue the hostages, and treat the terrorists with extreme prejudice. Complete this mission successfully, then proceed on to four more scenarios: rescue British prisoners from a jungle POW camp, destroy a subversive underground nuclear installation, rescue a hijacked ocean liner, and destroy a hostile nuclear weapons center deep in the desert. Detailed blue prints of each mission. Beautifully crafted isometric game landscapes. Digitized speech Available for IBM Compatibles on 3.5\" disk and CD-ROM MICROLEAGUE U.O.P., 201 BELLEVUE BUILDING, NEWARK, DE 19702 Interactive software For more information and availability call: Circle Reader Service #214  1994 MicroLeague Interactive Software. Krisalis Software Ltd. All rights reserved "


"REVIEW Defend The Alamo! The Mexicans Are Charging. Where's John Wayne When You Need Him? by Alan Emrich mi VY OR DEATH! HE TEXAS TOURISM BOARD REfateful siege at a tiny DEFEND THE ALAMO! when the Mexicans CENTLY DESCRIBED TEXAS AS BEING fortress called The approach a wall or, LIKE A \"WHOLE 'NOTHER COUNTRY.\" Alamo. Price: $29.95 + worse, are running $3.00 S&H This seems particularly apropos In Defend the around inside the System: IBM since, long before its admission as Alamo!, an unassumRequirements: fortress. The reala state, Texas had to fight for its indepening little wargame 286-33 or time play can test the dence from Mexico and, as a result, befrom Incredible better, VGA patience of strategists came a \"whole 'nother country.\" Simulations, the graphics, 1.5MB DEFEND who favor turn-based In February of 1836, when railroads player is put in the hard drive space. THE ALAMO! action, but I found were still a newfangled invention and the role of William BarMouse highly coordinating the batrecommended. professional Mexican army still dressed ret Travis, leader of Supports Sound tle to be manageable and drilled much like soldiers of the the fort's desperate Blaster and compatible sound cards. if I was not distracted. Napoleonic era of a generation before, defenders. With a Protection: Documentation look-up (A word of caution: Texas went into open rebellion. While small garrison of Designers: Jeff and Greg Lapkoff due to the game's enthese upstart Texans had no real army of about 180 men, you Publisher: Incredible Simulations, Inc. 7115 W. North Avenue, Suite #187 grossing play I found their own, Mexico did—and a respected, must stop the formiOak Park, IL 60302 myself snapping at professional army at that. Under the ruthdable Mexican army. (312) 267-3808 every interruption. less leadership of Generalissimo Antonio The Texans are indiOne gaming buddy Lopez de Santa Anna, it was sent to crush vidually named, but they are formed into called while my walls were being scaled the rebellion and regain Texas for Mexico. squads of six men, with three-man units and I told him the Alamo was lost because The first major clash of arms was to be the manning the cannons. Key units are idenof him! Of course, as a brother-in-gaming, tified by their leader's initialhe was understanding.) The trick to con'B' for Jim Bowie, \"T\" for Travis serving time on the game clock is to use and his 18-pound cannon, and the strategic and tactical phases to your 'C' for Davy Crockett-and best advantage, remembering that reloadthese units are particularly ing takes a while. Proper deployment of deadly in both fire and melee. troops in the fort and the timing of In general, it seems that one ranged fire are the keys to success. Texan is worth about eight Your Texans begin by keeping watch on Mexicans in combat. It's too Mexican movements while dispatching bad the 183 defenders are outtheir three most crucial operatives—the numbered by about 30 to 1.... messengers—who sally forth seeking reinforcements. Among the four nearby towns, TIME IS ON THEIR SIDE one hosts a group of 100 fighting men, Defend the Alamo! is played in while another sports 30 soldiers. If the loreal-time, with the game pauscal leaders can be persuaded to your cause, NO HOPE OF ESCAPE The strategic view confirms what any ing whenever a menu is acthey will add their units and gunpowder to Texan at heart already knows-the Mexicans have the tiny cessed. The time scale is 15 your defenses. Unfortunately, it might take Alamo garrison surrounded, and they are moving in for the kill. minutes per pulse, dropping to three or four plea attempts before they beabout 10 seconds per pulse gin to move out. By the time they finally C1 Fe 2 Cor Preferences History Time: 13.900 Daug 07 Score: 075 S ension Comment Bottle Date: 29 Februery 1036 Total Tesdan Defenders: 177 114 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"THE FIRST WONDER OF THE CYBER WORLD. ROM for PC VIRTUAL VEGAS INC. on CD-ROM WELCOMES YOU TO THE Availas FOR MORE INFO CALL THE VIRTUAL VEGAS HOTLINE 800-95-VEGAS PC & MAC FUTURE OF CASINO GAMING ENTERTAINMENT. COME TO VIRTUAL VEGAS AND TM WANDER THROUGH A STUNNING CYBERVEGAS CASINO WHILE BEAUTIFUL BLACKJACK DEALERS BECKON YOU TO THE TABLES. YOUR V OLUME O N E GOAL: WIN BIG. HER GOAL: STEAL YOUR HEART AND EMPTY YOUR WALLET! THE MORE YOU PLAY THE MORE PLAYFUL IT GETS! WRITTEN BY THE EDITORS OF NATIONAL LAMPOON MAGAZINE AND PACKED WITH 600 MEGS OF STUNNING 3DRENDERED GRAPHICS, QUICKTIME\" VIDEO AND VOICE RECOGNITION ILU TECHNOLOGY, VIRTUAL VEGAS IS THE FUTURE OF CASINO GAMING, AND THE FUTURE OF ENTERTAINMENT.  VIRTUAL VEGAS INC. DISTRIBUTED BY ELECTROMEDIA INC: (310) 315-3606 $29.95 AVAILABLE AT YOUR LOCAL RETAILER OR CALL: RETAI COMPUTER EXPRESS (800) 228-7449 MISSION CONTROL (800) 899-7995 Circle Reader Service #227 "


"arrive, the matter might be moot. F1 Fille F2 Command Preferences History Time: 05210 Day: 10 Score 221 MOOCAN 1ST COLUNON Col David Crockett has fallen! AT THE WALL THE TORT 335 NOX OT TEE ALL IN TEL TOT 1 QE ele SOQULLUE Be BE & GUNS TO THE NORTH, GUNS TO THE SOUTH While the Texans have more cannons than the attackers, the limited supply of gunpowder makes every shot extremely precious. Firing a 2-pound cannon won't use much powder, but Travis' 18-pound gun burns the stuff up very quickly. The Mexicans, with no gunpowder limitations, set up their guns several hundred yards outside the fort, blasting away at your walls in an effort to breach them. Should a breach occur, a massive, four-wall assault soon follows (as opposed to Santa Anna's normal attacks against one to three walls at a time). When that occurs, your cause becomes hopeless and it's just a matter of how many of the enemy you can take down with you. Therefore, the battle turns upon whether or not your Texans can take out the Mexican cannons before they breach your walls. This can be accomplished either by counterbattery fire (during the day—and I recommend using your 12-pound guns for this) or by sorties against them at night. Silencing Mexican cannons is a difficult but ultimately rewarding task, as they're worth a lot of victory points. By day 13, if you can hold out that long, Santa Anna is through wasting his time and men, and he makes his massive, coordinated assault on the fortress even if he has not succeeded in breaching your walls. While I've yet to completely hold out, I've had a tremendous time going down fighting and inflicting as much damage to the Mexicans as possible. Points are scored for destroying enemy soldiers and cannons, although the rules don't indicate the exact formula for this. (It turns out that you get one point for every 10 Mexicans killed, and Tedan Command: Battle Date: 3 March 1836 Total Tesden Defenders: 315 CROCKETT'S LAST STAND Even the famed Tennessee Long Rifles can't hold forever, as Santa Anna's finest swarm over the walls for the final time. DOEU five for each Mexican artillery piece destroyed. Historically, the defenders got an impressive score of about 175 points.) The included 32-page booklet is long on historical color while short on specific game hints. When I mentioned this to the designers, they quickly put together a playing tips sheet, which is now included with every copy of the game. Still, I managed to put a plan together quickly through trial and error, burning down the neighboring village of La Villita, which was providing cover for the enemy, and manning my ramparts efficiently. In the end, though, Santa Anna has worn me down every time and wiped out my desperate defenders to a man. Each time, though, I seem to be exacting a heavier toll and improving upon the Texans' historical performance. Defend the Alamo! includes three variations for play. The historical option provides 30 men from the nearby town of Gonzalez to reinforce you. A \"Fannin arrives\" option guarantees you will get the 350 men from Fort Defiance, along with those from Gonzalez. Finally, a random scenario has these two groups of men in random locations; your messengers must locate them and, with luck, persuade one or both groups to join you. BECOME A GAME REVIEWER! Receive hundreds of free games! WE WILL SHOW YOU HOW! YOU WILL RECEIVE:  FULL COURSE ON BECOMING A REVIEWER  DIRECT PHONE NUMBER FOR TRAINING SUPPORT  MONEY BACK GUARANTEE  MATERIAL FOR ATTENDING THE CONSUMER ELECTRONICS SHOW  QUARTERLY NEWSLETTER If you don't receive at least 6 games in 6 months by following our method, you will receive a full refund! ALL FOR JUST $39.95 (PLUS $8.95 S&H) LESS THAN THE COST OF 1 GAME REMEMBER THE ALAMO! It's exciting to discover a new game, particularly when it comes from a garage door, mom-and-pop wargame company, and nothing is more exciting than to be able to recommend a tremendously enjoyable wargame from such a company. DEFEND THE ALAMO! is just THE EDITORS SPEAK such a game. So practice up on DEFEND THE ALAMO your John Wayne RATING  1/2 imitation, don the coon skin cap, and PROS Fast, fun, and furious little get ready to jump wargame with lots of nice historical into the history touches. Turns a distant, textbook books for a heroic history lession into an impassioned, stand. The Mexican hands on experience. buglers are sound CON Not state of the art in terms of ing, and Santa Anna graphics and interface. It would have will not accept sur been nice to play the Mexicans for a render. change of pace. LIMITED NUMBER OF REVIEWERS PER AREA SO CALL TODAY! REVIEWERS OF AMERICA 1-800-GAME670 We accept Visa and Mastercard. No COD'S or send check or Money Order to: Reviewers of America. 2226 S. 12TH St. Philadelphia, PA 19148 116 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994"


"TEALTH STE Speed Demon 2MB VRAM HICS ACA CCELERAT 115+ Million WinMarks. No Sweat. Stealth 64 Graphics Accelerator Hungry for speed? Then get the fastest. The power of Stealth 64 will make your graphics fly. Now the award-winning Stealth gets even better. Sharper Image Max resolutions, max colors, and rock-solid refresh rates give you the best possible images on your monitor for DOS and Windows. 24-bit true color at 1152x864 with 4MB 1280x1024x65K colors with 4MB Up to 120Hz refresh rate 2MB VRAM upgradable to 4MB Software color correction Ease of Use With Diamond's InControl Tools software, Windows is a breeze to use. Change resolutions, colors and refresh along with control for cursor, DPI, DPMS and font size, all within Windows. Reset News Pelry 16 191 EEE 24-01 DB-Bit VISKONTRAS 200 MULANTE EDITORS STRUMENT CHOICE 1972 Stealth 64 builds on the award-winning Stealth Pro Record-Breaking Speed Stealth 64 is the world's fastest graphics accelerator. Our competitors claim otherwise. The benchmarks tell the story. 115+ million WinMarks, WinBench 3.11 43+ million WinMarks, WinBench 4.0 6200+ DOS video score, PC Bench 8.0 64-bit graphics processor S3 Vision964 graphics controller Optimized drivers for Windows, OS/2, NT and AutoCAD  PCI and VESA Local Bus Winbench 4.0 PCI BUS 50 38.4 SMOONIA Call Now For more on the Stealth 64 or where to buy, call our fax-on-demand service at 1-800-380-0030 Fast Graphics Acceleration 28.5 DIAMOND Diamond Stealth 64 Matrox MGA II Computer Systems, Inc. Windows 3.1 performance tests performed by Diamond Computer Systems, Inc. using Ziff Davis' WinBench Versions 4.0 on Intel P54C POMHz PCI system with 256k cache, 16MB RAM, 240MB IDE hard drive, SmartDrive 2048, and DOS 6.0. The Stealth 64 was configured with 2MB VRAM at 1024x768x256 and 800x600x16 million colors 72Hz Large Font using driver release 1.03. The Matrox MGA I was configured with 2MB VRAM at the same resolutions and font sizes using driver release 1.41.1. All trade names referenced are the service mark, trademark, or registered trodemarks of the respective manufacturers. Diamond reserves the right to change specifications without notice. Copyright  1994 Diamond Computer Systems, Inc. 1130 Eost Arques Avenue, Sunnyvale, CA 94086, 408-736-2000, Fox: 108.730.5750, ST64AD 060694 Circle Reader Service #229 Stealth 64 "


"REVIEW : Strike Package Delivered! Three-Sixty's HARPOON II Drives Its Point Home Owoa. 300 O Agostino von Hassell / Arms Communications by Tim Carter fast.\" sel.\" ON aptain, we have a new con\"SHE SAILS WELL, ADMIRAL\" times. This is particularly useful for viewtact, bearing 040, closing The designers at Three-Sixty have coming missions that require high levels of pletely redone the user interface for HARmagnification or that take place a long \"Identity?\" POON II. While pop-up windows remain, way from the scene of the action. \"It would appear to be a new the majority of functions are now icon driThe formation editor, which may be electronic warfare device, sir. Appears to be caven. A tool bar across the top of the main called up as yet another window, has pable of disabling large numbers of computer window provides almost all of the comchanged as well. In addition to the reguterminals for hours on end.\" mands you will need to issue in that winlar patrol zones, threat zones are now des\"Take evasive action, ensign. Lock the men in dow, while secondary windows each have ignated for each formation. These zones their quarters and disable every PC on the vestheir own, separate toolbars. may be tied to an outside location (i.e. an sel.\" Secondary windows? That's right, gone enemy airbase), a hostile group, or simply \"Too late, sir. The first officer just reported that is the single screen view of the action. In a compass heading, half the crew has reported sick, while the other its place is a system The use of threat half stormed off the ship shouting something of customizable HARPOON II zones makes forabout deficient missile modeling.\" windows that allows Price: $69.95 mation planning A fanciful scenario, perhaps, but cerplayers a far more System: IBM more realistic, as tainly not without a grain of truth. With flexible and func (Macintosh units maintain staThree-Sixty's Harpoon II threatening the tional view of the forthcoming) tion relative to the Requirements: store shelves for the last few months, action. For inexpected avenues 386 or better more than a few gamers have tidied up stance, suppose you (486-33 of attack, rather their affairs in anticipation of losing all are engaged in a recommended), than just points on contact with civilization. wide ranging air 4MB RAM, a compass. HowevThe long awaited sequel to HARPOON battle with multiple 25MB hard er, many players takes players back into the heart of modenemy groups drive space, mouse; supports Sound have complained ern naval warfare. The original game while simultaneousBlaster and compatible sound cards that they find the Protection: None broke new ground by providing players ly hunting an eneDesigners: Carl C. Norman, Michael Steele formation editor the opportunity to simulate modern naval my submarine Publisher: Three-Sixty Pacific user-hostile, some conflict with an exceptional degree of soimmediately in Campbell, CA to the point where phistication, complexity and realism. front of your flag (800) 653-1360 they refuse to use However, despite the large following ship. In HARPOON, it. While I did not that HARPOON had, few would argue that it would be necessary to constantly zoom find it quite so cumbersome, some addithe game did not suffer from a number of the screen in and out to view each battle, tional work does need to be done both to serious flaws. The program was disor concentrate on one at the expense of simplify it and to better document it. turbingly unstable, and a number of serithe other. Rather than struggling with extended ous anomalies in the combat model led to In HARPOON II it is possible to draw a and expanded memory, HARPOON II uses strategies which purists found unrealistic. window around a unit on the main screen empty space on the computer's hard dri(Although I quite enjoyed sinking the enand have this window function as a comve to store much of its operating informatire Soviet surface fleet with ASW aircraft.) pletely separate view. Each window has its tion. The result is that the game is HARPOON II, therefore, has a lot to live own level of magnification and may be orconsiderably more stable. However, it still up to, as well as improve upon. dered to keep one unit centered at all tends to slow down when a large number 118 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"Soccer's Your Game? Learn The Real Thing From Meola, Harkes, Hamm & Zachery Ty Bryan DEFENSE \"The key to scoring is opening the field up. Getting space.\" Transition Stance Channeling Cover Balance ESPN SOCCER SOCCER Rus on MACINTOSH Skills & Strategies Build real soccer skills with live-action, multimedia coaching from America's greatest players. All on CD-ROM for your Multimedia PC, 3D0 or Macintosh system. Get ESPN's Let's Play Soccer and learn offensive, defensive and team skills from John Harkes, U.S. World Cup Team star. Mia Hamm, all-time points leader in women's soccer. Plus \"Home Improvement's \" Zachery Ty Bryan, Official World Cup Youth Ambassador. Or choose ESPN Soccer: Skills & Strategy and team up with Harkes, Hamm and U.S. World Cup Goalie Tony Meola. You'll get interactive, personal coaching from three top champions. Covering everything from basic skills to advanced game strategy—all at your own pace. Either way, you're a winner. Call 1-800-831-2469 now for complete information. And start playing for real. *80 PIRY Play 3DO CD-ROM La PCI Multimedia PC World Socce ac for complete information. IntelliPlay Total Sports Instruction Published by Intellimeda Sports, Inc. Two Piedmont Center, Suite 300, Atlanto, Georgio 30305, Phone (404) 262-0000 Fox (404) 261-2782 IntelliPlay is a registered trademark of Intelimedia Sports, Inc. ESPN is a registered trademark of ESPN, Int. The Multimedia PC logo is a certification mork of the Multimedio PC Marketing Council, Inc. 300 end the 300 logos trehodemarks of The 300 Company Morintosh is a regostered trade mork of Apple Computer, Inc. Circle Reader Service #79 "


"PC DELETE S UUNTO GENETIA: ISO3 Cand Date A t Tim Compresso 19H r e STE Dottorate Lire cetat Detected Jack Ti Beth 0,00 OtherUrrard L the CL Delete Edie alrier coatact Delected list Lt. Jack LED Time! 05:00:00 of units are active at once, even on a high better than the documentation of the warfare guide is strong on explanations o performance machine. Gamers with less original HARPOON. Indeed, the manual is how naval warfare works in general, bu than a 486 may not wish to waste their a considerable improvement, and is very could use more discussion of how this car time. helpful on some points. The problem be applied to the game itself. here is really one of unrealized potential. \"LOADED AND READY At a whopping 257 pages long, the \"AN INTERESTING ARRAY TO LAUNCH, SIR\" manual includes a tutorial, a reference OF TARGETS AWAITS US\" HARPOON II also comes with new platsection, and a guide to tactics and strateHARPOON II provides a new and enterforms, including several navies not seen gy. The tutorial, while providing an amaztaining set of political conflicts and stratein the past. The Japanese gic and tactical problems. The scenarios AEGIS destroyers (!) put in are no longer limited to a single strategic a couple of appearances, as PPGEPAS map, and now range all over the world do the units of several Only a few involve the superpowers, and South American countries. most are at least somewhat plausible poThere is even a hypothetilitically. The U.S. versus Japan and the cal US battle cruiser, 12 U.K. versus the European Common Marequipped with a seemingly ket are a bit farfetched, but as they are endless supply of TomaContime Xoep 1-1 among the more fun to play, who cares hawk missiles. You can also refight the Falklands war Speaking of endless suptake sides in a renewed conflict between plies, HARPOON II incorpoChina and Taiwan or between North and rates logistical questions to South Korea. While the scenarios are wel a much greater degree done, more than 15 might have been inthan its predecessor. Included, given the price tag of the overal flight refueling is now pospackage and the fact that the first battlesible, as is at sea set is expected to be shipping within the replenishment. Unfortu\"I SHALL RETURN\" Only this time, it's North Korea instead of the month. nately, a number of fairly Phillipines. A scenario right out of the headlines pits the U.S. significant holes remain in against North Korea. \"DARN FUN SAILING\" the logistical model, particFor all of the bells and whistles, the essence ularly with respect to aircraft. ingly easy and accessible introduction to of both the old and the new HARPOON is Aircraft are ready for action 30 minutes the new interface, does not go far the simulation of modern naval warfare. after landing, and may be rearmed at any enough. At the very least, a section on the Despite all of the changes to the interface friendly airbase. While refueling is not unformation editor ought to have been inHARPOON II still feels like the original HARreasonable, it seems unlikely that an aircluded. POON. This is not to say that it plays the base in England would have stockpiles of same, however. Combined Phoenix missiles on hand for any F-14s with the changes to the of that happened to drop in for tea. Pilot fafensive and defensive tigue, aircraft carrier arsenals, and aircraft weapons models, a smarter maintenance are not considered either. computer AI means that the scenarios are no longer the \"CAPTAIN, cake walks found in HARWE APPEAR TO BE POON. While the computer GOING BACKWARDS!\" Continue Deep 11 to is hardly invincible, it can be Not all of the changes in HARPOON II are relied upon to launch CAP positive. The new platform database is a aircraft, to not try too many case in point. While the new database pro Continue Clear Assign stupid maneuvers, and to vides comprehensive information on every PZAR defend itself credibly. platform available, it is considerably more Some players have comcumbersome than the original. Simple plained that HARPOON II is things like the ability to call up all of the too liard on human players platforms available in the current scenario when modeling missile are gone. At the same time, the presentaTARGETS GALORE From digitized views of Tomahawk launches to combat. Both AAW and tion of the weapons information is considpop-up menus of point defenses, there is a window for every ASW weapons appear to be erably more clumsy, as now three different weapons system of your battle fleet. more accurate when used screens must be accessed in order to get by the computer. However, all of the pertinent information. The reference section includes some given the ridiculous ease with which one The manual is another aspect of the useful information, but is lacking in dewas able to sink enemy assets in HARPOON game that could be improved considertails. Examples and more careful instrucI don't consider this to be a serious probably. In this case it is not a question of tions would have made the overall lem, except that it may not reflect actual moving backwards, as anything would be documentation a lot stronger. The naval mission kill probabilities. TI L LATELITA center Kauge in TI OD TAN 50 TV Tio 1102 ( N K ABY Plattel nin 120 BUY Plotted ROT 162 READY Flori KC-119 Pen RADY Plotto KH-119 Tel KDY rotto DY 21ted sarRar Flottet EMIT Tine 12141290 Modern State wize) FRIH-711 part 111 Ready Cancel S anta Det lygaus Largeure tact ctecle r cy for the 120 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"Mom, why is the video on the computer so TINY ? An' how come it's so weird and JERKY? That's what they used to call «multimedia.\" Melvin. OLD MULTIMEDIA REALMAGIC RealMagic is multimedia now! Add the RealMagic card to your system for the incredible realism of smooth screen-filling, full-motion video and 16-bit audio. MPEG is the powerful new digital video and audio standard that puts the «real» in RealMagic. Enter the exciting new world of interactive MPEG CD-ROMs including movies, games, educational titles, music videos and more. RealMagic is available as an MPEG playback card or a complete multimedia upgrade kit. Anything less is history. Get RealMagic and get real multimedia. \"Old\" Video Image Full Motion Full Screen Full Sound For the store near you or more information on RealMagic, call 1-800-845-8086 EL Circle Reader Service #128 1994 Sigma Designs, Inc. The Sigma Designs' logo is a registered trademark, and RealMagic and ReelMagic are trademarks of Sigma Designs, Inc. All other brand and product names are property of their respective owners. REALmagic SIGMA ELSIONS As Big As It Gets "


"IR TIC s Histos Todox GANG Tine: 12:31951 ulu une Data19 Decedar 1924 SLIDEERITUD TANASE REPORT MENO:   RINET Corso: Speed: Aldade Detect Tire EZESTES Inc sis: 2 UNSTER LIDADE M Detection T: OOM 580300 stall assistant particularly overall gaming preference. HARPOON II is A LLO dislikes groups, splitting up an immensely technical treatment of a Tine Compressioni 30 MIN. both ships and aircraft complicated subject. It therefore requires every chance it gets. This is considerable effort in order to play, and both aggravating and danfor users not familiar with the system, will gerous; most players will, involve a lot of work. However, it remains for better or for worse, want a benchmark in terms of its modeling of to keep control themselves. modern warfare. The nature of the product ensures a tremendous amount of flexi\"CAN YOU CONFIRM bility in terms of additional scenarios and HOLLO A SUCCESSFUL add-on products which should keep grogLAUNCH, nards happy for years. While it will never COMMANDER?\" be the King of Beer and Pretzels, for seriHARPOON II is one of the ous wargamers, HARPOON II truly is the few games on the market Queen of the Sea. that can credibly claim to CLAWS BARED F-16D Tomcats wrangle enemies in mid-flight. be able to simulate both THE EDITORS SPEAK large fleet actions and very HARPOON II \"COXS'N, ALTER COURSE small engagements in the same package .0001 DEGREES...\" without sacrificing playability or exciteRATING  As in HARPOON, micro-management rement at one or both levels. PROS Immensely technical, commains the order of the day. For some A number of problems remain, includplex and detailed, Harpoon II offers gamers, this is paradise, for others it is a ing the usual bugs, quibbles over the acculots of new platforms, scenarios and mind-numbing chore. A new mission ediracy of some weapons models, the lack of a versatile Windows-like interface. tor in HARPOON II is supposed to alleviate comprehensive logistical planning and the CONS The strong points are also the need for micro-management by allowclumsiness of some aspects of the interface. the weak points. Immensely techniing the player to assign units to a mission According to the design team at Threecal, complex and detailed, the misand then let the staff assistant control the Sixty, an upgrade which solves many of sion editor doesn't alleviate the execution. Unfortunately, the staff control these nagging problems is on its way. need for serious micro-manageis very weak, and mission of all types are in the end, the decision to buy this ment. carried out in an erratic manner. The product ought to be based upon your SHAREWARE SPECTACULAR TOP SHAREWARE GAMES ONLY $ 1.50 PER DISK Top 30 CD Titles 83333 DSP Dual 16 Multimedia 9298 Flight Yoke 2000 Western Digital-Paradice 16 DSP Sound Card ( W etableUpgrade) FREE: Sony CDU-33ADual-SCD-ROM Drive  Shielded Speakers Ace of the  Microphonc Pacific Software  Biogrip Joystick .4 CD Titles: G .  ChessMaster 3000 Features:  US Atlas  Functions like 2 separate joysticks  World Atlas  Full horizontal-vertical control 67  Mavis Bescon Teaches Typing  Includes sturdy desktop clamp and suction cups Turbocharge CD Rom Now! Sony CDU-33A Double SoundBlaster 16 MCD 5298 Speed CD-Rom Drive Shielded Speakers 7th Guest Sound Cards CD ROM Drives Animal San Diego Zoo Chinon CD-535 IntSCSI II.5308.50 Cardinal DSP 16..........$128.50 CILA.O.S. Continuum Chinon CD-535 Ext SCSIL...398.50 Sound Blaster 16 MCD......Call Compton's Interactive Encyclopedia V2.01 Mitsumi FX-OOID..............138.50 Crial Path .... Advance Gravis UltraSound.....128.50 Days of Tentacle: Maniac Mansion. NEC 210 320ms SCSIT......171.50 Turtle Beach Monterey ....398.50 Dracula Un casbod... NEC CDR-510 3Xspeed SCSI 11378.50 Orchid Sound Wave 32......187.50 F-15 Strike Eagle 111. Panasonic 562/563. 138.50 Prometheus ARIA 16SE.......158.50 Gabriella's Knight.... Plextor (Texel) 3028 Int SCSI 11272.50 ADS Girolice's Encyclopedia V.6.0... Plextor (Texel) DM S028 Ext..368.50 GAME ZAPPER Guidebooks to Mathematics Sony CDU-33A...............138.50 $81.50 Indiana Jones: Falc of Atlantis Iroa Helix Toshiba 4101B IntSCSI II.208.50 Jast Grandma & Me 25.50 Toshiba 3401B IntSCSII ...298.50 Super Duper Fun Pack II Jutland. 30 $0 1. Critical Path Mad Dog McCree $109 2. Lord of Ring $83 Master of Onion Fun Pack In Stock Microsoft Encarta 94.. 6530 3. Myst 1. 7th Guest Microsoft Bookshelf 91. 38.30 2. Dracula Unleashed 4. Legend of Kyrandia Microsoft Dinosaur 91 3. Return to Zork Super Duper Fun Pack ! Myst. 15.50 4. Space Quest IV 1. Gabriella's Knight Nikko.... 21.50 $79 $99 28.50 2. F-15 Strike Eagle Prehistoria Education Pack 1 79 Rebel Assault. .......43.50 Return to Zork. 27.50 1. Grolier's Encyclopedia Ver 6,0 4. Rebel Assault Space Adventure Dinosaur Adventure........28.50 2. The Animals (Ver.94) Super Fun Pack $89 Where in the World is Carmen San Diego....34.50 3. Mayo Clinic-Family Health Sup 4. Mavis Beacon Teaches Typing 1. Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis State of the Art of Sight & Sound\" 5. ChessMaster 3000 8 2. C.H.A.O.S. Continuum 6. US Atlas 3. Days of Tentacle 7. World Atlas 4. Mad Dog McCree Tirth & Co L. W dniu guarantee major credit card Prepare for mi printa Open All Prdech.come with m utaclurer Warranty 1. Monterhundre accepted for return without an RMA M-F 7:00 am 6.00pm 5. Price and availabdits are subject to change without notice Sal. 8:30 am 4620 East Brickell, Ontario, Califomia 91761 6. Shipping and Handling charges are extra and are non-refundable. 12:00pm PST Purchasing Dept (909) 460-2587  Fax (909) 460-2589 THE LOWEST PRICE GUARANTEE  Doom  Multi-Dimen  Another Planet & Tetris 3D  Duke Nukem 2 s ional Theil Me with No Beer  Flight Simulators  Eternam  Goteworld  Roodwars 2000 Kiloblaster  Halloween Harry Simulations of Major Stryker Executioners Risk, Scrabble,  Lemmings Monopoly, Uno  Mystery Monor mystery montor . Stralsys  Kung Fu Lovie Spear of Destiny Hockey  Hugo's Whodonit  Jill of the Jungle  Megatron . Wotenstein 3D Baseball  Rechook's Revenge  Blake Stone  Galactix PLUS Many,  3D Chess Monster Bosh . Bio Menace Many More FREE CATALOG INCLUDING WINDOWS, BUSINESS, UTILITIES, EDUCATION, GRAPHICS ADULT SOFTWARE Now you Can Have Your Own GIRLFRIEND ... a sensuous woman living in your computer! GIRLFRIEND is the first VIRTUAL WOMAN. You can watch her, talk to lver, usk her questions and relate to her. Over 100 actual VGA photographs allow you to see your girlfriend os you ask her to wear different outfits, and guide her into different activities. As a true artificial intelligence program GIRLFRIEND starts with a 3000 word vocabulary and actually grows the more you use it. She will remember your name, your birthday, and your likes and dislikes. GIRLFRIEND requires 7-10 MB of free space. We offer the ADULT VERSION containing 2 different girls, LISA and SUZY of a special price of only $69. (reg. price $120.) ADULT GAMES SeXXcapades $79 Porntris $35 Pornpipe $35 Mozaik $35 ON SALE $49 Porntris, Pornpipe, Mozaik All 3 for $89 ADULT CD-ROMS Pornmania (2 CD Sch) King Dong, Sex Games, ScXXcapades. The Movie, Too Naughty To Say No, Neurodancer, Dream Machine, Winner Take All Seymour Butts 12 Doors of Passion, Hot Pix 3,4 & 5, Total Fantasy, Photo Gallery Our FREE CATALOG includes many more ADULT games, movies and pictures on both DISKS and CD-ROM ADD SAS/H: 3.5\" Or FOREIGN ORDERS AOD S2/DISKIN PA ADD TAX MUST STATE AGE OVER 21 YEARS. VISA/MC Orders Only: 800-243-1515 Ext. 600UC / 24 HRS / 7 DAYS FAX (215) 997-2571. Or CK/MO 10:SoXXy Software, P.O.Box 220., Dept. 600UC, Hatfield, PA 19440 Reader Service #221 Direciklaves 1-800-882-8108 Reader Service #61 122 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"THE YEAR... 2 4 8 9 THE SPOIL... BLOOD BOWL O COMING TITS FALL MICROLEAGUE AVAILABLE FOR IBM COMPATIBLES ON 3.5« DISK AND CO-ROM 1-800-334-6572 1994 MicroLeague Interactive Software.  1994 Games Workshop Inc. Blood Bowl is a registered trademark of Games Workshop Inc. All rights reserved, Circle Reader Service #213 "


"REVIEW : Tanks For The Memories SSI's TANKS! Recalls Playable Wargames From Gaming's Past by Josh Bruce WARGAME CONSTRUCTION SETIA NCE IN A VERY LONG TIME, YOU movement. Infantry marches, tank treads of the grognards happy, as well as novice FIND SOMETHING THAT IS grind, and truck tires squeal as they go tank commanders. GENUINELY GOOD. WHEN IT'S A SOULscooting across the map. However, players mate, you marry them. When it's a wishing to play a quicker game, or let their SUDDENLY, A TWIG SNAPPED... restaurant, you take your friends spouse sleep in, may turn off the audio and The entire game is played with hidden there. And when it is a computer game, miss out on the atmosphere. units and spotting rules, currently the rage you play it until your mouse explodes. in computer wargames. Sending your Strategic Simulations' new WARGAME POINT, CLICK...FIRE! forces through dense woods in a blinding CONSTRUCTION SET II: TANKS! would TANKS! uses a simple point and click interblizzard in search of the Chinese Army seem to contain all the elements that spin face with each unit equal to a platoon, and while listening to the marching of the hida wargamer's wheels, from Nazi Panzers groups of platoons organized into compaden enemy creates an appropriately eerie and Chinese hordes to friendly fire and nies. The computer activates a company sensation. Even the most jaded of gamers limited intelligence. Machine gun combased upon its speed and morale, leaving will be pleasantly surprised by the unprepanies and SherWARGAME CONSTRUCTION SET II: you to select any pladictability of play, as both armies struggle man tanks alike TANKS! toon of the active to find each other. are yours for the company by simply The computer opponent has three diftaking in a limit Price: $69.95 clicking on the unit. ferent difficulty levels, but is pretty good less number of System: IBM You then pick a tarat even the average setting. Stupid moves Requirements: scenarios from get hex and rightmeet with disastrous results, as the com386-33 or the entire 20th better, 2MB click with the mouse puter does not sit idly by while you search century. It's got RAM, 6MB to move there, or for its forces. I will never forget the time I all the right hard drive left-click to fire at the sent my cocky column of Abrams tanks pieces, but how space, VGA position—an excepstraight down a road into entrenched well does it all graphics, tionally simple and Iraqis, only to have it completely demouse; come together? efficient way of comstroyed by one Sagger missile unit. While supports AdLib, Gravis, PAS. Sound Actually, Blaster, and Thunderboard sound cards manding your troops I enjoyed being challenged by the comTANKS! as a title is # of Players: 1-2 (same computer) on the battlefield. puter opponent, I wondered at the resomething of a Designer: Norm Koger Despite the intersults. Even the most well-laid of ambushes misnomer. While Publisher: Strategic Simulations, Inc. face, TANKS! strives rarely achieve such a high kill ratio as in it does have a Sunnyvale, CA to be more than just this game. However, if you don't mind wealth of informa(800) 245-4525 an introductory playing with a lot of caution and hugging tion on armored game. The database the terrain, the battles are tense and, for warfare, the design focuses almost as much alone is stunning, covering over 120 difthe most part, well-balanced. on infantry-only battles. While the units are ferent weapon systems mounted on over The handling of air power is done in a represented by the standard NATO sym300 different types of vehicles and arcreative fashion. Rather than becoming bols or silhouettes, the graphics sport more tillery platforms from 13 different eras of bogged down in deciding the difference color and crispness than is usually the case the 20th century. Each weapons system is in attack strength between a Sopwith with wargames, with movement, range, given an attack strength for use against Camel and a B-52, air forces are broken and attack strength being shown on the \"soft\" targets such as infantry and motordown into four generic classes: light prounit display. There are graphic representacycles. In addition, it has a \"to hit\" perpeller, heavy propeller, light jet and tions for units firing, with corresponding centage and an armor penetration value heavy jet. Depending on the era and techexplosions when a target is destroyed. for use against armored vehicles such as nology level of the army, air units are eiThe audio segments are interesting, with tanks. There is a lot of number-crunching ther controlled by the computer, or the each unit type having its own noise for going on here, in an attempt to keep all player will have limited control over SRL 124 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"IN CYBERSTRIKE, ALL BEGINNERS WILL BE TREATED FAIRLY. AND THEN DESTROYED. Beaten all the boxed games? Done the arcades to death? Try CyberStrike, the wild new multi-player game on Genie where you hop into a two-legged CyberPod and battle it out against other real live humans for control of a virtual reality city. The action's fast and furious. But even if you're new in town, you won't get blown to Kingdom Come. Well, not right away at least. In fact, CyberStrike is so easy to learn, you might actually live long enough to waste someone else first. And best of all, it only costs three bucks an hour.' So strap yourself inside a Pod and come out shooting. You've got nothing to lose. Except your life. GEnie multi-player games 100% ORGANIC OPPONENTS SIGN UP NOW: 1. Set your modem for half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. 2. Dial toll free 1-800-638-8369. Upon connection, enter HHH 3. At the U# = prompt, enter JOINGENIE then press RETURN 4. At the key code prompt enter AJJ423 5. Have a major credit card or your checking account number ready. For more information in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800638-9636, TDD 1-800-238-9172. TE ansa \"Here's the fine print. Genie multi-player games and support services are $3.00 an hour in non-prime time: 6 p.m. to 8 a.m. local time Mon.-Fri., all and selected holidays. There's also an $8.95 monthly subscription fee. Each month, you'll get credit for up to four hours of nonprime time usage. Any surcharges incurred apply to all hourly usage, including your first four hours. Circle Reader Service #67 . "


"a TORUL UUTTA SIRE Y O Razor I Fin text. Loret Thus errations 0.00 Eu PASS placement and timing of air strikes. Once number of bi-monthly maga target is chosen, the aircraft must make azines which include a an approach on the enemy unit and surboardgame, as well as havvive any anti-aircraft fire. This serves to ing far more companies show the importance of developing close turning out a variety of tisupport tactics for aircraft, and how modtles. Let's face it, Microern communications have forever Prose or QQP will never changed the face of war. do the Siege of Malta nor will we ever see a Great BatTHE OBSCURE WARS SERIES tles of Yemen series, but The TANKS! random scenario designer now we don't have to wait may bring you back to the days before for the computer compahard drives, because it recalls nothing so nies to design our battles, much as MECH BRIGADE. Eras covered My favorite war of the are 1918, 1950, 1967, 1973, 1991, and a 20th century has always custing your order hypothetical near-future, with the battles been World War I, but most taking place in either arid, temperate, or game designers seem conFRANCE 1940 Armored formations blitz through the Ardennes frozen climates. Another menu lists the vinced that this era was towards Paris, little knowing that in this game, desperate French amount of habitation, roads, wilderness, composed of nothing but 1 forces await just past the next village. and roughness of the terrain. Finally, the bi-planes and Dreadcomputer will ask what the average monoughts. In an attempt to rectify this situherent view of tank warfare is isn't. For all bility of the forces should be, and how ation, I sat down to design a battle based the data poured into the design, it doesn't large of a force the player wants to comon the Meuse-Argonne. Creating terrain really capture the feel of platoon/company mand. Once these commands are issued, was simple enough, as all the terrain tiles combat, even in a broad sense. While I enthe computer will devise a scenario need only be selected from a list and joy blasting away enemy units as much as based on actual orders of battle for the placed on the map. After laying down the next guy, the inability of units to replenty of woods and trench treat or rout is a huge drawback. Most of SS lines, I moved on to the the trappings of tactical combat are includunit selection screen. ed, such as opportunity fire, but it often The unit selection screen seems so incredibly lethal that you wonder allows you to build compaabout the accuracy of the combat algonies out of any forces that rithms. Surely, some of the time, wellwere historically available. trained soldiers (and even green recruits) Again, it was a simple must know to run for cover. process of pointing and should gamers madly retreat from clicking before I had a GerTANKS? It really comes down to what they man Army with machine want from a game. Much older games are guns and heavy artillery beno more complex or no less fun—but they ing assaulted by hordes of do lack the crisp graphics and sound of light American infantry TANKS! Hardcore gamers will be disapsupported by French 75s. pointed that all the data included doesn't While the battle had the make for much of a simulation, but those TO THE GREEN FIELDS BEYOND In WWI scenarios, tanks provide the right result an eventual who simply want to push around military crucial new element in a combined arms force poised to break the American victory-it had hardware and approximate their favorite four-year deadlock of trench warfare. far too many casualties for conflicts of this century will have the rough even a WWI battle. The feel approximate of a very good time. two armies you have selected in a matter is much more generic than the marketing THE EDITORS SPEAK of seconds. This feature alone makes hype on the box would have you believe. TANKS! worth playing as it means that There is no provision for selecting indiWARGAME CONSTRUCTION limitless replay value is just a few mouse vidual units, for instance—you take what SET II: TANKS! clicks away. the computer gives you, trusting that it Ever since ROGUE began gracing the will select appropriate units within the pa RATING ** terminals of mainframes some 15 years rameters you define. Thus, the \"realistic ago, a constant debate rages between conorders of battle\" are more than a little PROS Fast, easy to learn and very ventional wargamers and computer suspect. playable. The best looking wargame wargamers over which format is better. Now, I don't expect every game to be since the V For Victory series. While hindsight and sales figures seem to the ultimate in realism, but when a prodCONS Very unrealistic combat meshow that computers are the way of the uct claims to be the definitive treatment of chanics and results. The construction future, conventional wargamers have al20th-century combat, there is a certain exkit aspects are not as flexible as one ways had the advantage of a wealth of pected standard to which it should aspire. would expect from a product billed so topics from which to choose. There are a Overall, TANKS! is a good game, but a coheavy as such. UL. CASOS L atest BE de ELER E11 BE GRAN BP HEREBBE OBDOBB BE [ LED LB BU AA  ALE ELLELE AN LE    HOW  Foto UN TOT uit Order OTO BAVARRA Out og 126 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"Sigma Designs and Activision present RETURN TO ZORK The MPEG Version Sharper Audio Smoother Video Richer Game Play Reel Magic 22 / Only ReelMagic makes interactive games look as good as your favorite TV show. ReelMagic puts the power of full-screen, fullmotion, eye-popping video realism on your PC monitor. Plus, 16-bit, CD-quality stereo sound is built right in. ReelMagic is a breakthrough MPEG playback card for the PC that adds a new and exciting dimension to interactive games. And now, Return to Zork, the most popular adventure game series ever, featuring a cast of 23 Hollywood actors, over an hour of spoken dialogue, a revolutionary interface, 200 musical themes, and serious puzzles with a sense of humor. It's no wonder it was voted \"CD-ROM Game of the Year» by PC Entertainment and «Adventure Game of the Year» by Strategy Plus and Games Magazine. Return to Zork on the ReelMagic board — not only sharper audio and smoother video, but richer game play. enters the world of ReelMagic. Welcome to the next generation of graphic adventure ReelMagie DESIGNS SIGMA INFOCOM ACTIVISION 800 8 4 5 80 86 Circle Reader Service #206 ReelMagic is a trademark of Sigma Designs, Inc. "


"REVIEW Poised To Strike + E0003 Scott Hamilton's One-Man TIGERS ON THE PROwl Show Begins A Blitz Tour by Terry Lee Coleman anime HE LUMBERING TANKS MOVED with armored units is laid bare, as Tigers flection play a crucial role in determining FORWARD, THEIR CLANKING TREADS ON THE PROWL examines the eastern front combat results. Also, artillery barrages inPROTESTING LIKE NOISY STEEL serof WWII in excruciating detail. clude both direct and indirect fire, with pents navigating the rough, broWhile tank games are certainly making the usual rules for spotting, line of sight, ken terrain. The commander a comeback, this is the game for panzer etc. Here is where TIGERS begins to break looked at his maps one last time-just freaks. Here the emphasis is tactical, with away from the pack. Wind varies, and will ahead was Hill #35. Determined that his individual units representing companies invariably affect the accuracy of fire. Tratroops would attain the objective first and or sections. All the expected stars are jectory deviation is painstakingly modhold the position until the slower infantry here, from the behemoth Tiger of the eled, with much more feel than the \"roll could establish an game's title, to the the die and see if the shot scatters\" that observation post, he Tigers on the Prowl T34/85, the quinwargames usually include. Indirect fire albrought his unit for Price: tessential Russian lows smoke screens, incendiary and illuward with caution. $69.95 (plus tank and one of mination targeting, counter-battery fire, Yet, almost before $4 shipping & THE PROWL the finest armored and my favorite, the rolling barrage (eshandling) he had finished givSystem: IBM vehicles in history. pecially when playing the Russians). Teing the order to Protection: The tanks on your dious?—not really; although those move forward, a Manual look-up computer screen looking for a light game are advised to tremendous explo Requirements: look pretty lame pass this one by. sion left men tum 386 or better when compared to That Hamilton's design showcases bling about the belly processor, VGA their historical tanks is hardly surprising. The subtleties of the tank like graphics, 8 MB counterparts, howof armored combat are brought out well hard drive space, mouse seeds inside a dry Designer: Scott Hamilton ever, and many by the game system, which calculates such gourd. Quickly de Publisher: HPS Simulations will be turned off varied information as range, terrain, the termining that no Santa Clara, CA by the lackluster relative movement rates of both the firing one was seriously in(408) 654-8381 graphics. HPS and target vehicle, the problems of acquijured, the commanSimulations, as a sition, and the effects of suppression fire. der turned to his radio operator: \"Get one-man company, does not attempt to Once a target is acquired, you may choose HQ and request an airstrike. It looks like match the graphics and sound of bigger to fire either high explosive anti-tank the Russians got here first, and we'll pay companies (those familiar with the graph(HEAT) rounds against enemy armor, or hell getting that artillery off that bill by ics in AIDE DE CAMP will feel right at home solid projectiles, depending on what the ourselves.\" here), but one has to wonder why some individual unit is armed with. Penetradigitized sound sampling couldn't have tion, angle of impact, deflection are all I COULD HAVE HAD AN 88 been used. Still, those looking for a pretty quite dutifully delineated in the game, While airpower may rule in the modern game are missing the point, as Hamilton with Hamilton even going so far as to era, in WWII tanks were the undisputed focuses on making his games the most replace the occasional physics formula for masters of the battlefield. Fast for their alistic on the market. emphasis for those who are interested. time, they combined awesome striking Hidden movement is included and repower with mobility, protected by armor THE COMBAT CALCULATOR ally works well at this scale. Units hide in so thick they seemed like dreadnoughts As one would expect from Scott Hamilravines, behind slopes, and are obscured on dry land. Scott Hamilton proved he ton, however, the physical modeling of by trees and shrubs. A nice touch is that was a designer to watch with his realistic weapons systems is very accurate. Armor vehicular units may sometimes be tracked POINT OF ATTACK, but here his fascination thickness and angles of penetration/devia the dust trails they leave behind. Still, 128 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"HARVESTER DNA'S pen 24 Hours coming fall '94 for PC CD ROM Merit Software\" FUTURE DALLAS, TX 1-800-238-4274  Merit Software, Dallas, Texas.  Future Visionary, Inc. Harvester is a registered trademark of Future Visionary, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Circle Reader Service #88 "


"Night fighting is inplaying itself, with the player an interes cluded and contrasts the ed observer), the system forces you t UNIT AD Pz IV DEFAULTS lethality of the weapons think of your units in more flesh-anc MAX RANGE 1800 M with the confusion of blood terms. Suicide attacks may be sus PRIMARY TYPE TANK finding the enemy in the cessful, but they are guaranteed to lowe ENGAGE HQ'S 1ST YES darkness. Weather is an morale of nearby units. Since units ar PAUSE TO ENGAGE YES option, and replaying a constantly having to deal with suppre. RATE OF FIRE SLOW normally sunny scenariosion fire, minefields and a host of othe SET FOR THIS UNIT (F1) in a muddy quagmire potentially demoralizing fare, troop qual SET FOR ENTIRE COMPANY will cause you to reline ty becomes the key element in play-as tactics on the fly. should be. Units that you control indivic The big question is the ually may even be given different order AI, and Hamilton's deduring combat, or you may move forma sign is just as thorough tions to save time, at a corresponding los BLITZING BY THE NUMBERS For quick play, you can use the defaults or here as the rest of the in flexibility. Actually, flexibility is th set parameters for each formation. game. The decisions of heart of the game, not only in the desigt the computer opponent but in the way Tigers forces you to thin even with all these details, movement is are based on sound military principles deon your feet. While any really good gam fairly simple to execute, as the computer rived from the designer's military experican achieve this, ew do it with the realism will figure the best way for a unit to maence and, more importantly, it plays by and insight of TIGERS. neuver. the same sighting rules as any human, a Ultimately, TIGERS ON THE PROWL is This means, of course, that hills bebig plus for most gamers. Replayability, demanding game, but well worth the tim come extremely important for observaalways important in a wargame, is enit takes to climb the tough learning curve tion and are often the focal point for While the rules are com IN UNIT SYMBOLS FOR: GERMAN WAFFEN SS assaults. This is where the infantry comes plex, they give compre in. TIGERS shines with regard to combined hensive information arms. Though the \"grunts» may have to TD/JPZ SP ARTY/AGRECON/CAV rather than the mediocry play second fiddle to the tanks, they do documentation sadly have a few tricks of their own. FlameFLAME TNK CARGO prevalent in much of the ANTI-TANK throwers can destroy treads and panzerindustry. If only the fausts can knock out an entire unit. K graphics of say, TANKS Infantry units have the ability to infiltrate ANTI-AIRFTINF/RIFLE HEAVY WPN could be combined with enemy positions, and more than one TIGERS, we would have player will grimace at the prospect of havSKI HU WPN MARINE INF AIRCRAFT the best game possible ing to use tanks to pry infantry out of for WWII tank opera towns, as their ability to disperse makes tions. Nevertheless, them difficult to destroy. If you like to whether you wish to have gamble, you may even close assault ene HEINRICH HIMMLER, WHERE HAVE YOU GONE As can be seen from this a good gaming session, my vehicles, but if the tank survives... unit manifest of Waffen SS units at the battle of Prokhorovka, TIGERS learn about combined Airstrikes may be called in TIGERS, as doesn't let controversy compromise its attention to historical detail. arms on the Eastern well, but you select only the general area, Front, or simply want to and the aircraft pick the specific target hanced by the fact that the Al's strategic see how a Panther would have fared from their vantage point in flight. Similar choices have some randomness factored against a T34/85, TIGERS will keep you to artillery plotting, selecting a target too in to force you, through its unpredictabili awake for many enjoyably long nights close to your own troops may risk losing ty, to make adjustments. It may not be the forces to friendly fire. This may well be same as playing a human, but TIGERS ofTHE EDITORS SPEAK one of the best treatments of a sensitive fers the best silicon opponent, along with (and rarely simulated) topic in computer CARRIERS AT WAR II, that I've seen this TIGERS ON THE PROWL wargaming. Another controversial aspect year. of the game is that flames may spread RATING  1/2 from one area to another affecting woods THE GREAT SUPPRESSION or even towns where you never fired a What lifts the game even higher is HamilPROS Incredibly detailed and realisshot. It makes you think a little before goton's attention to \"soft\" factors, such as tic model of armored combat, including crazy with that flame-thrower. morale and training, so often neglected ing hard data and \"soft\" factors. The design also factors in mines, so ofwith the excuse that these factors cannot Excellent documentation and custen ignored in wargames because US be quantified. Your units are not automatomer support. forces aren't exactly adept in their use (to tons in TIGERS, and if you give them CONS Lackluster graphics and sound be kind). Kursk is therefore simulated ridiculous orders, they may not react as with a diflicult interface. Heavy numproperly, as are many smaller battles with you would prefer. Without going to the ber-crunching will require at least a an emphasis on mines, as you learn the extremes of SSG's BATTLEFRONT series fast 386. fine art of clearing approach lanes. (where it often seemed as if the game was st et 130 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"Stalking the corridors is a thief with a stolen device of enormous Unfold power. Let the Hunt begin. STAR TREK DEEP SPACE NINE THE HUNT UNT Coming this Fall. For PC and Mac on CD-ROM. Alinimoun Paramount Interactive Inquiries please call 415-813-8040. TM &  1994 Paramount Pictures. All Rights Reserved. Star Trek: Deep Space Nine is a trademark of Paramount Pictures. Circle Reader Service #102 "


"STRATEGY : The First Line of Galactic Defense WOWO.3OOO Tactics And Tips For X-COM: UFO Defense by Jeff James Tank/Loser Cannon 90 ITH ITS FIRST-RATE INFANTRY ty to prevent aliens from finding your down or where interceptors are launched. COMBAT ENGINE, INTENSE base in the first place. Although you're stuck with the basic STRATEGIC GAME, AND SLEEK W hen building new bases, try to posistructural layout of your first base, you futuristic setting, MicroProse's tion them in areas with a high concentrashould try some different design ideas X-COM has all the markings tion of wealthy countries. North America with newer bases. When building a new of an addictive gaming classic. As the and Europe are obvious choices, as is a base, try to isolate the access lit and supreme commander of Earth's defenses hangars from the rest of the against an alien invasion, you enjoy an incompound. For example, credible number of options. While this locate all your hangars on flexibility is undoubtedly central to the one side of the base with popularity of X-COM, it also serves as a the access lift connecting stumbling block for many aspiring Xthe hangars and the rest of COMmanders. You're required to simulyour base. The reason, of taneously don the hats of a politician, course, is that when aliens administrator, research scientist, conattack, they enter the base struction engineer and combat trooper. D raco through hangars and access This strategy guide will help you keep GIBOXC9EGG lifts. By limiting the numthese hats firmly on your head and, hopeber of entry points invading fully, prevent the removal of that head by aliens have available and by a well-placed alien plasma bolt. CALM AMIDST THE CHAOS Heavy Weapons Platforms tend to make a channeling the invaders to shambles of the playground, but they provide instant cover for designated choke points, a A BASE WITH A VIEW X-COM troops, and are immune to alien mind control schemes. small number of X-COM After choosing your first base site, immesoldiers can defend a base diately add extra living quarters and storagainst a much larger force. age space. Follow with an alien base in Southeast Asia. Build bases on difcontainment facility so you can capture ferent continents to maximize radar covAIRCRAFT AVALANCHE and hold live aliens for study. Buy as erage. For example, instead of having As soon as the game begins, you should many scientists as your base can hold, and three bases in Europe, space your bases remove and sell the Stingray missile immediately get them started on rean equal distance from one another in launchers from your interceptors and researching laser weapons. After you start Europe, South America and Asia. Also, place them with Avalanche missile making some money, you should build keep in mind that multiple radar stations launchers. You'll eventually want to equip base defenses. Keep in mind that base deat a single base will improve the coverage each of your interceptors with plasma and fenses are ineffective when a base's comof your radar i.e., two long range radarlaser cannons as soon as you are able to bined defense value is under 2500 (you stations will double the effectiveness of a produce them. This will extend the usecan see this figure displayed on the base base's long range radar coverage). It's fulness of your interceptor aircraft and information screen), so purchase a conalso a good idea to separate research and eliminate the need to constantly restock siderable amount of weapons to keep production facilities from your radar and cannon rounds and missiles. While you're your bases safe. The ideal solution is to interceptor facilities. Aliens tend to search waiting for your researchers to develop have plasma base defenses teamed with a for and attack X-COM bases where there those new weapons, you can team up your gravity shield and a mind shielding facilihave been large numbers of UFOs shot interceptors-up to four at once-on one 132 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"THE ONLY THING MISSING S THE DRIVE TO THE STADIUM. DISK #11 SULONG Iron CRUCULEECE tinched CHCIGU .298 EVE SERIES The most highly detailed ballparks ever to be created. Each park consists of 9 full screens. Season Replay, Strategy Sheet, Head to Head vs. Human & Computer, and True Modem Play with Chat Mode. Contains full rosters for all 1993 teams with over 40 categories of batting stats and over 30 categories of pitching stats per player Draft module with «Computer Draft\" Option, Trade module, Team editor module and League Set Up module including the NEW 1994 Division Alignment. The sharpest detailed animation ever in a baseball simulation. Includes both Simulation and Arcade modes. Screens may vary. UIT 3rd Baseman TO PALE THOUTE PRP VACHAN 100 LAVO RANG ROC TOPCT 952 1 DIX MIUI Chicago 191 basebale PROM Winner of the Product Innovations award MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL PLAYERS TM MICRO SPORTS INCORPORATED Micro Sports Inc. One Northgate Park  Suite 103. Chattanooga, TN 37415 1-800-937-7737 Circle Reader Service #212 "


"JE mon weapon of the enemy, down a UFO and then investigate the so rather than produce the crash site. If you choose to shoot dowr Sectopod autopsy The robot is sturdily weapons yourself, your UFOs and not investigate crash sites constructed with powered grunts can recover them you're missing out on roughly half of ormour capable of resisting moat forms of attack, in from successful skirmishes the total point value, plus the opportuparticulor plasma weapona. However, the sensing circuitry with aliens. Without pernity to capture live aliens and research scems particulorly vulnerable to lager weapons. sonal armor, your soldiers new technologies. Killing aliens in tactiare going to die with alarmcal combat gives you points as well; caping frequency. Researching turing them will give you double that alien alloys allows you to amount. In addition, invading an alien build personal armor, base pays off with a hefty point boost. which will boost your solBut combat isn't the only way to keep dier's survival rate by a subfunding nations happy: successful reROBOT CADAVER While weapons development should be your main stantial margm. WC search will also earn a small number o emphasis, don't neglect research on alien lifeforms and machines, plasma weapons, alien points each month. If you botch things which will yield important tactical tidbits. grenades and personal arup-let too many civilians get killed in mor, your soldiers will have terrorized cities, lose a few to many solUFO. To do so, have all your available a much better chance of survival. Finally, diers, or lose too many X-COM craft to fighters attempt to intercept the alien never let your scientists or engineers sit hostile UFOs—the program counts craft. As soon as your first interceptor enidle: there are always new research pro those actions as negative points. At the gages the UFO, click on the \"standoff\" jects to start and new weapons to build. end of the month, both positive and button and then minimize the window. negative points are totaled and you're Wait until your other interceptors engage TONS O' FUNDS given a qualitative rating. Do well, and the UFO, then order them all to attack. There's no doubt about it: money makes your funding will increase. Do poorly, This tactic works especially well on large and it may decrease-even to the point and very large UFOs which tend to pack a world go round. You receive funding of a country removing its funding enconsiderable amount of firepower. from three sources: donations from memtirely, withdrawing from the X-COM When you are finally able to start buildber countries, the sale of captured alien program, and signing a pact with the ing advanced craft-such as the Firestorm, objects, and the sale of arms you manualiens. To summarize, aggressively purLightning and Avenger-be mindful of facture. sue UFO contacts, investigate all UFO vour Elerium consumption. These craft crash sites, eliminate every need Elerium for fuel, which can usually alien base you can find, only be found by attacking alien bases and and continuously research larger UFO crash sites. Using conventionnew technologies to keep al interceptors equipped with laser and countries happy. plasma cannons is a more prudent Selling The Spoils: Afmethod. Although the Skyranger troop ter most alien encounters, transport is slow and has a small carrying your troopers will recover capacity, it is very cheap and effective. large quantities of alien Build and use the Avenger only if you 12 COCA TODO weaponry, supplies and have large reserves of Elerium handy. GENG corpses. If you haven't yet Kenzi Sato-HH researched an alien artiSCIENCE GOES TO WAR fact, sell off every unit you To succeed at X-COM, you need to conGUT-CHECK TIME Facing down an Etherial on its home turf will stock except one; the same stantly research new alien technologies. goes for alien corpses. require bravery, and a steady hand, if this rookie is to survive. At the start of the game, you should imHeavy Plasma weapons, mediately research the following items in UFO Navigation and UFO order: laser weapons, laser pistol, laser riDonations From Countries: The maPower Sources all fetch tidy sums on the lle, heavy laser, laser cannon. This line of jor countries of the world will continue open market. research will give you laser rifles, which to fund the X-COM project so long as Arms Dealing: As a last resort, you can are cheap, effective weapons that never you keep their skies free of UFOs and manufacture goods and sell them on the run out of ammunition. Laser cannons their cities free of alien invaders. At the open market. Although you do gain some can be used to replace the shell-using canend of every month, the program ascash for doing so, the cost of paying the nons on your interceptors. Once you've signs a point value to every action you engineers to build the item, plus the cost investigated at least one UFO crash site, performed in the previous month. in material and man-hours lost is usually you should research these following You're given a certain amount of points not worth the expense. items: Plasma Rifle (and Clip), Heavy for destroying UFOs (the larger the Plasma (and Clip), Plasma Cannon, Alien ship, the higher the point value), and COMBAT: Alloys, Personal Armour, Alien Grenades. half that amount for shooting them KEEPING THE SQUADDIES ALIVE Researching the plasma weapons will aldown intact. Ultimately, the highest Tactical Tips: The best advice for combat low your troopers to use the most compoint values are given when you shoot is to use the best troops. Review each of 134 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"CREATIVE Game Blaster CD 16 CREATIVE LABS, INC. Multimedia Specialists 1-800-233-0010 The Game Blaster CD 16 multimedia upgrade kit features a Sound Blaster 16. a double speed CD-ROM drive, pair of speakers, high performance joystick, and an incredible software bundle including Rehel Assault, Return to Zork, Iron Helix, SIM City 2000. Civilization. Silent Service. F117A. Railroad Tycoon and more! $365 Tech Support: (608) 836-8001 Visa & Master Card welcomed! Fax: (608) 836-8002 P.O. Box 55164 Hours: M-F 9am 6pm Madison, WI 53705-8964 Sat. 9am -1pm CST |CREATIVE INEC CHINON CREATIVE LABS. INC. MultiSpin 3Xi CDS535 Double Speed CDROM drive Digital Edge 3X Powertisers, this is your New from Creative Labs! Along CD-ROM drive! Lightning fast with a triple speed CD-ROM internal triple speed drive with drive, the new Digital Edge 3X 195ms access time. 450KB/sec features the Sound Blaster 16 With an access time of 250ms. transfer rate, and a continuousSCSI-2 w/ASP, Groliers Multiand a double speed data transfer llow 256KB cache. Exceeds media Encyclopedia. Voice rate of 300KB/sec and a 256KB MPC level 2 specifications, and Assist, Text Assist. Digital buffer, the CDS-535 is one of is PhotoCD Multisession, and Morph. Rebel Assault. Indy 500. the fastest drives around! PC QuickTime compliant. SwitchThe Simulation, and much more! Magazine Editor's Choice! able SCSI-1/SCSI-2 interface. New Price! $414 CD-ROM Super Buys! Sony Media Magic Kit $145! This multimedia kit is complete with a Sony CDU33A double speed CD-ROM drive. 8-bit interface card. installation software and cables. Everything you need to get started in multimedia is included. Each kit comes with two free CDs including demos of the most popular business and entertainment software! Mitsumi dbl spd FX001D $137! The 250ms, 350KB/sec Mitsumi double-speed blows away Other CD-ROM drives costing twice as much! The Mitsumi comes complete with a 16-bit interface card, installation software and cables to connect! Triple Speed! $669 Complete Kit: $332 MULTIMEDIA HARDWARE 145 365 MM UPGRADE KITS Reveal DC260 Edut, Kit 249 NEC Multispin 4X Pro 909 Gravis Ultrasound Sony Media Magic kit Plextor DM3028 Internal 255 Gravis Ultrasound MAX Game Blaster CD 16 Plextor DM3028 int, w/kit 319 MV Pro Audio Studio 16 Edutainment CD 16 395 CD-ROM DRIVES Plextor DM5028 external 379 MV Pro Audio Spectrum 16 Discovery CD 16 299 Plextor DM5018 ext. W/kit 429 MV Pro Audio Spect 16 basic 129 Digital Edge 3X 669 Aztech CDA268-01A w/kit 475 MV Pro Audio Power Pak Plextor QUAD Speed Creative Omni CD int. 179 Chinon CDS 535 internal 332 319 MV Pro 3-D korg Toshiba 3401B internal Creative Omni CD 3X 415 Chinon CDS 535 int, w/kit 332 Toshiba 3401E external MV Premium 3-D SCSI-2 Media Vision Reno 275 Chinon CDX 535 external 424 Sony CDU-33A bare drive 145 MV Premium 3-D MultiCD MV 2000 Family kit 449 332 Chinon CDX 535 ext. w/kit Sony CDU 33A w/kit & 2 CDs 145 MV Deluxe MultiCD MV 3000 Super Kit 395 Creative Omni CD int. 179 Sony CDU-561-01 int. 259 MV Pro Wavetable Upad MV 4000 Premium kit 495 Creative Omni CD 3X (New!) 415 Sony CDU-7811-10 ext. 489 Sound Blaster Deluxe MV 5000 Pro kit 695 Mitsumi FX001 dbl spd w/kit 137 Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe 414 SOUND CARDS Reveal DC230 Hm Ofc kit 239 NEC Multispin 3Xi internal Sound Blaster Pro Value Ed. Reveal DC240 Educ. kit 239 NEC Multispin 3Xe external 459 Audio Magiclan Plus 49 Sound Blaster 16 Basic Reveal DC250 Ent. kit 249 NEC Multispin 3Xp portable 379 Gravis Ultrasound 115 Sound Blaster 16 Value Ed. 117 Sound Blaster 16 MultiCD 179 Sound Blaster 16 MullicD/ASP 119 Sound Blaster SCSI-2 97 Sound Blaster SCSI-2/ASP 77 Sound Blaster AWE-32 65 ASP upgrade chip 259 Wave Blaster Option 145 145 VIDEO CAPTURE/OUTP call ADS Game Zapper call Video Blaster SE 55 Video Spigot for Windows 79 Pro Movie Spectrum Sigma Designs Ree Magic 99 Reel Magic Lite (NEW!) 249 105 Call for speakers, SCSI controllers, more! 359 CD-ROM TITLES We only sell CD-ROM! g o 45 & San&a 39 44 AA Encoisoccer Tonebo 65 39 garage 49 44 44 5ft 10 Pack 31 Dark Seed 37 Interplay's 10 Yr Anth 45 MPC Wizard 2.0 MPEG 32 Star Trek 25th Enhanced 7th Guest Darksun 47 Tron Helix Multimedia Starter Pak 23 Star Trek Next Generation 7th Guest 2:11th Hour 53 Day of the Tentacle/M.M. II 37 Jones in the Fast Lane 36 Myst MPC 47 Star Wars Chess MPC 7th Guest/Dune 47 Doom II 46 Journeyman Prol. The 42 Nat. Geographic Plc. Atlas 56 Starlord Aces of the Pacific 40 Dracula Unleashed Jump Raven Neurodancer MPEG call Starship Rogarlan Aces over Europe Dragon's Lalr 33 Jurassic Park New Kid on the Block 35 Strike Commander/Tactical Aegls: Guardian of Fleet 48 Dragon's Lair MPEG 33 Just Grandma & Me New York MPEG call Stronghold Alr Warrior 39 Dragons Lalr ! call Jutland Outpost Syndicate Plus Al-Qadim 41 Dragonsphere King's Quest V 40 Pagemaster System Shock Aladin Dungeon Hack 36 King's Quest VI 42 Patrician T2 Chesswars Alone In the Dark Empire Dlx: Masters Ed. 26 King's Quest VI Upgd 22 Phantasmorgla Terminator Rampage Americana MPEG call Encarta Encyclopedia '94 Lands of Lore Photo CD Access TFX Armored Fist 41 ESPN Soccer 33 Laura Bow 2 Photo CD Workshop Theme Park Arthur's Teacher Trouble 36 ESPN Baseball Tonite 43 Lawnmower Man 37 Pollce Ost 4:Open Season Tony LaRussa BB 2 Backroad Racers 24 ESPN Sun. Nite Football NFL 39 Legend of Kyrandia BKI 32 Police Quest 4 MPEG Total Baseball 1994 Ed. Battle Isle II 39 European Racers 24 Legend of Kyrandia BK 11 36 Prehistoria, Groller's Total Distortion Beneath a Steel Sky Evasive Action call Lemmings 2. The Tribes 27 Privateer U.S. Atlas 4.0 Betrayal at Kondor 23 Eye of Beholder Trilogy Lesulre Sult Larry 6 39 Quantum Gate Ultima Under. 1 & 2 Bloforge call F15 Strike Eagle 3 Unks 19 Rebel Assault 42 Ultima VIII W/Speech Pack Buzz Aldrin Rce Space 42 Falcon Gold 54 Lightning CD Ravenloft 49 Under a Killing Moon C.I.T.Y. 2000 Fantasy Emples Lord of the Rings MPEG call Red Baron / AIOT. K. 41 Under a Killing Moon MPEG Cat Came Back The 32 Frontier Elite II Lost Treasures Infocom II 35 Return to Ringworld 42 Video Cube Castles II Gabriel Knight 43 Lost Treasures of Infocom 31 Return to Zork 42 Video Cube Sports CD Challenge Pack Gettysburg Lunicus 39 Return to Zork MPEG call Video Cube Space MPEG CD-ROMIXI Freex Goblins Quest III 19 Mad Dog McCree 28 Robinson's Requlo call Video Game Solution CD CD-ROMIXI Hardcase Grandest Fleet 37 Mad Dog McCree Il 27 Sam & Max Hit the Road 37 Who Shot Johnny Rock CD-ROMIXI Prime Great Naval Battles! 49 Man Enough 43 Seawolf 45 Wing Commander I Deluxe Chaos Continuum. The Great Naval Battles 11 41 Man Enough MPEG call Secret of Monkoy Island Il 39 Wing Commander ll Deluxe Chessmaster 4000/L.D. 2 Guiness Disc of Records 34 Master of Magic 45 Secret Weapons of Luftwffe Wing Commander II/Ulf UW Cinemanla Movie Gulde '94 Gunship 2000 w/Scenarlo Matinee MPEG 27 Sh. Holmes Con Det 3 Wing Commander III Commanche w/Mls. 182 Harpoon 11 call Mayo Clinic Famlly Hith Bk 37 Shadowcaster 43 Wolf Pack Companions of Xanth Harvester Mayo Clinic Total Heart 35 Sid & Al's Inc. Toons 43 Wing Commander/Ultima VI Compton's Int Encyc. Upgrd Harrier Assault SVGA 46 Mechamander call SimCity 2000 43 World Atlas MPEG Conspiracy Hell Cab v1.1 46 Mech Warrior II 43 SimCity Enhanced 45 World Circult Gran Prix Crime Patrol Horde, The 21 Mega Raco 32 Sound Track MPEG call World Cup Encyc. 1930-94 Crime Patrol 2 41 Horde, The MPEG Microcosm 48 Space Ace MPEG 39 World of Xeen Critical Path 44 How to Create Multimedia 22 Microsoft Golf for Windows 39 Space Pirates 41 World View MPEG Curse of Enchantia 21 Humans, The 23 Mighty Morphin Power Rngrs 26 Spear of Destiny Super Pak 39 Worldview Daemonsgate 36 Inca 2 24 Millenlum Auction Spirit of Excallbur 21 Wrath of the Gods CyberRace 29 Indy Jones Fate Atlantis 37 Morphology 101 29 Sporting News MPEG call X-COM Dark Legions 37 Inherit the Earth 24 MPC Wizard 2.0 12 Star Control Compendium 22 Zillon Sounds No surcharge on credit cards. CODs accepted with $6 charge. Software shipping $5/arder, Canada S8/order, hardware shipping is 5%, Canada is 6%. Personal and company checks allow 14 days. Returns must have an RMA#, call Software sales final unlass defective. Returns subject to 15% restocking leo. Pricing and availability subject to change. 34 bean: 4848wNNENBRBSauseraaseng 4) 48 Circle Reader Service #94 "


"golese All your soldier's ability ratings and sack any group of your soldiers, that trooper may small launcher equipped with stun bombs soldier with less than 50 bravery or firing decide to shoot the alien-and kill your to incapacitate these aliens. You'll need to accuracy points. Replace the fired soldiers soldiers in the process. To get around interrogate three different alien types to with new recruits and repeat the process. this, consider using up all that soldier's get all the information you need: an alien Soldiers with high strength ratings are time units before the end of the turn. officer, an alien leader, and an alien combetter at carrying heavy weapons, while If you have several rookies in your mander. Most high-ranking aliens will be others make better marksmen and scouts. squad, equip a few of them with auto-can found at alien bases and in the upper levUnfortunately, the game doesn't allow nons and heavy cannons loaded with high els of multi-level UFOs. While on the topyou to view soldier stats in the equip solexplosive rounds. Since the aforemenic of stunning your foe, you can also stun dier screen, making it far too easy to tioned weapons have a larger area of efany civilians you encounter during a city equip your weakest soldier with your fect than standard weapons, this will offset defense mission. Alien soldiers will treat heaviest weapon. To compensate for this a rookie grunt's poor design flaw, attach a one or two letter shooting ability and alidentifier to a soldier's name to indicate low him to bag more Dutch Donovan-HW what he or she is best at. For example, a aliens. When choosing < OK > ARMOUR PERSONAL RAMOUR soldier strong enough to carry heavy shot types, aimed shots RANKE, Commander MISSIONS> 14 KILLS> 21 CRAFT> NONE HOUND RECOVERY sa doya weapons would have an \"-HW\" attached may be effective, but they 0 20 ND 60 50 100 1200 160 to his name; soldiers with high firing acalso consume most of a TIME UNITS 17 curacy can be tagged with an \"-M\" for troopers movement STAMINA HEALTH marksman, and so on. points and are next to BRAVERY Avoid night missions whenever possiuseless when the trooper REACTIONS ble; wait until dawn to approach a UFO is a rookie. Rely on snap FIRING ACCURACY landing or terror site. If it absolutely, posshots for long distances, THROWING RCCURACY STRENGTH sitively has to be there over night, equip and auto fire for short to your troops with electrollares and incenmid-ranges. When movdiary munitions, which burst into flame ing your troopers, spread upon impact, illuminating the target area. them out in a loose skirFORCED R & R Commander Dutch Donovan is almost a walking Before combat, make sure that every solmishing formation, 5-6 superman, but he ended up wounded like any other poor human-oid. Use your troops wisely, regardless of their impressive stats. dier has a primary weapon in one hand spaces apart. This will and a grenade in the other. minimize the chances Once combat begins, always end your that they'll all get killed with one wellstunned civilians as dead ones, so you will soldiers' movements in a kneeling posiplaced grenade, and it will also increase gain points for keeping them alive. Finaltion and under cover. When dispersing their alien detection ability. Advance in ly, don't worry about having your soldiers leap-frogging movements. pick up discarded alien weapons and othJOK MAXIMUM SPEED>5 400 RCCELERATION10 Move some soldiers, keeper goodies during combat: they will autoAVENGER FUEL CAPACITY=60 WERPON POOS>2 ing their movement covmatically be recovered when the combat TRANSPORTER AND COMBAT DAMAGE CAPRCITY>1200 ered by other soldiers with is over. SPRCECRAFT. THE ULTIMATE REPLICATION OF ALIEN HUP CAPACITY) a large reserve of time Messing With Your Mind: If you're TECHNOLOGY units. Always (except in the losing battles to alien mind attacks, there special case of troopers with are a couple of things you can do to imarea ellect weapons) leave prove your situation. HWPs (see below) your troopers with enough are immune to mind control, making time units to perform a them ideal for rooting out hidden Etheresnap shot during opportual and Sectoid aliens. If you have one solnity fire. dier that is being repeatedly mind When assaulting aliens controlled, chances are that he has a low hunker down in their latent psionic ability. Sack any soldier that ALIEN SECRETS REVEALED Eventually you will be able to match UFOs, a good tactic is to is frequently mind-controlled and replace alien technology and meet these insidious invaders on even terms. ms. toss proximity grenades in him with a new recruit. For the ultimate front of the UFO's entry defense against mind attacks, you'll have from a landing craft, use the gear struts of door. Although it may take some time, to capture a living Ethereal (any) or a Secthe landing craft for cover, then systematmost aliens will eventually exit their craft toid leader or commander. After you've ically move your troopers towards coverand trigger the primed grenades. If your researched those living aliens you'll be ing terrain features, such as bushes, trees squad is equipped with flying suits, you able to build your own psi-lab and train and buildings. Remember: Troopers can jump up to the top of most UFOs and your soldiers to perform mind attacks of standing in open terrain will DIE very enter them via a top hatch. Dropping their own. Once your soldiers are enquickly. Troopers with a powerful area afthrough the top hatch of a UFO is also a rolled in a psi-lab, you'll be able to see all lect weapon (rocket launchers, auto/heavy good method to use when attempting to of their psionic abilities. As with any other cannons with explosive rounds) during capture aliens alive, which is essential to ability, if a soldier is pitifully low in psionopportunity fire tend to shoot first and finishing X-COM. The stun rod is next to ic ability, he should be sacked or assigned think later. If an alien appears next to a useless in this endeavor, so rely upon the to a non-psionic combat team. CARGO SPACE>26 136 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"Coming soon. Quarantine Hell Frontier-1st Encounters Bureau 13 Star Crusader Circle Reader Service #187 We make this lovely advertisement and you drool all over it. Why do we bother? "


"30 DOO Tanks For Everything: One of the weapons in your base storage. Any in X-COM to give you unlimited funds most effective weapons in the X-COM arweapons stored on a Skyranger, Lightning invincible soldiers and other special fa senal is the heavy weapon platform, or or Avenger transport craft will not be vors. Two of the most popular offering HWP. Basically a miniature tank, an HWP available during combat, as these craft are for editing X-COM saved games are gives you a number of advantages on the evacuated before any base invasion. Michael Chan's X-COM saved game hex battlefield. They normally have a large If you've designed your base properly, editing tutorial (available on many netnumber of movement points, making you'll be able to hold the aliens by securworks) and an X-COM saved game editor them perfect for scouting out enemies, ing the access points-access lifts and by a programmer who calls himself \"Flatand they're also immune to mind control, hangars. Aliens invading an X-COM base line.\" Using either of these utilities will making them extremely effective weapons usually carry at least one blaster launcher, give you an overpowering-albeit unagainst Ethereal and Sectoid aliens. The which launches devastating blaster bombs sporting-weapon to use against those HWP Rocket Launcher is a good first that can decimate your entire squad in bug-eyed nasties. Die-hard X-COM comchoice, but you should replace that tank one blow. To avoid having your squad manders may bristle at the thought of useventually with the vastly superior hoverkilled in this fashion, try hiding your ing a wimpy cheat file or hex editor to tank as soon as you can build it. To build troops behind doors during alien move improve their position, but cheating car hovertanks, you must have completely rement, then zip out into the passageway to rescue the lloundering commander in a searched the Firestorm craft, plus plasma fire at any aliens, then dash back behind hopeless situation. Regardless of the weapons for the hovertank plasma and closed doors. You may want to keep a means you use to finish the game, you the blaster launcher for the spare HWP at each base to serve as your should still keep an eye on the shelves o hovertank launcher. On the downside, \"eyes and ears\" during a base assault. Anyour local software shop. According to a HWPs are expensive, make for large tarother good tactic is to lay down a gauntlet spokesperson, MicroProse is planning gets, and don't take much damage to deof proximity grenades in front of your acnot one, but two follow-up products patstroy (with the exception of the hovertank cess lift and hangar entryways, providing terned after the original X-COM. SC HWPs). a ready-made minefield that the aliens enough of this idle banter-get out there Defending The Homefront: In the unand save humanity! fortunate event of an alien attack upon an X-COM base, you'll need to move quickly IF ALL ELSE FAILS-CHEAT! A special thanks to Julian Gollop, Higla to destroy the alien invaders. Your best. If you want to employ the ultimate Commander, X-COM UK Forces, for his asdefense is to equip your soldiers with arweapon against the alien menace, you sistance with this article. mor beforehand and stockpile plenty of can use a hex editor to edit the data files SIDELINE SOFTWARE n shares ORDERS 1-800-888-9273 ONLY YOUR PC IMPORT & CLOSEOUT CONNECTION NEW PC TITLES TYPE The UNIVERSAL Game Cheater! Amazon Adventure Battle Isle 2 Floppy or CD ROM War Simulation Beneath a Steel Sky Adventure Canon Fodder Arcade Strategy Chaos Engine Action Arcade Diogers Floppy or CD ROM Arcade Strategy In Extremis Like \"Doom Lil' Devil CD ROM Arcade Adventure Maniac Sports Sports Simulator Micro Machines Racing Arcade Reunion Floppy or CD ROM Role Playing Game Rise of the Robots Fighting Game Saber Team Strategy World Cup USA (floppy or CD ROM) Sports Simulation Test Drive 3. Star Control, Hoverforce all THREE for only Corporation, F-14 Tomcat, Supremacy all THREE for only PC MAGAZINES Get the latest nens on the best PC Bitles from the U.S. & Europe! These high gloss, full color magazines also feature demo-packed PLAYABLE cover DISKS OR CD AOMS with each issue! Titles include: PC Format, PC Rorlow, PC Zone, PC Plur, PC Power, and PC Gamer! Your choice! Only $10 each! NASDAGDAG GO GDCD Cheat death with.. THE INTINITY MACHINE It Came From the Desert 14 Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 9. Joe and Mac Caveman Ninja 9. King's Quest 6 21 Legacy (Microprose) 24 Legend of Kyrandia 21 Lemmings 2 28 Lil' Devil 24 Mantis 24 Mavis Beacon Typing Tutor 9. Mike Ditka Football 18 Mig 29 Fulcrum 18 Nigel Mansell's Grand Prix 21 Obitus (Psyonosis) 9. Out of This World 21 Pacific Islands 21. Patriot 24 Populous & Data Disk 24 Power Monger 19 Premier Manager 2 21. Pushover 18RBI Baseball 9. Rex Nebular 24 RoboCop 3 9.2 Sargon 5 9. Seal Team 24 Secret of Monkey Island 2 21. Seven Cities of Gold New Ed. 24 Shadowlands 18 Sim Ant 21 Sim Earth 212 Sim Life 18+ Sleepwalker 18 Space Crusade 18 Spacewrecked 9. Spell Casting 101 9.Special Forces 21 Spoils of War (RAW) 18 Star Legions 212 Strike Fleet 192 Super Space Invaders 14 Super Tetris 14Task Force 1942 (Microprose) 24 Team Yankee 21 The Immortal 19. The Lost Admiral 14 T.V. Sports Baseball 21. T.V. Sports Boxing 21. Trump Casino 2 14. Twilight 2000 16. Ultima 6 21. Utopia 18. V For Victory 21. W.W.F. 2 Wrestling 18. Waxworks 14. White Death (Raw) 18. Wing Commander Academy 24. Wizkid 18 World Class Leaderboard 9.9 Wrath of the Demon 16. Zool 21. SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 piecos, by payment: Mastercard & Visa $5,00. CO.. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day ait available! Call for prices on special shipping. Shipping limes not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to change! No refunds or exchanges. Delective products exchanged with same Item. Products warrantied through Sideline. FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Info Call (305) 491-9519 DEALER INQUIRIES INVITED! 840 N.W. 57th Court, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33309 The Infinity Machine works with virtually ANY game. Our easy to use interface allows you to edit or freeze almost any game feature such as lives, gold, or energy in real time. Our slow-motion mode lets you breeze through the tough spots like no tomorrow! What are you waiting for? Start living today! Creepers IPSY FROM ussie $3105 DON'T MISS THESE DISCOUNT PC DEALS! A-320 Airbus 24.95 Contraptions 18.95 4-0 Sports Boxing 18.95 Creepers (Psygnosis) 18.95 A-Train 26.95 Cybor Race 24.95 Action Stations 18.95 Dave Ledbetter Goll (Greens) 26.95 Ancient Art of War in Skies 24.95 Deluxe Strip Poker 2 18.95 Armageddon 18.95 Dune 18.95 Arctic Barons 21.95 Elvira 2 14.95 ATAC (Microprose) 24.95 Epic 21.95 8-17 Bomber(Microprose) 24.95 Etemam (Drakhan 2) 18.95 Bard's Tale 3 18.95 F16 Falcon 9.95 BAT 2 21.95 First Samurai 9.95 Battlechess 18.95 Flashback 24.95 Battle Isle 18.95 Fool's Errand 16.95 Birds of Prey 21.95 Four Crystals of Trazar 21.95 Brutal Sports Football 18.95 Global Conquest (Micropose) 21.95 Carmen USA Deluxe 21.95 Hardball 3 21.95 Castles 16.95 Harpoon & Battle Set 2 18.95 Centurion Dalendar of Rome 18.95 Haro Ouest 18.95 Command HQ 18.95 Hook 9.95 U.S. VISA REM Software -LL1 1359 FRANK DRIVE  MONROE, MICHIGAN 48161 TO ORDER, CALL 800-457-1161 Circle Reader Service #119 138 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 Circle Reader Service #107 "


"Finally. A Sound Card from a company that knows sound! SOUNDS a annos EENSONIO SoundscapeTM by ENSONIQ. The first wavetable sound board that gives you professional 16-bit sound and compatibility with today's hottest game titles and multimedia applications at a price you can afford. SOUND For $279 (su gutested retail) you get: 100% ENSONIQS ENSONIQ is a leading manufacturer of high-quality synthesizers used by top recording artists. Now, the same wavetable technology that drives our $3,000 keyboards is available for your PC. Genuine ENSONIQ wavetable synthesis 16-bit sound with 32 voice polyphony Award-winning sounds. Our commitment to sound is unequaled. With Soundscape, you'll hear sounds created by Grammy Award-winning musicians, renowned orchestral players, and top studio engineers. Supports the broadest range of games and multimedia standards, including: SoundBlasterTM, AdLibTM MPU-401, MT-32, General MIDI, MPC Level 1 & 2 Windows 3.1, Windows Sound SystemTM No host CPU overhead; no TSR's 3 CD-ROM connectors for maximum flexibility Maximum compatibility. Great sound doesn't matter if your board won't work with your software, so we've made Soundscape compatible with virtually all PC standards. Whether you're in the game room, the classroom, or the boardroom, Soundscape will provide unrivaled sound quality for all your applications. 60-day no-nonsense refund, plus a three year limited hardware warranty HUMENTUM ENSONC Make the right choice. LEADING THE WORLD IN SOUND INNOVATION Call 1-800-942-0096 for more information. Soundscape is now available at all Electronics Boutique and Waldensoftware locations. With the exception of the few titles that use ADPCM. All trademarks property of their respective owners. 1994 ENSONIQ Corp. 155 Great Valley Parkway, Malvern PA 19355-0735 Circle Reader Service #191 "


"STRATEGY 0 The Play's 0 The Thing 0 0 Ascending The Throne In Avalon Hill's KINGMAKER by M. Evan Brooks 0 HILE KINGMAKER SPORTS A map and determine where the Cinque claimants. Securing a Royal Heir tends to RELATIVELY ACCURATE HISTORPorts are located (never noted on the make you a target for the other factions, ICAL MILIEU, THE GAME map; only historical trivialists and veteran so it is often a good strategy to let the othmechanics do not reflect a players knew such locations). Road moveer factions weaken themselves first. simulation of the War of the ment and control is similarly easy to deThe major advantage of possessing a Roses per se. Rather, KINGMAKER recreates termine-in the board game version, crowned monarch during the game is the the spirit of the period in a more impres-heated debates occurred over whether or ability to call parliament into session (if sionistic fashion, emphasizing shifting alnot Shrewsbury controlled that fork in the no monarch is extant, or if there are two liances and loose coalitions coupled with road. rival crowned monarchs, then the Marrandomness and luck. Victory is attained shal of England has this power). This through having the last surviving Royal Uneasy lies the head that power is less effective than it seems. As a Heir crowned monarch of England. The wears a crown. New York judge once noted, «No man's power of the game lies in the noble housHenry IV Part II, life, liberty or property are safe while the es, much like a game of chess wherein the Act III, Scene 1 legislature is in session.\" king is essential, but is hardly the most While ultimate victory is awarded to the A convening of Parliament allows you powerful piece. Historically, the Yorks player with the last surviving heir, the inito distribute offices to various nobles. To and Lancasters were more powerful in tial stages of the game generally engenyour dismay, you will often discover that their own right than is reflected in the der a mad scramble for all potential when you finally have the power to call game, but this is not a game law as much Parliament, your Cart 06 as an intentional design parameter. Eccex strength is such that Treasurer Originally designed as a boardgame by 04 England the distribution of ofAndrew McNeil in 1974, KINGMAKER was saxons fices fails to signifireleased in the United States by Avalon courtenay 30 cantly improve your Hill two years later, and has become a position. This is exclassic of wargaming. There were some Northumberland acerbated by the fact minor differences between the early that you must distribBritish boardgame and the Avalon Hill ute offices in a pro version, and of course, there are minor vata method to rivals differences between the boardgame veras well. sions and the computer game. Although a disadPossibly the greatest advantage of the vantageous position computer game over the boardgame is may be improved the automatic movement. When a mission FOR ENGLAND AND ST. GEORGE A good starting position here, this gives through a calling of is ordered to the Cinque Ports, the comtwo powerful nobles with useful titles. If this isn't enough, you can always Parliament, this set puter will move the affected forces there. set up after the computer players. of circumstances selNo longer are you forced to squint at the dom arises. A more Back More Show 1 . Deronshire M ercy 100 140 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"There is only one... Legends OF FUTURE PAST 1993 Winner Computer Gaming World Special Award for Artistic Achievement! \"...A remarkably rich playground for modem owning role-players.\" (Computer Gaming World, Aug. 1992) \"...no other game... captures the true essence of roleplaying like this one.» (Computer Game Review, Oct. 1992) You just aren't going to have this much fun anywhere else. Now you can have the adventures of a lifetime in the award-winning multiplayer online game Legends of Future Past for as little as $1.80/hr! Create your character and visit Andor, a world created solely through artistic prose and colored by shared imagination. Meet the exciting and interesting people who populate these ever-expanding lands. Become part of the community of adventurers who have found reward, riches even romance in the fantastic land of the Shattered Realms. Live Game Masters: You'll explore a living world where professional game designers introduce new adventures and lands to explore on a continuing basis. Delve into the politics of the City-State of Fayd, or take up a noble quest. Become a Champion of Justice — or a Force for Darkness. Andor itself will change around you as you are drawn into the never ending plot of Legends of Future Past. Full Character Development: In Legends, you can assume the role of any character imaginable. Our skill-based system will enable you to develop the persona of your dreams. Be a powerful wizard, sly thief or valiant knight or even a gentle weaver, a skilled weaponsmith or a miner. The possibilities for profession and character development are endless. Advanced Interactive Fiction: Legends was designed as a monumental work of fantasy and artificial intelligence, Not only will you interact with people just like yourself you will be in a realm that responds to your every action. There are no graphics, because only the power of the English language could capture the beauty of this world. Come play it for yourself. Try it free! Give the NovaLink 800 sign-up line a call with your modem and create an account with your valid credit card today. When asked for a subscription code, enter Circle Reader Service #210 \"CGW 194\" and you'll receive five free hours and immediate access! No special software required. Available via the Internet and local access numbers. Toll free number customer service and technical support. All adult: You must be eighteen (18) or older. American Express, Visa, MasterCard, Discover and Diners Club. Novalink. INTERACTIVE NETWORKS 800-274-2814 Voice 800-937-7644 Sign-up/Info info@novalink.com. telnet novalink.com 79 Boston Tumpike. Suite 409. Shrewsbury, MA 01545 "


"y subtle benefit of a Parliamentary call is lose your strongest that it may be used to split up a rival's noble together with force. After the Parliament is concluded, 100 mercenaries the King's Peace assures that no hostilities cannot be considwill ensue between attendees for another ered more than a turn, but if the locations of rivals are proPyrrhic victory. Do pitious, you may use the Parliament to not over-commit call a rival noble, and then afterwards your forces (see pursue him and destroy his power after \"Done Like a Frenchthe King's Peace has ended. man\" below for an appropriate re. A horse! A horse! sponse). My kingdom for a horse. Advanced combat Richard III, Act V, Scene 4 operations allow you Horses are invaluable: when you simply to \"take the field» in must get there, the horse is the 15th cenOFF WITH HIS HEAD Regardless of the odds, when controlling your forces tactical battles. Note tury equivalent of Federal Express. Still, in advanced combat, always target the enemy nobles. that the combat you cannot count on always having equine odds table generally transport available, so use it only in situa2.0 may well recognize the negative imfavors the attacker; the same is true of tactions that will radically improve your posipact of this action and not allow the playtical combat. Generally, the best use of tion. Frittering horses away for mere er to benefit from a noble's execution. tactical combat is to form \"Assassination tactical expediency is a movement toDivisions.\" If the enemy force has a powwards defeat. Once more unto the breach, erful noble whose demise would severely dear friends, once more. weaken the opposition, choose the tactical Let's talk of graves, Henry VI, Act III, Scene 1 battle and commit all efforts to the assault of worms, and epitaphs. Combat operations are more regulated on that particular noble. Most other tactiRichard II, Act III, Scene 2 than is normal in the wargame genre. cal maneuvers will be moot versus the You have two options when you capture a The odds of victory in the open field are: computer opponent. rival noble: ransom or execution. When Ratio Victory Indecisive Interestingly enough, siege operations considering a ransom, you have the op 1:1 15% 85% also favor the offense-only even more so portunity to view a captured noble's assets 5:4 75% than open field combat. The defender before deciding. Unfortunately, ransom is 3:2 40% 60% will face an 85% chance of surrender, proa one-time demand; there are no negotia 2:1 55% 45% vided the attacker has enough in his force tions and counter-offers. If the captured 3:1 70% 30% to siege. When defending, rather than noble rejects your offer, then the prisoner 4:1 + 85% 15% waiting patiently for defeat within the casis executed. Inclement weather can prevent even tle walls, sally forth into the open field to In terms of game play, it is recomthe most propitious battle from occurring improve the odds. Remember-an indemended to set the ransom as high as posThus, make sure to prepare contingency cisive result is always better than an outsible. If it is accepted, the enemy noble maneuvers, so that a non-occurring battle right defeat. will be released, and the player will not doesn't leave your forces ripe for a fatal want a strong force left in his rear. If the riposte. Even a victorious battle can still We few, we happy few, ransom is rejected, the prisoner's execucause casualties among the victors. A batwe band of brothers tion will remove him as a threat. In fact, tle in which you defeat the enemy, but For he today that sheds in the mid to end his blood with me game, with the bulk Shall be my brother of nobles in play, exHenry V, Act I, Scene 3 ecution may well Use the Force! (Oops, wrong millennium.) cause the same noble But do examine your forces carefully. De(or more specifically, Kingston cide which noble will publicly join your his heir) to join the York faction and where he will start. Since sevplayer's faction. This eral nobles have more than one castle to is ahistorical, since choose from, experience in recognizing heirs were generally which nobles can meld together quickly is somewhat alienated an advantage. All nobles are not created by the execution of equal. For instance, Stanley is a strong notheir father and reble, but one who begins in the Isle of luctant to join those Douglas. Without a ship, he has no responsible. Discuschance of becoming a serious force. Even sions with project IS THE KING DEAD? Royal heirs are particularly susceptible to plague, worse, he is often called back to the Isle of manager Jim Rose especially in the Advanced Game. Douglas after it has taken numerous turns revealed that Version to get him to the mainland. There are two 25% C-T5 142 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"14h DIMENSION E N T E R T A L N M E N T. For the Best Times on CD-Rom! ORDERS ONLY USA & CANADA 1.800.258.0533 9-9 Weekdays, 10-8 Saturday, 12-5 Sunday VISACO Your complete source for all CD-ROM entertainment software! THEME PARK $42 MULTIMEDIA OUTPOST E MULTIMEDIA VISA MasterCard Think you can design and build the greatest amusement park in the world? You can select the site, you layout the rides. In fact, You control every aspect of running a highly profitable amusement park; from hiring employees, to developing new rides, to maintaining an adequate supply of soft drinks. Any mistakes and the bustling hordes of funseekers will let you know! System has real value! Sony double. speed internal CD-ROM Drive. Sonic 16 Sound Card, LABTEC Amplified Speaker System. Deluxe Microphone, Includes 4 CD ROMS: Voyetra Sound Software, David Leadbetter Greens, Strike Eagle III, Compton's Family Encyclopedia. BOOM. Earth is destroyed by a catastrophic event, and you're responsible for rebuilding civilization on another planet. Lucky you. Where you go and if you survive is up to you there's a galaxy of possibilities. $299 . $45 HARVESTER UMF ULTIMATE FOOTBALL REELMAGIC LITE Harvester is a graphically violent experience in terror, combining role playing action and arcade style combat with an intense, cinematic story line. Play an action-oriented simulation of the NFL or setup, run, and manage fanasy football leagues and teams using the real National Football League Players MPEG audio and video playback from a standard CD-ROM. Fullscreen, full-motion video in full color. CD-quality MPEG audio. Easy connection to sound cards. Look for ReelMagic-compatible game. Association player roster. SAL Real Mauro $45 game. $299 UNDER A KILLING MOON GETTYSBURG GETTYSBURG $43 PENTHOUSE $74 Under a Killing Moon takes you to the streets of post World War III San Francisco, into a Virtual World full of people and places so richly detailed, you'll feel like you're actually there. Experience The Battle of Gettysburg or Assume Command and Change the Course of History. Featuring over twenty minutes of scene from Turner Pictures' acclaimed epic Gettysburg with special narration by Civil War authority Shelby Foote. With PENTHOUSE INTERACTIVE Virtual Photo Shoot, you too can have one of the most envied jobs in the world Penthouse magazine photographer! You'll be amazed by the sensation of having three of the most incredible Penthouse Pets model for your own private photo shoots. FAMILY ENTERTAINMENT ON IBM CD-ROM 3333 $51 ADULT (18& OVER) ENTERTAINMENT INTERATIVE Call $50 056 $30 $47 $47 556 $55 $55 $35 $48 $45 $14 $50 $42 $48 $18 3833358338 $51 Beverly Hills 90269 Digital Dancing Dream Machine Maddams Family Neurodancer Night Watch Penthouse Interactive Pixis Sampler 2 Sexual Obsession Seymore Butts Strip Poker International Strip Poker Windows Virtual Vixens FAMILY LEARNING History Of The World EARLY LEARNING In The Company Of Whales Advanced Spelling Tricks JFK Assassination Best Neighborhood Ever Learn To Speak Eng engl Busest Noighborhood Ever 533 Learn To Speak Eng French Busy Town Learn To Speak Enggorman Gus Goes To Cyberton 529 Learn To Speak Eng spanish Kidworks 2 Mavis Beacon Tches Typing 2 Livbk. Just Grandma & Me Mayo Cinic Health Bk Livbk. Now Kid On Block $41 Monarch Notes Liv.bk. Rulf's Bone $41 Natgeo. Mammals Ency Lybk. Tortoise & Hare Natgeo.. Presidents Nigels World Nalgon. World Pict. Atlas National Parks Amer FAMILY LEARNING New Family Bible Audubon Birds S32 Normandy Great Crusado Berlitz Think, Tak French $109 Ocean Life Vol 2 Beritz Think, Tak German $109 Ocean Life V3 Borlitz Think, Talk Italian 5109 Prehistoria Beyond Planet Earth $39 Random House Dict 2nd Ed Bbes And Religion Shakespeare Body Works 548 Sharks! buzz Aldrin Space Solar System Dictionary & Language $12 Space Visual History Espn Baseball Hating $48 Tropical Rainforest Espn Golf Tom Kite 554 Zooguides 3 Africa Grest Literature Plus Zooguides 4 Rainforest 786338888883 $44 $32 $22 $44 $30 $37 $40 $35 $39 $32 $32 $52 $39 MOVIES $39 $35 $54 Panzer General Police Quest 4 Rampage Ravenloft Realms Of Arkania: Star Trail Rebel Assault Redshift Renegade Return To Zork Sabre Team Sam And Max Silly Noisy House Sim Ant Sim City Slayer Adad Soft Kil Space Pirales Star Trek 25th Aniversary Star Trek Deep Space 9 Star Trek Next Generation Strike Commander Wac-op Subwar 2050 Super Space Syndicate Plus T2: Chess Wars TEX Theme Park Tie Fighter Tornado'desert Storm Treasure Hunters, Inc Trivalal Pursuit UFO Ultima 1-6 Ultima 7 Complete Ultima 8 W/speech Ultimate Football Under A Killing Moon 28 Cay $12 3. Beauties Ear $41 31  5 Foot 10 Pak Volume 1 7th Guest 7th Guest W/dune 7th Guest 2: The 11th Hour Aegis, Guardian Of Fleet Al-qadin Alone In The Dark Alone In The Dark 2 Animal Kingdom B17/Silent Servece 2 Battles Isle 2 Balties Of Time Beneath A Steel Sky Campaign Chessmaster 3000 Colonng Book Comanche Maximum Overkill Coral Reel Corridor 7 Cowboy Casino Creature Shock Crime Patrol Crime Patrol | Cyber Race Cyberrace D-day: Operation Overlord Daring To Fly Dark Sun Ad&d Darkseed Darksun-shattered Land Day Of The Tentacle Deathstar Arcade Deep Voyage Delta-v Dennis Miller News To Me Dragon Lore Dragons Lair Dragonsphere $28 S26 560 $43 Call $35 call 38 3388339333 Fantasy Fiefdom Fast Attack Fighter Wing Firefighter Games Platinum Gateway 2 Gettysburg Giga Games Aug 93 Great Naval Battles 2 HAW.C. Harvester Hell Cab Horde, The Interactive Game Madness Iron Helix Jagged Alliance Jump Raven Jurassic Park Jutland Knight Of Zentar Lands Of Lore Lands Of Lore 2 Lawnmower Man Legend of Kyrandia Legend of Kyrandia Bk 2 Lemmings 3 Lost Eden Lost Treasures Of Infocom Lunicus Mad Dog II Mad Dog McCree Man Enough Mech Commander Megarace Menzoberranzan-Adad Microcosm Movies On Tv & Video Murmurs Of Earth Myst Nascar Racing Novastorm Out Of The Sun Out Of This World 2 Outpost 8883. $41 Cala Flash Curse Of Catwoman Dangerous Blondes Doopthroa: Girls Fra! Girl Of Double D Hidden Obsessions Legends Of Porn New Wave Hookers 2 Secrets Superstars Of Porn Traci, I Love You Wanda 2 $39 DROM Toclay Action $11 MAGAZINE $28 $41 $35 $10 Call Call $36 $41 $35 3333333338388982 S10 BURO MAGAZINES PC CD-ROM MAGAZINES FREE CD-ROM ON MOST ISSUES SUBSCRIPT MAGAZINE SINGLE BILLED ISSUE MONTHLY PC home N ICDOM CD POWER PLAY $10 CD-ROM TODAY CD-ROM USER $10 MULTIMEDIA & CD-ROM PC FORMAT CD $10 PC GAMER CD $10 PC HOME CD $10 PC PLUS CD $10 PC POWER CD PC TODAY CD $10 PC ZONE CD $10 ISSUES PRICE DOES NOT INCLUDE MAILING $43 $53 $41 $53 $42 $14 $28 $44 PC POWER $10 PICTURES Adut Refor Library All Beauties American Girls 2 Asian Palate Bodacious Beauties Busty Babes Vol 2 Centerfolds And Covergirls Hot Piks Southern Beauties T&A 2 The Maxx Taste Of Erotica Sample Treasure Chest 8888888 $35 $42 Call Viper $10 Call $48 $39 $32 Dune $50 $50 521 Call Who Shot Johnny Rock Wild Blue Yonder Windowate Wing Comm 2 Ultima Und wrid Wolfpack World Circuit World View World War II Wrath Of The Gods X.com Zorro $39 $49 Call Call Call Electric Sci-fi Anthology Escape From The Dead Zone Eye Of The Beholder 1,2,3 F-117a W/F1511 Falcon Gold $28 $53 4th Dimension Ent., a Div. of Computer Basics, Inc., 1490 N. Hermitage Rd., Hermitage, PA 16148 Customer Service 412-962-0533. Orders normally shipped within 1 business day. Overnight shipping as low as $5.00. No hidden handling charges. Air Express service: $0-99=7% minimum $5, $100 to $199 = 5% Minimum $7, $299-$499=4% minimum $10. Over $500 call. COD orders ok, add S5. Prices subject to change without notice. Adjustments gladly made within 10 days of purchase. Restocking charge may apply. Returns fed without prior authorization. Customers responsible for return shipping $45 83 $44 Call $26 $50 Circle Reader Service 205 "


"rit Writ of Accendance Storms of Sea M. SOOO3O KILL ALL THE LAWYERS You don't have to be Perry Mason to issue a writ and pull dangerous rivals away from their massed forces to Parliament. DELAYS HAVE DANGEROUS ENDS Random events not only make KINGMAKER replayable, but reward the opportunistic gamer. solutions: (1) assign a ship to Stanley and after he is on the mainland, commit this \"Stanley Steamer\" to the Isle of Douglas, ever ready to return Stanley as necessary; (2) assign Stanley a title and a major of fice. The offices of Marshal or Chancellor of England will insure that he stays on the mainland; this may not be exactly where you want him, but such a force is useful as a \"Risk Force,\" analogous to the Imperial German Navy's role in W.W.I. Done like a Frenchman; turn, and turn again! Henry VI Part I, Act III, Scene 4 KINGMAKER does not reward \"perfect play\" schemes, which is a large part of its charm. In fact, concentration and massing of forces simply makes a good target for The Black Death. There is no easy way to avoid the utter devastation of disease, and unlike most aspects of feudalism, the plague was non-discriminatory of rank or station in life. In fact, with the nobility living in damp dank castles, disease was even more virulent among the high born, but in game terms, home castles are plague-exempt, although Royal Castles are not. But knowing that disease is an equal opportunity device provides little consolation when your last Lancastrian on Yorkist Heir falls victim to disease, together with the bulk of your titled nobility. There are two methods of plague CD Light International SCIPUM HOURS: PSALMOS 2 A Bringing You 1,000's of CD ROM Software Titles! * 1000 Of The Wild Gertrud effets 10004 20th Century Sport SESSERE his Apon Mandacape INICE ORDER ... TITLE s 10190 Cabrit gat 2292 10421 Kar ner Companie 27.05 116 Kull H D 1.1 150 10570 Mad Dog More n 10ANO Mrrare ! 10.01 VAR PING. To watu 179 1067 World Of Windows 17. 10704 harmat 22.99 10707 50 Nivalye Mysteries 30.9 10714 futtatnim Thor Parade 1690 Nr Kit Service Raid $10 $10 4695 1001 Adventures o Willy Bramith 10011 Nter Dark Thielo y 10049 American Business well 100so Antericane Space 10057 Animals Sandiego Zoo 100. Arthur's Teacher Trouble 10179 1171 Mins Torta 10030 Backroad Kacen 10052 Barney Bear Goes To School i Battle 10088 Beauty & The Beast 10.   Came 10102 Retrayal Ar Kader 10110 Brween Ilm And liell 1012 Retana Furnity Our 10139 CILAOS. Continua 10147 Carmen Candice Where The World 10117 Cave of the Ca r d 1018 CD CAD V7 1016 Chamaer 1000 Turba +2 Gets 10183 Commande MammaMi16 10201 Complete Meestery Pack 10213 Compton's interactive Encycloped 4 10218 Computer Industry Amanar Con Thir Cinta  5502 17.95 1377 16 1909 17.9 1083 10224 15.99 10743 Rebel Ansau 20 10251 Return of the Hansen 27 n 1075 Return To Zock Kingweld Searn More and Secret Wracam fluttwall Shadow Worlds 21.73 10784 Padowcaser 11.99 10786 Shaka Nene um 1076 Stockhol 4199 10 Sedie Vault Hatimum Nextion Space S. Roer Wild 31.99 otis Sprar Of Destiny Super CD Park Spint Of Excalitar 9 10856 Sports Illustrated Cyclopedia 31.99 OKO Sartrek fertile 2. 10ML Star W 12010876 Super VGA Harrier 4212 Se rvet 26.99 OKT syang Cranion (1) 27. 1091 Irinator Chess Ward 120 icx 4699 10714 Tony user Talk un 0216 Top 2000 reware 17 1021 Total 1'711 99 10minmy lewe 207 102) Utina L 1 N Vand Warned/Winx Center 309 10 ittima VI& Wing C a 24.9) 10441 Vit Page 1290 RS in Wien 27.9) 1022 Virtual Reality 11, 1072 Window afirm 179 107 Wolfpack 179 107i Wrid A 40 inzi Cuneo Enchantia 10241 Citerplan Formula War Chris 1291 M HOURS: P.O. BOX 6295 GAM-11PM PST SALINAS, CA 93912-6295 7-DAYS 1-800-983-4321 CALL FOR ELECTRONaeS CALL FOR CURRENT PRICES EMOEM SCENARO DISKS 1th Hour CD $56 m Ouest $5 Bates of Nupo con-16 $5 1942 Pacific Air War $48 Dune $19 Bates of Nepoleon-1 a oss the Rhine 548 Gabriel Wright 528 Bates of Napoleon 2 $10 ADAD: Eye of the Behode 1,203 $15 ndana Jones:Alants $28 Bates of Napoleon 3 Bilecruiser 3000 AD. CALL on Helix 57 Bates of Napoleon 4 Dagorsphere 350 CD $5 utand $26 Bactes of Napoleon Dune Building a Dynasy $34 Legend of Kyanda $0 Bates of Napoleon 6 Fabad $15 lod of the Rings 29 Battes of Napoleon-7 Master of Orion $39 Maria Mansion 2 $29 Wargame Cons. Set It Tais 11 Mach Warrior 35 or CD $46 Mega Race $25 Wagame Cors. Set It Tanks 12 Moral Kombe $38 Rear Zok 21 Wacame Cons. Set It Tanks 13 Rise of the Trad $34 Secret of Morkey bland $15 Wacame Cors. Sed It Tanks 14 Robinson's Requiem 35 000 $35 Sm Cy 2009 CALL Wacame Cons Set It Taksis Sar Control 102 $18 Sa Was Chess 23 Wagame Cons. Set It Taris 16 Theme Park 35 542 545 SSLCLASSES HNT BOOKS Third Reich 5 B24 $15 N Ordin: The Gone's Curse Tie Fghter 548 Barte dAntetom $15 Eye of the Beholder 1 2 Tomado 25 Befes of Napoleon $15 Eye of the Beholder Unima 16-20 530 Conic Mode East $15 Uma 8: Pen blogy Ulama 7 Complete-CD 542 Getysburg: Turning Point $15 Underworld 102 Uma 8: Pagan Wi Speech AccesCD 547 Kampyruppe $15 Usma Underworld 1 & 2-CD 530 Mech Brigade $15 300 System Under a Kling Moon CD $55 Robo Charge Chiclamaga $15 Alone in the Dark Wargame Const Set TANKS $39 Red Lightning $15 Escape from Worstar Manor Warfods 2 Sceralo Bulder 9 Second Front $15 Horde Wng Commander for 2Deure-CD 39 Shish:Grants Tail $15 bhn Maiden Foonal Weg Amaca 35 54900 545 Sons of Liberty $15 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Wings of Glory 35 949 01545 Sa Command $15 Out of this Word Woensten 30. Sowar of Desony-CD 544 Solar Crusada $15 Pod Rash X-Com:UFO Defense 350 CD 543 Som Across Europe $15 Shock Wave 542 Wargame Construction Set $15 Super Wing Commander X-Wing Mission 1: Imperial Persuit $19 Warship $15 W E ALSO SEL: X-Wing Mission 2B-Wing $19 Weston Front $15 SEGA SEES HAC ATARI & a aces PRICES SUBJECT TO CHANGE, DEFECTIVES REPLACED WITH SAME PRODUCT 20% RESTOCKING FEE ON RETURNED & REFUSED ITEMS PAYMENT: CHECKS (ORDERS SHIPPED WHEN CHECK CLEARS) MONEY ORDERS (TREATED AS CASH) CA residents add 7.25% sales tax/HANDLING 52 PER ORDER SHIPPING: FREE GROUND SHIPPING WITH $100 PURCHASE, UNDER $100 PRIORITY MAIL ADD $4, 3-DAY UPS ADD $5 PER ORDER, 2ND DAY AIR ADD $7, OTHER SHIPPING TERMS ARRANGED. COD ADD $4 Sie 10245 22.30 10254 Day The Tentacle 10235 Death Star Arcade Rattir 102 Deep Sp Nne 10257 Deep Voyage 107 Iron Gate 10275 Dinotaur Space Adventure Bundle 10220 Docton Book Of Home Remedies Drage per 10101 10306 Erequest: Me Search F CRUS imik fayde Sud. Multimedia 1020 ESPN SPORT Shorts 10122 European kan 10037 Family Dextor Jed Edition CURGE 999983889 X-Wing See the light on educational SAW See the light on best prices! Many more! Call now to order or for your free catalogue @ 1-800-427-6790 No surcharge on credit cards Shipping $5.00 up to 7Lbs. $0.50/b thereafter. Detective S/W replaced with same product Prices in US dollars & are subject to change. School, State/City & Corporate purchase orders welcome. WE SELL ALL COMPUTER & VIDEO ENTERTAINMENT PRODUCTS Circle Reader Service #115 Circle Reader Service #208 144 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"DO avoidance: dispersion and cheating, Dispersion simply keeps your forces from uniting in a mass target for disease. Historically, armies of this period could not be logistically supported for any period of time, and conditions were ripe for disease. Therefore, keeping subordinates signed offices if they lack a title; player session to the conclusion. While in separate but manageable armies can do (3) Ships are more vulnerable to the fanatics are the most vocal on-line, I much to offset the ravages of plague. storms at sea; would imagine that the number of playConcentration of forces should only be (4) When all of your nobles in play are ers grateful for the ability to complete done when the end move is ready. On the killed, the computer will allow you to an entire game in one evening is even other hand, dispersion does make one bring another noble into play. greater than those crying for multi-playmore subject to defeat in detail by the opBut the biggest \"flaw\" according to er options. posing forces. most boardgame enthusiasts (and the Finally, I must make a confession. AlFor the less ethically-inclined, the review in CGW # 120) is the lack of multhough I have read many Shakespearesurest way to avoid the plague is simply to tiple player input. Clearly a design decian plays, I had never read one of the save and save often. Massing a large army sion, the solitaire play of KINGMAKER historical plays. Computer KINGMAKER and laying waste to the opposition can be may well give way to a multi-player or emotivated me to read all of the plays done safely and securely. And remember, mail option in Version 2.0 (due to be recovering this period of English history the opponents are computer opponents leased within the next 12-18 months). I (Richard II, Henry IV, Parts I and II, Henand their memory can be erased with a can understand the desire of users for ry V, Henry VI, Parts I, II and III, and flip of a switch (i.e. they won't tell). .multiplayer capability. At the same time, Richard III). Any mere game that can acEven more important than plague is I confess that in all the years I've owned complish this must have something gothe initial draw and placement of your the boardgame, I never played a multiing for it! forces. Since this is a purely random operation, close examination of friendly forces is a must. While anyone can become Kingmaker with an outstanding starting hand, the challenge lies in achieving dominance when dealt from the bottom of the deck. However, there are some hands that are best folded. With an atrocious starting hand, gameYou'll be play can become tedious and self-defeating. In games where you begin with right here! fewer than two nobles, at least one of whom is either entitled or has the assets With to become entitled, you would be welladvised to restart the game. Of course, Girlfriend this advice is only for real Kingmakers, who always play with advanced weather, plague rules and five computer factions. Now is the winter of our discontent... Richard III, Act I, Scene 1 Of course, no computer game is ever perfect. KINGMAKER did have some \"undocumented features,\" most of which have been corrected in Patch Version 1.51 (available on GEnie or CompuServe). The patch offers the following fixes: (1) One may now readily exit to DOS at the beginning and end of a game; (2) Computer nobles cannot be asExperience erotic virtual romance with Girlfriend! Forget limited mouse menus, canned dialog, frustrating riddles. Enter a world of beautiful virtual women where you can ask anything! You won't be battling any goons to \"get the No cartoons these are real digitized images! girl\" just your own inhibitions! Express your Girlfriend Lisa (PG-13) S59.95. Girlfriend secret fantasies using your keyboard. She'll Teri PG-13 $69.95. Girlfriend Speaks Sound respond with feminine charm on your CRT or Blaster add-on $29.95. Add $4 S&H. Ask sound card (optional). Watch her reactions in about adult-rated versions! VGA color! If you're tired of sci-fi games that Circle reader service number you've mastered in 5 days, maybe it's time to below for more info, or call: try your hand at a \"real\" virtual woman! (800) 324-AIVR Corporation 709 Lingco #106, Dept CG408, Richardson, TX 75087 USA (214)235-4999 a division of Aldatab, Inc. TM ruhe AiVR Circle Reader Service #42 SEPTEMBER 1994 . COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 145 "


"A GOOD SPORT I-Motion's goal is the US sports game markal, as their PLANET SOCCER is much more of a hard-core sports simulation than other soccer products released on these shores. Tennis fans can volley to their hearts' delight with Philips INTERNATIONAL TENNIS OPEN, a realistic and demanding sports game for both IBM and CD-1 SUCHEN CES (continued from page 37) ent formations included, as well as the view, lowing each play. You can become a regu. which includes the entire field (plus an inset lar television director in setting up FPSB. alien viruses) and HOT SHOTS: LE INTERAC translucent map of close-ups, if desired). In addition, Stormfront Studios is working TIVE (a sim-like flight game with a twisted PLANET SOCCER will offer tough computer feverishly on TONY LA RUSSA BASEBALL for sense of humor), SKI OR DIE uses a reasonteams, realistic goalies, FIFA rules, exacting 3DO. Details concerning game play are ably intriguing physics model, resembling oflicials, and even sudden death overtime. sparse, but you can expect lots of full momany detailed flight sims. More to pure American tastes, three tion video in the game. ROBINSON'S REQUIEM from ReadySoft new baseball games are currently under On the gridiron, there looks to be plenty provides a 3-D experience in an action/addevelopment. As noted earlier, Accolade's of action on the way. With actual video and venture format. The real-time action HARDBALL 4 will feature network/modem color commentary by Al Michaels and Pau game puts you in the position of a shipplay and dynamic statistics (adapting for Haden, Accolade's ALL-PRO VIDEO FOOTwrecked spacefarer who is stranded on a player performance throughout the year) BALL will allow gamers to coach an NFL dangerous alien planet from which he in more than All-Star game. Rather than using standard must escape. Though it wasn't shown at digitized footage from NFL telecasts CES, we are also aware of a unique new acthe design team staged 600 tion game from Bullfrog (to be distribactual plays using the Orlanuted by EA). Called MAGIC CARPET, it is a do Predators of the Arena 3-D flying carpet \"simulator\" where the Football League as stand-ins gamer flies over three-dimensional terfor NFL greats. Dynamix didrain and casts spells in order to escape an n't show any of the expected evil wizard who is chasing him. FRONT PAGE SPORTS: FOOTBALL Another zany game is CAPITOL PUN'95 at the show. ISHMENT, a combination of arcade titles No filmed stand-ins are refrom Sierra's Al Lowe, which include quired for Accolade's BRETT \"Bill and Hillary's White Water AdvenHULL HOCKEY '95, since video ture,\" a \"Dan Quayle Spelling Bee,\" doesn't factor into the play. and Ollie North's \"Shredtris.\" However, the publisher liFinally, we are intrigued by SSI's censed the names and statisALIEN LOGIC. This real-time action-roletics of 700 NHL players for playing game is based on the boxed this product, and the game game THE SKY REALMS OF JORUNE, and also allows you to customize is being produced by veteran the attributes of individual boardgame designer Bill Dunn (a players. Perhaps the most inChaosium alumnus). The game has 00:07 novative aspect of the game is COMES enough action to please the most dedi0 1:08 that you have more control of cated platform gamer, a marvelous the goalie than in most computreal-time spellcasting system and er/video games based on professome other surprises, too. sional hockey. Bethesda's NCAA: ROAD TO Sports Togs (Sports) THE FINAL FOUR 2 offers much Dressed for the international stage, socmore fluid animation than the cer was a major story during CES and, \"paper doll cut-out\" look of the at press time, the Brazilians had just players in the original version nailed down the World Cup. In comand the game play is significantputerdom, U.S. Gold is bringing the lily improved thereby. With its censed WORLD CUP SOCCER game to emphasis on action, it is questionthe market, complete with the German able that this will entice would-beNational Soccer Team's chosen fight coaches away from the excellent song, \"No Pain, No Gain,\" to be played by 50 categories. stat-based text games on this subthe Scorpions. World Cup Soccer will be Another neat feaject, but it should bring would be fairly standard treatment, however, comture is the automatic highlight reel for replayers onto its computer court. pared to the import from I-Motion. The latcapping league play where the highlights INTERNATIONAL TENNIS OPEN from ter's PLANET SOCCER offers a true 3-D are determined by the computer. FRONT Philips Media is being developed by Infoperspective with regard to on-field action PAGE SPORTS: BASEBALL from Dynamix is grammes, the leading name in computer and allows gamers to make strategic decithe logical sister game to the Premier-wintennis games. Available on both CD-i and sions while playing through the entire ning FRONT PAGE SPORTS: FOOTBALL. In CD-ROM, the game offers beautiful World Cup competition. Players are rated addition to using the Major League Playgraphics, digitized video, digitized voice for speed, technique, fitness, aggressiveness, ers Association license, the game has a and game play that seems as tough as everand ball-handling skills, all of which imdata entry option (for creating your own from the French design team. prove with play against better competition. teams). Another nice feature is the multiOn the more sedate side, Amtex is reFans will love the play-calling and 15 differtude of camera options available for folleasing GONE FISHIN', a fishing game that PHILIPS 146 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"PICK-UP THE PHONE AND PICK TWO GAMES FREE! LEROY ACES OVER EUROPE Crawl Inside the Mind of & Sarlal Kuler & fun-filed zdrenture where I DARYL E. GATES POLICE QUEST GABRIEL SHADOWS DARKNESS KNIGHT SINS OF THE FATHERS SIERRA SIERRA 1-800-795-5979 Choose Any Two Sierra Games FREE When You Switch to Sprint!* directory assistance, customer service, even instant credit for wrong numbers. And we do it 24 hours a day! Sprint long-distance service just became more valuable up to $159.90** more! Now, when you switch your nome long-distance service to Sprint, you can select any Sierra game, free! After enjoying six months of highquality long-distance, you may qualify for a second free Sierra game.*** Only Sprint can offer you a nationwide 100% digital, fiber optic network that provides the long-distance quality and reliability you need. Experience for yourself Sprint's \"fiber-optic\" clarity that makes both your long-distance calls and PC data transmissions crystal clear and virtually error free. Unsurpassed call and data clarity is just one of the many benefits you will enjoy as a Sprint customer. the most, including international calls-even if the called person is with a competitive long-distance carrier. The Most will also provide an automatic 20 percent discount off all calls to Sprint's millions of dial 1 customers, anytime and anywhere, When the person you talk to the most in a given month is a Sprint Customer, Sprint will combine both discounts for an effective overall savings of 36 percent on calls to that number.**** No Risk Guarantee Your satisfaction is guaranteed: we'll pick up the cost of switching your long distance to Sprint and will even pay to switch you back if you are not completely satisfied. (Some restrictions apply.) So why not sign up for Sprint and receive the clarity, savings and service you want while getting two Sierra games you enjoy? Sprint Save on Long Distance When You're away from home too! Sprint's FONCARDSM lets you continue to take advantage of long-distance calling and savings even when you're away from home. The FONCARD is free, with cards available for every member of your family. The Most A Unique Calling Plan Sprint offers an unprecedented longdistance calling plan called The Most available now for all customers. The Most will save Sprint Customers 20 percent off already low rates on calls each month to whomever you talk to The Service You Deserve At Sprint, we make no compromises when it comes to dependable, personal service we do it all operator services, Circle Reader Service #164 Offer valid only in the U.S. and for new Sprint customers. Not valid for FONCARD-only orders. One offer per household. Certain restrictions apply. Retail value of Sierra Games. Offer valid on any current Sierra product with a retail value of $79.95 or below To qualify for a second game, the customer must bill $20 per month in 3 of the first 6 months. THE MOST discounts apply to in state intraLATA calls only where authorized. "


"CHIPS & BITS 1692-767-3083 Fax Source 10099 Call 800-500-4263 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Source 10099 PO Box 234 Dept 10099 Rochester, VT 05767 I SPORTS Women 7.-T ESCAPE 2. FROM MARS GENESIS SPIDERMAN AND VENOM: MAXIMUM CARNAGE' Next generation Spiderman features Marvel's most popular heroes and villains, including Captain America, Venom, and Carnage! Nonstop action spins onto the screen with allnew combat moves. $54 'JOHN MADDEN FOOTBALL Fully digitized animations, 3-D rendered field and stadium, and CDquality digitized sound bring out the best of the 3DO system. Choose from 38 teams and over 100 different plays. Multiple camera angles for instant replay. 3DO $49 GENESIS \"TAZ IN ESCAPE FROM MARS' Taz caged in a zoo on Mars? The escape is onl This superstar-loaded video game features hilarious appear ances by Looney Tunes characters Wile E Coyote, Road Runner, and Yosemite Sam. Cartoon quality animation, sound FX and gags. $52 MADDEN FOOTBALL Alaim DO ILEGA FACE FREE HardBall SEGA CDL SHIPPING! Place an order for an out of stock item and recieve FREE overnight shipping when product becomes available. Handling $2 per shipment. \"MEGARACE' It's the far future, and the hottest entertainment around is Virtual World Broadcast TV, featuring head-to-head driving combat ona virtual racetrack. Offers 3D rendered graphics, 30 minules of video and animations and interactivity combined with a television look, CD $44 'HARDBALL '94 Slug it out with 700 MLBPA Stars. Dig in at the dish with Bonds. Belle. Mattingly. and Kruk. Play with major leaguers, swinging for the fence of 28 ball-parks. Offers 162 game season, \"94 League Division Re-Alignment, and a play editor to change player stats. $56 GEN HARDWARE GEN ADVENTURE GEN KICK & PUNCH GENESIS SHOOTERS GENESIS SPORTS GENESIS SPORTS $52 4 Way Play Adaptor $29 6 Button Arcad Pwr Stk $39 6 Button Control Pad $19 F-16 Wirelss Cntrl Pad $39 Gen Menacer Term 2 $46 Genesis Activator $69 GEN CD 2 Sports Pk $229 GEN CD Bkup RAM Ct $44 GEN CD Systm 2 CD $229 Genesis CDX System $399 Genesis Menacer $36 GEN RF Antenna Swtch $9 Genesis Systm 2 core $99 Genesis Sys Sonic 2 $129 Genesis Team Playr 2 $36 Mega Mouse Power Plug Remote Arcade Pad $19 Remote Arcade Systm $36 SG Program Pad 2 $32 Art of Fighting MA-13 $52 Brutal $52 Clayfighter $52 Double Dragon 5 $52 Dragon $56 Eternal Champs MA-13 $44 Fatal Fury 2 GA $56 Juggernts:New Breed $56 King of the Monsters 2 $54 Kung Fu:Legend Contn $56 Matrix Prime $56 Mortal Kombat 2 $66 Power Instinct $52 Prime CD $56 Samurai Showdown CD$48 Street Fitr 2 Champ Ed $49 Streets of Rage 3 $59 Virtua Fighters $79 World Heroes 2 $56 Contra Hard Corps $52 Crime Patrol CD $49 Drug Wars CD $49 Exo Squad S52 Fire Team Rogue $59 Iron Hammr Virt Reality $54 Lethal Enforcers 2 CD 544 NovaStorm CD $56 Rapid Deployment CD $44 Skeleton Krew $49 Surgical Strike CD $52 Urban Strike $52 Zero Tolerance $56 TNN Bass Tournament $49 Tecmo Super Bowl GA $54 Tiny Toon Advt:ACME $44 Tony LRs Ultm Bsbil 95 $54 Troy Aikman Football $59 Unnecessary Roughns $56 Vitale Basketball $52 WCW Super Brawl $49 WWF:Raw $54 World Chmp Scer 2 GA $46 World Cp Gif Dordo CD $49 World Series Bsball GA $49 GENESIS STRATEGY GEN SIMULATIONS Dragons Lair 2 CD $52 EarthWorm Jim $58 Ecco Dolphin CD $52 Fahrenheit CD $52 Flashback CD $52 Frankenstein Golden Axe 3 S56 Grt Orcs Myst wMickey $54 Hurricanes $52 Iron Helix CD $52 Izzy's Olympic Quest $52 Jurassic Park Rpag Ed $54 Lion King $59 Mega Man: Wily Wars $56 Michael Jordan: Chaos $49 Mickey Mania $56 Misadventures of Flink $52 Myst CD $46 No Escape CD $56 Pagemaster $54 Robocop Vs Terminator $56 Scooby Doo $52 Skuljaggers Revenge $52 Snatcher CD $44 Sonic the Hedgehog 4 $59 Sparkster Spidrmn:Max Carnage $54 Star Trek Next Gen GA $49 StarGate $58 Switch CD $49 Sylvester & Tweety GA $54 The Mask The Shadow The Tick $54 Time Cop CD $46 Tinhoad $52 Tom & Jerry $52 True Lies $52 ATP Tennis GA $52 Barkley Basketball GA $49 Bass Masters Classic $56 Bill Walsh Coll Fball 95 $54 Brett Hull Hockey 95 $58 Champ Soccer CD GA $52 College Football 94 GA $52 Double Dribble $52 ESPN Baseball GA $54 ESPN Football CD GA $49 ESPN Hockey CD $56 ESPN NBA Hangtm CD $56 FIFA Internatnl Scor CD$52 Golf Mag 36 Holes CD $52 Grist Heavyweit MA-13 $49 Hardball 94 GA $56 Jammit! $56 Kick Off 3 $52 Links Pro Golf CD $56 MLBPA Baseball GA $52 MLBPA Grnd Slm Bsbll $54 Madden Football 94 GA$49 Marco's Magic Scer GA $49 Mutant League Fball $38 NBA Bball NBA Act GA $49 NBA Jam Session CD 549 NBA Showdown GA $52 NFL Sporttik FB 95 GA $54 NFL Team Heroes $52 NHL All Star Hocky CD $54 NHL Hockey 94 CD GA S49 PGA Tour 3:Europe GA $49 Payne Stewart Goll $54 Pebble Beach Golf GA $44 Pele Soccer 2 GA $49 Pete Sampras Tennis $52 RBI 94 GA $52 Slam Masters $56 GEN ROLE PLAYING GEN ADVENTURE $44 3 Ninjas Kick Back CD $56 Adv Batmn & Robin CD $46 Aero the Acrobat 2 $52 Akira $52 Baby Boom CD $52 Batman & Robin S52 Berenst Bears Camp $44 Bonkers $44 Boogerman $49 Bubsy 2 $52 Castle Wolfenstein 3D $54 Daze Before Xmas Death of Superman $52 Demolition Man CD $54 Choplifter 3 Daytona USA $79 ESPN SpeedWorld $56 Flying Nightmares CD $44 Ground Zero Texas CD $54 Jungle Strike $49 Midnight Raiders CD $52 Nigel Mansell Indy Car $56 Outlaw Racg Virt Realty$54 Outrunners GA $56 Pacific Theater Ops $59 Pwr Mode:Bkrd Rcr CD $44 Pwr Modi:Spac Rcr CD $44 Rock & Roll Racing $49 SeaQuest DSV $56 Skitchin' MA-13 $42 Super Bike Challenge $49 Super Off Road:Baja $52 Top Gear 2 $52 Virtua Racing GA $76 Wing Commander 2 $56 Battletech $54 Eye of Beholder CD $46 Land Stalker $56 Lord of the Rings $59 Lufia $54 Might & Magic 3 $59 Phantasy Star 4 $79 Pirates! Gold $46 Poplul Mail CD $49 Romance 3 Kingdms 2 $56 Shadow Run MA-13 $49 Star Quest $49 Traysia Unchrld Watrs Nw Horiz$59 Vay CD $49 Aero Biz Supersonic $59 Animaniacs $49 BrainDead 13 CD $49 BreakThru $46 Clue CD $54 Dune CD GA $49 Family Feud $49 Generations Lost 549 Genghis Khan 2 $56 Lemmings 2:The Tribes $52 Liberty or Death GA $59 Nobng's Ambt Lrd Dkns $56 Panic! CD $44 Pinball Dreams $52 Risk $54 SimCity 2000 CD $52 Star Wars Chess CD $46 Thrd Wid Wr CD MA-13 $44 Trivial Pursuit CD $54 Warrior of Rome 3 CD $54 Wheel of Fortune 2 Dix $49 Wirehead CD $52 $52 $56 $39 $56 CGW SEPTA "


"OVERNIGHT SHIPPING in US $4 per order. Mail to Canada. PR. HI. AK APO FPO 84 per order: Worldwide airmail $6 per item. Handling S2 per shipment Visa, MC and Discover Accepted. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders same as cash. COD S3, Defectives replaced with same product. Most items shipped same day. Ship ping times may vary. Price/avallability may change. All sales final. Call for detalls. FREE GAME OFFER* CULING BUKS SEGA GENESIS 'MORTAL KOMBAT 2' is more than a sequel ... Its an amazing recreation of the original! Fight past 7 new characters with improved graphics. Offers 40 new special moves, 12 new finishing moves, more challenging game play, 12 \"Babalities\" and 2 new hidden characters. $66 GENESIS 'SHINING FORCE Il' A treasure hunter takes the magical Jewels of Light and Darkness and frees the evil Zeon. The warriors of the Shining Force must reclaim the jewels and defeat evil before the world is plunged into eternal darkness. Characters develop as the game progresses. $64 CENESIS COLLEGE FOOTBALL'S NATIONAL CHAMPIONSHIP The 32 finest college teams Michigan, USC, Notre Dame, Penn State, Texas A&M tear it up in league play. College playbooks, rules, fight songs and stadiums! All the excitement of college balll $52 COLLEGE FOOTBALL MORTAL KOMBAT 30 Alliano O GA FORMULA RFATTHOPFIRE No . *FREE GAME OFFER SQUARESORT *FORMULA ONE WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP' It's time to go up against the real pros. Race finely tuned machines on the Grand Prix circuit and challenge the real pros at speeds over 200 MPH. You may even come away a champion... or just another rookie in a burning heap! $46 UPER NINTENON 'BREATH OF FIRE'An evil sorceress has brought competing dragon clans under her diabolical spell. A young hero and 7 warriors must awaken from an eternal slumber to battle the enemies. $59 Buy 3 in stock Super Nintendo games and choose a 4th game from the list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid from August 1st through September 30 th or while supplies last. Operation Logic Bomb (SNES), Power Movers (SNES). Redline F1 Racer (SNES). Tuff Enuff (SNES), George Foreman Boxing (SNES), NHL Player's Hockey'93 (SNES). GA SNES HARDWARE SNES ADVENTURE SNES KICK & PUNCH SNES SPORTS SNES STRATEGY JAGUAR Championship Joystick $56 Power Plug $34 Pro Action Replay $79 Super Link (5 Playr Lnk)$29 Super Multitap $32 Super Nintendo Sys $139 Super Scope $54 Wireless Control Pad $42 Jaguar System $249 Barkley Basketball CD $52 Cannon Fodder $54 Doom $58 Euro Soccer Challenge $56 Theme Park $54 White Men Can't Jump $54 Art of Fighting $59 Clayfighter 2 $59 Double Dragon 5 $56 Dragon $56 Fatal Fury 2 $59 Fighters History $58 King of the Monsters 2 $54 Mortal Kombat 2 $69 Peace Keepers $54 Ranma 1/2:Hard Battle $54 Samural Showdown $59 Shien's Revenge $56 Streetfighter 2 Turbo Ed$49 Super Street Fighter 2 $66 TMNT:Tournamt Fight S56 Ultimate Fighter $54 WCW Super Brawl $52 World Heroes 2 $59 ACME Animatn Factory $54 Animaniacs $54 Break Thru $46 Jeopardy 2 (Deluxe) $52 Metal Marines $59 Mighty Max $54 Operation Europe S62 Pachi Slot $52 Shanghaii 2 $44 SimCity 2000 Wario's Woods $54 Pagemaster $56 Porky Pig $54 Scooby Doo $54 SeaQuest DSV $56 Skuljaggers Revenge $59 Sky Blazer $52 Sparkster $52 Star Trek Next Genertn $59 Star Gale $62 Stone Protectors $56 Super Adventr Island 2 $58 Super Return of Jedi S62 Sylvester & Tweety $58 The Mask $54 Time Cop $56 Tom & Jerry:Chase On! $56 True Lies Virtual Bart X MEN Yogi Bear GAME GEAR SNES ADVENTURE Bass Masters Classic S54 Brett Hull Hockey 95 $59 ESPN Hockey $56 Elite Soccer $52 Hammer Lock Wrestling$54 Hoop It Up! $58 MLBPA Grnd Sim Bsbll $62 Mega Man Soccer $56 NFL Team Heroes $54 Power Pro Baseball $52 Pro Sport Hockey $54 Slam Masters $59 Soccer Shootout $56 Stering End 2 End FB $62 Super Bases Loaded 3 $62 Super Punch Out $49 Super Soccer Champ 2 $52 TNN Bass Tournament S52 Tecmo Hockey $56 Tiger Mask Wrestling $56 Tiny Toon Advt:Wild Sprt$52 WWF:Raw $62 $38 SEGA MARS 32X $38 Genesis 32X System $149 College Football $56 Doom $59 Golf Mag's 36 Grt Holes$56 Midnight Raiders CD $56 Star Wars Arcade $59 Super Motorcross $59 Surgical Strike CD $56 Tomcat Alley CD $58 Virtua Racing Deluxe $59 Akira BreakThru Choplifter 3 GP Rider GA Lion King Mortal Kombat 2 $39 Sonic Triple Trouble $36 Star Trek Movie $34 True Lies $36 World Series Bsball 95 $36 SNES ROLE PLAYING S59 SNES SHOOTERS NEO GEO $52 SNES SIMULATIONS 3 Ninjas Kick Back $56 Aero the Acrobat 2 $56 Akira S52 Batman:Animtd Series $59 Biker Mice from Mars $52 Bonkers S58 Captain Commando $58 Crazy Chase $52 Death of Superman Demon's Crest $59 Donkey Kong Country $56 EarthWorm Jim $58 Frankenstein $52 Generation 2 $54 Ghoul Patrol $52 Grt Circs Myst w/Micky S59 Haunted Holiday $58 Ignition Factor Indiana Jones Grts Adv $59 Jelly Boy $54 Jurassic Park 2 $56 Knights of Round Table $56 Lion King Michael Jordan:Chaos $54 Mickey Mania $56 No Escape $56 $56 3DO Neo Geo Gold Systm $569 3 Count Bout $189 Fatal Fury 2 $199 King of Monsters 2 $169 Samurai Showdown S199 World Heroes 2 Jet $199 $54 Dragon Warrior 5 $62 DragonView $59 Eye of the Boholder 2 $69 First Queen Golden Empire Illusion of Gaia 359 Inindo $56 King Arthur/Knight Just $59 Lufia 2 $56 Might & Magic 3 $59 Obitus $58 Runes of Virtue $59 Shadow Run $56 Ultima 7:Black Gate $64 Unchrld Watrs Nw Horiz$59 Wizardry 5 $59 Exo Squad Fire Striker $52 Fire Team Rogue $59 Galactic Defenders S56 Lethal Enir w/gn MA-17 $64 Metal Morph $56 Soldier of Fortune $56 Super Metroid $56 Super Sonic Blastmn 2 $54 Super Turrican 2 Tin Star $54 View Point Vortex $56 Wild Guns $54 $52 8 Hours $52 Carrier Aces $52 ESPN SpeedWorld $56 Full Throttle Racing $52 Michael Andrti Indy Car $59 Spectre VR $52 Star Fox $46 Street Racer $56 Top Gear 3000 $56 UniRacers $54 Valkyrie $54 Wild Trax $56 11th Hour $59 Clayfighter 2 $46 Doom Incredible Machine $52 Jurassic Park $52 Samurai Showdown $52 Star Trek Next Genertn $54 Theme Park $52 World Cp Gif Dorado $52 HINT BOOKS $52 859 $54 Gensis Secrt of Game $6 Sonic Strategy Guide $16 Turbo Gratx Secrets $10 Circle Reader Service #200 CGW SEPT B "


"Besre 2101590 250 l eccos CARROHE 2013 S120 30 210012] P Impressions' trading/exploration/ SA combat game HIGH SEAS TRADER is not only their most beautiful game yet, it also sports a clever interface. Meanwhile, Avalon Hill is converting their bestselling boardgame, BLACKBEARD, to the computer screen, to the delight of scurvy dogs everywhere. sports some 42 different Konami's (Gremlin's) UTOPIA, but with computer bridge comtwo-player strategy. panions, as well as all Gamers looking for a bit of history with the latest bidding contheir strategy gaming will have plenty of ventions. Of course, choices. Koei's CELTIC TALES: BALOR OF poker fans will get a THE EVIL EYE takes gamers back to the chance to play against Emerald Isle during the days of Finn Mccelebrities via the Cool's Tuatha de Dannan. With a mixture magic of full moof magical, strategic and exploratory eletion video in New ments, you try to become the High Ruler World Comput. of Ireland. Impressions puts gamers on ing's MULTIMEDIA the other island, allowing players to beCELEBRITY POKER. come the ruler of a fief in medieval EngGamers looking land. LORDS OF THE REALM puts more for a bargain asemphasis on the economy than on warsortment will look fare, but as in real life, the lord of the for Cap-stone's manor will have to be proficient in manANYONE FOR agement, diplomacy and warfare to enCARDS? with cribsure the welfare of his people. bage, gin rumMeanwhile, US Gold will publish a realmy, hearts, time strategy game with a unique blend of spades, whist, role-playing, reflex-testing action and crazy eights, hell, strategic warfare. Originally scheduled to 31, 99, euchre, be published by ASCII Software, DOMINUS pinochle and gives players the opportunity to blend George. In ad their reflexes and synapses into a concertdition, Caped attempt to conquer a fantasy world. stone is Similarly, New World Computing's HEVintroducing anROES OF MIGHT AND MAGIC unites strategy ULTIMATE and adventure elements in a new game BACKGAMMON that suggests an SVGA update of THE game with 3-D KING'S BOUNTY, an underrated game that . rendered SVGA graphics. Meanwhile, on we enjoyed a lot. Also, don't forget MASTER Jooks similar to the Interstel game the chess front, Mission Studios is working OF MAGIC, the hybrid strategy game from of the same name on the Atari ST, though on BOBBY FISCHER TEACHES Chess, and MicroProse (this month's cover story). it appears to be more detailed. Another Software Toolworks is about to release The colonial era provides the backdrop game that looks familiar is Accolade's new CHESSMASTER 4000 CD. for three intriguing games. In early '95, JACK NICKLAUS game for Windows. It looks Space combat games serve as Impressions will release HIGH SEAS, a even prettier than their previous games action/simulation/strategy hybrids. We strategy/adventure game that will allow and should give the current MICROSOFT previewed Mission Studios' BATTLECRUISgamers to assume the role of a 17th CenGOLF a bit of a skins game. Of course, MiER 3000AD in our May issue, but joining tury privateer or trader. The game feaCROSOFT GOLF is not sitting in the clubthis epic space game will be three other tures a very intuitive interface to allow house, either. The next version from hybrids. SSI'S RENEGADE: THE BATTLE FOR sailing from port to port and the most imMicrosoft will offer lots of new aesthetic JACOB'S STAR will integrate the Renegade pressive graphics yet from Impressions. options, including the ability to customize Legion license from FASA and flight sim SID MEIER'S COLONIZATION is an upcoming skin pigment. Finally, Koei is producing a graphics in SVGA resolution. Take Two's MicroProse release that allows gamers to CD-ROM game based on horse racing STAR CRUSADER and Interplay's STAR build a New World colony from the called WINNING POST, purportedly a hit in REACH will also fight to conquer this niche. ground up. It uses an interface similar to Japan. Looking for a new challenge in the SIMSID MEIER'S CIVILIZATION and looks like it CITY arena? Children will gravitate to will oller the same depth of play. (See this Military Uniforms Maxis' SIMTOWN, a kids' SIMCITY with issue's editorial.) Moving into the 18th (Strategy/Wargames) Playschool-looking architecture, and parCentury, Avalon Hill will release a comThe traditional look is \"in\" for the strategyents will try to find computer time for puter version of their BLACKBEARD game and wargaming genre. Bridge fans will be Maxis' TOWER game, SimCry goes vertical (more than \"WOODEN SHIPS & TRON MEN interested in Interplay's BRIDGE DELUXE II in a micro-managed arcology. In the same with cards\" as some have called this hybrid with Omar Sharil, a CD-ROM version of vein, Swfte International has THE BIG adventure/strategy game) in 1995. their best-selling game with tutorial video ONE, a SINCriy-style simulation where you Those who want to experiment with Al footage from the renowned bridge master, rebuild Los Angeles alter a cataclysmic with enjoy two games due in 1994 and anand QQP's BRIDGE OLYMPIAD, a Soul earthquake. With a slightly different twist, other on the way for 1995. Sir Tech has TAIRE'S JOURNEY-style product where you Software Toolworks is working on METAL been showing their JAGGED ALLIANCE design go after the best in the world. The latter MARINES FOR WINDOWS, somewhat like for a couple of years now, but the game al150 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"Never Lose Sight Of How Pinball Should Be Played. OU DROOM A truly great pinball game is more than great graphics and spectacular sounds, more than the latest arcade features like 3D ramps and three multi-ball play, more than fast ball movement and precise flipper control, and it's more than being able to see the whole playfield at once so you can aim your shots. A great pinball game has that unique quality of playability and neverending challenge that keeps you coming back for...just one more game and a shot at your new high score! Washington Post-\"Crystal Caliburn perfectly captures the essence of a great pinball machine.\" New York Times -\"The realism is striking... [Crystal Caliburn) will be at the top of Silicon Santa's gift list this year.\" AESTROS SO IT BACKPOT Inside Mac Games \"ARCADE GAME OF THE YEAR\" WASHINGRAD YATORLD EXCALIDE SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS: SPAL SCHOLYCRA IXTAPALL Computer Game Review\"Crystal Caliburn sets a new standard. For realistic pinball on a computer, there's nothing like this game.\" LATITUDE EOUS ROLA Sot Electronic Entertainment=\"Crystal Caliburn is simply the best, most realistic, most challenging pinball simulation for the Macintosh yet.\" (Rating: 9 out of 10) MACINTOSH: 13\" or larger monitor, 256 colors, and 4MB RAM WINDOWS: 386 or faster processor, Windows 3.1, 256 SVGA monitor, 4MB RAM. Supports SoundBlaster and other Windows compatible sound cards. GAMES Magazine=\"You'll forget you're playing on a two-dimensional computer screen... the realism is astonishing.\" Windows compatible MacUser=\"Electronic pinball's Holy Grail.\" (Rating: 4 1/2 out of 5) COPYX0912 Solid State PINBALL CrystalCaliburn WINDOWS Crystal Caliburn From the creative genius of Little Wing, developer of TRISTANTM and Eight Ball Deluxe for Macintosh. Available from your favorite retailer or mail-order catalog. Interactive DEMO on AOL and CompuServe. Thite . Dar de 10 anos NOW AVAILABLE FOR WINDOWS! OPINBALL Crystal Calibura * StarPlay Productions, Inc.  PO Box 217. Greeley, Colorado 80632-0217 . Tel 303.447.9562  Fax 303.447.2739 TM Crystal Caliburn and Tristan are trademarks of LittleWing CO. LTD. Other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Circle Reader Service #225 "


"lows you to appoint Al secret agents/mercecommand air, land and space troops from for DOS should ship soon, and in the wings naries to fight alongside your player chara geo-stationary spy satellite. It looks very is STALINGRAD, featuring both tactical and acters and help you meet the objectives. similar to a DUNE II perspective. operational campaign play. ETO: D-Day by Merit Software is distributing another Another interesting non-historical game Arsenal Publishing will cover the same game that should sound familiar. Imagine is BATTLES IN TIME, based on a board front with phased movement, but will not D.C. True's SHADOW PRESIDENT with infigame by Bruce Williams Zaccagnino. The appear until 1995. nite replayability and enriched cyber-cabigame's premise is that the science of war is 5TH FLEET is Avalon Hill's game of modnet members. Then, imagine that one of unknown in the far future, requiring you ern naval warfare. Rather than micro-manthose cabinet members will definitely beto fight various conflicts throughout the aging every weapons platform a la HARPOON tray you. That's CYBERJUDAS, D.C. True's ages to learn your craft. A departure from II, or Alliance's HARPOON CLASSIC on CD, new game to be distributed by Merit. the normal QQP game, combat occurs you spend more time with fleet maneuvers. With regard to abstract strategy games, within the hex, each space blowing up into The heart of the game lies in locating eneAccolade's BATTLE ISLE 2200 lets you wipe its own tactical map. Variable rounds of my forces. There are plenty of weapons out far-future 3-D battleships, and New combat, camouflage units, commandos, platforms to choose from, and the data has World Computing's ZEPHYR lets you wipe rangers, anti-tank weopons, numerous arbeen updated and enhanced from the out far-future tanks. Both offer multi-playtillery, and bazookas, are but a few of the award-winning board game. As for modern er campaign games with necessary reeclectic items which keep this game lively. land warfare, Arsenal's TACOPs has already source management, but the former is for even more flexibility, the battles may been previewed in CGW (#116). e-mail-based while the latter is real-time. be either real-time or turn-based. Naturally, MicroProse is not wasting time On the wargame front, there is a great The Quality Of Fashion in preparing a sequel to X-COM, as UFO variety of games on the way. (See PANZER So, there you have it-CGW's report on 2 is already in the works, with even better GENERAL this month on page 97). New the offerings from the most famous de3-D modeling and the core of the comWorld's TRON Cross is a real-time game signers and our take on what will adorn bat/strategic system intact. Unfortunately, featuring the Western Front, and Avalon the well-dressed computer monitor durthere are no solid details on the sequel to Hill had a working demo of THIRD REICH ing the coming season. Be sure to let us Dune II, COMMAND & CONQUER, which is for DOS, considerably changed from the know how fashionable these games are supposed to provide DUNE II-like combat Atari ST and Amiga versions. The game once you get them home. That's really in multiple theaters of war. In a similar now features more pleasing graphics and more important than how they look at vein, Psygnosis has an interesting game completely reworked strategic Al. Of the Summer Consumer Electronics called THEATRE OF DEATH that lets gamers course, Avalon Hill's OPERATION CRUSADER (Fashion Show. FREEFREEFREEFREEFREE THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit the 42 games listed below in boldface type. The price for this editor is $59.95. That's under $1.50 per editor. Upgrades will be available for new games as they are released for only $9.95 per game. CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1,2,3,4,5), Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3), Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3). Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasures of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I, Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Drakkhen, Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2), Keef the Thiet, Escape from Hell, Ultima Underworld (1 or 2), Twilight 2000, Gateway to the Savage Frontier, Planet's Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, Prophecy of the Shadow, Dark Sun, Martian Dreams, Realms of Arkania, Challenge of the 5 Realms, Bloodstone, Betrayal at Krondor, Lands of Lore, Dungeon Hack, Disciples of Steel. HINT BOOKS $9.95 each except where noted Might and Magic 1, Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Wizardry (1,2,3,4, 5, Bane or Crusaders ($12.95)), Eye of the Beholder 2, Might and Magic 3 ($12.95). IBM listed. Apple and C64 versions also available. Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. MasterCard VISA Open from 9 AM 9PM every day for your convenience. GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS P.O. Box 1083 Brighton, MI 48116 (313) 229-2453 GREETINGS BY COMPUTER Greetings by Computer The First Computerized Greeting Card With Animation And True Sound!!! Now you BIRTHDAY DISK can send a unique greeting card to your friends and loved ones. Greetings by Computer allows you to send a personalized message which will be displayed along with the animated computer graphics. Music and actual voices will play and sing through your computer's standard speaker or Soundblaster card. No special equipment is needed.  SAVE MONEY!! REUSABLE CARD!! . You may send personalized greeting cards to as many friends and loved ones as you wish. Use it over and over again and you will save money over printed cards  PERSONALIZED MESSAGES. This disk contains an EASY TO USE message writer. You may enter up to an 8 line message that will display on the screen.  UNIQUE ANIMATED GRAPHICS AND TRUE SOUND!!! A new dimension in computer technology allows you to hear the animals talk and sing while an animated scene plays. Nof computer generated sounds but TRUE SOUND as on a recording . plays through the standard speaker on your computer, or through a SoundBlaster card. People of all ages will enjoy this card.  AUTOMATICALLY ADJUSTS TO ANY COMPUTER There is no need to be concerned with the type of computer your recipient has the program will automatically adjust to display at the resolution of the computer it is used with.  WHY WE ARE OFFERING GREETINGS BY COMPUTER FREE Our tests have shown that over 70% of the people who received a FREE copy of Greetings By Computer were so thrilled with it that they ordered the other 2 disks in the series and recommended it to their friends. You will receive the BIRTHDAY DISK free. The other disks are an ANNIVERSARY DISK, and a GENERAL MESSAGE DISK. BE THE FIRST TO SEND THE MOST UNIQUE GREETING CARD OF THE 90'S... GREETINGS BY COMPUTER PERFECT FOR CHILDREN OF ALL AGES Send $5.00 for shipping and handling to: S Software 2880 Bergey Rd. Dept 600GX Hatfield, PA 19440 Circle Reader Service #69 152 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 Circle Reader Service #160 "


"My son and I love this game!!! Great work!! Roter Strous bubunok 100 new landscapes New objects and game elements to explore. Robert Strauss, Burbank Oxyd magnum! is an entirely new and riveting challenge for Oxyd experts and beginners alike. Fyrr Oxyd magnum! for PC, Mac & Amiga Sequel of the award winning Oxyd game! Mac: 1MB RAM, color or monochrome! PC: 386 or above, 2.5 MB RAM, EGA or VGA monitor, Soundblo. or Adl. optional. ID Circle Reader Service # 64 Circle Reader Service # 63 My daughter (11 years old) and I have become \"Oxyd\" addicts. We Oxyd Credits: Some fine comments about Oxyd magnum! cannot wait to begin exploring the many other levels. Thanks for creating Game of the Year 1993 I like Oxyd magnum because it's different in every landscape, such an excellent product. R. S. Germantown Australian MacWorld surprising, challenging, compelling and fun! Every landscape is like a This is, without question, the most impressive game I have ever seen. / Best Brain Game 1993 new game. It's so trickyl Il drives my wife crazy. More levels and just as good as Oxyd. You have challenged me! Thanks. My wife and I am amazed at the audio, visual and action. George L. Tonty MacWorld Goma Hol of Fame like to play puzzles together. It's unique. Great puzzles. It's aesthetically pleasing and exercises the mind. It makes me and my Wow! That's all I can say about Oxyd. What an incredible game! Game of the Year 1992 kids think and we don't have to punch or kill anything. One of the nicest games I have seen in a long time. Computer & Pdagogik 08/93 Thanks for creating such a challenging piece of software. Game of the Year 1992 I'm completely hooked! The game is really slick, well designed. Display Camper Club e.V. Germany Arcade Action Those first 10 levels alone were worth paying for! The variety of play is tis rare to find such a visually appealing, addictive and playable game. literally, incredible. for PC, Mac & Amiga! Score this game a solid 10 Download Shareware Episode One One of the most elegant games I've played. Jeffrey Jondahl, San Diego Current Notes 05/93 \"A\" rating Wow! Exquisite. #enjoy this game a great deal and so do my children and their friends. It is just what I have been looking for !! Jerome Wescott, Minneapolis A must for your games library. AmigaWorld 06/93 Oxyd has to be the most artistically superb piece of programming that Game of the Month. MorWelt 02/93 Whave seen. From my position of having completed about one third of Top of the Charts he single-player levels, the landscapes have been continuously varied Bruin Teaser Category, PC Garses German edition, with a marvelous attention to graphic and audible detail that makes Treat of the Month each new one a continuing delight. I especially appreciate how the Circle Reader Service # 66 Atur Roundtable in Génie, 12/92 -narble interacts in seemingly realistic but different ways when rolling Editor's Choice * 004970 P Over or bouncing against different \"natural\" (or unnatural) substances PC Games Germon edition, 12/92 KURULU like stone, wood, swamp, freefall etc. At this point, I'm already vorrying that I'll run out of levels. Jeffrey R. Harrow Download free appetizers from SWC BBS at (508) 368-7036 @ 2400-14.4k Even our 3yr old enjoys the game. baud or send a check to Dongleware: just had to write to tell you how much fun I've had playing Oxyd. The 10 levels of the Oxyd game $ 1.00 attention to detail-the sounds, the textures of the surfaces really odds PC, Mac, Amiga, ST or NeXT. to the fun of the game. It invites the imagination for a ride. The Oxyd Code Book $39.00 Thanks also for making all of the landscapes challenging but not Take 5 demo of magnum! $ 1.00 Impossible. Tom Phoenix, Portland for PC or Macintosh Tubular Worlds episode one $ 1.00 I'm really impressed with your game, Oxyd. Congratulations on a for PC or Macintosh. unique and fun product, and best luck to you all. John M. Dodd Shipping & Handling $ 3.00 2492920 If your dealer does not carry Oxyd, Oxyd magnum! or Tubular Worlds, call 1-800-228-6993 to order Checks, Visa & MasterCard accepted MA residents add 5% sales tax Dongleware Publishing 35 Howard Street Cambridge, MA 02139 (617) 497-1130 12 229840 2 4 62 29 021 ST "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL Smooth Moves On The Field How Dynamix Used 50-Year Old Technology To Produce Breakthrough Realism In Their Sports Games by Paul C. Schuytema SIS HAT DO PERFORMER CAB CALLOWAY, SHORTSTOP Ozzie SMITH, AND WIDE receiver James Lofton all have in common? They all have smooth moves of one sort or another, and their grace has been translated into graceful animation. Track down any of the Depression-era Max Fleischer animated shorts (or the quirky 1940 feature \"Mr. Bug Goes to Town\") and you will see characters move with a fluidity that is rare in today's Saturday-morning fare. Similarly, boot up FRONT PAGE SPORTS FOOTBALL from Dynamix and you'll see the silkiest runningback cuts, diving tackles, and leaping receptions to be found in a sports game. Although separated by 50 years, these animated characters were created IF YOU BUILD IT (RIGHT). THEY WILL COME This rotoscoped image gives a much more natural and fluidusing a technique called rotoscoping, an looking view of a catch than could be achieved with traditional animation. animation process pioneered by Fleischer in the earliest days of the art. Basically, rotoscoping is a way to capBoop, is surely worth the effort. created in a number of ways. The most ture the subtleties of human motion in the in their Front Page Sports line of games common technique is to have an artist fanciful world of animation. Fleischer's (FRONT PAGE SPORTS FOOTBALL and BASEdraw the character frame by frame. The studio in California was set up as a rotoBALL), Dynamix turned to the time-honbest example of this type of animation can scoping production facility. For an aniored technique of rotoscoping to craft be seen in LucasArts' DAY OF THE TENTAmated dance number like the incredible animations of unparalleled realism. The CLE. Another popular technique is to modMinnie The Moocher routine from \"Snow art team at Dynamix is quick to point out el an image in a computer and then White and the Seven Dwarves,\" Cab Calthat with «traditional\" animation, such as animate it by setting \"key frames\" and letloway would come into the studio and perthat in many other sports titles, an individting the computer handle the animation form a soft shoc behind a linen screen, ual frame of animation might have more in between (more on this in next month's completely back-lit. A camera would film detail and graphic appeal than an individcolumn). Some companies are now using his silhouette, and then that film could be ual Dynamix frame. But when those motion trackers attached to a human body viewed, frame by frame, on a special aniframes are joined together in an animato transcribe joint positions into a stream mator's light table. The animator would tion, the level of realism is inferior to Dyof computer data. This data is then used use Calloway's image as a guide for drawnamix' games. For Dynamix, though, to animate a \"virtual actor\" (look for an ing the movement of the character. It was choosing rotoscoping as the imaging upcoming column on Origin's use of this a painstaking process, often taking more process for gameplay animation was a technology in BIOFORGE). Finally, an anitime than traditional animation, but to see commitment to massive amounts of labormation may be created by using footage of Cab Calloway, reborn as a rubber-legged intensive, pixel-by-pixel work. live actors as a movement reference, which Koko the Clown, dancing around Betty Fluid computer game animation may be is called rotoscoping. 154 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"INTRODUCING TWO NEW INTERACTIVE GAMES FROM TRIMARK. ONLY ONE IS GUARANTEED TO BOMB. 3 EUROPEAN WAR ZONE CAM1AIGNS THUMBELINA Sandy Yayin Blade CD) RO OPERATION DESERT STORM Tornado is guaranteed to over 17 unique characblow you away. ters (and voices), an And with a total of 72 original musical score different missions all on one and 4 complete songs! CD-ROM, there's about as We're sure Thumbelina much chance of commercial will earn at least two failure as there is of a thumbs up\" from you. U.S. invasion by Saddam In addition to Hussein. these exciting games, Tornado explodes with 18 different Desert Storm Trimark will also be introducing two more great titles missions and 54 additional missions from 3 different in the near future: Blind Date: A CD-ROMance European combat arenas. It's so realistic it's actually Adventure and The Emperor's New Clothes, another used by the RAF for ground based simulator training, delightful story by Hans Christian Andersen. Thumbelina, our second new game, will have Pick up both of our new plenty of impact too. It just won't make as much noise. games today, because even the This delightful Hans Christian Andersen fairy tale has one that bombs will be a success. TRIMARK Circle Reader Service #226 INTERACTIVE Artwork and Design 1994 Tnmark Interactive "


"HEX, BUGS & ROCK 'N ROLL When the Dynamix team got together the animation packets to begin work on the first football title, would have to flow seamseveral members had recently come from lessly together, so that a the now-dead Cinemaware, where they running back could leap had experimented with rotoscoping in the for a catch, land, spin, TV SPORTS line of games. The team felt then sprint for an endthat the limitations seen in the other prozone. Often, single frames duct's animations (such as a tackle in of animation were handwhich a running back was standing in one created to serve as transiframe and lying prone in the next) could tions between event be overcome by rotoscoping. animations. In FRONT Mounting a Hi8 video camera atop a PAGE SPORTS BASEBALL, cherry-picker, the team headed out to a lomany of the animations CHROMAKEY WIZARDRY After being photographed on a blue cal gridiron to capture the footage they conclude with the player background, this baseball player's motions are transferred directly to needed. Since FRONT PAGE SPORTS FOOTreturning to a \"neutral computer images. BALL, animates from eight different angles, position,\" either standing the film crew had to capture eight unique up or with the ubiquitous takes of each action they required. They hands-on-knees stance. This meant that was translated into VGA resolution. Finally, taped down markers on the field, set their fewer transitions had to be hand-created, they captured the images directly into the camera to a 23% lift, and adjusted the focal so more frame packages could be put tocomputer. This eliminated a middle step point to optimally capture the action. gether to create unique animations to and allowed the work to proceed directly Then the action began. Players, suited up match the gameflow. to the artists' work on each frame. in pads and helmets, ran moves back and The FPS FOOTBALL team was very In BASEBALL, as well as in the upcoming forth, over and over again, until the Dypleased with the final results in both of FOOTBALL '95, the player can position the namix team had checked oll all the moves their products. Players seemed to come camera anywhere on the play-field. While they needed. Then, it was back to Dynamix alive on the screen, so much so that the this might seem to mandate a large numheadquarters for the real work to begin. mind's eye would vest the image with even ber of animation angles, they still only Working with a video editing deck, more realism than was actually displayed. shot footage from eight angles. \"When Thomas VanVelkinburgh, the team's lead Patrick Cook, executive producer for FPS you see it,\" explained Cook, \"with the artist, set up the portions of the video he BASEBALL, said they have received stacks of field lines converging the way they should, needed. He would then capture the indiletters describing things which never actuthen your eye is fooled; it looks completely vidual frames into a crude video image ally happen in the game. \"People are seenatural.\" Keeping the animation tightly file, matching the final resolution of 320 x ing things that aren't there; the controlled was a prime logistical issue. 200 pixels. Finally, using a paint program, mind's-eye is filling in those details,\" he Each FRONT PAGE SPORTS game features the Dynamix artists would paint over the said. Some customers swear they saw a thousands of frames of animation that are image, pixel by pixel, to create a frame of lineman trying to strip the ball from a stored in compressed form, \"streamed\" off game animation. Special care had to be running back while others claimed to witthe hard drive, and uncompressed as the taken by the artists when working with ness illegal blocks and stiff-arm tackles. game plays. footage of a player running to or from the For Patrick Cook, the technology of camera; in the actual game-field, the playSAME TEAM, video captures and other computer imagers are all modeled at the same size (it DIFFERENT BALL ing techniques truly enhances the realism makes for easier player control rather Essentially the same art team was assemof the animation, but he feels that artists than dealing with too much perspective). bled to work on BASEBALL. (When I talked are still the fulcrum on which all of a so some video images had to be collapsed with the Dynamix crew, they were literally game's art balances. \"You still need the or expanded to fit the generic player working around the clock to finish the skilled artist to push it out to where it height. game; even with gallons of coffee pumping needs to be.\" When a move was set down in animathrough their veins, they seemed lucid For FRONT PAGE SPORTS BASEBALL, the tion, the artist would review the work, ofenough, and genuinely excited about the art crew will feel like they've done their ten tweaking things to make it look just game.) From their experiences in FPS job if a customer says, \"Wow, those look right. Arms, often only a pixel wide, would FOOTBALL, they learned volumes about rolike real players!\" I asked the Dynamix require the most work to look realistic and toscoping and applied that knowledge to team if there were any animations which natural when moving or going for a block. the baseball project. First, instead of filmstood out for them. They hemmed and After the cleanup work, the team would ing on an actual field, where the backhawed for a few seconds, throwing out name each little animation \"packet\" ground is an image which must be cut out such animations as a collision at home (sometimes consisting of only a pair of in a pixel-by-pixel operation, they rented a plate, or leaping up to catch a ball, but afframes, while other animations, such as a warehouse and painted an entire corner of ter a pause, there was a unilateral rediving tackle, might be composed of up to it in \"photo matte blue\" so the background sponse: \"the coil.\" This is the animation 14 frames). Naming was very important, was electronically \"invisible.\" They also put when an outfielder loses a high lly ball in because it had to be clear when assemyellow tape on the player's main joints, the the sun and recoils at the last moment to bling the game animation which clip to knees, shoes and wrists, to make the posiavoid being smacked in the face by the show for which game event. Beyond that, tions more clearly defined when the image ball. \"It's very cool,\" they enthused. 156 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"14 UJU CO!! Or Or! 16 11 28 JSED IBM GAMES COMPLETE & VIRUS FREE; VITH THE ORIGINAL BOX, DOCUMENTATION AND DISKS 19 JACK NICKLAUS SIGNATURE 19 JACK NICKLAUS UNLIM GOLF 13 JAMES BOND STEALTH A 7 JETFIGHTER 2. 0 2 2 JIM CONNORS PRO TENNIS 13 JOE MONTANA FOOTBALL 12 JOURNEYMN PRJCT-CD ROM 26 KASPAROV'S GAMBIT KGB KILLING CLOUD KING'S QUEST 4 EGA 13 KING'S QUEST 5 VGA 15 KING'S QUEST 6 CD ROM 15 KING'S QUEST 6 VGA KINGDOMS OF GERMANY 26 KNIGHTS OF THE SKY 12 LABRYRTH OF TIME-CD ROM 29 LAFFER UTILITIES LANDS OF LORE LASER SOUAD LAST DINO EGG CD ROM 24 EL FISH ELITE PLUS EYE OF BEHOLDER 3-CD ROM 32 EYE OF THE BEHOLDER 9 EYE OF THE BEHOLDER 2 15 F-117A STEALTH FIGHTER 14 F15 STRIKE EAGLE 2 9 F15 STRIKE EAGLE 3 F19 STALTH FIGHTER FALCON 3.0 FALCON 3.0-FIGHTING TIGER 16 FALCON AT FLAMES OF FREEDOM 6 FOUR CRTYS OF TRAZERE 9 FREDDY PHARKAS FRONTIER 19 MICROSOFT ARCADE WIN 15 MIDWINTER MIG-29 FULCRUM MIGHT & MAGIC 4 CLOUDS 25 MIGHT & MAGIC 5 DARKSIDE 29 MIT &MAG:WORLD-CD ROM 39 MIKE DITKA FOOTBALL MIXED UP FAIRY TALES ML FOOTBALL 2 MONKEY ISLAND CD ROM 22 MONOPLY DELUXE MONOPOLY MONOPOLY DELUXE WIN 19 MORPHMAN CD ROM 21 NASCAR CHALLENGE 16 NFL 94 FOOTBALL NFL COACHES CLUB 25 NFL FOOTBALL NFL PRO LEAGUE FB '93 12 NFL PRO LEAGUE FB 91 5 NFL PRO LEAGUE FB 92 9 NFL VIDEO FOOTBALL 10 NHL HOCKEY REX NEBULAR COS GEN BEN 19 RING WORLD 19 RISE OF THE DRAGON-VGA 15 ROAD TO THE FINAL FOUR 19 ROBOSPORT.WIN 21 ROME PATHWAY TO POWER 19 SARGON 4 SAVAGE EMPIRE 14 SCRABBLE SEAL TEAM SECRET OF SILVER BLADES 5 SECRET WEAPONS-ADD ONS 8 SECRET WEAP LUFT-CD ROM 16 SECRET WEAP LUFTWAFFE 19 SENTINAL WORLDS 1 SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD SHADOW CASTER 17 SHADOW OF YSERBIUS 19 SHADOW SORCERER SHADOWGATE WIN SHADOWLANDS SHERLOCK HOLMES-CD ROM 22 SHUTTLE 19 oooooooooo in 12 22 13 Y REALM OF TERROR 24 LEGEND OF FAERGHAIL 12 29 12 16 23 WE'RE BUYING! IBM GAMES GAMER'S GOLD WE PAY CASH FOR USED GAMES We want your current used games 1-800-377-8578 call for authorization before shipping or FAX list for current quotes to 605-334-8766 In Canada, call 605-339-2060 Got Something To Sell? Follow these Easy Steps 1. Prepare a list of the games you are selling, Callfax, or mail your list to OAMER'S GOLD. 2. GAMER'S GOLD will quote the current buying prices & issue an authorization number for your shipment. Games will not bo occopled without on authorization no. Price quotes are good for 14 days. 3. Pack games in box. Write cuthorization no clearly on outside of box Mail to OAMER'S GOLD. Save your authorization no. Wo con't answer questions obout your shipment without your number! STUNT ISLAND STUNTS SUBWAR 2050 SUMMONING SUPER TETRIS SWORD OF THE SAMURAI SYNDICATE TAKE-A-BRK CROSSWORDS TANGLED TALES TANK TEGEL'S MERCENARIES TERMINATOR TERMINATOR 2: CHESS TERMINATOR 2029 TERMINATOR 2029: OPER TERMINATOR: RAMPAGE TEST DRIVE 3 TETRIS THE PROPHECY THEIR FINEST HOUR THEIR FINEST HOUR THIRD COURIER THUNDERSTRIKE TINIES TOM LANDRY FOOTBALL TONY LARUSSA 2 ALINL TONY LARUSSA 2 FANT 9 TONY LARUSSAULT BB 5 TONY LARUUSA 2 '92 TORNADO TREASURES SAV FRONTIER 9 TV SPORTS FOOTBALL TWILIGHT 2000 -VGA 16 ULTIMA 5-WARRIORS DES 16 ULTIMA 6 -FALSE PROPHET 11 ULTIMA 7-BLACK GATE 26 ULTIMA 7 FORGE OF VIRTUE 10 ULTIMA 7.5 SERPENT ISLE 27 ULTIMA 8 SPEECH PACK 10 ULTIMA 8: PAGAN CD ROM 39 ULTIMA 8:PAGON ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 1 ULTIMA UNDERWORLD 2 ULTRABOTS UMS 2 UMS 2. DESERT STORM UMS 2: PLANET EDITOR UNNECESSARY ROUGHNESS 29 V VICTORY: UTAH BEACH 9 V VICTORY: VELIKIYEL 9 VAXINE VEIL OF DARKNESS VENGEANCE OF EXCALIBUR VETTE VISIONS OF AFTERMATH WALLS OF ROME WAYNE GRETZKY HOCKEY 9 WEAVER BASEBALL 2 WELLTRIS WHEN TWO WORLDS WAR 23 WHERE IN WLD DLX-CD ROM 29 WING COM/ULT 6-CD ROM 19 WING COMMANDER 1 WING COM 1 DELUXE WING COMMANDER 2 WING COM 2 OP 1 OR 2 15 WING COM 2 SPEECH WING COM ACADEMY WING COM MISS 1 OR 2 5 WIZARDRY 6-COSMIC FORGE 12 WIZARDAY 7-CAUSADERS 22 WONDERLAND WORLD CIRCUIT WORLD TOUR TENNIS WORLD WAR 2: BATTLES WW2: AIR FORCE COMMA 21 X-WING YEAGER'S ADV FLIGHT WE SELL USED GAMES -88 ATTACK SUB TH GUEST-CD ROM -TRAIN TRAIN CONST SET L.A.C 10 TANK KILLER VER 1.5 14 BC MON. NIGHT FOOTBALL 5 CES OF THE PACIFIC CES OF THE PAC-MISSION 13 CES OVER EUROPE OV OF WILLIE BEAMISH LIR DUEL IR WARRIOR SVGA LL AMERICAN COLLEGE FB 9 LONE IN THE DARK LONE IN THE DARK-CD ROM 34 LONE IN THE DARK 2 28 LTERED DESTINY MAZON MERICAN GLADIATORS 10 NCIENT ART OF WAR-SEA 8 NCIENT ART OF WAR-SKY 9 RCHON ULTRA RENA:ELDER SCROLLS 32 SHES OF EMPIRE AT. 17 FLYING FORTRESS ALANCE OF THE PLANET ATTLE CHESS-WIN ATTLE CHESS 4000 ATTLEHAWKS 1942 ATTLES OF DESTINY ETRAYAL AT KRONDOR ICYCLE POKER IRDS OF PREY LOODWYCH LUE FORCE: NEXT OF KIN 25 O JACKSON BASEBALL 5 RAIN BLASTER UZZ ALDRIN RACE SPACE 28 ARRIER COMMAND CARRIERS AT WAR 2 ASTLE OF OR BRAI-VGA FASTLES ASTLES 2 ENTURION DEF. ROME CHALLENGE OF 5 REALMS 16 HAMBER SCI MUTANT P CLASH OF STEEL COASTER CODE NAME: ICE MAN COHORT 2 COMMAND HO OMPANION OF XANTH 27 CONFLICT CONQUERED KINGDOMS CONQUESTS OF CAMELOT CONQUESTS OF LONGBOW 9 CORPORATION COVERT ACTION CRIME CITY CRIME WAVE CRISIS IN THE KREMLIN CRITICAL PATH CD ROM CURSE OF AZURE BONDS CURSE OF ENCHANTIA 21 CYBER RACE 22 CYBER SPACE-CD ROM -GENERATION 15 DAEMONSGATE 23 DAEMONSGATE-CD ROM 22 DAGGER OF AMON RA DARK CENTURY DARKLANDS DAY OF THE TENTACLE 26 DAY OF THE TENT-CD ROM DAY OF THE VIPER DUNE DUNE 2 DUNGEON HACK EARTHRISE ECOQUEST-VGA All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked games are in original box with original documentation Call for current title availibility AMER'S WE ACCEPT ONLY VISA/MasterCard/Discover 2 \"Money Orders/Cashiers Check XGAMO Most items shipped same day. $5 UPS/59 2nd Day Air roll for information on Canodion shipments GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakota 57105 4. If you would like to use your money or credit to purchase games, include a 'wish list of titles you are interested in 5. Your check will usually be mailed within 10-14 working days of receiving your games. Some 'wish list game credits may take slightly longer to fill. Gomos will be checked for viruses & completeness. Games must be complete with all disks, printed materials, & in original box. Incompleto games will be returned at your expense. annon 18 12 17 11 22 an 25 19 19 28 FRONT PAGE FOOTBALL 12 FRONT PAGE FOOTBALL PRO 29 FUTURE WARS GATEWAY GATEWAY 2. CD ROM GATEWAY 2: HOMEWORLD 24 GEEKWAD CD GLOBAL CONQUEST GLOBAL DOMINATION GOBLIIINS 1. VGA GODFATHER GOLD RUSH GRAIL QUEST GREENS GUNSHIP 2000 -VGA GUNSHIP 2000 VGA-CD ROM 24 GUY SPY HAND OF FATE 21 HARDBALL 3 16 HARDBALL 3 PLAYERS DISK 6 HBALL 3: DIAMOND COLL 29 HARPOON HARRIER ASSAULT HEART OF CHINA VGA HEIMDALL HEIRS TO THE THRONE HELL CAB. WIN CD ROM 29 HEROES OF THE 357TH HIRED GUNS HOUND OF SHADOW HOVERFORCE INCA INCA CD INDY JONES FATE OF ATLAN 19 IRON HELIX CD ROM JACK NICKLAUS GREATEST 15 19 12 LEGEND OF KYRANDIA 15 LEG. OF KYRANDIA-CD ROM 24 LEISURE SUIT LARRY 5 19 LETHAL TENDER LEXICROSS LIGHTSPEED LINE IN THE SAND LINKS GOLF 16 LOOM LOOM CD ROM LOST ADMIRAL LOST FILES SHER HOLMES LOST IN TIME 16 LOST IN TIME LOST IN TIME. CD MADDEN FOOTBALL 1 MADDEN FOOTBALL 2 MAELSTROM MAGIC CANDLE 2 MAGIC CANDLE 3 MAN ENOUGH CD ROM MANHOLE CD ROM 23 MANHUNTER SF MANTIS EXP. FIGHTER -VGA 11 MARIO ANDRETTI RACING 11 MARTIAN DREAMS MARTIAN MEMORANDUM 13 MASTER OF ORION 34 MAX OKL OVER THE EDGE 17 MAXIMUM OVERKILL MAX OVERKILL MISSION 1 12 MEAN STREETS MEGATRAVELLER 1 MEGATRAVELLER 2 METAL & LACE MICHAEL JORDAN FLT SIM 14 NIGHTSHIFT NO GREATER GLORY NOBUNGA'S AMBITION NOVA 9. VGA OBITUS OUT OF THIS WORLD OVERLORD PACIFIC ISLANDS PATRIOT PATTON STRIKES BACK PERFECT GENERAL PERFECT GENERAL SCEN PERFECT GENERAL TRIL PLANET'S EDGE 12 PLAYMAKER FOOTBALL POLICE QUEST 3. VGA POOL OF RADIANCE POWERMONGER PRO LEAGUE FB '93 PRO TENNIS PROPHECY OF THE SHADOW 4 QUARTERPOLE 16 QUEST FOR GLORY 4 29 RAILROAD TYCOON RAVENLOFT REALMS REALMS OF ARKANIA REBEL ASSAULT CD ROM 35 REO BARON -VGA 15 RED BARON MIS BUILDER 12 RED CRYSTAL 21 RED STORM RISING RET OF PHANTOM-CD ROM 29 RETURN OF THE PHANTOM 14 RETURN TO ZORK RETURN TO ZORK CD ROM 35 SILENT SERVICE 2 SIM ANT SIM CITY SIM CITY 2000 29 SIM CITY TERRAIN SIM EARTH SIM LIFE WIN SIPHEED SKATE OR DIE SORCERIAN SPACE QUEST 1 VGA SPACE QUEST 4 CD ROM SPACE QUEST 4 VGA SPACE QUEST 5 VGA SPACEWRECKED SPEAR OF DESTINY SPECIAL FORCES SPELLCASTING 101 13 SPELLCASTING 201 SPELLCASTING 301 SPELLCASTING PRTY PK-CD 29 SPELLCRFT ASPECT OF VAL 15 SPELLJAMMER PIRATES 13 STAR TREK 25TH ANN STAR TREK: JUDGEMENT STAR WARS CHESS STELLAR 7 STORMOVIK STRATEGO STREET FIGHTER 2 STRIKE ACES STRIKE COMMANDER STRIKE COM SPEECH STRIKE SQUAD STRONGHOLD STUNT DRIVER 19 19 Prices & availability subject to change. Call Toll Free for current titles and those not listed-we've got lots more! All Used Games are complete & virus free with original box, documentation & disks. System compatibility is not guaranteed. All sales are final defective games replaced with same title. Free shipping (Regular Ground) in the continental USA on orders over $150. 18 18 11 18 29 NG WeBuy & SELL 23 Circle Reader Service #68 "


"THE MARKETPLACE Call your Account Representative, Marci Yamaguchi, at (714) 283-3000 x37 for information on how you can advertise your game, product or service in the economical MARKETPLACE section. PAPER MAYHEM SAKUKKIVIIKKIKIRIKIKLIGIO \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" Do you know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 10 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies, PBM game & company ratings and more lill each issue. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news. So why delay and miss out on all the tun? PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG, 1518 Adams St. Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: Please inquiro for rates. Reader Service #101 \"Powerful programs of growth and adventure\" MAGIC MIRROR I... a toolbox for your mind. E. Kinnie, PhD. Clinical Psychologist, $39.95. MAGIC MIRROR II ... experiences for your mind, $39.95. THREE GATES ... skryeing, awareness shifting, I Ching and runes, $39.95. MERLIN ... an apprenticeship. $29.95. PHOENIX FIRE... high-tech Ouija Board, $39.95. MAGIC MOUNTAIN... weird adventure, male and female versions, not for children, $39.95. Blue Valley, 29 Shepard St., Walton, NY 13856 KIRKE MasterCard/Visa 1-800-545-6172 (after 5 p.m.) WWWWWWWWLANE Reader Service #48 Games Too Expensive? Consider Pre-owned Software  Save big $S$ over new . Original disks and manuals  IBM AMIGA C64 Hard-to-find classics plus all the latest releases Call or write for free catalog (specify computer) Bare Bones Software 940 4th Ave #222 Huntington WV 25701 1-800-638-1123 Customer Service: 304-529-0461 BBS for complete list: 304-529-7050 Reader Service #45 The NEW CAPE COD CONNECTION ELECTRONIC SHOPPING MALL Our BBS is back 24 HOUR Electronic On-Line Shopping is available. . Download our complete new & used Software, Tabletop & Sports Apparel Catalogs, updated daily with new products. OnLine Ordering 24 Hours . One of the largest used software listing available today. Have us sell your used software on consignment. Robert Berry, Proprietor 21 PLEASANT VIEW AVENUE FALMOUTH, MA 02540 BBS 508-548-2908 HELP 508-457-0738 24 HOUR FAX 508-457-4558 Reader Service #50 GYBERLANG TRANSLATIONS TRANSLATION AND LOCALIZATION OF COMPUTERAND VIDEO GAMES PHONE: 303-678-1770 FAX: 303-678-1066 CIS: 73233,742 Reader Service #215 SSI's Out of Print Wargames Are Back For Only $15!!! B-24 Mech Brigade Star Command Battle of Antietam Rebel Charge Stellar Crusade Battles of Napoleon Red Lightning Storm Across Europe Conflict: Middle East Second Front Wargame Construction Set Gettysburg Shiloh: Grant's Trial Warship Kampfgruppe Sons of Liberty Western Front FREE Software! FREE Hardware! Scenario Disks for SSI's Battles of Napoleon for $10 Scenario Disks for SSI's Wargame Construction Set II: Tanks! for $15 Our hours are 8:00 am to 5:00 pm PST M-F We accept Visa, M/C, Checks, Money Orders To order or request a free catalog contact: Novastar Game Co,. P.O. Box 1813. Rocklin, CA 95677 (916) 624-7113 Become a Beta Tester! It's easy! Companies can't afford to pay employees to play games all day in search of programming errors. They need you to test their newest games and hardware. You can keep what you test Free! For a complete information package on becoming a Beta Tester send $9.95 + $3.95 S/H to: CCB Enterprises PO Box 336 Saint Marys, GA 31558 Reader Service #219 Reader Service #52 158 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"Can you create worlds? Origin Systems You may already know us from titles such as: Ultima, Wing Commander, Strike Commander, and Privateer\". However, you may not know that we are currently building hard-core flight sims, interactive movies, and programming tools too. We are always seeking skilled and creative individuals to help build our software worlds. Our demands are simple you must demonstrate that you are uniquely qualified to build cool games! Programming We build primarily MS-DOS games. We seek especially PC C/C++ and Intel assembly programmers. However, we also need people with general skill in areas such as: graphics, audio, CD-ROM, and Windows\". Experience with 3DO\", Sega\", or other specialized game systems is also useful. We look primarily for enthusiastic individuals who share our spirit of innovative hacking! Send resumes including past experience. Demos are especially welcome. Artists We need individuals who are excellent creative artists first, and computer users second. Especially valuable is experience with human and architectural forms, conceptual design, animation, and fantasy or sci-fi artwork. Previous experience with a 3D modeler such as 3DStudio\" or Alias\" is a plus, but not required. Please send resumes including a portfolio of past work, traditional and computer. Send resumés to: FORIGIN We create worlds: Designers We seek creative writers and game designers who have a diversity of experience. Avid game playing is a must. Knowledge of our existing product lines, particularly the Ultima and Commander series, is advantageous. Creative writing, artistic experience, and a knack for technology, especially programming, are the ideal skills. Send a resume with past experience. We would also like to see other useful information such as an analysis of your favorite or least favorite games and how you might have designed them differently. An Electronic Arts Company 12940 Research Blvd. Austin, TX 78750 No e-mail resumés please Copyright 1994, ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin, Ultima and Wing Commander are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Privateer and Strike Commander are trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts. 3DO Is a trademark of the 3DO Company. Intel is a trademark of Intel Corporation. Windows is a trademark of Microsoft Corporation. Sega is a trademark of Sega Enterprises, Ltd. Circle Reader Service #220 "


"ADVERTISER Company and company and Phone Index INFO, # COMPANY PHONE PAGE INFO. # COMPANY PHONE PAGE 205 206 42 145 150 171 93, 96 215 216 94 43 94 151 31 217 152 218 50 207 51 52 169 219 97 220 208 190 209 67 200 153 102 195 196 180 56 131 229 61 132 63, 64, 66 136 119 43 160 85 191 4th Dimension (800) 258-0533 143 Entertainment Activision 127 AIVR Corporation (800) 324-AIVR Apogee Software (800) GAM-E123 21 Avalon Hill (800) 999-3222 Bare Bones Software (800) 638-1123 158 Bethesda (800) 677-0700 38, 39 Blue Valley (800)545-6172 158 Cape Cod Connection (800) 548-2908 158 Capstone Software (800) 468-7226 Capstone Software (800) 468-7226 CCB Enterprise (508) 548-2908 158 CD Light International (800) 427-6790 144 CH Products (619) 598-2518 83 Chips & Bits (800) 699-4263 Chips & Bits (800) 699-4263 148-149 Chips & Bits (800) 699-4263 52-61 Computer Express (800) 228-7449 70-75 Creative Labs (800) 998-5227 167 Diamond Computers 117 Direct Wave (800) 882-8108 122 Domark (800) 695-GAME Dongleware (617) 497-1130 153 Empire Software (800) 216-9706 Ensonig (800) 942-0096 Epic Mega Games (800) 972-7434 Falcon Northwest (800) 258-6778 FormGen Corporation (800) 263-2390 G.E. Information Systems (800) 638-8369 125 Gamer's Gold (800) 377-8578 157 Gametek 137 Gametek 34, 35 Gosselin Computer (313) 229-2453 152 Consultants HPS Simulations (408) 554-8381 id Software (800) IDGAMES Impressions (617) 225-0848 Impressions (617) 225-0848 Inner Circle (800) 274-2814 141 Technologies, Inc. Intellimedia Sports (800) 886-4956 119 Interface Dynamics (603) 569-4638 90 Interplay (714) 553-6678 65 Keyboard Commander (800) 262-6066 Corporation Lead Pursuit, Inc. LucasArts Entertainment (800) STA-WARS Megatech (800) 258-MEGA Merit Software (800) 238-4277 129 Micro Sports, Inc. (800) 937-7737 133 Microforum (416) 656-6406 177 MicroLeague (800) 334-6572 MicroLeague (800) 334-6572 123 MicroProse (800) 879-play 105 MicroProse (800) 879-play 107 Mission Control (800) 999-7995 164, 165 MK Translation (303) 678-1770 158 Momby (800) 636-6629 171 Multimedia Specialists (800) 233-0010 135 New World Computing (800) 325-8898 New World Computing (800) 325-8898 New World Computing (800) 325-8898 111 NovaLogic (818) 774-0812 29 Novastar Game Company (916) 624-7113 158 Ocean of America (408) 954-0201 79 Origin Systems (800) 245-4525 159 Origin Systems (800) 245-4525 Paper Mayhem (815) 433-2047 158 Papyrus (800) 874-4607 Paramount Interactive (415) 813-8040 131 Philips CDPhilips CD-i Quantum Quality (908) 788-2799 109 Products REM Software (313) 457-1161 138 Reviewers of America 116 S Software (800) 243-1515 122 S Software (800) 243-1515 152 Sideline Software (800) 888-9273 138 Sierra (800) 757-7707 Sierra (800) 757-7707 16 Sierra (800) 757-7707 17 Sierra (800) 757-7707 Sierra (800) 757-7707 Sierra (800) 757-7707 Sierra (800) 757-7707 Insert Sierra Direct (800) 795-5979 147 Sigma Design (800) 845-8086 121 Spectrum Electronics (800) 983-4321 Spectrum Holobyte (800) 695-GAME 45 Spectrum Holobyte (800) 695-GAME Starlight Electronics StarPlay Productions, Inc. (303) 447-9562 Strategic Simulations, (800) 245-4525 Incorporated Strategic Simulations (800) 245-4525 Incorporated Strategic Simulations (800) 245-4525 Incorporated Take 2 Interactive Sw. 100, 101 Thrustmaster, Inc. (503) 639-3200 Thunder Seat Technologies (800) 8-THUNDER Titan Games (800) 247-5447 TRIMARK Interactive 155 Virtual Vegas Incorporated * 115 181 141 E 67 222 89 223 93 187 120 2,3 228 164 128 144 115 109 & 78 224 230 225 210 151 79 166 175 80 108 211 68 184 161 86 185 88 50 99 212 89 214 213 117 226 227 113 * Please see advertisement for contact information. 160 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"FOR QUICKER RESPONSE FAX TO (609) 829-0692 NO POSTAGE NECESSARY IF MAILED IN THE UNITED STATES Product Free Information BUSINESS REPLY MAIL | FIRST CLASS MAIL PERMIT NO. 433 RIVERTON, NJ POSTAGE WILL BE PAID BY ADDRESSEE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD P.O. BOX 10126 RIVERTON, NJ 08076-8626 luululllulilululululululull COMPUTER FREE PRODUCT INFORMATION GAMING WORLD IT'S AS EASY AS 1,2,3 1. Fill in your name and address and check off 2 Circle the numbers on the card that correspond to 3. The literature will be mailed to you from your answers to the seven research questions the ads or articles you'd like more information about the advertiser free of charge CIRCLE FOR FREE INFORMATION Void after December 31, 1994 001 002 003 004 005 006 007 008 009 010 011 012 013 014 015 016 017 018 019 020 021 022 023 024 025 026 027 028 029 030 031 032 033 034 035 036 037 038 039 040 041 042 043 044 045 046 047 048 049 050 051 052 053 054 055 056 057 058 059 060 061 062 063 064 065 066 067 068 069 070 071 072 073 074 075 076 077 078 079 080 081 082 083 084 085 086 087 088 089 090 091 092 093 094 095 096 097 098 099 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143 144 145 146 147 148 149 150 151 152 153 154 155 156 157 158 159 160 161 162 163 164 165 166 167 168 169 170 171 172 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180 181 182 183 184 185 186 187 188 189 190 191 192 193 194 195 196 197 198 199 200 201 202 203 204 205 206 207 208 209 210 211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 221 222 223 224 225 226 227 228 229 230 231 232 233 234 235 236 237 238 239 240 241 242 243 244 245 246 247 248 249 250 251 252 253 254 255 256 257 258 259 260 261 262 263 264 265 266 267 268 269 270 271 272 273 274 275 276 277 278 279 280 281 282 283 284 285 286 287 288 289 290 291 292 293 294 295 296 297 298 299 300 301 302 303 304 305 306 307 308 309 310 311 312 313 314 315 316 317 318 319 320 321 322 323 324 325 326 327 328 329 330 331 332 333 334 335 336 337 338 339 340 341 342 343 344 345 346 347 348 349 350 351 352 353 354 355 356 357 358 359 360 361 362 363 364 365 366 367 368 369 370 371 372 373 374 375 376 377 378 379 380 381 382 383 384 385 386 387 388 389 390 391 392 393 394 395 396 397 398 399 400 1. What is the highest level of education that 5. How often do you usually buy computer games? Name CGW 9/94-4 you completed? (Check one only) (Check one only) 01. Some high school or less 01. Once a week 02. Graduated High School 02 Once every two to three weeks LULU 03. Some College or Technical school 03. Once a month Title Telephone 04. Graduated College 04. Once every two to three months 05. Post Graduate schaal 05. Once every four to six months 06. DOn a year LILLETTE 2. Computer currently owned is: Check all that apply 6. Where are you most likely to purchase games? Company Name 01. IBM compatible (Intel standard) (Check all that apply) 02. Macintosh 01. Independent computer store 04. Computer store chain L I L ILOUUUUUUUUUU 03. Amiga 02. Consumer electronic store 05 Direct from vendor 04. Dedicated game machine 03. Mass merchandising store 06. Mail order Address 05. None 7. What is your (and others in household) favorite type 3. It Intel, what level? Check on only) of game? Check one in each column) 01. Power PC Yourself Other 1 Other 2 02. Pentium (586) 01. Strategy City State Zip 03. 486 02. Wat/Military 04. 386 03. Role Playing 05. 286 04. Brain Teasers 05. Card Please send me a one-year (12-issue) subscription to Computer Gaming World for $27.94 (U.S. price); 4. Do you own (or plan to buy in next 6 months) 06. Sport a CD-ROM? (Check one only) all other countries add $11.00 for additional postage. 07. m Action/Arcade 01. Own 08. Educational 02. Plan to buy (6 months) In a Hurry? Fax This Card To: 609-829-0692 09. Adventure "


"       U G       GAMING WORLD 1. Fill in your name and address and check off IT'S AS EASY AS 1,2,3 2 Circle the numbers on the card that correspond to 3. The literature will be mailed to you from your answers to the seven research questions the ads of articles you'd like more information about the advertiser free of charge CIRCLE FOR FREE INFORMATION Void after December 31, 1994 001 002 003 004 005 006 007 008 009 010 011 012 013 014 015 016 017 018 019 020 021 022 023 024 025 026 027 028 029 030 031 032 033 034 035 036 037 038 039 040 041 042 043 044 045 046 047 048 049 050 051 052 053 054 055 056 057 058 059 060 061 062 063 064 065 066 067 068 069 070 071 072 073 074 075 076 077 078 079 080 081 082 083 084 085 086 087 088 089 090 091 092 093 094 095 096 097 098 099 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111 112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143 144 145 146 147 148 149 150 151 152 153 154 155 156 157 158 159 160 161 162 163 164 165 166 167 168 169 170 171 172 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180 181 182 183 184 185 186 187 188 189 190 191 192 193 194 195 196 197 198 199 200 201 202 203 204 205 206 207 208 209 210 211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 221 222 223 224 225 226 227 228 229 230 231 232 233 234 235 236 237 238 239 240 241 242 243 244 245 246 247 248 249 250 251 252 253 254 255 256 257 258 259 260 261 262 263 264 265 266 267 268 269 270 271 272 273 274 275 276 277 278 279 280 281 282 283 284 285 286 287 288 289 290 291 292 293 294 295 296 297 298 299 300 301 302 303 304 305 306 307 308 309 310 311 312 313 314 315 316 317 318 319 320 321 322 323 324 325 326 327 328 329 330 331 332 333 334 335 336 337 338 339 340 341 342 343 344 345 346 347 348 349 350 351 352 353 354 355 356 357 358 359 360 361 362 363 364 365 366 367 368 369 370 371 372 373 374 375 376 377 378 379 380 381 382 383 384 385 386 387 388 389 390 391 392 393 394 395 396 397 398 399 400 1. What is the highest level of education that 5. How often do you usually buy computer games? Name CGW 9/94-4 you completed? (Check one only) (Check one only) 01. Some high school or less 01 Once a week 02. Graduated High School 02. Once every two to three weeks 03. Some College of Technical school 03. Once a month Title Telephone 04. Graduated College 04. Once every two to three months 05. Post Graduate School 05. Once every four to six months 06. Once a year 2. Computer currently owned is: Check all that apply 5. Where are you most likely to purchase games? Company Name 01. IBM compatible (Intel standard) (Check all that apply) 02. Macintosh 01. Independent computer store 04. Computer store chain 03 Amiga 02. Consumer electronic store 05. Direct from vendor 04 Dedicated game machine 03. Mass merchandising store 06. Mail order Address 05. None 7. What is your and others in household) favorite type 3. ll Intel, what level? (Check one only) of game? Check one in each column) 01. Power PC Yourself Other Other 2 02 Pentium (586) 01. Strategy City State Zip 03. 486 02. War/Military 04. 386 03. Role Playing 05.1266 04. Brain Teasers 05. Card Please send me a one-year (12-issue) subscription to Computer Gaming World for $27.94 (U.S. price): 4. Do you own (or plan to buy in next 6 months) 06. Sport a CD-ROM? Check one only) all other countries add $11.00 for additional postage. 07. Action Arcade 01. Own 08. Educational 02. Plan to buy (6 months) 09. Adventure In a Hurry? Fax This Card To: 609-829-0692 er FOR QUICKER RESPONSE FAX TO (609) 829-0692 NO POSTAGE NECESSARY IF MAILED IN THE UNITED STATES Free Product Information BUSINESS REPLY MAIL FIRST CLASS MAIL PERMIT NO. 433 RIVERTON, NJ POSTAGE WILL BE PAID BY ADDRESSEE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD P.O. BOX 10126 RIVERTON, NJ 08076-8626  ||| "


"ADVERTISER Product Index Game and Product Index INFO. # PRODUCT COMPANY PAGE INFO. # PRODUCT COMPANY PAGE 208 171 150 54 43 56 69 216 98 218 111 213 96 115 94 165 107 230 68 160 223 89 79 220 225 151 153 190 0000 44 64 63 47 136 30 187 120 101 45 212 228 128 50 217 206 80 214 113 109 141 1942 MicroProse 107 Across the Rhine MicroProse 105 Action Games Apogee Software Alien Legacy Sierra Armored Fist NovaLogic Battlebugs Sierra Blood Bowl MicroLeague Catalogue Mission Control Computer and Video Spectrum Electronics 144 Hardware and Software Corridor 7 CD-ROM Capstone Software 169 Cowboy Casino Intellimedia Sports 119 Create Worlds Origin Systems 159 Crystal Caliburn Pinball StarPlay Productions Incorporated Cyberstrike G.E. Info. Systems 125 Cyclones Strategic Simulations, 47 Incorporated DarkSun:Wake of the Strategic Simulations, 49 Ravager Incorporated DeltaV Bethesda 38, 39 Doom id Software Dream Web Empire Software Electronic Shopping Cape Cod Connection 158 Mall BBS Empire Masters New World Computing 40 Epic Pinball Epic Mega Games 27 Falcon & MIG Keyboard Commander 108 Commander Corporation Falcon Gold Spectrum Holobyte 4 5 Falcon MACH V Falcon Northwest 11 Front Page Sports: Sierra Insert Baseball Gameblaster Creative Labs 167 Games for Titan Titan Games Girlfriend AIVR Corporation 145 Grandest Fleet Quantum Quality 109 Products Greetings By Computer Software 152 Growth and Adventure Sw. Blue Valley 158 Harvester Merit Software 129 Heroes of Might New World Computing 111 and Magic Interactive Entertainment Chips & Bits Interactive Games TRIMARK Interactive 155 Joyswitch Lead Pursuit, Inc. 68 Knights of Xentar Megatech Legends of Future Past Inner Circle 141 Technologies, Inc. Litil Divil Philips CD-i Litil Divil Philips CD-I Lode Runner Sierra Lode Runner Sierra Lords of Midnight Domark Lords of the Realm Impressions Lords of the Realm Impressions Mail Order Mission Control 164 Mail Order Peripherals Direct Wave 122 Mail Order Products 4th Dimension 143 Entertainment Mail Order Products CCB Enterprise 158 Mail Order Products CD Light International 144 Mail Order Products Chips & Bits 52-61 Mail Order Products Computer Express 70-75 Mail Order Products Gosselin Computer 152 Consultants Mail Order Products Momby 171 Mail Order Products Multimedia Specialists 135 Mail Order Products Sideline Software 138 Mail Order Products Starlight Electronics 96 Mail Order Software Gamer's Gold 157 Mail Order Software S Software 122 Metaltech Sierra Music Game, Virtual Microforum Escape, 24 Hr. Assistance NASCAR Papyrus New Family Ad CH Products Operation Crusader Avalon Hill Oxyd Dongleware 153 Oxyd magnum! Dongleware 153 PC Promo Gametek 137 Phastasmagoria Sierra 2,3 Play By Mail Magazine Paper Mayhem 158 Pre-owned Software Bare Bones Software 158 Pro League Baseball Micro Sports, Inc. 133 Quarantine Gametek 34, 35 Real Magic Sigma Design 121 Return to Zork Activision 127 Reviewers Information Reviewers of America 116 Sabre Team MicroLeague SkyRealms of Jorune: Strategic Simulations 51 Alien Logic Incorporated Soundscape Ensonia Spear of Destiny FormGen Corporation Mission Disks Sprint Sierra Direct 147 Star Crusader Take 2 Interactive 100, 101 Software Star Trek: Deep Space 9 Paramount Interactive 131 Star Wars Screen LucasArts Entertainment 44 Entertainment Stealth 64 Diamond Computers 117 TFX Ocean of America The Infinity Machine REM Software ThrustMaster Controls Thrust Master, Inc. Thrustmaster Support Interface Dynamics Brackets ThunderSeat ThunderSeat Technologies Technologies Tigers on the Prowl HPS Simulations Translation Service MK Translation 158 Tubular Worlds Dongleware 153 Video Games Chips & Bits 148-149 Virtual Vegas Virtual Vegas Inc. Wargames Novastar Game Co. 158 Wild Blue Yonder Spectrum Holobyte Wings of Glory Origin Systems Zephyr New World Computing 31 Zombie Dinos CD ROM Interplay Zorro Capstone Software * Please see advertisement for contact information 191 65 117 99 164 184 180 102 48 88 152 229 97 138 67 209 226 211 119 161 166 8 86 69 185 210 195 196 181 222 132 200 227 115 Ova 219 224 78 99 151 205 175 207 52 SEPTEMBER 1994  COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 163 "


"MISSION (800) 999-7995 FREE SHIPPING! ON ALL U.S. ORDERS OVER $50. CONTROL ON ALL U.S. ORDERS OVER $50. VIA UPS GROUND WITH COUPON. PIXIS INTERACTIVE TRY US..YOU'LL LIKE US! NEW MACUINI VIRTUAL VIXENS PRIVATEER THE DREAM MACHIE SNISHT PRIVATEER CD $52 ARENA $42 $45 MILLENNIUM VIRTUAL VIXEN You must save your friend from the evil Crystal, who has imprisoned him in a VR Pleasure World. You must get past three beautiful women before you can reach Crystal, and solve the mystery of her strange, exotic existence. A Virtual Reality science fiction adventure with 3D animation and graphics combined with high qual ity live motion video and a virtual realistic SALE!!! interface.Requires: 486, SVGA, 8 MB Ram. CD ROM $54. NEURODANCER NEURODANCER Use your computer and VidFone to obtain enough credits to view the exotic Neurodancers who roam the computer networks in search of willing viewers. Featuring 3D animation, interactive gameplay, and live motion video. Requires: 486, SVGA, 4 MB of Hard Disk, 8 Mb RAM. CD ROM $49 The most innovative CD Navigate through a 3D w where your ultimate fant come alive. The Dream Mach beautiful hostess will lead yo an interactive journey thre your imagination. The only that adapts to your choice seen on Donahue, Joan Rivers and C CD ROM $54. SAL THE UROTSUKIDOJI COLLECTION An Intense blend of Exoticism and Horror. The END OF THE US perfect collection is a hybrid boxed set containing 5 discs. Birth of the Overfiend, Curse of the Overfiend, Final Inferno, Legend of the Demon Womb and Battle at the Shinju Skyscrap Limited Supply! 5 CD ROM SET Only $99 COMMANCHE CD 852 METAL & LACE $34 MILLENNIUM AUCTION CD 548 11 STONES TANKS $38 ULTIMA 8 GD 847 SCISSORS N STONES CD $49 2A 2 AU 1 &SBN 43 30 34 125 ) &&8699 8  54 Gabriel Knight San Franolsco Disk Gobling 3 ! Sorabble Deluxe 29 1842 Pacho Alr War Grandest Fleet Sert City Life Is Feudal Aces of the Deep 43 Great Naval Battles 2 Shadowcaster Aces Over Europe Hannibal Slm City 2000 Across the Rhine Harpoon 2 SimCity 2000 MD1 AD&D Genle's Curse Harpoon 2 #2 WESTPAC Slmolty Classic Graphics 18 AD&D Fantasy Emplre 40 Harpoon 2 Scenarlo Simon the Sorcerer AD&D Ravenloft Inoa 2 SSN-21 Seawolf Alr Warrior 37 Incredible Toons ! Star Roach Allen Legacy 42 Indy Car Exp Pk 1: Star Trek Judge Rights Alone In the Dark 2 Indy Car Exp Pk 2 Star Trek Next Gen Armored Fist Als IndyCar Racing Strip Poker Professional 34 Beneath A Steel Sky Inherit the Earth 42 Strip Disks 1-13 each Betrayal at Krondor Isle of the Dead 2 Stronghold BloForge Joruna Allen Logic Sub Wars 2050 Carriers at War 2 Kasparov's Gambit Syndicate Civilization King Maker Syndloata Am Revolt Clash of Steel Kingdoms of Germany System Shock Cobra Mission AD! Lands of Lore Terminator Rampage Comanche Bundle Unks 388 Pro TFX Comanche MD2 : Unks Belfry The Blue and The Gray Corridor 7 Unks Innlsbrook The Dig 43 Cyber GO Unks Pebble Beach The Merchant Prince. 40 D-Day Master of Orlon Theme Park Dark Legions Meadowlark Bridge Third Reloh Dark Sun 62 Mech Warrior 2 Disk 1 The Fighter Delta V MechWarrior 2 Timeout Sports Baseball 27 Detroit Metal and Lace Upgrade 6 Ultima VIIT Pagan Disciples of Steel Mlorosoft Flight Sim 6.0 49 Ultima VIII Speech Pack 22 Dragon's Lair 3 New York Scenery Disk Unlimited Adventures Elder Scrolls The Arena 43 : Operation Crusader Victory at Sea Emplre Deluxe Windows 37 Paolilo Strike 50! Victory Pak F-18 Hornet 36 i Pachno Strike Speech 22 Warlords 2 43 Falcon 3.0 ! Parls Scenery Disk 34 Warlords Il Scon Bulld Falcon 3.0 Mig 29 Power Game Bundle 2 Washington Scenery Fatty Bear BirthSurp. Power Poker Windows WC 2 & Speech Pak Fatty Bear's Fun Pack ! Privateer . ! Wing Command Armada Fields of Glory | Privateer Righteous Fire 25 Wings of Glory FIFA Intern. Soccer Privateer Speech Pack WW TI Battles Paciflo 57 Fleet Defender F-14 Pro League Baseball X Com Flight Light Putt Putt to the Moon X-Wing Filght Sim Toolkit Putt Putt Jolns Parade X-Wing MD1 Imperial Forgotten Castle Putt Putt's Fun Pack X-Wing MD 2 B Wing Formula One Quarterpolo Front Page Football Pro 47 Frontler Elite 2 40 i Return to Zork SadaRBAS&&&&& ANSS8898 Blood Net Scooter's Maglo Casti JOYSTICKS Daemonsgate Sorabble Deluxe ACM Game Card 35: Dark Legions Shadowoaster Flight Control Pro 115 Dark Sun Sim City Flight Control System 88 Darkseed Small Blue Planet Flight Stok Dracula Unleashed Software Vault: Emer: Filght Stok Pro Dragon's Lair Software Vault: Gama Formula T1 Dragonsphere Software Vault Gold Rudder Pedals Fingers for Windows Software Vault: Platin Virtual Pllot Filght Light Plus Software Vault: Windo Weapons Control Mark 295 Flight Sim Toolkit Space Hulk Global Explorer Star Trek 25th Great Naval Battles 2 Street Atlas USA SOUNDGARDS Hell Cab Strike Commander Sound Blaster 18 Baslo 119 Inca 2 Syndloate Sound Blaster 18 MCS 124 Interplay's Collection TEX Sound Blaster SCSI 136 Labyrinth of Time Complete Ultima VIIB Sound Galaxy NX Pro 18 129 Lands of Lore The Horde Sound Machine Learn Fly Fishing The Journeyman Proj Ultrasound Lord of the Rings Theme Park Voloe Blaster Lost In Time Tony LaRussa 2 Wave Blaster Mayo Clinio Under a Killing Moon Mayo Clinlo Total Heart 40 Who Shot Johnny Rool Mechamander Wing Command & Ult CD ROM MM2 Day of the Tentacle 30 Wing Commander 2 DH 7th Guest 2 The 11th Hour 50 Myst Wing Commander Dix Aces of the Deep Paciflo Strike Wolf Pack AD&D AI Genla's Curse Putt Putt Goes to Moon 47 World of Xeen AD&D Dungeon Hack 40 Putt Putt Jolns Parade 39 Wrath of the Gods AD&D Fantasy Emplres 45 Rabal Assault 52 AD&D Ravenloft 54 ! Sam & Max ! Aegis Guardian of Fleet 63 Circle Reader Service #93 Alr Warrior Alone In the Dark Armored Flst Artic Baron Call 201.783.3374 from your fax Astrology Source machine. Receive information on ne Backroad Racer releases, Adult GD rom, Battlechess Enhanced specials, and more. Betrayal at Krondor BIble ubrary 24 HOURS A DAY 7 DAYS A WEEK  52 Get the facts via FaxBack... NNS 888&SSERS Rally ORDER LINE (201) 783-3600 FAX US YOUR ORDER! (201) 783-368 "


"FREE! ADULT SAMPLER 49 29 With any Adult CD order over $99. Clip & Mail expires 9/31/94 ($14. value) 39 ADULT CD CENTE INTERACTIVE ADULT GIFTS MOVIES New Wave Hookers New Wave Hookers II Ol Sexual Positions for ll 34 3D Darlings A Pussy Called Wanda Night Trips Adult Movie Almanac 59 3D DreamGirls Amorous Asian Girls Princess of Persia dventures of Seymore Adult Palate Vol.2 Art Of Picking Up Girls Racquel Released dventures Seymore Pt2 69 Amateur Models Best of Inferno Secrets Buttman's Vacation Amateur Models 2 Best of Vivid Sex Condo Cuties 44 American Girls Betrayal Steamy Windows Digital Dancing American Girls 2 Bikini Beach Super Models Go Wild Dirty Debutantes 59 Asian Ladies Blonde Justice The Barlow Affair Doors of Passion Asian Palate Busting Out Trad I Love You Hot Wire High Society Mag 59 Biker Babes Cafe Flesh Wicked _.A. Strippers Blonde Bombshells College Girls Wicked Whispers addam's Family Busty Babes 2 Coven Massive Melons 39 Combined Fantasies Curse of the Catwomen Hight Watch 49 Double Play Debbie Does Dallas Hightwatch 2 49 Girlsla Vivia Deception The Dream Machine disers Stones Girls in Vivid Girls of Mardi Gras Virtual Vixens Tirgins Girls of J. Stephen Hicks Hidden Obsessions Nightwatch 2 Girls on Girls House of Dreams High Volume Nudes Horose of Slezing beauties NeuroDancer Hot Hunks Immortal Destres Adventures of Seymore More Morthern Delights Insatiable Raquel Released Northem Delights Kama Sutra Dirty Debutantes Legend 4 Southern Beauties good only towards Adult CD Roms Blonde Justice Legends of Pom II Gold free disc equal to lowest price paid Sweet Dreams Stills Scissors N' Stones Mind Shadows Underground Ref Library 49 Hot Wire Magazine CLIP & HAIL expires 9/31/94 Women on Wheels Mystique of Orient Our Top 10 Picks WANT A SAMPLE? Buy 10 Get 1 FREE! Mask Interactive Adult Cd's by: New Machine Publishing Pixis Interactive Vivid Interactive $14. for One Two for $24 ALL THREE FOR $29. *CD SPECIALS The First Wonderof --the CyberWorld. 7th Guest 101 Games FREE SHIPPING Arthur's Teach Trouble 29 On All US Orders over $50 via UPS Ground The First In a Series of Virtual Compton's Interact 94 49 Simply send in coupon with your order! Adventurescapes. Critical Path Offer expires 09/31/94 Dark Seed Dune Would You Encarta 94 F-15 Strike Eagle Like To Gabriel Knight Receive Our Groller's 6.0 Adult CD Gunship 2000 Catalog? Iron Helix Just Grandma & Me Kings Quest 6 Simply Circle Reader Service #96 Lawnmower Man & We'll Rush One Out To You! MegaRace Sign card stating you are over 21. FOR GROWNUPS THATS FREE FROM THE LAWS Quantum Gate Return To Zork Wolf 3D Manla World Circuit Racing CD ROM $49. must be bundled, call for detalls! CONTROL Circle Reader Service #96 Orders To: Mission Control 70ak Place CGW0994 Montclair, NJ 07042.MC, Visa, Discover, Checks & Money Orders. Checks 14 days. Please Include Phone # ZShipping $5 UPS/$7 Two Day/ Int'l Shipping $20 Minimum. Over 21 To Order Adult Products 98% GIANT PYRAMIDS? MEDIEVAL CASTLEST ROMAN COLISEUMS? HO HUM, WAIT UNTIL YOU SEE A PLAYGROUND OF TIME, PHYSICS. OR THE MOD. VIRTUAL VEGAS IS THE PLACE. YOU'RE THE V.I.P. HERE'S YOUR TICKET. MISSION "


"UNDER THE HOOD Get Your Virtual Front End Aligned CGW's Technical Editor Returns From CES With A Stiff Neck HORNYAK by Mike Weksler Lost in the maze of VR technology? Does \"wirthings need to happen before VR becomes it can be used as either a digital or analog tual reality\" leave you virtually flat? Well, help a reality: higher resolution, lower price, joystick with the flick of a switch. is on the way, as our resident techwarrior reand more support from game companies. In the sounds category, 3D audio is goturns from CES, sporting the latest VR helmets Other cool hardware included the new ing to do to your ears what the stereoand wielding the newest virtual weaponry. Thrustmaster F16 FLCS (light controller. scope did for your eyes. The SRS-licensed Modeled after the real F16 stick, this baby 3D audio products from Nu Reality run VR helmets were everywhere at this has more knobs and switches than a UNIbetween your PC's sound card and speaksummer's CES in Chicago, yet most VAC, all of which are programmable with ers. The result is a surround-sound-like proved to be merely head mounted lowthe Mark II Weapons Control System. A field that seems to come from all over the res displays, without head-tracking capanew Thrustmaster Weapons Control Sysroom, even though it emanates from just bility. The technical nod at this point goes tem (the Mark III?) is on the horizon. two speakers. Nu Reality's product, Vividto Forte, who has been showing the VFX1, Building on the features of the Mark II, the 3D Studio, has controls for spatial width a head-tracking VR helmet, for the past new controller looks as though it was lifted and virtual center-channel depth. Unforfew CES shows. Even though it's the best straight from a fighter cockpit. The cheesytunately, the SRS effect-a process apwe've seen, it still reminds us of two Sony looking buttons on the Mark II have been plied to the signal-is lost when Watchman TVs hung in front of your face, replaced with realistic looking, feeling, and headphones are used. Headphone junkies but only offering a low res image. A bit moving knobs and switches. Sometime in might want to check out the UltraSound much, perhaps, for the $1000 price tag. the future, Thrustmaster may release their Max from Gravis. In addition to being Forte's Doom demo was disconcerting, golf controller, which will let you haul of General MIDI-compatible with TSR utility since my head didn't move independently and whack a real ball into a net from a tee, to access the 128 General MIDI patches, of my view. I found myself spinning like a or hit their hanging ball-on-a-string. A dethe card uses the Focal Point 3D audio systop, scanning for nasties, while using a vice hooked up to your computer will then tem, which works with headphones only. \"virtual joystick\" to move forward and give you clubhead angle, speed, etc., and it From low-res headsets, to new controls backward. I can only imagine using this al will be compatible with a special version of and immersive audio products, we're gethome, a whirling dervish flailing around Access' LINKS 386 PRO. ting closer to home VR for computer the living room knocking over lamps, tryGravis' new Phoenix game controller ofgames than ever before! For more informaing to maintain balance like a tightrope fers a built-in joystick, a pseudo-mousetion on these products, call the following: walker and lots of programmable buttons. The Forte (716) 427-8595 The FLIGHT UNLIMITED demo from interface is a snap to use and the device Thrustmaster (503) 639-3200 Looking Glass Technologies (see the should certainly help clear your desk of Gravis (604) 431-5020 sneak preview in this issue) actually used that keyboard, mouse, and joystick Space Tech (508) 970-0330 the headset for looking around in the virSpace Tech showed off their highly in STD (410) 785-5661 tual world and cockpit, but movement was novative hand-held Spaceball for action Nu Reality (714) 442-1080 all controlled by the joystick. This demo games. It has a strain-gauge ball which inshowed that VR headsets are more suited terprets forces exerted on it into the apWhy don't you share your technical adfor moving your head around to see what's propriate character movements. The grip ventures with your fellow CGW readers going on than for controlling movement. portion has plenty of buttons to play with, who may have the same problems? Send Flight simulations such as 1942 PACIFIC but it's a bit awkward to get the hang of at your questions, cool hacks, and tips to UnAIR WAR from MicroProse and the forthfirst. STD, known for their high end video der The Hood, c/o Computer Gaming coming plethora of Doom-like games that game hardware, showed off their new PC World, 130 Chaparral Ct. Suite 260, Anaallow separate head movement from body Optix, which uses a frictionless optical heim Hills, CA 92808, or at any of our movement are perfectly suited for adaptasensor, providing fast feedback. Requiring email addresses (Internet: 76703.622 tion for VR headsets. In short, three less calibration than mechanical joysticks, @compuserve.com). 166 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"MIOHAVN FITA ZORK ASSAULT STEALINFITER 2.0 YCOON CIVILIZATION MICROPROSE SIM CITY 2000 TUENT GROLIER : A  IRON HELIX THE PLANET'S HOTTEST HARDWARE MEETS THE PLANET'S COOLEST SOFTWARE. INTRODUCING GAME BLASTER CD 16. (( All the leaders of the gaming universe FX-2000 joystick, so you can hone your reflexes. have joined forces. And now they're coming Not to mention the most outrageous games in the Sound BLASTER to get you. No other game experience can cosmos, like Rebel Assault, Sim City 2000, Return 16 prepare you for what's waiting inside the new to Zork, Iron Helix, F-117A Stealth Fighter, Silent Game Blaster CD'16 multimedia upgrade kit.* Service II, Civilization, Railroad Tycoon, and The You get a Sound Blaster 16-bit sound card and New Grolier Multimedia Encyclopedia. Of course, speakers that make all your games sound all your games will sound better because they're made terrifyingly real. A to be played on Sound Blaster. The question is, can double-speed CDyou handle it? Want more info or the name of a BLASTER CD 16 ROM, so all your Creative Labs dealer? CREATIVE POUS games run faster. An Call 1-800-998-5227. CREATIVE LABS. INC. Suggested Retail Price $54995 1994 Creative Technology Lad Game Master CD Sound Blastet. and the Sound Blaster and Creatives are trademarks of Creative Technology Lad. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. US inquiries: Creative Labs: 1-800-9985227 09-428.66XL Intemtitl e s Creative Technology Lud. Singapore, TEL 65-773-0233 FAX, 65-773-0353 Circle Reader Service #131 "


"NOW PLAYING These Just In Here are our quick takes on games that arrived just before press time. You can be sure that the more prominent titles will be given a full review in the next issue. ELIJOOD 0503 The Big Dee [ike S latina Teal Yiew Windo help DE 20 LEDOA DIFCEDORFE ALIEN ARCADE fires to put out, riots to quell, power to reOut of the noise of STREET FIGHTER store and freeways to reopen. A Windows clones and concern over violence in video game reminiscent of the disaster scenarios games comes this collection of non-vioin SimCity, The Big One is a detailed simlent arcade games for the youngest joyulation developed with the aid of several stick waggler in the house. The look of government agencies who were consulted the six games is decidedly cute, low-tech, to determine their effectiveness in the face of such a disaster. Although the game is trivially simple to win (getting re-elected after a week's worth of clean up), its fascination comes from sending out the ambulances, calling in the national guard, setting up field hospitals, all in the face of distinguish this game from so many other gas and power outages. As the death toll arcade exercises. All of which is a shame, because this product could have included voice bits from the Blues Brothers routines, as well as some of the group's real hits, rather than the lame remixes found here. If you're missing the brothers Jake and approachable. Game play is simple, and Elwood, check out the Nickelodeon with instructions included to let you capSNL reruns or rent their movie. IBM, ture Stink Snakes, clean up nasty lungi, $44.99. Circle Reader Service # 3 or get those Klutsy Quasars under conTrrus SOFTWARE, 20432 CORISCO ST., trol. Of all the six games included, NERCHATSWORTH CA, 91311, (818)709-3692 DOIDS offers the most arcade challenge, 720 but none of these are going to give carCORRIDOR 7 tridge veterans any sleepless nights. In and amount of damage fluctuates, so does Recipe for a Capstone Cocktail: License keeping with the non-violent theme, your popularity in the polls. If you decide WOLFENSTEIN-3D engine from id and mix nothing dies in any of the games. ALIEN to check out THE BIG ONE, do us a favor ideas from TERMINATOR RAMPAGE; shake ARCADE might be a good choice for the and restore the power to Anaheim Hills as thoroughly. Add an aliens overrunning youngsters, as long as it doesn't take away soon as possible. IBM, Windows, $49.95, the secret desert compound\" motif for llaany of Dad's Doom time. Mac, $49.95. Circle Reader Service # 2 vor; mix well. Even topped off with an Circle Reader Service #1. SWFTE INTERNATIONAL, LTD., STONE MIL. olive, the taste may be too dry for many, as LUXENBERG SOFTWARE, Inc. 254 FERN OFFICE PARK, 722 YORKLYN ROAD, HOCKESSIN the result is yet another \"lind the key, unST., WEST HARTFORD CT, 06119, (203) DE, 19707, (302) 234-1740 lock the door, see what's left to explore\" 236-1993 maze game. While CORRIDOR 7 has adeBLUES BROTHERS quate music, cool enough sound, and the THE BIG ONE Anyone familiar with the characters crerequisite funky weaponry, the colorful Many Southern Californians live with ated by Dan Akroyd and John Belushi for KOR ALIZATE anxiety over The Big One, the large magSaturday Night Live would marvel that they nitude earthquake that seismologists have could be contained on just one floppy HH been predicting for years. Troubled Angedisk. Our musical heroes are reduced to lenos might find it therapeutic to take the jumping, climbing and scrolling around a Big One into their own hands with this variety of screens in fairly mundane arproduct. After determining the size of the cade fashion. The plot plays lip-service to earthquake and its location along one of the pair's musical heritage, as Jake and Elmany major fault lines, you must handle wood must find lost notes in order to esthe after-ellects of the quake. As the Super cape from an evil jukebox. While the Mayor of the Southland and chief organizcharacters look the part, right down to the er of disaster relief, you will have plenty of dark sunglasses, this is the only mark to Torre DOS 50 26000 168 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"More Players. More Levels. More Weapons. More Enemies. The Invasion Begins On CD-ROM. Technology licensed from ID SOFTWARE, creators of WOLFENSTEINTM 3D CORRIDOR TM Alien Invasion For IPX Networks: Up To 12+ Players Capstone THE PINNACLE OF ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE MILE Now available on disk and August 7 on IBM CD-ROM. To order call: (305) 591-5900(800) 468-7226 BBS (305) 471-8962 Software Creations BBS (508) 365-2359, 2400 Baud (508) 368-7139, U.S. Robotics  (508) 365-9352, 14.4-28.8K Wolfenstein is a trademark of ID Software. All Rights Reserved. Corridor 7: Alien Invasion and Capstone are trademarks of IntraCorp, Inc. All other trademarks acknowledged. Circle Reader Service #51 "


"NOW PLAYING baddies just don't seem to evoke the terror ISM, Inc. 2103 HARMONY WOODS of Doom or the camp of WOLF 3D. Despite ROAD, OWNINGS MILLS, MD 21117, (410) their ferocious looks, most creatures bite 560-0973 the dust if you so much as tickle them with the provided Taser. Nevertheless, there LEISURE SUIT LARRY 6 CD are clever innovations within the 30 floors, «Hi, I'm Larry. Larry Laffer. Wanna see including a tiny level map, land mines, my hard drive? I've got these great-lookand the ability to scan for invisible eneing gals on there that talk just like real mies and hidden lasers in infra-red visor women. They'll tease you, tell you stories, mode. CORRIDOR 7 will work on a slower and make you feel things you've never felt machine (386SX) and is fairly entertainbefore-all kinds of secret exotic, erotic ing-a nice alternative for those whose thrills (handcuffs included). Don't worry, systems are not quite up to Doom. A CD you won't see anything you wouldn't see 2001: A Space Odyssey had been updated version is promised that will contain even on late night television (unless you find Unlike its distinguished film predecessor more levels. IBM, $49.95. Circle Reader one of the hidden 'Easter eggs), but however, OUTPOST lacked a good director Service # 4. thanks to my 'digital ditherings,' the nine The documentation in particular leaves a CAPSTONE, 7200 NW 19 STREET, SUITE girls you'll meet are more beautiful and lot to be desired-especially damning 500, MIAMI, FL 33126 (305) 591-5900 realistic than ever (if you've got a VESA since the Official Strategy Guide appeared driver, otherwise you hafta look at their some two months before the game's reG-NETIX perfect tans in low-res VGA). I've won two lease, and was written by the game's deLonely is the life in space; but here it's free weeks at the La Costa Lotta resort hosigner. One has to wonder why there isn' really isolated. You play the part of a scientel, and if you can't get lucky here, buddy, a decent tutorial included, and why the tist and last survivor of the human race, you're worse than me. But beware! Like use of function keys is kept secret. If NASA spared from a deadly virus only because my friend Al says, this is the longest and had been this confused, Neil Armstrong's you inhabit a space station in orbit. Your Felipe H A MT0713 famous step would have been into the job is to reconstruct mankind from scratch void. Despite all the data plugged into this through genetic engineering. Making package, potential stellar explorers may your task a bit more daunting is the genowant to do a bit more research before cidal plague, which has a bad habit of liftofr, lest they crash and burn on re-encausing mutations—undesirable, to say try. MPC CD-ROM, $69.95. Circle Reader the least. For those who can't wait to maService #7 nipulate DNA, there is a \"Genetics CrashSIERRA ON-LINE, INC., P.O. Box 485 Course\" primer included. Unveiling the COARSEGOLD CA, 93614, (800) 757-7707 secrets of the double helix will require a lot of work, as you must tediously compare PRO LEAGUE BASEBALL strands of genetic code, symbol by symbol. This latest pitch from the computer Additionally, the human genotypes are hardest Larry yet.' If you're not a seasoned baseball mound is delivered by those vetthe only ones allowed. You could not, for scrounge wizard, you may not get far. eran switch-hitters at Micro Sports, and instance, create a race of humanoids with With the babes, that is. See you in the like most sports products, features official cat eyes, as in Cordwainer Smith's classic penthouse.\" IBM CD-ROM. $69.95. Cir-major league licensing. A nice touch is Norstrilia series of science-fiction stories. cle Reader Service # 6 that the league set-up module contains the While useful for understanding the comSIERRA ON-LINE, INC., P.O. BOX 485, new (and controversial) 1994 Division plex science of genetics, the lack of flexiCOARSEGOLD CA, 93614, (800) 757-7707 alignment. Realizing that baseball is the ultimate statistical sport, the designers OUTPOST have thrown in an encyclopedic array of For all the science-fiction extravaganzas player information, all of which can be of the past few years, a huge void remains printed out for your own baseball archives. in the \"hard\" science fiction genre. OUTThe usual draft/trade options are includPOST set out to address this lack using ed, but a wily human general manager can NASA research data as its base. In the game's fiction, Earth is destroyed by a renegade meteor, leaving the remnants of humanity to colonize the stars. Planetary exploration and colonization is depicted with some of the most beautiful 3-D artbility in the design makes this more of a work yet seen in a computer game. Robotpuzzle to be solved, rather than a reics, terraforming, hydrogen ramscoops, playable learning experience. A Windows and suspended animation (the long sleep) version and a Mac version with enhanced are but a few of the classic SF themes exgraphics are in the offing. Mac, $59.95. plored. In fact, at times this game almost Circle Reader Service # 5. looks as if Stanley Kubrick's classic film Fie cast turve USB Here 170 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


" New Lowest Prices CD ROM Titles y 19 25 19 29 29 25 peatusta Bookshers Dr 10 49 15 29 39 15 11 36 10 39 39 10 Sear's Birthday srprs 25 10 Pac CD Titles Vol. 1 Corel Waterfalls 19 Interactive Storytime Vol. 2 19 Shareware Explorer 52 XX Beverly Hill 90296 29 1001 Utilities 10 Corel Wild Animals Interactive Storytime Vol. 3 19 Shareware Heaven 15 XX Blond Justice 20th Century Video Almanac 21 Corel Wildlife Babies Iron Helix 25 Shareware Heaven 2 19 XX Bodacious Beauties 3D Dinosaur Adventure 21 Corel WWII Aircraft 19 JFK Assassination 43 Shareware Overload Trio 24 XX Busty Babes Vol. 2 7th Guest Corel Art Show 4 Jokes & Pranks 9 Shareware Studio 3 17 Buttman's Euro. Vacation 9 Digit Zip Code Directory 27 Critical Path Jones in the Fast Lane 15 Shrick Hims nsultg Dtctv 2 26 XX Collectible 9000 Sounds/Sound File Shrwr 21 Current Shareware Jan 1994 Journeyman Project 25 Slilent Service II 25 XX College Girls Adv. of Willy Beamish 16 Cyber Race 22 Jurasic Park (Game) 49 Simtel 2.0 17 XX Condo Cuties Aesop's Fables Database Made Easy 12 Jurassic Park Screen Saver 15 Sleeping Beauty 17 XX Debbie Does Dallas Aircraft Encyclopedia Day of The Tentacle Just Grandma & Me 19 Small Blue Planet 49 XX Deception All Music Guide 49 Deathstar Arcade Battles Jutland 25 So Much Modem Madness 19 XX Deep Throat Amazing Universe Desktop Bookshop Kid's Zoo & Undersea Adv. 25 So Much Shareware 4 17 XX Deep Throat Girls America Alive 19 Desktop Publishers Drm Dsk 29 King's Quest V 10 Softwre Vault Games Coll 12 XX Digital Dreams American Vista Atas 25 Destination Mars King's Quest VI 19 Software Vault Gold Collect 12 XX Digital Dreams #2 Anlamil San Diego Zoo 17 Dictionaries & Languages 10 Kodak Photo Access CD 15 Software Vault Windows 12 XX Digital seduction Arctic Baron Dinosaurs. Multimedia Ency. Language of the World 24 Solar Heaven 14 XX Doors of Passion Art Appeal Vol. 1: Business 19 Dinosaur Safari 15 Lawnmower Man 45 Sound Sensations 10 XX Dream Girl Art Appeal V2: Gov't & Ind Dinosaur/Space Adventure 25 Learn to Speak English 3.0 59 Space Quest 4:Roger Wilco 15 XX Erotica Art Appeal Vol. 3: Education 19 Direct Phone 89 Learn to Speak French 3.0 59 Space Shuttle 19 XX Eurotica Arthur's Teacher Trouble 19 Dracula Unleashed Learn to Speak Spanish 3.0 59 Sports Best 18 XX Exotic Girls 3 in 1 Audubon Birds 13 Dragons Lair Learning Adventure 9 Sprt Ilus Sports Almanac94 19 XX Fantasies Audubon Mammals 19 Dr. Fonts for Windows 1 15 Leaming Heaven 15 Star War Chess 19 XX FAO VOL. 2 Backroad Racers 29 Dr. Games Dos 15 Legend of Kyrandia 30 Stellar 7 15 XX FAO VOL. 3 Barney Bear Goes To School Dr. Games ll Dos Library of the Futuro 29 Straight from Heaven 17 XX Fisherman's Wife Bamey Bear Goes to Space 15 Dr. Games | Expert Windows 15 Lifestyle Rich & Fms ckbk 29 Street Atas USA Ver. 2.0 88 XX Frat Girl of Double D Beauty and the Beast 16 Dr. Music Lab 15 Loom 14 Super Arcade Collection 16 XX Girl's of Mardi Gras Best Business 25 Dr. OIS 2 Gold I 15 Lord of The Rings 27 Super Programmer 15 XX Girl's of Risque Beyond the Planet Earth 36 Dr. Shareware 2 15 MacMillian Dictionary for Child 19 Supergames for Windows 2 14 XX Glamour Girls #1 Bibles and Religion 11 Dr. Ts Sing-A-Long 16 Mad Dog Mcree 19 Technotools 10 XX Heiki's Girls Exposed Blue Force 36 Dr. Windows 2 15 Magic Death 15 Three Stooges 10 XX Hidden Obsessions Brain Drain Dune 25 Mario Is Missing Deluxe 19 Time Almanac 19 XX Hot Bodies Bugs Bunny 11 Ecoquest Mario Is Missing/World Atas 19 Timelapse 22 XX Hot Peppers' Business 500 19 Education Master 18 Mario's Early Years! 19 Too Many Typefonts House of Sleeping Beauty Business Assistant 10 Electronic Home Library Mayo Clinic (Family Health) 18 Toolworks Refemce Library 17 XX Insatiable Business Master 19 Encarta 1994 67 Megarace 25 Tortoise & The Hare 36 XX LA Strippers Busy Town Encyclopedia of Sound Microsoft Bookshelf 93 38 Total Baseball 1994 14 XX LA Traviata CUsers Group Library 23 Eric the Unready Microsoft Bookshelf 94 57 Undersea Adventure 21 XX Legends of Porn V2 Caricaturas 10 Everywhere USA Travel Gd Microsoft Dinosaurs 35 US Atlas V. 4 19 XX Local Girls V. 2 (3 in 1) Carmen San Diego Delux 19 Exploring Ancient Architect 39 Microsoft Encarta 94 67 US Civics Fedl Citiznshp Txt Chaos Continum 19 Eye of the Beholder III 25 Microsoft Golf 27 US History 19 XX Massive Melons Chessmaster 3000 15 F-15 Suike Eagle Ill 19 Microsoft works 2.0 29 USA State Factbook 29 XX Model's Memoirs Chessmaster 4000 19 Family Doctor 3rd Edition 19 Mixed Up Mother Goose 12 USA Tours 24 More Northem Delights Classic Cartoons Family Education Coll. 2.0 19 Monarch Notes 45 USA Wars: Civil War 28 XX My First Time City 2000 34 Fantasia Fonts & Sounds 19 Monkey Island 17 USA Wars: Korea 28 XX Mystique of the Orient Clip Art Comucopia 19 Morphman 29 USA Wars: Vietnam 28 XX Neuro Dancer Clip Art Heaven 16 Fatty Bear's Fun Pack 18 Mother of All Clipart 12 USA Wars: World War II 28 XX Nightwatch Clip Art Heaven 2 22 Flight Simulator Tool Kit 58 MPC Wizard 12 Utilities Platinum 13 XX Northern Delights Clip Art Warehouse 10 Font Elegance 12 MYST 45 Video Cube: Space 19 XX One-Nine Hundred Color Magic Fonts Platinum 12 National Geogrphic Mammals 19 Wave Pool, The 13 XX Paradise Club Colossal Cookbook 10 Food Analyst National Parks of America 37 Where in Wrd Is Carmn SD 35 XX Pinch of Pepper Companion OS/2 Fractal Exstasy New View of Space 18 Who Killed Sam Rupert? 18 XX Pom Mania 2 Disc Complete Bookshop Free Phone 25 Newsweek Interactive 28 Win Platinum 12 XX Princess of Persia Composer Quest 24 Full Bloom Night Owl 11 19 Windoware 10 XX Priority Male Compton's Inter Ency 94 39 Futura Games Nomad 35 Windows 1994 29 XX Private Collection Compton's New Centry Ency. 19 Gabriel Knight/Sins of Fathe 25 North American Fax Book 29 Wing Commander 2 Delux 29 XX Rainwomen Computer Reference Library Game Master 3rd Edition 15 North American Indians 27 Wing Commander/ Ultima 22 XX Raquel Released Computer Tutor Games Platinum Windows 12 Oceans Below 19 Wolfenstein 3D/Allens Gold 15 XX Rimfire Pacific Video Computer Works 18 Gardening 10 Officer's Book Case 29 World Atas V. 4 19 XX Scissors & Stones Conan the Cimmerian Gifs Galaxy 18 Our Solar System 10 World of Flight 28 XX Sex Games Conspiracy 25 Global Explorer 85 Parenting 19 World Traveller 10 XX Sexoccapades Consumer Information 35 Godzilla 10 PC Karaoke 18 World Vista Atas 25 Symr Butts Deep Insd Shn 25 Cookbook Heaven 15 Graphic Textures 19 PC Library 19 Wrath of the Demon 19 Symr Butts in Paradise Coral Draw 3.0 Groilers Ency. '93 V. 6 39 PC SIG 13 Symr Butts Is Blown Away 25 Corel Auto racing 19 Guinness Disc of Records 93 19 Peter and the Wolf Symr Brtts & Honeymners Corel Aviation Gunship 2000 19 Phoenix 4.0 17 XX 101 Sex Positions #1 29 XX Sizzle Corel Bridges 22 Gus Goes to Cybertown 15 Porky Pig 10 XX 101 Sex Positions #2 29 XX Southern Beauties Corel California Park 22 Hacker Chronicles 27 Precision Mapping 79 XX 3-D Darlings 33 XX Storm Vol. 1 Corel Carribean 19 Ham Radio 10 Print Shop Ensemble CD 75 XX 3-D Dream Girls 29 XX Storm Vol. 2 Corel Coast Hamcall Oct 1993 Privateer 56 XX Adult Dirty Ltl Cartoons 35 XX Storm Vol. 3 Corel Deserts Hard Day's Night 19 Programmer's ROM 29 XX Adult Picture Library 19 XX Super Models Go Wild Corel Fields Hobbes OS/2 Archives Project Guttenburg Ckbk 19 XX After Dark Trilogy 19 XX Super Smutware Corel Fireworks Home Medical Advisor Pro 45 Publish itl Dos Vol. 2.0 14 XX Amateur Model 22 XX Super Stars of Pom Corel Flight Jet 19 Home Remedies 18 Publisher's Paradise 20 XX Amateur Models #2 33 XX Sweet Dreams Corel Flowers Home & Office Platinum 12 Publishers Platinum Vol. 1 15 XX Amateur Video for Win 19 XX T & A to the Maxx Corel Foods 19 Horde, The 48 Publisher's Power House 19 XX American Girls 29 XX Touch Me, Feel Me Corel Fruits & Vegetables 19 House of Games 11 Putt Putt Fun Pack 16 XX American Pie 29 XX Toys Not Boys Corel Japan 19 House of Games 2 15 Putt Putt Goes to the Moon 18 XX Amorous Asian Girls 32 XX Traci, I Love You Corel N. American Wildlife Humans 29 Putt Putt Joins the Parade 18 Animated Fantasies Vol. 1 34 XX Tropical Girls 3 in 1 Corel People Images of NASA Collection 20 QRZ Ham Radio 15 Animated Fantasies Vol.2 34 XX Virtual Vixens Corel Residential Interiors 19 In the Company of Whales 39 Return to the Moon 19 XX Asian Ladies 39 XX Wicked Whispers #1 Corel Rural Africa 19 INCA 1 Return to Zork 25 XX Best of Vivid 29 XX Women of Venus Corel Sunrise, Sunset Indiana Jones(Fate of Atlantis) 25 Scooters Magic Castle 33 xx Beverly Hilllles 29 XX X-Rated Bloopers Corel Swimming 19 Information USA 45 Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe 15 Corel The Artic 19 Interactive Storytime Vol. 1 19 Select Phone Corel Underwater Reefs Toll Free Order Line: 1-800-636-6629 Ext. 101 Download Detail Description or Placing Order via our BBS 24 Hours Everyday! BBS Lines: (818) 842-2873 (909) 464-2750 Free UPS Ground shipping in U.S. UPS Ground shipping $5 per order. Express shipping available upon request. Additional shipping on purchase 3 or more titles. charge will apply. Please call for detail. Price and availability subject to change without notice. All return titles subject to 20% restocking charges. Defective title exchanges with same title only. Money MOMBY INC. DBA/ CompuShopping Net order same as cash. California residents add 7.75% sales tax. Personal checks held 4 weeks. All Info: 909-613-1815 Fax: 909-613-1817 reum decks will assess a $25 service charge. Visa and Mastercard accepted. 3811 Schaefer Ave., Suite C, Chino, CA 91710 Business Hours: Mon I'ri 8-6 PST Alter hours, please place order by fax or call our BBS Circle Reader Service #216 19 33 12 12 11 19 59 25 15 Adult 19 19 45 19 15 19 19 169 19 "


"NOW PLAYING usually cut better deals than the AI owndering the correct lab studies after all, it ers. The graphic look is improved over rewouldn't do to lose the patient before the cent Micro Sports products, most operation. Success in surgery depends on noticeable in the great looking ballparks. many factors, including operating on the Add modem play to this product's scoutcorrect hemisphere, careful use of the drill, ing report and you've got a game that just and being able to handle a variety of commight make it to The Show. IBM, $49.95. plications. The staff will help you in the Circle Reader Service # 9 lower difficulty levels, but make one wrong MICRO SPORTS, INC., ONE NORTHGATE move and your patient's not only off to the PARK, SUITE 103, CHATTANOOGA TN, 37415, morgue, you're staring at a letter from the (800) 937-7737 bereaved family's attorney. There's a life under your knife, and the EKG is showing SPACESHIP WARLOCK largely on value perception. Sure, the cardiac arrhythmia. What shall we do, docHearken, space rangers, to a tale from USA team is available, but the package tor? Doctor? Mac, $59.95. Circle Reader CD-ROM galaxies past. Now Windows features only eight teams in all, hardly alService # 12 users may tour the cosmos where only Maclowing fans to replay significant World ISM, Inc., P.O. Box 247, PHOENIX MD gamers could venture before. In this MPC Cup rivalries (although Brazil is avail21131, (410) 560-0973 version of Reactor's first release, you must able). The joystick controls are much betset out in search of planet Earth, which haster than most imports, although the TIE FIGHTER been hidden away in deep space by the evil ability to affect shot trajectory after strik The Rebel Alliance is teetering on the Kroll, conquerors of all humanity. Docuing the ball takes this game into Arcade brink of dissolution, awaiting only our fimentation is scanty fuel indeed for the inNever-Never Land. Managing aspects renal stroke. A Tie Fighter awaits you, trepid adventurer, but the interface is so ceive more emphasis than in the typical young pilot-go forth and destroy the simple, even a humanoid could figure it arcade soccer game, and you may select rabble that has dared to dely us. If you out. All actions, whether fighting alien players as well as set up your own offensucceed in your dangerous missions, you thugs, procuring stolen credit, or exploring sive and defensive formations. A good will have the gratitude of the Empire, and the labyrinthine tunnels of a Kroll base, are enough cartridge port, it unfortunately perhaps, a glimpse of the glory of the cffected by a mere mouse click the latest in fails to take advantage of the home comDark Side of the Force. You know that futuristic technology). Conversations are puter's capabilities in any significant way, you cannot resist-the seductive graphics, graphically or otherwise. Amiga, IBM, the Gouraud-shaded ships, reach out to $19.95. Circle Reader Service # 11 you; the digitized sounds, the banshee DAVIDSON & ASSOCIATES, INC., 19840 PAONEER AVE., TORRANCE, CA 90503, (800) 556-6141 typed in Galactic Infocom Standard-an ancient method of communication, so be wary of the dreaded text parser translation syndrome. The SVGA graphics are packed into \"wide screen\" format and have a strong Blade Runner feel with decent animation (for such primitive 20th-century ef ects), provided you run the game on a fairly fast machine. A good upgrade of an older Mac title, this shouldn't be left to rot in the time capsule. Mac/MPC, $57.95. Circle Reader Service # 10 REACTOR, INC. 445 WEST ERIE, CHICAGO IL, 60610, (312) 573-0800 SURGEON 3: THE BRAIN No time for those med school classes on neurosurgery? No need to worry-one weekend with this little package and you'll be carving craniums like a pro. SURGEON 3: THE BRAIN is an unpretentious educational program that is as difficult to master as it is FUSCLAC 52 visually spartan. Despite coloring-book STIEBO 3. TIE Bombers FG Etentecitorea at 6 graphics, this program will have your own scream of your TIE Fighter, rush from brain squirming within minutes. Don't one speaker to the other. Grasp the joyeven think about going to the operating stick and feel the Force flow through the room until you've studied the medical computer system, the fighter moving aljournals in the hospital's library. Then most effortlessly from your touch. Let you'll be able to diagnose the patient by oryour hatred for the rebels be your strength. We will train you in the training grounds and the virtual combat chamber, and then you shall lead the Empire to a new era of greatness in 50 missions, interspersed with cinematic cut screens to tell your story. Choose your fighter from one of six craft and be gone...and don't bother to return if you fail! IBM, $63.95. Circle Reader Service # 13 LUCASARTS ENTERTAINMENT, P.O. Box 10307, SAN RAFAEL, CA, 94912, (800) 782-3394 Tie instrumenti Sulit Drugs Flotil SENSIBLE SOCCER This month's entry in the Soccer Sweepstakes comes with a better pedigree than most. A best-seller in Europe, its acceptance on American shores will hinge 172 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"SCORET Welcome to the Cooperstown of Computer Games. Here, raised upon pedestals, you'll find the games that broke the records, established the benchmarks, and held gamers in delighted trances for hours untold. GW H.O.F. HIGHLIGHTS HALL OF FAME CIVILIZATION bad Anato Send The lo SID MEIER'S CIVILIZATION MICROPROSE, 1991 Though we have only anecdotal evidence to support us, we would guess that more hours have been invested in conquering the worlds of CIVILIZATION than in any other computer game in the hobby's history. Economics, exploMICROPROSE ration, military strategy and diplomacy are all elegantly bound together in this magnum opus of world conquest games. Designer Sid Meier has long been synonymous with great game play, but in this design Meier truly out-did himself, creating an experience conducive to a vicious case of what we call \"game lock»-that overwhelming state of mind where you are glued to your keyboard, promising yourself that you'll play \"just one more turn, one more turn, one more...\" The upcoming COLONIZATION will use the basic design of CIVILIZATION, but will focus in on a specific historical period. THE BARD'S TALE (Electronic Arts, 1985) BATTLE CHESS (Interplay Productions, Inc., 1988) CHESSMASTER (The Software Toolworks, 1986) CIVILIZATION (MicroProse, Inc., 1991) DUNGEON MASTER (FTL Software, 1987) EARL WEAVER BASEBALL (Electronic Arts, 1986) EMPIRE (Interstel, 1978) F-19 STEALTH FIGHTER (MicroProse, Inc., 1988) GETTYSBURG: THE TURNING POINT (SSI, 1986) GUNSHIP (MicroProse, Inc., 1989) HARPOON (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) KAMPFGRUPPE (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) KING'S QUEST V (Sierra On-Line, Inc., 1990) M-1 TANK PLATOON (MicroProse, Inc., 1989) MECH BRIGADE (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) MIGHT & MAGIC (New World Computing, 1986) M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) PIRATES (MicroProse, Inc., 1987) RAILROAD TYCOON (MicroProse, Inc., 1990) RED BARON (Dynamix, 1990) SIMCITY (Maxis, 1987) STARFLIGHT (Electronic Arts, 1986) THE SECRET OF MONKEY ISLAND (LucasArts, 1990) THEIR FINEST HOUR (LucasArts, 1989) ULTIMA III (Origin Systems, Inc., 1983) ULTIMA IV (Origin Systems, Inc., 1985) ULTIMA VI (Origin Systems, Inc., 1990) WAR IN RUSSIA (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) WASTELAND (Interplay Productions, Inc., 1986) WING COMMANDER (Origin Systems, Inc., 1991) WIZARDRY (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) ZORK (Infocom, 1981) freie DUNGEON MASTER FTL SOFTWARE, 1987 If you set aside ULTIMA IV, you would have trouble finding a game that had more influence on role playing games than Dungeon Master. Originally released in 1987 on the Atari ST, DUNGEON MASTER's trend-setting graphics moved away from the \"windowed\" screen look, and its realistic sound effects created a terrific adventuring atmosphere. The game instantly became a showcase title for the Atari and Amiga machines. Though in many ways it was a typical hack n' slash dungeon romp, it introduced many subtle twists to the mechanics of role playing, many of which have been emulated by other games over the years. The only blemish on this game's history is that it took FTL over two years to complete the IBM conversion of the game, by which time many other games had adopted and improved upon its innovations. Fans of the game will want to keep an eye out for a sequel coming this Fall from Interplay Productions. SEPTEMBER 1994. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 173 "


"SCORE TOP 100 GAMES READER POLL #120 EAME 1 2 3 TOP ADVENTURE GAMES COMPANY Day of the Tentacle LucasArts Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts Quest for Glory III Sierra Sherlock Holmes CDI Viacom Gabriel Knight Sierra Star Control II Accolade The Seventh Guest Sam & Max Hit The Road LucasArts Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electronic Arts SCORE 9.94 9.83 9.79 9.56 ONTAGE 9.55 5 6 7 48 L 9 T 10 *1 *2 * B4 5 6 9.52 9.33 9.32 9.30 9.20 22432443 Virgin Ultima TOP ROLE PLAYING GAMES GAME COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.22 Betrayal at Krondor Dynamix 9.50 Ultima Underworld II Origin 9.42 Might & Magic III New World Computing 9.41 Lands of Lore Virgin 9.38 Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen New World Computing 9.37 Eye of the Beholder 11 SSI 9.34 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Computing 9.34 Ultima VII Origin 9.25 Eye of the Beholder 9.10 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 *8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21  COMPANY Id Software MicroProse Access Origin SSG Origin QQP LucasArts Maxis LucasArts Virgin LucasArts Dynamix Three-Sixty Pacific SSG QQP LucasArts Three-Sixty Pacific Spectrum HoloByte Three-Sixty Pacific Electronic Arts Sierra Viacom Id Software QQP Sierra Dynamix MicroProse SSI Origin New World Computing WG GON SSI SP AD.RP AD 23 AC GAME Doom Master of Orion Links 386 Pro Ultima Underworld Warlords II Wing Commander II Solitaire's Journey Day of the Tentacle Sim City 2000 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge Dune II Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis Front Page Sports Football Pro V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Carriers at War Construction Kit The Perfect General X-Wing V for Victory: Utah Beach Falcon 3.0 V for Victory: Market Garden NHLPA Hockey Quest for Glory III Sherlock Holmes CDI Wolfenstein 3-D Conquered Kingdoms Gabriel Knight Betrayal at Krondor World Circuit War in Russia Ultima Underworld II Might & Magic III Merchant Prince Fleet Defender Lands of Lore Aces of the Pacific Might & Magic: Darkside of Xeen Indy Car Racing Pacific War Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen Eye of the Beholder II Star Control II The Seventh Guest Chessmaster 3000 Sam & Max Hit The Road Comanche: Maximum Overkill Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Ultima VII V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword Privateer Lemmings WG,ST 25 26 27 28 AD SCORE 10.46 10.33 10.33 10.22 10.00 9.97 9.97 9.94 9.91 9.83 9.82 9.79 9.75 9.73 9.68 9.67 9.65 9.63 9.59 9.58 9.56 9.56 9.55 9.55 9.53 9.52 9.50 9.44 9.44 9.42 9.41 9.40 9.40 9.38 9.38 9.37 9.36 9.34 9.34 9.34 9.33 9.32 9.32 9.30 9.27 9.27 9.25 9.24 9.22 9.21 TOP SIMULATION GAMES GAME COMPANY Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte World Circuit MicroProse Fleet Defender MicroProse Aces of the Pacific Dynamix Indy Car Racing Virgin/Papyrus Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts Hornet Spectrum Holobyte Stunt IslandDisney Gunship 2000 MicroProse 1 2 FALCON 3 4 5 6 7 44 cm 8 9 10 SCORE 9.59 9.44 9.40 9.38 9.36 9.27 9.19 9.08 9.00 8.95 30 31 32 QOP to 34 MicroProse Virgin Dynamix New World Computing Virgin/Papyrus SSI New World Computing 36 37 38 RP WG SSI 1 ADAC 41 42 TOP STRATEGY GAMES GANE COMPANY Master of Orion MicroProse Warlords II SSG Solitaire's Journey QQP Sim City 2000 Maxis Dune II Virgin Merchant Prince QQP Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electronic Arts Syndicate Electronic Arts The Lost Admiral QQP 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 SCORE 10.33 10.00 9.97 9.91 9.82 9.40 9.32 9.13 44 45 JORION Accolade Virgin Software Toolworks LucasArts Novalogic Accolade Origin Three-Sixty Pacific Origin Psygnosis 47 48 49 50 WG 9.07 MECSOPROSE 9.05 AC.ST "


"SSI giggggggg SSI 9.22 8.57 TOP WARGAMES 51 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electronic Arts 9.20 52 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts 9.19 GAME COMPANY SCORE 53 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... 9.17 1 Sierra Three-Sixty Pacific V for Victory: Velikiye Luki 9.73 54 Hardball III Accolade 9.16 2 Carriers at War Construction Kit SSG 9.68  Vituay 55 Tetris Classic 9.14 3 Spectrum HoloByte The Perfect General QQP 9.67 56 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electronic Arts 9.13 4 V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Pacific 9.63 57 The Castle of Dr. Brain Sierra 9.11 5 V for Victory: Market Garden Three-Sixty Pacific 9.58 58 Eye of the Beholder 9.10 6 Conquered Kingdoms QQP 9.53 59 The Dagger of Amon Ra Sierra 9.09 7 War in Russia SSI 9.44 8 60 Pacific War Ultima VII: Part Two Serpent Isle 9.08 Origin 9.34 Hornet Spectrum Holobyte 9.08 9 V for Victory: Gold Juno Sword Three-Sixty Pacific 9.24 62 Syndicate Electronic Arts 9.07 10 Empire Deluxe New World Computing 9.04 63 Les Manly in: Lost in LA. Accolade 9.06 64 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Sir-Tech 9.05 TOP ACTION GAMES Quest for Glory 1 (VGA) Sierra 9.05 The Lost Admiral QQP 9.05 GAME COMPANY SCORE 67 Eric the Unready Legend 9.04 1 Doom Id Software 10.46 Empire Deluxe New World Computing WG 9.04 2 Wing Commander II Origin 9.97 Conquests of the Longbow Sierra 9.04 3 X-Wing LucasArts 9.65 70 Police Quest 3 Sierra 9.01 4 Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 9.55 Clash of Steel 9.01 5 Privateer Origin 72 Stunt Island Disney 9.00 6 Lemmings Psygnosis 9.21 Battles of Destiny QQP 9.00 7 Tetris Classic Spectrum Holo Byte 9.14 74 Space Quest IV Sierra 8.98 8 Oh, No! More Lemmings Psygnosis 8.92 Western Front SSI 8.98 9 The Horde Crystal Dynamics 8.61 76 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 8.97 10 Out of this World Interplay Carriers At War SSG 8.97 78 The Adventures of Willy Beamish Dynamix 8.96 Freddy Pharkas Frontier Pharmacist Sierra 8.96 TOP SPORTS GAMES 80 VGA Planets Tim Wisseman 8.95 GAME COMPANY SCORE Alone in the Dark 1-Motion 8.95 1 iLinks 386 Pro Access 10.33 Gunship 2000 MicroProse 8.95 2 Front Page Sports Football Pro Dynamix 9.75 83 Arena: The Elder Scrolls Bethesda 8.94 3 NHLPA Hockey Electronic Arts 9.56 84 The Incredible Machine Dynamix 8.92 4 Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade 9.27 MicroProse 8.92 Hardball III Accolade 9.16 Oh, No! More Lemmings Psygnosis 8.92 Tony La Russa Baseball II SSI 8.78 87 The Island of Dr. Brain Sierra 8.91 7 NFL Pro League Football Micro Sports 8.54 88 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Electronic Arts 8.87 8 The Games: Winter Challenge Accolade 8.50 Aces over Europe Dynamix 8.87 9 4-D Boxing Electronic Arts 8.37 90 Indianapolis 500 Electronic Arts 8.83 10 Wayne Gretzky Hockey III Bethesda 8.30 91 Carriers at War il SSG 8.82 92 Spellcasting 301: Spring Break Legend 8.81 93 Rex Nebular MicroProse 8.80 94 Gateway to the Savage Frontier SSI 8.79 95 Tony La Russa Baseball Il 8.78 You've read our take on the latest games, now here's a chance to see what your fellow Populous II Electronic Arts 8.78 gamers think. The CGW Top 100 is a monthly tally of game ratings provided by our Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 Sierra 98 Heart of China Dynamix 8.75 readers via the CGW Poll ballot found in each issue. Approximately 50 games are ratKasparov's Gambit Electronic Arts STA 8.75 ed each month, and the results are added to the aggregate results from past months. 100 Veil of Darkness SSI RP 8.74 This historical database serves as a terrific reference for what you, the gamers, feel are Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. = Top game of type. Dark Teal = New Game, the best plays in gaming. AD = Adventure, RP = Role Playing, SI = Simulation, ST = Strategy, WG = Wargame, AC = Action, SP = Sports The Com Outer Gaming World POIL A MONTHLY SURVEY OF THE READERS OF COMPUTER GAMING WORLD aaaaaaaaaaaaaaa F-117A Vote! SSI 8.78 "


"SSORE PATCHES AEGIS Patch: Eliminates the Electronic Book crash. 4/28/94. 9 fixes for Origin's new flight sim. 5/27/94 Air Warrior V1.13 Update: New execute files, fixes several problems. 3/1/94 Police Quest 4 Patch: Fixes all known problems and speeds up restoration of saved games. Disk version only. 4/5/94 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Patch: Replacement file for players who get a divide overflow when starting the game. 3/23/94 Prophecy Patch: Solves graphics problems with faster systems. 6/15/94 Computer game programs have grown so massive and the number of hardware configurations has become so huge that incompatibilities and glitches are frustratingly common. Patches for buggy programs have become the fastest fix. NET These patches can be downloaded from ZiffNet, both on CompuServe and on Prodigy, except where indicated. On CompuServe, go to Computer Gaming World's own Forum, GO GAMEWORLD, Library 2, The Patch File. To sign up, call (800) 848-8990. On Prodigy. jump \"ZiffNet\" and Search by Title for the patches listed here. Or, Search by Category to browse the entire games library. These patches can also be downloaded from other on-line services, from software publishers\" BBSs, or directly from the publisher. We urge publishers to keep us informed of the latest patches for their games. Red indicates new files. Battles of the South Pacific Upgrade: Latest patch for OOP's WWII naval strategy game. 5/24/94 Rally V1.1 Upgrade: Fixes joystick calibration and other problems. 3/24/94 Ravenloft 1.1 Upgrade: Latest version from SSI, floppy and CD-ROM. 4/29/94 Cactus League Pro Basketball Update: Corrects stats of 70-71 season disk. 6/23/94 Global Domination Update: Fixes modem play bugs. 6/23/94 than just the default 220 address. 5/3/94 Red Baron Patch: Configuration fix for IBM only. 3/29/94 Chessmaster 4000 Turbo v1.04: Newest upgrade for Software Toolworks chess program. 6/28/94 Gobliins CD-ROM Patch: Fixes sound card and CD-ROM driver problems. 3/1/94 Kingmaker V1.51 Upgrade: Latest version of Avalon Hill's strategy game with many fixes. 5/25/94 Seawolf Patch: Allows 16-bit Sound Blaster sound effects and music. 3/30/94 Comanche Joystick Drivers: Adds Flightstick Pro support. 5/24/94 Great Naval Battles v1.1 Upgrade: Several corrections listed in readme file. 6/24/94 Shanghai II V1.05 Update (Mac): Fixes tournament crash bug. 3/24/94 Command Adventures Starship Patch: The latest fixes for Merit Software's Sci-fi game. 5/19/94 Lands Of Lore CD-ROM V1.22 Upgrade: Fixes lockup problems on fast machines, allows retrieval of Dawn's key and allows use of Waveblaster/ Soundblaster 16 combo. 3/7/94 The Horde V1.1 Revision: Now supports Media Vision Pro Audio sound cards. Fixes lockups on some Sony drives, dead knights not disappearing after snowball hits, and also slows down the end credits. 4/28/94 Sierra Sound Patches: A variety of fixes and drivers for Sound Blaster, Gravis Ultra Sound and General Midi users, for a number of older Sierra games. 5/19/94 Companions of Xanth Points List: Complete point totals for Legend's adventure game.5/25/94 Lands of Lore Floppy V1.23 Upgrade: Fixes \"Dawn's Key\" problem and Pentium lockups when choosing a character. 4/28/94 Subwar 2050 V2.02 Update: Corrects cursor drift, time and date problem. 4/28/94 Detroit Upgrade: Fixes include finances, the December crash and the 255-worker bug. 5/31/94 IndyCar Racing V1.04 International: Different patches for owners of IndyCar Spanish, Italian, German or French language versions. 5/19/94 Lucky's Casino Update: Latest version of QQP game. 5/19/94 Tigers on the Prowl V1.1: Fixes the mortar problem, among others. 5/28/94 Diamond Dreams Upgrade: Fixes all known bugs, and features greatly improved AI for computer manager strategies. 3/29/94 IndyCar Racing Patch: Improves Al and cleans up tracks. 6/23/94. Megarace v1.1 Upgrade: Solves Sound Blaster difficulties. 6/28/94 Tony La Russa Baseball 2 Patch: Fixes stadium lockups. 5/3/94 Ultima 8 Patch: Fixes AdLib problem with some machines. 4/15/94 Merchant Prince Update: Newest version of OOP's strategy game. 3/11/94 IndyCar Racing Modem Patch: Cleans up difficulties with modem play, and fixes scrolling menus for steering devices with no y-axis. 4/7/94 Empire Deluxe V1.1 Mac: Latest version of New World's strategy game for Mac gamers, fixes include cleaning up PBM play. 6/1/94 Victory At Sea V1.01 Upgrade: Corrects numerous problems with the initial release. 3/14/94 MicroProse Sound Drivers: New AdLib sound drivers for many older games which had problems running with 486 and Pentium machines. 4/7/94 Jutland V1.1 Upgrade: Allows non-penetrating shells, adds more graphics, runs smoother, and most significantly, includes time compression. 3/30/94. Falcon 1.02 Mac Upgrade: Fixes sound problems on Mac AVs. 3/20/94 Warlords II Update: Latest version, for those who don't have the construction kit. 6/17/94. 1942 Pacific Air War: Fixes all known bugs, specifically those affecting joystick control. 6/4/94 Fleet Defender V1.2 Upgrade: Latest version of MicroProse flight sim, with 41 new features. 5/17/94 Jutland Patch: The game will now recognize different sound card addresses, rather X-Wing Enhancement: This TSR allows use of extra Thrustmaster buttons. 6/2/94. Pacific Strike V1.19: Contains 176 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"Microforum Presents: TH LATEST IN CD-ROM NEW! NEW! Virtual ESCAPE Virtual Escape An absolute must for all computer users! Incredible animation will take you into a relaxing virtual world! Select your own virtual animation and music to help escape everyday stress & worries (music selection includes \"Barcelona Nights\" by Ottmar Liebert which has sold over 500,000 copies). This CD also includes \"Super Natural\" 3D photographs which you can view with newly developed 3D glasses enclosed! Also the latest in fractal animation and a live video personal trainer to guide you through specific exercises designed to tone your body to fight everyThe Ultimate Trivia CD Take the Ultimate Trivia Challenge and test your knowledge. The Ultimate Trivia is the most advanced, challenging and exciting trivia game you'll ever play. This advanced multimedia trivia game includes live video questions, incredible sound effects, breath-taking photography and hundreds of Trivia Questions! Fender VIDEO ELP. GRAPHICS Ar Breitlitaking Photos! 4995 day stress. 4995 Melica NEW! NEW! The Video Game SOLUTION G.O.R.G. Experience the adventure of a lifetime and venture into the dark threatening planets of the G.O.R.G. galaxy. These games specifically designed for CD-ROM will keep you playing for hours. Includes an extensive collection of sound effects, animation, incredible graphics and over 35 planets to explore. The Video Game Solution CD This CD-ROM includes easy to follow instructions to use hints and tips on how to solve the most popular games on the market! Also included are special editors which allows a player to have an unlimited number of lives and makes each game more exciting. 4995 3995 ATTENTION DEALERS! Get into the Microforum Multimedia Program! With over 20 fabulous titles to choose from, these will prove to be hot new items among your customers. NEW! PET CLECTURE SUPER ARCADE CAMES SUPER ARCADE GAMES The ultimate CD for video games. Hundreds of the very best arcade style games with incredible graphics, super sound effects and fast action! All games are easy to install and are carefully selected in this limited collector's CD-ROM edition! Most games can be run directly from the CD! Sounds Siness fecom NEXUS *** 2995 KUHMOMB SUPER ARCARE che WAXMS Programmer FOR A COMPLETE CATALOQUE PLEASE CALL (416)856-8406 ATTENTION PROGRAMMERS DO YOU HAVE A SOFTWARE PROGRAM SUITABLE FOR CD-ROM? MICROFORUM IS LOOKING TO ADD TO ITS INTERNATIONALLY DISTRIBUTED CD-ROM COLLECTION. FOR MORE INFO. PLEASE CALL (416)656-6406 M Microforum Mieroforum FOR AT DET STORT SET 1 Woodborough Ave. Toronto, Canada, Tel: (416)656-6406 Fax: (416)656-6368 SOLD AT BETTER COMPUTER STORES EVERYWHERE! TO ORDER DIRECT CALL TOLL FREE 1-800-465-2323 Circle Reader Service #89 "


"CHATEAU LA RUMOUR The Rumor Bag Chateau La Rumour VINO DA TAVOLA DELLE TRE TEMECULA PINOT BREVITO DRY LIGHT HUMOR COLUMN BOTILID WYCHATERO LA RUNOKRAT SONY NET CONT 750 WORDS. ALCOHOL 134 PRODUCTOS IMAGINATION LUSEN TISCELLA by Baron Phillippe Masson Gallo Temecula is more than an old California Arriving at the restaurant, a loud crack the valley, \"is destroy L.A. so that everytown where gangs of train and stage robrang out, and a man who seemed to be where could be this beautiful.\" His abrupt bers used to hide out. Sure, it has its old waiting for a table crouched and whirled shift in demeanor was alarming. I quickly Town section of historical buildings and around looking for unseen assailants. glanced about to see if anyone else had antique stores, but it is also the home of a Guessing him to be my out-of-place Hollyheard him. boutique wine industry and a popular wood connection, I neared and said, \"Just \"Well,\" I ventured, \"you could try to keep gathering area for classic car buffs. In fact, some poppers. They're set to go off ranpeople from destroying L.A. in FormGen's it was just such a convoy of '56, 57 and 59 domly in the vineyards to scare birds away upcoming RISE OF THE TRIAD game. It's 3Fords that awakened me from a lazy afterfrom the grapes. You must be J.T.» He D action that uses digitized actors and lots noon nap just as I was having this weird smiled and handed me a large manila enof explosive effects. I guess you could even dream about Software Toolworks' velope detailing MGM/UA's BLOWN AWAY be an evil Triad member and try to destroy MEGARACE 2. It seems I had been hired to for PC and Macintosh CD-ROM. The L.A. in the head-to-head action mode.\" host the competition in the sequel and, game picks up at the end of the movie, He looked at me in startled confusion. complete with bag, become the man and the players have to use knowledge, in\"Did I say, L.A.? I meant EA.\" He said it everyone loves to hate. A lot of our readtuition and speed as opposed to guns and with such conviction that I didn't know ers thought the original MEGARACE was too violence to defeat a disciple of the movie's how to take him. simplistic. This time the game will feature villain, Gaerity. I was starting to get worried. I pacified dynamic tracks with hazards like openWe ordered our meals and began to talk him by sharing that Electronic Arts had ing/shutting gates, enemies that fire at of other studios entering the computer just signed a deal with Europe's Delphine you, and improved artificial personalities game industry. He hadn't been aware of Software. It appears that Delphine has to compete against. Trimark Interactive's new CD adventure, taken their 3-D technology yet another I suddenly realized that I was going to BLIND DATE. He grimaced as I quoted the step further than OUT OF THIS WORLD and have to race the clock, myself. I was suppress release reference to a CD-ROMantic ALONE IN THE DARK. The fiction may posed to meet an industry source for lunch adventure, but he thought the idea of sur change from the somewhat juvenile story in an open-air cafe. I raced upstairs to the viving a blind date fraught with disaster by in the European version, but the technoloshower at a pace akin to the chase scenes being witty and inventive was an intriguing gy is impressive. on the old Benny Hill television show. It idea for a computer game. He also didn't Suddenly, two male nurses appeared, made me think about another British huknow that Pepe Moreno, the designer of one on either side of my source. \"Can't let morist-science fantasy writer Terry Time-Warner's HELLCAB, has signed to do you out for a moment, can we Johnny?\" Pratchett. Pratchett's Discworld series of huan adventure game for Media Vision. I Before I could say anything, they began to morous novels is coming to the computer couldn't tell him much about Moreno's haul him away. One of the nurses turned courtesy of Psygnosis. I had seen some of new product except that it is supposed to to me and apologized, \"Sorry, he went a the animation for that game and became be called RIVERS OF DAWN and will use malittle crazy editing Tim Burton's rushes for convinced it could become this year's Day nipulable video. «That's good,\" he reBEETLEJUICE 2. He'll be okay if we can just OF THE TENTACLE in terms of quality anisponded, \"we can use some games where keep him away from you media types.\" mation and delightful humor. Of course, I the video is more interactive. I get tired of «But the rumor?\" I asked, \"Is it real?\" reminded myself, it would have to compete watching movies on my computer screen.\" \"It's real,\" he replied, \"as real as anywith MediaVision's off-the-wall X-DUCK \"What I'd really like to do,\" he said, gazthing you could steal from a Hollywood 2000 to garner top comedic honors. ing across the vineyard-covered hillsides of mailroom.\" Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016. Subscription rate is $27.94 for a one year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $11.00 for postage. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-7167. Canadian GST registration number is R123669673. Second-class postage paid at New York, NY 10016 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Printed in the U.S.A. 178 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. SEPTEMBER 1994 "


"FROM THE CREATORS OF THE AWARD-WINNING WOLFENSTEIN 3-D \"The graphics are superb, with lighting effects and art that could only come from dark and demented minds.\" Computer Gaming World \"You want action? You want gunplay? You want gore? ...DOOM has it all.\" PC Entertainment \"...if you have saliva, prepare to drool now.\"\"...an absolute musthave for PC action fans.\" Electronic Games WANT TO BE A HERO? GO TO HELL! DOOM is a lightning-tast virtual reality adventure where you're the toughest space trooper ever to suck vacuum. Scientists stationed on a far-off moonbase have opened a gateway to Hell, releasing a monster-infested holocaust upon the universe. You're the last marine remaining on the base after the invasion. Your mission is to survive!  Four-player combat over network  Two-player action over modem  Incredibly detailed 3-D world  Blood-curdling stereo sound effects Hair raising demonic denizens of Hell Awesome foe-fraggin' weapons LUULEEE Call 1-800-IDGAMES Order the entire DOOM trilogy for $40.00 or get episode one, Knee-Deep in the Dead\" for the cost of shipping and handling. Or download episode one from Software Creations BBS. (508) 368-4137 @ 2400-14.4K baud Canadian customers call 1-800-661-7383. INC SOFTWARE Requires a 386DX PC compatible or better; hard disk drive; VGA graphics; 4 Megabytes of memory. A 486 is recommended. Multiplayer options require a network which uses the IPX protocol, a modem, or serial link. Digitized sound effects require a 100% Sound Blaster compatible card, Gravis Ultra Sound or Pro Audio Spectrum-16. DOOM is a trademark of id Software, . Other trademarks are the property of their respective companies. Circle Reader Service #71 "


"SKIM THE CLOUDS. BUST A FEW BALLOONS AND DOGFIGHT YOUR WAY THROUGH THE GREAT WAR. @ LORY limb into the cockpit of a Sopwith Camel and test your skills as a daring aviator in the War to End All Wars. Fly for the British and Americans, discovering the strengths and weaknesses of your different planes as well as those of the enemy. Earn the respect of both sides as you secure your place in the company of aces! Actual screens may vary.  4-channel digital sound gives you the roar of dogfighting the way WWI pilots heard it.  Instant mission generator lets you fly against any combination of enemies you choose.  Refined game engine generates realistic couds, trees and increased plane detail. FOR A GREAT GAME EXPERIENCE, WE RECOMMEND AN INTEL486\" DX2 OR PENTIUMTM PROCESSOR-BASED SYSTEM. FOR LITERATURE ON INTEL PROCESSORS, CALL 1-800-756-8766 B RIGIN, Copyright  1994 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Wings of Glory is a trademark of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Origin and We create worlds are registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered trademark of Electronic Arts, Intel, Intel486 and Pentium are trademarks of Intel Corporation. We Ouate world Available at a software retailer near you, or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. Circle Reader Service #99 An Electronic Arts Company P.O. BOX 161750 AUSTIN, TX 78716 "

