"D ZIFF DAVISStarCraft Strategies company 10 Hot New WWII Flight Sims 21 Tough Reviews July 1998 No. 168 LAMING The #1 PC Game Magazine WORLD AGE OF EMPIRES Giant 8-Page Preview! Never-Before-Seen Screenshots! $3.99 USA, $4.99 Canada 07> Final Fantasy VII Bonus Pull-out Strategy Guide. 014024069523 "


"\"The future of gaming.\" PC Gamer V a completely original 3D engine ruthless A.I. E hyper-realistic environmental effects UNREAL "


"\"The world may never be the same after Unreal is released.» boot be a revolutionary easy-to-use lev YOUR FEARS UNLEASHED ASS YOUR REALITY ALTERED Visit unreal.gtgames.com for shareware MATURE Coming Soon to Macintosh AMD M WINDOWS CD-ROMAT M K6 MacSoft she MacSoft O n e 3 Intel MMXUnreal 1998 Epic Meogames, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Created by Epic Megagames, Inc. in collaboration with Digital Extremes. Published and distributed by GT Interactive Software Corp. G is a trademark and GT is a registered trademark of GT Interactive Software Corp. Microsoft and Windows are registered irademarks of Microsoft Corporation. MAX and the MMX Logo are trademarks of Intel Corporation. All other trademarks are the property of their respective companies. "


"editor 61 optimized for MMX and leading 3D accelerators an endless multiplayer universe of user-created, hot-linked levels / CLEAREAL YOUR SENSES EXPANDED . ER Hiheten, BIL ...FOREVER Uord ELE DE available at your local retail store Order direct at store.gtinteractive.com or call 1-800-610-GTIS. \" GT Interactive Software www.gtinteractive.com Digital Extremes www.unreal.com "


"ortals V2 welcome to the Bermuda Triangle of the Galaxy \"The best looking game of all time.\" Next Generation S REAL. Actual gameplay screen shots Go to #169 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"ou know the feeling. It sets in around the 5th or 6th pot. It's a bit beyond the traditional adrenaline rush. Well, that's what it feels like when you get to the 5th and 6th cylinders in Dead Reckoning, And with 9 more cylinders left to conquer, each featuring a more challenging alien opponent than the last, you'll be wired for days. So don't put your plans for universal domination on the backburner. Check out the Dead Reckoning web site at www.deadreck.com now and look for this addictive game to hit store shelves near you soon. Dead Reckoning is massive multi-player fun to the last drop Who spiked 15 unique cylindrical battlefields Customize your game by selecting wingmen, ships and opponents Battle other players via internet, modem, IPX or direct connection Designed to take full advantage of 3D card acceleration "


"wwwmu RECKNING. the coffee? Warning: This game is served scorching HOT. GOLDTKEE Go to #134 @ www.computergaming.com/intolink "


"YOSEMITE ENTERTAINMENT A LITRRA COMPANY "


"B QOB 8 . \"...the only game in town.\" Adrenaline Vault SWAT 2 is the only authentic police tactical simulation. Adrenaline Vault \"Unpredictable...the suspects act differently each time you play.\" Tim Tietjen, SWAT officer, 4 year veteran AI opponents' reactions are based on their personalities, the situation, and you. \"very realistic to what I do in a real life situation.\" Rick Massa, SWAT officer, 16 year veteran Scenarios are based on authentic SWAT cases POLICE QUEST SWAT = ABERDIC Palice Tactical Sim WON For more information, check out www.sierra.com and www.swat2.com (c) 1998 Sierra On-Line, Inc. (r) and/or tm designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. Go to #099 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink www.won.net "


"Antech and the Interpack logo e registered trademarks and I 30 and the Intense 30 Voodoo kopa are trademarks of Interproph Corporation. Bottonic Arts ko p od hradunak EA a hodimak of Electronic Arts Mots Rocotisa trademark of Odphire Saltwere laterfonal. Jone's burgued hodemark of Jane's Information Group Lid wd under license. Turok is a top stored radenarkal CMC, asesidiary of Golden Borks Family Entertainment, 3D, the 30ti logo, Voodoo Graphics and Voodoo Ruhan stod trademarks ol 3Dlx Interactive, Inc. Wndows koostend to mark of op het broodkond nomes of trademarks of their respective owners. Copright 1997 Interpoph Corporation Huntsville, 1.35894001. MC 980012 3/98 LECTRO BUTON "


"«I kick tush in PC games. INTENSE Ush Voodoo I used to rap your knuckles twice a week for not doing your homework. Now I'm going to kick your tush in a fast-paced action-packed game of Moto Racer. And I can do it, too, because I've been playing with an Intense 3D Voodoo PC graphics card. Based on the 3Dfx Voodoo Rush technology, Intense 3) Voodoo's ves me the edge to hone my playing skills. And its TV-out connecter lets me plug my PC into the big-screen television in the rectory, so I really get into the action. Plus, because Intense 3D Voodoo runs regular Windows 95 applications, I still manage to track the school finances and bake sales and keep up my correspondence with Father Flanagan.\" Get the card that's given Sister Mary Margaret the edge. Get Intense 3D Voodoo, now. W WIE SE Available at retailers nationwide. **3D Voodoo 6MB 2D/3D GRAPHICS ACCELERATOR Sister Mary Margaret, Moto Racer devotee, says \"Get Intense 3D Voodoo, or suffer the wrath!\" TIME SB Includes full-versions of TUROK: Dinosaur Hunter, 99 Moto Racer and Jane's Longbow FX Intense 3D Voodoo delivers super-sharp graphics for stunning realism and intense game play. INTERGRAPH COMPUTER SYSTEMS Buy Intense 3D Voodoo at your local computer retailer. www.intergraph.com/voodoo 1-800-763-0242 Go to #072 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"IT'S TIME YOU SGT 1998's BIGGEST GAME! PC Gamer. LS RATING PENDING CONTENT RATED BY Cound & Cam S nrg bol Conquer Tiberian Sun and Westwood Suxhinse m na o Westwood Songs, Inc. 1993 Www Sunds, Inc. All nghits roger wat "


"SAW THE FUTURE COMMAND CONOUER TIBERIAN SUN Westwood www.westwood.com Go to #252 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"COMPUTER JULY 1998. NO. 168 JULY 1998 . NO. 168 GAMING The #1 PC Game Magazine FEATURES Age of Empires II t may seem odd, but it's by featuring the Dark Ages that Microsoft continues its gaming renaissance. The sequel to AGE OF EMPIRES has everything that made the original so addictive, with the addition of wicked medieval weaponry, staunch castles, and a more robust economic model. Join \"Genghis Khen\" Brown as he fiddles with new battle formations, assigns aggressiveness levels to his faithful serfs, and makes the world safe for ore miners everywhere. And don't miss the special guest appearances by wolves, outlaws, Celts, Vikings, and everyone's favorite party crashers, the Mongols. ....52 Bandits at 12 O'Clock! isted for years as missing in action, WWII flight sims have returned with a vengeance, offering some of the most up-close-andpersonal air combat action we've seen in years. Soar with Denny Atkin, CGW's flight sim ace, for a recon flight that will help you separate the fighters from the fodder. .................. 72 12 READ.ME SNEAK PREVIEWS News, Views, and the Latest Releases ...30 Jordan Mechner's classic PRINCE OF PERSIA Series retums David Lynch joins game project. 3DRealms employees form new company. HOMEWORLD to render real-time strategy in full 3D Blizzard explains email sniffing MechCommander Fans of the BattleTech universe won't be disappointed in the newest incarnation of the series--a real-time strategy game-if MicroProse delivers all the features it has promised for MECHCOMMANDER........ ...45 Commandos Relive World War Il as the Allies' most prized crack commando team. Can Eidos add something new and fun to the crowded real-time strategy genre? ....... .50 10 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"HARDWARE REVIEWS Action Intro, News, 3D Iron Works .... 115 Orchid Righteous 3D || ....... 127 Logitech Trackball ........... 127 TSW Driving Wheel .......... 130 Alienware Area 51 System ..... 134 Ultimate Race Pro .. 144 Shadow Master .... 146 Hexen II Expansion .. 148 Grand Theft Auto ... 152 GAMER'S EDGE Adventure/RPG StarCraft The first in a series of STARCRAFT strats, this month's guide has basic tips, resource-gathering hints, and a list of Terran hot-key commands.......200 Black Dahlia ....... 154 CGW Tips Jane's F-15. Deer Hunter Jedi Knight Tomb Raider II. Dark Reign: Rise of the Shadowhand. WarBreeds Storm in the West Fallout ........... .......... 208 Simulations Jane's F-15 ......... 160 iF-22 5.0 ........... 162 200 Sports F1 Racing Simulation ........ 164 Deer Hunter ....... 166 Game Reviews You Can Trust REBELLION, BLACK DAHLIA, STARCRAFT, and 14 more (see our full listing to the right). The party starts on page 139. DEPARTMENTS Johnny Wilson Game Expansion Woes ....................... Letters Our Readers Speak Out ............. .............. 25 Loyd Case The Changing (Inter)Face of Game Controllers ............. 122 Reviews Introduction ....... 139 Review Index: Two Months of Ratings ................ ....... 143 Top 100 Readers Rate the Top Games .......... Greenspeak Adventure Editor Goes Berserk .... Strategy/Wargames StarCraft ............ 168 Rebellion .......... 172 Warhammer: Dark Omen ........178 Great Battles of Julius Caesar ....... 184 WarBreeds ........ 189 Dark Reign Expansion ......... 195 East Front Campaign CD ...... 195 Dragoon .......... 197 ......222 www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1998 "


"Battlezone Commanding Attention On and Off the Battlefield. are propres there Segons contrast . HEAT HEATET E HEST 1909 1915 de \"A fantastic gaming experience.\" \"True strategic depth in a great action game.' Computer Gaming World n trestres Rated 93% , 1960.1046 Stats Ce Act \"The most addictive, ingenious, and approachable game to appear in a long while.\" PC Gamer e st ve B The «strategy game is one of the most interesting and entertaining multiplayer experiences available... it's a mix of Total Annihilation and MechWarrior 2...\" Computer Games Strategy Plus 1994 ted trademarken \"A' Rating «...exquisite hybrid of strategy and 3D action.\" Ka PC Games "


"ACTIVISION 5 Star Rating --Computer Gaming World ZONE ALENE Revolutionary Action Strategy Take Strategy to the Front Lines. www.activision.com Go to #231 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"TCT "


"You command turn of the century tanks, battleships and observation balloons. They command 200-foot Fighting Machines. Size doesn't matter. Strategy does! It's not how big your units are, it's what you do with them. When the Martian war machine lands on the green and pleasant land of 19th century Britain, strategy is all youve got. And in this revolutionary non-linear war, you'll need it, Deploy your forces anywhere on the map of Britain. Choose your missions. Pick your battles. Because you can lose a battle and still win the War. Maube. It's your primitive tanks against their Fighting Machines. Your biplanes against their Flying Machines. Your observation balloons against their Xeno-telepaths. 150 30 rendered units stand between you and Martian domination. Or experience strategy from the other side and play as the Martians! JEFF WINES TV 11 The War of the Worlds the original british invasion Based on the classic novel by H.G. Wells and featuring a fully remixed 45 minute score licensed and composed by best selling artist Jeff Wayne Designed for RP Han Penting Race o Hoilds Race GT Interactive Software RESAD Microsoft Windows 95 www.gtinteractive.com Available soon at your local retailer Go to #171 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink *The War of the Worlds\" 1998 Rage Software Limited. All Rights Reserved. Published and Distributed by GT Interactive Software Corp. GT is a trademark and the GT Logo is a registered trademark of GT Interactive Software Corp. The Story, script artwork and logo from Jelf Wayne's Musical Version of \"The War of the Worldso Ollie Record Productions. The musical score from Jell Wayne's Musical Version of \"The War of the Worlds\" 1978 Jeff Wayne Music Publishing Ltd. Microsoft and Windows are registered trademarks of Microsoll Corporation. All other Trademarks are the property of their respective companies "


" 14  LSIRONGLY K3A MTTTTT HU zo nas   MUI TAFURE. ANAS SAY NO AR. RATING PENDING 1998 Virgin Interactive Entertainment Inc. Recoil is a trademark of Virgin Interactive Entertainment, Inc. Vireyin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises. Lid Windows is a registered trademark of the Microsol Corporation. All rights reserved ZIPPER INTERACTIVE WINDOWS 95 CD-ROM CONTENI RAILDET ESRB "


"Wiegen JKEY WU4b1TE IWE FIRST ITT IE FIRST INTER active 3. 2 beapon leben EXPLOSIVE Missile 3.4 .3 Ileapons EXPLOSIVE Portar RECOIL COMMAND A RAPID MOTION BATTLE FORCE TANK ARC SABRE NAPALM CANNON FREON BURST CANNON RAPID-FIRE PULSE GUN HIGH EXPLOSIVE MORTAR MOLECULAR DISTORTION MORTAR PROXIMITY HIGH EXPLOSIVE MINE PROHIMITY MOLECULAR DISTORTION MINE TETHER-GUIDED EXPLOSIVE MISSILE ENHANCED RAPID FIRE PULSE GUN TETHER-GUIDED PRACTICAL NUKE REMOTE HIGH EXPLOSIVE MINE LOCK-ON EXPLOSIVE MISSILE LOCK-ON PRACTICAL NUKE SONIC BURST CANNON LASER DESIGNATOR LASER SABRE FROM A FIRST OR THIRD-PERSON PERSPECTIVE MORPH IT INTO FOUR DIFFERENT VEHICLE TYPES: LAND. HOVER. AMPHIBIOUS, AND SUBMERSIBLE. TOTE 18 HIGH-POWERED WEAPONS OF MAS'S DESTRUCTION. BATTLE YOUR WAY THROUGH SIX TREACHEROUS. MISSTON-BASED WORLDS MANIPULATE HIGH-TECH INDOOR ENVIRONMENTS AND STRIKING OUTDOOR TEXTURES. OR BECOME ONE WITH THE EARTH. WEAPON SEQUENCE OF TARGET STATUS DESTROYED DISTANCE 123,25735 ARONO MOLECULAR DISTORTION MORTAR CRITION AIM AT TARGET WITH RETICLE AND FIRE. THIS IS A NONTRACKII WEAPON, SOOS FIRE. THE ENEMY MAY SUSTAIN LITTLE OR NO DAMAGE IF IT MOULE THIS IS PRIE WEAPON USED FOR DESTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS AND CRATER CREATION GLE OR MULTIPLE SHOT IF LOCKED ON TO ONE OR MORGENEMIES, ENHANC E ! HORTAR SOUND AND SMOKE DISSIPATION. IT WILL HAVE A MEDIUM-SIZELOSION BIOETAPE SUPON IMPACT, SOMEWHAT SLOW. AROUND 3 SECONDS TO TRACT QUEEN OB MOTION OUEDUTA I NG A LIGHT SMOKE TRAIL BLAST OF FIRE AND DE LOB MOT HEADS ANG A LIGHT SMOKE TRAIL UTSUNAL OF CLP VISUAL EFFETYDPEL ON DAMAGE LEVEL AND RANGE ARD SALON odavce Unaccelerated screenshots! Downloadable demo coming soon. Check www.vie.com for details. I Go to #205 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"The sky is your playground. Be the bully. EVERYONE E ESRB 1998 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Onign is a trademark or registered trademark of Origin Systems, Inc. and We Build Sims by the Book is a trademark or registered trademark of Electronic Arts in the U.S. andor other countr "


"715 THE DEFINITIVE JET COMBAT SIMULATOR [ ACTUAL GAMEPLAY SCREENS] Janes Janes F15 F-15 ESTHEDETINITIVE JET COMBAT SIMULATOR Available now for your PC. Visit your software retailer or call 800-245-4525 Jane's COMBAT SIMULATIONS WE BUILD SIMS BY THE BOOKTM rights reserved. Jane's is a registered trademark of Jane's Information Group Ltd. Jane's Combat Simulations is an Electronic Arts brand e 30lx Interactive logo is a trademark of 3D Interactive, Inc. WWW. f-15.com "


"TALONSOFT PRESENTS NORM KOGER'S THE OPERATIONAL ART OF WAR AVAILABLE JUNE 1st AC MENN Just one of the many preset scenarios. Korea 1950! The most comprehensive scenario editor ever! Fully integrated Force and Events Editors! VOL 1: 1939 1955 Talonsoft has unleashed the legendary Norm Koger to create the ULTIMATE computer wargame! After a ten-year relationship with ssI developing titles such as Age of Rifles, Tanks, and Red Lightning Norm Koger has joined of RitlesioTanks and recognitiche TalonSoft to create the wargame of his dreams: The Operational Art of War\". Unmatched flexibility, complete scenario editing system and state of the art graphics, combined with a variable game scale, will prove to be the greatest achievement of his career! Available June 1st at Software Retailers World Wide! Reserve your copy today! PCD CROM Call (410) 933-9191 or visit our web site at www.talonsoft.com Go to #245 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Copyright 1998 Talon Soft Inc. P.O. Box 43730, White Marsh, MD 21236 SSIO, Age of RiflesTM Tanks and Red Lightning are registered trademarks of Strategic Simulations Incorporated TALONSOFT "


"Tuning a Game Engine Why Companies Can't Win With Game Upgrades and Expansion Packages it won't have the impact of a retail product. Finally, you get a brilliant idea. You'll put all the inevitable patches you've created since the engine was released onto one CD. You'll tweak the engine a bit to add some new animated sequences and maybe a cool league feature or two. Then, you'll put it all together with the old game and expenses, end-cap costs) without having the advantages of fresh reviews and media excitement. You lose again. Worse, even though you've improved the product, all of the journalists have played the old product and reason (and I use that verb loosely) that you haven't made near as many improvements as you should have if you're marketing it as a \"new\" product. Recently, Ocean and Activision faced this dilemma. Ocean originally promised a dynamic campaign for F-22 AIR DOMINANCE FIGHTER that would be distributed as an add-on. (Actually, the dynamic campaign was supposed to be part of the original game, but as development became more difficult, gamers were told that F22 ADF would be released at a WAR has become a full-priced product as well. Fortunately, the company has responded to the anguished cries of betrayal on the newsgroups and announced that there will be an upgrade program for the original owners. The reality is that there is no way Ocean could have successfully launched TOTAL AIR WAR as a reduced-price product on retail shelves. However, its marketing decision may cost it hordes of once-loyal customers who are angered by their belated upgrade decision. Activision opted to bundle the newly accelerated 1-'76 engine with the NITRO PACK and market it as a full-price product. They offered an upgrade path for loyal game owners right from the start, and were rewarded with angry would like to take a moment to explain the lose-lose scenario that game compa. nies experience whenever they decide to build upon an existing game engine. No game publisher has asked me to write this, and it may upset some of the good folks on the newsgroups, but sometimes an observer has to share his observations. Let's say that you're a game publisher that has just released a fabulous 3D LACROSSE sim in your sports line. It's selling incredibly well for a lacrosse game (both of the U.S. fans bought it!), but it's time to decide what to do about next season. The game came out late enough in the year that you don't have time to create a new engine before the next lacrosse season, so you decide to put out an expansion disk. No problem. No problem, that is, until you try to get it on a retail shelf. You suddenly discover that retailers don't really want $19.95, or even $29.95, expansion products. They want full retail products because they get a certain percentage from each sale, and smaller prices equal smaller margins equal smaller profits for the retailer. So, as a game publisher, you now have limited options. You could raise the price of your expansion to standard retail price. As a result, you'll anger your customers, because they aren't really getting an entirely new game even though they're paying the price of a full game. Bad idea! You could give the expansion data away free, eating the development costs and, if you've gone too far down the road, manufacturing costs. Not a particularly sound business model! You could try to sell the expansion package over the Web. You'll sell some, but Retailers don't really want $19.95, or even $29.95, expansion products. sell it as 3D LACROSSE GOLD or 3D LACROSSE DELUXE. Now, your product can be in the stores at a competitive price. There are only a few problems. Your loyal customer base has to buy a full retail package in order to get the $20 expansion disk they wanted in the first place. Even if you provide a rebate plan in which the customers can get back the difference in cost between a full retail package and the expansion disk, customers are likely to complain that filling out a form and sending it in is too much trouble. Further, the magazines don't want to review the gold or deluxe editions of products because they're \"just add-on packages.\" So, you have all the problems of making a retail launch (paying cooperative ad costs, shelf-stocking fees, Marketing Development Fund customers on the Internet claiming that it was too much trouble to send in the rebate. I love to see new scenarios, campaigns, data disks, and adventures for old MARKETING IMMELMANN When F-22 Air products. UnforDominance Fighter launched, gamers tunately, until Web expected a low-priced campaign CD to fol distribution proves low. Now, it's a full-priced product. to be a little more secure, I don't reduced price (sure!) and the addthink these add-ons and camon would be released at the paigns are a very good bet for typical $19.95 (or so] data disk game publishers. Publishers are price.) Few were expecting a better off giving their customers downloadable freebie, but few the editing tools and watching were expecting the campaign to the proliferation of expansion be released as a full-priced products hit the Web. That way, product called TOTAL AIR WAR, the games have legs, but pubeither. Now, F-22 ADF has already lishers don't have to absorb the hit at full price, and TOTAL AIR development costs. CGW www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 21 "


"aine, N Onlib.  . euiuo  199 Cendant Software Corporation, All ints secu. NN  World Opponent Network are the trademarks ol, or licensad to Cenland Selfie stials. "


"Red Daarom Welcome to World Opponent Network, your FREE online gaming service. ACROPHOBIA Break the chains of solo play at WON and experience the ultimate mix of pure fun GOLF PRO'98 EEdom to and intense competition. Whether you're dogfighting aces in Red Baron II, outwitting, om to play LORDSII VOF THE REALM\" punsters in Acrophobia, or storming a castle in Lords of the Realm II, you're always playing CYBERSTORM CORPORATE WARS real people in real time. Check out WON and discover your FREEdom to play online, Go to #194 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink WON WORLD OPPONENT NETWORK WWW.Won.net "


"YOU YOUR TANK GOTO WORK -It's you, your tank, and the U.S. Army going to war in the heat soaked deserts of Tunisia. Spearhead puts you in charge of the Army's best armored weapon, the M1A2, immersing you in intense battles with state-of the-art graphics and innovative adrenaline-pumping gameplay. Stop playing around, it's time to go to work. Features 3D accelerated graphics for 3DIX and Power VR Stellar multiplayer mode allows battling over modem, LAN or the Internet. Competitive gameplay for novice through hard-core players. Choose from 20 action-soaked single missions or the exhilarating desert campaign. SPEARHEAD IMA Coming Fall 1998 Spearhead is a trademark and Interactive Magic is a registered trademark of Interactive Magic, Inc. All other trademarks are property ol theli rospective owners. Copyright 1998 Interactive Magic, Inc. All rights reserved, range management en coming an 19 INTERACTIVE MAGIC MK Zombilo www.imagicgames.com Go to #086 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"COMPUTER GAMING The #1 PC Game Magazine W O RL The Fogs of War PUBLISHER Dale Strang EDITORIAL Editor-in-Chief Johnny Wilson Executive Editor Ken Brown Features Editor Denny Atkin (Simulations) Reviews Editor Terry Coleman (Wargames) Technical Editor Dave Salvator (Hardware) Associate Editors Jeff Green (Adventure, Sports), Elliott Chin (Action, Strategy) News Editor Charlotte Panther (Classics/Puzzles) Copy Chief Joe Vallina Assistant Editor Allen Greenberg Editorial Assistant Matthew Schaefer CG-ROM Editor Jack Rodrigues CG-ROM Assistant Thierry Nguyen Contributing Editors Scorpia (Adventure Games), Charles Ardai (Interactive Fiction), Loyd Case (Hardware) Founder Russell Sipe Why do so many real-time strategy games have hidden maps? Hiding the map makes sense in games like Age of Empires or Civ 11 when you start out as a new civilization with primitive technology. However, when I loaded up STARCRAFT and saw that the map was once again covered, I couldn't help but wonder why. I mean, supposedly I can build flying craft that go into space, but I don't have the capability to make aerial maps? -Chad Sorrell via the Internet DESIGN engrossed in REBELLION; you just have to be a gamer. -Joe Kvam via the Internet Art Director Dan Fitzpatrick Associate Art Director Steven Wanczyk PRODUCTION Production Director Carlos Lugo Assistant Production Mgr. Martin Walthall Electronic Prepress Group Manager Michele Kellogg Assistant Manager Tamara Gargus Senior Prepress Technician Jackie Cuneo Technician Roger Drake HOW TO CONTACT THE EDITORS Address questions and feedback to: CGW Editorial, 135 Main St, 14th Floor, San Francisco, CA 94105. Or you may contact us via: Phone: (415) 357-4900 Editorial Fax: (415) 357-4977 CompuServe: (76703,622) Internet: 76703.622@compuserve.com Web site: www.computergaming.com Conflicted Strat Gamer I am not a strategy gamer. Yet here I sit dreary-eyed and exhausted after a marathon evening with LucasArts' REBELLION. That I have a hard time remembering the last time a newly purchased game held me into the wee hours of the morning (on a work night, I might add) surprises and pleases me. I say that because REBELLION has reminded me both why I love gaming and of how many crummy games I've had the displeasure of buying lately. I said above that I am not a strat gamerI've long hated them and the space you continually devote to them. I can't shake the static look and feel of most strat games. I suppose the \"real-time\" innovation (or bastardization, depending on your view) has helped some gamers see the light, but I can't help but think that, even more importantly, a great story (like the Star Wars mythos) and attention to detail can engross gamers of any stripe. The last time I was this feverish over a game was DIABLO. (Was that a strat game? waited months to buy it fearing that it was....) I find myself saying I am not a strat gamer yet I sit here with my (also) new copy of STARCRAFT staring me in the face like a jealous pet while I toil away in the universe of REBELLION. Good games elevate their genres and bring gamers across boundaries. In other words, REBELLION is not just a great strategy game, but just a great game, period. Any game that expands your appreciation of the form and its different genres deserves high praise. Thanks to LucasArts, you don't have to be a strategy gamer to become CGW Article Index I have been reading Computer Gaming World cover to cover since October 1992 (issue 99) and still have every issue on my overstuffed bookshelf. Over that time, I have enjoyed many fine articles and reviews. But, I hate remembering that I read something and not being able to locate it, especially over such an extended period of time. Is there a comprehensive review index somewhere? Lately, I have noticed review indexes that cover the past several months of reviews and have bookmarked them in case I would like to go back. But is there an index of hardware reviews and other articles? --Donald Noel via the Internet ADVERTISING SALES Associate Publisher Lee Uniacke (415) 357-4915 East Coast Sales Manager Laura Pitaniello (212) 503-4851 East Coast Sales Assistant Megan Moran (212) 503-3926 Southwest Sales Manager Pat Walsh (949) 851-2556 Southwest Sales Assistant Sandy Marciniak (949) 852-5914 Midwest Sales Manager Marci Yamaguchi (415) 357-4944 Silicon Valley/Northwest Sales Manager Dru Montgomery (415) 357-4925 Marketing Manager Sat Sharma (415) 357-4935 National Account Rep Joann Casey (415) 357-4920 Advertising Coordinator Leslie Ventimiglia (415) 357-4930 Assistant to the Publisher Linda Fan (415) 357-5425 Sales Assistant Tallie Conner (415) 357-5398 HOW TO CONTACT ADVERTISING SALES Address inquiries to CGW Advertising, 135 Main St., 14th Floor, San Francisco, CA 94105; or call (415) 357-5398, fax (415) 357-4999. CONSUMER MEDIA GROUP Vice President Jon Lane Business Manager Cynthia Mason Executive Director, Marketing and Research Randy Cohen Creative Services Manager Francesca Koe SUBSCRIPTION INQUIRIESIADDRESS CHANGES For subscription service questions, address changes or ordering information, call (303) 665-8930 or fax (303) 604-7455 within the U.S. and Canada. All other countries call (303) 604-7445 or fax 303) 604-0540, or write to Computer Gaming, P.O. Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80322-3131. The subscription rate is $27.94 for one year (12 issues). Additional postage for orders outside the U.S. add US$16 per year for surface mail. Payment must be in V.S. dollars made by check or money order drawn upon a U.S. bank. Visa, MasterCard, AMEX accepted. BACK ISSUES For back issues send 57 per issue ($8 outside the U.S.) by check or money order to Back Issues Dep't. Ziff-Davis Publishing Co., P.O. Box 53131, Boulder, CO 80322-3131. Don, we'd like to provide a comprehensive article index, but it would require more resources than we have available. Instead, we have chosen to provide more recent indexes that will serve a wider percentage of readers. Two indexes can be found every month: the Reviews Index in print, and the 12-month software and hardware reviews index on the CG-ROM. Near the end of the year, we provide an index of all reviews, previews, strategies, and feature stories from the past year. Perhaps in the future we'll be able to provide a comprehensive article index on the Web. We'd certainly like to be able to reward loyalty such as yours. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 25 "


"WANT TO LIVE THROUGH HALF-LIFE? PLAY IT ON A MA . FALCOY NORTHWEST COMPUTER SYSTUS FALCON NORTHWEST FALCON NORTHWEST COMPUTER SYSTEMS SIERRA VALVE MACH V is a trademark of Falcon Northwest Computer systems. Half-Life images are courtesy of valve, LLC. and Sierra On-Line, Inc. Half-Life is a trademark of Sierra On-Line. All rights reserved. "


"FRAME RATE IS LIFE Computer Surround Sound System 1-888-ASSE www.faceSPRESSE Custom built PCs starting at 5 0 desing, game design, graphics, or even getting some woma done. Computer & Net Lamily CHOICE PC GAMER EDITORS prs AWARDS Family EDITORS GAMES A List CHOICE RATED POR RATED A CHUILL OF FAME OF FAME June '97 June '97 July 197 Aug 197 D ec '97 July '97 Jan '97 Jan '98 Dec '97 Mar '98 Go to #257 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink PL 998 Feb '98 Feb 97 Jan '97 Mar '98 "


"GREAT WARS REQUIRE "


"GREATER BATTLEFIELDS \"Fans of the space shooter genre will have a field day with Descent: FreeSpace\" PC Gamer \"It simply looks fantastic with a fast frame-rate, beautiful ship designs and special effects galore.\" Online Game Review \"This is one mighty fine space combat sim.\" CNET Gamecenter \"FreeSpace's fantastic effects, excellent gameplay, and well-designed interfaces could make it a serious contender for the space-combat crown.\" Gamespot  ATEUR Look for the official strategy guide from BradyGAMES at your favorite software retailer or book store. III BradyGAMES STRATEGY GUIDES Actual gameplay screens trom 3Dtx version, DESCENT: FREE  THE GREAT WAR EVERYONE Designed for E v Parallax Parallax Software Microsoft Windows NT Windows'95 ESAD volition, inc BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS.\" www.interplay.com DESCENT, FREESPACE THE GREAT WAR.  Volition, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Descent, Descent FreeSpace The Great War, Interplay, the Interplay logo and \"By Gamers. For Gamers\" are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All Rights Reserved. Parallax is a trademark of Parallax Software Corporation. All Rights Reserved. Volition and the Volition logo are trademarks of Volition, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Windows 95 is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. All Rights Reserved. All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners Go to #162 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"READ. THE LATEST NEWS FROM THE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The Prince Flies Again! The PRINCE OF PERSIA Series Returns in a Brand-New Dimension t's been nearly 10 years since Jordan Mechner's PRINCE OF PERSIA was unleashed upon unsuspecting gamers, ensnaring and enthralling all who took on its winning combination of platform-style action and devious puzzle solving. Despite its age (the sequel, PRINCE OF PERSIA 2, is itself five years old), it's a game that continues to have a strong influence today, inspiring recent games like TOMB RAIDER and TWINSEN'S ODYSSEY. Mechner has veered off in a totally different direction in the last few years, creating the critically acclaimed (and vastly underappreciated) mystery-adventure THE LAST EXPRESS. Hence, it seemed as though the Prince might have forever hung up his sword. But, happily, Mechner is now returning to the franchise that made him famous, serving as design consultant and co-author on Red Orb's upcoming PRINCE OF PERSIA 3D. The game promises to convert everything we knew and loved about the original PRINCE titles into an immersive 3D world. You'll still dodge rotating blades and hoist yourself up to ledges, but, as in TOMB RAIDER and SUPER MARIO 64, you'll do it from over the Prince's shoulders, exploring the world from within. \"The timing is definitely right,\" says Andrew Pederson, the game's producer at Red Orb. \"We've thought about this for a long time, and pitched the game about a year ago. Now, with 3D acceleration, we know we can make a 3D game worthy of the PRINCE OF PERSIA name.\" Red Orb is not designing the 3D engine from scratch, nor are they licensing the QUAKE II, UNREAL, or another existing engine. Instead, the team is working on merging two existing technologies: NetImmerse, a 3D rendering engine from Numerical Designs, and The Motion Factory's Motivate, a character animation and authorina tool. This strategy gives them the flexibility to tweak things as they see fit, while still being able to concentrate on the game's design \"Everything that separated PRINCE OF PERSIA from other games at the time, we wanted to keep in the new game,\" says Pederson. \"Fluid character animation; an integration of a cool story line with the game's action; easy, intuitive character controls and interface; and a good hybrid of action and adventure.\" Apart from authoring the Arabian Nights-style storyline, Mechner's role among the 17-plus team is largely to ensure that it adheres to the \"classic\" PRINCE OF PERSIA style. He is actively involved, along with co-designers Tom Rettig and Todd Kerpelman, in creating the action, puzzles, and traps within the game's 15 levels. The game will take you through seven environments: an interior prison/tower, outdoor rooftops, a palace, a floating dirigible city, floating ruins, and a stronghold. Sword fighting is returning, of course, but will be more advanced than before. When you draw your sword, the camera will swing out from behind the Prince's back into a more traditional third-person fighting game perspective. Along with a sword, you'll also have a bow, which will be able to fire an assortment of different arrow types. You'll also get to use a staff-which will be slower but have a longer range than the sword-and a truly gruesome double-sided blade. PRINCE OF PERSIA 3D won't be released until next year, but the game's engine, plot, levels, art design, and animation are well on their way, which leaves ample time to fine-tune the gameplay. The Prince may not have Lara Croft's body, but it looks like this title could be one of the biggest 3D action releases of next year. -Jeff Green \"Now, with 3D acceleration, we know we can make a 3D game worthy of the PRINCE OF PERSIA name.\" -Red Orb's Andrew Pederson 30 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Rocking the Boat 3D Realms Employees Jump Ship to Start Their Own Gaming Company READ. ME Lynched you can add fledgling company Rebel Boat Rocker to the list of gaming companies that have been spawned by fleeing 3D Realms employees. Headed by Billy Zelsnack, who worked on engine design at Epic Megagames and 3D Realms, RBR consists of several DUKE NUKEM 3D and SHADOW WARRIOR team members, as well as a few talented designers and programmers from the online community and other high-tech companies. The team has been working for some time on its secret project, tentatively titled PRAX WAR. PRAX WAR is a 3D military, action-adventure game with an all-new engine that is being designed by Zelsnack and two other programmers at Rebel Boat Rocker. The game is still in very early development, so we haven't been able to see the engine running, but Zelsnack hopes to cre. ate an engine that will integrate indoor and outdoor environments, offer detailed character animation, and present varied Al behavior. The game's fiction posits that the evil Prax Corporation has a stranglehold on the world's fuel supply and is using its economic influence to gain world domination. What's left of the ailing global government David Lynch to Create Game Content he king of cult, David Lynch, is unleashing his talents in a new arena. The director of such critically acclaimed movie hits as Blue Velvet and The Elephant Man has teamed up with Tokyo-based multimedia company Synergy Inc. to create an upcoming computer game with the intriguing title WOODCUTTERS FROM FIERY SHIPS. It comes as no surprise that when Lynch expressed an interest in entering the gaming market, he was immediately wooed by some of the industry's largest developers. Impressed by the work that Synergy had done on its last project, GADGET, however, Lynch opted to sign up with the smaller company. Lynch and his Hollywood-based interactive company, SubStation, will create content for the title. Lynch will develop the storyline, and, as with his movies, both visual effects and music will play a huge part in the final product. Natalie Fay, president of Synergy's U.S. operations, confirms that Lynch will contribute to every step of the project, from start to finish. \"He really wanted to be a part of the project,\" she says, \"not just lend his name to the game... It should be vintage Lynch.\" Although at this early stage it's hard to categorize the game, it will be in real-time 3D, and it will have multiplayer elements. Fay is quick to point out that this is not going to be a RIVEN or MYST. She is confident that WOODCUTTERS will appeal to hard-core gamers, and she stresses that Lynch is not interested in merely putting together a string of video clips for the PC. At press time, Synergy was in negotiations to bring a top U.S. designer onto the project, but the company was unable to reveal his name until the deal was complete. Look for more info about WOODCUTTERS FROM FIERY SHIPS in upcoming months. -Charlotte Panther agency, GATO, wants to eliminate the corporation by employing the elite commando squad Eclipse Team. As the leader of Eclipse, it's your job to destroy Prax Corporation The game is being published by Electronic Arts and is slated for a fall 1998 ship date. We'll know more about the game, and its shipping status, when it is shown at E3.-Elliott Chin Mousing Made Easy veryone's had at least one novelty mouse-pad during his or her computing career. Unfortunately, novelty doesn't necessarily mean quality. In fact, some of these pads actually worsen your mouse's operation by gumming up the works with threads from the pad itself. A company called EverGlide has a different approach: They have turned the mouse-pad into a mouse-board. EverGlide is a hard plastic mousing surface that's designed to make mousing easier, while providing durability. The surface works well for mousing in QUAKE II, and also for the more mundane chores of driving through business applications. If you're tired of picking micro dust-bunnies out of your mouse's undercarriage, then take a look at EverGlide. For more information, head to www.everglide. com. Dave Salvator www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 "


"News Flash README XOXO Sierra to Create Tolkien Game Online & film. All products are slated for release later this year. & & & & cuit again with the release of GAME NET & MATCH. The 3D tennis game will allow players to play against more than 100 different computer opponents, on a number of different court surfaces, each of which will affect gameplay differently. GAME, NET & MATCH will offer training programs, both singles and doubles matches, and tournament play. Blue Byte's Internet Tennis Server will host tournaments based upon renowned tennis events, including Wimbledon and Flushing Meadows. The game should be available as you're reading this. For more information, head to www. bluebyte.com & ord of the Rings fans will be happy to hear that Sierra Online is developing a new multiplayer online game based on J.R.R. Tolkien's famous Middle Earth universe. The company plans to beta test a \"massively multiplayer\" online game in mid 1999, and release it commercially before the turn of the century. Entitled MIDDLE EARTH, the game will let role-players become an elf, hobbit, dwarf, or human and play in some of the well-known locales of Tolkien's fantasy universe. MIDDLE EARTH will use the same online RPG technology as Sierra's THE REALM, which currently hosts 3,000 players, according to Sierra. The company expects many more users of MIDDLE EARTH, and is looking into Sun servers to provide adequate capacity 0498 Activision/Nihilistic Form Partnership ctivision has signed an agreement to publish the first three titles from Nihilistic Software, the newly formed company headed by industry veterans Ray Gresko, Robert Huebner, and Steve Tietze. The team's first project will be a 3D role-playing game, which Activision expects to release in the fall of 1999. 0498 PIPELINE Abyss: Incident at Europa Sound Source 03 98 Age of Empires II Microsoft Apache vs. Havoc Empire Asheron's Call Turbine Microsoft Axis & Allies Hasbro Baldur's Gate Interplay Battle of Britain 1940 TalonSoft Birth of the Federation MicroProse Blackstone Chronides Legend/5SI Centipede Hasbro Combat Flight Simulator Microsoft Creatures II Mindscape 0498 Daikatana lon Storm/Eidos 03 98 Descent III Interplay 0498 Duke Nukem Forever Apogee/3D RealmsQ4 98 European Air War MicroProse 0498 Extreme Warfare Red Orb 03 98 F-22 Total Air War DID Falcon 4.0 Micro Prose Fallout 2 Interplay Fighter Duel 2 Ocean Fighter Legends Jane's/EA 03 98 Flanker 2.0 SSI Freedom in the Galaxy Avalon Hill Q1 99 Gabriel Knight 3 Sierra Galactic Mirage Virgin 0398 Grim Fandango LucasArts Gualdalcanal Avalon Hill 03 98 Guardians: Agents of Justice MicroProse Q3 98 I-War Ocean 0398 Jeopardy Hasbro 0398 King's Quest: Mask of Eternity Sierra 0498 Klingon Honor Guard MicroProse 04 98 Luftwaffe SSI 0498 Madden 99 EA Sports 0498 Mech Commander FASA/MicroProse MechWarrior III Micro Prose NASCAR 3 Papyrus/Sierra NHL Power Play 98 Virgin People's General SSI Phantom Ace. Virgin Prince of Persia 3D Red Orb Quest for Glory V Sierra Reach for the Stars Il Microsoft/SSG Requiem Cyclone Studios/3DO Return Fire 2 MGM Return to Krondor Sierra Revolution Fenris Wolf/GT Interactive Screamer 3 Virgin Screamin' Demons Activision Secret of Vulcan Fury Interplay Sid Meier's Alpha Centauri Firaxis/EA Smart Games 3 Smart Games/Hasbro Squad Leader Big Time/Avalon Hill Star Control 4 Accolade Starship Troopers MicroProse Star Trek: First Contact MicroProse Stratego Hasbro Swords and Sorcery Virgin Team Apache SSI Tomorrow Never Dies MGM Ultima Ascension Origin/EA Ultimate Civ II MicroProse Unreal EpidGT Interactive WarCraft Adventures Blizzard Warhammer 40K: Chaos Gate SSI WarTorn Impact Interactive Wings of Destiny Psygnosis Wizardry VIII Sir-Tech X-Files Adventure Game Fox Interactive 0398 Activision to Distribute Quake III n related news, id Software recently announced that it has licensed the worldwide distribution rights for QUAKE III to Activision. QUAKE III will feature a new graphics engine that will take advan tage of the latest advancements in 3D acceleration. Hence, the game will be 3D hardware-only. & & & & & & & 0088 087 0888 8 8 8 & & & Lode Runner Sequel in the Works T Interactive has announced a sequel to the classic game LODE RUNNER-originally released in 1983 on the Apple Il platform. The game is being created by Presage Studios in conjunction with LODE RUNNER's original creator, Doug Smith. The sequel will feature five 3D worlds, more than 75 new levels, and a level editor. LODE RUNNER 2 will be available for the PC later this year. Lost in Space ew Line Cinema has announced a deal with Sound Source Interactive to bring Lost in Space to the computer. Sound Source will create a series of CD products based on both the classic '60s TV series and the recent hit feature film from New Line. The first product in the series, the LOST IN SPACE ARCADE SERIES ENTERTAINMENT UTILITY, will offer screen savers, audio and video clips, still photos, and desktop themes based on the original TV show. The product will also include an arcade game. Sound Source will also release two children's titles based on the 8 & 8 8 & & 8 & & & Anyone For Tennis? ow there's a way to play tennis year-round. without having to scramble to find an open court. Blue Byte Software, the company behind JIMMY CONNORS' PRO TENNIS TOUR, is preparing to enter the tennis cir& SSS 0498 32 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"The Final Frontier Relic's Inaugural Project, HOMEWORLD, Could Revolutionize 3D Strategy Gaming README ery few games these days can be counted on to advance the state of computer gaming. Clones have proven so successful that developers try not to stray too far from the original formulas that inspired In The Works them. Hence, excellent games like AGE OF EMPIRES and TOTAL ANNIHILATION offer a handful of new features while staying close to their roots. It is true that many games that try to innovate too much end up failing, but once in a while you get a game that is not only truly revolutionary, but that looks as if it will succeed financially as well. Such is the case with HOMEWORLD, a true 3D strategy game from startup Relic and Sierra Studios. Eons ago, your benign rule over a federation of planets was interrupted when a mysterious and malevolent race conquered your homeworld and exiled you to the farthest reaches of the galaxy. While in exile, your civilization suffered cultural amnesia, as the evil race killed off your political, cultural, and religious leaders. Having forgotten your heritage, all you have left as a people is a legend of better times in the distant While the integration of story into the game at this level is fairly innovative, the gameplay is what is truly unique about HOMEWORLD—it's true 3D. Basically, all the missions take place in deep space, and combat occurs between a plethora of space ships, from small fighters to gigantic capital ships. Not only are all the ships and celestial bodies full 3D objects, but the playing field is full 3D as well. In HOMEWORLD, you can come in at opponents on the z-axis, attacking from above or below. Even games with 3D terrain, like TOTAL ANNIHILATION, don't have full 3D combat. And games with true 3D engines, like MYTH, haven't taken their gameplay into outer space, where 3D combat can really come into play. HOMEWORLD will be unlike any other real-time strategy game you've seen. There's a lot more to say about it, so be sure to read next month's full-blown, hands-on sneak preview.-Elliott Chin past and a shard of crystal. Now, though, the crystal is resonating with a force that is acting as a beacon, pulling you back to a home sector you have all but for. gotten. The game begins as you and your people, adrift in a ragtag fleet, set off on this journey back to your homeworld. The entire game revolves around this plot of exiled children finding their way home. However, there are various subplots involving meetings with traders, pirates, and more malevolent bad guys. While the story and the mission progression will be fairly linear, Relic hopes to add multiple choices to some of the mission pathways. There will also be plenty of cut-scenes, using the beautiful in game engine, to punctuate the campaign with narrative and compel players forward. Player Stats Not only are all the ships and celestial bodies full 3D objects, but the playing field is full 3D as well. Casual 68% Core 76% 09 1035 How Many Gamers Have Access 0107.000 to the Internet? 1610 010100 How Many Hours a Week Do Gamers Play Online? CORE % of Gamers CASUAL Less than 5 5 to 9 FLOO 15 to 19 20 or more GRAPHIC BY XPLANE Total Hours Playing Games Online/Week Source: The Strategy Group www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 "


"EAD. ME Blizzard Accused of Email Snooping-Privacy Suit Ensues f you tried to play STARCRAFT Over Blizzard's online gaming service, battion, Blizzard says, helped the statutes: the California Business company to determine whether and Professions Code, and the the problems stemmed from a California Penal Code. manufacturing glitch or from piraThe lawsuit alleges that cy. It also allowed Blizzard to use Blizzard used a program to transemail to contact users with CD mit user information without the problems. users' permission. Driscoll told us Blizzard says that outside this that he had contacted Blizzard seven-day period it has never colattorneys by phone and fax, and lected any user information. The they had indicated to him that company says the information they would not destroy records of that was obtained during the Blizzard's past information acquiseven days didn't go beyond whatsition activities. These records is typically extracted by Internet would be essential in determining browsers or registration cards. says he has received some interest in a class action suit. Commenting on the fact that Blizzard only continued the practice for a week, Driscoll had this to say: \"[lt] sounds like Blizzard's lawyers got involved. There is a practice in defense cases where the defense makes sure that it deletes any information that could be used to incriminate itself. Why else would Blizzard collect this information for seven days, stop, and then start deleting it?\" In response, Blizzard was only able \"We believe that our track record proves our respect for gamers' privacy\" —Blizzard have been in for an unpleasant surprise. In what can only be described as a serious invasion of privacy, the company appeared to be extracting email and name data from gamers' Windows 95-based machines. Blizzard Entertainment confirmed gamers' suspicions and explained why it had taken the information without gamers' knowledge. The company says that shortly after STARCRAFT shipped, it began receiving customer complaints from a small number of users who were having trouble connecting to battle.net for multiplayer sessions. Many users were complaining that their CD keysthe special numbers on the jewel cases that ship with most software—were not allowing them access to the online service. In an attempt to solve these gamers' problems, Blizzard gathered email and name information from people who couldn't log onto the service. Blizzard says this took place over a single seven-day period simply to help those users who were denied access to battle.net. Collecting this informa Blizzard pointed out that it keeps \"no user database of any kind in conjunction with battle.net.\" Battle.net is one of the only online services that requires no personal data to play. \"We believe that our track record proves our respect for gamers' privacy.\" Blizzard says. Just as we went to press, however, an Albany, California, attorever, an Albany, California, attorney filed suit against Blizzard and its parent company Cendant Corp. The suit, filed by attorney Donald P. Driscoll in San Francisco County Court, is based on two sets of Driscoll, who represents a nonprofit consumer watch-dog organization called Intervention, Inc., is not asking for money damages but wants Blizzard to accept returns from STARCRAFT buyers for a full refund. He also wants Blizzard to supply a new copy of STARCRAFT without the part of the program that can upload registry information. Driscoll said that a class tion action suit isn't out of the question, but that if Blizzard has delet ed the uploaded information, it would be tough to prove who was damaged. Despite that, Driscoll to release the following statement: \"We have been notified that papers have been filed. We have not been served. We cannot discuss matters in litigation.\" We should add, that Cendant already offers a 30-day moneyback guarantee on all of its products, which makes some of Driscoll's requests seem rather strange. Michael Mullen For up to the minute news on the latest developments in the Blizzard saga, head to www.gamespot.com/news/ news/index.html Adham to Become Blizzard Chairman lizzard announced recently that its current president, Allen Adham, will be promoted to chairman, and Mike Morhaime, formerly Blizzard's executive vice president, will become president of the company. The two co-founded the company in 1990. Blizzard says the move will \"allow Adham to focus entirely on development, while Morhaime assumes the davto-day responsibility for the success of Blizzard.\" Adham said in a statement, \"My first love has always been making games. After we completed STARCRAFT, I realized I wanted to devote more of my time to game design. By relinquishing control of day-to-day operations, I can focus all my efforts on development. \"Mike was the natural choice to take over the reins as president. He has been a driving force in the company since day one. Mike is the right person to build on our successes and shape our direction,\" says Adham. Blizzard is currently riding a few fast-breaking waves with the recent release of STARCRAFT, the ongoing development of DIABLO II, and the successful implementation of battle.net. -GameSpot For more info check out: w ww.gamespot.com/news/ news/index.html Blizzard Chairman Allen Adham 34 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"You've Always looked Down On Orcs.. "


"R WASARAN BIZZARD Data STARCTAFT ADVINCULES WARCRAFT ENTERTAINMENT e www.blizzard.com 1-800-953-SNOW WarCraft and Blizzard Entertainment are registered trademarks and Lord of the Clans is a trademark of Davidson & Associates, Inc. All rights reserved. No Orcs were harmed in the creation of this advertisement "


"Time for a New Perspective. hed your pathetic human skin and descend into an all-new dimension of the world of WarCraft. Through the eyes of the captive Orc, Thrall, you'll come face-to face with over 70 legendary WarCraft characters as you unravel the mysteries of the land that millions have fought to conquer. Over 40,000 frames of handcrafted animation and actual Orc voices combine to bring the Kingdom of Azeroth closer than ever before. As the last symbol of honor for the Horde, you must lead your warriors onto the field of battle and write the pivotal next chapter in the epic WarCraft saga... Over 20 minutes of animated cinematics richly illustrated locations Explore over 60 Unravel the pivotal next chapter in the epic WarCraft saga WARCRAFT ADVENTURES LORD OF CLANS Go to #220 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"Going Global READ.ME Rule the World in GLOBAL DOMINATION, Psygnosis' New Real-time Strategy Game f conquering a mere town or even an entire country has lost its appeal, perhaps it's time to set your sights higher-how about ruling the whole world? You can do just that in GLOBAL DOMINATION, a new real-time strategy game in the also choose to ally with fellow gamers against the Al players. In single-player mode, there is an Academy training session, which offers various playable scenarios of missions will allow you more technologically advanced weapons as well as promotion through the ranks. There are several technological upgrades, including one pickup that can save your country from a nuclear missile attack. If a player sets off the Doomsday Device and no one else is able to intercept it, however, that player achieves a strange sort of victory: all that is left is a rock, in the player's color, flying through space. Each time you replay a mission, the power-ups will be located in In The Works to bring you up to speed. There's also an Arcade mode, for those who prefer to focus less on the strategic element of the game. This is a real-time strategy game with a different feel from the C&C clones. Look out for it in stores this fall.—Charlotte Panther See Also in the works ... TILOMLECTIEP wo 000 GOMITANT SQTE III 0:40 III 10-CITIAL Om 111111 DOLNIU DOU FLOOD release. You play one of four characters who land on the planet Kali, and must save its people from a terrible disease. Weapons will include lightning bolts, and fire, and magic and potions. DRAKEN UNAM PARDONVATTILLES Q26100 LIONLOTAROM CS works at Psygnosis. Set in the year 2015, you're a new recruit working for the Universal Tactical Response Agency (ULTRA). The idea is to climb up the career ladder and replace the current top dog as commanderin-chief of the planet. As you work your way to the top, you must protect the earth from the clutches of the evil breakaway empire of WOE (World Order Enterprises). The game begins with a threeminute FMV sequence, which serves to fill you in on the backstory, and explains your mission (each scenario thereafter will also start with a short FMV sequence outlining your goals). There are 20 preset single player missions. An in-game editor allows you to tweak everything from who owns which countries to the level of technological skills available. You can choose to attack with either land, sea, air, or space units Your weaponry will include basic intercept missiles, electronic missile jammers that cause missiles to drop on whatever country they happen to be over, and advanced reverser missiles that will reprogram a missile to go straight back down the head of the launcher it came from. Successful completion different places. Replaying missions can improve your overall score, as your ranking is based upon your percentage score in each level. If you've completed 12 levels, for example, you may find you have a lower-ranking title than a friend who has only completed eight; if he tackled the missions more strategically, he could receive a higher overall percentage than you. A tactical zoom allows you to see exactly where everything is, so that you can be sure to attack an important country. If you alone attack a target, you'll take over a nice healthy country. If you attack along with three or four other enemies, however, you can expect the target to have lots of damage from each of the countries attacking it. The game will support up to 16 players (or eight-player empires or teams) in multiplayer, and you can ragon fans, get ready for DRAKAN (working title), a 3D action/adventure game in which you take on the role of Rynna tough heroine whose mission is to defeat the evil sorcerer Kulrick and his evil minions. Assisting and protecting Rynn throughout her quest is the fearless dragon Arokh. Players can control Rynn alone--the sword-wielding warrior possesses more than 50 other weapons, including spears, crossbows, maces, and spells, and can run, swim, and climb or you can move both heroine and dragon together with Rynn riding on Arokh's back. (Arokh has the advantage of being able to destroy anyone in its path by breathing fire, ice, and lava.) You can engage in either groundbased or aerial combat and exploration, as you travel through five different fantasy worlds and 14 levels. Look out for DRAKAN in early 1999 Psygnosis is also working on ODT-OR DIE TRYING (working title)-another third-person action/adventure set in outer space, scheduled for an October Look out, too, for SENTINEL RETURNS, the sequel to the early-'80s Amiga game SENTINEL. Your mission is to knock the sentinel off his pedestal while avoiding his gaze. To do so, you must build boulders to hide yourself as you cross a checkerboard-type landscape. If the sentinel sees you, he'll absorb your energy. The game attempts to maintain the feel of the old Amiga game while incorporating today's 3D graphics and sound, including a score by horror maven John Carpenter (Halloween). SENTINEL RETURNS may prove to be just a little too weird for today's audience. Find out for yourself when the game hits stores in August. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Microsoft DER HELE IF YOU CAN'T BEAT EM, (Lil : M Monster Truck Madness 2 is here, with more ground-pounding, trash-talking fun than the original. Featuring 20 trucks that show the damage you dish out, including four new WCW and nWo WrestleTrucks like \"Hollywood\" Hogan. Risky night racing and nasty weather options. Thumping force-feedback support. The Summit Rumble, an outrageous multiplayer game of \"king of the hill.\" And 11 wild new tracks. Get your free demo and start crushing the competition at www.microsoft.com/games/monster/ MONSTER TRUCK MADNESS EVERYONE CONTENT MAY SSR S 2.1998 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved. Microsoft and Monster Trek Madness are either registered Baders or traderinks of Microsoft Corporation the Umted States and/or other countries 1998 TWCW loc Other products and.company names mentioned herein may be the trademarks of the respective owners YRE DHE "


"Rescue the Vice President of Marketing. Defuse nuclear warheads. Race through a burning spaceport, Teleport a battle cruiser into the heart of a sun. Save humanity from certain extinction. The Corporate Empire might even cover your overtime. TWENTY-SEVEN BIG LEVELS of single or multi-player 3-D action 99$ SOC RICH ENVIRONMENTS with INTERACTIVE CD-QUALITY music CN CUSTOMIZABLE VEHICLES with over 25 weapons and systems INTELLIGENT OPPONENTS with morale and unique tactics TWO PLAYER SPLITSCREEN option in team or deathmatch play JA KILLER GRAPHICS with or without acceleration MAD SOFTWARE www.madgenius.com "


"GUNMETAL THE ASSAULT BEGINS AUGUST Bo to #080 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"EW Playing Lately Windows 98: Good for Gamers? REA CGW Survey * Last Month Months on Chart 1. Quake II (id Software/Activision) 2. Age of Empires (Microsoft) 3. Jedi Knight (LucasArts) 4. Civilization II (MicroProse) 5. Wing Commander: Prophecy (Origin/EA) 6. Total Annihilation (Cavedog/GT) 7. Diablo (Blizzard/CUC) 8. Fallout (Interplay) 9. Panzer General 2 (SSI) 10. Duke Nukem 3D (3D Realms/GT) * Check your mailbox: We mail a survey to 1,500 randomly chosen subscribers each month. The results of Playing Lately indicate what games readers are blowing the most time on, as opposed to the readers overall \"quality ranking\" in the Top 100. ADOW uses HaNN PC Data Best-sellers ** Last Month 1. Deer Hunter (GT Interactive) 2. Titanic: Adventure Out of Time (Cyberflix) 3. StarCraft (Blizzard) 4. Myst (Red Orb) 5. Star Wars: Rebellion (LucasArts) 6. Flight Simulator '98 (Microsoft) 7. Cabela's Big Game Hunter (Head Games) 8. Quake 11 (CD Win 95) (id/Activision) 9. Age of Empires (Microsoft) 10. Riven: The Sequel to Myst (Red Orb) * This list indicates what the top-selling PC games were, as calculated by PC Data, for March, 1998. OUTW.NIN s this issue went to press, Windows 98 was scheduled for release on June 25. Assuming the Department of Justice and numerous state attorneys general don't have their way and the product is indeed released then, should you upgrade? CGW will run a full review of the product once we get our final copy, but in the meantime, here's my initial impression. I tested release candidate versions of Win 98 on a Win98 variety of sysWin98 tems ranging from a Pentium 133 notebook to a Pentium 11/400 desktop. On systems with less than 32 MB of memory, Win 98's larger memory footprint made for more disk swapping and thus jerkier performance in games. If you have less than 32 MB, make sure you have room in your budget for some RAM in addition to the OS upgrade. In addition to its controversial integration of Internet Explorer 4.0, Win 98 includes a number of enhancements to support the latest PC hardware. These include AGP and DVD support, as well as USB support that actually works. If you have a large hard drive, you can gain space by using the FAT32 converter to change your disk format. Sim fans will dig the ability to hook up two monitors simultaneously. And on the newest systems, you can simply \"suspend your desktop computer just like a laptop, so you can avoid the wait for Windows to boot. If your system's hardware specs sport all the latest acronyms-AGP, DVD, and USB—then you may see some real benefit from Windows 98. For older systems, though, you may just want to download Internet Explorer 4.0, which will give you most of the non-hardware-related improvements found in Win 98. Unlike the upgrade from MS-DOS/Windows 3.1 to Windows 95, this time there are no major underlying changes to how the operating system functions, so you're unlikely to see titles that require Windows 98, and on older machines the $100+ could better be spent on a RAM or 3D card upgrade.-Denny Atkin «Every Location Gorgeously Drawn and Flawlessly Textured\" -MSNBC.com Actual screen captures from Tex Murphy: Overseer 42 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 "


"TEX MURPHY Real Life (**verseer Comparison Enter a Virtual Reality world where an unspeakable evil is destroying the elite team of scientists who created it-with only you to stand in it's way.  You solve over 20 mini-mysteries on your way to the final confrontation  You search for clues in over 31 virtual reality locations  You interrogate up to 40 unique witnesses and suspects  Both DVD and CD versions inside the box  Featuring Dolby DigitalTM (AC-3) 5.1-charynel surround sound (DVD version only) TEX MURITY vcrsccr TEX MURPHY verseer For information on this fine product, visit our website at www.accesssoftware.com/a71 or call 1-800-800-4880. And add some color to your life! ACCESS SOFTWARE INCORPORATED Go to #241 www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"AMERICA ID I IIN TGET TO BE THE clipcord most powerful nation on earth Zombie BY ASKING NICELY. www.ripcordgames.com Highly skilled and expertly trained, the U.S. Army Rangers are the most revered and feared cf Zombie. Ale reserved. Districted by Parsonic For ordenag normation please call 09, 737-5867 trademarks are the property of the respectrecers. All rights C1998 Record Games. 1099 Zomble. Secop Rangers Le tre Ways a trademark, fighting unit in the world. Now you can put it all on the line and be one of them. Intensely real, SpecOps: Rangers Lead the Way takes you from snowy Korean forests to steamy South American jungles. Everything is authentic, from uniforms and vehicles to the tandem Ranger \"fireteams.\" Everywhere you go, another Ranger goes with you, watching your back, following your commands, and trusting you with his life. SPEC OPS: Rangers Lead the way So let's go, soldier Your country needs you. Your COUNTRY. Your HONOR. Your TURN. "


"SNEAK PREVIEWS YOUR BEST SOURCE FOR THE HOTTEST GAMES IN DEVELOPMENT MechCommander SNEAK PREVIEWS Iron Cocoon No More the \"realism\" (a strange word when dealing with fictional futures) of the combat. by Johnny L. Wilson 14th-century chronicler described a medieval knight as a \"worm in an iron cocoon.\" For fans of the BattleTech universe and players of the MECHWARRIOR series of computer games, the vision of futuristic knights may be more like \"worms in a ferro-ceramic alloy cocoon.\" These fans are accustomed to looking out their cockpits in first person and taking in, as well as contributing to, the pyrotechnics exploding around them. In MECHCOMMANDER, the universe gets a new perspective. Instead of commanding from a pilot's couch inside a behemoth built for maximum destructive power, the player controls the action from a command module-seeing the situation from a satellite view and monitoring the action from an isometric, thirdperson perspective. MECHCOMMANDER is truer to the BattleTech miniatures game than is the MECHWARRIOR computer simulation (whether on PC or in the popular BattleTech Centers). In other words, MECHCOMMANDER is another real-time, science-fiction strategy game in a market that is already crowded PT The Difference Engine In horde games, those levels of realism probably don't matter as much as in a tactical game like MECHCOMMANDER. That sort of realism also might not be practical in a game where mass-produced units might not last for more than a few seconds. That's not the case HASTEKO in MECHCOMMANDER. You guide a ELEMENTAL, MECHCOMMANDER Special body-armored infantry limited number of persistent pilots units look like hummingbirds next to giant mechs. and units throughout a campaign for the liberation of Port Arthur, a games just listed are some planet in the Smoke Jaguar territotimes called \"horde\" games. In ry. With a more narrow focus, most of these games, you win MECHCOMMANDER can afford to by building up a massive army indulge in all those options for or horde of units and assault increased realism. ing your enemy with an attack To succeed at some missions, wave or more likely, attack you'll need to avoid combat, waves. Terrain-as one exam either by making use of superior CENSORED DISPLAY ple of realism-has some speed or more efficient sensors. MECHCOMMANDER's sensor dis impact in all of the games, but You'll also have to effectively use play may work well for a real you don't usually see the artifiterrain as cover. time strategy game, but does cial opponents using it as well At times, you'll have to deform the cloaked terrain make sense as you'd expect. Also, terrain the terrain (by burning forests or for the universe? doesn't always impact speed stomping down trees) in order to and line-of-sight as much as accomplish certain objectives, such with real-time, science-fiction you'd expect. Further, even in as throwing off enemy sensors, strategy games like TOTAL ANNI real-time games involving armor, avoiding enemy lines-of-sight, HILATION, STARCRAFT, COMMAND & facing (that is, the CONQUER, and DARK REIGN. direction a target MECHCOMMANDER does have unit is facing) the advantage of being set in the doesn't usually rich universe of the BattleTech matter. Although novels, specifically within the uni armored units have verse set forth in Michael Stack maximized front pole's novel Grave Covenant armor to the detriStill, why would any non ment of side and Battle Tech aficionados want to rear armor for as play MECHCOMMANDER? long as tanks C OOT@@@@@ First of all, MECHCOMMANDER have had treads, BARNSTORMING Some missions require offers a different style of play most real-time your squad of mechs to defend terrain like from the other real-time games, games ignore the this barn, currently under siege by Smoke as well as enhanced realism. At impact of armor Jaguar vehicles. CGW, the real-time strategy further reducing MechCommander GENRE: Strategy RELEASE DATE: Q3 '98 DEVELOPER: FASA Interactive Technology PUBLISHER: MicroProse Software CG-ROM Play MECHCOMMANDER on This Month's Demo Disc www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 199845 "


"WIN_ 770523 63450 EIDOS w INTERACTIVE WWW.EIDOSINTERACTIVE.COM lon STORM Play DOMINION,.,with up to eight others online at www.eidosgames.com with MPlayer technology "


"05031 Puerto PERHEDGECO www.DOMINION-STORM.COM DOMINION STORM DVOR GF Go to #279 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink A TODD PORTER GAME "


"MECHCOMMANDER (purchase, repair, refitting, and weapon load-outs) is handled without the clock running. This will give you the chance to both savor an individual victory and get solid reports on your weapon systems, mech pilots, and the overall campaign. SNEAK PREVIEWS Everything in the missionbriefing screens, mech-purchase screens, and mech-bay screens is handled elegantly with a \"point, click, drag and drop\" interface. Further, every screen pictured in this management portion of the game is dynamic. It changes as you lose mechs, repair them, or strip them to support other mechs. Since you are part of a larger military force, the amount of resources you have to spend will depend upon the reputation you are building. As you succeed in each mission, your pilots gain skill and you gain the resource points that drive every purchase from weaponry to repairs to mech acquisition. KNOTTY DEFENSE Your mechs pick off enemy forces from the shelter of the forest where they landed, keeping enemy mechs at bay. BRIEFING/DEPLOYMENT taking out enemy units through collateral damage, or creating a shortcut through an obstacle. For example, in the second mission in our prerelease build, your squad of mechs lands in a forest. You'll eventually have to burn down a section of forest in order to reach your objective. Before doing that, however, you can use the trees to keep the armored cars and J. Edgars (heavier armored vehicles) away while picking them off with your longrange and medium-range weaponry. Burn down the terrain too fast and they'll have an unobstructed path to your mechs, inflicting unnecessary damage that could hinder your chances against the scenario's main opponents: tougher mechs. Since salvaging from enemy mechs offers the chance to pick up some of the superior technology from the clans, you may not want to destroy the enemy mechs completely. To win the battles, you'll need to efficiently choose between the different available weaponry ranges and types. You'll also need to use the combined-arms capacity of your 18 different mech types in order to win when outgunned. You'll even need to keep your mech pilots alive long enough to improve their targeting capabilities. And don't forget to learn to flank and surround your enemies to take advantage of their weaker rear armor. Naturally, the artificial opponents are programmed to avoid letting you get behind them. The game's Al mechs are also very good at retreating in order to keep you at long range whenever they are armed with long-range weaponry. They don't simply close and conquer. VESNA ma S TAR EVERY LITTLE BRIEF Each mission typically begins with a briefing that not only outlines your objectives, but also offers some tactical advice. What, Me Worry? Of course, as a BattleTech fan, have a few worries. First, I'm not sure that the standard cloaked map makes sense in the BattleTech universe. After all, air support has been a major factor in the BattleTech universe since the battles of House Davion versus the Draconis Combine. In fact, given the existence of orbiting satellites, wouldn't there be periodic updates to the fog-of-war? Second, there are times when I'd like to have just a little larger scope, in terms of what I can see on the screen. My build didn't offer a lot of zoom options. Finally, I wonder if anyone else misses the handling of heat displacement. It is purely abstracted in MECHCOMMANDER, but it is a vital part of the BattleTech paper game and the novels. Nonetheless, I've been playing a version of the game in which the pilot development hasn't yet been implemented and I'm still spending plenty of time in that universe. MECHCOMMANDER looks like the kind of game that BattleTech fans won't dare let slip by, and the kind of game that tactical gamers of all kinds can't afford to miss. MECHCOMMANDER looks like it will bring BattleTech a little closer to everyone. Let's hope it succeeds in its mission. CGW SHAYARA 'MECH DAY TILSANII REPIRAL TIDEN FERALL Unreal Time A further difference between MECHCOMMANDER and the leading real-time strategy games currently on the market is that while MECHCOMMANDER's combat is in realtime, the resource management of individual mechs FIX 'ER UPPER It takes only a point and click or drag and drop to repair or re-outfit your mechs in the Mech Bay. 48 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"What are you waiting for? See all that Lara has to offer. Complete your collection today. TOMBAK RAIDERN TOMB RAIDER TOMB RAIDED) ch RIDER EIDO KEIDOS TOMB RAIDER There are now three Tomb Raider products to choose from in the ever growing list of Lara Croft's adventures. NG LARA CROFT STARRING LA www.tombraider.com TOMB RAIDER, TOMB RAIDER II, TOMB RAIDER GOLD and LARA CROFT are trademarks of Core Design. 1996 1998 Coro. EIDOS INTERACTIVE is a trademark of Eldos, Plc. 1998 Eidos EIDOS N T E R AC Go to #111 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"Commandos Relive World War II as the Allies' Most Prized Crack Commando Team SNEAK PREVIEWS by Elliott Chin o we need any more real-time strategy games? If they're going to regurgitate the same gameplay we've seen for the past three years, then no. But the answer will always be yes if the game adds something new and fun to this crowded genre. Thankfully, Eidos' newest real-time strategy game, COMMANDOS: BEHIND ENEMY LINES, does this. COMMANDOSwhich Eidos plans to ship in July is more like a smart, squad-level role-playing game than a mere COMMAND & CONQUER clone. This Is Not Your Father's Real-time Game The big difference between COMMANDOS and other real-time games is its gameplay. We've seen and played squadlevel games before, in the forms of the hit X-COM and JAGGED ALLIANCE series. You know the drill: You command a team of specialized units, moving cautiously across a range of environ ments as you try to outmaneuver and kill your computer oppo081931 nents. COMMANDOS' basic gameplay follows that same principle. You lead from one to six commandos, each with his own specialty, through obstaclepacked levels while evading enemy detection and trying to achieve your goals. Of course, should you be discovered, you can always engage the ene. mies. But be careful, because you aren't here to take the enemy head-on, and you're not equipped DOWN WITH THE THIRD REICH In COMMANDOS, you control a squad of for that; your essential aim Allied commandos. Your mission? Sabotage key Axis installations and is to sneak behind enemy undertake missions against Germany. lines and attempt sabotage or espionage. Surgical Strikes Sneakiness is key in this game. The combat engine is fairly realYour commandos are the only istic, and line-of-sight plays a huge troops you'll get, and if one is role. Since you need to sneak gunned down, he is gone for the around, you must take advantage duration of that scenario. And of what the German sentries can because each commando has a and cannot see. There is a handy special role, if one dies too early, hot-key that shows the sight cone that might mean you have to of any single unit, and you'll have GET A CLOSE-UP The graphics restart the mission. To avoid such to time all your evasive actions to in COMMANDOS are slick 2D an outcome, you have to learn these moving cones. with various levels of zoom. guards' patrol patterns, sneak by While realtime enhances the guards, and either evade sentries do-or-die feel of the game's misgame, commandos get hung up or shoot them in the back. sions, it also presents some on rocks and trees. (Eidos, howOccasionally you'll be spotted, unique problems. The biggest dif ever, is working on improving the and then you'll have to take ficulty is that you have to jump p athfinding.) cover, trading fire with the enemy between commandos frequently, A few other drawbacks turned while you find some way-perespecially if they have different up in the build I played. Although haps by employing a flammable objectives or starting locations. the graphics engine is pretty to barrel near the approaching bad This wouldn't be a problem if look at the speed has to be optiguys—to even the odds. you could trust your commandos mized. The game could benefit COMMANDOS' other distinction to behave themselves on their from a rotatable camera; some is that it's set during World War II. own, but they don't. If you leave times I lost my commandos behind Your crack commando team is one commando and jump to buildings. The line-of-sight needs here to neutralize key German another, that first commando tweaking; there were cases where military installations on behalf of will stand dumbstruck. If anyone I could draw a straight line to the the Allies. You'll journey to the shoots him, he won't shoot back. enemy but couldn't fire at him North African desert and to war And there's no way to get mes because a little tree branch torn urban landscapes all over sages when your commandos are blocked my whole line-of-sight. Europe. under attack or spotted. (An However, the mission design, Many of the missions you'll alert for when your idle soldiers WWII setting, and basic gameplay undertake are what you'd expect are spotted would be a welcome set this game apart. Overall, the from a commando team-taking addition to the game.) Further, game is incredibly promising, and out radar installations, freeing you can't trust your commandos if the company irons out the wrinPOWS, eliminating key weapons to pick the best path to a given kles, it could become a real-time facilities, and so on. location. In this build of the strategy sleeper hit. CGW DESERT FOXES The action in COMMANDOS spans North African deserts and European cities and towns. Commandos GENRE: Strategy RELEASE DATE: Q2 '98 DEVELOPER: Eidos PUBLISHER: Eidos 30 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"ONLY EIDOS brings you the most INNOVATive and challenging games E Discover why millions of people worldwide go adventuring with Lara Croft TOMB OMIKRON C OMIKRON THE NOMAD SOUL NOW for the PC. It doesn't take much just your soul An epic adventure of good and evil EIDOS INTERACTIVE One lifetime isn't enough JOHN ROMERO'S | + Eventually everyone must leave the Kiddie Table REVENAN DL www.eidosinteractive.com DAIKATANA name and logo is a Trademark of lon Storm LP DAIKATANA ONO, SUPER FLY HIRO and MIKIKO Copyright 1997 Ion Storm LP AI Rohts Reserved TOMB RAIDER GOLD and LARA CROFT and her likeness are trademarks of Core Design. 1996-1998 Coro. EIDOS INTERACTIVE is a trademark of EIDOS pia. Copyright 199B Eidos pl Go to #115 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"DAWNING OF A COVERS NEW Ensemble's Encore, AGE OF EMPIRES II Advances to a New Era y any measure, Ensemble Studios belted one out of the park with its 1997 hit AGE OF EMPIRES. TO most real-time strategy fans, it was the best looking, most balanced, and, at times, the most vexing game to come along since WARCRAFT II. The game delivered a near-perfect blend of strategic and tactical considerations in an elegant interface that was accessible to everyone. It earned numerous awards around the world, including CGW's Multiplayer Game of the Year award, and, at the moment, it's on the verge of breaking the millioncopy sales mark. Not bad for Ensemble's first game, eh? Of course, AGE OF EMPIRES might've been a home run, but it wasn't Bruce Shelly's first time at bat. Shelly has been a game designer since 1980, and he served an important role as an assistant designer on SID MEIER'S CIVILIZATION, in addition to designing RAILROAD TYCOON. (See the interview with Shelly on page 55). Beginning in 1995, Shelly began roughing out the design for AGE OF EMPIRES with co-designer Rick Goodman. During the ensuing two years, Microsoft and the development team at Ensemble put such a deep polish on the game that players still see themselves reflected in its gorgeous graphics as they boot up yet another random map to foil by Ken Brown COVER ART BY CHEA O'NEIL, SCOTT WINSETT, THONNY NAMOUNGLO AND BRAD CROW Age of Empires II RELEASE DATE: Q1 '99 GENRE: Real-time Strategy DEVELOPER: Ensemble Studios PUBLISHER: Microsoft COMPUTER WORLD JULY 1998 www.computer "


"COVER_SITORY Es ist ROLL CALL These archers are being produced and directed automatically, thanks to new unit queues and gathering points. the belligerent intentions of those evil priests. But AGE OF EMPIRES II looks even better. The development team remains intact, it's just been augmented with new designers and programmers, and the new game's design is significantly more ambitious than that of the first game. Some of the new features include an entire economic game, historical campaigns, a larger scale, greater differentiation between cultures, deeper combat options, better Al, unit facing, new victory conditions, and all-new artwork. Clearly, this is not your typical game sequel. But will it preserve the accessibility and addictiveness of the first game? Let's take a closer look. Dark Age, Feudal Age, Castle Age, and Imperial Age. You can choose from the English, Byzantines, Celts, Chinese, Franks, Goths, Japanese, Mongols, Persians, Saracens, Germans, Turks, and Vikings. Each civilization will have unique attributes, as in the first game, but Ensemble has tried to further differentiate the cultures by giving each one a unique unit. If disc space permits, units from different cultures may also have different speech prompts. Shelly says the unique units will give the game more personality. \"That unit is not just the waterboy, but the quarterback of your football team,\" he says. \"For example, the Samurai warrior will have a bow and a sword: He shoots at you for a while, he rides, and then he closes up to your guy with a sword. That's something new. No one knows how to deal with a unit like that.\" NEW CRUSADE Here are some units issuing from a castle in formation. Heavy cavalry in a wedge lead paladins, compound bowmen, crossbowmen, scorpion ballista, and battering rams. It Takes a Pillage Players will once again lead one of several civilizations through four historical eras. But this time you'll play through the Unlike in the first game, some of the civilizations in AOE II will be raider civilizations. The raiders, the Mongols Celts, and Vikings can move their town centers, and, although they can't build a \"The greatest pleasure is to vanquish your enemies and chase them before you, to rob them of their wealth and see those dear to them bathed in tears, to ride their horses and clasp to your bosom their wives and daughters.\" -Genghis Khan www.competani COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 "


"AGE OF EMPIRES II No matter which civilization you choose, you'll have to satisfy one of five victory conditions to win. These have changed from the first game to allow players to win through conquest, through the accumulation of wealth, by having the highest score, or by protecting a king or queen. You'll still be able to win by building and defending one of four wonders. more on this in a moment). Villagers can also be used as farmers, and thankfully, in AOE II you won't need to keep throwing down farms—they'll last as long as you can support them. Also, farms will spread across larger areas, but units will be able to traverse them. wonder, they can certainly destroy one. Mark Terrano, the lead designer for AOE II, makes the raider civs sound endearing: \"They live in lean-tos that they can pack up into carts and move across the map, and settle down somewhere else. They have really poor resource gathering, but they can pillage-they go to your buildings and pillage things and try to get away with them. They can pick up your goods, and they can pick up villagers to take back to their town centers, and then they become their villagers. They steal right out of your treasury when they go into your market place. They'll wreak havoc, take your stuff and try to get away with it. \"Of course, you can attack them and get them to drop what they picked up. They don't have much of an economy to build up, other than to explore around the map and find more stuff to raid. They're slower to expand, but they should be kind of fun to raid with. Combat is your only objective.\" Getting Around Town The town center remains the central starting place and villagerproduction facility. You'll now be able to produce military units from the town center to repel any early attacks. In addition, the all-male villager cast has been replaced with a 50-50 gender split, presumably boosting morale. You'll need to provide housing for every one, but Ensemble may let you expand the town center to house up to 50 people. To increase capac ity, just build more town centers. As your villagers start exploring, they'll encounter new opportunities and new dangers. The lions and crocodiles of AOE I have been replaced with wolves. The wolves will stalk units for a while and attack if they see an opportunity. You can still hunt deer, but the new deer have antlers and look realistic enough to advertise for Hartford. You'll also see flocks of birds wheeling through the air, and perfectly detailed dolphins leaping from the water. Villagers will have better pathfinding ability in AOE II, thanks to some programming changes. Lead Engine Programmer Dave Pottinger says that all the unitsboth human and computercontrolled-will know the lay of the land. As a result, if you tell a unit to go across an unexplored map, he'll get there without getting blocked by terrain. Villagers remain the basic production unit for gathering resources and performing other basic roles. But now they will be upgradable. With the advent of the loom, for example, villagers will be able to make cloth armor and manufacture trade goods Hoarding & Trading Resource gathering and production are going to be more complicated than before. In addition to wood, food, stone, and gold, you'll have trade goods and ore to worry about. Trade goods are produced at a trade workshop. Villagers assigned to a trade workshop automatically begin making trade goods, using one unit each of stone, food, wood, and ore. (The actual \"goods\" are generic and can't be selected.) Ore essentially takes the role of gold in the first game. Higher-end units need ore for steel and iron in their shields and cannon. Gold has become the currency of the realm, and you won't find it lying on the Model Village: A Closer Look at a Feudal Japanese Town Temple Market Deer Stable Wolves Mill Female Villager Siege Workshop Janissary University Trade Cart Monk 54 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"AGE OF EMPIRES II Et Tu, Bruce? COVER STORY An Interview With Bruce Shelly, Designer of AGE OF EMPIRES CGW: What led you to become a people will look forward to and that give and others), longbow archery barrages, the computer game designer? them a very satisfying entertainment experi beginnings of gunpowder, a generally new Bruce Shelly: I had been developing and ence for their money. paradigm for naval combat, Greek fire, the designing boardgames for a number of comimportance of castles, and barbarian raiders panies since 1980. I played my first computer How has your role changed from like the Vikings and Mongols. Since much of games in the late '70s. In 1988 I was hired by AOE I to AOE II? Europe reverted to a very basic tribal culture MicroProse to work on the database and 3D I am less involved at this point in AOE II following the fall of Rome, starting with very maps for F-19 STEALTH FIGHTER. I worked there than I was in AOE I. That is partly because we little and building up continues to work. for five years. For most of that time I was were starting from scratch the first time and assigned to work with Sid Meier as his assis beginning with a very successful base the sec Is there any truth to the rumor tant designer. We didn't have (job) titles, but ond. I do not live in Dallas (Ensemble's loca that Microsoft will integrate AGE that is how I saw my job. tion) and am not available on-site, other than OF EMPIRES V into Windows about one week out of every month. Mark Millennium? Will there be a Bill How do you define \"fun\" for a Terrano is the lead designer on AoE ll and lan Gates campaign? computer game? Fischer is assisting. I am part of the design Why wait? We would like to see AoE Il bunSid [Meier) once defined a game as a series team, and I work with Mark and lan on fram dled with Windows 98, but Microsoft is pushof interesting decisions. I expanded that defining new concepts, but they are mainly responing back on that idea. We see it as a killer proition to require a competitive environment sible for the specification and communicating ductivity app combined with a productivity and a satisfying conclusion. The rocket-science within the team. I am doing a lot of the killer app. We have gates in AoE ll at this stuff to me, though, is the interesting deci research that underlies the game, and I am point, but not Bill Gates. Maybe we'll call sions. A good game presents decision after working on the historical notes, from open gates \"bill gates,\" decision to the player. To be interesting, they which come many of our game ideas, civinviting the player cannot be trivial or random. Pacing influences ilization choices, and new units. to take the how interesting decisions are to make. Arcade Ensemble Studios would like to develop road ahead. games (and to some degree real-time games) more than one game at a time eventually, would not be as fun if you had all the time so we want more people to get you needed to take a turn or make a decision. experience in the design side. Part of the responsibility of a game designer is to present decisions that are sufficiently You indicated that there will interesting to a wide spectrum of game play be historical campaigns in ers, so the game sells well. Interesting deci AOE II. What will they be? sions have been fundamental to making The campaigns and scenarios are still games fun for thousands of years and always in the planning stage. Some ideas we will be, regardless of technology. are considering concern Arthur of Britain against the Saxons, the What were your goals for AOE II? Hundred Years War (England We believe that 12 to 18 months after the versus France), the Crusades, release of AGE OF EMPIRES people are going to the Vikings the Mongols, the want more of that experience. By then a sig. unification of Japan, and nificant number of people will have explored Charlemagne. most of what the first game has to offer. We believe that a similar game-but in a new What sort of design time-period with new artwork, buildings, challenges emerged units, technologies, and civilizations—will be a as a result of progood thing for our customers, Microsoft, and Ensemble Studios. We will take the opportuniMiddle Ages? ty to learn from the first game and add some Concepts that we hope new features that improve the gameplay. We offer more of an opportunwant to build on the success of the first game ity than a problem include with more of the same, but better. We want charging knights, immobile to build a franchise of \"AGE OF\"games that siege artillery (trebuchets See much more of this interview online at gamespot.com/features/shelly. THE NHC www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 "


"HEROES of Might and Magic PC GAMER >> EDITORS RATED > CHOICE Editors Choice --PC Gamer Strategy Game of the Year 1995 -Computer Gaming World 5/5 stars -Computer Gaming World AEROESTI PC GAMER PC GAMER EDITORS BEST STRATEGY GAME Turn-Based Strategy Game of the Year 1996 -PC Gamer 5/5 stars -Computer Gaming World CHOICE Editors Choice -PC Gamer EROES of Might and Magic THE PRICE OF LOYALTY RATED A 5/5 stars -Computer Gaming World Great PC Games from 3 DO RATING PENDING RP  1998 The 3DO Company. All rights reserved. New World Computing, the New World Computing logo, Heroes of Might and Magic, the Heroes of Might and Magic logo, 3DO and the 3DO logo, are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of The 3D0 Company in the U.S. and/or other countries. All other trademarks belong to their respective owners. New World Computing is a division of The 3DO Company CONTENT RANDET "


"Legendary Bloodlines... HEROES II OF MIGHT AND MAGIC EPIC BATTLES OF STRATEGY AND TACTICS. Coming Soon. Go to #098 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink NEW WORIO COMPUTINE www.heroes3.com "


"IMACIONAM OD 10 TO AMOUNT DOWNLOD O   ALLE SER DOWNLOAD -COM MM BOTY 'It's your duty to protect mining operations in the new Frontier... but who are these guys? Looks like the same heinous Sectoids from Earth. Only this time the battle is on their turl. Good thing you're piloting a fighter you designed and armed with everything from a Plasma Pulse Cannon to an Elerium Torpedo Launcher. Good for you... bad for them. You nabbed a Sectoid fighter with a secret weapon on board. But where's the trigger? The Research Screen will help you return the aliens thunder in an intense and epic battle. WAMON MED ARACH LODOU 274 Q000 A brutal dogfight you take some losses. But by intercepting an alien supply ship, you find the secret location of their key outpost and replenish your resources. Now that you've researched the Doppleganger Missile Launcher from the alien ship, you can equip your fighters with powerful alien technology and improve your odds. With this new arsenal, the tide is turning. The aliens are retreating to their cozy little black hole. But what will they plan next? Better lind out... before they come back for you. STOP THINKING WITH YOUR JOYSTICK To blow away these aliens, you'll have to use a totally different kind of weapon: your brain. COM IEEEBEEPROB una RP MICROPROSE M Was o w Available on Windows 95. Visit your local retaller or call POR WWW.microprose.com 1-800-695-GAME day or night (U.S. or Canada) ine All TOSI N ANG MGROPROSEE US Teated trademarks and countercopron Prostlas. Bate.conueniu ter r a property of the respective holders Go to #151 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"AGE OF EMPIRES II WOMANACIONS sede sinas COVER_STORY JOHN BELL PAINTED HORSE This Paladin, like all the units in both AoE games, was built as a 3D object. The wire-frame views reflect the level of detail in the 3D geometry. Ensemble's artists have become so proficient at making these models that they can usually do them in a day or two. regenerate if they aren't exhaustbut, alas, it was the stone age, ed. If you clear-cut the forest (as and the only certainties were we all did in AOE I), it'll never death and axes. return. But if you leave a few The result is, you'll be able to trees, they'll continue to grow and play AOE II purely as an economic spread. The same goes for fishing game, without raising armies and areas. This is just one example of going into battle. the attention to detail the team is Of course, business isn't bringing to the project. always friendly, and one would presume it was even less civil in The Economic Game the Dark Ages, but it is a viable The economic game in AOE II is option, should you choose to go a major new component, and it that route. just might help you in the spousal rationalization department, so it's worth knowing. There are also some interesting surprises. Ensemble received a lot of feedback asking for an alternative to the fighting and bloodshed of the first TRIBAL BY DESIGN Mark Terrano, Bruce Shelly, game. The and lan Fischer (left to right) divide design game's pastoral responsibilities. Terrano is the lead designer, scenery and and he coordinates the art and programming peaceful vilteams; Shelly reviews the design and does lages certainly historical research; and Fischer, the assistant suggested an designer, keeps the design documents current. economic path, ground anymore you'll have to earn it. To help you manage the new complexity, Ensemble has added new viewing modes to the minimap. You can switch between three view modes: resources, trade, and combat. Each mode highlights the relevant features in the areas you've explored. For example, the trade mode will show your markets, foreign mar kets, and your trade routes. If production is stopped for any reason, you'll be notified on the map. The resource mode shows all the resources you've discovered and highlights idle villagers—a wel come improvement. One of the easiest ways to increase your resources will be to raze your opponent's buildings. In AOE II, destroyed buildings leave rubble piles that can be scavenged for raw materials. Another interesting develop ment is that some resources will BUILDING A SIEGE ENGINE After the wire frame is built, textures are applied to give the object realistic coloration and shading. Then the unit is animated for gameplay motion. Finally, the unit is rendered, stray artifacts are cleaned up, and it's ready to be used. The whole process takes about two to three weeks. www.computerami.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 "


"Wise Men Believe in Legends. \"FINALLY, THE SEQUEL THAT RPG FANS HAVE BEEN WAITING FOR!\". PC GAMER \"BEST OF SHOW E3 AWARD.\" GAME PEN TEEN AGES 13 CONTENT RATED ESRA NEW WORLD COMPUTING Great PC Games from WWW.3DO.COM 01998 The 3D0 Company. All rights reserved. New World Computing. Might and Magic BDO aod their respective logos are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of The 3DO Company in the U.S and/or other countries. All other trademarks belong to their respective owners. New World Computing is a division of The 3D0 Company "


"OOO arien on saluray STAVB 1169 OLOI 01 01 2000 JOURNEY THROUGH A FUN AND ENGROSSING WORLD THAT'S COMPLETELY AT YOUR CONTROL. EXPERIENCE BREATHTAKING 16-BIT. 65,000 COLOR GRAPHICS IN A SMOOTH-SCROLLING HIGH-RES ENVIRONMENT. 1991 OOO Ollobe CHOOSE WHETHER TO PLAY IN REAL-TIME OR TURN-BASED COMBAT MODE. ENGAGE IN HUNDREDS OF ENTERTAINING MINIQUESTS THAT BRANCH OFF FROM THE MAIN SAGA, Embark upon a legendary adventure to save the imperiled Ironfist Dynasty. Combining a unique first person perspective with both realtime and classic turn-based play, Might And Magic Vi has revolutionized computer role playing. From the depths of the deepest dungeons to the intrigues of the royal court, you will lead a band of adventurers on an amazing journey of depth and intelligence. Might Magic:VI and THE MANDATE OF HEAVEN EXPERIENCE THE LEGEND Go to #097 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"AGE OF EMPIRES II New Units in AOE II COVERS TO The marketplace is the center of focus for economic players. You can effect two kinds of trade there: commodity trade and player trade. Commodity trade is when you exchange materials for gold at your own marketplace. This lets you buy materials like wood or ore. The more you try to buy, the more the price goes up, because each market has its own economy. Player trade occurs between players, via trade routes. Set up a trade route between any two markets or docks, and the carts or boats will go back and forth carrying trade goods out and HEAVY SWORDSMAN Good armor and a large shield make this unit versatile against archer and infantry attacks. PIKEMAN Best used defensively to block areas and protect units, they are extremely effective against cavalry. TWO-HANDED SWORDSMAN Gives up the shield to gain extra reach and attack power. C2930 returning with gold. You get income when people trade at your market, as well as when you trade at other players' markets. Be prepared for some surprises. There are not only wolves in the wild, but outlaws as well. Outlaws can attack your trade routes and carry off gold or goods. But worse things than outlaws are eager to prey on you. \"One of the things you can do to add some spice is hire mercenaries to go harass your economic opponent,\" says Lead Designer Mark Terrano. \"You can go beat on his trade route and destroy and pillage his buildings.\" Terrano's team is also experimenting with off-map trading, where you'll send your boats off the map with trade goods, in the hope that they'll come back with gold. He says, \"You'll get a very good value for your goods, depending on how risky that trade route is. We're experiment ing with that. We wanted to have an economic option, if it's a two-player game, to have a third player who's not on the map with whom you can trade. So you send your boats off to explore a trade route, and then you get to pick which trade route you want.\" HAND CANNONEER This first gunpowder unit is slow to fire but has a strong ranged attack. * BOMBARD CANNON The \"ultimate\" siege weapon makes quick work of fortifications and castles. WOLF This neutral unit hunts in packs, and mostly attacks lone units. * TEUTONIC KNIGHT A German superunit with a devastating hand-to-hand attack. My Name Is Inigo Montoya... How has the combat changed in ACE II? Let me count the ways.... Since we've advanced to the Dark Age, all of the military units will *** PALADIN An elite religious warrior, the Paladin is a skilled fighter and is nearly impossible to convert. EVOLUTION European buildings through the four ages: (top to bottom) Dark Age, Middle Age, Feudal Age, and Imperial Age. (More next page) COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Microsoft 8751 DREADSUTS OUTWARS MEMORIAL (ITEM NO. 328) BELONGED TO A B JET PACK TO A BRAVE DREADNAUT SOLD MILITARY RELIC FOUND DURING EXCAV! C. 2389 RELIC FROM THE 1ST. OUTWARS OLDIER WHO WARDED OFF HUGE EN EXCAVATION OF THE GALAXY TNT GE EXO SKELETON CREATURES LAXY MINI MALL, 2506 AD. COCKETING ACROSS A 10.000-FOOT CHASM BLASTING RUTHLESS SKULL HORDES EXPLORING DEPTHS OF PLANET OASIS O2 u Sports UNENE OUTWARS. WWW.MICROSOFT.COM/GAMES/OUTWARS EIMILRTMAC  1998 MICROSOFT CORPORATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. MICROSOFT IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF MICROSOFT CORPORATION. OUTWARS IS A TRADEMARK OF SINGLETRAC STUDIO. A G INTERACTIVE COMPANY "


"AGE OF EMPIRES II KNIGHT These swift and deadly mounted units use a lance on the battlefield. SAMURAI A unit unique to the Japanese civilization, the Samurai attack and move with amazing speed. DETAILS, DETAILS In addition to greater detail, the artists have added more environmental touches, such as flocks of birds (bottom right) and even leaping dolphins (bottom left). OUTLAW A neutral unit, the outlaw-like Robin Hood-preys on trade units with the intent of theft, not killing. AXE THROWER This unit hurls an axe a short distance, but with incredible force. be new. The basic fighting units are infantry, cavalry, archers, and siege units. Advanced infantry include spearmen, pikemen, swordsmen, heavy swordsmen, and two-handed swordsmen. The cavalry line progresses from scout to lance cavalry, knights, and paladins (religious knights resistant to conversion). The archer line has archers, composite archers, crossbowmen, and heavy crossbowmen. Siege units include scorpion ballista, mangonel, trebuchet, hand cannon, bombard cannon, and, perhaps, a battering ram. There are also special units unique to each civilization. To help facilitate production, Ensemble has added the unit queues and gathering points that have become standard equipment on most real-time strategy games. They've also added retreat points, where you can have monks standing by to heal your injured troops. There'll be new settings to give you greater control. Ensemble has replaced the ineffectual settings in AOE I with three new aggressiveness stances: passive, defensive, and aggressive. Passive units will not attack unless others come within range; defensive units will rush forward to engage, but will return to their station when the threat is past; and aggressive units will pursue enemies until they lose them, destroy them, or die trying. Expect the basic units to be smarter and easier to control than those in AOE I. In addition to the stances, you'll be able to give your units orders, such as follow, scout, or patrol. Units ordered to follow will track JANISSARY The military elite of the Turks—they were disciplined troops who lived only for battle. They terrified their opponents with sound (drums and horns) as well as their fighting prowess. DERVISH The Saracen elite fighting unit has a devastating attack against heavily armored units. CROSSBOWMAN Though slower than an Archer, these units train quickly and have a good ranged attack. MANGONEL A small field weapon that uses tension to fire a headsized stone, it is effective against slow-moving units and buildings. FARMING BY THE SEA Units can walk across the new, persistent farms. Nearby horse-drawn carts service a busy dock. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"ATI XPERT @Play 98 8MB The new breed of speed hew GST do YOU WANT to .. go today? POWERED BY  ATI's XPERT 8MB graphics boards are the only way to experience incredible gaming in Windows 98 and Windows 95.  Get 8MB of power, the best 3D, DVD-quality video and TV-Out starting from just $98' (ask your favorite retailer for more details). Save even more money with ATI's cool Windows 98 rebates.? AN XPERT 98 Features Designed for  ATI's XPERT graphics boards are available in PCI or full AGP 2X versions. XPERT@Play 98 Microsoft Windows 98 El  Get TV on your PC with ATI-TV. MATI-TV !  Check out www.atitech.com for more details on ATI's Windows 98 products and rebates. Now You See It Copyright 1998. ATI Technologies Inc. ATI XPERT Play, XPERT, ATI.TV and RAGE PRO TURBO are trademarks and or registered trademarks of ATI Technologies Inc. All other company and/or product names are trademarks andor registered trademarks of their respective acturers. Features, performance, and specifications may vary by operating environment and are subject to change without notice. Products may not be exactly as shown. Surested retail price. Check store for further details on exact rebate amount www.atitech.com/cgw Go to #106 www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"\"Game of the Year\" |-GameSpot Editors \"Game of the Year\" -GameSpot Reader's Choice Awards \"Best Real-Time Strategy Game\" -PC Gamer On-Line, Reader's Choice Award \"Best Real-Time Strategy Game\" -Adrenaline Vault \"Best Real-Time Strategy Game -Ultra Game Player's magazine Plus Oy 50 other major awards worldwide! TOTAL INNIHILATION PANTHLATTAL Download the demo now at www.cavedog.com or ask for it at your favorite retail outlet. "


"TOTAL ANNIHILATION THE CORE CONTINGENCY 75 New Units 50 New Maps 25 New Missions 6 New Worlds TOTAL ANNIHILATION Z THE CORE CONTINGENCY Experience the real time strategy game that just doesn't quit. Total Annihilation, winner of over 50 awards world wide and Total Annihilation: The Core Contingency, the second explosive chapter in the world's hottest strategy saga. Go to #170 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink orarios RBRE <A VE ENTERTAInment A GT Interactive Company www.cave dog.com Stotalter pansioa Disko 01997, 1998 Humongous Entertainment, Inc. All rights reserved. Total Annihilation, Total Annihilation: The Core Contingency, Cavedog Entertainment and the Cavedog Entertainment logo are trademarks of Humongous Entertainment, Inc "


"AGE OF EMPIRES II other units and try to stay out of and 50 percent more damage to their line-of-site. You can follow vilthe rear of your opponents. This lagers back to their town center, or means you'll be able to sweep in you can follow trade units and fishyour cavalry from the side, roll up ing boats. Units ordered to scout an enemy's flank, and inflict will explore areas and signal you if severe damage to his formation they detect enemy activity. Patrol in a pseudo-historical, real-time lets you use waypoints to patrol a battle. Is this a cool time to be a designated area-around a city or computer gamer or what? up and down a narrow crossroad. Ensemble has vowed to significantly improve the combat AI, Time to Die, Cur! which was one of the most critiCombat should be very interestcized weaknesses of the first ing in AOE II. You'll be able to game. The company has hired two LAUNCH! Cataphracts wait for the trebuchets to pound down assemble your troops in forma new programmers, and part of the castle walls. Purple silhouettes near the gate highlight units tions such as a line, column, their responsibility is schooling the hidden behind the walls. square, or wedge. This will provide units. Says Terrano, \"The unit Al is a greater sense of historical realcertainly an area we're going to castles and fortifications to dis sides, as was the case historically. ism, as well as facilitate battlefield focus on. We're going to make courage attackers. In fact, the fortiGiven enough time and enough management. It will be a nice units smarter. Your siege engines fications in AOE II are imposing: men, the attacker may have the change from the chaotic melee won't fire in the middle of your the buildings are larger and lend a advantage with his powerful siege combat of the first game. formations. And we'll definitely better sense of perspective, the weapons, but the defender has Ensemble is still working on the allow the player to set aggressive towers can be garrisoned, and the the benefit of healing garrisoned troop formations, but they sound ness stances for the entire forma portcullis can be lowered on your units. Churches and castles can committed to supporting multiple tion or for individual units within Warriors' virtuous heads. You won't house quite a few units, and they rows of combatants. Says Bruce the formation. In addition, you find archers on the battlements, heal them much more quickly Shelly, \"Obviously, people would can expect the enemy leaders to which is disappointing, given their than does a monk in the field. like to see swordsmen out front be fairly adept at formation tactics. realistic appearance, but you will Siegecraft might be a little and archers behind them, with a It's one of the priorities on Engine encounter archers in castles and easier if you rule a culture sophispriest in the middle, in a kind of Lead Dave Pottinger's list. towers. And if you're vulnerable, ticated enough to develop the wedge--going around like a giant beware of garrisoned infantry that cannon. The same holds true for meat slicer.\" Storming the Castle can sortie out at any moment. naval vessels: some civilizations But there are even more There comes a time in every In such cases, the best-dressed will be able to develop ships intriguing possibilities. Now that despot's life when he has to gate-crashers learn to be pre equipped with cannon in the bow Ensemble will be modeling unit conquer foreign cities. Their rulers pared. You can find out how and stern. facing, you'll be able to inflict 25 can be a little touchy about these many archers are lying in wait percent more damage to the flank things, so they sometimes build with the aid of spy units (dressed Waiting for Battle like villagers). You I've tried to cover the most can also hire a important aspects of the game, horde of merce but I'm afraid there just isn't naries to go beat enough room to cover everything. on the back door As you can see, the design spec for a while and try for AGE OF EMPIRES II is more to divert the ambitious than that of most enemy's attention. sequels, and judging by what You can then roll saw during my visit to up a few giant treEnsemble—not to mention the buchets and hurl design team's track record—it's a some nice greeting safe bet they'll implement most of cards into your what they showed me. But do friend's house. If keep in mind the game is months the defenders are away from completion (which is dead-set on stayestimated to be early next year), ing, you might and some features may not suralso be able to try vive the final cut. making your own in the meantime, save your gold, door with a bat study your formation maneuvers, SURRENDER OR DIE The siege begins with archers softening up the castle tering ram. and be ready when the fated day defenders. Trebuchets, mangonels (smaller catapult-styled artillery), and Expect heavy dawns to slaughter the infidelsbattering rams stand ready. casualties on both for God and country! CGW COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1998 wwr mutng n "


"OROSOMAN, GROOSMAN & GROSSMAN ATTORNEYS AT LAW 1947 LYON TRE CLARA, GALIFORNIA ODOS 2 1408) 752.0753 hereby declare that I will not hold S3 Incorporated or its subsidiary companies responsible for injuries and/or symptoms I may incur including but not limited to: concussions, contusions, lacerations, jammed or sprained aigits carpal tunnel syndrome, electrical burns, compound fractures, cranial fractures, maxiofacial fractures, choking maiming, gunshot wounds, evisceration, dismemberment, removal of my spine, disembowelment with a spork, fatigue, soreness of the buttocks, whiplash, collapsed lungs, kidney failure, seizures due to strobing, nose bleeds, ringing ears, detached retinas, hair loss and/or flatulence as a result of the overwhelming and dumbfoundingly realistic 3D graphics capabilities of multimedia systems equipped with the Savage 3D Chip. Signed Witness SAVAGE You play games. Savage3D makes those games better. More realistic. How? With stuff like single pass trilinear filtering, S3 texture compression, true color rendering and AGP texturing. All of which means you get more complex and visually compelling 3D environments, more realistic 3D games, and no compromise performance. Now go get it. Just don't hurt yourself. http://www.s3.com 408.588.8000 Sight. Sound, Speed. Go to #270 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"FIRAXIS CONTENT RATED ESRB GAMIS NG   Electronics Arts. Electronic Arts is a trademark or registered trademark of Electronic Arts in the U.S. and/or other countries. All rights reserved. Firaxis Games is a trademark of Firaxis Games, Inc. "


"W0) | HAVIN A jyyd 1y   1 2. ELLI LI -, "


"O 0 Seemingly Lost for Years, World War Il Flight Sims Have Returned in Force by Denny Atkin any simulation players feel that World War II is where the real action is. Unlike in today's high-tech jet simulations, which are as much exercises in computer-systems management as in dogfighting, WWII air combat was up-close and personal. Rather than mastering the intricacies of radar or learning how to get missile lock, the WWII pilot had to rely on quick reflexes, situational awareness, and pure maneuvering skill to put his guns on the bad guys. Despite the more personal—and some would say more exciting-feel of WWII combat, for years the era has been ignored by software companies. Certainly, there have been some good online multiplayer WWII sims, but for single player action, sim players were limited to AIR WARRIORS II and III (which wedged solo play into a design optimized for online flight) or now-dated classics such as FIGHTER DUEL and 1942: PACIFIC AIR WAR. Software companies finally saw the pent-up demand and started work on a variety of WWII sims over the course of the past year or so. And come this fall, WWII sims will be even more abundant than F-22 sims on store shelves. Given the major advances in technology that have taken place since the releases of such classics as PACIFIC AIR WAR and ACES OVER EUROPE, World War II air combat will be a whole new ball game. With today's hardware, you can look forward to more planes in the virtual skies, more realistic flight models, better artificial intelligence, and, of course, dazzling 3D graphics. In this, CGW's exclusive WWII sim roundup, you'll find information on 11 new sims slated for release between now and early 1999. So no matter what you look for in a simulation-historical realism, maximum dogfighting action, ultra-realistic flight models, or the chance to change the course of the war-we'll show you which WWII sim is in the works for you. 12 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"WorHwanasing Combat Flight Simulator Microsoft Finally Puts the Guns to FLIGHT SIMULATOR basically chased a tiny wire-frame biplane across a small, flat landscape--but it was a pleasant diversion to occasionally have the chance to shoot at something when you got bored with trying to find VOR radials. And compared to the other sims of the day, it wasn't that primitive. But rather than updating that module to keep pace with dedicated combat sims, FLIGHT SIMULATOR's developers eventually pulled the minigame from later versions of the program. ay back in early 1997, when I first heard that Microsoft was going to do a World War II combat simula tion based on the FLIGHT SIMULATOR engine, I have to admit that I was not enthused. After all, even with yearly upgrades, FLIGHT SIMULATOR was starting to show its age. Plus, the engine could barely provide the frame-rates to convincingly pull off sightseeing in a Cessna, never mind dogfighting in a Spitfire. To say I was pleasantly surprised when I visited Microsoft to spend some hands-on time at the controls of the game code-named \"Spitfire,\" then, would be an understatement. MICROSOFT COMBAT FLIGHT SIMULATOR is definitely not just FLIGHT SIMULATOR with hotter planes and working guns. The development team has done some serious re-engineering of the game's engine to optimize it for historical air combat. With a redesigned terrain system, an optimized 3D engine, innovative Al pilot programming, and unprecedented expandability, COMBAT FLIGHT SIMULATOR looks like it may just have what it takes to carve a significant niche in the soon-to-be-crowded WWII sim market. e DOWN 06) () . INSTRUMENTS OF DESTRUCTION COMBAT FLIGHT SIM will include detailed bitmapped instrument panels for each plane, as well as virtual cockpits with functioning instrumentation. COMBAT FLIGHT SIMULATOR has very little in common with that primitive early effort. Although there is some code in common with FLIGHT SIMULATOR 98, there's just as much here that's new. Set in the European theater of war, the sim allows you to fly a variety of fighter aircraft in two campaigns. An optimized 3D engine and a new terrain system make for a more realistic combat environment. But what will likely separate this sim from the pack is something brought over from FLIGHT SIMULATOR: the ability to import user-created aircraft, scenery, and scenarios. Given the hundreds of aircraft and scenery areas available for COMBAT FLIGHT SIMULATOR's peacenik civilian counterpart, one can only imagine the potential amount of thirdparty support this historical sim will garner. The sim focuses on fighters, and in various campaigns you'll be able to fly the Spitfire Mk.I, Hurricane Mk. I, Messerschmitt Bf109E, Messerschmitt Bf-109 G, Focke Wulf 190 A8, P-47D Thunderbolt, P-51D Mustang, and the Spitfire Mk. IX. In addition, there will be about 30 computerflown aircraft, such as the B-17F, B-24J, Mosquito, Ju-88a, and Hawker Tempest. Each of the player-flown aircraft will feature a full cockpit with authentic instruments and instrument layouts. Instruments will use appropriate measuring systems, such as kilometers per hour. So if you plan to fly nonAmerican aircraft you'd better brush up on your foreign rulers. If you were disappointed with the virtual cockpit in FLIGHT SIMULATOR 98, which was terribly slow and didn't feature instruments, fear not. The virtual cockpit here pans very quickly, and features a full suite of working instruments. SHATTER DAY Planes will come apart if you hit them right, with multiple parts spinning to the ground. LITTLE FRIENDS As you take the fight to Germany, you'll escort B-17s and B-24s in the long-range P-51D Mustang. Combat Revisited Longtime fans of flight simulations will remember that FLIGHT SIMULATOR was not always such a peaceable game. In its earliest incarnations, the game included a World War I air combat scenario. It was nothing spectacular-you Combat Flight Simulator RELEASE DATE: Q3 '98 DEVELOPER: Microsoft PUBLISHER: Microsoft FACTORY FRESH Ground objects in the sim exhibit a realistic scale; look for plenty of historical buildings around London, Paris, and Berlin. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 "


"World warumheshma COMBAT FLIGHT SIMULATOR Situational awareness is one of a chance he'll be working so hard COMBAT FLIGHT SIMULATOR'S Of course, gathering the data to the biggest limitations in flight to get on the tail of his target that flight models. The planes are as insure proper performance for airsimulations. In a real WWII plane, you'll be able to sneak up on him touchy as you'd expect from a craft more than five decades old searching for enemies was a sim unnoticed. Similar attention is WWII sim, but not more so. There isn't easy. In fact, Mike Schroeter, ple matter of continuously pivot given to the abilities of gunners in are toggleable concessions for the team's flight model guru, said ing your head around looking for bombers. The firing arcs of the more casual players, such as part of the fun of developing this bogeys. (Trivia point: \"bogeys\" are various guns in a B-17, for automatic trim, but there's also game has been learning to underaircraft of unknown affiliation; instance, are based on a diagram plenty there for the expert pilot. stand the engineers from the '40s. \"bandits\" are planes that are that was issued to German pilots Because of the prop and torque, Among the information the team definitely enemies.) A computer who were likely to encounter the for instance, aircraft will have difdug up was original wind-tunnel screen shows only one direction, bomber. ferent left-turn tendencies. In data, engineering documentation, and has a much narrower field of some early-war aircraft, such as and pilots' handbooks, as well as view than do human eyes-limi Model Citizens the Spitfire Mk.I, the engine will anecdotal data from pilot reports. tations a good simulation comThere's a legion of civilian sim cut out if you push the nose They even obtained reports from pensates for. COMBAT FLIGHT fans out there who swear by down into negative G forces, or if NACA's (the predecessor to NASA) SIMULATOR should please players FLIGHT SIMULATOR 98's flight you fly inverted for too long. The testing of captured Bf-109s and no matter what their view system modeling. I've always found it a sim uses a new piston engine FW-190s. preferences. Along with a virtual lot touchier to fly the Cessna in model that supports supercharg Al pilots use the same realistic cockpit padlock view, there's also the civilian sim than to fly a real ing, critical altitude, and different flight models that you do. Don't a very complete set of fixed views. small aircraft (although the high prop directions. Drag from a expect to see any \"super\" Although the view system is wing demon can be tamed windmilling prop is now simulat maneuvers from the computerbased on the keypad-controlled through careful tuning of the ed, and atmospheric and weather piloted planes. The sim actually layout popularized by AIR WAR sim's control settings), and trim conditions can affect engine per simulates the position the Al pilot RIOR and WARBIRDS (which is ming aircraft for level flight is far formance. Look for detailed simu is moving the control stick of his quickly becoming a standard, hapless natural in the sim than in the lation of some of the problems of plane to and then applies the pily making for one less set of real world. I was happy, then, to high-speed flight, such as aileron flight model to that control input. commands to learn when flying a see the tuning that has gone into reversal and compressibility. Do expect to see computer pilots new sim), it's actually more flexiutilizing the strengths of their airble than that old layout. Also, the craft. They're aware of their enerCOMBAT FLIGHT SIMULATOR view gy state, and better pilots are system features new view combilikely to turn or boom-and-zoom nations such as 45 degrees/up/ as appropriate to the combat situright. As with its civilian counteration. Although there are five Al part, COMBAT FLIGHT SIM will skill levels, expect a realistic mix allow you to fully customize all of pilots. Even with everything keyboard and joystick functions. cranked up, you'll see a mix of Because of the role that just aces, good pilots, and newbies. spotting the enemy played in The action will lean toward furWWII air combat, the sim's balls, with lots of \"many on designers have also tried to give many\" encounters. Computer the enemy pilots realistic situapilots use a sophisticated process tional awareness. Al pilots have to logically determine which realistic field of view, which is brotargets to go after, taking into ken down into six arcs, and their BOGEY DOPE In addition to this forward view, a wide variety of account distance, the energy situspotting is affected by the sun and fixed views, and a virtual cockpit, the sim is also likely to ation, direction of travel, and cloud layers. There are five Al skill include a toggleable \"pointer\" that indicates the direction of whether other friendlies are levels; expect the more talented Al the enemy. already on the target. And, of pilots to do a course, if a juicy better job of new target sudscanning the denly appears, skies around they can change them. Just like their minds. real pilots, the Some Al details, Al fliers can such as whether become targetseverely damfixated. If you SUPER SPIT The later-war BIG STICK The P-47 packs WULF IN THE FOLD The aged planes spot a Bf-109 Spitfire Mk.IX is heavily eight .50-caliber machine Focke Wulf 190 is the will make a run closing in on a armed, but the extra weight guns, making it an excellent mount of choice for for home, are Spitfire, for takes its toll on the craft's mount for ground-attack German pilots in the laterstill being example, there's missions. maneuverability. war missions. worked out. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Torld wardro Sims Mission Critical other in the later air war over COMBAT FLIGHT SIMULATOR will Europe, where you can fly as a offer two campaigns. One is set German or American pilot. Each during the Battle of Britain, in campaign is broken up into three which you'll be able to fly for phases, each phase consisting of England or Germany, and the eight missions. Pilots for the Allies start the Battle of Britain campaign assigned to a Spitfire or Hurricane squadron. The first phase of the campaign is the war over the English Channel, followed by the Axis attacks against aircraft facto ries. Finally, you'll defend the skies BUFF THE EMPIRE SLAYER over London during the Blitz. The You'll be able to escort B-17s second campaign starts with in the game, but not fly \"Close Escort,\" missions from them. England to France and Germany, in which you'll SINGLE MISSIONS be tasked primarily with escorting bombers (or shooting them down, if you're flying for Germany). The second phase, \"Free to Roam,\" lets you strafe fields and targets of opportunity after you've escorted bombers out of danger. Finally, \"Closing in on the Reich\" focuses on fighter/ bomber missions over Germany in the last phase of the war. Microsoft is trying to stick as close to history as possible with these missions. They're based on real mission records from files found at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, as well as a variety of other sources. The airfields, times and dates of the missions, and aircraft used are accurate whenever possible. Of course, while finding records of flight makeups, squadrons, and the like wasn't too difficult for the RAF and U.S. missions, it proved more difficult from the Luftwaffe side. In addition to the campaigns, there will also be a series of single missions, as well as a quick-action mode that lets you set up a combat situation, such as an attack on enemy bombers, and jump into the action. However, the missions are scripted, so what do you do Marion Dificulty Looks Veleron Sew All PAUSWR e Set Minion one A1A2) Corel Lecare Rester Enert DATO LA BATE CAMPAIGNS TE Nett Norr Datout Wattle of Britain Battle over Europe . Cervy ANTARZE fleria 7 Alask Relat Le Ser B Che Det Bart Defit Lav tere? P er TELECOETE LA LA HOME Uong after you've played through all the campaigns from every side? By the time you get to that point-if the third-party support for this sim's civilian counterpart is any indication-you're very likely to find a host of new missions available on the Internet, created by other COMBAT FLIGHT SIMULATOR users. There's no graphical mission-creator interface, but Microsoft is making a software development kit available (possibly even before the sim's release) that will include details on mission building (as well as on converting FLIGHT SIMULATOR 98 aircraft, and on creating terrain). Mission data is actually stored in a fairly easy-tounderstand text file (which can be created in Excel or manually), containing actions, waypoints, formation instructions, ground unit details, mission summaries, and so on. Actually, there is a way to get an almost-graphical interface, at least for locating waypoints: Mission designer Kris Shanker uses Microsoft's Encarta Virtual Globe product to place pushpins at each waypoint, and then takes the data from that program to assign waypoints for Allied and Axis aircraft. Thirdparty commercial and shareware mission editors are also likely if the game is successful. In addition, you'll be able to bring in aircraft designed for FLIGHT SIMULATOR 98 with minimal modifications. I watched as one of the team members replaced the B-17s in one mission with the 737 from FLIGHT SIMULATOR 98, after performing a simple file copy and a quick edit of a mission file. While FW-190s attacking 737s is likely to be only a briefly amusing diversion, the real potential here is that the huge library of combat aircraft already available for FLIGHT SIMULATOR 98 can be quickly brought into COMBAT FLIGHT SIMULATOR. Of course, aircraft created with FLIGHT SHOP may not have the flight model and damage fidelity of the built-in planes; but it's hoped that Microsoft will release all the details on the updated aircraft ALERT FLIGHT In addition to the two campaigns, you'll also find a variety of single missions. MESSERSCHMITT LOW! Although the terrain is based on tiled textures rather than satellite imagery, there's enough variety to avoid obvious repetition; look for enhanced levels of detail on AGP and Voodoo2 systems. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1998 75 "


"The Congressional Medal of Honor... Janes LONGBOW 2, Jane's atis LONGBOW 2 The completo combathelicer ...is about the only award we haven't won TEEN F! months (c)1998 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. All rights reserved, Wo Bulld Sims by the Book is a trademark of Electronic Arts Jane's is a registered trademark of Jane's Information Group Ltd, Jano's Combat Simulations is an Electronic Arts brand, 3Dix (c)1998 3Dlx Interactive, Inc. Tho 3Dix Interactive logo is a trademark of 3Dix Interactivo. Inc. All rights reserved. This product is not licensed or endorsed by McDonnell Douglas Corporation "


"Simulation Game of the Year -Computer Gaming World, March '98 LONGBOW2 Simulation of the Year -PC Gamer, March '98 Special Achievement in Graphics -PC Gamer, March '98 Gamecenter's Sim of the Year CNET Gamecenter, February '98 Simulation of the Year --GameSpot, February '98 Reader's Choice: Sim of the Year -GarneSpot, February '98 Simulation of the Year -Online Gaming Review, January '98 Kick Ass Product --Boot, February '98 Actual Gameplay Screens Best Simulation -Computer Games Strategy Plus, February 198 DEMO Reader's Choice: Best Sim -OGR, January 98 WWW . Janes.ea.com Jane's And the list goes on... COMBAT SIMULATIONS WE BUILD SIMS BY THE BOOKIM "


"Mything speed. thing is OTHRUST jets, 4 rudder jets My stone goes like as calded cats I move in QUICK strike fast and BLOW before they know what fit er. ALL their FIPEPOWer doesn't meaniacK if they can't hit me. 100 KODIAK Heavy FIREPOWER is for SUCKERs with small JOHNSons All I need are 3 solar collectors MAXIMUMSHIELD WALLS Oh yeah, and about a dozen PAMMING Spikes When my fortress POCks your world, you'know it. P Firepower, FIREPOWER_and O REfirepower. This isn't a BRIDAL SHOWEP, it's war I'll take my chances with 4 doom bolt guns 2 dragstone LAUNCHEPS and 3 SHOCkWave cannons. TRUST Noe don't want any of what. \"I got for you. w what kind of fortress will you build conquesto in ESRIES STRAJOSPHERE part STRATEGY.pari FEAR (888) 797-JUMP(5867) www.stratospherepc.com www.ripcordgames.com "


"COMBAT FLIGHT SIMULATOR World Warn ing WE'RE SO SORRY UNCLE ALBERT The Royal Albert Hall is just one of the juicy historical targets the Luftwaffe may target during the Blitz over London. TEMPEST IN A TEAPOT The Hawker Tempest is one of the 30-odd computer-flown aircraft found in the sim; with a few tweaks, you can fly these planes in the sim. format so talented third-party designers can create aircraft that fly as well as the ones that come with COMBAT FLIGHT SIMULATOR. While Word and Excel users may be happy with an electronic manual, Microsoft learned with the release of FLIGHT SIMULATOR 98 that sim pilots want paper documentation. You can look forward to a 224-page document containing historical background, combat tutorials, and, of course, program operation information. on real terrain data, so you'll see rivers, farmland, cities, and towns in all the right places. They're also wrapped over accurate elevation data. Textures are now 16-bit color, and transition textures put an end to the sharp breaks between terrain tiles you've seen in earlier incarnations of the game's engine. The game's appearance is further enhanced through the placement of 3D objects and hand-crafted coastlines. Another graphic enhancement is the damage detail. One annoyance of FLIGHT SIMULATOR 98 was that most of the planes remained intact after crashing. Not so here-planes shatter nicely. The team watched lots of gun camera footage from World War II to see how planes came apart, and they've done an admirable job of recreating that effect. Come in behind an enemy fighter and start firing and you'll see flashes as the bullets hit, as well as small fragments of the plane streaming off the wing. Hit the target just right and you may saw off the wing and be rewarded by an explosion as the plane comes apart at the fuel tanks. COMBAT FLIGHT SIMULATOR'S damage model is very detailed, and individual systems or flight controls may be knocked out, depending on where you are hit. Alpha-blended smoke will pour out of damaged engines—it's even white or black, depending on whether the engine or cooling system was damaged. It's the Little Things There are a host of other enhancements to the engine to optimize it for the combat regime. Of course, one of the biggest concerns is frame-rate-the screen updates in FLIGHT SIMULATOR 98, on most systems, were far too slow for combat play. The good news is that a number of changes have been made to the 3D engine to ensure good performance on a wide range of systems. In fact, the pre-alpha version I flew was managing over 70 frames per second on a mid-range Pentium II (in an area with fairly simple scenery). When all the details and Al are implemented, frame-rates will slow down a bit. The team's goal is to maintain 15-20 frames per second in software mode on a low-end machine, and 30-50 on a faster machine equipped with a 3D card. Some of this performance boost comes from the new ground-texture system used in the sim. Mapping the ground with satellite imagery proved to be a major performance inhibitor, especially on 3D cards with only 2MB of texture memory. The engine now uses creatively tiled \"generic textures in most areas. While not as exacting as satellite imagery, the textures are based Reach Out and Shoot Someone Once you get the feel for the planes, you'll want to try COMBAT FLIGHT SIMULATOR's multiplayer mode. Microsoft hopes to be able to support up to eight players in games over the Internet Gaming Zone, but that will depend on how things play out in testing. In addition to a free-for-all combat mode, there will also be team play. Particularly intriguing are plans to include the voice support introduced in MONSTER TRUCK MADNESS 2, which would allow you to communicate with your wingmen. Even at this early stage of the game's development, it's evident that Microsoft's COMBAT FLIGHT SIMULATOR is a significant product in its own right. It's picking up the good points of FLIGHT SIMULATOR 98—the extensibility and years of flight model development-without bringing along much of the baggage of what's essentially the most upgraded game in the history of computer gaming. CGW HURRICANE FORCE If you're looking for a bigger challenge in the Battle of Britain scenarios, choose the less-maneuverable Hawker Hurricane over the Spitfire. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 19 "


"OSED 00 DD "


"The most anticipated RPG of the year. In the FORGOTTEN REALMS, we've lived through foul pestilence, vicious battles, exorbitant taxes, and even the occasional dragon. But when HE showed up, things really started getting ugly. Prepare to be immersed into a world of intrigue and mystery on a perilous quest to rescue a storied land from impending war. Even your own soul is at stake as you and a party of adventurers become entangled in a dangerous riddle of betrayed alliances, dark prophecies and murder. Will you become the unlikely hero of the story, or merely another of its unfortunate casualties? Before you answer, the big guy here might have something to say about it. Explore an immense, intricate game world from cloud-covered mountains & rain drenched plains to dark catacombs & abandoned, temples all meticulously rendered in lush, 16-bit SVGA graphics. Invoke more than 100 spells Freeze enemies with an icy blast from a Cone of Cold, or incinerate them with a searing stream of magical flame. Push your leadership skills to the limit as you guide a party of up to six characters, each with a personality that affects gameplay. Don't let your stubborn fighter pummel the arrogant thief you may need their teamwork in your next battle. Create your character from six AD&D races and 26 different classes and subclasses. You control every attribute, down to skin and hair color, weapons, and armor all accurately depicted on-screen. GORGOT REALNng Baldur's Coming Soon Gate BP Microsoft WA BIOWARE BY GAMERS. FOR GAMERS. Dungeons & Dragons www.interplay.com 01998 BioWaro Corp. All rights reserved. BALDUR'S GATE, FORGOTTEN REALMS; I FORGOTTEN REALMS logo. ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D, the AD&D logo and the TSR logo are trademarco TSA, Inc., a subsidiary of Wizards of the Const, Inc., and are used by Interplay under licento Interplay, the Interplay logo and \"By Gamers. For Gamers are trademarks at Interplay Productions. All rights reserved Tha BioWaru logo is the trademark of BioWare Corp. All rights reserved. Exclusively licensed and distributed by interplay Productions. All other copyrights and trademarks in the property of their respective owner Go to #163 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"You've witnessed some of the greatest moments in NASCAR'S 50-year history. Now create your own. SOTH ANNIVERSARYTZ W NASCARTO NASCAR 3 PEETA 1713 en Powered by PAPYRUS WWW.sierrasports.com 01998 serratine, cand desista trademarks olored to serra de Lim, Beleven, M88007. A R NEL P I Papyrus pee trademara Perrus Den Brous, boc. RECER C A Pack are officially licensed by NASTAL RASCART Brand National and the othersary lop are registered trademarks al The Betonal desaction for Hack Car Auto Racintac. Alaturradaria e pr o tec t ed for part "


"LERRA SPORTS Play the sport INTER Some people will call it a collector's item. The best selling, most realistic stock car sim ever NASCAR Racing 2and the NASCARGrand National Series Expansion Pack. Together in a special commemorative 50th Anniversary package from Sierra Sports. But to call it a collector's item would be to miss the point. Racing. So peel those stickers. You know you want to. Go to #110 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"world war musim Luftwaffe Eagle Interactive's German WWII Sim Comes With the Backing of a Company That Knows Simulations ET ome may think the German Luftwaffe a controversial focus for a flight sim. But from the perspective of the sim pilot, it makes perfect sense. After all, it's the only service in which you can realistically start the war flying a biplane and end your career at the stick of a jet fighter. LUFTWAFFE is being developed by Eagle Interactive, the designers of SABRE ACE. That product met with a cold reception amongst the core simulations crowd due to a number of factors, including a poor view system and publisher Virgin's shortsighted decision to strip the realistic flight models from the game in a failed attempt to appeal to a wider audience. This time around, Eagle is producing the game for SSI, a company that understands flight sim players, and that has no problem with producing very realistic sims. Add to that Eagle's careful attention to feedback from players of the earlier game and you'll find a sim that's likely to make gamers forget about the missteps in SABRE ACE. IMPENETRABLE FORTRESS BF-109s prepare to strafe Toledo (that's Spain, not Ohio) during the Spanish Civil War. LOW PASS Terrain graphics detail is good at low altitudes; the sim supports 1024x768 graphics on some 3D cards. SIGHTSEEING The view system will be dramatically improved over that found in Eagle's SABRE ACE. Start to finish LUFTWAFFE covers the longest time span of any of the games in this roundup: from the Spanish Civil War (in which the Luftwaffe developed the tactics that gave it such an advantage early in WWII) through the final defense of Germany. The game features training missions, a campaign mode, quick-combat custom missions, and two multiplayer modes. Luftwaffe The campaign is broken down into five segments. You'll start flying biplanes in the Spanish Civil War, progressing to earlymodel Bf-109s. Next is the blitzkrieg over France, where you'll encounter a number of French aircraft never before seen in a flight sim, followed by the Battle of Britain. Then it's off to Colonel Klink's worst nightmare: the Russian Front, where you'll start flying in the frigid conditions of January, 1942. Finally, it's back to Deutschland for the defense of Berlin. Although the campaign missions are pre-script ed, Eagle is looking at a variety of techniques to introduce random aspects to the missions to add to replayability You'll start in the Heinkel He-51 biplane, and then fly the Messerschmitt Bf-109 D, E, F, and G models. Finally, you'll get the chance to fly the Me-262 jet. Of course, you'll see a wide variety of hardware (at last count, Eagle Interactive had 58 different aircraft models in the game) in the different campaigns. You'll also see changes in pilot AI: Opponents get progressively more challenging as the war progresses, and you'll have to deal with the influx of inexperienced pilots into the Luftwaffe. The Al pilots will take advantage of their aircraft's particular strengths, and when they're heavily damaged, out of ammo, or low on fuel, they'll realistically break for home. The Quick Combat mode lets you set up custom encounters against any of the sim's planes, as well as ground-attack missions. There's also a multiplayer mode similar to the Quick Combat mode. More intriguing, however, are the cooperative multiplayer missions, where groups of human players can fly for each side in a wide variety of historical missions. One side may fly P-51Ds in escort of B-17s while the other attempts to down the bombers using BF-109s and RELEASE DATE: Q4 '98/Q1 '99 DEVELOPER: Eagle Interactive PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations, Inc. COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"World WrirSima The graphics engine will require a 3D card, and looks much better at low altitudes than the one used in SABRE ACE. Along with the snow-covered Russian front, you'll also fight over the mountains of Spain, Madrid, Toledo, Berlin, London, and other detailed cities. Eagle Interactive's first effort started out with a lot of promise and ended up disappointing many due to a series of bad marketing decisions by its publisher. LUFTWAFFE looks ready to redefine the developer's reputation in the sim market, and with the support of the publisher who unleashed SU27 FLANKER—the hardest of hardcore sims—behind it, this time the promises should be kept. CGW MOUNTAIN SKIRMISH Spitfires mix it up with Messerschmitts in the mountains North of Leone. RARE BIRDS Look for plenty of planes you've never before seen modeled in a sim, such as the Whirlwind and Bristol Beaufighter. Me-262s. Other potential encounters include 1-16s vs. Bf109Ds over Spain, P-39s vs. Bf109Fs over Russia, or escorting Stuka flights against Spitfires over Britain. Crowded Skies effects. Advanced modeling features include flight model effects such as the fuselage blanking out a wing when your plane sideslips, engine cutout during negative-G maneuvers, trim, and overstressing the airframe. You'll even need to manage your plane's cowl flaps to keep the engine from overheating. Of course, newbies can turn off any or all of this detail, and take advantage of features such as formation augmentation to keep them close to their wingmen. LUFTWAFFE includes an amazing variety of aircraft, including a number of planes never before seen in a flight sim. Flyable Campaign Aircraft Heinkel He-51 Messerschmitt Bf-109 D, E, F, G Heinkel He-72 Messerschmitt Me-262 Additional Network and Custom-Combat Flyable Aircraft P-390 Airacobra Polikarpov 1-16 P-51D Mustang Spitfire Mk.I Iron Cross The biggest criticism of Eagle's SABRE ACE was the oversimplified flight models. This time, Eagle is including a wide variety of realism options, with two modes of play. The Iron Cross mode includes a variety of adjustable realism settings, while Knight's Cross not only locks you into using all the realism options, but also doesn't allow you to refly missions—when you're dead, you're dead. When you crank up all the options, you'll be faced with details of plane handling and systems operations details you've never encountered in a military sim. The flight model has all the requisite hard-core features, including stalls and spins, inertial effects, altitude effects on performance, ground effects, and inertial Seat with a View Although LUFTWAFFE might not end up including a virtual cockpit, due to technical issues with the 3D modeling technique Eagle is using, it will have a complete set of overlapping fixed views (accessible through an AIR WARRIORstyle keypad setup, or using an automatic padlock) that leave no blind spots. The view from the cockpit is a fully rendered 3D model, not a bitmap, so you'll actually see damaged aircraft parts and control surfaces moving. Computer-Piloted Aircraft Assault Glider B-17F Flying Fortress B-25 Mitchell B-26C Marauder Barrage Balloon Bf-110C Boulton-Paul Defiant Mk.I Breguet 19 Brewster Buffalo Bristol Beaufighter Bristol Blenheim Mk.IV BV-138G C-47 Skytrain CR 42 D.500 Dewoitine D.520 Dornier Do-172 Fairey Battle Mk. 1 Fokker DXXI Fokker G.1a FW-190 Gloster Gladiator Handley Page Heinkel He-111 Heinkel He-59 Heinkel He-72 Hudson Hurricane Mk. 1 11-2 Stormovik Ju-87B Stuka Ju-876 Stuka Junkers Ju-52 Junkers Ju-88A Lavochkin La-5 Me-163 MiG-3 Mosquito Mk. FB VI MS 406 P-38J P-40 Warhawk P-47D Thunderbolt Pe-2 Polikarpov l-15 Potez 630 Short Sunderland Tempest Mk. V Tupelov SB-2 Whirlwind Yak-9D THE PLANE TRUTH Along with the aircraft information screen, LUFTWAFFE will also include audio interviews with pilots. BI THE FARM You'll start your career flying He-51 biplanes, and if you survive into 1945 you'll progress all the way to the Me-262 jet. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 "


"APACHE PILOTS: TIME TO UPGRADE. THE FLIGHT SIM OF THE YEAR IS NOW GOLD. *Flight Sim of the Year-PC Format Comanche 3 is the Winner of Multiple Awards: boot! AWARDS RIER REVIEWERS CHOICE ASS! pour NOVALOGICO "


"COMANCHE NEW Campaigns and Missions  NEW Mission Design Tool NEW Terrain, Vehicles and Objects  NEW Amazing Weather Effects  NEW Weapons Loadout Option  NEW Internet Multi-play** via novaworld.net NEW Windows 95 Native and MMX Support  BONUS Campaign Designed by the U.S. Army's Official Comanche Team INCLUDES an Enhanced Version of the Best-selling Helicopter Sim of 1997, Comanche 3 (Source: PC Data) IN STORES NOW Original Comanche 3 Owners: Upgrade to Comanche Gold and Receive $15.00 Back from Novalogic (see store for details or visit our web site at www.novalogic.com) Limited time offer: *FREE internet play via novaworld.net ISP required. Player Respons til for all applicable kternel, connection and telephone lees. 1998 Novatogle, tac. Currancht, RAM GB and Novalogie au registered trademarks of Novitogle, Inc. U.S. Patent 15.625,759 and 5,560,858. Alletter trademarks are me property of their respective owners, Go to #093 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"ACCEPT NO Although the response to the Duke Nukem casting call was overwhelming, in the end The King of Carnage, Duke Nukem! He's back, out of hiding and ready to rock. Make 'em history with Duke Nukem Time-To-kill, the revolutionary 3rd-person shooter exclusively on PlayStation game console and rage through the ages fraggin' every alien that ever was. Coming this fall. Or raise the stakes with the highly anticipated Duke Nukem Forever, and put out the lights in Las Vegas with the PC blockbuster for the next century! Or better yet, go for a total Nukem meltdown and get them both! See who got to wear the King's crown for day. Behold the winners of the casting call at www.qtgames.com. All hail the true King, baby! Developed by RP n GT Interactive REALMS. Software SPACE www.gtinteractive.com RATING FERDINS 3 Duke Nukem Forever 1996 1997 1998 30 Realms Entertainment. All Rights Reserved Duke Nukem Tino To KL 1996. 1997, 1998 30 Realms Entertaiment. All Rights Reserved Developed by Space Inc. Under sublicense from GT lateractive Soltoare Cap. under license from 3D Realms Entertainment Published and distributed WG Interactive Software Corp. GI and the Gr Games Logo are trademarks so GT Loca is a registered trademarks of GT Interactive Software Corp. Physson and the lysuton logas are fostered trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment lac ATO denurks are the property of their respective companies www.3drealms.com "


"SUBSTITUTE! 1'0\" 6'0\" 5'0» 4'0\" 3'0\" G RITOS DUKE NUKEM TIME TO KILL DUKE NUKENT FOREVER PC PlayStation ROM Go to #092 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"World Warr simg Nations Psygnosis Gets Serious and Shows you the War From All Sides The campaign missions will all be based on historical records Unfortunately, while the early version I tested already had some fairly complete flight physics, the missions were still being developed, so details will have to wait for a preview closer to the product's release. The availability of a detailed mission editor should make for a wide variety of user-created missions. You'll be able to fly a number of planes for each country. American pilots can choose the P-38, P-40, P-47, and P-51; Ithough Psygnosis has flirted with the simulations market over the years, the company's efforts have tended to be casual, arcadish efforts, such as AIR SUPPORT. Hence, NATIONS, a World War II sim being developed by the same Psygnosis division that gave us G-POLICE, should come as a pleasant surprise to serious sim pilots. As the name implies, NATIONS is geared toward letting you experience the European air war from the perspectives of three of the major players: England, Germany, and the U.S. While the game has the flash and dazzle you'd expect from a Psygnosis title, the alpha version 1 tested showed promising customizability and realism. HEDGE HOPPING P-51Cs come in low on a target. HEAD FOR THE HILLS NATIONS sports realistic elevation data. Luftwaffe pilots will fly the Bf 109, Me-163, Me-262, and FW-190; and British chaps can choose the Spitfire, Hurricane, Typhoon, or Mosquito. Each plane features a detailed 3D virtual cockpit, complete with working rear-view mirrors in appropriate craft. Flight modeling was impressive in the alpha version, with good modeling of energy, maneuvering, and departures. You'll also find convincing turbulence in stormy weather; a full particle system makes for very convincing rain. Look for some of the most accurate height-mapping yet seen in the terrain—Psygnosis wants to properly simulate combat down on the deck, so you won't see rapid, unrealistic jumps in elevation. You'll be able to hide from both Al and human opponents by using clouds and sun glare; the 3D volumetric clouds here look even more realistic than the super \"puffy\" clouds in EA's FIGHTER LEGENDS. Real-time lighting means you'll be able take off before the sun comes up for dawn patrols. The version I flew was still pretty preliminary, but it looked very promising. The team is hoping to wrap up the game before Christmas, although (of course) the release could slip into the first quarter of 1999. Look for a handson preview as NATIONS developsit's definitely a surprise standout in this roundup. CGW Custom Combat NATIONS will offer a campaign mode, instant action, and a very detailed custom mission creator. Cooperative multiplayer missions will also be included, tasking you with missions ranging from V1 buzz bomb intercepts and bomber escorts to simple squadron-vs.squadron furballs. Nations RELEASE DATE: Q4 '98/Q1 '99 DEVELOPER: Psygnosis PUBLISHER: Psygnosis OUT OF THE SUN You'll be able to use sun glare to your advantage in NATIONS-it should come in handy in multiplayer dogfights. Wings of Destiny OO OOO nveiled at the 1997 E3 show, Psygnosis' WINGS OF DESTINY now looks as if it's not going to ship until early 1999. Targeted more at the casual sim buyer (although the pre-alpha I flew did have decent flight modeling). WINGS uses a 1940s comic book as the wrapper for its missions, with a story that unfolds as you progress. Once in the air, the missions are more serious—the sample mission I flew put me in a Bf 109 tasked with protecting Ju-52s dropping paratroopers into Allied territory from Hurricanes. Graphics are impressive, reminiscent of the 3D version of EF2000, but with a more vibrant color palette and far more detailed aircraft. The game will feature multiplayer support, although it will be limited to head-tohead and squadron-vs.-squadron action. DELAYED FLIGHT Set for release in 1999, WOD may appeal to the more casual WWII gamer. 90 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Finally! A bundle worthy of CanopusQuake II Mission Pack: The Reckoning HECEUNING TV-out his x la Quick Control SW 2 Requires Quake ll (not included) 00W Fan MADE WWW WWW App Launchiet MWMINI WARNING: Getting stuck with the wrong Voodoo game board can be painful.. 2017 **** Canopus Design Memory Price $329 Canopus Utilities Cooling Fan Video Out-to-TV 66 MHz PCI Support Pure3D II 12MB Pure 3D II LX 12MB $279 Pure 3D 6MB $149 Pure3D LX 6MB $129 t All Pure 3D products can be fitted with an optional fan. Quake Reckoning Bundle available only with Pure 3D II and Pure 3D II LX. Quake It required for Quake / Mission Pack: The Reckoning STRERERE More memory is better...for faster, smoother, more realistic game he action. The Pure 3D II with 12MB memory blows away all other 8MB game boards. And, the original 6MB Pure 3D and Pure 3D LX smokes other 4MB Voodoo1 boards... they even give the 8MB Voodoo2 boards a run for their money in sub-200 MHz PCs. Don't get stuck with an under-powered, under-featured reference design game board. Order your Pure3D game Pure 3D LX card today. Call Canopus toll-free at (888) 868-2533 $129 or on the web at http://www.pure 3d.com. . Pure 3D II $329 canopus Pure 3D power. 01998 Canopus Corporation. All rights reserved. Pure 3D and Quick Control are trademarks of Canopus Corporation. Voodoo is a trademark of 3d Interactive. Quake II Mission Pack: The Reckoningi 01998 M Software, Inc. Developed by Xatrix, Inc. for id Software, lic. Distributed by Activision, Inc. under license. QUAKEO is registered trademark of id software, Inc. Quake Il Mission Pack: The Reckoning Quake the id Software name, the logo and the id logo are trademarks of id Software, Inc. Activision is a registered tradew of Activision, Inc. Xat is a registered trademark of Xatrix, Inc. All other trademaks are the property of their respective owners. Any resemblance of Voodoo doll to corporate executives, wingar dend is purely coincidental Canopus not responsible for mysterious acts of vengence from use of voodoo dolls, Go to #266 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"LE! Allison's wonderland in scientifically perfected eve popping 360-degree space cam. 100 evil lagamorphs with the devastating H.A.R.E. rifle. 120 along with Allison and her host of mutant allies along with Allison's dancing as she hypnotizes the bunnies to do her bidding! 12098 Ripcord Ganes. Space Bunnies Must Diell a trademark of JINX. All other trademarks are property of their respective company. All Ri Re: "


"LIKE MANY WOMEN, ALLISON IS LOOKING FOR AN EFFECTIVEN HARE REMOVAL SYSTEM. An army of sinister mutants from beyond!!! The shocking story of a kidnapped country starlet with a twang and a twin!!! This sassy, rodeo-riding waitress is servin' up a serious side-order of slaughter!!! SPACE MIL ANG ON X Cipcord Panasonic WWW.SPACEBUNNIES.COM WWW.RIPCORDGAMES.COM DANES "


"World Warn simg Fighter Legends Jane's California Team Breaks Out With the Most Impressive Visuals Yet Seen in a Sim NO HAND HOLD THUNDERBOLT CLAP A battle-damaged P-47 Thunderbolt fires at a target; notice the spent shells streaming from the wing. ---VIRTUAL NIRVANA The virtual cockpits have unprecedented detail, and all the instruments are fully functional. of the sims in this roundup, FIGHTER LEGENDS: EUROPE 1944 is set in the European theater. But where most of its competitors send you on missions running the course of years of the war, FIGHTER LEGENDS concentrates simulating one battle in exacting detail. The game's 70odd missions all take place over the first week and a half of the Battle of the Ardennes in December of 1944. bullet hole textures, but they can also lose elevators and other control surfaces. Blow a plane apart and it shatters, with parts spinning LIGHTNING STRIKE The level of detail in the aircraft is amazing, down to the radio antenna wires attached to the tail. FIGHTER DUEL 2 comes close to matching the amazing visual detail of FIGHTER LEGENDS. The game's 3D-only engine will work on a system as limited as a Pentium 2000 with 32MB or a Matrox Mystique, but it can also take advantage of the features in a setup as advanced as a Pentium Il with dual Voodoocards. On the latter rig, you'll be able to run the sim at an amazing 1024x768 resolution while maintaining a smooth frame-rate. The game supports all the major 3D APIsDirect3D, OpenGL, and 3Dfx Glide-so you'll be able to use whichever one performs best on your machine. You'll be able to adjust detail levels as well, so whether you want to sacrifice frame-rate for impressive 3D clouds is up to you. The attention to graphics detail is amazing, from 3D virtual cockpits with working instruments to shell casings flying out the bottom of wings as guns are fired. As planes are damaged, you'll see New Dimensions By far, the most impressive aspect of FIGHTER LEGENDS is its visual engine. While all the games in this roundup look good, at this point in development only Fighter Legends RELEASE DATE: Q3 '98 DEVELOPER: Jane's Combat Simulations PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts JET DOWN An Me-262 comes apart as it explodes; notice the bullet holes across its wing. 94 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"World Wrn simg CGW Interview Bud Anderson: To Fly and Fight FURBALL! You'll be able to set up multiplayer battles with up to eight players. SPIT ON THE ENEMY A Spitfire dives down into the haze; FIGHTER LEGENDS takes advantage of—and requires a 3D card. larence \"Bud\" Anderson flew two tours with the 357th during World War II, garnering a total of 16 1/4 kills. He later went on to work as a test pilot and he also flew F-1055 over Vietnam. Today he can often be seen at air shows, flying P-51s with former squadron mate Chuck Yeager. Anderson provided some background on the P-51 for FIGHTER LEGENDS video sequences. I talked to him in April about simulations and World War Il combat in general. His excellent book, To Fly and Fight, is currently out of print, but it's well worth tracking down a used copy. to the ground. You can even tell which way an enemy pilot is looking by using the external view—the pilot's head follows the Al's scan direction. Sounds are impressive as well, and there are over 2,000 lines of radio calls-that's 2,000 for each language. In the sim, you can fly the P47D Thunderbolt, P-51D Mustang, P-38J Lightning, Spitfire Mk.IX, Bf-109G-6, FW-190A-8, and Me262. Unlike the relatively simple flight models in this team's previous effort, the U.S. NAVY FIGHTERS series, the planes here have a full six-degrees-of-freedom model. There are other sims here, such as LUFTWAFFE, that are more likely to satisfy the hard-core purist, but aircraft performance promises to be fairly convincing. ALUMINUM OVERCAST B-17s approach a target; check out the \"puffy\" clouds, which are realistically alpha-blended when you fly near them. CGW Having spent a little time at the controls of an F-15 and a T-34, I realize that games can only simulate a tiny portion of the real experience. But purely from practicing in sims, I had the basics down in the real planes. Anderson I think the trouble with the games is that they really need to balance realism with making them fun to play. If you made it fully realistic, probably nobody would play it. It would be very difficult to fly. You just can't simulate the whole flying environment on a screen, a static situation. So there has to be that balance to make it interesting enough to keep people wanting to do it. You know, when you read about how realistic they are you have to take that with a grain of salt. Some of them are very good, though, a lot of fun to play. st CGW The biggest complaint I've heard from pilots is lack of situational awareness-looking at a screen versus being able to turn your head. Anderson I don't know what the solution to that is on a little-screen simulator. I would say that probably is one of the biggest drawbacks—not being able to know exactly what's LITTLE FRIENDS P-38s protect B-17s from an FW-190. The mission creator will easily let you add more than 30 planes to a formation the real limitation is your computer's horsepower. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 93 "


"World War rusting FIGHTER LEGENDS going around in your area. There are ideas on it. The games are getting really sophisticated; 1 can dial up some friend clean across the country, tell him to hook up, and he and I can go at it. God, that's incredible! FRAMING THE TARGET A BF-109 comes in low; notice the semitransparent prop graphic. random elements in missions, such as varying starting locations for units. Triggers let you set up things to happen when various other events occur, so missions can play out differently depending on player strategies. Ground-level units aren't sitting-ducks—they have Al. Tanks will roll into enemy territory and engage. The editor can also be used to create missions for multiplayer play over Jane's online gaming center. When you're creating missions for others, you can hide enemy locations. You'll also find a Quick Mission creator, where you can set up to four flights on each side, and jump into the action. FIGHTER LEGENDS has a full complement of Jane's reference material, and there's a whopping 50 minutes of video, including a number of pilot interviews. While I did get some time with an early version, at press time (late April) the sim wasn't slated to go into alpha testing until around the very end of May, so a fullfledged preview would be premature at this point. Look for detailed, hands-on coverage in an upcoming CGW. CGW CGW Was there much of a difference between the Band the D-model P-51s? Anderson Yes. The B, of course, was the first production model with the Rolls RoycelPackard Merlin engine, and it had a birdcage canopy. It had four .50 calibers, and they were mounted in the wings in a slant. Consequently, we had a lot of gun problems. Then we go to the D model. and that had six guns, and Bud Anderson they were mounted vertically. And of course, it had the big bubble canopy. Now, to offset that canopy problem in the B models, we immediately modified all the Bs with what they called a Malcolm hood. And that was tremendous. It was, in some senses, better than the D canopy. You could stick your head out because the whole canopy was a fishbowl. TANKS A LOT Ground units exhibit plenty of detail; you'll encounter infantry, armor, artillery, and flak units. On the Battle Front The sim uses a branching campaign system, with about 70 missions. You can fly for either side, and your squadron's performance can affect the outcome of the battle.Top-notch newsreel video sequences play at strategic points in the game, if you do very poorly, you'll be treated to a newsreel in subtitled German) showing Panzers rolling to victory. There is also a series of single missions, as well as a full-fledged graphical mission creator. The mission structure addresses the chief complaints about mission creators in the USNF series: mission goals can now center on destroying a certain percentage of targets, rather than specific aircraft, and there can also be CGW In WWII, it sounds like you primarily faced Messerschmitt 109s and FW-190s. Anderson Yes. As a matter of fact, I never saw any twinengine fighters the whole war. Our group got into some of these battles where they just cleaned them up. I wished I'd helped. I think the only twinengine airplane I saw was the Heinkel (He-111), an old Battle of Britain thing probably converted to a transport. I later saw a couple of Me2625-our group shot down 17 of those things, but I never did. This was getting on into the war and Yeager had already shot one down. Of course, he didn't tell anybody he got it with the gear down. He got it in the traffic pattern, which is not very sportsmanlike. But it's war. BANDIT HIGH Bud Anderson says that tactics didn't differ much whether you were engaging an Me-109 or an FW-190. 96 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Solutions as Guide to Power Protection YES! I want to know how to choose the right UPS for my system. Please send me my FREE Solutions guide. NO, I'm not interested at this time but please add me to your mailing list. Iris Pir  U ARS 2 Name: Title: Company: Address: Just mail or fax this completed coupon for your FREE Solutions Guide. Better yet, order it today at the web address below! City/Town: State: Zip: Country APC FRANCE Phone: AMERICAN POWER CONVERSION Brand of UPS used? OMERCIAL OUTRYMDRECHOW SOLUTIONS Brand of PCs used? KEY CODE http://promo apcc.com 0312Z Brand of Servers used? (888) 289-APCC X8392  FAX: (401) 788-2797 21998 APC. All Trademarks are the property of their owners. BP1C8EB-USE-mail: apcinfo@apcc.com. 132 Fairgrounds Road, West Kingston, RI 02892 USA : "


"NO POSTAGE NECESSARY IF MAILED IN THE UNITED STATES | BUSINESS REPLY MAIL FIRST-CLASS MAIL PERMIT NO. 36 WEST KINGSTON, RI POSTAGE WILL BE PAID BY ADDRESSEE AMERICAN POWER CONVERSION DEPT. D3127 132 FAIRGROUNDS ROAD PO BOX 278 WEST KINGSTON RI 02892-9920 Illuullullilulululululul "


"Nothing Lasts Longer DO WINOMSNIK  Ranawabla UPS System DESIGNED TO LAST A LIFETIMEI cert buralaca Battant. Back-UPS Pro i Borkeure fra fameused by PowerChute plus power management software lets you configure UPS response to over twenty events. The software can also automatically save data, close programs, MXHENET. and shut down your computer, even if you're not there. CUMMIBE Automatic Voltage Regulation (AVR) let you work through the deepest prolonged brownouts without wasting battery power. CellGuard intelligent battery management, extends battery life, and speeds recharging and automatically tests battery status. APC's innovative multipath protection guards against damaging surges carried on both AC power lines and network/telephone/modem lines. The QuickSwap user-replaceable battery system lets you renew the UPS system and avoid factory service delays. (Batteries typically last 3 6 years) A push-button circuit breaker means quick recovery from overloads caused by surges. The Site Wiring Fault Indicator lets you know when APC UPS units automatically identify building wiring problems. 6 5 0 Best Uninterruptible Power Supply \"With its wealth of features..., APC Back-UPS Pro makes it easy to protect your equipment and data against clectrical surges, brownouts, and blackouts.\" 'Long Lasting PCComputing \"Back-UPS Pro was our favorite unit.... (it) won top Rangup honors in our battery life tests\" www.apco.com APC protects your data and guarantees the longest runtime URSES 10&EST HUVITAE GUARANTEE DYES! NO mote If you like games, you probably won't Regulation and instantaneous battery backup. Of C Guide to Power like these odds: You have a better course, if the sags turns into a complete outage, L Protection ZAPC chance of winning the lottery than of you're still covered: APC's software will auto Just mail or fax this avoiding the sting of bad power. matically save open files and safely i completed coupon for your Considering a power related comshut down your computer, even if FREE Solutions Guide. Better yet, order it today at: puter crash could turn your high you're not at your desk. So why make a scores into electronic garbage and http://promo.apcc.com victory impossible when you can preKEY CODE D3127 rob you of impending victory, vent the problem with APC? I'd like more information. Please send my playing on an unprotected com APC Back-UPS, Back-UPS FREE catalog. I'm not interested at this time but please puter can quickly make a chalOffice, Back-UPS Pro, Multipath: one unit protects everything add me to your quarterly newsletter mailing list. will provide runtime lenging game impossible. But APC protects everything: CPU, monitor, i Name:_ which meets or exceeds why worry? APC Back-UPS Pro that of any same VA external modem, laser printer, fax 1 Title: Company: easily stops bad power from ruinUPS for desktop PC machine, zip drive, you name it. And 1 Address: applications or your ing your day. money back. since phone and network lines carry For policy information, The leading cause of data loss: Sags dangerous surges, your CPU and i City/Town: visit www.apc.com modem benefit from APC Back State: __ Zip: Country Power sags are the single largest UPS Pro telephone/ network Phone: reason power users end up pulling Brand of UPS used? surge suppression. out their hair over lost Brand of PCs used? data. These undervoltIt's no wonder APC is the world's Brand of Servers used? ages are easily correctbest-selling desktop power ed through APC protection Back-UPS Pro's Automatic Voltage AMERICAN POWER CONVERSION FRANCE 98 OFFICIAL POWER PROTECTION SOLUTIONS (888) 289-APCC X8392  FAX: (401) 788-2797 Micro Available at: VAREROUSE EGGHEAD 800-328-2261  APC. All Trademarks are the property of their owners.BP2D8EF-US MIGOCENTER (800)347-FAXX Power Fax . E-mail: apcinfo@apcc.com 132 Fairgrounds Road, West Kingston, RI 02892 USA Computing APPROVE APC has won more awards for reliability than all other UPS-vendors combined. Networking Go to #062 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"EHOLD, THE DAY OF THE LORD COMES, CRUEL, WITH E WRATH AND FIERCE ANGER, TO MAKE THE EARTH A DESOLATION AND TO DESTROY ITS SINNERS FROM IT. ISAIAH 13:9 BEIEN WRATH OF THE FALLEN, THIS FALL WWW.REQUIEMPC.COM MATURE M Great PC Games from 3 DO PC CD-ROM "


"Go to #243 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink  1998 The 3DO Company. All rights reserved. Requiem Wrath Of The Fallen, Cyclone Studios, and their actrademas ant iegistered trademarks of The 3DO Company. Codore Studios is a division of The 3DO Company "


"Worldworms European Air War The Long-Anticipated Sequel to 1942: PACIFIC AIR WAR Is Getting Close... Really! won't be immersive, however. 1 set up an instant-action mission against a flight of Bf-110s and suddenly found myself in the midst of impressive, semi-transparent bursts of flak exploding around me. Smoke was a bit cheesy in the early version, but the game's designers should Dynamic Campaign EAW is the only sim previewed in this feature that uses the holy grail of the hard-core flight sim fan: a dynamic campaign system. The world is persistent between missions-bombed targets remain destroyed-and new missions are based on the current 'm not sure what it is with MicroProse's sims, but EUROPEAN AIR WAR has seen about as many delays and restarts in development as the fabled FALCON 4.0. It's been four years now since the release of 1942: PACIFIC AIR WAR, EUROPEAN AIR WAR's predecessor. The good news is that the current incarnation of EAW is far more advanced than the original design for what was going to essentially be an SVGA version of PAW. The even better news is that it looks as if it's really going to ship this timeMicroProse even provided us with a playable beta version, so we know it's real. FAST ATTACK In the 1944 campaign, you'll get to try your hands at jet tactics. QUICK MISSIONS The Single Mission Builder allows you to create new challenges. war situation. You can indeed win the Battle of Britain for the Germans (or lose it for the British). In addition to the Battle of Britain, there are two other campaigns: Europe 1943 and Europe 1944. There's also an impressive single-mission designer, which is simple, but effective. You can choose the time of day, your flight makeup, the makeup of other Allied and Axis flights, mission type, targets, and so on. Any of these can be random, offering virtually unlimited replayability. There's also a multiplayer mode, in which you and up to seven other players can participate in a variety of mission types—including search and destroy, interception, ground attack, and the like. The interface feels very much like the MicroProse classic sims of years past, and, as you'd expect, you gather medals and promotions as the campaign progresses. Game briefings are in the appropriate language (and accent, if you're playing the British), with English subtitles. It's been too long since we've seen a sim from MicroProse Hunt Valley. From what we've seen so far of EUROPEAN AIR WAR, it appears they still have what it takes. CGW New Starts A promising sign that this incarnation of EAW is on its way to becoming real is the addition of Tsuyoshi \"TK\" Kawahito to the development team as designer and lead programmer. Those of you who read game credits will recognize Kawahito as a significant contributor to the Jane's LONGBOW series. As this article went to press Kawahito and the team were working on beefing up the flight models—they'll be dramatically more realistic than those of PAW, with proper low-speed handling characteristics, compressibility effects on the P-38, and so on. MicroProse is bucking the photorealistic cockpit trend embraced by other developers EAW uses hand-drawn cockpits. That's not to say the graphics PEELING OFF A group of P-38 Lightnings prepare to dive on the enemy. Semi-translucent cloud effects are quite impressive. improve it as they add special effects. The sim features 20 flyable fighters from American, German, and British air forces. You'll find multiple models of some planes, such as both razorback and bubble-canopy versions of the P-47 and P-51. Other flyable craft include the P-38, Bf-109, Bf-110, FW-190, Me-262, Hurricane, Spitfire, Typhoon, and Tempest. European Air War RELEASE DATE: Q3 '98 DEVELOPER: MicroProse Hunt Valley PUBLISHER: MicroProse DAMAGE PATROL An FW-190 dives in to finish off a crippled B-17. 102 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Recreated for the new millennium the classic Dune II returns ALL THE FAVORITE UNITS FROM THE ORIGINAL. NEW STRATEGIES, SPECIAL EFFECTS, AND MUSIC OVER 40 MISSIONS AND FULL MOTION VIDEO BRIEFINGS. DUNE 2000 DUNE 2000 LONG LIVE THE CICHTERS! DUNE 200020 New HIGH COLOR GRAPHICS IN 8 AND 16 BIT. CHALLENGE YOUR FRIENDS TO MULTIPLAY. Available At Retailers Everywhere Or Call 1-800-874-4607 Westwood www.westwood.com DUNEM and  Dino De Laurentiis Corporation Licensed by Universal Studios Licensing, Inc.  Westwood Studios, Inc. All rights reserved. Go to #249 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"YAL 44 Six Impotent Points Bilete ZEN . G ratis 1. Fourteen new levels of killin and Mayhem. SIASANA 1. new pissed off dudes to whasa ass on 3. U can ride a heg and drive a swamp buggy 4. Tons of Killer environments like a Jackalope Faroe Swamp brothel, gamblin' boat and more Arkansas 5. Up to six rednecks can play at the same time over LAN... What the hells a LAN Bubba ? G. You can even State a stick of dynamite up a chicken's 45s! 7. pusdy cheerleader babes, www.interplay.com MATURE AGES 17+ CONTENT RATED BY RS GAMERS. For examens \" XATRIX By Rancis Forens entertainment  1998 Xatrix Entertainment. All rights reserved. Redneck Rampage, Redneck Rampage Rides Again, Interplay, the Interplay logo, and \"By Rednecks. Fer Rednecks.\" are trademarks "


"REARE SOME ACTIONS TREK GAL SEM Features Redneck Rampage Rides Again barbie Fashion Designer night Wh nope nope Nope nepe hope diote Hope Run over chickens pigs and motorcycle Loud Farting # burping Big-breasted Cheerleaders Get pissed on after u die Plenty of swearin' with optional cuss pack Hit yer brether in the head with a crowbar Nearly 3D OR as close to 3D 45 u can get S Nope NOPE n ope Tope nope nope Hope Nape Dope hope 3 Nope www.xatrix.com M toperiope nope Nope ? ee on AET terplay Productions. All rights reserved. Exclusively licensed and distributed by Interplay Productions. All other copyrights and trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Go to #071 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"sport Get Real To play with the best online, you gotta have speed, reflexes, awesome timing... and the right equipment. DWANGO puts you in today's hottest games like QUAKE I with high speed, consistent data transfer that makes real-time interactive multiplayer competition a reality. No delays. No waiting. Always 24-hour access to the action. Real games. Real fast. Real time. Get www.dwango.com. And get after it. DWANGO Multiplayer Network don't let the internet slow you down! QUNE a registered trademark and QUAKE IS, Schwere and the lo logo are trademarks dl Schere, I QUE DO 1997 la Seter, ne Al Rights Reserved Go to #174 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"World warum Ethms Fighter Duel 2.0 The Premier Dogfight Sim Is Back, This Time With Real Missions campaign system. Although the sides are realistic, the missions have a historical flavor without necessarily being based on particular events. All missions are playable in either soloor multiplayer mode. he FIGHTER DUEL series has a long heritage of top-notch graphics, superior flight modeling, and multiplayer support that goes back to its initial release on the Amiga. However, the sim has always concentrated purely on dogfighting, and has been weak in the mission department. That's about to change. In addition to dogfight modes and single-mission types such as Scramble, Escort, and CAP, the game now features a branching planes. The 3D cockpits are topnotch, easily as attractive as those in FIGHTER LEGENDS. A particle graphics system will make for impressive special effects, from smoke puffs when guns fire to explosions as planes come apart. Aircraft are very detailed, and you'll be able to customize the planes' paint jobs. The graphics engine supports OpenGL and Direct3D, and has native drivers for 3Dfx (including enhancement for Voodoo2), PowerVR PCX2, Matrox, Rendition, and Pyramid 3D cards. Look for more details about FIGHTER DUEL 2.0 in a full preview in an upcoming issue of Computer Gaming World. CGW Start to finish FIGHTER DUEL 2.0 includes a whopping 44 flyable aircraft (at last count), which range from the AT-6 Texan and Brewster Buffalo to the high-tech Me-262 and J7W2 Shinden jets. For the first time, there are bombers as well albeit bombers with noses packed with machine guns, such as the Mosquito and B-25 Mitchell. The attention to detail is amazing, all the way down to landing gear that cycles precisely at the same speed and order as on the real Fighter Duel 2.0 RELEASE DATE: 03 '98 DEVELOPER: SPGS PUBLISHER: Ocean/Infogrames SHATTER DAY A Zero meets its end; this is the only sim set for release this year that includes Japanese aircraft. THE BIG PICTURE In the virtual cockpit, you can zoom out to a wide-angle view, or close up on the gunsight. Fighter Squadron The Focus is on the Fighting and Physics IGHTER SQUADRON: THE SCREAMING DEMONS OVER EUROPE, is a sim that puts you in a world a bit smaller than the real thing in order to get you right into the combat. With an unprecedented level of physics detail, a powerful mission builder, and detailed terrain, it promises lots of fun to the dogfighter and test pilot alike. If you flew A-10 CUBA, you know Eric Parker has a knack for physics. The detail is even greater here, as was evidenced when I shot down a plane and its detached wheel rolled across the landscape, eventually spinning to a stop like a quarter on a table, More pertinent to gameplay is areas—Dover, North Africa, and watching your wings flex as you the Rhineland--are compressed in pull heavy Gs—this is the first sim size, it will take 15 minutes to that lets you literally bend your traverse the terrain. The goal is to aircraft. Many players will get hours of fun out of just shooting things to see what happens, or damaging their own planes to see how they fly. The game simulates 10 different planes: the U.S. P-51D, P-38), and B17G; the German Me 262A, Ju-88A, and FW190A; and the British MEMPHIS BELLE This is the only sim we Typhoon Mk. 1B, previewed that lets you fly heavy Lancaster Mk. II, bombers. Mosquito Mk. VI, and Spitfire. Parsoft's Open Plane get into combat quickly. Three camInterface will allow the addition of paigns are included, and the misthird-party and shareware planes. sion editor can be used to create The 3D imagery is top-notch, solo missions or sorties for up to and Parsoft plans specific support 16 players. Although it's running for high-end chips, such as the almost a year late, I think that the Voodoo4. Although the campaign fall release date is possible. CGW STRAFING RUN The 3D instrument panels are simpler here than in some competing products, but they can even be viewed from outside the plane. Fighter Squadron RELEASE DATE: Q3 '98 DEVELOPER: Parsoft PUBLISHER: Activision OH DAM A P-38 surveys the results of an enemy attack: damned dam damage. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1998 107 "


"x You have only \" ENOUGH TO HAVE ANY REAL-TIME STRATEGY FAN DROOLING It's your fault if you can't design and build battle-savvy units from scratch. Extreme Tactics offers a massive palette of design options giving you the chance to build the ultimate war machine. And if you had any real talent, you'd take one of your inventions out for a spin against a friend and bust his real-time ass. Look, you've logged countless sleepless hours playing traditional strategy games. It's time to take it up a notch. GAMESPOT EXIREME TACTICS Take control of your game. WERDE SENTER SERIEN tce o hazai 1998 Piranha Interactive Publishing, Inc. All rights reserved. Published by Piranha interactive Publishing, Inc. "


"YOURSELF to blame. EXIREME TACTICS MACACOTCACGTATGITTO TCCGCA LITIGINAGTATGT TCTNSCA SE CATITOS VAACA LAC GTTST:  T Tv (AAA TT A FA STACAGIX GOGAITT TGCAGASAGAAAGGGOTT Hd101 \"UNIT DESIGN AND AI STREAMING COULD VERY WELL REVOLUTIONIZE THE REAL-TIME STRATEGY GENRE\" GAME INFORMER |     SSP HOTI Hd 10: She $ 7 HCT11 ou TCTTCCA ACGACG TGCTGCTC CNACCAccccace HT LLP X Hd , P LFP HOT TIGCTCATTTTAN TGCTATTGTTAGTC HATUTTGOTCATIITTAATTGC TATTGTTAGIT 000 H 461|LIX310 \"THE MOST COMPREHENSIVE USE OF AI THAT I'VE EVER ENCOUNTERED INSIDE GAMES MEDIA STATION PIRANHA INTERACTIVE PUBLISHING www.extreme-tactics.com Go to #136 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Designed by Media Station Inc. Extreme Tactics is a trademark of Media Station, Inc. Media Station is a registered trademark of Media Station, Inc. "


"Worldwarr3 mg Warbirds 2.01 Already an Acclaimed Game, a Direct3D Graphics Update Makes WARBIRDS the Online Sim of Choice redesigned with more functional gauges, and 11 new aircraft debut. This is a carefully thought out, well-executed advance in online WWII flight simulation. have been completely revised and improved. The colors are deep and true and the gauges, with bitmapped needles, look just like the real thing. More instruments are available now: Working G-meters and oil-pressure and enginetemperature gauges help you perform to the max-as well as tell you when to run for home. of aircraft already in the game (for example, a new P-40B joins the existing P-40E), but two all-new Russian Yaks and the Me-262 jet also join the party. Even the game's sounds are new. by John Nolan t's an exceedingly welcome but, unfortunately, rare feeling to know that you're looking at a winner only 10 minutes after loading the beta version of a game. This is one of those times. Interactive Magic's WARBIRDS 2.01 is uncommonly good. Considering the daily refinements I've seen, it should be exceptional by the time it's released. WARBIRDS is a well-established online WWII air combat game that accommodates up to 200 players from around the world in a single arena. Divided into four competing countries, players pay about $2 per hour to fill each other with lead. Free head-to-head play capability via Internet is also included. The latest upgrade to the WARBIRDS franchise improves the game across the board. While Direct 3D capability (a 3D card is not required but does improve graphics) is headlined, in this download there's more than eye. candy alone. The flight models, which were already good, get better, cockpit art is completely Looks Good! The Direct-3D capability delivers some of the best terrain visuals yet seen. From 1,000 feet it looks good, and from 5,000 it's outstanding. At very low altitudes it's a bit undefined, looking as if you're flying over mottled green frog skin, but you can easily judge your height without having to check the gauges Sky coloring and cloud effects are exquisite, although you won't be logging any actual instrument time; this is still a visual flight rules (VFR) game. Aircraft exteriors are superb, with translucent canopies, squadron markings, oil smears, and gun-smoke smudges. Many special effects are present Gun barrels flash, torpedoes hit the water with realistic splashes, and flak explosions are just right. The light-sourcing effects as the sunshine slides down a turning wing are near perfect Some of the best graphics are not 3D at all. The 2D cockpits Is Good! Beta versions of games are never rated, but when this story is finished, I'll relaunch WARBIRDS 2.01. Despite being tired, bleary-eyed, and hungry due to playing it non-stop for the last six hours, the craving just won't quit. It's that good. You should be able to try it for yourself about the time this article sees print. The program will be available for free download at www. imagicgames.com. CGW Feels Good! The improved flight model makes the G-meter particularly welcome. The airplanes depart controlled flight into spins more realistically now and respond better to standard spin-recovery techniques. Monitoring airspeed and the Gmeter will give you a much better feel for riding the edge. Now, the aircraft's overall feel is closer to actual flight; a plane's feel is properly sluggish at slow speeds and it requires trimming as speed changes. Take a Zero up a few thousand feet and do a few slow, coordinated barrel rolls; this is the way it is supposed to be. While the new graphics and flight model tweaks steal the show, there's more in store. The 11 new aircraft are primarily variants The Only Show in Town? he online skies are beginning to look like Chicago's O'Hare at 5 p.m. on a Friday night; there are airplanes everywhere you look! For virtual pilots in search of WWII air combat, the Internet offers direct vectors to Kesmai's AIR WARRIOR III, Interactive Magic's WARBIRDS, and the newest challenger, Microsoft's FIGHTER ACE. If WWI action makes you itch for a silk scarf, AIR WARRIOR currently has a separate arena for that and a Korean-era choice as well. SimGuild has FLYING CIRCUS, another WWI game in free online beta testing, and Interactive Magic has a WWI simulation in development, as well. EMIL, IS THAT YOU? Each aircraft variant is painted a bit differently. Warbirds 2,01 CGW Online RELEASE DATE: Q2 '98 DEVELOPER: 1-Magic Online PUBLISHER: Interactive Magic PAINTED PONY Corn's beautifully decorated P-51 leads a Corsair into battle. Light sourcing highlights the exhaust stained nose of the Mustang; notice the improved Corsair instrument panel. Check out our in-depth online air combat headto-head roundup at www.gamespot.com/ features/onlineflight. 110 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"The Fastest 3D Gameplay. Period. BLASTER Voodoo? Nothing Else Even Comes Close. 50 billion operations per second. 3 million triangles per second. Up to 12MB of ultra-fast, single-cycle DRAM. Two independent, on-board texture processors for single-pass trilinear filtering. Full triangle set-up processing. LOD MIP-mapping. Texture compositing, morphing and other complex effects. High-precision Z-buffering. True perspective correction with sub-pixel and sub-texel accuracy. As much as 3 times the performance of the previous generation of Voodoo-based accelerators. You know you want one. Get it now at your favorite retailer. Or visit us at www.soundblaster.com/voodoo2 for more info. CREATIVE WWW.SOUNDBLASTER.COM Go to #070 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink  Creative Technology Ltd. All other brand our product names listed are trademarks or registered trademarks and are property of their respective holders, "


"WorlaWorks Sims Other WWII Sims There's a Squadron of Other Sims on the Horizon FLYING NIGHTMARES 2 will make an an upcoming CGW. Finally, we hope to have details next month on FLIGHT: COMBAT, the first simulation from Looking Glass that will let you actually shoot things. The company is mum on the WWII sim for now, but the buzz we've heard is that the graphics and physics will make the same kind of impact on the market as did the original FLIGHT UNLIMITED. CGW he eight sims previewed in this feature are just the first wave of upcoming WWII sims After a long drought this deluge doesn't look as if it's going to stop any time soon. There's good news and bad news from Sierra/Dynamix. The good news is that the company is now working on ACES OF THE PACIFIC 2, a modernized version of their classic Pacific simulation. ACES 2 is due for release in the first half of 1999. The bad news is that Dynamix's new commitment to finishing its sims: the XFIGHTERS team has been tied up with major flight-model patches for RED BARON II, and they plan to release a 3D patch for that game this summer. Believe it or not, CONFIRMED KILL is still in the works. In addition to the online component, which may be in testing by the time you read this, the Eidos team is also developing a stand-alone boxed version of the game for release late this year (or in early 1999); much of the technology from the shelved Coming Next Month Part II of our Simulation Roundup ACES: XMIG MAYHEM IN ISRAELI AIR FORCE, you'll face modern aircraft, such as MiG-29s, and dated planes, such as this MiG-17. FIGHTERS, the intriguing \"modify your own plane\" design, has been pushed back on the schedule and will be released after the completion of ACES 2. More good news is that this delay is due to on 49 X MARKS THE DELAY ACES: X-FIGHTERS has been shelved while Dynamix works on RED BARON II enhancements and ACES OF THE PACIFIC 2. n our next issue, we'll continue the flight-sim fest with coverage of all the post-World War Il sims in the works. In addition to updates on titles such as MIG ALLEY and APACHE VS. HAVOC, we'll bring you the first look at the new F-16 sim from Novalogic, and an exclusive handson sneak preview of Jane's WORLD AIR POWER: ISRAELI AIR FORCE This sim promises gameplay similar to FIGHTERS ANTHOLOGY, but with more authentic flight models, more realistic mission goals, and a richer environment. With some of the most authentic terrain we've ever seen, it's dazzling. And it's being developed by a team that includes active IAF pilots. DESERT MIRAGE Set in modern times, ISRAELI AIR FORCE includes a range of. fighters from the Mirage to the F-151. INSTRUMENTAL INTERLUDE Although it has some elements of a modernized FIGHTERS ANTHOLOGY, IAF's all-new engine includes actual instruments, such as this F-4 panel. CONFIRMED TO EXIST Eidos swears that CONFIRMED KILL will ship someday. 112 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"76 Incoming Screenshot Courtesy of Rage. The future of gaming is no longer just in front of you. INTRODUCING 360 DEGREES OF TOTALLY IMMERSIVE MONSTER SOUND. MOT DIAMOND \"IF YOU CAN AFFORD JUST Ground fire blasting on your right. Laser ONE GAME-RELATED UPGRADE bursts whizzing overhead. You can even FOR YOU PC THIS YEAR. hear the roar of an enemy fighter MAKE IT MONSTER SOUND.\" behind you. Because with Diamond Family PC, Sept. 97 Monster Sound MX200 PCI audio card, Positional 3D Audio With 2 Or 4 Speakers you're surrounded with amazingly real, true positional 3D sound. Plug in  64-Voice Hardware Wavetable (Roland Authorized Sample Set) either 2 or 4 speakers, strap on your headphones, and experience the  Drastically Outperforms ISA Sound Cards incredible 3D positional audio for the ultimate gaming experience. Monster Accelerates DirectSound, DirectSound3D, Sound MX 200 brings 64 voice hardware wavetable synthesizer, with Roland and A3D Includes Hot 3D Games Like Incoming, authorized sample set, and 23 independent audio streams, creating the Jedi Knight,\" and Outlaws. entire spectrum of realistic sound. Plus, you get Aureal's award-winning A3D technology and Microsoft's DirectSound and DirectSound3D to unlock the chel cComputing latest effects in your Windows 95/98 system. Better yet, it comes with killer 3D games like Jedi Knight, DIAMOND Enter the Monster Sound MX200 Sweepstakes by visiting our website at Outlaws, and Incoming. Get Monster Sound today and MULTIMEDIA http://www.diamondmm.com/monstersound 200 make the world revolve around you for a change. Accelerate your world. Go to #145 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink 1998 Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc. All rights reserved. Diamond and the Diamond logo are registered trademarks of Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc. Monster Sound is a trademark of Diamond Multimedia Systems, Incorporated, 2880 Junction Avenue, San Jose, CA 95134. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. CHCE "


"The Generation of Extreme Control You've been gaming ever since you got weaned on Pong as a kid. Along the way you've tried everything. Now you want a stick that'll do it all. Programmable. Digital. Analog. Comfortable. Cool. Different. New. GenX 700 by QuickShot is all that and more. This programmable stick comes complete with switches to move between digital and analog modes for the HAT, rudder, handle fire buttons and X&Y axes. Plus a 3D rotational handle and multi-view HAT switch. Your hands won't give out in the middle of battle 'cause this stick's super-ergonomic with a contoured BioThrottle complete with extra fire buttons. And the Genx 700 is a really cool metallic purple color-sure to look perfect anywhere. But wait, there's more! Check out our streamlined GenX 500 and the extra-special GenX 500L the world's first joystick made for lefties! Punish yourself no more. Enter the generation of extreme control. GET THIS STICK! GE series QuickShot www.quickshot.com 01998 QuickShot Technology, Inc. QuickShot is a registered trademark of QuickShot Patent (BVI) Ltd. GenX 700, GenX 500 and GenX 500L are tradenames of QuickShot Patent (BVD) LE Go to #260 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"HARDWARE IN SEARCH OF THE ULTIMATE GAMING MACHINE Technology Horizon Watch VIRGE to Go Gently Into That Good Night... nVidia RIVA TNT This is nVidia's next-generation 2D/3D graphics accelerator, which may well out-perform two-yes two-Voodoo-boards running SLI. The company anticipates that the TNT will have a fill rate of 200-250Mpixels/sec, as compared to twin Voodoo-s, which are generally in the 180-200Mpixels/sec range. ETA: Q3 '98 nd there was much rejoicing. 53 handling Windows 9x 2D GUI chores. On has certainly taken its fair share of the 3D side, the Savage 3D has around lumps over its ViRGE accelerators. 125Mpixels/sec of fill rate, which is 25 perThe only chip in the industry to be cent faster than the anticipated fill rate of dubbed a \"3D de-celerator,\" the Matrox's upcoming G200, and VIRGE's 3D performance was about 38 percent more than with sorely lacking. Well, after briefly one 3Dfx Voodoo board. S3 is circling the wagons, S3 is set to planning on the 128-bit, 125MHz unveil its next-generation accelSavage 3D supporting single-cycle erator: the Savage3D. trilinear filtering, and being fully IRON WORKS The Savage3D's 3D core is AGP 2X-compliant. completely new. S3 threw out the ViRGE If the Savage3D hits all these marks architecture and started from scratch. upon its release, 53 could be a strong Actually, the card's 2D core is the same as force in the market. As soon as we can get the one developed in S3's Trio3D chip-set our hands on a reference board, we'll let but it should be more than adequate for you know how it fares. -Dave Salvator 3Dfx Banshee This is 3Dfx's first integrated 2D/3D accelerator. Banshee will be 3Dfx's first large-scale entry into the lucrative OEM/system makers' side of the graphics business, where about two-thirds of all graphics chips are sold. Performance numbers on the as-yet-unannounced part are very sketchy, but we've heard rumors that its 2D performance will be very competitive, which was a weakness in their Voodoo Rush chipset. ETA: Q3 '98 FireWire Also known as IEEE 1394, this is a high-bandwidth bus (400Megabits/sec, or 50Megabytes/sec) that will support high-quality digital video, hard-drives, and other storage devices. All FireWire devices will be hot swappable, meaning you can attach or detach devices and immediately be able to use them while your machine is still turned on. ETA: Q4 '98 New 3D Engine Architecture Texture Texture Cache Unit Decompression Unit AGP-2x bus with sidebands Burst Command Interface Triangle Setup Engine 128-bit Rendering Pipeline Monitor monior et met 250MHZ RAMDAC e Streams Processor 128-bit 2D Engine 125MHz SGRAM up to 8MB AMD K6 3D+ This is AMD's next X86 CPU, which will feature AMD's own set of floating point instruction extensions designed specifically to accelerate Direct3D's geometry engine. These new instructions could very well give AMD a floating-point performance edge over Intel-an industry first-at least until Intel's Katmai processors ship. ETA: Q2 '98 NTSC/PAL Encoder w Macrovision MPEG-2 Acceleration Unit High Quality Video Processor TV VIP/LPB THE NEW STANDARD? This graph illustrates the new 3D architecture used by S3 in its new Savage3D card. Micronics Launches Righteous Gaming PC Intel Katmal Katmal will be Intel's next round of CPUs, with anticipated clock speeds of 450-500MHz. In additional to the higher clockspeeds, Katmai CPUs will also feature what Intel has clumsily dubbed \"Katmai New Instructions,\" a name given to avoid calling these new instruc tion-set extensions MMX2. Among other things, these instructions will speed up Direct3D's geometry engine (in DX6), which will allow the Katmai to crank out more polygons per second. ETA: Q4 '98 icronics, a longtime maker of motherboards and add-on cards, has decided to get into the sys. tems business. Its first system, the Righteous Game Machine, is targeted right at hard-core gamers. The Righteous Game Machine has an impressive set of features: a pair of 12MB Righteous 3D Ils (using 3Dfx's Voodoo-chip-set), the Orchid NuSound 3D (which uses Aureal's Vortex A3D sound chip), and a Micronics 440BX motherboard. The preliminary system we looked at had a 400MHz Pentium II. Some details, such as the primary AGP card, hasn't been finalized yet. Pricing hasn't been set, either. As soon as we get the final product, we'll write up a full review. However, based on what we've seen so far, the Righteous Gaming Machine may have the righteous stuff, indeed.-Loyd Case Intel LA-64 Intel's next-next-generation of processors, the IA-64 will be a substantial departure from the company's traditional X86 CISC-based architecture. This new 64-bit CPU will use a new set of Very Long Instruction Word (VLIW) instructions, and use a technology termed EPIC (Explicitly Parallel Instruction Computing) to execute a number of instructions in parallel. ETA: Q4 '99 www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 115 "


"SCIENCE FICTION "


"JUST GOT REAI "


"THE YEAR IS 2829. IT IS A TIME OF GREAT DANGER AND DESTINY. FOR DECADES, THE EMPIRE HAS PREPARED FOR THE NEXT CYBRID INVASION. YET WE ARE NOT UNITED. MILITANT REBELS ON THE COLONIES OF MARS AND VENUS DISRUPT OUR PURPOSE AND BLEED OUR STRENGTH. THEY MUST BE CRUSHED. MULTIPLAYER MADNESS FLAG, DEATHMATCH, TEAM COOPERATIVE, AND OBJECTIVE MISSION SCENARIOS "


"NEW TERRAIN ENGINE WITH UNBELIEVABLE VISIBLE DISTANCE FULLY-INTEGRATED INDOOR AND OUTDOOR ENVIRONMENTS MORE THAN 45 CAMPAIGN MISSIONS ON 7 PLANETS "


"3D-ACCELERATED GRAPHICS: OPEN GL AND CUSTOM SUPPORT FOR ALL 3DFX CARDS MORE THAN 25 CUSTOMIZABLE VEHICLES INCLUDING TANKS, FLYERS, AND HERCS MORE THAN 40 FUTURISTIC WEAPONS TO CHOOSE FROM INTERACTIVE 3D MISSION EDITOR FOR ADVANCED PLAYERS SIE 1998 Sierra Ore "


"A WHOLE NEW UNIVERSE OF 3D COMBAT SIM. PLAY THE FREE TECHNOLOGY RELEASE NOW. GE JOIN US ne, Inc. All rights reserved. and TM designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Lino, Inc. Go to #135 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink WWW.STARSIEGE.COM Dynamix "


"HARDWARE I Need Input! The Changing (Inter)Face of Game Controllers 998 will be a transition year for computergame controllers. The arrival of Windows 98 will see real Universal Serial Bus (USB) support moving to the forefront. USB has many implications for gamersnot the least of which is a brave new world of game controllers. Macintosh users are no doubt chuckling knowledgeably. \"We've had ADB for ages.\" Now if they could only get top-shelf games in a timely manner.... 430HX chip-set, although USB support was broken in some of the earliest motherboards. Microsoft took tentative steps toward USB in DirectX 3.0, then promptly broke away from it in DirectX 5.0. So USB has been something of a mystery to some users and a frustration to the few companies brave enough to try to ship USB peripherals, won't take up any space at all on the USB bus. Already we've seen some examples of game controllers with USB support, including a USB version of Thrust Master's Top Gun joystick and a gamepad from Alps. There's also a USB version of US Robotics' 56K voice fax/modem; even Microsoft's newest keyboard, the Natural Keyboard Elite, can attach via USB. So, as you can see, hardware is coming along. That is all well and good, but you can't play the game without the software (driver) support. something mysterious happened in DirectX 5, and USB no longer worked properly, causing a number of vendors some anguish. Thrust Master finally developed its Direct Connect technology because they couldn't wait for USB to be fixed. Both Windows 98 and the upcoming DirectX 6 offer a more robust tale. We need to begin the story with something the USB technology folks call Human Interface Devices (HID). HID hardware can consist of anything that users interact with, from mice and keyboards to game controllers to more exotic gear, such as VR helmets. A HID device-driver will have a set of capability bits (cap bits) that present to DirectX all the capabilities of the devices. These could hypothetically The Software Story Until Windows 98 shipped, the software story was far less robust. USB support in DirectX 3.0 worked, after a fashion. However. LOYD CASE USB supports up to 128 devices on a chain. If only I had room on my desk.. -Total USB bandwidth 12 Mbits/Sec The Hardware Side Back in the dark ages when the first IBM PC shipped, IBM saw fit to include the PC's game port as an option. This immediately made the PC a desirable gaming platform, and joysticks began appearing. The PC's game port, however, is an aging, flawed device, and one that often uses many CPU cycles in the game port polling process. The game port needs to be polled, because it measures the changing resistance presented by the joystick's potentiometers, yet transmits nothing directly to the system. On top of that, you have a maximum of four axes and four buttons. Newer devices have gotten around this problem, but it's all been something of a kludge, and it's no surprise that support for various digital optical game controllers is sometimes spotty. So, gamers need something more flexible and robust, and that's where USB comes into the picture. Those with newer machines have no doubt seen on the back of their systems those two small connectors that don't seem to have any visible use. Intel began supporting USB in their chip-sets starting way back with the -.wav file 1.4 Mbit/sec USB, as implemented on PCS, has a maximum throughput of 12 Mbits/sec. Let's put that in perspective: A CD-quality wave file (44.1 KHz, stereo, 16-bit) takes up 1.4Mbits/sec. If we then add a joystick that's sending out 2,000 16-bit words per second, that's another .031 Mbits/sec. At the same time, we'll also have an ISDN modem on the same bus, connected to an ISP using STAC data compression, which adds about another .5Mbits/sec. This means that even a lot of peripherals on USB won't saturate the bus. This concept is illust rated in the graphic at right. New disk interfaces, digital video, and other high-bandwidth applications that are too demanding for USB will use IEEE 1394, also known as FireWire. This means that they Joystick .031 Mbit/sec include number of axes, number of buttons, type of buttons (for example, toggle, hat), and so on. Since USB (and HIDs) are digital devices, controller makers are no longer constrained by the number of axes supported by the lowly PC game port. In addition, USB promises to be less CPU intensive than the analog game port. So we have greater flexibility and efficiency-in theory This doesn't mean your analog joystick has to be trashed-the thought of discarding an expensive, nearly new, high-end controller is enough to make you choke. There will still be support in DirectX 6 for the good old analog game port. In fact, analog devices will still be supported as though they were HID devices (with some limitations) in DirectX 6. Plus, the VJOYD.VXD driver will -ISDN modem 0.5Mbit/sec SPACE TO SPARE USB is hard to bog down. Combined, a .wav file, Joystick, and modem still leave 10.069 Mbits/sec of free bandwith. 122 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"MGA-6200 0079-VOW When it comes to 3D gaming, matrox how sharp is yours? Take the Matrox video card quiz and find out. Can you... Run Forsaken at over 100 frames per second? Play Jedi Knight\" at 1280x1024 resolution? Get Vibrant Color Quality for Quake II? Smooth everything over with per-pixel Trilinear filtering? Upgrade to a whopping 16MB of memory? Go blind with brilliant 2D performance? Brag about your full AGP2x performance? Couch surf with DVD video and PC to TV displays? Ride the 128-bit DualBus? Thank God you didn't buy that expensive 3D-only card? Answer \"YES\" to everything this summer with MGA-G200. For more information, visit our web site at www.matrox.com/mga matrox Forsaken Quaker 1997 Acclaim Entertainment IncJedi Knight\" Lucasfilm Ltd. Copyright LucasArts. 1997 id Software Inc. All trademarks are the property of their respective owners Go to #124 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"LOYD CASE Tech Tips HARDWARE continue to exist, so your old Windows 95 games will run as well. (Keep your fingers crossed.) The issue of multiple controller support becomes much easier with USB, since it can support up to 128 devices on a single chain. Each can (if the hardware developer supports it) daisy chain to another device. Connections can become a bit more convenient, through the use of USB hubs. That way, you can have a single cable coming out of the back of your computer into the hub, and multiple devices (joystick, throttle, rudder, MFD controller) all linked through the hub. There's even the potential for more robust wireless devices. ThrustMaster Pro Panel If you're using joysticks or analog gamepads, do yourself a favor and head over to the Thrustmaster Web site (www.thrustmaster.com) and download a copy of Thrusty's Pro Panel. It installs into your control panel, and is a somewhat easier-to-understand alternative to Microsoft's Game Controller control panel. CH Joystick Drivers for Windows 95 If you've been running your F-16 Combat Stick or other CH products, download the latest Windows 95 drivers from the CH Web site (www. chproducts.com). DirectInput games will now have access to the full range of button options supported by the CH sticks. There's also a DirectInput driver for the CH Force/FX force feedback joystick. Brave New World Of course, I don't necessarily recommend that you rush out, buy the Windows 98 upgrade, and begin hunting for USB controllers, since many aren't even out yet. But 1998 will be the transition year for digital controllers, and by this time next year, many of us will have full USB setups on our desktops. Now if only I had room on my desk for all this stuff.... CGW Multiplayer Support If you want to hook up two controllers to play multiplayer (and you don't have those cool new gamepads that daisy-chain), then get a joystick Y-cable. Note that to work properly with many sound cards, you need to get a Y-cable specially designed to work with sound cards. Also, each pad or joystick will only have two buttons available. BATTLEZONE Joystick Support If you've been frustrated by BATTLEZONE's inability to remember that you use a joystick, download the 1.01 patch from the Activision Web site (www.activision.com). After loading the patch, you'll no longer have to specify a joystick every time you start the game. Ahis is the 125th Anniversary of Arbor Day, the tree planters' holiday. This year The National Arbor Day Foundation asks you to plant Trees for America, and provide for their care. Trees Make a World of Difference. Thanks to trees we enjoy shadier streets, greener city parks, and friendlier neighborhoods. Trees also produce oxygen, absorb carbon dioxide, and help keep the atmosphere in balance. This year, plant Trees for Am free brochure, write: Trees for America, The National Arbor Day Foundation, Nebraska City, NE 68410. SKUP TROMM 1872-1997 Plant Trees For America Nedos Day Foucalon The National Arbor Day Foundation www.arborday.org "


"IN OUR DISTINGUISHED 111 YEAR HISTORY, YAMAHA HAS CRAFTED THE FINEST MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS AND MOST ACCURATE AUDIO COMPONENTS IN THE WORLD. NOW IT'S TIME TO... Hill Butt! WOULUT-102 wa WAVEFORL YAMAHA SGEELSEDIS WAVEFORCEM192XG YAMAHA XG Lightening Fast PCI Bus Unlimited Sounds via DLS 3D Positional Audio Incredible Sound Effects 676 Sounds21 Drum Kits Physical Modeling Synthesizer Wavetable Synthesizer * Outstanding Digital Effects Full Duplex Record & Playback Powerful Software Bundle SHOULD SOUND. YAMAHA Studio Quality Sound that kicks butt! For more information please call 18001823 6414 exi. 403A. www.yamaha.com 01998 Yamaha Corporation of America. P.O. Box 6600. Buena Park, CA 906226600 Yamaha and WaveForce are registered trademarks of Yamaha Corporation FURRE 192X GENERAL Xama MIDI Microsoft Windows WAS Go to #101 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"DESTROY MORE. DISMEMBER MORE. & DISEMBOWEL MORE. Monster 3DT Now More Than Screenshots of Shadow Warrior courtesy of 3D Realms Entertainment. 3 Times Faster Want a killer experience? Just check out Diamond's new Monster 3D II. It's the fastest 3Dfx Voodoo2 graphics weapon ever. Monster 3D II gives you more speed, more action, and more gaming power! MONSTROUS GAMING BUNDLE Special Edition Star Wars Game Pack from LucasArts Heavy Gear\" by Activision Full Version  Tomb Raider 11\" by Eidos Interactive\": Special Edition  Plus 3D Game Demos: Final Fantasy,\" Daikatana,\" Need For Speed 11\" SE, and more EXCLUSIVE SECAL COMON 2 Monster Din STAR WARS JEDIKNIGHT DIAMOND IAMS IDEI CHECK OUT OUR NEW GAMING WEBSITE DIAMOND UNDERGROUND http://www.diamondmm.com/underground FASTEST VOODOO2 ACTION! Monster 3D Il features: Screaming performance at over 60 frames per second (fps)  Advanced MEGAMonster dual card feature for over 100 fps at 1024 x 768 gaming Glide (Voodoo, Voodoo 2). Direct3D, and MiniGL acceleration Superior resolution support at 800 x 600 with Z-buffer .8MB and 12MB configurations DIAMOND MULTIMEDIA Accelerate your world. Enter the Monster 3D Il Sweepstakes by visiting our website at http://www.diamondmm.com/monster3D2 LIMITED TIME OFFER FOR MONSTER 3D OWNERS Get a $50 Upgrade Rebate when you buy Monster 3D II. See retail box or diamond website for details of the mail-in-offer. Go to #190 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink 1998 Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc. All rights reserved.Shadow Warrior 1998 3D Realms Entertainment. Diamond and the Diamond logo are registered trademarks of Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc. Monster 3D is a trademark of Diamond Multimedia Systems, Inc. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. "


"REVIEW  ORCHID RIGHTEOUS 3D II CGW On the Righteous Path Again EDITOR'S CHOICE COMPUTER GAMING ORD HARDWARE by Loyd Case oughly 18 months ago Orchid's Righteous 3D was the first 3Dfx Voodoo Graphics board out of the starting gate. After a brief blaze of glory, the Righteous 3D dropped off a lot of radar screens. This was mainly because Orchid's parent company, CGW Labs * * * * * APPEAL: Righteous 3D II Gamers wanting a 12MB board and a software bundle at a reasonable price PROS: It's fast in Glide and OpenGL apps, good bundle. CONS: Direct3D performance isn't where we'd like to see it yet. Micronics, encountered some control panel-the V-sync slider and OpenGL games, probably financial hiccups and cut back on only affects Direct3D apps. Orchid because Direct3D doesn't yet take marketing. should have a fix by the time you advantage of the second texture Well, Orchid's back, and this read this. mapping unit (TMU) on the card. card proves that the company is Performance was pretty good, The Righteous 3D Il comes with serious—its 12MB card hit the with the usual set of impressive the best bundle we've yet seen in a streets just ahead of Diamond's QUAKE Il numbers. As with the Voodoocard. There's the full verversion. other Voodoo cards, the Direct3D sion of BATTLEZONEdefinitely one As with Diamond's, Orchid's conapps didn't fare as well as Glide of the cooler games out this year. trol panel proThere's a limited vides you with a version of JEDI performance KNIGHT, and full slider, though it versions of both doesn't tell you INCOMING and Gwhat the miniPOLICE. So you get mum and maxisome decent mum clock games and a lower speeds are. list price than that There's also only of Creative's 12MB a single slider to board. Whoever control V-sync. said that good At first, I thought things come to it turned off Vthose who wait sync for all APIs. RIGHTEOUS, DUDE Orchid's newest 3D graphics board isn't must have had the In fact, there's much to look at, but it posts some impressive numbers. Righteous 3D II in a bug in the mind. CGW Price: $265 (12MB) Vendor: Micronics (800) 577-0977 www.orchid.com REVIEW . LOGITECH TRACKMAN MARBLE/FX CGW EDITOR'S Absolutely Marble-ous CHOICE COMPUTER GALING HORIE by Loyd Case have to confess up front that I'm mouse-centric, but if ever convert to a trackball, this will be it. I've used a variety of pointing devices (including trackballs), and have always been disappointeduntil now. The Trackman Marble/fx looks sleek and streamlined. However, unfortunately, as with many this veteran mouse-user. I checked got shot up in the process. Still, it ergonomic devices, it's for right it out with QUAKE II and JEDI was great to be able to grab the handers only. KNIGHT. You have to play around trackball and line up your shot so At any rate, if you are right with the mouse speed a bit, but that the first one hit home. This handed, your hand will wrap itself the buttons are nicely placed for was really handy with weapons like very comfortably around the three-button play. The extra preci QUAKE II's rail gun, which has a Marble/fx. This particular trackball sion in aiming is nice, though narrow field of fire, does a lot of is unique in its having a cut-out on tended to get sidetracked by trying damage, but has significant one side so that you can control to carefully aim, and occasionally recharge time. You want that first the trackball with shot to kill. both your fingers The only downside and your thumb. In I've found is that my fact, for really prepalm gets a little sore cise control, you on the palm rest after a can grip the ball long session, but it's with your thumb partly because of the and forefinger. So odd placement forced as a Windows by my desk layout pointing device, Overall, I'd recommend it's great. this to anyone who's As a gaming looking for a mouse device, it's pretty alternative, and espe. good, too, though it ONE SHAPELY EXTERIOR With these sleek lines, the cially for those who did have a high Trackman Marble/fx looks cool, and works great, too. might be getting mouse learning curve for elbow. CGW CGW Labs * * * * * APPEAL: Gamers looking for an effective alternative to the mouse. PROS: Smooth ergonomics, good button placement: great ball control. CONS: Not for lefties. Price: $99.95 Manufacturer: Logitech (800) 231-7717 www.logitech.com www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 "


"VIDER QUIN TO BUILD Old Trail DRIVEN THEAT WE ARE FAMILY Not everyone that joins you looks like, you. Super-mutants, robo-dogs and ghouls may join your adventure, or why not do it yoursell by implanting the brain of someone near-and-dear into that shiny new robot body. KILL SMARTER, NOT HARDER Improved combat Al for friends and foes alike. Most of the people in your own group won't take that burst shot with the Flechette-gun, but a couple are probably just aching for the opportunity. BIGGER & BADDER THAN EVER Bigger, smarter, nastier enemies than you've ever fought before. We've given you a few pals that are just as ugly. You didn't think you were the only Bad-ass in town did you? LEARNING IS TUN-DA-MENTAL Over 100 new skills, called perks, available to learn during the course of your travels. Better to learn the Flaming Dragon Punch from the crazed tribal shaman or how to squeeze the trigger on your spiffy new Gauss-rifle faster than the next guy? Decisions, decisions... SHARE THE WEALTH If you want to, you can upgrade any traveling companions with more dangerous weapons, tougher armor, or even teach them new skills and abilities. Of course, you'd better make sure they're on your side. Te SEX & ROMANCE AFTER THE BOMB Iall in love, get married, and then pimp your spouse for a little extra chump-change. Hey, it's a dark and dangerous world. "


"Sequel to the RPG of the Year quun. , VHITEC bultes Arriving Fall '98 Designed for RATING PEADING Fallout 2 Microsoft Windows'95 ILSIE LENOM HY GAMERS, FOR GAMERS STATE www.interplay.com t es A MUST HOOLIKIR TOLL PLATINE CAIL Fallout 2. A Post-Nuclear Role Playing Game: 1998 Interplay Productions. All rights reserved Fallout. Interplay, the Interplay logo Black Isle Studios, the Black Isle Studios logo and \"By Gamers. For Gamers.\" are trademarks of Interplay Productions. All rights reserved Windows 95 is a registered trademark of Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved All other trademarks and copyrights are properties of their respective owners play Prick Isle s Go to #166 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW THOMAS SUPER WHEEL Industrial Strength Sim Driving HARDWARE by Loyd Case f the Extreme Competition CDS 5000 is too rich for your blood, then take a look at Thomas Enterprises' Thomas Super Wheel. The TSW has fans among hard-core sim racers, who rave about its rock-solid feel. has a full, 270-degree rotation and has a nice, stiff wheel. It's not force-feedback enabled, but the nonlinear springs have a good feel. The potentiometers seem stable on road courses with many sharp turns, you get accurate response in cornering when you turn the wheel. The base of the wheel looks somewhat industrial, but is weighty enough not to shift on your desktop. And while it takes up less space than the monster Extreme Competition Wheel, it can't be described as \"svelte.\" The floor unit is sufficiently weighty. There are GET YOUR MOTOR RUNNIN' You can order a customized TSW to suit your individual driving needs. a variety of options, including floor pedals (instead of the roller type), paddle shifters on the steeri ng wheel, and so on. Thomas Enterprises also offers a series of upgrade kits. If you really want, you could have multiple wheels for different sims. After all, you wouldn't want to drive a 3,000lb. NASCAR stock car with a Grand Prix-style open wheel, would you? CGW PEDAL TO THE METAL The TSW floor unit can be customized. The Super Wheels are madeto-order, depending on which features you like. The basic wheel starts at $270. There are a number of different wheel combinations. If you're looking for a truly realistic look, then TSW even offers Italian-made Momo racing wheels—the same ones used in real Grand Prix cars, but that option costs an additional $195. The TSW behaves like any standard two-axis, four-button joystick, and it's compatible with most driving games. The device CGW Rated Actual screen captures using Links LS 1998 APPEAL: Hard-core racing sim fans with big, but not extravagant, budgets. PROS: Good feel; accurate potentiometers; numerous configuration options CONS: Option choices can be confusing: no force-feedback option: pricey. Price: $320 (stock model), $500 (Formula, with Momo wheel) Vendor: TSW Enterprises (319) 462-2396 http://soli.inav.net/-thomas/ quear oliy 130 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 "


"Seal Cycle LinksLS 1998 Edition Kayolun Village Pole 6 Por 367 yards Real Life Comparison Take a 20-minute Links break and challenge Arnold Palmer to 18 holes at Kapalua's Bay Course on the Island of Maui. no 292 40 100  New waving flags, airplanes and other animations  New water reflections  Six golfers including Arnold Palmer  Faster screen redraws  Quick-start internet play  Over 20 other new features a LinksLS 1998 Edition ACCESS ACCESS SOFTWARE INCORPORATED For more information, visit our website at www.accesssoftware.com/a7g, or call 1-800-800-4880. And add some color to your life! Go to #079 www.compute gaming.com/infolink "


"pS ARMY MEN Real Combat Plastic Men. Take any one of six classic army men figures into combat in this squad level action-strategy game. Melt attacking infantry with your flamethrower or shatter enemy vehicles with your bazooka and tank. "


"«I love the smell of burnt Plastic in the morning\" ATV REAL COMBAT. PLASTIC MEN: Break your troops out of a heavily guarded POW camp in one of over 30 action-packed missions. www.al'mymen.com Make your way through alpine, desert and bayou terrains or play against your friends on special multiplayer maps. 1998 The 3D0 Company. All rights reserved. Army Mon is a trademark of The 3DO Company. All othor trademarks are proporties of their respective owners. Go to #112 @ www.computergaming.com/Infolink "


"REVIEW ALIENWARE AREA 51 ARDWARE Alienware's Area 51: High-Flying UFO Dedicated Gaming System Delivers Performance and Value CGW EDITOR'S CHOICE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD by Loyd Case here must be more computer gamers out there nowadays. How else can you explain the appearance of all the new PCS created specifically for gaming? The latest hardcore gamer's system is from Florida computer maker Alienware PC. To be honest, I was skeptical. I've run across a number of PCs ostensibly marketed for gamers. The ones from the big boys (IBM. HP, et al) usually demonstrate the companies' ignorance of gamers' needs. The best gaming systems tend to come from boutique companies like Falcon Northwest, but even many of them often drop the ball. So, when the FedEx guy arrived with these three enormous boxes, my trepidation only increased. One of the boxes had \"Alienware\" in huge, green, stencil-painted letters on the side. I half expected a little green man to pop up out of the sea of Styrofoam pellets. A look at the Area 51's list of components tells you that the Alienware folks seem pretty serious about gaming. Now, I've seen impressive laundry lists of compoLET'S DO THE NUMBERS 3D WinBench 98 Primary 6x4 572 Primary, 8x6 338 Secondary 6x4 883 Secondary, 8x6 876 WinBench 98 Business Graphic WinMark at 1024x768x16 149 Business Disk WinMark 1240 FPU WinMark 2110 CPU32 1020 CD-ROM WinMark 1040 CD-ROM Access 130 CD-ROM CPU Usage 2.31% Quake II 6x4 89.7 8x6 88.1 1024x768 70.00 Forsaken Primary 77.3 Secondary 219.7 Turok Primary D3D Glide 159.8 Voodoo, D3D 88.3 Microsoft Flight Sim 98 Primary, kx7 52.4 Secondary, kx7 38.5 nents in the past, but they often didn't play well together. Here, however, we certainly encountered a few glitches, but some were simply due to the fact that we had one of the first 440BX-based, 100MHz motherboards out there. After upgrading the Hercules crivers, most of the glitches disapp eared. The techs at Alienware color-coded most of the connectors, speakers excepted. This was particularly handy with the complex graphics setup. Not only did we have to contend with the primary card-to-Monster II SLI connection, but also the output from the master Voodoo2 card then goes into the DVD decoder. DOS real-mode drivers for the DVD drive and mouse were installed, although the Alienware techs had forgotten to remove the comment from the MSCDEX.EXE line that was put in by the Windows 95 setup. Still, the drivers were there and a few strokes of the delete key gave us CD access in DOS. Performance was simply stunning. Part of this was due to the fact that Alienware overclocked the system slightly, setting the bus speed of the P2B mainboard to 103MHz. At this slight increase, the PCI clock was still 33MHz, so none of the peripherals were affected. QUAKE Time Demos were in excess of 80fps, except at 1024x768, at which point the system dropped to a \"mere\" 70fps. TUROK'S Glide scores were a staggering 159fps. The only time the Thriller WHAT'S IN THE BOX CPU Intel Pentium 11/400MHz Motherboard ASUS P2B System RAM 64MB SD-100 SDRAM Primary Graphics Hercules Thriller3D w/8MB RAM Secondary Graphics Two Diamond Monster 3D is running Su Primary Audio Diamond Monster Sound Secondary Audio Creative Labs Vibra16 Speakers Altec Lansing ACS 500s (Dolby Pro Logic) and ATS-43s (for rear channel) CD-ROM Hitatchi second-generation DVD-ROM Hard Drive 8.4GB Quantum Fireball SE Other Storage IDE Iomega Zip Drive DataComm Dual Boca 56K modems (can be run in tandem) Case Elan Vital T10AB outperformed the dual Monster Ils was in FLIGHT SIMULATOR 98, where the Thriller's extra RAM probably helped out. The one serious downside to this system is a lack of free slots. However, company sources indicate that Alienware will be moving to Quantum 3D's Obsidian line of single-board SLI accelerators, freeing up a PCI slot in the process. Documentation was nicely done, though a diagram of the rear panel connections would have been a plus. Also, a true AGP card might have been better, but that's a quibble; the Rendition card is certainly a good choice. All in all, the Area 51 is a solid system, slightly rough around the edges, but clearly well thought out. The mass-storage system is a bit of a compromise in terms of speed, but there's lots of storage space available. At under four grand for this virtual hot-rod, it's worth giving up a little transfer rate. CGW CGW Labs * * * * APPEAL: Gamers looking for the fastest, most reasonably priced 3D gaming system. PROS: Voodoo2 SLI; price; wellintegrated. CONS: No free slots; somewhat slow mass storage Price: $3.999 (without monitor) Manufacturer: Alienware PC Systems (800) 494-3382 www.alienware-pc.com 134 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"DEMONSTRATION: 1 Tear out this page. 2 Crumple into ball. 3 Toss over your shoulder. The sound this ad will make when it hits the ground behind you is the power of A3DM from Aureal, the only audio that works the way your ears do. No wonder game makers like Interplay and GT Interactive are featuring A3D in their newest titles. Experience it for yourself at www.A3D.com 3D BELIEVE YOUR EARS Go to #271 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink 01998 Aureal Semiconductor, Inc. A3D and Aureal are trademarks of Aureal Semiconductor Inc. Other trademarks are properties of their respective owners. "


"WINS: 00 RAIDEN WINS: 00   That which calls the Warriors summons the vultures. WINSSON montage WINS: 00 FUN RAREN --WINS: 00 OLAN CHILE WINS. OD STURXERCI Woo IUXIT Forget every gruesome battle you have ever waged. Introducing Mortal Kombat 4 with newly forged Weapons that will stash and bludgeon beyond imagination. And a total 3-D environment that will take your senses to dizzying new heights. MATURE NINTENDO.54 Windows 95 CD-ROM went on MWMIDWAY ADMIDWAY PlayStation COBITUTE www.midway.com Mortal Kombat 401998 Mid Games Inc. All rights reserved. MIDWAY MORTAL KOMBAT the DRAGON DESIGN and al character names are trademarks of Midway Games Inc. Distributed by Midway Home Entertainment Inc. Nintendo Nintendo 64 and the 3-D 'N logo are trademarks of Nintendo of America Ine. 01998 Nintendo of America Inc. Licensed by Nintendo, PlayStation and the PlayStation logos aro registered trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. All other trademarks and trade names are properties of their respective owners. "


"TMRIA 4 KUMBALI Darkness is calling. Go to #183 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"AMD PGL \" OFFICIAL SOVER $250,000 NEWS UPOATE PROFESSIONAL GAMERS' LEAGUE IN CASH AND PRIZES! To Sign Up, or For More Info, Go To : http://www.pgl.com The First Pro Sports League for the Computer Gaming Crowd ATTACK OF THE 50-FOOT QUAKE WOMEN! Attention Boys: Enjoy the last days of supremacy you'll ever have in computer gaming. The more delicate sex' has decided enough is enough. They want respect among the multiplayer gaming elite, and they want it NOW. Arguably the best of the all-women teams, The Femme Fatales is very likely among the top 4 or 5 teams in the entire league. Here's the scoop on the deadliest all-female Quake team ever assemble  Real Name: Christina Chan Preferred Weapons: Rocket Launcher and Lightning Gun Also Plays: MUD. Doom Doom II, Diablo, Warcraft, Subspace, Duke Nukem, Ultima Online, Tetrinet, Quake 2, Starcraft Honors Awards: Red Annihilation (Ferrari) Tourney finalist; All Female Quake Tournament finalist Birthplace: Denver, CO Residence: Berkeley, CA (attending UC Berkeley) Age: 23 Connection: T1 CPU Speed: 233mhz Favorite Level: DM3, DM6, E1M2 Hobbies: Miniature figurines, piano, violin, volleyball, basketball, swimming, literature, anything concerning computers KORNELIA Real Name: Kornelia Takacs Preferred Weapons: Rocket Launcher, Lightning gun. AlsoPlays: Driving games, Tetris, Wipe Out, Boggle, any cool computer or console games. Honors/Awards: CGDC Quake Tournament Champion; All Female Quake Tournament Champion; Queen of the Hill Tournament (pb) Champion; QuakeCon '97 8th Place; Frag came in 7th through 12th; First Rocket Arena Tournament Champion Birthplace: Budapest, Hungary Residence: Los Angeles, CA Age: 21 Connection: ISDN CPU Speed: 200mhz Favorite Level:dm4 Favorite Hobbies: Swimming and hanging out at my dad's place in the summer. (lake, river, hiking.) Hanging out with friends, watching movies, and listening to music, the usual stuff. Visiting the countryside and castles of my homeland in Hungary MYSTIQUE AKA: Firesea Real Name : Shawna Brown Preferred Weapons: Rocket Launcher, Grenade Launcher AlsoPlays: List is too long :) Honors Awards: Founding member of PMS (Psycho Men Slayers), original all-female Quake clan Birthplace: Salmon Arm, British Columbia, Canada Residence: Victoria, British Columbia, Canada Age: 18 Connection: T1 CPU Speed: 300mhz Favorite Level: DM3 (Abandoned Base) Hobbies: I play games, what \"gamer\" doesn't? JASP Real Name: Kristy Pallan Preferred Weapons: Rocket Launcher OHH BABY Also Pleys: Warcraft2 and Starcraft Birthplace: Victoria, British Columbia, CANADA Residence: Victoria, British Columb CANADA Age: 18 Connection: 28.8 or T. CPU Speed: 180mhz Favorite Level DM4 (ffa), DM3 Hobbies: Gaming, IRC, Magic: The Gathering (card-based version) 00 YOU UKE TO WATCH? TV As always, the PGL is featured regularly on America's .COM most popular television show dedicated to computers and the Internet, TV.com, airing weekly all over the country. Check http://www.Tv.com for the station and air times in your area! TIKA Real Name : Mabelene Ng Preferred, Weapons: Rocket Launcher, Lightning Gun Also.Plays: Descent, Hexen 2, Duke Nukem 3D, Heroes of Might & Magic Birthplace: Singapore Residence: Palo Alto, CA (attending Stanfor University) Age: 22 Connection: Ethernet CPU Speed 200mhz Favorite Level: None Hobbies: Reading, swimming, anything computer-related Sign Up Now www.pgl.com Counters 2. Wortelser **CREATIVE 6 R AMD AMD GTE Computer Gaming WorldNet CREATIVE GANE Rabats Robotics Logitech AMD, the AMD loro, and the combination thereof, are trademarks of Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. PGL. Professional Gamers' League, and the PGL loro are trademarks of Professional Gamers' leru. TEN, Total Entertainment Network Play It Online, and the TEN loro are trademarks of T Network, Inc. QUAKE is a registered trademark of Software, Inc. The id Software name and the id loro are trademarks of id Software Inc. US Robotes and the US Robotics loro are registered trademarks of COM Corporation or its subsidiaries. Dockers and the Dockers logo design are registered trademarks of Levi Strauss & Co. Creative Labs and the Creative Labs logo are registered trademarks of Creative Technology Lid. AT&T WortNet is a registered trademark of ATALAll other logos, trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective owners. The Professional Gamers' League will be subject to all applicable federal and state laws. The Professional Gamers' League reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to modily this contest in any manner whatsoever (including, but not limited to rules, prizes, and start date) as well as the right to cancel this contest for any reason Go to #088 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEWS THE MOST TRUSTED REVIEWS FOR 16 YEARS F1 RACING SIMULATION 195 The New Champion of Formula 1 Racing 166 STARCRAFT 195 This Month CGW Editors' Choice games are indicated in red. GAME RATING PAGE Black Dahlia *** ** 154 Dark Reign Expansion * *** * Deer Hunter *** ** Dragoon * **** 196 East Front: Campaign CD **** * F1 RACING SIMULATION ***** EDITORS' CHOICE! 164 Grand Theft Auto * * * * * 152 Great Battles of Julius Caesar ***** 184 Hexen ll Expansion CD **** * 148 iF-22 Persian Gulf 5.0 ***** 162 JANE'S F-15 ***** EDITORS' CHOICE! 160 Rebellion *** ** Shadow Master * * * * * 146 STARCRAFT **** EDITORS' CHOICE! 168 Ultimate Race Pro ***** WarBreeds  189 Warhammer: Dark Omen ** *** 178 Triple Scoops of Strategy With Meat GREAT BATTLES OF JULIUS CAESAR 172 144 Boiling Oil, Anyone? Quote of the Month The Game Genres \"I'm a country boy. I mention this to dispel any rumors that I might be some Birkenstock-wearing, tree-hugging, antigun Berkeley-wannabe who hates anything to do with hunting\" -Joe Vallina, reviewing DEER HUNTER Our reviews are categorized by genre. Not every game fits neatly into a single genre, but here's how we define the categories in general: Action Games that emphasize fast gameplay over story or strategy Adventure Games that require you to solve puzzles to move through a story line. Classics/Puzzle Classics are old stand-bys such as Chess and MONOPOLY. Puzzle games empha. size problem-solving without requiring gamers to follow a story. Role-Playing A subset of adventure games that stress character development through attributes. The gameworld tends to be large, and the plot less linear Simulations Highly realistic games from a first-person perspective, including flight sims and space simulations Sports A broad genre encompassing action sports games, such as NBA LIVE; strategic sports games, such as FPS FOOTBALL: and even driving games, such as CART PRECISION RACING. Strategy Problem-solving and planning are the keys here. These games emphasize resource and risk-management. Includes conflict-based sci-fi and fantasy games as well as construction programs like SIMCITY. Wargames A subset of strategy games, these recreate historical conflicts from a command perspective. They may be tactical, operational, or strategic. How Do We Rate? We review only finished products, not prerelease versions. The ratings are as follows: * * * * * Outstanding The rare game that gets it all right. A must-play experience. * * * * * Very Good Worthy of your time and money, but there are drawbacks. * * * * * Average Either an ambitious design with major flaws, or simply vanilla. * * * * * Weak Seriously lacking in play value, poorly conceived, or just another clone. * * * * * Abysmal The rare game that gets it all wrong. Pathetic. Coaster material. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 139 "


"turn, run, turn, turn run, turn, run, turn turn, turn, run, run run, turn, run, turn turn, run, run, run run, run, turn, run turn, turn, run, run run, run, slam door breathe, breathe feeling safe? "


"Think again. You can run. You can they'd like to get a taste. Change cours up to flush you out. Slam a door, they So ask yourself: Is your will to live stro MATURE AGES 17+ CONTENT RATED BY ESRB  1997 Sierra On-Line, Inc. and/or TM designate trademarks of, or licensed to Sierra On-Line, Inc., Bellevue, WA 98007. All rights reserved.  1997 Valve LLC. All rights reserved. Valve and the Valve logo are trademarks of Valve L.L.C. This product contains software technology licensed from Id Software, Inc. (\"ld Technology\"). Id Technology  1996 Id Software, Inc. Direct3D is a trademark and Microsoft and Windows are registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. OpenGL is a trademark of Silicon Graphics Computer Systems. "


"hide. But these guys can smell you. And Fe, they'll follow. Take cover, they'll team I get it open. They're hunting you down. onger than theirs? SHOOT TO KILL. THINK TO LIVE. HALF LIFE PLAY FREE ON DEVELOPED BY  SERRA STUDIOS VALVE 146 www.won.net WWW.SIERRASTUDIOS.COM Go to #156 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"CGW Reviews Index These Are the Games We Have Reviewed in the Last Two Months Month Page May 158 Jun 184 May Jun 154 196 189 141 Jun May CGW Rating * * * * * ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** ***** Jun Game Balls of Steel Battlezone Carmageddon Splat Pack Deathmatch Maker 2 Interstate '76: Arsenal Jedi Knight: Mysteries of the Sith Juggernaut Redneck Rampage: Suckin' Grits ... Sega Touring Car Championship Star Trek Pinball SubSpace Tanarus Team 47 Goman Virus X-Men: The Ravages of Apocalypse ACTION Publisher GT Interactive Activision Interplay Virtus Activision LucasArts Headgames Interplay Sega Interplay Virgin Interactive Sony Interactive 47-Tek Sir-Tech Wizard Works May Jun o O Jun May May May ***** ***** * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * May 162 * * * * * ADVENTURE Battlespire Beyond Time Of Light & Darkness Tex Murphy: Overseer May May Jun 166 172 202 197 Bethesda Softworks Dreamcatcher Interactive Interplay Access Software * * * * Jun May CLASSICS/PUZ. Creatures: Life Kit #1 Monty Python's The Meaning of Life Pharaoh's Ascent Star Trek: The Game Show 260 197 260 198 Mindscape Panasonic Interactive Media Ambertech Sound Source Interactive * * * * * * * * * * ***** ***** Jun May 177 SIMS Air Warrior III Search and Rescue May Jun Interactive Magic Intense Entertainment * * * * ** * * * * 204 May 184 SPORTS Andretti Racing FIFA Road to World Cup 98 VR Baseball Hardware Accelerated 208 180 EA Sports EA Sports Interplay May ** May * 192 245 Jun Jun 257 * * ** * May 187 * STRATEGY/WARGAMES Aide De Camp 2 Armor Command Deadlock II Deeper Dungeons Evolution Magic the Gathering...Planeswalkers Semper Fi Storm in the West 195 HPS Simulations Ripcord Games Accolade Electronic Arts Discovery Channel Multimedia MicroProse Interactive Magic Schwerpunkt * * May May Jun Jun 190 254 * **** ** * * * ** * ** 258 www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1998 143 "


"REVIEW  ULTIMATE RACE PRO It's Wafer Thin... ACTIO This Arcade Racer Could Have Been a Contender TIME by Greg Fortune honestly don't know where MicroProse's ULTIMATE RACE PRO fits into the scheme of racing games today. It doesn't begin to have the detail and complexity of NASCAR 2 or GRAND PRIX RACING. It also doesn't have the exotic cars and widely varying locales of the NEED FOR SPEED and TEST DRIVE group. The question becomes, \"Who is this game for, anyway?\" If you love racing just for the thrill of the race and find the rest unnecessary, this may be the game for you. In Control The first thing of note in ULTIMATE RACE PRO is a definite positive. When it comes to configuration interfaces, this game gets top marks. The controller configuration is pretty standard, with support for Windows 95-compatible joysticks and wheels. The real would start a rain race. C53 cm (Sloem 216 ALBExanh, Before I knew it, I was racIST:KALISTO 5PECIAL ing in a pitch-black storm, -28°20 0:27:50 HARBINGEA 6 despite the fact that four --OS\"49 laps earlier there was day2:02:02 DUST DEVIL +02-72 light. I'm curious: Where do these programmers live? The standard multiplayer game flavors are present, with an added wrinkle. There is also a DESTRUCTION DERBY-style deathmatch, in /B which you can compete on one of the tracks or in an WATCH YOUR HEAD ULTIMATE RACE PRO is a mix of good and bad. Some arena. While this does add a of the few nice touches are objects, such as this downed tree, that add bit of longevity to the title, to the scenery. still have to recommend other games for multiplayer beauty is in the game setup menu. extend the playability beyond vehicular combat. The menu features a frames-perthese basic four, I could see the second slider bar that will tell you reasoning behind the decision to Finish Line what frame-rate you can expect make such a limited number of If ULTIMATE RACE PRO had a given your video card and your courses. In this case, I couldn't track and car editor, or came current options. Alternately, the FPS shake the feeling that MicroProse packaged with an expansion pack slider will suggest the viable game took the very cheap route to boost at no charge, I'd say this product options, based on the frame-rate the number of courses. might be a winner. But making you select. I found this feature to I must say, however, that the you drive in a storm just so you be pretty accurate and very helpful. courses are beautiful. They are can get a change in courses is a Car selection is also very nicely rendered and there are cool cheap shot, and is no substitute straightforward. This is in part due touches around every turn. But for building additional tracks. to the fact that all of the cars are after the novelty wears off, you are looking at the things that were identical with the exception of the left wanting more tracks. either left out of this game or just paint, and that any car can be conThe weather effects, while inter done cheaply, I'd say that rather figured to perform like any other esting, again left me asking what than stand behind this product, car. In the end, car selection all the designers were thinking. Your I'll have to pass. CGW boils down to which color scheme environmental you like best. choices fall into four categories: Completely Off Track day, night, rain, Track selection is an exercise in and storm (for minimal choice. There are five basic anyone thinking tracks, including a test track. The that rain, wind, four non-test tracks are repeated and darkness with different weather effects. The make a good different effects have you either combination). racing on the track in the reverse Another interestdirection, on the track after it has ing phenomenon been flipped over, or both. The net was that despite result is you get to see the same selecting a day scenery and the same course, but race, after a coufrom a new angle in severe weathple of laps it TIGHT FIT The first time I blew through these er. Now, if the designers had seen would grow toll gates at 140 mph, I was so stunned that I fit to add a track designer to dark. Then I completely missed the next turn! CGW Rated APPEAL: Arcade racers who aren't looking for lots of tracks or realism. PROS: Beautiful graphics; nice game setup options; environmental effects. CONS: Too few tracks, weather effects inconsistent; not enough play value. DIFFICULTY: Intermediate REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 133, 16MB RAM, 20MB hard drive space, 2x CD-ROM drive, SVGA graphics card, DirectX-compatible sound card. 3D SUPPORT: 3Dfx, PowerVR, Direct3D compatible. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: Modem, serial cable (2 players), LAN, Internet (2-16 players): 1 CD per player. Price: $48.99 Publisher: MicroProse Alameda, CA (510) 864-4550 www.microprose.com 144 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"CAN YOUR PC SPEAKERS DO THIS? TE mm Lent.LT The aftereffects of the Philips Digital USB Speakers, Not your average PC speakers. Whether it's the DSS350 or DSS370, immerse yourself in the experience of high intensity sound. Featuring \"Incredible Surround\"-3D digital sound quality and \"Hot Plug & Play» for easy installation. Philips Digital USB speakers. It's not only sound you can hear, it's sound you can feel. For more info, call 1-800-835-3506 or visit us at www.usbaudio.philips.com 1998 Philips Electrita North America Corporation O PHILIPS Let's make things better. Go to #140 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW  SHADOW MASTER OT All Looks, No Brain Good Art Can't Make Up for Bad Gameplay by Thierry Nguyen here is no denying it: Psygnosis makes some of the most beautiful PC games. Whether it's the fully AGP and 3D-accelerated glory of G-POLICE, or the humble, but gorgeous, SHIPWRECKERS!, you're guaranteed a beautiful play experience. SHADOW MASTER succeeds in introducing another good-looking engine, but it definitely lags a bit in actual gameplay. ARACHNOPHOBIA Here you see the colored lighting and lens flare, as well as Matthews' art style. The graphics are the only good thing about this game. Shadows Over Sci-fi In SHADOW MASTER, as in so many other games, an evil man will conquer the universe unless you do something about it. The twist, though, is that you aren't piloting some super car or ship to save humanity, you're driving a mighty, all-terrain buggy. The game's 16 levels are spread across several planets and different environments, and are mission-based in design. Your buggy fires a main laser that can paths, but all in all, they're too linear. They are also weak in design: levels are really just glorified holding pens for groups of enemies. Probably the most aggravating design element of the game is its save feature. As in DARK FORCES and many console games, you can only save at the end of each level. But unlike console games, there aren't even checkpoints to let you restart midway through levels. The buggy has problems as well. It's sometimes hard to handle, and it also tends to roll to one side and sometimes won't fall off edges. That's right, you can ride to the edge of a cliff, and the buggy simply stops. Sure, you escape death, but this is completely unrealistic. And since you are stuck in the buggy, you can't \"use\" anything. This means the already minimal puzzle interaction consists of shooting doors and buttons in the pre-arranged order. The controls can't be mapped. Instead of defining your commands, you select them from a menu of prefabricated schemes. SHADOW MASTER is a game that focuses too much on art and sacrifices gameplay. It may be a good bargain buy for you if you don't mind indiscriminate shooting and you can bear with the bad save system. CGW be augmented with additional weapons by acquiring power-ups during battle. Psygnosis' biggest selling point for SHADOW MASTER is the involve ment of fantasy artist Rodney Matthews, best known for his fantasy book jackets and album covSHADOW MASTER proves to be one of the prettiest games around. It's fast, too-frame-rates still remain high when fighting more than 10 enemies on the screen. Bad Buggy Everything else about this game is bad, however. The gameplay, the controls, the design, and the saving system all have flaws that pull this shooter down. SHADOW MASTER is more like a pure arcade action game than a QUAKE clone; you progress linearly through simplistic levels while fighting up to 10 enemies at a time. The levels do have alternate the Scorpions, Nazareth, and Thin Lizzy. The game sports Matthews' unique fantasy/sci-fi look: a world filled with bizarre biomechanical spiders, apes, and other critters. Top this off with the usual 3Daccelerated features, such as lens flare, colored lighting, translucency, and smoothed-out textures, and CGW Rated APPEAL: Action SHADOW gamers who like ASTES flash over substance PROS: Beautiful engine; nice art design; easy to play. CONS: You can save only at the end of levels: quirky controls: your vehicle sucks; level design is simplistic and uninspired. DIFFICULTY: Intermediate. REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 133, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 45MB harddrive space, 4x CD-ROM drive, Windows 95 compatible sound and video cards. 3D SUPPORT: Direct3D. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: Serial, LAN (2-8 players): 1 CD per player. Price: $49.95 Publisher: Psygnosis Foster City, CA (415) 655-8000 www.psygnosis.com SHADOWS IN SNOW SHADOW MASTER takes place on a variety of planets, and landscapes range from lush jungles to snowy peaks. MULTIPLE MONSTER MASH SHADOW MASTER's frame-rate is always good, even with many enemies on-screen. 146 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"ANGERS one for the road. R Get ready to squash it, scrape it and trade it. Transforming your reality in Spring '98! Visit your local retailer or call 1-800-789-1534 for additional information and try the free demo at www.imagicgames.com Go to #089 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink P.O. Box 13491 . Research Triangle Park  NC 27709 INTERACTIVE MAGIC Vangers is a trademark and Interactive Magic is a registered trademark of Interactive Magic, Inc.  Copyright 1998 Interactive Magic, Inc. All Rights Reserved. "


"REVIEW HEXEN II: PORTAL OF PRAEVUS ACTION Ten Levels in Tibet PORTAL OF PRAEVUS Doesn't Break New Ground But It Should Satisfy HEXEN II Fans by Thierry Nguyen The HEXEN franchise has always taken the 3Dshooter genre into more beautiful and fantasygeared directions. While these games didn't really add a lot of innovation to the crowded genre, they did show that you can combine aesthetically pleasing levels with decent gameplay. Such is the case with the new mission pack for HEXEN II: PORTAL OF PRAEVUS. revised Blackmarsh that spans 5 levels, and Tulku, which spans 10 levels. You can either play through the game as one of the original four classes from HEXEN II, or try out the new Demoness class. There are only two all-new enemies, the rest are versions of old favorites (albeit altered to fit in the Tibet-style Tulku levels). The Tulku levels also sport some engine enhancements, such as falling snow and pseudo colored lighting for the spell attacks. SMASH THAT SKULL WIZARD This large bundle of polygons is the corpse of a Skull Wizard I just killed; they are supposed to disintegrate, by the way. Serpent Riders... Again? PORTAL OF PRAEVUS begins where HEXEN II ended; in fact, the introduction is a replay of the defeat of the final Serpent Rider, Eidolon. But now, trouble has started to stir in Eidolon's castle. So, it's back to the fray. In this mission pack, you'll be playing through two new hubs: a CGW Rated * * * * * Actual screen captures using Links LS 1998 Edition. Several add-on courses are shown Sun APPEAL: Fans of HEVENTI the HEXEN series. PROS: Beautiful levels, cool Eastern influence in level design; improved single player, action-RPG experience; faster in software. CONS: Still HEXEN II; Pentacles is too unfair slow in GL; some GL graphics glitches. DIFFICULTY: Intermediate REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 90, Windows 95, 16MB RAM (24 for GL) 45MB hard-drive space, 2x CD-ROM, Windows 95-compatible sound and video cards, original HEXEN II. 3D SUPPORT: OpenGL. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: LAN, Internet (2-16 players); CD not required for multiplayer. Price: $26.95 Publisher: Activision Santa Monica, CA (310) 255-2000 www.activision.com inkstes UN WE "


"Links 5Courseli links Links LS kan US Links Course Library re Championship Courses Reallife Czesland Golf Club Holey-ar 3 220 yanl BOMANN Shot Comparison Castle Pines Golf Club (LS) Wole 10 Par 960 yards SWING Cty Rough Lake a 20-minute Links break and challenge Davis Love III to 18 holes at Congressional Country Club. Over 25 available Championship Courses, including:  Valderrama-Site of the '97 Ryder Cup  Davis Love III at Sea Island-Winner of the '97 PGA Championship  5-course Libraries Vol. 1-420 courses including Riviera and Pinehurst  And much more! Links Links Links (LS Tour Papir 1 0 5 Course Libray in tengintip Overse Links (LS. Championship Cousins Links LS. Championship Couse Davis Valderrama ! LININ DAN VALDERRAMA nksts Congressional COUNTRY CLUB B; FRAGILE ACCESS s For info call 1-800-800-4880, or see us on the web at www creesoftware.com/a7c. And add some color to your life! og en a SOFTWARE INCORPORATED ndere Go to.E240 @ www.stomputergaming.com/infolink "


"HEXEN II: PORTAL OF PRAEVUS REVIEW ACTION RE SHIVA REBORN? The expansion's Eastern influences are reflected in the game's architecture and artwork. VAGK ALL YOU WANT This new enemy, the Gyagk, is HEXEN II's answer to the Shambler. happening in Eidolon's abandoned home. While the single-player experience isn't groundbreaking, it is an improvement over the QUAKE model. Not only are there now mission objectives for the hubs, but there is also a mystery to solve, as your character rifles through journals and papers to see just what is Down With the Demoness As for the game mechanics, they are essentially the same. The Demoness is basically the female Necromancer: a woman with powerful ranged attacks to counter the Assassin and the other melee attackers. She can also cushion her falls with her tiny wings and absorb mana from her enemies' attacks. Besides the ice-altered enemies, the new monsters include the THUNDERSEAT www.thunderseat.net 1-800-8-Thunder Gyagk (a minotaur-like yakman) and the Pentacles, which is perhaps the most irritating enemy in 3D gaming. Imagine a living mine that can shoot at you from a distance and blends in perfectly with its surroundings. While I thought the Gyagk was a fine enemy, the Pentacles was a bit too annoying for my tastes. The new levels are akin to HEXEN II's, but with more puzzles involving fancier objects (which are still just glorified keys). However, these new puzzles often significantly alter the architecture of certain rooms. For example, they reveal new stairways and trapdoors in previously empty rooms. And Raven still has some of the most beautiful levels in the genre. The Tibetan influence on the Tulku levels is wonderful. Despite the pleasing level design, new class, and new enemies, it's still HEXEN II. It's the same game style, has the same loading times in GLHEXEN (the software engine does load a lot faster, though), and has the same limited weapon variety. Another slight annoyance is that playing in GL mode tends to give lots of \"mishmashed\" models for characters, which is a bit sloppy of Raven. Still, if you liked HEXEN II, you'll probably like this expansion pack. Though it doesn't really add anything new, it's still a well-done effort. CGW Be practical ... or take a ride on the wild side! Go to #185 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink www.computergaming.com "


"AUTHENTIC ARCADE ACTION On Your PC No Tokens Required! BATTLE ARENA TOSHINDEN 20 3D Accelerated Fighting Game with Head 2 Head Internet, Network & Modem Play! GA E SRL 0021323 BI PRESS STORT DARIUS GAIDEN Supercharged side-scrolling shooter with outrageous bosses! VPNALLIENHEAVDES EN ANDBOGARDS FATAL FURY 3 Ferocious FastPaced Fighting Game for one or two players! SUBWOO HE PUZZLE BOBBLE 2X Addictive Arcade Puzzle Play with Head 2 Head Internet & Modem Play! RAIDEN 11 Terrific Top-Scrolling Shooter! EIGHT GREAT TITLES COLLECT THEM ALL! Buy Three, Get One Free COMING SOON! SAMURAI SHODOWN Fearsome Fighting Game with wild Warriors! COMING SOON! PC CD-ROM Windows'95 ZEITGEIST Explosive First-person shooter *For details www.arcademaster.com Free E-mail AMANK oisease COMING SOON! & Fujitsu Interactive, 128 Spear Street San Francisco, CA 94105-1503 ZER DIVIDER Deadly 3D fighting game with Head 2 Head Internet, Network and Modem Play! COMING SOON! ALL GAMES SOLD INDIVIDUALLY. Dit buted by Fulltu lateractive. Inc. Fuit and the Fujitsu logos are registered trademarks of Fujitsu Limited. The Masters of the Arcade logo to a trademark or o Folta Tateractive. Inc. Battle Arena Toshinden 2015 registered trademark of O Takart Co. Ltd. & Gamebank Earp. Darius Galden Pirate Bobha 2x0 and Zeitgeite are registered trademarks of Tatto Corn Fatal Fury 36 and Samural Shodown 20 are registered trademarks of SNR Corp. Zero Divide it a registered trademark of o Zoon, Tac. Raiden 11 is eregistered trademark of Selbu Kathatsu, Inc. All other trademarks mentioned here are the property of their respective owners Go to #102 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW  GRAND THEFT AUTO O Crime Doesn't Pay Take Away GRAND THEFT AUTO's Controversy and You Have a Mundane 2D Shooter 1 1 1861 don't take assignments you won't advance in the game. Played by the book, this is an extremely long game. BISITED) by Scott A. May RAND THEFT AUTO (GTA), imported from Europe by ASC Games, signals the conspicuous return of DMA Design. This legendary British developer put Psygnosis on the map with groundbreaking Amiga titles, such as LEMMINGS and BLOOD MONEY. Filled with cartoonish depictions of carjacking, drug running, car bombs, and mangled pedestrians, GTA has, understandably, generated a lot of controversy. Part of this is deserved, but most is simply game-selling hype. My response: Get over it. It's only a game...and not much of one. HE WAS A GOOD KID Even with 6,000 miles of simulated streets, some mobster wannabes can't escape the long arm of the law. Don't worry, he'll make bail. 12 20 Mob Warfare Delivered with a roving topdown view of the action, GTA CGW Rated * * * * * APPEAL: Arcade players with a criminal bent. PROS: Original; music and sound effects, huge open-ended game world: multiplayer support. CONS: Repetitive; dated graphics; limited joystick support, lousy save-game. DIFFICULTY: Intermediate. REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 75. DOS or Windows 95, 16MB RAM 80MB hard drive space, 4x CD-ROM drive, 1 MB VESA-compatible video card, analog joysticks (DOS only), and Sidewinder gamepad (Windows 95 only). 3D SUPPORT: 3Dfx. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: Modem and null modem (2 players), IPX or TCP/IP (2-4 players); 1 CD per player. Price: 549 Publisher: ASC Games Darien, CT (203) 655-0032 www.grandtheftauto.com something, retrieving and delivering some. thing, killing someone, and avoiding police. The more points you earn the more difficult your assignments become Earn enough points and you'll move on to new, more difficult cities FAT TONY SENT ME Visit GTA's secret first San Andreas and shops, usually marked by the entrance, then the ultimate urban to get a quick paint job or outfit your cesspool, Vice City. vehicle with new weapons. What the game lacks in visual acuity, it makes unfolds across three fictional cities up in little details. For example, and 6,000 simulated miles of urban sound effects are superb, with streets, freeways, elevated tracks, incessant traffic noise and the and sidewalks. Whether played in chatter of multiple radio stations. low-res, high-res, or with a 3Dfx More than 20 types of vehicles are card, the game's graphics are sim accurately modeled in each city, plistic and dated; it's as if the game from motorcycles and sports cars is a holdout from the 8-bit era. to school buses and elevated Luckily, gameplay is strong enough trains. Not only can you drive them that you probably won't notice. all, but each drives exactly as you'd You begin the game as a smalltime thug, slumming about the ing, top speed, and turning radius). streets of Liberty City, looking to Each of GTA's linear missions is make it big in the local mob. open-ended. You can walk or Missions basically involve one or drive wherever you like, at whatmore of the following: stealing ever speed you desire. But if you The Rap Sheet The game's length brings up a big sore point: Games can be saved only between stages, each of which can take hours to complete. Another of the game's stumbling blocks is control. GTA defaults to keyboard controls that are fairly intuitive and can be modified to suit your personal preference. However, traversing the game's mean streets via keyboard can be frustrating and awkward. Precision steering, particularly when you're being pursued by wailing police cars, is critical to your success. Using the keyboard is not an easy task, especially when your directional orientation shifts every five seconds. GTA supports analog joysticks in DOS mode, but only digital sticks specifically, Microsoft's Sidewinder gamepadin Windows 95. Regrettably, using an analog stick can be even worse than the keyboard, prompting such wild oversteering that you'll feel like a drunken Shriner in a clown car. On the other hand, Sidewinder control in Windows 95 is tight and responsive. Another item worth noting is the skimpy documentation, with fold-out city maps that are mostly useless for navigation. Multiplayer support livens things up a bit, with street racing and deathmatches, although both modes have limited long-term appeal. ASC Games desperately needs a hit on the PC, but I'm not sure GRAND THEFT AUTO will be it. It's a fun, mock-deviant diversion, but one whose reputation ultimately exceeds its significance. CGW 152 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD  JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Tired of waiting for your turn to get on the Internet? Computer Gaming World Software Included on the CD-ROM SHOPPING ONLINE Join EarthLink Network GET OUT OF AOL FREE CHS NO MORE BUSY SIGNALS DON'T TAKE A CHANCE CHATS & BUDDIES START PAGE PERSONAL STOCK QUOTES EMAIL NOT JUNKMAIL ON AOLUD79 ON AOL JAIL HERE'S YOUR CHANCE TO GET OUT OF AOL FREE. Switch to Earthlink and get your email, news, stock quotes, sports scores, entertainment, shopping, chat, and an instant messaging program—all the things people like about AOL-without the busy signals, failed connections, junk mail, lost mail, and endless commercial messages you're forced to click NO THANKS to. And we're still just $19.95 per month for unlimited access. Playing the Internet game should be fun! So, what are you waiting for? Call now 1-888-QUIT AOL, ext. 3961 7 8 4 8 2 6 5 FOR JUST $19.95 PER MONTH, YOU GET: Unlimited Internet usage Nationwide access Over 1,300 local dialup #'s Choice of browsers Complete software for Windows and Mac Personal Stare Page EarthLink Network Free 6MB Web site Free Internet user guide Bi-monthly newsletter Toll-free 24-hour help MAGNING EDITORS CHOICE September 9, 1997 Internet Access Provider Email or visit us at: www.earthlink.net/quitaoll Computing Fint Class It's your Internet.\" 1998 EarthLink Network, Inc. Trademarks are the property of their respective owners. All rights reserved. February 8. 1998 Internet Service Provider. Go to #087 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW  BLACK DAHLIA ADVENTURER Black and Blue The Story Is Compelling, but BLACK DAHLIA's Puzzles Make for a Deathly Experience by Scorpia uring the late 1930s Cleveland was terrorized by a serial killer called, variously, the \"Mad Butcher\" and the \"Torso Killer.\" Twelve murders were attributed to him, and another five were possibly linked. The carnage stopped shortly before World War II. Officially, the case was never solved, and remains open to this day. On January 15, 1947, the tortured and maimed body of Elizabeth Short, a wannabe actress, was discovered in Los Angeles. She was strikingly beautiful, with a preference for wearing black. A reporter covering the crime nicknamed her \"the Black Dahlia.\" Her murder, in several ways, resembled the gruesome killings in Cleveland. And as was the case with those earlier deaths, the Black Dahlia's was never officially solved. moved around the screen, it can change to a large pointing arrow for movement, a small spinning arrow for actions, and (when the left mouse button is held down) a circle with small arrow for turning in place. Despite the ability to turn a full 360 degrees, however, movement is actually rather limited. You can only go in certain directions to predesignated points, rather than walk around the screen at will. This is basically the same system Take2 used in RIPPER, though here it's faster and much less aggravating. BLACK, WHITE, AND RED ALL OVER This bloody clue only hints at Traveling to various locations is the atrocities at the center of the Black Dahlia mysteries. quick and easy. A \"world map\" displays photographs Through the years, many un the war, beginof places you can official solutions to both cases ning in a Nazi visit: clicking on were put forth. Now Take2 has vault, then one takes you tried its hand at it with the mys moving to an right there. tery adventure BLACK DAHLIA. The Austrian Naturally, only results are mixed, at best. monastery, an areas relevant to American air where you are in A Thickened Plot base, and a the story are The story begins in Cleveland in cross-country JIGSAW HELL Yes, once again, shown. late November 1941. Jim Pearson is train. The story you'll need to solve a jigsaw Typical for appointed to the newly created finally con puzzle as part of your detecadventure games COI (Coordinated Office of cludes in Los tive work. these days, the Intelligence) to replace the hastily Angeles in action cursor retired Walter Pensky. He isn't tak1947. 1947. automatically performs the approing over Pensky's work, however; The tale is a skillful blend of fact priate function when clicked: it Pearson's assignment is to investi and fiction, using, or based on, opens a door, picks up an item, gate the Brotherhood of Thule, an many actual events in both the talks to someone, reads a docuorganization suspected of being a Torso Killer and the Black Dahlia ment, and so on. The cursor has a front for subversive Nazi activities. cases. Jim Pearson, of course, is Secondary use of moving items, but It isn't long before Pearson real fictitious, though much of what it isn't always obvious when this izes the Brotherhood is something goes on around him, or what he should be done. For example, far more sinister, and that it's investigates, is part of history. The there's a notepad in a desk drawer. somehow connected to both designers really did their home Clicking the pad shows you what's Pensky's case and the Torso murwork here; the fictional and real written on it. However, you can ders. Add in a rivalry between the world elements are seamlessly also hold down the mouse button local police and the FBI, then integrated-at least for game pur and drag the cursor, thus moving throw in some Nazi spies, and the poses-into a plausible whole. the pad to reveal something under complications pile up fast. it. But there's nothing special to A resolution of sorts is reached Rune, Don't Walk indicate the pad can be moved. just at the time of Pearl Harbor, but In terms of mechanics, the inter Talking to people is simply a the matter is far from finished. The face is simple. The basic cursor is a matter of clicking on them and action picks up again at the end of diamond-shaped rune. As it's then going down a list of topics. CGW Rated * * * * * APPEAL: Murder mystery fans; Black Dahlia historians. PROS: Compelling, complex story line that skillfully weaves fact and fiction, good interface CONS: Way too many difficult and pointless object-manipulation puzzles, main character doesn't develop: ending is lousy. DIFFICULTY: Hard REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 90, Windows 95 or DOS, 16MB RAM, 20MB hard-drive space, 4x CD-ROM drive, VGA card with 512K memory, sound card. 3D SUPPORT: None. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: None Price: $49.95 Publisher: Interplay Irvine, CA (714) 553-6655 www.interplay.com 154 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"THE ROYAL SEAL OF APPROVAL \"If you wanna crack skulls with the big boys, the Panther XL is the weapon of choice.\" -John Romero Chairman: ION STORM CO Creator: DOOM and QUAKE Creator: DAIKATANA pone Let Them Eat Cake: When John Romero gives the thumbs up to our two-fisted killing machine, we know we did something right. Reach for the Panther XL--the fastest way to strafe, frag and bomb your way to total domination. Remember: absolute power doesn't corrupt...it makes you the King. A lethal combination of Premium Joystick and Optimized Controlball.  Intuitive 360 independent move-and-aim control.  17 fully-programmable buttons and dial throttle.  Supports all the hottest 3D first-person games. MADCATZ  Functions as a premium digital flight stick for all Win 95 games. 1998 Mad Catz, Inc. Mad Catz, the Mad Catz logo and Panther XL are trademarks of Mad Catz Inc. International and domestic patents pending. All other trademarks and/or registered trademarks are property of their respective owners. Babbage's By any means necessary www.madcatz.com olacionice boutique Go to #091 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"Meet the future. Or you're just meat. It's DVD. It's here. And it shreds through huge chunks of 3-D animation like nothing else. And nothing else is close to NewCom's DVD2 solutions. CD/DVD dri works with a VGA car CINEMA II deliver seamless DV playback in formats wi Dolby AC-3 soun Or get it all wit CINEMA || Ple We give you everything you can handle. Like full multiformat capability. Eye-popping DVD video. And 5.1 channels of pumping audio. verkon DRIVE And the price? You can handle that, too. PLUS It's better than CD audio, slicker than laser disc video. Get NewCom DVD. Or DVDII suffer the consequences. change. or die. TEST YOUR SENSES NEWCOM www.newcominc.com 818.597.3200 Go to #073 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"BLACK DAHLIA  REVIEW Badge Hag of Fames Black List Case File Finster Stationery Helen's Notes Key to 236 Lockou Matchbook Parchment Sheets Photo from 25G Revolver ADVENTUREZRPG Naturally, all the puzzles have events late in the game rather to be solved for the game to painful to watch. progress. If you don't like this Speaking of painful to watch, type of enigma, or have a hard the ending is definitely in that time with such things, BLACK category. At the penultimate DAHLIA will be that much more moment, you have a choice difficult for you, and you won't between two actions. One leads find it to be much fun. I should to the \"good\" outcome; the other point out that there are other to the \"bad\" outcome. The suppuzzle types in the game, both posedly \"good\" outcome is far traditional object-oriented adven from satisfactory. This is, after all, ture puzzles and some logic a game, not film noir. The player deduction problems. There is vari deserves something better, if only Use ety here, but the manipulation as a reward for making it through puzzles are, by far, the most to the end. Inventory numerous. IF I HAD A HAMMER This lockbox puzzle is one of many object Jim Pearson's character was The Big Sleep manipulation puzzles that bog down the game, another sore point. At the start, Overall, BLACK DAHLIA is yet he is near perfect as the new another in a long line of games You can sometimes ask about Monkey Business agent on the block: a bit naive, that leaves me with mixed feelitems by opening the inventory While the story is interesting, it but not unduly so; occasionally ings. The period flavor is good, box, highlighting an object, and is easy to become bogged down, brash and overeager, but in the the story is interesting, the clicking \"use.\" If the item is relemainly because of the puzzles. main, fairly intelligent. Hence, we research is well done. But many vant to the situation or person, you There are far too many mechanical expect that four years in the COI of the puzzles are tedious and get a response; otherwise, nothing manipulation puzzles in the game, would bring him some maturity frustrating; the main character happens. most of which have no clues or and smarts. doesn't develop; and the finale is Saving and restoring can be hints toward their solutions. For Unfortunately, his secret service a disappointment to say the done at almost any time, and the example, you have to open a puz experiences seem to make him least. This is a pity, because with number of save slots is extremely zle box in the shape of a mill by more gullible than before. He a bit more attention to the advengenerous. Very likely, you will go pushing and pulling various parts, mouths off to the wrong people, ture side of the game, and with a through the entire game without such as windows, doors, and the falls for the most obvious tricks, less dismal conclusion, this could having to overwrite an old position. like. The only way to do this is by and allows the main villain to lead have been a superior product. As BLACK DAHLIA is linear not only trial and error. him around by the nose. After it is, anyone who plays BLACK in its story but also in its progres Later in the game, in the Nazi Cleveland, Pearson's abilities take a DAHLIA should be prepared for an sion across the eight CDs. Whereas vault, you are faced with four diffi severe downhill slide, making some uneven ride. CGW some games make you constantly cult problems, of which getswap discs, here you move through ting the door open is only the discs sequentially. Near the the first. Inside are three end, you will go back a couple of small safes, each requiring times to an earlier disc (the game an elaborate set of moveactually finishes on CD #1), but for ments to unlock. Again, you the most part, when you're done have no guidance toward with a CD, you won't need it again. the answers; you just have There was occasional stuttering to experiment. in the FMVS; this was somewhat Even worse, there are annoying, but was not a major times when you solve a difproblem. I did have a lot of trouble ficult puzzle and find that with CD #7, which I suspect was the payoff was hardly faulty. It didn't sound right in the worth the effort. At one drive, which seemed to have trou point, you have to open a ble reading it, and several times the door by pressing panels in game crashed to the desktop. Once a certain order. The order is I finished with that disc, the difficulon a card that can be foldties cleared up. Other than that, the ed in various ways, as well Museum of Ta stery game ran flawlessly. Sad to say, the as flipped over (thus folded game is completely auditory; there from either side). When you are no text subtitles here. Anyone finally get into the room, with hearing problems will have a it's just to look at someLET'S GO BLACK DAHLIA's elegant interface includes an easy-to-use difficult, if not impossible, time thing you probably exam travel map. Click on any photo to travel to previous locations. playing it. ined on an earlier visit. foxe Mery65 v.ce My Office www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1998 157 "


"SQUARESOFT EIDOS www.ff7pc.com 01828 Erdo. Edos Interactive is a trademark of Eds. Plc. 1907 1908 Square Co Ltd. All rights reserved. Find Fantasy and Square Solto todomarks of Square Co Ltd Job Cola e a registered trademark of the Global Beveruse Company "


"Cola CAFFEINEX 2 Eliminate distractions. Like sleep, for example. FINAL FANTASY. VI Now for the PC. Go to #277 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW . F-15 CGW EDITOR'S CHOICE The Eagle Has Landed COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Ed 57 NOTI1WTS This Strike Eagle Sim Hits the Bull's-eye for Beginners and Experts Alike by Robin G. Kim ntering its ninth year of service, the F-15E Strike Eagle remains a remarkably potent and versatile aircraft Crammed full of the best technology U.S. tax dollars can buy, the al plane boasts impressive all-weather ground-attack capabili ties. Yet, the F-15E retains much of the air superiority of its renowned \"not a pound for air-to-ground\" cousin, the mighty F-15C. The sophistication of the jack-of-alltrades Strike Eagle makes it a natural choice for a seriously deep flight sim, and that is just what F-15, the latest release from Jane's Combat Simulations, delivers. Mideast Mayhem Set in the Persian Gulf region, Jane's F-15 provides two separate CGW Rated * * * * * APPEAL: Any flightsim player, from the casual gamer who can tolerate a bit of complexity to the veteran F-15 PROS: State of the art flightand systems modeling: powerful mission builder, good Al; impressive 3Dfx graphics; immersive, interesting missions; campaigns. CONS: No multiplayer cooperative or front seatback seat play, no flight recorder, weak mission planning interface; many minor bugs, some documentation deficiencies. DIFFICULTY: Intermediate. REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 133 with 3Dfx card, Pentium 166 without 3Dix card, 16MB RAM, 35MB hard drive space, DirectX 5-compatible 2MB PCI video card, DirectX compatible sound card, 4X CD-ROM, joystick, mouse. 3D SUPPORT: 3Dfx MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: Modem null modem; IPX/SPX or TCP/P network (2-8 players): 1 CD per player Price: $54.95 Publisher: Jane's Combat Simulations/Origin (800) 245-4525 campaigns, Operation Desert Storm and a near-future scenario hypothesizing a U.S. response to Iranian expansionism-plus multiplayer deathmatches and a variety of single missions. Additional missions (but not campaigns) can FLYING ARSENAL Just about every ordnance type the real F-15E can carry is in the be created using sim from AMRAAMs to TV-guided glide bombs to cluster munitions. either a fully customizable quick-mission generator or a pow recorder feature and the external erful mission builder. views generally cannot focus on The two campaigns are com distant objects. Voice communicaposed of branching scripted mis tions suffer no such restriction. sions with provisions for random Interactions with AWACS, JSTARS, elements, mid-flight assignment Tankers, FACs (forward air conchanges, and other triggered trollers), your WSO, and your wingevents to keep you on your toes. men are extremely well done, and Continuity is enhanced by damage add tremendously to the immer FILL 'ER UP In-flight refueling that persists across missions and siveness of the sim. will challenge your piloting the need to manage scarce airskills. A cheat key is provided crews, airframes, and ordnance The Long Road for those not up to the task. inventories. Failed missions can't Flight distances are realistically be reflown; if you take losses, you lengthy, occasionally exceeding and postflight stages lack polish, must fight on with what you have 1,000 miles, round trip. Even with what counts most is the part in left. This campaign structure 8x time compression, such sorties between, when you are at the condoesn't offer as much replayability take a while to complete. The game trols. This is where the sim really as does a fully dynamic campaign. lets you jump to the next stage of begins to shine. However, this is offset by the richer a mission, but because the actions In terms of overall technical content characteristic of handof all objects are still calculated accuracy, F-15 has no peer. Its crafted scenarios. Its biggest drawduring the jump—which can take flight model-based on actual back is a lack of any substantial minutes to complete little time is USAF data-combines a realistic role-playing element; with no actually saved. Fortunately, you can performance envelope with a truly cumulative statistics kept, it's hard skip the return trip with no nega authentic feel. The F-15E isn't as to become especially attached to tive consequences. nimble as an F-16, and hard your crew members. Determining how far you must maneuvering bleeds energy rapidly. As you fly, there are always fly is impossible with the mission As airspeed drops, handling other allied and enemy aircraft planning map because no scale is becomes progressively more sluggoing about their business, which given. Worse yet, information can gish. Unlike in most sims, roll rate may or may not have anything to only be obtained for half of your also degrades markedly in tight do with your objectives. Unfor waypoints! At the end of a misturns. This forces you to ease off tunately for sightseers, it's rarely sion, the bare bones textual report the Gs when you need to reverse possible to watch them do their you get really puts the \"brief\" in your turn quickly-exactly like the thing; the sim lacks a flight debrief. Although these preflight pros do. Takeoffs and landings are www.janes.ea.com 100 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"F-15 . REVIEW SIMULATION SPACE EIGHT PACK Up to seven wingmen can accompany you on missions. Each can be armed differently, letting you attack multiple target types. cockpit mode, and a quick-panning 3D variant of AIR WARRIOR's system of 24 fixed views. Big Pros, Little Cons No flight sim is perfect, and this one is no exception. Perhaps because it tries to do so much, the game contains numerous minor flaws, ranging from esoteric technical errors and niggling graphical glitches to infrequent game crashes on some systems. Despite these annoyances—most of which will go unnoticed by the majority of gamers-Jane's F-15 clearly excels in many areas that contribute most to an immersive gameplay experience. If you can overlook its shortcomings, you may judge it to be one of the best air combat sims ever made. CGW KUONALE Sweating the Details less believable, due to an artificial Voodoo Magic pitch limit imposed when on the F-15 supports only 3Dfx accelerrunway and a tolerance for fantas ator cards—if your machine does tically hard touchdowns, but every not have one you'll be stuck in 2D thing else seems just right. mode. The game's unaccelerated graphics look fine, as they benefit Hands-On Cockpit from software filtering that elimiBoth the pilot's and weapon sysnates pixelation at low altitudes. tem officer's instrument panels But, of course, they can't hold a have been recreated in exacting candle to the dazzling effects and visual and functional detail. Almost smoother screen updates possible all the switches and knobs can be with a 3Dfx card. Severe frameoperated with the mouse, including rate slowdowns occasionally occur the 20 buttons surrounding each of in either case, but not often the seven multipurpose displays. enough to impair playability. More Stepping through the different annoying are the periodic in-flight modes by pushing virtual buttons pauses that occur when loading like a real crew member would not terrain data in-flight (unless you only draws you into the experi install 450+ MB on your hard ence, it greatly reduces the number drive) and the way distant ground of key commands you must memo appears to sink and flow in mounrize. Because you're doing the tainous regions. work of two crewmembers, F-15 For cockpit views, the designers lets you manipulate the controls took the kitchen sink approach. even while the game is paused. F-15 supports a variety of padlock Four ground and 13 air radar views, a manual-panning virtual modes are available in the sim, and the advantages and disadvantages of each are modeled with exceptional accuracy. Unfortunately, F-15's infrared and electro-optical targeting modes are less impressive. Although workable with practice, they tend to be imprecise and difficult to use without pausing the game. The game's thick, CONSTRUCTION ZONE densely packed manual does a rea Extraordinarily full-featured sonable job of explaining most sys mission builder utility is the tems and procedures, but it also same tool the developers contains several misleading errors used to create the missions and omissions. in the game. For less hard-core types, a \"casual\" play mode is available (complete with its own shorter manual) featuring greatly simplified avionics and an alternate set of key commands. The latter difference can be confusing when trying RADAR RIDER The backseater view shows the to tailor a diffiF-15E's ground mapping radar, which can use culty level synthetic aperture radar techniques to create between high-resolution \"patch maps\" of terrain for \"casual\" and precision targeting. \"expert.\" the accuracy of the avionics modeling in Jane's F-15 sets a new standard. The best example of this is in its radar-system modeling, which simulates some nuances that only hard-core realism fanatics would likely ever notice. Whereas other jet simulations simplistically model ground mapping radar modes (if they model them at all). F-15 incorporates details such as the radar horizon, blind zones caused by terrain, and the ability to create near-photorealistic \"patch maps\" of target areas using synthetic aperture radar. These intricacies contribute substantially to the sim's involving gameplay. F-15 features a bunch of air radar modes, as do many other sims, so it scores no points there. Where F-15 stands out is in its modeling of the real-world subtleties that make all those different modes truly unique. Among the sim's five air search modes, these subtleties include PRF (pulse repetition frequency, the rate at which pulses of radio waves are emitted), scan rate (slower updates improve sensitivity), and the use of doppler information (which tells whether a target is approaching or receding). Radar theory is horrifically complex. High PRF pulse-doppler modes are great at detecting most distant targets, but they are unable to distinguish from ground clutter any low-flying target that is not coming toward you. Medium PRF modes can pick out such aircraft, but at the cost of decreased overall detection range (even with high-flying contacts, for which ground clutter is not a problem). It's possible to achieve a compromise between standard high PRF and medium PRF modes by ignoring doppler data and filtering out the ground return (using only range information). This is complicated stuff, but with a simplified radar model also available, F-15 provides the goods for casual gamers as well. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1998 "


"REVIEW. IF-22 PERSIAN GULF V5.0 LONUSPACE Raptor Redone Fine-tuned Features Make This F-22 Sim More Playable Than the Original by John Nolan F-22 PERSIAN GULF V5.0 introduces a totally new \"spin model\" for the entire flight-simulation industry. This \"spin\" has nothing whatsoever to do with the game's flight model, though. Although this is only the second release of the program, Interactive Magic decided to count the three patches to the original game as full versions, and thus named this release v5.0. Creative marketing, indeed. The original game took heavy flack in several areas. Installation problems, slow frame-rates, game pauses, uninspired graphics, and lack of a virtual-cockpit padlock view were the most frequently mentioned beefs. I-Magic Labs took the criticism seriously and \"Persian Patch v5.0\" is the result. essentially tamed if your computer is properly prepared. Current drivers for video cards, sound cards, and controls are mandatory to launch this sim. Even so, some tweaking may be required. A CH CombatStick (with current driver) simply wouldn't calibrate; launching under these conditions resulted in spiraling death-augers. When a simple two-axis, two-button stick was substituted for the CombatStick driver in the Windows Control Panel, everything worked fine. There were no DirectX problems using current drivers for the Stealth II S220 3D card. Still, the shakedown flight revealed a potential show-stopper: my Pentium 166 with 64MB of RAM and a Diamond Stealth II looked like a steam-powered slide projector. Fortunately, it was simple operator error; the READ.ME file suggests setting at least 80MB of virtual memory in the Windows 95 Control Panel. After the reset, the game was almost totally silk, even with all the graphics options toggled on and detail maximized. LOW PASS Terrain is no longer blocky or splotchy at low altitudes, but ground objects are still sparse. This airbase seems deserted. Raptor-Ready The widely reported installation problems seem to have been CGW Rated * * * APPEAL: Jet-sim fans more interested in good dynamic campaign system than flash and dazzle. PROS: Eliminates most complaints about original release; easier installation; smoother graphics; better Al; excellent dynamic-campaign engine. CONS: Terrain is sparsely populated: aircraft and other objects lack detail. DIFFICULTY LEVEL: Intermediate. REQUIREMENTS: Windows 95, Pentium 133, 16MB RAM, 4x CD-ROM, 640x480 SVGA monitor, keyboard, mouse. 3D SUPPORT: Direct3D. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: Modem, serial, LAN, and Internet (2-8 players); 1 CD per player. Price: $59.95 Publisher: Interactive Magic (919) 461-0722 www.imagicgames.com Eye of the Beholder After clearing these hurdles, the game ran well, providing a chance to check out the refined graphics and the new Persian Gulf theater. The terrain is what you'd expect in a desert-miles and miles of sand in varying shades of brown. The old terrain heaving and shifting in the first version is gone, and the view from high or low altitude is much more believable, thanks to the new perspective-correct textures. While there are few buildings or other objects (which one might easily excuse in a desert environment, except for the fact that Bosnia and the Ukraine are also sparsely detailed), the terrain is definitely enhanced. Aircraft and missile models received some attention; wing leading-edges lost padlock view in the full virtual most of their \"jaggies\" due to cockpit: you can even padlock improved anti-aliasing, and planes incoming missiles. Chalk up more show more panel seams and other successful refinements to the detail touches. On the other hand, program. missiles under the wings still hang All that was good about the iniin space without the benefit of tial game remains, and there's a lot hardpoints. Overall, the terrain and to like. There's plenty of action; the game objects are improved, but dynamic campaign is quite still can't match current standards detailed, with great replayability: set by other sims. the multiplayer options are excellent; and the flight model is believHelp From Your Friends able. With all the improvements, The bone-headed wingmen that this is a fun, enjoyable game. But used to fly \"welded wing\"-to it's more like version 1.5 than the point of in-formation augering 5.0—it's the game iF-22 should into the ground with their have been last year. CGW leader-have been to school. Their urge to selfdestruct is gone, and wingmen are now smarter and more agile, breaking out when the flight lead goes stupid. Flight commands remain essentially unchanged, but you can now check the stores and SMOKIN'! This Sukhoi is trailing smoke aircraft status of the rest (as displayed by a Rendition V2100 of the flight with the chip); the 3D effects may vary dependFlight Weapons Status ing on which card you have installed. MFD. It's also easier to Note the angular look of what should lead your mates into the be a smoothly contoured aircraft. furball by using the new 162 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"HIGH PERFORMANCE 2D / 3D GRAPHICS BOARDS G AZ alla STARFIGHTER AND THE INTEL740 CHIP. 3D PERFORMANCE THAT WILL BLOW YOU AWAY. A62 Real 3D's StarFighter graphics accelerator gives games, simulations and presentations the same dazzling graphics you'd expect to find only in an arcade. We should know. Our Now available for technology has been powering Sega's AGP and PCI arcade games for years. StarFighter delivers true colors, fully-formed images and eliminates z-buffer problems. You get clean, complete and stunning graphics. Every screen. Every time. Even at resolutions up to 1280 X 1024 \"We can't stress enough just how gorgeous D3D titles appear with the StarFighter.\" -Boot Magazine, Issue 20. April 1998 \"Whiplash: Real 3D's StarFighter, based on the Intel740 graphics chip, leaves STB's Nvidiabased Velocity 128 in the dust.\" PC Computing, May 1998 \"This board will feed your craving for exceptional 3D and 2D performance.\" Windows Sources, May 1998 Check the benchmark numbers. But pay close attention to the images. StarFighter goes beyond the numbers to deliver high realism, high fidelity images with extraordinary detail. It's a combination of power and refined image quality you'd expect from Intel's new Intel740 graphics accelerator chip. The REAL 3D Starfighter brings that performance to life. Look for Starfighter in new PCs from Micron. Or pick up the StarFighter board from a reseller listed below. 1-800-393-7730 www.real3d.com/cgw 01998 Real 30. REAL 3D and the Real 3D logo are registered trademarks of Real 3D. Inc. StarFighter is a trademark of Lockheed Martin Corporation, Intel and Into1740 are trademarks of Intel Corporation Sega is a registered trademark of Sega Micron and the Micron logo are trademarks of Micron Electronics, Inc. Microsoft Windows. Windows NT and the Windows logo are registered to PC Computing Des ched for Pioneer MICRON D SHOP PARALLAX FOREFRONT SOLUTIONS, Iur. Windows Stellar .   1-888-215-6500 www.pios.com 1-800-773-7881 www.the3dshop.com 1-888-368-3266 www.voguead com 972-881-1579 www.forefront.com Canada: 1-800-667-1689 PC Computing THE A LIST PRODUCT Microsoft Windows NT Windows 95 Go to #108 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW  F1 RACING SIMULATION CGW EDITOR'S SPORTAS Number 1 in F1 CHOICE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD Ubi Soft Goes Racing and PC Drivers Are the Winners by Gordon Goble entle wisps of cloud floated across the blue sky as I gunned the throttle and anticipated the starting lights at Belgium's storied SpaFrancorchamps. I heard the blast of the horn and watched all five lamps illuminate, then grow dark. It was time to go I was off. Too much power and unwanted wheelspin at first, so I eased off the accelerator before cranking hard to the right, hoping to snare at least a couple of spots before the dreaded La Source hairpin. Up through the gears, back down again, then hard on the brakes. A little too hard, actually, and suddenly, tires sliding and nowhere to go. I was headed e CGW Rated * * * * * straight for a pair of Ferraris. But up ahead, the two drivers were taking evasive measures, zigging and zagging to make room for my misdirected machine. Downhill now through Orrari the slippery Eau Rouge dip, I watched in shock as two cars ahead tapped one another and left the track, spinning through the deep sand in a smoky, dusty haze. I streaked past the accident site and SCHUMACHER approached the roughPIT STOP 1:12.2 and-tumble section known as Raidillon. Here, my car CHECK THE OIL, BUB F1 RACING SIMULATION offers real-time pit stops with bobbed and grounded and exterior 3D views. shook me about With Raidillon safely behind, I sim to date-MicroProse's GRAND Just how touchy is this driving was afforded my first opportunity PRIX 2. In a back-to-back test, the model? So touchy that a joystick is to take stock. Pinpoint car control, GP2 cars feel sluggish, the Al not-repeat not-recommended. lightning fast frame-rates, and the drivers need a crash course on situThe key to driving an F1 car is best visuals I'd ever seen in a rac ational awareness, and the envi subtlety and control over wheeling sim. I realized I'd never experironments are yawningly drab. How spin, something that will take even enced racing quite like this. things change in just 18 months! seasoned sim veterans quite some Though the MicroProse game time to master. Needless to say, Road Rage remains a classic, its wrinkles are you'll be feathering and tapping The above scenario is indicative showing and its reign has ended. pedals faster than you can say of F1 RACING SIMULATION's sin F1 RACING SIMULATION has a lot FOCA, but that's just one of the gular purpose: to thoroughly congoing for it, the most critical of joys of this game. vince you that you're at the con which is its incredibly snappy Another comes through the trols of an extremely fast and physics. Head down to your local realization that you'll simply have nimble Formula 1 bullet. The fact go-cart track, take a few spins, to drive \"on the edge\" all the that you'll be competing with Al imagine moving at 10 times that time or be relegated to a lessdrivers of unprecedented intelli speed, and you'll get the picture. than-desirable finishing position. gence while snaking through eerily realistic terrain only adds to this marvelous experience. Melarr Still not convinced? 6m 09 25. So Then take it from someone who's com CALM BEFORE THE STORM The starting RUSH HOUR IN MONTE CARLO pared it to the grid-here at Magny-Course is no place As the sun beats down relentlessly, strongest F1 for wimps. action gets hairy in the Loews hairpin. APPEAL: Race simulation junkies in general, and those who appreciated MicroProse's GRAND PRIX II in particular. PROS: Accurate, responsive car movement fully reactive Al; huge garage graphics, variable weather, intricate track detail; advanced, accelerated effects and sharp cars. CONS: Collisions can cause curious aerobatics; engine audio is \"stepped and the tremendous roar of an F1 start is muted; driving under an assumed name is less than satisfying the game will retard other programs while running. DIFFICULTY LEVEL: Hard. REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 120, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 57MB harddisk space, 4X CD-ROM drive, DirectX 5.0 compatible sound card. 3D SUPPORT: 4MB 3Dfx or Direct 3D-compatible graphics accelerator. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: LAN (2-8 players), direct cable (2-4 players on 2 PCs), high-speed serial port (2 play ers): 1 CD per player. Price: $44.95 Publisher: Ubi Soft Entertainment San Francisco, CA (415) 547-4000 www.ubisoft.com 164 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"F1 RACING SIMULATION  REVIEW SPORTAS DOIMO I don't think I've driven a racing setup area I still don't fully 0'59\"375 POS 15715 0/5 Laps sim yet that so convincingly por understand, though the trays the huge power-to-weight results of the modifications ratio these high-end, open I have made have proven wheeled race cars possess. quite plausible. To compete here, you must pay in terms of graphics, absolute attention at all times, be your eyeballs are going to fully familiar with each nuance of pop out of your skull each track, know the capabilities of when they see what F1 your current setup, and never ever RACING SIMULATION has in miss a shift. Oh yeah, light-speed store for them. A 3D reflexes are a prerequisite. accelerator card is a necessity, but this game Artificial, but may just be enough reaIntelligent son to go out and procure *** 185.00 sams Of course, it helps when the Al o ne, if just for the trackdrivers recognize your presence outside Jumbotron screens there, and F1's racers are smart, that continually run a accident-conscious, and one might rough, but fully animated, BUMPY RIDE With rumble strips like these, you'd better bring along even say...mannerly. Only the look at the race from your those seasick pills. most foolhardy of maneuvers will perspective. Wow! result in contact. And that's a good Jumbotron aside, the game's game sports killer frame-rates in stops, setup tutorials, and head-tothing, because contact may result depiction of environmental condi all but the most crowded spots. head play—it's all here and it's in some rather bizarre improb tions is especially gorgeous. Audibly, F1 RACING SIMULATION supported by an excellent Web site abilities. In one race, I bounced up Inclement weather, more prevalent mostly rocks. From the \"sksksksk\" (www.ubisoft.com/f1us/ against the rear tire of another car in certain climes than others, is of bottoming out to the \"ft...ft... f1racing.html). only to be inexplicably launched particularly impressive. Fog, rain, ft...\" of a flat tire, the \"sswssh\" of Even crashing your car brings up backward and airborne, end-overand blackened skies are nothing a wet track, and the rough metala number of options, including end and off the track. What the...? short of TV quality. to-metal grind of shifting gears, the reliving the whole thing through But if you play it smart, you'll There's not enough room here sound is ferociously realistic. Your the replay, hitting the Instant find the opposition consistent to go into detail about the detail, own engine notes are unfortunate Restart button, or perhaps hopping enough to make even a single pass but suffice it to say that the ly stepped, jumping abruptly from into a competitor's cockpit to extremely rewarding. Yet even scenery is lively, intricate, and pitch to pitch, and I did miss the watch what he's doing right. Just those single passes will be few and dotted with brake markers, exhilarating whine of 22 F1 cars as don't go ALT-TABbing somewhere far between, should you opt to signage, and all the necessary they readied for a standing start, else, because the game has a tencontest the Pro or Expert difficulty peripheral elements. Pavement, in but those are relatively incidental dency to bring your system to a levels, in which extensive car particular, is exceptional. It varies complaints. near standstill. preparation and an ultra-hot setup in shading and texture from track With all 16 tracks and 22 are a must. to track and from section to The Last Lap drivers and cars from the '96 seaFortunately for you grease mon section. In terms of amenities, F1 RACING son, the game offers lots of keys, F1 provides an ample garage. The cars themselves are fes. SIMULATION Supplies just what variety, although I was disapone that's at least as intricate as tooned with colorful, authentic you'd expect from a game of this pointed that I always had to race those found in any racing sim to logos and paint schemes, and are caliber, and then some. Ghost cars, as another driver instead of under date. I'll freely admit that there are very solid in appearance. Of multiple play modes, variable race my own name. And although areas of the hideously deep F1 course, being 3D-accelerated, the distances, cool real-time 3D pit the game does support forcefeedback equipment, that support is mired in a blur of unwanted wheel tension and limited effects-a patch is apparently on the way. Mobil 61 But don't let those last couple CONTENFO. of knocks fool you. This is a game that's been making the rounds in Europe for some time now, and 3. m 93 there is no doubt that this is where you want to be right now if you want Formula 1 racing. HEY, I'M ON TV! Drafting hard at Japan while IT'S RAINING, IT'S POURING... But you'd best There is a new king, and F1 a Jumbotron (top left) details every move not be snoring, because these guys are fast RACING SIMULATION Wears the you make. even in the wet. crown. CGW Mobil1 www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 165 "


"REVIEW DEER HUNTER SPORTS Big Lame Hunter This Hunting Game Needs Its License Revoked RAISE DEER HUNTER promises to give by Joe Vallina you the complete interactive huntefore I get started, let ing experience, and it lets you hunt me say up front that in three different settings (why I'm a country boy, West only three?): an Indiana winter, Virginia born and Colorado alpine meadows, and raised, and I've hunted Arkansas autumn woodlands. In for most of my life. I addition to these three locations, mention this only to you can take target practice at a dispel any rumors that virtual shooting range. might be some BirkenstockAt the beginning of your hunt, wearing, tree-hugging, anti-gun, you have several options. You Berkeley-wannabe who hates any decide if you want to hunt with a thing to do with hunting. That's rifle, shotgun, or compound bow; not the reason I didn't like DEER if you want to use doe scent or MAP CALL RATTLE LOOK AIM HUNTER. The reason I didn't like cover scent, or both; and if you COMPASS WIND HELP QUIT. DEER HUNTER is because it's bor want to hunt from a tree stand or TIME TO DIE, BAMBI This deer is about to meet its maker. Note ing, repetitive, unrealistic, and its from the ground. It's almost the cut-and-paste graphics of his surroundings. graphics are lame. impossible to get a deer if you DEER HUNTER does do some don't use the scents, but I found things right. It's the first game to little difference on trees and shrubs, and bring deer hunting to a mass between huntthe deer animation is gaming audience, and the idea ing from a tree prone to clipping and behind the game is a good one. stand and huntblockiness. Sportsman computer gamers haveing on foot. Realism also takes a hit made fishing titles very popular in After setting in the hunting mode. The the last few years, so it's only natyour options, game talks about hitting a ural for the genre to move into you go to an deer in the \"kill zone,\" but the realm of hunting. Also, at only overhead map it makes no difference $20, DEER HUNTER's price point is of the hunting whether you shoot the Deer Rubbing a good one. area, where you buck in the side, head, or randomly search rump. In real-life hunting, CGW Rated (by pointing and a gut shot results in an clicking) for HUNE WIND   extended tracking expedisigns of deer SIGNS OF LIFE Here is DEER HUNTER's map screen, tion, in which it can take activity, such as APPEAL: Real-life where you look for a good hunting spot (based on hours to find the wounded deer hunters with $20 DER HUNTER rubs, scrapes, signs, such as this rubbing). animal. In DEER HUNTER, to blow. droppings, or however, any hit equals a PROS: Choice of bedding. This kill, so what's the incenweapons, price point. mindless searching process is actually does matter if you're up tive to make a good shot? Also, in CONS: Boring, repet itive gameplay, unrealtedious and, at times, close to or downwind of the deer) and the game, when you down a buck istic action; primitive graphics. maddening. It would have been compass direction; it also lets you you are instantly transported to DIFFICULTY: Easy. much more fun to actually walk use a deer call, antler rattles, and the trophy room to see your deer's SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS: around in the 3D environment, binoculars. This is also where you mounted head—where's the field Pentium 75, Windows 95, 16MB RAM looking for signs. As it stands, 30MB free hard drive space, CD-ROM click to raise your weapon (you use dressing? drive, DirectX-compatible video and when you do finally find signs of the mouse to aim and fire). Hunts in DEER HUNTER are just a sound card. activity on the map, you click the matter of waiting and watching for MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: None \"hunt\" button and are magically And Then the deer to saunter up to your 3D CARD SUPPORT: None. transported to your site. Depression Set In... spot. You then shoot the deer and Price: $19.99 The interface in the hunting porThe \"3D\" graphics in the hunt start a new hunt. This waiting and Publisher: WizardWorks (GT Interactive) Plymouth, MN tion of the game is straightfor ing scenes are marginal, at best. watching may be realistic, but in a (612) 559-5301 ward. A menu at the bottom of the The scenes look like 2D-scroller computer game it gets really www.sunstorm.net screen shows wind direction (it backgrounds layered with pastedboring, really fast. CGW 166 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"1.000.000.000 TUBLI AVABTERS CAT 0 ( Ca Colden Tee -GOLFTM INCREDIBLE PLAY THE ARCADE GAME    P THE GAME www.itsgames.com 'Go to #232 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink TECHNOLOGIES "


"REVIEW  STARCRAFT TEGYZWAR Strategy Supernova CGW EDITOR'S Blizzard Lives Up to the Hype, Delivering the Most Satisfying Real-time Strategy Game to Date CHOICE COMPUTER GAMING WORLD by Robert Coffey ith all the prerelease publicity surrounding STARCRAFT, it would have been more than easy for Blizzard to tumble off that mountain of hype and fall flat on its face. With expectations at an unprecedented high, anything less than a great game would likely be seen as an utter failure. After months of delays, the game is out and the verdict is in: STARCRAFT isn't just a great game; it's the kind of game that grabs you by the brain stem and compels you to play it. This baby's gonna stick around. Destroy the Pratoss force All Zerg bulldings must survive Kerrigan must survive CGW Rated * * * * * APPEAL: Any and all STARCRAFT gamers hungry for challenge depth, and fun. PROS: Gameplay, gameplay, gameplay: unique races that stress different strategies, no one way to win missions; balanced play: great multiplayer action; engaging story: good Al; excellent campaign editor. CONS: Multiplayer spawning feature could be friendlier; Al players don't fight among themselves; no difficulty toggle. DIFFICULTY: Intermediate REQUIREMENTS: Windows 95, Pentium 90, 16MB RAM; 80MB harddrive space; 2x CD-ROM drive, quad required to view cinematics: DirectXcompatible local bus SVGA video card: DirectX-compatible sound card; 14.4 modem for direct connect play, 28.8 modem and Internet connection for Internet play on battle.net. 3D SUPPORT: None. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: Modem, serial cable (2 players), LAN, Internet via battle.net (2-8 players): 1 CD per player. 2-8 players on 1 CD with spawned copy. Price: 554 Publisher: Blizzard Irvine, CA (800) 953-SNOW Race Relations STARCRAFT gives you the opportunity to play as one of three distinct races: the scrappy, militaristic Terran (human) forces; the Protoss, with their unusual blend of advanced robotics and mysI heard. I'm going down there. Arcturus knows what he's doing ticism; and the horrible, can't back out on him now. mucus-slicked Zerg, the much nastier cousins of those critters from the Alien Objectives movies. STARCRAFT's fullcampaign game is spread out over three separate, 10ST mission campaigns, one for Replay Cancel each race. Most stories in real-time strategy games simply PLOT POINTS Briefings not only outline your mission goals, but they serve as flimsy props to jusalso reveal the story that propels STARCRAFT's single-player campaign. tify gameplay. Not so in STARCRAFT. Somehow, Blizzard games, in which every map is has found a way to tell an engagessentially a puzzle that can be ing story filled with plot twists solved in basically one way, the and treachery across the three missions in STARCRAFT are wide separate campaigns. Told chiefly open to your particular style. Any through stunning cut-scenes and gamer who has endured repeated emotionally charged mission defeats in a strategy game until briefings, events frequently occur they discovered that one and only even during the missions them trick will find this a real breath ON THE MOVE Unlike the selves, changing mission objec. of fresh air. Like other entries in other races, Terrans can relotives and the story's complexion the real-time genre, STARCRAFT cate most of their primary at the same time. It's a deft piece stresses resource gathering and structures. of storytelling. exploration, but the openness of But while the story may con the game introduces a type of balancing. Each race is signifitribute to that \"just one more exploration rarely seen in other cantly different from the others, mission\" syndrome we know and games-an exploration into the which affects strategy and play. love so well, it's the gameplay With their lower cost and fast that will keep you glued to your production rate, the Zerg can computer. No other strategy game Balancing Act spew out hordes of units from has so thoroughly hooked me as One of the true marvels of their bleeding, organic structures. has STARCRAFT. Unlike other STARCRAFT is the game's play The Protoss units are more costly but deadlier and, with their psionic shields, much sturdier. Terrans split the difference in cost and effectiveness. But, they can build anywhere, unlike the Zerg, who must build on their own excreted slime, or the Protoss, BUGGING OUT The Zerg Overmind sets up shop in one of the who must build and maintain an game's stunning cut-scenes. energy grid. This lets the Terrans www.blizzard.com 168 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"STARCRAFT  REVIEW STARCRAFT is setting a standard for Al difficulty would have been that will be hard to beat. Besides, nice, as well as the option to aren't real gamers tiring of one make Al players fight among dimensional tank rush tactics? themselves in human-versus-Al STARCRAFT's Al is both a bless deathmatches. ing and a curse. On the one STARCRAFT could stand hand, it is very smart, not only improvement in some areas, for a real-time game, but also forthough. It would be nice if hota strategy game in general. The key numbers for grouped units computer is very good at using were displayed onscreen alongits spells, gathering intelligence, side the highlighted units. Also, a and reacting to your moves. friendlier spawning feature (like However, it's sometimes too WARCRAFT II's) would be weltough with its rushes. A toggle come; as it is, one CD-ROM will STRATEGYZWAR 11037832/68 line attack routes with bruising defensive structures. With three different races, it would have been easy for the designers to succumb to that \"same unit, different name\" syndrome you see in other games. But they didn't. CRYSTAL METHOD Every race has its Instead, they serve up own special abilities and attacks. In this remarkably distinct shot, Protoss arbiters have paralyzed unit sets for each race, Zerg forces in a stasis field. each with its own devastating strengths and vulnerable State of the Art? weaknesses. While trolls and With all the hoopla surroundarchers were more or less the ing STARCRAFT's release, gamers same in Blizzard's own WARCRAFT might well expect it to be unbe. II, you can't say that about a lievably groundbreaking. Well, it Terran siege tank, Zerg ultralisk, doesn't feature true 3D graphics or Protoss reaver. and terrain, as does TOTAL Such variety of forces creates ANNIHILATION; it doesn't have the seemingly endless strategy formation options and complex options, and this is never more waypoint system of DARK REIGN; apparent than in the addictive and it doesn't let you group multiplayer action. On a LAN, it scores and scores of units for rocks. Over the Internet on Bliz those RED ALERT-style tank rushes zard's battle.net servers...it still (there's a 12-unit limit for rocks. I lost a good six hours my grouped forces). So does first night on battle.net, and I'm STARCRAFT redefine the real-time still going back for more. The only genre? In graphics, command knock against online play is that options, and the like, it doesn't. many goons are inclined to aban But in deep, challenging, and don strategy in favor of rushes. downright exciting gameplay, LOOK MA, NO LAG! Blizzard's battle.net servers are generally very fast and reliable, allowing underpaid, distant freelancers to get pounded by their heartless editor's Protoss carriers. StarCraft Stratagems or some preliminary strategies and Terran tactics, turn to this month's Gamer's Edge section, where we have a STARCRAFT strategy guide. Here are some tips that didn't make it in the guide, but will help you out. perimeter and draw out enemy forces with other unit types; Goliaths are a good choice for this since they can protect the tanks from flying units. Also, don't leave your tanks idle while you're building up an invasion force-set them up in siege mode to protect your base until you're ready to go.  Has the 12-unit grouping limit got you down? Here's a way to command a true swarm of Zerglings (or any other unit) without constantly punching up group numbers. Drag a box around a dozen Zerglings then quickly right-click on one-the others will now follow him wherever he goes. Create a few more groups with leaders. then make a numbered unit out of the leaders only. Now you've got scads of Zerglings linked to one unit designation.  Disrupt Terran resource gathering with hit-andrun attacks. Buildings with extensive damage (shown in red on the damage grid) will continue to deteriorate unless they are repaired. This means that you don't have to destroy a building to hurt your enemy. Your opponent will have to cut into his supplies and his collection operations to fix the building. If he doesn't, it will eventually be destroyed. You win either way. Don't waste your time trying this on the Zerg. Their organic buildings actually heal over time. Protoss buildings' shields also autoreplenish. support eight players in multiplayer-only combat, but those seven spawned players are locked into playing solely in games hosted by that exact CD-ROM; no other registered disc will do. But these minor shortcomings are trivial in light of the game's powerful mission/campaign editor, sharp graphics, and extra little STARCRAFT games—which include football, road racing, and a SPACE INVADERS-style arcade diversion called GALACTIC DEFENDER. (All of these extras are included on the CD, and all were built using the included STARCRAFT campaign editor). With its artfully balanced play, imaginative story line, and a strategic depth that other games can only dream of, STARCRAFT is, quite simply, a winner. CGW  Siege tanks are too versatile to waste in an old-fashioned tank rush. Instead of charging into an enemy base, set up in siege mode on the www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 169 "


"MICRON MAKES THE MOST VISUALLY INTENSE MIND-BLOWING, BODY-SLAMMING, GAMING MACHINE AVAILABLE. \"SERIOUS SPEED, DAZZLING MULTIMEDIA, AND THE LATEST GAME TITLES MAKES THE MILLENNIA AN EXCELLENT CHOICE FOR GAME FANATICS.\" FAMILY PC Millennia 350 Millennia 400 Millennia 400 Intel 350MHz Pentium Il processor 32MB PC100 SDRAM 4.0GB Ultra ATA hard drive 17\" Micron 700 FGx, .26dp monitor (16\" display) 82440BX chip set 512KB internal cache, 2MB Flash BIOS 3.5\" floppy drive 32X EIDE variable speed CD-ROM drive 128-bit AGP Diamond Viper V330 (nVidia), 4MB SGRAM & MPEG Integrated 64 voice Wavetable 3D stereo sound Advent AVoog stereo speakers 56K X2 data/fax modem\" 104-key enhanced keyboard Microsoft IntelliMouseTM, USB connections Microsoft Windows 95 and Microsoft Plus! Microsoft Office 97 Small Business Edition 5-year/3-year Micron Power limited warranty Intel 400MHz Pentium Il processor 32MB PC100 SDRAM 4.0GB Ultra ATA hard drive 17\" Micron 700 FGx, .26dp monitor (16\" display) 82440BX chip set 512KB internal cache, 2MB Flash BIOS 3.5\" floppy drive 32X EIDE variable speed CD-ROM drive 128-bit AGP Diamond Viper V330 (nVidia), 4MB SGRAM & MPEG Integrated 64 voice Wavetable 3D stereo sound Advent AVoog stereo speakers 56K X2 data/fax modem\" 104-key enhanced keyboard Microsoft IntelliMouse, USB connections Microsoft Windows 95 and Microsoft Plus! Microsoft office 97 Small Business Edition 5-year/3-year Micron Power limited warranty Intel 400MHz Pentium Il processor 64MB PC100 SDRAM 8.4GB Ultra ATA hard drive 17\" Micron 700 FGx, .26dp monitor (16\" display) 82440BX chip set 512KB internal cache, 2MB Flash BIOS Integrated 100MB lomega Zip drive, 3.5\" floppy drive DVD-ROM drive and PCI decoder card 128-bit AGP Diamond Viper V330 (nVidia). 4MB SGRAM & MPEG Integrated 64 voice Wavetable 3D stereo sound Advent AVoog stereo speakers 56K X2 data/fax modem\" 104-key enhanced keyboard Microsoft IntelliMouse, USB connections Microsoft Windows 95 and Microsoft Plus! Microsoft Office 97 Small Business Edition 5-year/3-year Micron Power limited warranty $2,299 $2,499 $2,945 Cons. lease $92/mo. Cons. lease $99/mo. Cons. lease $117/mo. case. Consumer leasing arranged by Leasing Group Inc., an independent entity, to qualified customers. All above monthly consumer lease payments exclude taxes which may Included within the monthly payment; security deposit equivalent to one or two monthly payments is required; subject to credit approval and availability. Documentation fee of $50 required with security deposit payment for consumer lease. At consumer lease end, equipment can be purchased for an amount equal to 15% of the original amount financed, plus applicable sales tax. Lease terms subject to change without notice. "


"CAN YOU TAKE THE HEAT ? MMX f you want to descend deeper into the depths of your gaming experience than you ever thought possible, the new Micron Millennia 400 desktop is your hand basket. This is the premiere, high-end gaming machine you've been asking for. Come and get it. intel inside pentium II Unleash your power with the Intel 400MHZ Pentium Il processor, 100MHz SDRAM memory, and 100MHz front side bus. This computer will take you deeper than you should probably go. And it will keep you there for as long as you can handle the heat. Experience the other side of safety. Call Micron today. MISPER Derfor Microso Windows WARRANTY Sim o n and manmemory mind parts any warranty 1. 2. 3. para malone wice agro Marondespandert * 30 days of Micron-bled uport for Micro toptym, Jetonal workers o nde o cron server systems 30 day one policy  2 tour chicasport The breggisstudomalled by Vicron's sta t ed otes and terms and condorse Terms and condition a ry trece congrations Coco wartytetard on ou W abycaling Man Micron Sales Hours: Mon-Fri 6am-lopm, Sat 7am-5pm, Sun oam-5pm (MT) Technical Support Available 24 Hours A Day-7 Days A Week. Toll-free from Mexico: 95-800-708-1755 Toll-free from Canada: 800-708-1758 Toll-free from Puerto Rico: 800-708-1756 International Sales: 208-893-8970 International Fax: 208-893-7393 Call now to order. 888-669-0969 www.micronpc.com M \"Mamun transmission speed of up to 56 Eps when downloading data and 33.6Ktps when uploading. However, cal performance is dependent upon n ous factors and observed transfer talis may be less MICRON um potentials ELECTRONICS 1998 Moon Electronics, Inc Nhatred Man Exctricssortieren nocytaty w Duchessym Pros es may chwytwa res derende og and handing and any applicable toes 30 day money back policy does not ediderunto tandoorashopogtanding chega, plesonlyMoonbrand products and stude r et AS Duted to Montturid arute and conditions of sale Amost reyestrbusnes ingebeden 35 morse The LodPortum S a n Ma r c portion of Windows Windows NT and the Windows logo se registered trademands of Micro Corporation Product names of Mogaproducts wee r registered trademas con Encanic, Other produces  (Septta d ODriyey befce fd Crpri Configured For Your Life.\" Go to #100 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW STAR WARS REBELLION TRATEGYZWAR. Got a Millennium to Kill? This Galactic Battle Isn't for the Micromanagement Weary EXIS BUILDING by Martin E. Cirulis hen word came out that LucasArts was actually going to make a wargame based on Star Wars, two things became evident very quickly: first, most wargamers were thrilled by the idea; and second, almost every one of them had a different idea of the perfect Star Wars strat-fest. Well, now that STAR WARS REBELLION has finally arrived, I think it's pretty safe to say that this was nobody's ideal. Does that make REBELLION a bad game? Not necessarily—but it does mean that this rebellion will have an easier time succeeding against the Empire than it will battling the preconceptions of the wargaming crowd. materials to build units, but also the maintenance points needed to keep them running. Leia Organa Mission Report Now, while this is a fairly simple system compared to other spaceploitation games, the rub is that this is a very big game that runs in a day-by-day progression of \"realtime.\" This means that the clock is always ticking, and things My diplomacy mission to Hoth has increased popular support on that system. The population supports the are always happening no matter Alliance Do you wish the mission to continue? what you do—and while the clock can be turned down to the MOSSOR point that one day passes every a . minute or so, sooner or later you will be overwhelmed by micromanagement woes. Luckily, the HELLO, YOUR HIGHNESS-NESS REBELLION allows you to control designers did provide a decent Al dozens of Star Wars characters in various missions. agent in the guise of an advice droid, who can handle most of These Aren't the Droids their industrial capacity to build the minutiae for you, though it You're Looking For up your war machine. And if that takes some practice to know The first thing you need to proves too difficult, there is which responsibilities to allocate know about REBELLION is that the always the unexplored galactic and when to allocate them. designers did not go with the rim, with literally dozens of sys Luckily for you, the Al for the comlight-and-fluffy approach. Despite tems, both populated and barren, puter player doesn't really put up what you may have heard about to be discovered and exploited. much of a fight. this game being in realtime, there Once you get your fleets up is no base-building, resource I Dunno Kid, I Can and running, you will undoubtedly scrounging, tank-rushing Imagine an Awful Lot! find yourself in the real-time comCOMMAND & CONQUER-ing to be Each system is abstracted bat cube. This is a 3D space that is found here. Instead, what we down to a resource capacity, an used to resolve all ship-to-ship have is some pretty solid and energy capacity (which denotes battles, and, basically, it begins serious spaceploitation, combined the number of facilities the sys with opposing forces facing each with a quasi-RPG aspect and a tem can support), and three pro other across a cubic space about big, big playing field. duction slots-one for starships, three times farther across than REBELLION centers on the con one for ground units, and one for the longest weapons range. To be flict between the evil Empire and construction of the Rebel Alliance, and sets the facilities like mines, stage directly after the destruc refineries, orbiting tion of the Death Star at the end shipyards, training of the first movie. The balance of barracks, and power in the galaxy is in a state ground-based of flux, with only a handful of star defenses. Players systems supporting one side. The must balance provast majority are declaring neuduction of military trality and sitting on the fence units, which conwaiting to see who has the upper sume \"maintenance hand. As supreme leader of either points,\" against side, your job is to crush your infrastructure, such THE ETERNAL STRUGGLE The eternal war opponent-but in order to do so, as mines and between Empire and Rebellion continues in you will need to bring neutral refineries, which REBELLION, a game of tactical and grand systems under your sway and use create not only the strategic gameplay. CGW Rated APPEAL: Star Wars fans and strategy gamers willing to dive into a hard-core REBELLION wargame. PROS: A challenging. bug-free monster game that captures the spirit of the military side of the Star Wars universe while managing to remain character driven. CONS: Bad interface, dated graphics. and information overload may cause many generals to surrender without a fight; timid Al makes it unsuitable to play as the Empire. DIFFICULTY: Hard. REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 90, 16MB RAM, 50MB hard drive space, 4x CDROM drive, PCI graphics card, 16-bit sound card. 3D SUPPORT: None MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: Modem, serial cable, LAN, Internet Gaming Zone (2 players): 1 CD per player. Price: $49.95 Publisher: LucasArts San Rafael, CA (800) 985-8227 www.lucasarts.com 00 A172 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Dych THE FALLEN LORDSV Game of the Year! Computer Games Strategy Plus STRATEGY GAME of the Year! Computer Gaming World Real-time STRATEGY Game of the Year! PC GAMER Top 50 GAMES of All Time! Online Gaming Review Go to #265 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink For more information visit www.bungie.com or call 800 295-0060. hundje.net BUNGIE Mythu The Fallen Lords and bugie notre trademarks of Bungie Schware Product Corporation. All rights reward.1997 Bungie Saltwole Proxlucts Corporation, "


"umAEWWW THE LOST WORLD JURASSK PARK DREAMWORKS INTERACTIVE "


"20 1 Do you have what it takes to be part of an exciting new technology? To find out, simply answer the questions below, then go to www.trespasser.com for a complete psychological evaluation. You could be on your way to the experience of a lifetime! DOOOOOO no en yes OD OD DO Ribisha Cara que 1. Would you consider yourself a fast runner? yes 2. Have you ever been exposed to encephalitis? yes 3. Does the sight of blood make you feel queasy? yes 4. Can you swim? yes 5. True/False: Wood floats. o true false 6. Do you fear death? O no 7. How many living members are there in your family? __ _Are you close to them? 8. If threatened, would you beat an infant animal with a table leg? 9. Do you have any phobias relating to reptiles? ANTILES 10. Which is something you might say: O A. Genetic cloning is OK as long as it doesn't involve humans. O B. Genetic cloning of humans for medical purposes is OK. O C. Genetic cloning is wrong and should be illegal. SONAR O D. Genetic cloning is a real turn-on. THE 11. Have you ever shot a gun? yes 12. Are you in good physical shape? yes O no 13. True/False: Dinosaurs are extinct. D A N true false 14. What is the longest period you have gone without human interaction? 15. As a child, were you afraid of monsters? yes Wilhelm 16. Do you like sleeping outdoors? yes 17. A velociraptor is: COLOMBIA O A. A device used to measure velocity. O B. A German sports car. M O C. A singing purple dinosaur who loves you. 0 D. About 6' tall with a hooked toe for ripping flesh. Star 18. Do you bleed easily? yes no 19. True False: Anything can be used as a weapon. true false 20. Do you have a dirty little secret? Fase O yes no Let no ODO DO OO yes no DE MARIA Jara Ve Pedrens TRESPASSER We make the future. International Genetic Technologies, Inc. www.trespasser.com. INTERNATIONAL GENETIC TECHNOLOGIES, INC., IS NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR ANY INJURIES, MUTILATIONS, MAIMINGS, OR DEATHS RESULTING FROM FIELD BIOHAZARD RESEARCH CONDUCTED BY VOLUNTEER PARTICIPANTS. INGEN'S LABORATORY CONFORMS TO USG P4/EK3 GENETIC PROTOCOLS. TRANSPORTATION OFF SITE B IS NOT PROVIDED.WARNING: RADIOACTIVE ISOTOPES IN USE. HARMFUL CARCINOGENS MAY BE PRESENT. SOME ANIMAL SPECIES MAY BE CARNIVOROUS AND POSE A SERIOUS HEALTH RISK. PREGNANT WOMEN AND THOSE WITH HEART CONDITIONS SHOULD NOT APPLY.  1998 UNIVERSAL CITY STUDIOS, INC., AND AMBLIN ENTERTAINMENT, INC. TRESPASSER IS A TRADEMARK OF UNIVERSAL CITY STUDIOS, INC. AND AMBLIN ENTERTAINMENT, INC. THE LOST WORLD: JURASSIC PARK TM &  1998 UNIVERSAL CITY STUDIOS, INC., AND AMBLIN ENTERTAINMENT, INC. LICENSED BY UNIVERSAL STUDIOS CAUTION LICENSING, INC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. COMPUTER PROGRAM  1998 DREAMWORKS INTERACTIVE L.L.C. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. DREAMWORKS BIOLOGICAL INTERACTIVE IS A TRADEMARK OF DREAMWORKS L.L.C. HAZARD "


"RIGHT NOW YOU COULD BE ON A TROPICAL ISLAND. International Genetic Technologies, island off the west coast of Costa creatures you have only read Inc. (InGen), a leader in biotechnolRica. There you will cohabitate about in history books. Due to ogy, has immediate openings for with exotic plant life and intelligent, computer-literate males interact with unique and Thirsting for excitement? Interact with Site B's authentic prehistoric ecosystem. and females to be part of a power lively animals. Your advenful new scientific study. If chosen ture will take you to pristine the highly confidential nature of you will be taken to Site B, our beaches, lush mangrove swamps, this project, we can tell you only field research facility on a remote and dense jungles. And you will this: Sheep cloning was merely Enjoy the conveniences of modern life, including championship-caliber golf. come face-to-face with living the beginning, International Genetic Technologies, Inc. Www.trespasser.com cen We make the future. "


"STAR WARS REBELLION REVIEW ing your characters and their development, I wouldn't recommend it. honest, it was one of the most promising parts of this game, but it feels like the designers left it unfinished. The graphics are good enough to be useful, but they won't wow anybody. The maneuvering commands are useful, but this 3D combat had so much more potential. If the combat field had included a planet or other celestial phenomena, then driving forces past defenders for troop landings or bombardments would be an important tactical consideration, and maneuvering of ships and fighters would take on greater meaning. The final, and probably most distinctive, part of REBELLION is the use of various characters from the Star Wars universe as agents. Players can send Leia out to swing a world over to the Rebels; Vader can lead commandos in covert acts of destruction; Solo can be promoted to admiral and lead your fleets to victory; Luke can train other Jedi Knights. While other strat games use heroes, this is one of the only games outside the play-by-mail venue to use them in such an intrinsic fashion. While it is possible to get through a game ignorSTRATEGY AWAR. . Sowenna LIX I've Got a Bad Feeling About This Despite all this wealth of strategic and tactical potential REBELLION's fatal flaw will probably turn most gamers away before they can see just how much game is here. The LESS THAN STELLAR COMBAT 3D tactical problem is that REBEL combat ensues once two star fleets LION offers some of the meet over planet orbit, but the action is most informationsomething of a letdown. intensive gaming I have seen on a computer. Unfortunately. If you have the strength and you have to view it through an desire to get a handle on the interinterface that can only be gener face beast, you will find one of the ously referred to as both crude largest, most novel spaceploitation and intricate. The lack of a high games made yet. REBELLION is fully resolution mode means that only equipped when it comes to multitwo sectors and two system win player capability, but I wouldn't dows can be open at the same recommend starting a game with time—and they overlap each anybody who isn't a stable friend, other. In a game in which seeing as the average-sized conflict can where your forces are at a easily go 5 to 10 hours. But, as a glance-and moving them around bonus feature, LucasArts has genASAP-is crucial, this is not the erously taken us back to the days best arrangement of information of yore and produced a virtually The long and the short of it is bug-free product, a rarity in these that when you combine these patch-addicted times. problems with a large manual that So if you want to join this war, can be more than a little vague, be prepared for a tough gig in you get a strategy game with a boot camp, because REBELLION IS learning curve that rivals the most definitely not for the casual, obtuse of board-based wargames. quick-thrills crowd. CGW Q 291 St W all HARDEST OF THE HARD-CORE REBELLION is not for the macromanager. This game requires that you make sense of tons of data in realtime. Learning When to Let Go LLLLLLL RPM EBELLION takes place across such a large playing field that even without real-time action it is still micromanagement hell after the 1,000th day or so. The key to surviving your own success is knowing when you have built up to a point where the computer can take over your more mundane chores without undermining your entire strategy. Basically the key is to concentrate on only two or three planets in a sector as far as production goes, and leave the rest for infrastructure. A good, but risky, strategy is to put all your eggs in one basket and specialize each of these worlds for your needs. The first should have four or five construction yards so you can quickly build up and ship to other facilities around the sector. Your second and third worlds should have multiple shipyards and training barracks, respectively. Once you have done this for two or three sectors, you can safely allocate infrastructure chores to your Al assistant. At this point, the only production messages that need concern you are warnings of idle shipyards and training barracks. 20 IT'S YOUR SHOW, 3PO Although there is so much information to assimilate in REBELLION, you can delegate much of the micromanagement to a competent AI advisor. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 "


"REVIEW  WARHAMMER: DARK OMEN A Good Omen TRATEGYZAWAR The Warhammer Universe Comes Alive as Role-playing Meets Real-time Strategy RTS game that's much more fun than its predecessor. by Elliott Chin efore there was MYTH, there was WARHAMMER: SHADOW OF THE HORNED RAT, a real-time strategy game that did tactical 3D two years before MYTH ever appeared on the horizon. Not only did SHADOW OF THE HORNED RAT have bleeding edge technology, but it also mixed a good dose of role-playing with its strategy. Unfortunately, its 3D engine had trouble running even on the best of that day's machines, and its sluggish gameplay caused the game to pass into obscurity with a whimper. The same won't be said about its sequel, WARHAMMER: DARK OMEN, which is an excellent 3D CGW Rated * * * * APPEAL: Fantasy buffs and Warhammer veterans who want a deep, tactical game with plenty of magic. PROS: Good 3D graphics; realistic, detailed combat engine; role-playing elements; limited user-choice in campaign path still better than other RTS games. CONS: Software engine slow on some machines, poor interface feedback, no replay option; too difficult DIFFICULTY: Hard REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 120, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 32MB harddrive space, 4x CD-ROM drive, DirectX 5.0 supported PCI video card with 2MB RAM, DirectX 5-supported sound card. 3D SUPPORT: 3Dfx, PowerVR, Direct3D. MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: Modem, serial, LAN, Internet (2 players): 1 CD per player. Price: $44.95 Publisher: Electronic Arts San Mateo, CA (800) 245-4525 Waking From a Fantasy DARK OMEN is a gorgeous 3D strategy game set in the fantasy Warhammer universe. The game reprises your role as mercenary commander Morgan Bernhardt. The peace you achieved after beating the Skaven in SHADOW OF THE HORNED RAT has been shattered by the rampaging greenskins (orcs and goblins). Normally, greenskins would never attack humans so boldly; but something has scared them away from their usual hunting grounds. That WAR GAMES In DARK OMEN, you command regiments of magical something is an undead legion and mundane troops against mummies, skeletons, orcs, and that is vast and frightening other foul creatures. enough to destroy the Warhammer world. So, at the story unfolds within the linear playing aspect; you commanded behest of the Emperor (who missions. the same band of troops throughstands to lose much to the Between each campaign sce out the game, nurturing them from undead and greenskin hordes), nario, you see a static screen in battle to battle as they gained you strap on your magical sword, which up to four character por experience and gold. DARK OMEN round up your troops, and sally traits engage in conversation. continues in that fine tradition. forth against the combined might Sometimes, it'll just be a short and you start the game with the of orcs and zombies. obvious setup for the next scenario Grudgebringer mercenary army, DARK OMEN has a fairly linear (as when Morgan cries out \"orc which begins with an initial four campaign of more than 20 mis ambush\"), but other times, it will regiments: you, your horsemen (the sions. There are a few optional be a big session in which more Grudgebringer cavalry), infantry, scenarios, but for the most part plot details are revealed (as when crossbowmen, and a cannon team. you follow a narrow path. I didn't Morgan, the Emperor, and the As you progress through the game, mind that much, since a good court wizard spend several minutes you get opportunities to add more discussing the rising regiments to your army. These regithreat of the undead in ments include mercenary ogres, the realm). What's great dwarven axemen, and elven guerabout these briefings is rillas. All your regiments can grow that, for the most part, as they gain gold and experience they don't seem like the after each victory. The experience canned mission briefings goes toward level increases, which of other games. Instead, enhance a regiment's strength, you get to see your mis while the gold buys armor and sion objectives, and the replacements for fallen warriors. story, come together as However, if an entire regiment falls the characters talk in a scenario, it's lost for the rest of DEATH SANDWICH Victory requires amongst themselves. the game. Each regiment has a smart tactics, like seizing high ground and softening up infantry with SHADOW OF THE name, follows you from scenario to artillery and arrow fire. HORNED RAT's one great scenario, and can die, making it feature was its roleseem more real. www.ea.com 178 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"ULTIMATE POWER (AVAILABLE ONLY TO THOSE AT THE TOP) DO YOU HAVE WHAT IT TAKES TO BE AN INDUSTRY GIANT? INDUSTRY MATHS JoWood Productions MAGIC Visit your local retailer or call 1-800-789-1534 for additional information www.imagicgames.com Industry Giant is a trademark and Interactive Magic is a registered trademark of Interactive Magic, Inc Copyright 1998 Interactive Magic, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Go to #188 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"\"\"POSSIBLY THE MOST BIZARRELY IMAGINATIVE GAME YET.\" -PC GAMING WORLD (UK). DOUGLAS ADAMS CD-ROM FOR WINDOWS 95 S T A R SWH ITANIC THE SHIP THAT CANNOT POSSIBLY GO WRONG NOT A SEQUEL TO ANYTHING \"...A MASTER AT CREATING FUTURISTIC SCI-FI PUZZLES, PARADOXES, AND OTHER LOGICAL PERPLEXITIES....\" COMPUTER LIFE THE RICHAL VILLAGE A CO-VENTURE FROM SIMON & SCHUSTER INTERACTIVE AND THE DIGITAL VILLAGE www.starshiptitanic.com DONDU MEDIAS BEST CIRCUIT CITY. COMPUSA. AVAILABLE FROM THESE FINE STORES Go to #251 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"WARHAMMER: DARK OMEN REVIEW STRATEGYZWAR 15 War Is Where It's At such as houses and trees-can be This game is quite difficult. The were reflected as action on the While the role-playing adds perused for cover and concealment. later missions throw over a dozen screen (especially when trying to sonality, the heart of the game is Morale is also important in this regiments at you, and start you off pump up my troops' morale). On its combat. Unlike in other real game. Regiments can break rank at a tactical disadvantage, such as my work system (a Pentium 200 time strategy games, you don't and flee if they suffer heavy casu when the game positions you at MMX), the game ran smoothly. command individual units, you alties or come under the influence the bottom of a hill while green Still, the game should have been command regiments. While they of undead-induced fear. Regiments skin archers on the hilltop rain faster on my Pentium 133, as this can be of varying sizes, you never can also benefit from hatred, arrows down on you. Because the is still higher than the minimum break regiments into individual wherein they fight to the death missions are so hard, you end up system requirement. components. As in MYTH, you start against mortal enemies (as is the losing lots of men. If you lose more Also, while DARK OMEN's interwith a set number of troops per case with elves versus orcs). men than you can replace (given face is much improved over scenario, and never build more durMagic plays an even bigger role your resources), you'll be stuck. If SHADOW OF THE HORNED RAT's, it ing the course of a mission. in combat here than in other this happens, you'll have to restart still isn't good with feedback. I However, unlike in MYTH, you fantasy/strategy games. DARK from a previously saved position could tell how many men were left always know which regiments you OMEN's many spectacular spells (before you got into the hole) and in a regiment, but not how many are bringing into the scenario, can turn battles, but they cost any try to win with less casualties. hit points units had or how much since you carry your army from where from one to three magic My biggest request is a replay damage they'd dealt. When a wizbattle to battle. points to cast. The game uses a button after each scenario. ard (which is considered a regiAt the beginning of each sce conceit called the \"Winds of Currently, if you want to replay a ment of just one unit: itself) was nario, you deploy your regiments Magic\" for its magic system. Magic scenario, you have to quit back out attacked, I didn't know when to and issue preliminary to the main menu and pull him back, because I never orders in the deployment then reload from your last knew how many hit points he had phase. Once you finish saved position. This also left. Hot-keys for the individual deploying your troops, the brings up the point of spells would also have been nice. battle is joined in realWARHAMMER: DARK OMEN is a time. Typically, once you have been an auto-save good game, and is much better spot enemy troops, you feature and an in-scenario than its predecessor. Its only direct click on each regiment tab save feature. competition right now is MYTH, to tell it to engage the Also, the software ren and DARK OMEN holds its own enemy, fire its ranged derer could have been with its 3D graphics, deep combat weapons, cast spells, or faster. On my Pentium 133 engine, role-playing elements, and move. Then, you just sit system at home, I had to story-driven gameplay. If you can back and watch the regiturn off all the details and stand a more slowly paced realments follow orders until play with the sound off, time game and a steep learning they, or the enemy, die. and even then, I some curve, you'll find a redeeming stratBattles between regiments EYE CANDY The 3D-accelerated graphics in times had to wait a half egy experience in this latest can last for a while, and DARK OMEN are amazing, with plenty of rich second before my clicks WARHAMMER offering. CGW there isn't much to do textures, special effects, zooming, and a rotatonce two regiments lock able camera. horns except order retreat or pick at idle regiments. storms continually rage DARK OMEN's combat isn't as during battle, generating frenetic or active as in other real potent magic points. The time strategy games. Its pace is battle begins with definitely slower, and there is no between zero and three speed slider to liven things up. points already stored in Also, combat is on a smaller scale the magic well, and as (you rarely command more than a each storm passes, more dozen regiments per scenario). magic is added to this However, combat is tactically pool. As you cast magic, focused and fairly deep, as facing, the pool becomes exhaustterrain, and line-of-sight come into ed. If the pool runs out, Help fight the Undead play. For instance, ranged units you have to wait for the need to establish a line-of-sight s torms to replenish your Rerum to Altdorf with their targets before they can well before you can cast fire, units facing the opposite way new spells. from their attackers can be mangled from behind while they Some Bad Luck TALKING HEADS Not only do the between-mission character converturn around, high ground allows I enjoyed DARK OMEN, sations make the scenarios less cut-and-dried, but they also uphold the units to see better, and objects but it did get frustrating. game's story-driven, RPG feel. Bele Bundy www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1998 181 "


"CIAL DUCTS BATTLETECH You are in command of the MechWarriors of Zulu Company. On the planet below, they await your orders.  Should you give your Elite MechWarriors long range weapons and play it safe? Or send them into the fray and trust their skills and your tactics to get them back alive? Each decision you make, each parry and feint, bears consequence. You hesitate and the recruit you nurtured into an experienced MechWarrior is lost. His death a stunning blow. The calls for back up, the missile impacts, the pilot's final scream. All play loud and clear.  Command up to 12 MechWarriors against dozens of enemy 'Mechs, Elementals, and armored vehicles. Buy Mechs, weapons and pilots to create a unit to your specifications. Use salvage from the battlefield or trade-in what you don't need. Retrieve the survivors and their 'Mechs. Repair and refit what you can. Move your best MechWarriors into the best 'Mechs. Or add a new pilot. The next mission beckons.  The most animation in game history guarantees off-the-scale visual effects. 30 in-depth missions. Full multiplayer network capability This is MechCommander. You will know what it is to command. RATING PENDING Available for Windows 95/98. Visit your local retailer or call 1-800-695-GAME day or night (US and Canada). CONTENT RATED BY ESRB 1998 FASA Corporation Published by MicroPros Microprose is a registered trademark of MicroProse, Inc. or its alliated companios, Battle Toch, MochWarrior, Battlo Mech and Moch are registered trademarks and MochCortimandoris Trademark of FASA Corpomtion. Used under license. The FASA Interactive logo design is a trademark of FASA Interactive, Inc. All other trademarks are properties of their respective holders "


"You will have a plan. You will be wrong. You will love your troops. You will curse their names. You will hesitate, You will respect yourenemy. -You will be defeated. You will hesitate. YOU To You will attempt the impossible. You will pull it of You will pay the price. You will face your fear. You will act on instinct. You will be exalted. You will ask foren second cha You will know what it is to command. MECH COMMANDER THE FIRST MECHWARRIOR GAME OF TACTICAL COMMAND www.microprose.com www.mechcommander.com A INTERACT Go to #282 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink F959 420 PROSE "


"REVIEW. GREAT BATTLES OF JULIUS CAESAR STRATEGYZAWAR Caesar's Mighty Sword The GREAT BATTLES Series Ends With a Strong Thrust LE by Jim Cobb he third in a series featuring antiquity's finest generals, GREAT BATTLES OF JULIUS CAESAR portrays the Roman military machine in its prime. This is the army that rolled over Europe, the Mediterranean, and North Africa, and found its ultimate enemy only within itself. CAESAR not only chronicles the great leader's rise to fame in Gaul, it also concentrates on the civil war between Caesar and Pompey. BATTLE OF MUNDA The medium zoom gives you a good view of Caesar's assault on this enemy mountaintop camp. Note the strategic map window in the lower left corner. In the close-up (right), you can view the details of the uniforms—and the carnage of the battlefield. More of the Same, but Better CAESAR's mechanics show little difference from the preceding games in the series, ALEXANDER and HANNIBAL. Leaders have initiative ratings that determine when they can move in a turn, how many orders they can give to units, CGW Rated * * * * * APPEAL: Anyone BATTLES interested in ancient warfare or the exploits of Julius Caesar. PROS: A masterful examination of command control, morale effects, and the interaction of different weapon systems in the ancient world; the best of the GREAT BATTLES series. CONS: No fog-of-war, no editor, while the engine's improved over that of HANNIBAL, animation still slows play DIFFICULTY Intermediate. REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 90, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 30MB harddrive space, 2x CD-ROM, SVGA graphics, DirectX5-compatible sound. 3D SUPPORT: None MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: IPX. TCP/IP, direct modem (2 players): 1 CD per player. Price: $39.95 Publisher: Interactive Magic Research Triangle Park, NC (800) 789-1534 and if they can take multiple actions in a turn. Orders include movement of units, rally, firing missiles, and restoring cohesion. Each order uses an initiative point per unit; thus, a leader with an initiative of six can order six individual units. Alternatively, some leaders can expend all their points on a Group Order, which lets all eligible units of that formation move, attack, retreat, and restore cohesion as one. CAESAR introduces a critical new level of leader, the Roman military tribune. These junior officers only have an initiative level of two, limiting discrete movement. Unlike their barbarian counterparts, however, they don't have to make an initiative check for a Group Order. Tribunes can thus guarantee that their men will do as they commandat least in their initial maneuver (all that Roman training must count for something). Tribunes' group attacks do sometimes get out of hand, but senior commanders can then rally forma tions, restore cohesion, and order e d instead, and victory is a funcexposed troops to fall back. Overtion of the number of troops all, CAESAR does a very good job of retreating off the board. showing how the Roman system of Cavalry, skirmisher units, and a command works on the battlefield. few artillery units are represented, Combat units sport the typical but infantry is the key to CAESAR, ratings for the GREAT BATTLES reflecting the changes in tactics series: size, troop quality, and cohefrom the time of Alexander. s ion level. Combat itself starts with Whether formed into a line or their an exchange of javelins or other famous \"checkerboard,\" the foot missile weapons to disrupt oppo soldiers carry the brunt of the nents (very effective if the enemy fighting. CAESAR shows that it was has just incurred cohesion hits troop quality, not raw numbers, moving up or down terrain). Handthat was crucial to success. to-hand combat follows, and is automatically resolved after the leader has finished for the turn. Units' relative size, quality, and cohesionall modified for flank attacksdecide melees. CAESAR SALAD SURPRISE Sabis is a great sceUnits are rarely nario, showing how the Romans reacted to a eliminated; they sneak attack on their camp complete with a are usually routvariety of colorful uniforms. www.imagicgames.com 184 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"THE HIGHEST RATED WAR SINCE DESERT STORM. Over 100 different 3-D land, sea and air units for the most strategic assaults. The first true 3-D strategy game to deliver real combat. Rotate the entire battlefield for unlimited camera angles to choose the most strategic view of the combat. \"WarGames takes the technology associated with real-time strategy games to the next level... a damn good RTS game, with clever innovations in both unit design and graphic technology. Keep your eye on this one, it's COOL.\". FALLABOUT GAMES «A deep and beautiful real-time strategy game.The polygonal landscapes and units look even better than Total Annihilation...» -ULTRA GAMEPLAYERS \"...stunning visuals...oodles of gameplay...' -GAMES DOMAIN REVIEW NGAN P WAR GAMES DELLE INTERACTIVE STUDIOS WARGAMES WARGAMES GAME 1997. MGM Interactive, Inc. WarGames and O 1983. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Inc. Distributed by MGM Home Entertainment, Inc. 2500 Broadway, Santa Monica, CA 90404. All Rights Reserved. WWW.warga mesmgm.com Go to #210 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"REVIEW  GREAT BATTLES OF JULIUS CAESAR From Phalanx to Cohort TRATEGYZWAR MASSILINSAMNIVM VOYONIVN For example, Caesar's staunch veterans, long with Cleopatra. (It's a pity that the with good play, can hold off Pompey's Cleo rule is so abstract.) conscripts at three-to-one odds, and they snicker at barbarians. Rugged Legions, Ten battles make up the game. Two of But Rusty, Too these represent battles fought before These graphics won't make anybody Caesar's day, Marius in Gaul and Sulla in forget MYTH or PANZER GENERAL II. Even Greece, but they're still important in tracso, for a year-old engine, there is enough ing the development of Roman tactics. of a 3D effect to clearly delineate the difTwo other clashes highlight some of ferent elevation levels and obstacles Caesar's masterpieces in Gaul. The other which is key, given the effect terrain has scenarios represent the knock-down, on cohesion in CAESAR. The soldiers' unidrag-out clashes of the civil war. forms and weapons are nicely detailed Even the less well-known battles as well. CAESAR runs faster than have interesting twists. Sabis shows HANNIBAL, but the animation still slows how the Gauls surprised Caesar while play during big battles. the Romans were erecting their nightly And there are other minor flaws. Siege camp. Giving the Gauls a free move warfare isn't shown--even though Caesar's most famous victory occurred at 7OV. MS Alesia-and ROMA artillery is more for show than use. SICILIA The absence of a fog-of-war continues to be a seriNVIDIA ous flaw in the STANDA game: A cursory pass will show you exactly which enemy units are Round #1 You have 10 turn(s) left to win the civil war wavering. Commanders may have been able to ROMAN CIVIL WAR CAESAR's campaign is much better than in judge their foes to earlier GREAT BATTLES. It shows the fall of the Roman some extent, but Republic as Caesar defeats Pompey and his Senate allies. not with the exactitude of this while having the Romans all facing the game system. Some may also quibble wrong way simulates the element of with the initiative-based phased system, surprise without a lot of complex rules where an entire front line can't move forfor one scenario. In other battles, novel ward together. ty troops, such as Moorish cavalry and While the Al is fundamentally sound, elephants, add spice but, in most batit doesn't exhibit the necessary briltles, Caesar's veterans have it their way. liance for a decisive stroke. To be fair, Thus, you should take advantage of set among wargames, this problem is ting different rout levels and custom hardly unique to CAESAR, and the initial deployments, or just play at the Internet option lets you battle against a hard level. human general, should you tire of the The campaign is refreshingly different computer opponent. from earlier GREAT BATTLES affairs. If you're willing to put up with its Instead of fighting all the battles in eccentricities, CAESAR does a remarkable sequence while garrisoning provinces, job of recreating ancient warfare. It's not Caesar must defeat four of Pompey's only the best of the GREAT BATTLES series armies in 10 turns, all the while keeping to date, it's also the most realistic them out of Rome. Staying in Rome ancients-era game yet on the PC. That it reduces troop quality, so Caesar blocks happens to be challenging and fun as movements with his fleet, tracks down well is a boon for Julius Caesar fans his enemies, and tries not to dally overly everywhere. CGW 22 he GREAT BATTLES series, despite some flaws (particularly in HANNIBAL), traces the evolution of ancient infantry. ALEXANDER showcases the phalanx, the first expression of Western arms, in its most developed form. The phalanx is the army's cumbersome, but essential, backbone. It pins the enemy while the cavalry (usually Alexander's elite Companions) delivers the decisive blow. In this era, commanders handled a large number of troops personally, with the accompanying inefficiencies of communication. HANNIBAL represents a fork in the road. The Carthaginian armies still reflect a dependence on the phalanx within a mix of specialty and cavalry units. Success depends on talented commanders being in the right place at the right time in order to micromanage the battle. The early Roman maniples, deprived of inspired leadership, depend on discipline and a trilevel structure of Hastii, Princeps, and Triari to adapt to changing terrain and enemy movements. The strength of organization compensates for flaws in the individual soldier. CAESAR represents the triumph of professionalism on the battlefield. Grizzled veterans in flexible formations respond to numerous military tribunes who though they may not grasp the whole situation, know exactly what to do within their range of vision. Overall commanders, relieved of directing every vital attack, can save their energy for the most important areas of the field. Interactive Magic and Erudite Software deserve a lot of credit for showing that games can teach a fairly esoteric history lesson and still be entertaining and challenging. If you haven't played any of these games, start with CAESAR-and if you like it, take advantage of Interactive Magic's aggressive pricing on the earlier two games in the series. 186 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"This Summer Real-Time Strategy War Gaming will be changed Forever. Introducing ORN www.wartorn.com Produced by Published by PC CD-ROM IMPACT Interactive Aubbing Pty Ltd. 3D ACCELERATED Copywrite 0 Eyst l'ty. Ltd. All rights reserved. Warlor is a registered trademark of Lyst l'ty. Ltd. All grademarks and all registered trademarks are the property of their respective owners, Go to #082 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"When Solar Systems Collide... | Let the Battles Begin Exploration Expansion Exploitation Extermination DOCENTI Manage Resources:  Acquire and hold asteroids  Mine asteroids for minerals Generate and transfer power  Buy/Sell resources, ships, and votes to the guild for credits ESCAPE TAIVUREA SE 100 M MALKARI Dynamic 3D solar system with all asteroids in constant orbital motion creates unique challenges as resources and territory move over time. SIMULTANEOUS TURN-BASED STRATEGY GAME MAGIC Multiplayer capabilities for up to 40 players via LAN, Internet, and play-by email,.featuring cooperative and competitive play. INTERACTIVE MAGIC Interactive Magic P.O.Box 13491 Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 www.imagicgames.com Design and construct modular ships. Options allow for specialization: offensive, defensive, construction, maintenance, tracking and surveying. Visit your local retailer or call 1-800-789-1534 for additional information Go to #085 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"WARBREEDS REVIEW Bred for Success Red Orb's Genetic Battleground Isn't Your Typical Real-time Clone STRATEGYZZWA YOU STARTED IT! This being is a Yedda scientist, one of the former rulers of the planet who started the game's vicious war by breeding three of the four warring factions. by Scott A. May roderbund Software, responsible for some of the most imaginative 8-bit games of the 1980s, has fallen virtually silent in today's gaming era. But not for long. Last year's formation of Red Orb Entertainment, Broderbund's new in-house development team, signals the publisher's belated return to original, adult-oriented computer gaming. Better late than never. WARBREEDS, Red Orb's first foray into real-time strategy. blends sci-fi and fantasy with one of today's hot-button topics, genetic engineering, to form a truly unique gaming experience. Unlike many games in this overcrowded genre, WARBREEDS boasts a fascinating backstory that's deep, articulate, and totally integrated with all aspects of CGW Rated ***XX APPEAL: Real-time strategy fans looking for something different War3EDS PROS: Unique resource management model; challenging com: 20 puter Al; excellent sound effects; multiplayer support. CONS: Could have used more polished graphics or 3D support: somewhat redundant background graphics; no map editor. DIFFICULTY: Intermediate. REQUIREMENTS: Pentium 90, Windows 95, 16MB RAM, 34MB harddrive space, 4x CD-ROM drive, mouse, DirectX 5-compatible sound and video cards. 3D SUPPORT: None MULTIPLAYER SUPPORT: Modem, Internet, Red Orb Zone (2 players); IPX LAN (2-4 players): 1 CD per player Price: $29.95 Publisher: Broderbund Software Novato, CA (650) 474-0485 gameplay. In other words, it The resulting genetic mutations Years of civil war followed, doesn't just bulk up the manual, were kept as pets or slaves by resulting in the near-complete instead, it pulls you into the the Yedda. genocide of the Yedda. The newly game and makes you care about Meanwhile, a radical group liberated Tanu, Sen-Soth, Kelika, its characters. called the Magha Dhuerenya and Magha creatures evolved (who were opposed to the quickly, eventually learning the Once Upon a Time.... ancient Imperial Order) created secrets of genetic engineering On the planet Aeolia existed a an entirely new race of bootleg themselves. They became known as race of intelligent bipeds known beings that were designed to the Four Clans, battling each other as the Yedda. Their civilization liberate the common people. for the right to rule Aeolia. was based on a class system and What they got instead was a Each Clan consists of five creareligious order that stressed murderous race of bloodthirsty ture types, which are totally differYedda superiority over lesser supercreatures, named after their ent from each other in appearance species. Little wonder, then, that creators, the Magha. speed, strength, and intelligence. the discovery of genetic engiES neering was so Select Components embraced by Yedda leaders. Ironically, it would later prove to be their downfall. Charged by their newfound \"religion of genes,\" Yedda shamans engineered new races from the genetic material of three indigenous animals: the desert Tanu, subterranean Sen-Soth, and swampGENETIC SOUP Use enemy DNA to construct new creatures in WARBREEDS. According to the designers, more than 35,000 combinations are possible. dwelling Kelika. CANCEL www.redorb.com www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 "


"VYBER WARRIOR INC. Presents RUBES of U EVENTIDE Rubies of Eventide Massive on-line interactive fantasy role playing game Over 3 years in development Advanced, multi-threaded client/server architecture Playable over the Internet State of the art visuals utilizing Windows 95 & DirectX technologies Over 200 player/character combinations ... 7 races, 16 classes, 2 genders Experience an infinite number of encounters in a growing game environment An abundance of items, hundreds of spells, 7 spell schools Over 300 sound effects: 125 separate musical scores Thousands of high quality illustrations in a richly detailed 3D environment Call 1-800-Play-CWI for information on membership and pricing. www.rubiesofeventide.com Go to #253 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"WARBREEDS REVIEW Slidis SITRATEGYZWAR I WAS BLIND BUT NOW I SEE Despite their name, Listener devices, shown in the upper left, eliminate the fog-of-war, helping your clan see approaching enemies. CAR 54 WHERE ARE YOU? The graphics in WarBreeds are good, but they're sometimes cluttered, which makes it difficult to pick out your units in the midst of a melee. The only creature type common to all clans is the shaman, who serves as the spiritual and scientific leader. Most other creatures serve as scouts and soldiers, each as gruesome as they are deadly. Most are ground-based, except for a few, like the Magha Viper and Tanu Jubjub. Depending on their size, most creatures can hold up to four weapons, which are mounted on their head and torso. other critical structures include gene collectors, which shamans use to gather DNA from dead opponents for gene lab research. Relay towers can be built to extend the power zone of refineries. Automated defensive structures include rotating turrets, electric towers; mines; plasma cannons; and the summoner, an ultimate weapon that fires explosive crystals capable of mass destruction. Finally, there are listener towers that extend the line-of-sight surrounding your base, and healers who rejuvenate ailing creatures and expedite weapons rearming. WARBREEDS can be played in a variety of ways, including singleplayer campaigns or skirmishes; two-player skirmishes via direct modem, null modem, or Internet connection; and four-player games on a LAN. Internet games Indoor Combat? Sowing the Seeds of Discord The crux of play follows four main elements: planting seed pods that are used to draw energy from the planet's core; harnessing that power; building structures, researching genes, and creating new creatures, and leading your warriors into battle. A brief hands-on tutorial is available to familiarize newcomers with this basic process. As they say, the devil's in the details, and this game has plenty of them. Energy pods can only be planted by the shaman on special crop soil. From there, you must build refineries to harness pod power, which in turn, provides power to other critical structures, such as psi towers (used to control your creatures). Gene labs are needed to research and create custom creatures, and there are over 35,000 possible variations, according to the game's designers. Of course. Go to #186 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink www.computergaming.com "


"noMING every breath they takes could be your last PERMEDIA FullForce Feedback Support 3D spatialized sound 8 player LAN Network play Atmospheric soundtrack Stunning lighting NVIDIA MPACT WEWNOIR Lle Go to #125 @ www.computergaming.com/infollnk "


"WARBREEDS. REVIEW acid, and plasma) to missiles to hand-held explosives. Each does various amounts of damage and some are more effective on some types of creatures than others. The sound effects and animation that accompany each weapon are entertaining in themselves. STRATEGYZWA CERTIFIED ORGANIC Everything in WarBreeds has a bizarre, organic look, such as this close-up of a Refinery device, used to convert pod power into usable energy. The Visual Fruits of Genetic Testing The graphics in WARBREEDS are a mixed bag. Viewed from a threequarter, top-down perspective, the background tiles are often too dark, flat, and redundant. On the other hand, both the creatures and their contraptions sport imaginative, organic detail. For example, as creatures develop in the gene lab, they expand like miniature Macy's parade balloons. Death is equally animated, as some creatures blow apart, scattering arms, legs, and heads across the desert plain. Although the game only supports 256 colors, you can change resolution on the fly, to either 640x480 or 800x600. The latter disPersonally, I found the lower resoplay looks best, but distances playlution better, zoomed in for close ers from the action. Even when combat and pulled back for movezoomed, things look too far away. ment or strategic planning. which makes the visual experience This isn't the type of game that less satisfying, especially when cries out for 3D acceleration, but it you're first learning the game. could have used it. The fog-of-war effects, in particular, are pixelated and give the game a rather muddy look. We can only guess how nice this same effect could have looked with 3D translucency and fog, or even STARCRAFT's 2D, but polished, special effects. Overall, WARBREEDS is decidedly not just another real-time strategy clone. The game features a wealth of detail and depth, with an intuitive interface SILENT HUNTER This creature is one and incredible variety. It's of the Magha, the game's closest guaranteed to keep you thing to an evil scourge. They killed coming back for more the Yedda and began the planet's Although it has a few nagcivil war. ging problems, it's worth your time. CGW Outdoor Combat? can be played using either direct TCP/IP connection or through Broderbund's Red Orb Zone. Multiplayer games can be competitive or cooperative. Two campaign modes are available: Tanu Ascendancy and Magha Uprising. Each consists of more than a dozen individual missions and leads to one of two cataclysmic endings. Skirmish mode lets a single player engage in a random or custom-designed game, set on 1 of 19 available maps, ranging in size from 48 to 96 tiles square. The game's Al proves very competent The essence of gameplay involves building your base, creating new creatures, and eliminating all opposition. Up to 10 custom attack formations can be designed, the effectiveness of which depends on the number and type of creatures in a particular squad. It's a good idea to build fundamental defensive structures as quickly as possible, otherwise invading clans especially the stealthy Maghas—will attack and destroy your pod fields and refineries. You can also set up patrols using user-defined waypoints for your sentries to follow. Battles are fought with closeor long-range weaponry, depending on unit placement and available weapons load. There are 22 weapon types, ranging from melee (hammer, blade, drill, and circ saw) to guns (heat, laser, That's New. Go to #186 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink www.computergaming.com "


"Your HARD DRIVE WITH 44,000 LBS OF THRUST* INTRODUCING iF/A-18E CARRIER STRIKE FIGHTER FEATURES: iMagic's TALONT Campaign System gives you a brand new mission each and every time you play! INTRODUCING 1 DEMONT Terrain Engine generates amazing 3D terrain theaters based on satellite imagery. Carrier missions give you the thrill of catapult takeoffs and landings on an aircraft carrier flight deck. Active Cockpit provides the most intuitive control system found in a flight sim. Multiplayer options let you play solo or battle your friends via modem or network. The U.S. Navy's hot new F/A-18E Super Hornet starts fleet operations in 2003-but you can fly it TODAY! INTERACTIVE MAGICO Pump the Super Hornet's 44,000 LBS of thrust into your computer and experience its high tech avionics and radar technologies years before it goes into service. PO Box 13491 Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709 iMAGIC SO3 *G-SUIT NOT INCLUDED. LABS Visit your local retailer or call toll-free 1-800-789-1534 for additional information, and visit our website: www.imagicgames.com! Go to #084 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"DARK REIGN EXPANSION/EAST FRONT CAMPAIGN/DRAGOON REVIEWS This Means Fargin' War! A Look at New Strategy and War Games STRATEGIYAWA native species to compensate for their lack 5 of equipment, and the Shadowhand get to play with some new, powerful armored units. Many of these new missions are difficult. Some are so unforgiving that I had to restart them repeatedly (after only one mistake) in order to find the exact place to position my troops. Still, with new maps, missions, and challenges, SHADOWHAND can only make DARK REIGN shine brighter. You will need the original DARK REIGN to play SHADOWHAND.-Lance A. Larka East Front Campaign CD 1 * * * * * Price: $34.95 Publisher: TalonSoft www.talonsoft.com Aplethora of unusual battles make this campaign CD a must-have for EAST FRONT fans. The campaign engine still has some serious flaws, though improvements are visible. German infantry caught in the open can now take casualties, and Russian tanks occasionally blow up. However, there is still a tendency for the Al to move as a disorganized mob toward victory point hexes, and single battalions still seem to receive four or five headquarters units. However, the heart and soul of this add-on are its new scenarios (battles). There are now Finnish, Polish, Italian, Rumanian, and Hungarian units. The game gives credit to some of these lesserknown forces. The Poles, though outgunned and out-armored, can put up a tough fight when backed into a corner. And the Finns are Cool Vehicles? Dark Reign Expansion: Rise of the Shadowhand * * * * * Price: $26.95 Publisher: Activision www.activision.com ctivision whetted our whistles with DARK REIGN, but fell down when it came to scenario variability and strategic challenge. RISE OF THE SHADOWHAND fills the gap beautifully. In a hostile and isolated corner of the Dark Reign galaxy, a small group of marooned Freedom Guards are giving the SS-like Shadowhand forces a run for their money in a do-or-die script. This time around, each side's mission set is different, and unlike in DARK REIGN, each mission set forms a contiguous, linear campaign. The end result is the same, though: Win or die. The beauty of SHADOWHAND IS the variability of its missions. The missions encompass everything from escorting cargo APCs and diplomatic envoys to stonewall defenses and flanking attacks. Might does not make right in every mission, however. Sometimes, instead of building up Cold War-proportion forces, you have to make do with the meager forces you start with. But, you do get some powerful new units to supplement them. The Freedom Guards make use of Ninevah's Wow. Go to #186 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink www.computergaming.com "


"Ks TRUCKIN' YOUR WAY THIS SUMMER MUST DIE! CHEOTO 0000 OOOK WWW.spacebunnies.cc www.ripcordgames.cc Inc (d) 1999 Rhod Game PDC Happy M 91011 lraileThu||||X.DougId\"Timizure peoply a hui Pelie ColloTM | PTE  , "


"DARK REIGN EXPANSION/EAST FRONT CAMPAIGN/DRAGOON REVIEWS off and give this campaign CD a spin.-Loyd Case 45 2222222222 STRATEGIYAWLAR 15 si ETT me * fully capable of bloodying the nose of the oversized Russian bear. Play over the Net or via hotseat makes for a nice two-player game, especially now that the damage model has been tweaked. The main performance problem has been partially fixed. Before, the Al would often take inordinate amounts of time in large battles, but now a \"fast Al\" mode has been added, which minimizes the time taken to move units, and shortens Al turns by about a third. The other big improvement to the game is the manual—this is the manual that should have shipped with the original game. It is now complete (yes, supply is discussed), and contains strategy notes and full sets of weapons tables. Of course, you get the latest update, plus patches of other TalonSoft games. If EAST FRONT has been sitting on your shelf because of previous problems, you might want to dust it Dragoon * * * * * Price: $29.95 Publisher: Art of War www.boku.simplenet.com/index.html RAGOON is a turn-based wargame (at battalion/battery scale) that focuses on the distinctive pace of combat in the era of Frederick the Great. The game's emphasis is on leadership and movement, with activation of troops based on command ratings: If a commander fails his \"command check,\" he cannot order troops that turn. The uncertainty of leaders' ability to move troops reflects the halting pace caused by the rudimentary communications of the period. Units in DRAGOON sport a wide range of movement, quality, and morale factors, which are further enhanced (or detracted from) by choosing to put troops in line or column formation. In a column, troops can move without disorga nization but are more vulnerable to fire. Line formation is essential for combat but can cause disorga. nization, unwanted facing changes, or crippling disruption. Combat thus becomes a stately, if frustrating, series of maneuvers that nicely invoke the feel of 18th-century warfare, with plenty of assaults, long-range artillery fire, bloody defensive stands, and routs. There is a great deal of period flavor in DRAGOON. The Prussians, for example, can use a special assault and gain two movement points, but only if they forgo first-fire opportunity. The relatively simple interface can be unwieldy at times, and the graphics are dated, to be sure. The computer Al is weak on the attack, so this is best played by PBEM. Still, where else can you find comp uter games covering Koelin, Mollwitz, or Hohenfriedburg? DRAGOON is a treat for aficionados of this period. Jim Cobb What's the 3-D Action World Coming To? Ist-Person Squad Warfare ...this Fall. W W w.starsiege.com Dynamix STARSIEGE DM BM Strategia Go to #186 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"<You are GRAPHICS THAT PACK THE PUNCH OF A PANTHER: Includes superior 3D rendering with texture mapping, directional lighting and fog effects. 30 omfa t is Esch Loading me persone WINDOWS 95 CD-ROM EVERYONE Developed by ULTIMATE PANZER COMMANDER IS a trademark of Strategic Simulations, Inc.  Strategic Simulations, Inc. a Mindscape Company All rights reserved. All other trademarks and registered trademarks are the property of their respective holders Cover photograph: UP/Corbis-Bettman MUS Langarmer garang TAT "


"meo TSITAL IN-TANK VIEWS INCLUDE Historically accurate driver, main gunner, machine gunner and cupola vleurs Erternal views Include three-quarter, zoom and elevation views. PANZER COMMANDER The most comprehensive World War Il tank sim ever! PANZER PANZER COMMANDER PANZER COMMANDER SAYAR WORLD WAR II TANK SIMULATOR FEL U.S., British, Russlan and German tanksl Over 24 driveable tank types include: US M26 Pershing and M4 Sherman series, British Matilda and Cromwell series; Russian T-34/85 and IS-Il series; German Tiger I, II and Panther series and many more. Virtually limitless gameplay: Fight 3 German and 3 Russian campaigns, with 20+ scenarios per campaign. Stand-alone scenarios include 10 each for U.S., British, German and Russian forces. You also get 10 scenarios designed specifically for multiplay! Highly accurate physics model simulates realistic movement over rough, muddy and frozen terrain, weapons recoil and performance. Multiplayer support for up to 6 players. Additional game objects include support vehicles, pillboxes anti-tank guns and enemy aircraft Choose your position: Commander, driver, main or machine gunner. Your intelligent crew follows your commands and crew performance improves with every successful scenario! Powerful Scenarlo Editor lets you adjust over 150 variables to create custom scenarios no two battles need ever be the same. To Order: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-234-3088 (USA & Canada) with VISA or MasterCard. SA www.panzercommander.com Go to #239 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"GAMER'S EDGE STRATEGY  CHEATS WALKTHROUGHS StarCraft STARCRAFT Boot Camp Starts With Some General Strategies by Elliott Chin lizzard's STARCRAFT has finally arrived, and, in a few short weeks, the game has proven to have an unmatched wealth of subtlety and depth-much of which isn't readily apparent to first-time players. The single-player game does an excellent job of introducing you to each race's strategic options and specialties, but solo play leaves much of the richer strategy hidden. You can learn the intricacies of each race by getting your butt kicked on battle.net, or you can keep reading. This month's STARCRAFT strate. gy guide has basic tips on such topics as hot key commands and resource-gathering hints. The next several months will also feature race-specific tips and overviews for the units and special abilities of the Terran, Zerg, and Protoss. Next month's strategy guide will feature more advanced tactics, including combined-arms offensives, optimal building orders, and how to stop rushes. Part One: last message, whether it is a completed building or a firefight. The Basics to save up to 10 unit groupings or buildings. These groupings are extremely helpful in combat. For example, make your marines one group number and your tanks another, and you can quickly select the correct units by hitting a single number key. Keep in mind that the maximum number of grouped units is 12. These groupings are also useful for saving buildings. I often save my ComSat as 0. When I want to scan an area, I move my cursor to that area, hit 0 and thens (for scan) and immediately scan it. Just two key presses gets me what I want, without diverting my cursor or eyes from the on-screen action. Attack Move An important interface tip is knowing the difference between the Attack Move command and the Move command. If you use the right-click button or the Move command to move a unit to a designated location, it ignores all targets along the way. If you use the Attack command, by clicking the Attack button or hitting the appropriate hot-key (a), and only then clicking on the destination, the unit will attack any enemies that it encounters along the way. For a better explanation of why you should use this command, see the Attack vs. Move sidebar on the next page. 22 MARINE MASH Dragging a box around all these marines to stim pack them won't work; you'll catch vultures too. Hold Ctrl and click ona marine to select them all. Now you can use stim pack. Learn the Interface he interface can really help you if you use it to its fullest potential. Don't waste your time fumbling with it. A mastery of the interface is key in STARCRAFT. Selecting All Units of One Type You can select all units of one type by holding down Ctrl and clicking on one of that unit type. For example, if you want to select all your vultures (up to the unit-grouping limit of 12) out of a marine-vulture-firebat-Zerg mash, all you have to do is hold down the Ctrl key and click on one vulture, and all the vultures on the screen become highlighted. Resource Gathering After you have mastered the interface to the point at which it serves you rather than enslaves you, the next things to learn are general building and resourcegathering strategies. Moving your cursor away from the main screen to click on that SCV icon takes way more time in the long run than just hitting the skey. Check out the hot-keys sidebar accompanying this article for a complete list of Terran hotkeys. Next month, we'll show you the other races' hot-keys. Hot-keys Memorize the hot-keys for building units and buildings. Optimum Number of Peon Units Unlike in WARCRAFT II, only one peon unit can mine a resource patch at a time. That includes vespene geysers. If you start next to a cluster of six mineral patches, don't just crank out 20 peons to See the Review IN THIS ISSUE. 5 STARS Saving Groups and Buildings You can use Ctrl + Inumber keys) Jumping to the Last Message Remember that hitting the space bar centers you on the 200 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"CAMERAS EDGE WE MENU Zerg Hatchery Mutalog ca REAL DOGFIGHTS, REAL BATTLES, IN 3D! Massively Multiplayer. Only ONLINE! WHAT TO BUILD NEXT? As Zerg, I went for maximum drones and a spawning pool. Then an overlord, extractor, hydralisk den, and a second hatchery. Attack vs. Move these two sets of screens show just why you should use the Attack Move command instead of the normal Move command. In the set below, by pressing the button on the cursor's location, these hydralisks will attack any enemy units en route, including this emerging spider mine. By simply right-clicking the hydralisks move toward their destination, while ignoring any encountered enemies. In some cases, as in this one, it can prove to be lethal. AIR WARRIOR.III www.airwarrior.com n the above set, the battlecruisers move only to within maximum range when they first encounter these enemy goliaths because they are ordered to this location with the Attack command. The minute they see their targets, they fire. In the screen below, where an ordinary Move command has been issued, they continue moving to their destination, which is well within the goliaths' range. They won't attack the goliaths until after arriving at the destination, by which time they've taken a severe beating. GAMESTORM. Go to #197 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink GameStorm is a trademark of and Kesmal and Air Warrior are registered trademarks of Kesmal Corporation www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1998 201 KESMAL STUDIOS "


"TEAM  HELICOPTER COMBAT Top-notch 3D graphics showcase cities, scorched terrain, real-time lighting effects, and the AH-61A Apache combat helicopter. Test your combat skills in two full campaigns and 18 stand alone missions; mission editor provided for extended gameplay. min Sa Interactive flight environment registers turbulence from explosions, blasts, and other aircraft support for force feedback joysticks included! Manage your team of ace pilots! Options include skill ratings, fatigue and morale management, recruitment, and courts martial. Training mode with instructor feedback, adjustable difficulty settings, and easy/advanced flight models will get you in the air fast. Supports both head-to-head and cooperative multiplayer for dogfights over the internet, on a local network, or modem to modem against your buddy. RATING PENDING Armed to the teeth and clressed to kills SIMIS MINDSCAF ENTERTAINME Go to #189 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink www.teamapache.mindscape.co Sims CONTENT RAILD BY  Simis Holdings Ltd. All rights reserved. Team Apache is a trademark of Simis Holding Ltd. used under license by Mindscape Inc. "


"STARCRAFT 11742 GAMERS EDGE Hot-keys Heel the terror Massively Multiplayer. Only ONLINE! harvest those patches in the hope that once one is done harvesting, the next each additional peon will translate into one can swoop right in and start gatherextra resources. It doesn't work that way. ing. This circular cycle ensures that you You should create twice as many peons are harvesting at the optimal speed. as there are mineral patches; in this case, Create any more and the extra peons will 12 peons would be perfect. That way. idly wait in line to harvest. For geysers, it's best to assign three to five peons to harvest gas, depending on the distance Here are the Terran hot-keys. to the geyser-if you see more than one peon waiting Shift+F2-F4 = saves S = supply depot in line outside a geyser, you map location R= refinery have too many there. Because of this bottleneck, it B = barracks Command is essential to get expansion Hot-keys E = engineering bay bases up and running as fast Universal T= missile turret as possible, especially if you M= move A = academy want more vespene gas. S = stop U= bunker When you take a peon A= attack unit away from harvesting P= patrol H= hold position Advanced buildings to build a structure, make F = factory sure you queue up another ComSat to take its place. Otherwise, S = starport S = scanner sweep you could end up disrupting I = science facility your harvesting flow. This is SCV A = armory especially true for the Zerg H = hold position (although it isn't as big a R = repair G= gather Add-on concern for the Protoss). B = build standard structure Hot-keys V = build advanced structure C= build comsat, machine When to Expand it's always a good idea to get Marine, firebat shop, control tower, or a second base up and runT = use stim pack covert ops ning as soon as you can N= nuclear silo afford to do so. Pick secGhost i = lockdown P= physics lab ondary resource nodes that C= cloak are in easily defensible N= call down nuke Unit positions, such as those on Hot-keys plateaus or islands, and begin your expansion. Also, I = lay down spider mine At barracks don't start another base M= marine unless you have enough Siege Tank O = enter siege mode F = firebat money to build both a comG= ghost mand center/nexus/ Wraith hatchery and some defensC= cloak es: a few towers or a At factory bunker or shield batteries, Dropship V = vulture for example. U = unload troops T= siege tank If you only have 400 Science Vessel G= goliath minerals and no troops, D= defensive matrix don't build the expansion. 1 = irradiate At starport Build up a handful of E = EMP shockwave troops first, and then go for W= wraith it. Secondary bases are Battlecruiser D = dropship always prime targets, so Y = Yamato cannon V= science vessel don't expand too quickly. Building B = battlecruiser Make sure you do get Hot-keys one started, though, because each additional Standard buildings: At nuclear silo C= command center N= build nuke base can double your resource gathering. Vulture ====== www.aliensonline.com GAMESTORM. Go to #197 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink GameStorm is a trademark of and Kental is a registered trademark of Kostrad Corporation Aliens\"and 1986, 1997 Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation. All rights reserved www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 203 KESMAL STUDIOS MYTHIC INDIRIAIN MINT "


"NINTENDO 1, 2 or 3 can play at once! Now Available on If you're gonna eat, burp and puke, it's just more fun to do it together. 1-2 Players Windows 95 CD-ROM KIDS TO ADULTS MIDWAY RAMPAGE CONTES AB PlayStation CONTENT RATED BY www.midway.com WORLD TOUR Go to #184 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink PlayStation and the PlayStation logos are registered trademarks of Sony Computer Entertainment Inc. Nintendo Nintendo 64 and the 3-D 'N Togo are trademarks of Nintendo of America inc.  Nintendo of America Inc. Licensed by Nintendo. Rampage World Tour 1998 Midway Games Inc. All rights reserved. Designed by Game Refuge Inc. RAMPAGE WORLD TOUR and MIDWAY are trademarks of Midway Games Inc. Distributed by Midway Home Entertainment Inc. under license. All other trademarks and trade names are properties of their respective owners. "


"STARCRAFT VAA MERISED Build Orders As a general rule, in the beginning of a game, it's a good idea to crank out four more peon units than you begin with regardless of which race you play. Tell your eighth peon unit to build a barracks, pylon, or spawning pool, and queue up a ninth peon unit. That ninth unit should immediately start work on a sup WAITING IN THE LINE Because only one peon ply depot or gateway. The unit can mine a resource spot at a time, the rest Zerg should have the ninth of these SCVs have to wait outside the geyser peon build an extractor, until their friend comes out. queue another drone, and spawn an overlord. Terrans should change drastically from this point on. You queue up a 10th SCV and have it har can lay down bunkers or shield batteries vest. Then crank out two to three more to guard against rushes, build a third peons, build a second supply building barracks, or go for a factory or starport. (or overlord, for the Zerg) and a second This early build order is just meant to get barracks or gateway. Only then should you up on your feet as fast as possible. Terrans and Protoss build gas buildings. Terrans who suspect rushes should The following build order will ensure insert a bunker after the first barracks, that you get a good harvesting force up and then build one or two more and running and have the money and (depending on the severity of the rush) buildings to defend against rushes: as the resources become available. For the Zerg, after the extractor, build (a) 4 peons a hydralisk den, crank out more peons, (b) barracks/spawning pool/pylon and then spawn a second hatchery. (c) 2-3 more peons On an island or very large map, (d) supplyloverlord gateway though, where you might not be rushed (e) 2-3 more peons as quickly, you could forgo the second (f) a second supplylpylon and barracks and go straight for the gas barracks/gateway building. Again, tailor your build order (g) 2-3 more peons to your current map. For more advanced building orders, Depending on which strategy you check out next month's STARCRAFT want to pursue, your build order can guide. CGW Join MOUR the Massively Multiplayer. Only ONLINE! The Hidden Battle System: Damage and Target Types Jackdfucktaus ONLINE GOLF TOUR www.jacknickonlinetour.com omething that isn't readily apparent to STARCRAFT newcomers is the different damage and target types in the game. Each unit deals one of three different types of damage: normal, explosive, or concussive. Each unit also has a size rating: small, medium, or large. Read the STARCRAFT Readme.hlp file under \"Hints, tips, and other information\" for a compete list of damage types and sizes. Normal damage deals full damage to all targets regardless of size. A marine would deal six points of damage to any unit in the game. Explosive damage does a full 100 percent damage to large targets, 75 percent damage to medium targets, and 50 percent damage to small targets. So a siege tank would do 30 points of damage to a dragoon, 23 points of damage to a vulture, and 15 points of damage to a Zergling. Concussive damage is 100 percent effective against small targets, 50 percent effective against medium targets, and only 25 percent effective against large targets. Thus, a vulture is excellent for fending off marines, and terrible at tackling siege tanks. Protoss shields are an exception to this system; they take full damage from any attack, regardless of damage type and target size. GAMESTORM. Go to #197 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink GameStorm is a trademark of and Kosmai is a registered trademark of Kesma Corporation, Jack Nicklaus is a registered trademark of Golden Bear International and used under license to Accalade Inc. 1997. All rights reserved. www.computergaming.com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 205 ANIOWDE "


"ADVERTISER INDEX Order Free Prodi Order Free Product Information @ www.computergaming.com/infolink INFO# COMPANY PRODUCT PAGE INFO# COMPANY PAGE 148-149 210 MGM PRODUCT WarGames WarGames Millenia echCommander 130-131 185 185 170-171 182-183 M 42-43 12-13 219 100 282 151   183 184 98 65 135 35-37 173 91 220-221 111 190 39 63 136-137 204 56-57 60-61 156 86-87 70-71 18-19 97 Micron MicroProse MicroProse Microsoft Microsoft Midway Home Ent. Midway Home Ent. New World Computing New World Computing Newcom, Inc Novalogic, Inc. ORIGIN Systems, Inc. ORIGIN Systems, Inc. ORIGIN Systems, Inc. ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Philips Piranha Interactive Piranha Interactive 73 93 *  126 240 79 241 231 105 62 106 271 220 265 266 68 70 253 190 145  87 276 279 115 277 111 257 102 92 170 169 171 82 232 84 188 85 86 89 113 76-77 X:COM Interceptor Monster Truck Madness Outwars Mortal Kombat IV Rampage World Tour Heroes III Might & Magic VI Sound Video Card Commanche Gold Alpha Centauri F-15 Longbow 2 Ultima Ascension USB Speakers Dead Reckoning Extreme Tactics Joystick Blow You Away Blow You Away Space Bunnies Space Bunnies Special Operations Stratosphere 174 153 C5-C7 46-47 140 134 136 260 145 2-3 108-109 158-159 108 QuickShot Technology, Inc. Real 3D Ripcord Games Ripcord Games 114 163 163 92-93 26-27 151 Access Software . Access Software Access Software Activision Alienware American Power Conversion ATI Technologies, Inc. Aureal Semiconductor Blizzard Entertainment Bungie Software Canopus Corporation Chips & Bits Creative Labs CyberWarriors Diamond Multimedia Sys, Inc. Diamond Multimedia Sys, Inc. Dreamworks Earthlink Eidos Interactive Eidos Interactive Eidos Interactive Eidos Interactive Eidos Interactive Falcon Northwest Fujitsu Interactive GT Interactive GT Interactive GT Interactive GT Interactive Impact Interactive Incredible Technologies Interactive Magic Interactive Magic Interactive Magic Interactive Magic Interactive Magic Interactive Visual Systems Intergraph Computer Systems Interplay Interplay Interplay Interplay Kesmai Kesmai Kesmai Kesmai LucasArts Ent.Co. Mad Catz Mad Genius Software Matrox Graphics 196 Courses Links LS Tex Murphy Battlezone Alienware Systems APC Graphics Board ABD Lord of the Clan Myth: The Fallen Lords Pure 3D Game Card www.cdmag.com/chips.html Graphic Blaster Rubies of Eventide Monster 3D 11 Monster Sound Tresspasser Earthlink Network Commandos Dominion Eidos Interactive Final Fantasy VII Tomb Raider II Mach V Masters of the Arcade Duke Bridge Campaign Total Annihilation Unreal War of the Worlds WarTom Golden Tee Golf F18 Industry Giants Mal Kari Spear Head Vangers Get Real Intense 3D Voodoo Baldur's Gate Descent Freespace Fallout 2 Redneck Rides Again Air Warrior Aliens Gamestom Jack Nicklaus Golf Recruitment Panther XL Romero Gun Metal Graphics Card 88-89 78 66-67 C2-C4,1 14-15 187 167 140-142 82-83 116-121 4-5 191,193 1 179 88 24 147 * 270 156 110 135 99 99 186 186 251 239 189 245 112 243 185 88 125 195,197 180 198-199 106 6-7 80-81 Ripcord Games Ripcord Games S3 Inc. Sierra On-Line Sierra On-Line Sierra On-Line Sierra On-Line Sierra On-Line Sierra On-Line Sierra On-Line Simon & Schuster Interactive Strategic Simulations, Inc. Strategic Simulations, Inc. Talonsoft The 3DO Company The 3DO Company Thunderseat Technologies Total Entertainment Network XiCat Virgin Interactive Entertainment Westwood Studios Westwood Studios Won.net Yamaha Corp. of America 72 163 162 166 71 197 197 197 197 : 91 80 124 Half Life Nascar S0th Starsiege Swat 11 Swat || Tribes Tribes Starship Titanic Panzer Commander Team Apache Operational Art of War Army Men Requiem Thunderseat PGL Incoming Recoil C&C Tiberian Sun Dune 2000 Won.net WaveForce 192XG 28-29 128-129 104-105 201 203 207 2 05 218 155 40-41 123 20 132-133 100-101 150 138 192 16-17 8-9 103 22-23 125 252 249 194 101 206 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Forget the box. Forget limits. Forget small. The future of games is online. Massive. Random. Forever changing. Populated by thousands. Real people. Real battles. Real adventures. This is GameStorm. GAMESTORM www.gamestorm.com The best massively multiplayer games. Virtually any networkable CD-ROM game. Award-winning editorial content. Thriving player communities. All in one package, for one price. Unlimited play. $9.95 monthly. First month FREE! KESMAL ENGAGE NEAT.NET GAMES PO games online SM Varrior II, Aliens Online, Warcraft ITM, Diablom, Claw, Virtual PoolTM Featured games include: All the latest news, reviews, Nicklaus Online Golf Tour, Descent Splatterball Rolemaster: QUAKET 18:11, NetFighterTM features, tips, downloads Player BattleTech, Legends MagestormTM, Darkness FallsTM, Rolemaster: Hexen ITM, BattlezoneTM, Total and more from the esmaie Starship Troopers The BladelandsTM Caesar's Palace AnnihilationTM Mech Warrior 2, Internet site named 70, card, and board games... US Chess Federation, Improv Trivia, WarCraft II, Postal ... and virtually \"Best Gaming Site\" and more! Billboard Live Trivia...and more! any networkable CD-ROM game! by EntertainmentWeekly. Go to #197 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink GameStorm is a trademark of and Kesmai is a registered trademark of Kesmai Corporation.ENGAGE games online is a service mark of Games On-Line, Inc. All rights reserved. SegaSoft . HEAT and HEAT.NETI are trademarks of Segasoft Networks, Inc.GameSpot is a trademark of GameSpot Inc. All other trademarks, registrations, and copyrights are properties of their respective holders. "


"GAMER'S EDGE TIPS Action CHEAT CODES HINTS WALKTHROUGHS Simulations JANE'S F-15 here are a few undocumented commands that add new functions to JANE'S F-15. To use these, you must edit the keyboard macro file. To access it, use Windows Explorer to navigate to your F-15 directory (default is ciljanes\\f15) and doubleclick on f15keys.ini. To add a frame-rate counter to your heads-up display, add the following line to either the Expert or Casual sections, depending on which control set you use: KEY KEDISPLAY_FPS. Pressing K will now activate the framerate counter. One of F-15's designers has been known to be active in a WARBIRDS squadron called the \"F'ing Pigs.\" Well, next time someone says, \"when pigs fly!\" just press the Y key in JANE'S F-15 after adding this key to the .ini file: KEY Y=MEET SMUT. In F-15's mission builder, you can actually change the default aircraft from the F-15E.Just alter the Aircraft Type on the aircraft that is set to \"Human\" to any other plane model. Although your plane will still look like an F-15E from the inside (and will still use the F-15E's flight model), from the exterior, it will appear to be a B52-or whatever MISSION BUILDER you choose. Although this isn't very useful, the fun comes in when you add some wingmen. Now you can fly as leader of a flight of F-165, MiG-29s, or even Hind choppers! Denny Atkin JEDI KNIGHT: MYSTERIES OF THE SITH aving a hard time getting past Noghri guards? Is that last Vornskr simply too fast for your Banthalike reflexes? Well, when all else fails. here are the cheat codes. Press t to get the console, and type in the code for the desired effect. Codes in red require a switch after the code (1 for \"on\" and 0 for \"off\"). For example, boinga 1 turns on invulnerability. Code Effect iamagod Uber-Jedi: you get all Jedi powers diediedie All weapons gimmestuff .......... Full inventory gameover Skip current level statuesque Disable Al (freezes the enemy) trainme . Force level up freebird .... . Fly mode boinga .............. Invulnerability toggle trixie .......... Refill Force power cartograp ... Show full map -Thierry Nguyen TOMB RAIDER II is a lack of deep-sea diving skills hampering your progress in 40 Fathoms? Do those jumping puzzles in Floating Fortress have you feeling like a jack-in-thebox? Don't despair for here are some simple cheats to help vou out of those TOMB RAIDER II jams. First, light up a flare. Then, with flare in hand and while holding down the Shift key, take one step forward, and one step backward. Keep holding the Shift key down, and turn 360-degrees in either direction three times. Then, you can either jump backward to get all the weapons or jump forward to skip the current level and go on to the next one. -Thierry Nguyen EXIT Sports DEER HUNTER mick of waiting around for those elusive bucks to arrive? Here are some cheat codes to get the action started. Type them in at the map screen before you begin your hunt. The downside is that any bucks you kill using a cheat code will be marked as such in the trophy room-doh! Joe Vallina dhbambi ....... ..Shows location of deer in map view dhdoeinheat ....... Attracts all bucks to your location dhstealth ............. Deer won't hear or smell you COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 "


"   Super Strategy Guide "


"FINAL FANTAST. VI SUPER STE CGW's Introductory Guide to Final Fantasy VII #1111111 quare Soft's legendary role-playing franchise will make its PC debut sometime this summer. FINAL FANTASY VII, although available for over a year on PlayStation, will soon offer PC gamers a chance to savor what console gamers have enjoyed for years. FF games have always been known for story and gameplay, and they've also been known to have tons of secrets and hidden goodies awaiting the meticulous gamer. We know you're going to want to play the game, so here are some strategies to help you on your quest. The key to FINAL FANTASY VII lies in two factors: the characters you use in your party, and the materia (items that bestow spellcasting ability) that each member carries and uses. We'll talk about characters first. by Thierry Nguyen HZ FINAL FANTASY STRATEGY GUIDE JULY 1998 "


"SUPER STRATEGY GUIDE FINAL FANTASYVI Characters Ithough there are nine characters available, you can only use three at a time; and the three that are active are the ones that will gain levels the fastest. Since Cloud is a constant character throughout the game, you only have two open slots to play with. A good rule of thumb is to have one well-balanced character and one extreme fighter or spellcaster. One factor that should determine which characters you use is their Limit Breaks. Limit Breaks are special attacks that only become available for use after the character has been severely damaged. Every attack adds to your limit gauge, and when it is full, the character can execute his or her Limit Break. There are seven Limit Break maneuvers per character, divided among four levels (two per level plus the final level-four Limit). All characters start with their first, level-one Limit Break. Gaining each successive Limit Break is not automatic. Here is how you learn them: First Limit Break: Deliver the killing blow on at least 80 enemies in order to learn the next level's first Limit Break (except for the level-one Limit Break, which you begin with). Second Limit Break: Use the first Limit Break of that given level eight times to learn the second Limit Break. Level-Four Limit Break: The level-four Limit Break is a special case. You need to have learned all prior ones, and then use a special item (there is a unique item for each character) that will teach the final Limit Break to your character. CLOUD Cloud's Limit Breaks are: Level 1 First Limit Second Limit Braver: Attack on single enemy for moderate damage Cross-Slash: Single attack on single enemy for moderate damage plus a chance to paralyze the target. Level 2 First Limit loud is the game's main character, and hence will always be in your party (with the exception of one sequence in which Cloud is temporarily incapacitated). Because he's in your party for 90 percent of the game, he is simply your best character. He has excellent attack and magic strength, a solid amount of both HP (hit points) and MP (magic points) and the best Blade Beam: Moderate damage attack on primary target, followed by splash damage on every enemy Climhazzard: Heavy damage attack on one enemy. Limit Breaks. Also, because the strength of a spell is tied to the magic strength of the caster, you should give Cloud the most powerful materia to use, such as Knights of the Round. Ultima, or your best custom materia combos (described later in this strategy guide). Cloud can only use melee weapons, so he must remain in the front of the party. Keep in mind that characters in the front row suffer full damage from attacks but deal full damage in turn; characters in the back row suffer half damage from attacks, but only do half damage if they employ melee weapons. Second Limit Level 3 First Limit Second Limit Meteorain: Ranged attack on every erierny on-screen; four meteor strikes doing moderate damage per strike Finishing Touch: Percentage chance to instantly kill all enemies; any survivors are then attacked for moderate damage Level 4 Final Limit Omnislast: Fifteen strikes inflicting heavy damage. divided along enemies Red XIII Tf you don't find Yuffie, Red XIII will be your most balanced character in the game. He has fine attack and magic strength and lots of UP and MP. Red XIII is essentially the party's everyman, perfect in his role as fighter, spellcaster, or both. His attacks are mostly close range, so keep him in the front of the party. He has the HP to survive in the front row. Red's Limit Breaks are: Level 1 First Limit Sled Fang: Attack on single enemy for moderate damage. Second Limit Lunatic High: Casts \"Haste\" on the entire party. Level 2 First Limit Blood Fang: Attack on single target for moderate damage plus Red Xill regains a small amount of HP and MP in return. Second Limit Stardust Ray: Attacks all enemies 12 times for moderate damage Level 3 First Limit Howling Moon: Castes both \"Berzerk\" and \"Haste\" on Red XIII. Second Limit Earth Rave: Five attacks on single target for moderate fire and normal damage Level 4 Final Limit Cosmo Memory: Fire attack on all enemies for heavy damage FINAL FANTASY STRATEGY GUIDE JULY 1990 H3 "


"FINAL FANTASY, VE SUPER STRATEGY GUIDE Cid Highwind id is second only to Cloud in physical strength (and that only because Cloud is usually at a higher level than Cid; if they are at equal level, Cid exceeds Cloud's attack strength). His MP count is more modest, though, and he isn't much better than Barret in magic strength. Use him for his raw physical talents and his excellent Limil Breaks. If you use Cid, it's best to pick a good spellcaster to balance out the party. Cid's Limit Breaks are: Level 1 First Limit Boost Jump: Single slash attack to one enemy for moderate damage. Second Limit Dynamite: Fire-based attack on all enemies for moderate damage Level 2 First Limit Hyper lump: Attacks all enemies for moderate damage Second Limit Dragon: Attacks single target and transfers MP and HP from target to Cid. Level 3 First Limit Dragon Dive: Attacks all enemies six times, dealing mod erate damage Second Limit Big Brawl: Attacks all enemies eight times, dealing heavy damage Level 4 Final Limit Highwind: Summons 18 missiles to strike all enemies for light damage per missile Cait Sith ait Sith is a unique character. Unfortunately, he is also one of the weakest characters in the game. His main strength is spellcasting, but even his magic isn't as strong as Aeris' or Yuffie's. His physical strength is the second worst ahead of Aeris'. There is one point where he needs to be used, but otherwise, he's not a very good character to develop. Cait's Limit Breaks are: Level 1 Dice: Rolls dice, and damage is determined by varying factors, such as the number of dice and on which side they land, Level 2 Slots: Varying effects to party. rying many HP and MP. as follows: 3 hearts: Lucky Girl 3 faces: Instantly kills 3 bars: Randomly sum appears, and every party every enemy, with no mons monster. member inflicts aitical exceptions. 3 crowns: Six toy sol strikes 2 faces, 1 bar: instantly diers attack all enemies 3 moogles: All party kills party. No exceptions. for moderate damage members merge to one Anything else: Toy Box 3 stars: Moogle dances large Cait Sith, inflicting attacks enemy for modand restores MP and HP heavy damage and car e rate damage. Barret Wallace Yuffie Kasagiri Yuffie is perhaps the best balanced character besides Cloud. For one thing, her weapons are all longrange, so she can be placed in the back of the party. Yuffie has tremendous attack strength and her Limit Breaks are awesome. On top of that, she has capable magic strength and MP stores. Since Yuffie is a secret character, you need to find her. Here's how: Yuffie hangs around the forests near Gold Saucer and Junon. Wander around these places until you encounter and fight a \"Mysterious Ninja.\" Defeat her, then convince her to join your cause. Don't touch the save point on that screen. If you do, she will run away and steal 200 gil from you. She'll also steal the gil and run if you answer any of her questions incorrectly. This will force you to once again find and fight her. Here is how you should reply to her questions: bottom option, top, boltom, top, bottom. Yuffie's Limit Breaks are: Level 1 First Limit Greased Lightning: Quick strike at single target. dealing moderate damage. Second Limit Clear Tranquil: Restores some HP to the entire party. Level 2 First Limit Landscaper: Attacks single target for moderate earth damage. Second Limit Bloodfest: Attacks all ene. mies 10 times for moderate damage per strike Level 3 First Limit Gauntlet: Attacks all enemies for moderate damage Second Limit Doom of the Living: Attacks all enemies 15 times for moderate damage Level 4 Final Limit All Creation: Attacks all enemies for heavy damage. arret is one of your starting characters, but he quickly becomes obsolete. He has good attack strength and massive HP, but is weak with magic and MP. However, many of his weapons are long-range, so you can place him in the back of the party without penalty. Barret is definitely a fighter, not a magic user, and provides good offens ive support for Cloud in the beginning of the game. However, his attack strength eventually is eclipsed by heavy hitters like Cid and Yuffie, and his weak magic becomes a huge liability (the other characters are at least as strong and much better spellcasters). He takes a back seat in the latter part of the game. Barret's Limit Breaks are: Level 1 First Limit Big Shot: Single attack on single enemy for moderate damage. Second Limit Mindblow: Single attack that completely drains the target of MP. Level 2 First Limit Grenade Bomb: Explosive attack that strikes all enemies for moderate damage Second Limit Hammerblow: Attempted instant-kill attack on single target Level 3 First Limit Satellite Beam: Attacks all enemies for moderate damage. Second Limit Ungarmax Attacks all enemies for heavy damage. Level 4 Final Limit Catastrophe: 10 strikes on all enemies for heavy damage. FINAL FANTASY STRATEGY GUIDE: JULY 1998 "


"SUPER STRATEGY GUIDE FINAL FANTASY Aeris Gainsborough eris provides an invaluable skill: natural healing. Aeris is simply the best spellcaster in the game. She has to be; she's terrible on attack. She has a huge amount of MP relative to other party members at an equal level. Unfortunately, her HP count isn't very high, so she'll need to be shielded by being placed in the back row of the party. Don't engage in physical combat with her; let her cast spells. use various skill materia, and perform Limit Break techniques to aid the party. Vincent Valentine incent is the other hidden character, and he is almost as well balanced as Yuffie. Like Yuffie, Vincent uses long-range weapons: guns. So you can place Vincent in the back row, as well. Vincent possesses both good attack power and the MPs to cast some decent spells. You can designate him as the party's healer, and give him healing magic and some less powerful offensive spells. To get Vincent, you need to grab the Gold Key from the safe in the Shrina Mansion in Nibelheim. The hints to the combination are strewn about the house, but in case you can't figure it out, it's Right 36, Left 10, Right 59, and Right 97. Defeat the Lost Number boss, and use the key on the crypt door in the cavern leading to the Shinra Library. Approach the coffin, open it, and speak to Vincent. Make sure to talk to him and reply as follows: \"Talk about Sephiroth,\" and then \"Who are you?\" (this reply is available after you re-open the coffin). Leave the room and Vincent will follow you. Vincent's Limit Breaks are unique. Rather than perform a special move, Vincent morphs into a special creature, depending on the level of the Limit Break. Once in this mutated rage, Vincent becomes uncontrollable, fighting the enemies on his own. The condition expires after the combat ends. Aeris' Limit Breaks are: Level 1 First Limit Healing Wind: Heals the entire party Second Limit Seal Evil: Casts \"Stop\" and \"Silence\" on every enemy Level 2 First Limit Breath of the Earth: Cures entire party of any and all status ailments. Second Limit Fury Brand: Instantly maxes out limit gauges for other members. Level 3 First Limit Planet Protector: Grants temporary invulnerability upon the party. Second Limit Pulse of Life: Cures entire party of status ailments, and restores MP/HP. Level 4 Final Limit Great Gospel: Completely restores HP/MP to entire party, and makes party invulnerable during combat Level 3 Hell Masker: Vincent's Limit Breaks are: Level 1 Galian Beast: Fast and agile monster that deals light, firebased damage Level 2 Death Gigas: Slow but strong monster dealing moderate, lightning-based damage Defensive monster that deals moderate damage and induces various status ailments. Level 4 Chaos: Powerful all-around monster that deals heavy non-elemental damage to all enemies and randomly attempts an instant kill attack. Tifa Lockheart Tifa's Limit Breaks are: Nifa is another fighter, and the other starting character (along with Barrel and Cloud). Her MP and magic strength are average, but her physical strength is quite good. She is a better spellcaster than Barret, as competent in combat (a little faster and only slightly weak er), and has much better Limit Breaks. She should last in your party a little longer than Barret. However, she could be a sentimental favorite as she is one of Cloud's love interests. Her Limit Break is unique, in that it is a string of cumulative attacks on the target. When you use it, each stage of her Limit Break is a wheel on a slot machine. As you press the button, you can get either a hit, miss, or \"yeah!\" result. which translates into normal damage, a whiffed attack, or double damage, respectively. Each stage will randomly pick an opponent to perform the move on. Level 1 First Limit Beat Rush: A series of punches for moderate damage. Second Limit Somersault Kick:A lone kick for moderate damage Level 2 First Limit Waterkick: A water-based attack dealing moderate damage Second Limit Meteodive: A slam causing moderate damage. Level 3 First Level Dolphin Blow. Uppercut dealing moderate damage. Second Level Meteor Slam: Explosive body-slam that inflicts moderate damage Level 4 Final Limit Final Heaven: A last, explosive strike that inflicts heavy damage on target. FINAL FANTASY STRATEGY GUIDE  JULY 1998 "


"FINAL FANTASY. VI SUPER STRATEGY GUIDE Materia fter assembling a crack party to tackle the game's enemies, it's time to select the best materia. Many weapons and armor items have materia slots paired together so that two materia can be linked together for powerful effects. In the beginning, some combinations are pretty obvious, such as an All materia paired with a Restore materia to cure the whole party or with a damage spell to attack all the enemies. But later on, there are more subtle and powerful combinations you can experiment with; combinations that can land you entire strings of attacks or moves. Here are some combinations that many veteran players use: Final Attack linked with A MOST HOLY LIGHT Alexander does well with MP Absorb, since it deals enough Phoenix: Final Attack will trigger Holy damage (which everything is affected by) to give more MPs back than the whatever materia it is linked to in the number of MPs spent. event of the caster's death. Since Phoenix will resurrect the entire party, Alexander costs about this means that if you die, the Phoenix 80 MP to cast, but the materia kicks in and everyone is instant damage will yield back ly resurrected! about 97 MP (depending on level), so you actually MP Absorb linked with a gain MP for casting this strong offensive materia: MP very powerful summon Absorb takes a percentage of the damage spell. you inflict and restores your MP by that amount. This can be useful for characAdded Effect RISING FROM THE ASHES Combining Final Attack and ters that cast lots of spells. For example, linked to Hades: Phoenix allows you to not fear death, since you'll be This will revived afterwards with this combination. let you use the attributes of the There's also the phenomenon of Hades summon (which Natural Materia, super-powerful and curses enemies with hidden materia that are accessible only such conditions as Stop, with Chocobos (ostrich-like mounts that Stone, Frog, Silence, and you must breed and train). To get the so forth) in either armor desired Chocobos, you'll need to breed or weaponry. Put this Chocobos on Billy's Chocobo farm and combination on armor. train them in the Gold Saucer races. and you are protected from all of those ill Quadra Magic: Any spell or effects. Attach it to summon this is linked to is cast four your weapon, and every times in a single casting (basically, you time you attack with it, get four castings for the cost of one). KNIGHT STRIKE Knights of the Round, the most powerful you have a chance of You'll need at least a Blue Chocobo summon spell in the game, requires a Gold Chocobo in inflicting those effects (the one that can cross rivers) in order order to obtain it. on the target. to get to the cave at the end of the FINAL FANTASY STRATEGY GUIDE JULY 1998 "


"| FINAL FANTASY. VI Special Bonus Preview Final Fantasy V Eidos and Square Soft Have a Bonus in Store for American FINAL FANTASY Fans by Thierry Nguyen ZERO TIMES FOUR Combine Bahamut Zero, or any powerful non-elemental summon, with Quadra Magic, and you get four powerful castings in one shot. chain of islands in the southern continent. L ight white Mig GI: Raina 330 275 290 Mimic: Mimic allows you to copy the same move (attack or spell, but not Limit Break) of the previous acting character. If Cloud casts Knights of the Round, the Mimic-wielding character will cast Knights of the Round after him, for free. Imagine casting Quadra Magic and Bahamut Zero, and then duplicating that vicious casting. You need a Green Chocobo to navigate your way to the cave on the eastern-central part of the West Continent, near the side of a mountain that is directly west from Rocket Town. Knights of the Round: The most powerful offensive spell in the game, it strikes all enemies 13 times for heavy, non-elemental damage. To get this mighty spell, you need a Gold Chocobo to take you to the isolated island in the extreme northeast of the world. hile FINAL FANTASY VII is DE EXUBE launching with great anticipation from gamers and much fanfare from the press, FINAL FANTASY V is entering the field as a stealth product. It is, after all, a sixyear-old 16-bil Super Nintendo game with old graphics and sound. It is still FINAL FIRE This battle against one regarded as one of the best FINAL of the bosses in the game illusFANTASY games, in terms of play. trates how the battle system has though. It also wasn't one of the FINAL remained constant throughout FANTASY games to make it to the the FINAL FANTASY series. States, but Eidos hopes to bring it to the PC if FINAL FANTASY VII does well the game? The wind has stopped. All with U.S. gamers. over the land, the different characters that you have the option of portraying Never-Ending Fantasy will all simultaneously notice the sudFINAL FANTASY V starts off like den death of the wind. The king of the other FF games in a typical fantasy land then tells his daughter, Reina, land. This one is called Tycoon. The that he must journey to the Wind basic earth-shattering premise behind Shrine as fast as he can. After arriving, the king sees the Wind Crystal shatter. Elsewhere, we assume the role of the protagonist, a wandering traveler named Bartz. Earthquakes suddenly rock the land. and in the midst of AX-Death one, Bartz runs into I'm BACK! Miss me, Galut? Mwa, ha, ha, ha. Princess Reina and an amnesia-stricken man named Galuf. The trio decides to travel to the Wind Shrine together, X-CELLENT VILLAIN X-Death, the main villain of the but along the way, they game, arrives to taunt the heros for their failure in stumble onto a pirate saving this crystal. base, and decide to HELPFUL HADES Hades randomly deals seven status ailments on the enemy; Added Effect materia plus Hades will either inflict such ailments or protect you from them. FINAL FANTASY STRATEGY GUIDE JULY 1998 "


"FINAL FANTASY VIL SUPER STRATEGY GUIDE LV9 sneak aboard one of the pirate ships. States), yet its actual Faris The ship's captain, Faris, catches them, gaming system is Don't ye talk down ta me, jes 'cause I be a woman!! but after a lively discussion, he agrees to much more flexible take them to the Wind Shrine. and complex. The four adventurers eventually reach the Wind Shrine, only to find that A Career in Gaming Reina's father, the king, has died, and FINAL FANTASY V utithat the Wind Crystal is shattered. The lizes the jobs system, spirit of the king implores the adventurwhich allows you to ers to protect the other crystals sprin customize your party in kled throughout the land. And then the terms of stats and abilireal game begins. ties. The jobs system is akin to a traditional Nostalgic Gaming CRPG's class system, FAIR FARIS This humorous scene in which Faris' gender FINAL FANTASY V will be an exact except it allows switch is finally revealed is indicative of the game's humor, port of the original SUPER FAMICOM ing on the fly, and and in the translation quality of the port overall. (the Japanese name for the SNES) allows you to combine game. The graphics and sound will different abilities to make your charac Time/Space, Call, and Chemical. White remain completely untouched. The only ters even more unique. magic is healing and defensive magic. change involved is the translation from The system divides your character Black is offensive magic. Blue magic is Japanese to English. into jobs and abilities. Jobs are classes the special enemy skills you learn from FINAL FANTASY V won't look or sound like Knight, While Mage, Summoner, opponents in combat. Time/Space pretty (it looks downright primitive), and Dragoon, and they determine what alters rate of time for your party and but the feeling you'll get when you play kinds of weapons and armor you can the enemy. Call magic summons creaequip, your general stats, and tures into battle. Chemical magic is & Bigal Arghe 13/13 Job some base-level abilities, such as the Chemist's ability to combine two the Knight's Block or the Drag common items to make completely oon's Jump. new ones. Abilities make the game even Finally, the battle system is the more flexible. Each job will gain active-time system of FINAL FANTASY abilities specific to that job as the VII, where each character has a timegame progresses. You gain these bar that replenishes itself over time, abilities by gathering ability points. and you can only attack when the bar is Nanga Can Equip: Lvl. 0 0/10 which are issued after battles along full. While waiting for the bar to fill, or This is a description for the Ninja. with experience points. Now, if you while deciding what to do once the bar decide to switch jobs, the abilities is full, enemies will be able to attack LOVE OF LABOR FINAL FANTASY V's jobs you've already gained will be placed you if their time bar has filled, making system separates it from other FF games, in a pool of available abilities when this turn-based system more dynamic allowing for much flexibility. you change jobs. Then, you can reand urgent than CRPG turn-based this game is akin to what you feel when equip some of these abilities to go combat systems. booting up ULTIMA IV again. You'll be alongside your new job's abilities. This The main question is: Will gamers go playing a game with history-one that means that you can have Black Mages for the retro look? Eidos is taking a big doesn't have modern polish but has who jump like Dragoons, or Ninjas that risk with FINAL FANTASY V, because it is enough gameplay to stay on your shelf. learn to cast white magic. both a console RPG, something computIn describing the FINAL FANTASY series, The magic system is more traditional er gamers still need to adjust to, and an it's said that the even-numbered games than FINAL FANTASY VII's. You don't old one at that. FFV's success will concentrated on plot and character equip items to gain spells. Instead, you depend on how many gamers are willing development, while the odd-numbered simply learn magic spells innately as to look past the graphics and sounds to ones concentrated on the gameplay and you grow in experience. This means see the flexible gameplay within. Eidos battle system (with VII being the meld t hat in the heat of combat, your charhopes to make it easy by offering FFV at ing of both gameplay and story). FINAL acter may suddenly learn the next level a lower price point, possibly on their FANTASY V follows this basic philosophy of a spell he or she already knows. The Web site. We'll know more about FFV's as the plot is simpler than that of FINAL magic system is divided into the followshipping and pricing details once FINAL FANTASY IV or VI (II and III in the ing schools: White, Black, Blue. FANTASY VII releases. $ $ $ $ LA SOS 18 FINAL FANTASY STRATEGY GUIDE JULY 1998 "


"Strategy/Wargames Adventure/RPG FALLOUT DARK REIGN: RISE OF THE SHADOWHAND couting is everything. What you don't see will kill you. Use drones and scouts, and take advantage of elevation to look beyond the event horizon. Tired of the steady onslaught of attacks? If you can't get a moment to breathe during battle, nothing breaks an opponent's rhythm like several heavy bombers set to Harass and High Independence. If your character's intelligence is fairly high, teach a Shady Sands farmer about crop rotation and you'll earn some additional experience. TDI GAMER'S EDGE Save up your bottle caps for some attributeboosting in the Brotherhood Place turrets at natural choke points. Back them up with some mobile units in case they get surrounded. Always build a few camera towers right next to your turrets. The computer treats them as primary targets and gives your turrets a few more minutes to pick off the attackers. lecie Artillery is the king of battle. Use large groups of artillery to support your troops and interdict corridors of travel. Use the Temporal Gate in conjunction with the Rift Generator whenever possible. It's the most devastating tactic in the game. -Lance A. Larka Xenite critters heal themselves. Rotate wounded Gants and Grendels out of combat Convince Vree to give you evidence of the mutants' sterility and use this to get the Master to selfdestruct. lou. GUNTHEAT CU Use a radio to trick most of the mutant patrols around the Military Base into walking away. WARBREEDS o cheat in WARBREEDS, you must already have a game running. Turn the Caps Lock key on and type SPAMSPAMSPAMHUMBUG while holding down the Ctrl key. Turn the Caps Lock key off, and hit F9 to enter the following cheat codes (which must be in lower case): QUR OAS QUN, KARLANIE ............. Lets you see entire map cgk max Puts your cgk level to maximum crop pop All croplands on the map receive pods crop kill ............. Kills all pods on the entire map egg boy returns ...... Causes an earthquake Kills currently selected thing minimap on/off ....... Toggles the minimap on and off, but only if you have at least one working listener-Scott May MULETAK MISSILE kill. This computer's pest-control functions in the Military Base can be reprogrammed to view mutant guards as pests. Local sentries can then take care of most of the mutants for you. STORM IN THE WEST yake advantage of the over-aggressive German Al by using an \"armored cul-de-sac.\" First, leave an opening in your line with a blocking force a few hexes back. The Al will rush a corps of prime mechanized units there but will have to forgo attack. Next turn, slip your armor behind them, damage their rear units, then seal off the remaining Germans with infantry. Supply penalties will leave the remainder of the corps ready for destruction while denying the Germans desperately needed manpower elsewhere. -Jim Cobb You can sneak into the Military Base without alerting the guards or triggering the forcefields. You can open the door in the Cathedral's basement using your Traps skill on an adjacent bookcase. Rewriting History The winning strategies we listed in May's CG Tips for CLOSE COMBAT: A BRIDGE TOO FAR should have been credited to John Anderson of Atomic Games (the developers of the CLOSE COMBAT series). Our apologies for the error, and thanks again to Mr. Anderson for his excellent advice. 2 -Petra Schlunk COMPUTER GAMING WORLD. JULY 1998 217 "


"GAMING ZIFF-DAVIS INC The 1 PC Game Magazine W ORLD Chairman and CEO Eric Hippeau Chief Financial Officer Timothy O'Brien MAIL ORDER Presidents ZD Publishing Claude P. Sheer ZD Market Intelligence Bob Brown ZD Comdex and Forums Jason Chudnofsky ZD Brand and Market Services Terri Holbrooke ZD Internet Productions Dan Rosensweig ZD Education William Rosenthal 2D Television Larry W. Wangberg Senior Vice Presidents Rayna Brown (Human Resources) Daryl R. Otte (Planning and Development) MALL Vice Presidents Steve Gladyszewski (Information Services) J. Malcolm Morris (General Counsel and Secretary) Mark Mayer (Controller) Tracy Nadi (Human Resources, Operations) \" Treasurer Thomas L. Wright Corporate Sales Joe Gillespie (Executive Vice President) Save Time and Money Ordering Games by Phone! ZD Media Network Jeff Bruce (Executive Director) Scott Murphy (Executive Director) Rita Burke (Managing Director) . Local Stores don't always have the games you're looking for or the expert advice you need. Take a few minutes to browse the next few pages and shop with the courteous, experienced salespeople in Computer Gaming World's Mail Order Mall! ZD Brand and Market Services Brooke Correll (Vice President, ZD Brand Marketing) Michael Perkowski (Vice President, Client Marketing) Elda Vale (Vice President, Corporate Research) Herb Stern (Vice President, ZD Brand Management) Gregory Jarboe (Director, Corporate Relations) ZD PUBLISHING President Claude P. Sheer Executive Vice Presidents Don Byrnes Chris Dobbrow Jack Dolce Al DiGuido Thomas McGrade Michael J. Miller Senior Vice President Nancy Newman Fill the Void. ILTA Vice Presidents Bob Bader John Dodge Kathleen Goodwin Roger Herrmann Jonathan Lane Eric Lundquist Jim Manning Charles Mast James . Ramaley Paul Somerson Mark Van Name Sam Whitmore Executive Director, Licensing Gertrud Borchardt Director, Benchmark Operations Bill Catchings Director, ZD Labs Lauren Black Editorial Director, New Products Bill Machrone LUCASARTS ENTERTAINMENT COMPANY Siggraph '98 Orlando, Florida, July 19-24th, 1998 LucasArts Entertainment Company makes games. We don't make gobs and gobs of them; we just make a few. And to make those games, we hire a few extraordinary people to do what they love to do. We'll be recruiting at Sigyraph this year for the following positions: 3D Animators  Texture Artists  3D Modelers  Background Artists  3D Art Technicians We'd like to schedule interviews prior to our arrival at Siggraph. If you are interested in meeting with us please send your resume, demo recl and submission release form to: LucasArts Entertainment Company PO Box 10307 San Rafael, CA 94912 Attn: Siggraph Recruiting www.lucasarts.com Job Hotline: 415-444-8495 Arts PERMISSIONS AND REPRINTS COMPUTER GAMING WORLD (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Ziff-Davis. Copyright  1998 Ziff-Davis. All Rights Reserved. Material in this publication may not be reproduced in any form without permission. If you want to quote from an article, write to Chantal Tucker, One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016-5802, or fax 212-503-5420. ZD ZIFF-DAVIS a SOFTBANK company Computer Garning World is not affiliated with IDG. LUCAS Computer Gality Reprints For reprints, please call Ziff Davis reprints at (800) 825-4237. ARC AUDITED Audit Bureau of Circulations Member www.computergaming.com "


"PC GAMER EDITORS \"BOTTOM LINE: If you've got the money to spend this is the gaming system to own -PC Gamer, January, 1998 The \"GREY\" The \"HIVE\" The \"HIVE-MINDY Intel Pentium II 300MHZ MMX Intel Pentium II 333MHZ MMX Intel Pentium II 350MHZ MMX 440LX AGP Motherboard w/512K 440LX AGP Motherboard w/512K 440BX AGP Motherboard w/512K AAVID Cooling System AAVID Cooling System AAVID Cooling System 64MB SORAM PC-100 64MB SORAM PC-100 64MB SDRAM PC-100 3.5\" Floppy Drive 3.5\" Flappy Drive 3.5\" Floppy Drive Intel 1740 2X AGP w/8MB Intel 1740 2X AGP W/8MB Intel 1740 2X AGP w/8MB Diamond Monster Voodoo II w/BMB Diarnond Monster Voodoo Il w/8MB Diamond Monster Voodoo II w/8MB 4.36B Ultra-OMA Hard Drive 6.4GB Ultra-OMA Hard Drive 8.4GB Ultra-DMA Hard Drive SoundBlaster AWE 64 PnP SoundBlaster AWE 64 PnP SoundBlaster AWE 64 Pne Altec Lansing ACS45 Altec Lansing ACS45 Altec Lansing ACS48 Subwoofer & Speaker System Subwoofer & Speaker System Subwoofer & Speaker Susiem 32X EIDE CO-ROM 32X EIDE CD-ROM 32X EIDE CD-ROM ATX Full-Tower Case w/300 Watt) ATX Full-Tower Case w/300 Watt ATX Full-Tower Case WB Watt Power Supply w/Dual-Fans Power Supply w/Dual-Fans Power Supply w/Dual-Fans KoolMaxx Video Cooling System KoolMaxx Video Cooling System KoolMaxx Video Cooling System 104-Enhanced Keyboard 104-Enhanced Keyboard 104-Enhanced Keyboard Microsoft 2-Button Mouse Microsoft 2-Button Mouse Microsoft 2-Button Mouse Diamond Supra 56K 7.90 Modem Diamond Supra 56K V.90 Modem Diamond Supra 56K V.90 Modem Windows '95 OSR/2 Windows '95 OSR/2 Windows '95 OSR/2 Latest Drivers for Motherboard. Latest Drivers for Motherboard, Latest Drivers for Motherboard. Video, Sound, Direct X Video, Sound, DirectX Video, Sound, Direct X Free Installation & Configuration of Free installation & configuration of Free installation & configuration of Favorite Games Favorite Games Favorite Games Price: $2,099.00 Price: $2,499.00 Price: $2,799.00 \"Attention to detail, personalized treatment, optimized The \"AREA51\" quality components ready to take on any game or Simulation Intel Pentium II 400MHZ MMX ...A system truly built and serviced by hard-core gamers. That's 440BX AGP Motherboard w/512K what makes a system like the Area51 a worthwhile investment, AAVID Cooling System not a high price gamble' 128MB SORAM PC-100 -PC Multimedia & Entertainment, February. 1998 3.5\" Floppy Drive Intel 1740 2X AGP w/8MB \"The Area51 is an out-of-this world, polygon-pumping. Dual Diamond Monster Voodoo II pixel pushing gamers' dream machine on speed that w/16MB Scan Line Interleave Mode kicked every benchmark I fired it's way\" 8.46B Ultra-DMA Hard Drive -VOODOO Extreme, January. 1998 lomega Internal Zip Drive 100MB SoundBlaster 16 PnP Diamond Monster Sound PEI Altec Lansing ACS500 Subwoofer & Speaker System Hitachi DVD Player 20X w/MPEG-2 Decoder Card ATX Full-Tower Case w/300 Watt Power Supply w/Dual-Fans KoolMaxx Video Cooling System 104-Enhanced Keyboard Logitech Mouseman. Diamond Supra Sonic II 112K Modem Saitek X35/X36 Controllers Windows '95 OSR/2 Latest Drivers for Motherboard, Video, Sound, Direct X Free installation & configuration of Favorite Games Game Bundle Price: $3,999.00 Quality Monitors ALIEN WARE. 17\" Viewsonic V773.26dp add: $400.00 19\" Viewsonic V95.26dp add: $715.00 21\" Viewsonic P810 .25dp add: $1,050.00 PC Systems www.alienware-pc.com Go to #105 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink Go to #105 @ www.computergaming.com/intolink 1-8 00-4 94 3 ER . Product names used in this publication are trademarks of their respective companies. "


"CHIPS&BITSINC. 2 Monster Di Huge Selection POB 234 DEPT 11013 ROCHESTER, VT 05767 INT'L 802-767-3033 FAX 802-767-3382 Great Prices AMOND The IWA NBAN FREE INSIDE 'DIAMOND MONSTER 3D II' This 3D addDiamond (Hardware) on upgrade card works with your existing Release Date: NOW 3D graphics card or 2D/3D combo card. It PC delivers 3D more shockingly real than anything you've ever seen! Using the next 8meg $229.99 generation 3Dfx Voodoo2 chipset, Diamond Monster 3DII simply blows away previous standards of performance. 12meg $269.99 T ITLE RELEASI PRIE Tank! 09/98 $18. Team Apache 07/98 $469 Top Gun 2 Hornets Nest 09/98 $48. Total Air War 07/98 $48.5 Train Dispatcher 2 0 3/98 $44.5 Trans-Am Racing 68-72 09/98 $36. Ultimate Racing Pro 03/98 $42.5 UltraFighters 12/98 $14.9 Vangers 06/98 $46. WC 5 Prophcy Miss Dsk 06/98 $19. Wing Comm 5: Prophcy 12/97 $41.5 Wings of Destiny 09/98 $49.5 X-Car Exprinti Ron 08/97 $11.9 X-Com Interceptor 06/98 $48.9 X-Wing Collector's Srs 06/98 $29. 1A-10 Warthog 09/98 $43.5 F-22 50 03/98 $35 F/A-18 GSF 05/98 $469 iPanzer 44 04/98 $35.9 \"FALCON 4.0' Pilot an F-16 in a real-time war in this multiplayer air combat simulation set in the Korean Peninsula. Superb 3-D photorealistic, Al, texture-mapped graphics and detailed models of F-16 avionics, weapons and threats. Play options include: Dogfight. Instant Action, Campaign Mode, & Tactical Engagement COMPUTER GAMES: SIMULATION TITLE RELEASE PRICE TITLE RELEASE PRICE TITLE RELEASE PRICI 10th Planet 09/98 $48.99 Destruction Derby 2 11/96 $19.99 Monster Truck Madnss 2 05/98 $46.99 1943 Euro Air War 11/98 $45.99 F-15 03/98 $46.99 Newman Haas Racing 06/98 $39.99 6881 Hunter Killer 06/97 $46.99 F-16 Agressor 08/98 $48.99 Outlaw Racers 06/98 $39.99 AH-64D Longbow 2 12/97 $39.99 F-22 ADF 12/97 $44.99 Panzer Commander 05/98 $28.99* ATF 98 08/98 $46.99 FIA 18 Korca 12/97 $36.99 after $20 in-box rebate Aces: X-Fighters 10/98 $49.99 F1 Racing Sim 04/98 $46.99 Panzer Elite 12/98 $48.99 Across Desert 1941 11/98 $48.99 Falcon 1,0 06/08 $54.99 Phantom Ace 09/98 $48.99 Air Warrior 3 12/97 $39.99 Falcon 4.0: MiG 29 12/98 $30.99 Privateer 3 03/99 $52.99 Anarchy 05/98 $11.99 Falcon Gold 07/94 $25.99 Recoil 11/98 $48.99 Andretti Racing 12/97 $29.99 Fighter Legends 11/98 $48.99 Red Line Racer 06/98 $42.99 Apache Havoc 09/98 $18.99 Flying Corps Gold 02/98 $33.99 Redline 07/98 $46.99 Army Air Corps 42 06/98 $48.99 Flying Nightmares 2 10/98 $39.99 SU-27 Electrnc Blield 10/98 $46.99 Brout Champ Dragrcng 04/98 $44.99 Grand Prix Legends 07/98 $44.99 Scrmn Demons Europe 11/98 $17.99 Castrol Honda Superbike 04/99 $43.99 Joint Strike Fighter 12/97 $27.99 Silent Hunter 2 09/98 $46.99 Comanche Gold 04/98 $45.99 M1 Tank Platoon 2 01/98 $32.99 Skies 06/98 $48.99 Condemned 05/98 $48.99 MS Combat Flight Sim 08/98 $48.99 Spearhead 09/98 $49.99 Confirmed kill 09/98 $42.99 MS Flight Sim 98 09/97 $52.99 Spearhead Exp Pack 09/98 $29.99 Cyberstrike 2 08/98 $39.99 MechWarrior 3 12/98 $52.99 Starship Troopers 12/98 $46.99 Deep Six 09/98 $46.99 Mig Alley 06/98 $46.99 Starsiege 091/98 $48.99 COMPUTER GAMES: HARDWARE Controllers Gravis PC Gamepd Pro 11/96 $26.99 Saitek X-35T System 04/98 $49.99 ACT Racing System 05/98 $49.99 Joyswitch 09/94 $42.99 Saitek X-36 Cont Sys 04/98 $107.99 CH F16 Combatstick 1 1/95 $59.99 MS SdeWdr Fisti Pro Pad 09/98 $89.99 Saitek X-36 Joystick 04/98 $69.99 CHF16 Fighterstick 1 1/96 $84.99 MS Sidewinder FF Pro 09/97 $148.99 Suncom F16 Talon Ustk 07/95 $42.99 CH Gamestick 14 12/97 $59.99 MS Sidewndr Prec Pro 10/97 $54.99 Suncom SFS Throttle 04/98 $89.99 CH Jane's Combt Stck 07/97 $69.99 Mad Catz Panther XL 01/98 $66.99 TM Attack Throttle 02/98 $51.99 CH Joystick Switchbox 11/97 $24.99 Quickshot Master Pilot 98 04/98 $53.99 TM Elite Ruddr Pedals 03/98 $67.99 CH Pro Pedals 12/94 $79.99 Quickshot Mstr Pilt Val 03/98 $64.99 TM F16 TOS 06/95 $114.99 CH Pro Throttle 03/96 $84.99 Quickshot MstrPat Prop 04/98 $25.99 TM F22 Pro 10/96 $133.99 CH Rang Wni W Pedal 10/97 $85.99 Saitek PG Dash 04/98 $49.99 TM Nascar Racng Wnt 11/97 $119.99 COMPUTER GAMES: ACTION Battlezone 03/98 $36.99 Descent 3 12/98 $48.99 Hexen Portal Praevus 04/98 $25.99 Beneath 10/98 $48.99 Descent Freespace 05/08 $46.99 Incoming 05/98 $40.99 Blood 2 11/98 $48.99 Die By the Sword 03/98 $14.99 Interstate 77 09/98 546.99 Daikatana 09/98 $39.99 Duke Nukem Forever 12/98 $48.99 MIA 07/98 $29.99 Dark Forces Jedi Msst 02/98 $24.99 Duke Nukm 30 Atomic 01/97 $31.99 Omikron 11/98 $41.99 Dark Frces Jedi Knght 10/97 $31.99\" Forsaken 04/98 $49.99 OutWars 04/98 $48.99 after S15 manufacturer's rebate Hall Life 06/98 $48.99 Prey 12/98 $50.99 Dark Vengeance 06/98 $45.99 Heavy Gear 2 02/99 $48.99 Ouake 2 12/97 $44.99 Dead Reckoning 08/98 $44.99 Heretic 2 12,98 $49.99 Quake 2 Mission Pk1 05/98 $29.99 Death Trap Dungeon 05/98 $39.99 Hexen 2 09/97 $40.99 Ouake 3 04/99 $48.99 COMPUTER GAMES: SPORTS Microprose (Simulation) Release: 6/98 $54.99 Video Cards ATI Xpreply 8MB AGP2X 04/98 $249. Crtve 3D Bistr 2 8MB 03/98 S219.5 Citve 3D Bistr 2 12MB 03/98 $275,5 Omnd Mnstr 3D II BMB 04/98 $229.5 Dmnd Mnstr 30 11 12MB 04/98 $269.9 Herculs Thrir 3D PCI 8MB 04/98 $239. Orchd Rghts 3D II BMB 04/98 $249. Orchd Rghts 3D II 12MB 04/98 $289. Matrox MGA GT200 5/98 $299. PC CD 'PANZER COMMANDER' is an immersive 3D battle simulator in which the player is given the task of driving a WWII-vintage Panzer or Allied tank in a variety of combat scenarios. Features Realtime 3D rendering, directional lighting, fog effects, accurate tank physics, a variety of different terPANZER rains. Mindscape/SSI(Simulation) COMMANDER Release: 5/98 PC CD Price Before Rubale $48.99 NII TANK SIMULATOR ManufacturerHebate 520.00 Price Alter Rebale $28.99 Requiem 09/98 $46. Revanant 09/98 $48. Sin 07/08 $48.5 SpecOps 04/98 $48. Star Trek Klingon Academy 10/98 $48. Tomb Raider 2 11/97 $375 Tomb Raider 3 11/98 $41.3 Tomb Raider Gold 03/98 $25 Unreal 05/98 $43 Wrath 12/98 $48 \"DESCENT FREESPACE' Battle DFSGENT and command up to 12 units in dogfights with high resolution space craft. Choose your fate in branching missions with multiple solutions. Multiplayer capable and 360 degrees of freedom with no walls or corridors. Experiment with an array of ships & weapons at your disposal. Team up with or fight your friends in multiplayer action over a network Interplay (Action) Release: 5/98 PC CD $46.99 All Star Baseball 99 0 5/98 $44.99 Baseball Mogul 99 05/98 $29.99 Bass Mstrs Cissic Pro 06/98 $42.99 Bass Pro Fishing 06/98 $18.99 Big Game Hunter 03/98 $19.99 Big Game Hunter Add-On 07/98 $15.99 Browning's Duck Hunter 05/98 $15.99 Duck Hunter Pro 0 8/98 $17.99 Extreme Fishing 06/98 $17.99 FIFA Road Wild Cup 98 12/97 541.99 Salt Water Fly Fishing 04/98 $15. Tiger 99 06/98 514 Tiger 99 TPC Courses 06/98 $18.9 Tiger 99 Tournament Crs 06/98 $18.9 Triple Play 99 03/98 $45.5 Trophy Bass Deluxe 03/98 $47. VR Baseball 98 04/98 $40 VR Baseball 99 04/99 $44 World Cup 98 05/98 $45 World League Soccer 98 05/98 $44 FPS Raseball 98 06/97 $28.99 MS Golf 99 05/98 $48.09 FPS Football 98 11/97 $29.99 Madden FB 98 10/97 $45.99 FPS Skiing 01/98 $47.99 Mastrett Extrm Watr Spts 08/98 $17.99 FPS Trophy Bass Ruts 11/97 $36.99 NBA Live 98 10/97 $39.99 Game, Net & Match 05/98 $39.99 NFL Gameday 99 08/98 $39.99 Golf Pro: W/ Gary Player 04/98 $42.99 NHL Hockey 98 09/97 $45.99 Hardball 6 04/98 $45.99 NHL Power Play 98 10/97 $34.99 High Heat Baseball 04/98 $35.99 NHL Powerplay 99 09/98 $44.99 Jack Nicklaus Golf 5 12/97 $35.99 PBA Bowling 2 10/98 $35.99 Links LS 98 07/97 $33.99 Remnat Uplnd Brd Hntr 08/98 $17.99 COMPUTER GAMES: ADVENTURE Gruesome Castle 10/98 $48.99 Nomad 04/94 $16.99 Heart of Darkness 08/98 $42.99 Of Light & Darkness 04.98 $45.99 Homeworld 08/98 $48.99 Overseer 03/98 $38.99 Journeyman Projct 3 02/98 $39.99 Pirates! Gold 02/95 $19.99 KOS:Mask of Eternity 12/98 $48.99 Ouest for Glory 5 06/98 $48.99 Leisure Suit Larry 7 11/96 $48.99 Redguard 09/98 $52 99 Morpheus 09/98 $44.99 Return to Krondor 12/98 $45.99 Myst 03/94 $19.99 STG Klingon Honor Guard 12/98 $48.99 Myst 2: Riven 11/97 $35.99 Sanitarium 04/98 $37.99 Neverhood 11/96 $22.99 Siege of Stormhaven 10/08 $48.99 YOU \"DUKE NUKEM FOREVER' Duke is back and badder than before in this retooled sequel. Dr. Proton has taken over Area 51 & nuked Las Vegas. Making use of the Quake II engine, the team at 3D realms promises not to disappoint with new weapons, new villains, and full 3Dix support. Multiplayer options & incredible lifelike environments Abyss. Incidnt Europa Alien Intelligence Badlands Beyond Time Black Dahlia Blade Runner Curse of Monkey Isle Demon Isle Gabriel Knight 3 Grim Fandango 08/98 $43.99 08/98 $45.99 10/98 $48.99 09.98 $44.99 02/98 $39.99 11/97 $39.99 11.97 $35.99 01/99 $48.99 09/98 $48.99 08/98 $48.99 Star Trek Birth Fed 1298 $52 Star Trek SFA Mssn 01/98 $19 Star Trk Str Fit Acad 09/97 $38. Starship Titanic 04/98 $48 Str Trk Sert Vien Fry 08/98 $48. Warcraft Lord of Cins 06/98 $46. Worlds of Billy 03/98 $19. X-Files Adventure Game 06/93 $48. Zork. Gend Inquisitor Zork. Nemesis 04/96 $29. HINT BOOKS GT Interactive (Action) Release: 12/98 $48.99 PC CD DUKE PUKE FOREVER Age of Empires Agents of Justice Alpha Centauri Black Dahlia Blade Runner Caesar 3 Curse of Monkey Isle Daikatana Dark Forces 2 Dominion Storm 01/98 $1599 03/98 $16.99 08/98 $16.99 03/98 $16.99 01/98 $16.99 08/98 $18.99 01/98 $16.99 08/98 $15.99 12/97 $16.99 06/98 $16.99 Sid Meiers Gettysburg Sin Starcraft Starsiege Total Annihilation Ultima 9 Ascension Ultima Collection Ultima Online Unreal Warcraft Adventures 11/97 $18. 05/99 $14 04/98 $16 09.98 $18 03/98 $18 12/98 $16. 02/98 $16 10/97 $16 05/99 $16 06/98 $18. 'SIN' As the leader of HARDCORPS sec-force. Armed with an array of weaponry and pitted against mean and ugly mutants, you must infiltrate the drug circuit and bring it's master mind to justice. Driveable vehicles, seamless multi-player gameplay over LAN, modem, or Internet. Quake 3D Engine enhancements include tog & water effects, translucent models, and improved physics. Activision (Action) Release: 7/98 $48.99 A PC CD Duke Nukm 3D Atomic 04/97 $16.99 Mechwarrior 3 09/98 $16.99 Elder Scrolls 2 10/96 $13.99 Might & Magic 6 05/98 $16,99 F-15 04/98 $16.99 Myth 01/98 $16.99 Falcon 4.0 05/98 $18.99 Overseer 03/98 $16.99 Gabriel Knight 3 09/98 $18.99 Prey 07/98 $18.99 Hall Life 06/98 $16.99 Privateer 3 09/98 $18.99 Heroes M&M 3 07/98 $18.99 Ouake 2 Comp Surv Gde 03/98 $12.99 Hexen 2 10/97 $16.99 Quest for Glory 5 06/98 $16.99 King's Quest 8 08/98 $16.99 Rebellion 04/98 $16.99 MechCornmander 07/98 $16.99 SWAT 2 05/98 $16.99 COMPUTER GAMES: ADULT Deep Thrt Gris 4PK 06/96 $49.99 Glamor Girls 1-3 el. 02/96 $19.99 Devil in Miss Jones 12/93 $19.99 Latex 02/96 $49.99 Dirty Debutnt 6 PK 01/96 $44.99 Net Erotique 02/96 $19.99 Diva X NJ 11/97 $39.99 Nightwatch Int3 07/96 $39.99 Diva X: Kanako 03/98 $39.99 Platinum Six Pack 04/96 $44.99 Dream Machine 2 10/96 $19.99 Poker Party 06/95 $39.99 Duke Screw'em 12/96 $49.99 Private Psr Park 2 08/96 $49.99 Fantascenes 3 07/97 $39.99 Romsoft Six Pk 2 06/96 $29.99 Femme Fatale 09/95 $22.99 Ropes & Chains 02/96 $19.99 Girlfriend Donna 12/96 $44.99 Scissors N Stones 02/94 $19.99 Ace In the Hole Aladdin & City of Sin Arabian Nights Beverly Hi Call Gris Busty Babes Hard Core Cabin Fever Celebrity Nudes Club Royal Crystal Fantasy Cyber Photographer 10.97 $39.99 04/98 $34.99 03/98 $39.99 07/96 $19.99 11/97 $36.99 07/97 $34.99 01/95 $19.99 04/98 $39.99 09/95 $24.99 08/96 $29.99 Space Sirens 2 09/95 $34 Tabloid Beauties 12/94 $19. Tokyo Glamour Girls 08/95 $19. Ultra Vixen 05/97 $49 Vampire's Kiss 10/94 $36 Virgins Vol 3 10/95 $29. Virtual Valerie 2 68/95 $19 Virtual Vixens 05/94 $24 Wheel of Fantasy 08/95 $19. You're the Director 11/95 $29 01970 CHIPS & Bits, "


"New Releases Order Online www.cdmag.com/chips.html or call 1-800-699-4263 GET ! Source Code 11013 $107.99 TILE SAITEK X36 CONTROL SYSTEM includes Saitek (Hardware) the fully programmable X36F Control Stick & Release Date: 5/98 X35T Throttle & Rudder Control PC X35T: 2xFireButtons, 4 WayHat Switch Rudder Control, 2xRotary Controls MouseController/8Way Hat Switch $49.99 X36F:5xFireButtons 2x8Way HatSwitches X&Y TrimContr ols, \"Pinkie Shift Function with LED. 569.99 RELEAST PRICE Six 09/98 $35.99 D&D Birthright 07/97 $27.99 dhara 3 05/98 $45 99 dmral Ancient Ships 06/98 $46.99 dvancd Civilization 11/95 $35.99 ge Empires Finl Congst 05/98 $18.99 ge of Empires 10/97 $41.99 ge of Empires 2 12/98 $48.99 ge of Wonders 05/98 $47.99 plu Centauri 08/98 $48.99 mcient Empires 03/96 $15.99 mmy Men 04/98 $35.99 $ & Allies 09/98 $43.99 attle of Britain 1940 10/99 $44.99 attiewagons 09/98 $44.99 Hackstone Chroncles 11/98 $44.99 & C 2: Tiberian Sun 09/98 $48.99 & C Covit Options 03/96 $18.99 & C Gold W95 02/97 $18.99 & C RA Aftermath 10/97 $19.99 &C Red Alert 11/96 $25.99 Besar 3 12/98 $48.99 apitalism Plus 05/97 $35.99 aptives 06/98 $40.99 ave Wars 11/96 $24.99 2 Fantasy Worlds 11/97 $25.99 v2 Platinum 06/98 $16.99 vilization 12/95 $19.99 vilization 2 03/96 $29.99 vilization 2 Scen 11/96 $23.99 ommandos 06/98 $35.99 WARCAVES COMPUTER GAMES: STRATEGY TIME RELEASE PRICE TITLE RELEASE PRICE TITLE REASE PRICE Cong New World Dlx 11/96 $24.99 Incbtion: Retrn Scayra 04/99 $18.99 Seven Kingdoms Plus 05/98 $35.99 Conquest Earth 09/97 $28.99 incubation 10/97 $39.99 Siege 08/98 $35.99 Constructor 10/97 $34.99 Industry Glant 04/98 $35 99 SimCity 3000 09/98 $54.99 Creatures 2 11/98 $39.99 Jagod Alina Ddly Game 09/96 $19.99 Small Soldiers 06/98 $28.99 Creatures Lite Kit 1 01/98 $22.99 Jagged Alliance 2 10/98 $44.99 Soldiers at War 04/98 $43.99 Dark Omen 03/98 $39.99 KKND Krossfire 08/98 $46.99 Star Control 4 10/98 S48.99 Dark Reign Futre War 09/97 $40.99 Lords Realm 2 11/06 $34.99 Star Trek Starlleet Cumind 12/98 $48.99 Dark Reign MP 1 04/98 $26.99 Lords Realm 2 Exp Pk 08/97 $28.99 Starcralt 04/98 $39.99 Dawn of War 10/98 $39.99 Lords of Magic 12/97 $39.99 Starcraft Expansion 06/98 $29.99 Deadlock 2 03/98 S43.99 MAX 2 06/98 $44.99 Stars Twinpack 05/98 $27.99 Dominant Species 11/98 $48.99 MTG Duels Planeswalker 02/98 $26.99 Stellar Frontier 06/98 $44.99 Dominion Storm 05/98 $35.99 Magic Spells of Anct 10/97 $28.99 Stratosphere 08/98 $46.99 Duel. Mage Wars 09/98 $48.99 Malkali 11/98 $44.99 Theocracy 12/98 $42.99 Dune 2000 06/98 $41.99 Mass Destruction 03/98 $38.99 Total Annihilation 10/97 $19.99 Dungeon Keeper Gold 04/98 539.99 Master of Magic 12/94 $19.99 Total Annihilation 2 12/98 $48.99 Dungn Kpr Deepr Dngns 12/97 $19.99 Master of Orion 11/94 $19.99 Total Annihilt Mssn Pck 07/98 $16.99 Emperor of Fadng Suns 01/97 $19.99 Master of Orion 2 11/96 $25.99 Total Annitn Cr Clacy 04/98 $22.99 Extreme Tactics 05/93 $49.99 Mechcommander 07/98 $52.99 Transport Tycoon Dlx 09/95 $25.99 Extreme Warfare 08/98 $48.99 Missn Fre:Cyrstem 2 05/98 $46.99 Uprising 10/97 $19.99 Force Commander 11/98 $49.99 Myth 11/97 $39.99 Wages of War 11/96 $19.99 Freedom in Galaxy 11/98 $42.99 Plague 09/93 $42.99 War of the Worlds 09.98 $44.99 Galactic Mirage 07/98 $44.99 Populous 3 10/98 $45.99 Warcraft 2 12/95 $25.99 Global Domination 11/98 $49.99 Railroad Tycoon 2 12/98 S48.99 Wargames 05/93 $39.99 Guardians: Agnts Js! 09/98 $47.99 Rainbow Six 09/98 $45.99 Warhmm 4Ok Chs Gate 07/98 $14.99 Heroes M&M 2 11/96 $26.99 Reach for Stars 2 04/99 $48.99 Warlords 02/91 $9.99 Heroes M&M 2 Exp Pk 05/97 $19.99 Rebellion 03/98 $49.99 Warlords 2 Dix 09/95 $41.99 Heroes M&M W95 02/96 $19.99 Revolution 09/98 $44.99 Warlords 3 08/97 $35.99 Heroes of M&M3 11/98 $14.99 Ruthless.com 08/98 $48.99 Worms 2 01/98 $24.99 Hidden Wars 05/98 $48.99 SWAT 2 05/98 $48.99 X-Com Apocalypse 08/97 $26.99 Hollywood Mogul 12/97 $39.99 Settlers 2 Gold 04/97 $19.99 X-Com Terr frm Deep 03/95 $16.99 Imperialism 08/97 $29.99 Settlers 3 09/98 $44.99 X-Fire 06/98 $45.99 COMPUTER GAMES: WAR Great Barries Caesar 03/98 $34.99 Panzer General 2 10/97 $37.99 Storm in the West 04/98 $33.99 Great Battis Alexndr 0 6/97 $35.99 Panzerblitz 10/98 $42.99 TACOPS 98 05/98 $35.99 Great Bttles Hannibal 11/97 $32.99 People's General 10/98 S4299 Tank Resistance 2024 05/98 $39.99 Guadalcanal 08/98 $39.99 Prelude to Waterloo 10/97 $19.99 Third Reich 10/96 $29.99 Harpoon 97 11/96 $29.99 Road to Moscow 09/98 $43.99 Tides of War 06/98 $36.99 Plus 05/98 $24.99 Sid Meier's Gettysbrg 10/97 $13.99 Tipers on Prowl 2 12/96 $12.99 Opertianl Art of War 05/98 $39.99 Squad Leader 12/98 $39.99 V Victory Bundle 11/95 $28.99 Over the Reich 11/96 $25.99 Steel Panthers 2 11/96 $19.99 War in East Rostov 04/98 $25.99 Pacific General 07/97 $29.99 Steel Panthers 3 11/97 $26.99 War in Europa 05/93 $48.99 Pacific Tide 08/98 $45.99 Steel Panthers Arsenal 05/98 $37.99 West Front 09/98 $44.99 BOARD GAMES \"WAR GAMES' For the 1st time in a PC strategy game, the True 3-D engine eliminates \"tiles and allows the entire playfield to rotate. Alpine, jungle, desert, lowlands, pacific, and urban environments. Every unit, building, and environment is created in complete 3-D, creating battles so realistic, you'll swear you are there! MGM (Strategy) $39.99 Release: 5798 PC CD SID MEIER'S A LP 0-1 A CENTAURI Chtung Spitfire de de Camp 2 attlegrnd Bull Run attlegrnd Gettysbrg attlegrnd Mid East attlegrnd Shilot attleyrnd Waterloo ose Combat 2 ast Front est Front Camp 09/97 $39 99 01/98 $44.99 05/97 $21.99 12/95 $18.99 09/98 $42.99 | 07/96 818 99 05/96 $18.99 11/97 $12.99 11/97 $39.99 03/98 $23.99 \"ALPHA CENTAURI' is Sid Meier's new turn-based empire-building strategy game. A mother ship's human cargo fleeing earth in the 22nd century splits into 7 factions en route to the self-titled destination Colonists can terraform land, changing topography to suit needs. Determine your infant civilizations modus operendi. Design your own military with land, sea, & air units. Electronic Arts(Strategy) $48.99 Release: 8/98 PC CD DUNE 2000 attam 330 RR & Abbr Brons 944 Second Front Bartles Anc, World cross 5 Aprils Hvanced Clvilization Avanced Squad Leader emy Heartland furnin of Glory alanche. Invan Itly 5 & Allies attle for Africa attles of Waterloo httleforce 2 httletech 4th Ed. 12/94 $20.99 12/94 $29.99 01/95 $21.99 12/94 $23.99 12/94 $25.99 12/94 $37.99 07/96 $36.99 12/94 $21.99 01/95 $27.99 11/94 339.99 03/97 $32.99 11/94 $33.99 02/98 $29.99 12/94 $21.99 Bells of War 05/98 $42.99 Emperors of Europe Bloodst Day Antietam 09/95 $29.99 Empire Builder Caesar Civil Wars 12/94 $38 99 Fire in the Fast Campaign to Stalingrd 01/35 $29.99 For The People Campaigns Givil War 02/95 $19.99 Gettysburg Carrier 12/94 $27.99 Give Me Liberty Civilization 12/9: $29.99 Harpoon Box Set Colonial Diplomacy 01/95 $12.99 Here Come the Rebels Colorado Rails 02/97 $17.99 History of the World Command at Sea Rules 05/96 $15.99 Napoleon's Battles D-Day 12/94 $16.99 Over the Reich Decision in France 09/95 $19.99 Pax Britannica Die Hanse 11/95 $39.99 Rebels & Redcoats 2 Eagle Empire Borodino 11/95 $29.99 Republic of Rome ROLE PLAYING GAMES 05/96 $33.99 03/96 $25.99 02/95 $58.99 05/98 $43.99 12/94 $15.99 04/95 $22.99 11/96 $41.99 12/94 $23.99 12/94 $27.99 12/94 $24.99 12/94 $30.99 12/94 $18.99 04/95 $25.99 12/94 $29.99 Samurai Swords 04/97 $38.99 Serenissima 01/97 $45.99 Squad Leader 12/94 $23.99 Star Fleet Battles 11/94 $25.99 Stonewall in Valley 05/95 $29.99 Texas Revolution 05/96 $18.99 The New Acquire 06/95 $25.99 Turning Pl Stalingrad 12/94 $19.99 Typhoon! 1941 11/95 $37.99 War of 1812 01/95 $34.99 Warhammer Fantasy 10/95 $59.99 We the People 12/94 $29.99 Wooden Ships Iron Men 12/94 $19.99 World in Flames Dlx 11/96 $89.99 DUNE 2000' This multiplayer update of Dune Il has translucent shroud effects and smoke trails, real-time lighting, and particleeffect explosions. Play one-onone on the internet or with 8 on a LAN. All 27 missions have been updated and feature new FMV mission briefings and cutscenes with 6 different actors. Repair or sell structures & create teams to carry out orders. Virgin (Strategy) $41.99 Release 6/98 PC CD bedo 04/98 $18.99 ternityPlayer's Handok 04/98 $24.99 s Magica 4th Ed 08/95 $26.99 oblegum Crisis 12/96 $16.99 all of Cthulhu 02/95 $18.99 astle Falkenstein 02/95 $25.99 nspiracy X 09/96 $21.99 wberpunk 2020 05/95 $17.99 Deadlands Rulebook Dragonlance 5th Age Earthdawn Fading Suns GURPS Rulebook Heavy Gear Hercules & Xena Indiana Jones 10/97 $27.99 09/96 $21.99 06/95 $18.99 02/97 $22.99 02/95 $20 99 08/95 $25 99 04/98 $26.99 02/95 $24.99 Jovian Chronicles Macross 2 MERP 2 Softcover Mechwarrior Ritts Robotech RuneQuest 4th Ed Shadowrun 2nd Ed. 04/99 $24.99 04/95 $11.99 10/95 $17.99 07/95 $13.99 06/95 $21.99 04/95 $11.99 06/98 $19.99 12/94 $20.99 Skyrealms Jorune 3rd Ed. 09/95 $17.99 Star Fire 3rd Edition 05/98 $17.99 Star Wars Revised 01/97 $25.99 Traveller 09/96 $24.99 Vampire 2nd Ed. 02/95 $24.99 Warhammer Fantasy 06/95 $24.99 Werewolf 02/95 $24.99 Wraith 02/95 $24.99 'EXTREME WARFARE' combines EXTREME WARFARE intense, on-the-battlefield action with prebattle planning. Play with up to 32 players (16 per side) on 24 landscapes over the Internet. Al, 25 upgradable weapons, & 10 combat machines (tank, jeep. attack helicopter, transport, & trooper). Play as one of two races, Human or Sway, fighting for your very existence on Mars, in 1st or multiple 3rd person views. Broderbund (Strategy) COMPUTER GAMES: ROLE PLAYING FREE GAME OFFER! $48.99 Release 8798 ablo PC CD dur's Gate 08/98 $46.99 Gothica 09/98 $48.99 mttiespire 12/97 $39.99 Hexplore 07/98 $45.99 Spend the specified amount on any in-stack software and choose one free eltica 09/98 $44.99 Lands Lore Grans Ost 10/97 $28.99 LIBM game from the corresponding list. Request must be made at time of 01/97 $32.99 Lands of Lore 3 12/98 $48.99 order. Olfer good on in-stock software only, while supplies last. Limil 2 per ablo 2 09/98 $49.99 Might & Magic 6 05/98 $46.99 customer. Valid through 6/26/98. ablo Hellfire 12/97 $22.99 Might & Magic 5 LE 05/98 $59.99 SPEND $60 dr Scris Mrrowind 07/98 $54.99 Swords & Sorcery 09/98 $48.99 Bridge Olympiad 3.5, Disciples of Steel CD, Elements 3.5. Origamo 3.5 06/98 $45.99 Swords of Heroes 10/98 $46.99 SPEND $100 VerQuest 09/98 $44.99 Thief The Dark Pric! 09/98 $48.99 Julland Co. Return of the Phantom 3.5, Riddle Master Lu CD, allout 10/97 $37.99 Ultima 9 Ascension 12/98 $52.99 Simon Sorcerer 3.5 allout 2 11/98 $48.99 Ultima Online 09/97 $49.99 SPEND $200 nal Fantasy VII 06/98 $39.99 Wizardry 8 10/98 $50.99 Air Combat Pacific 1942 3.5, Grandest Fleet 3.5, Star Trek Judgement Rites 3.5, Universal Neverlock 3.5 isa, MC & Discover accepted. Checks held 4 weeks. Money Orders under $200 same as cash. COD $8. Price, release, availability, shipping times offer not guaranteed & are subject to change at any time. Hardware may require added S&H. Within 10 days defectives repaired or replaced at ur discretion. After 10 days the manufacturer's warrantee applies. All sales final. S&H calculated on a per order, per shipment, and per item basis. he 'per order charge is charged once per order placed the 'per item' charge Standard Procity Express Express Mail TOM TO charged once for each item ordered and the per shipment' charge is U.S. NI US Mail Canada The World harged once for each shipment we make to you. For each US order $10.00 Per Order will be allocated to a 12 issue subscription to computer games strategy plus. Per Shipment $1.25 $1.00 $500 $1300 $2.00 $2.00 Fall for details. $075 $1.00 $1.00 $2.00 $200 $6.00 1999 CHIPS & BITS, INC. Goto #068 @ WWW comnutergaming comlinfolink \"FINAL FANTASY VII' An innovative role-playing game featuring seamless 3D gameplay and animation. Rather than learning spells, characters find & buy gems which are mounted on weapons or armor giving spelllike power. Hundreds of pre-rendered, computer-generated backgrounds and real-time battles map screens, and complex engrossing storyline Eidos (Roleplaying) $39.99 Release 6/98   "


"CGW'S MONTHLY READERS' POLL ach month, 2,000 CGW subscribers are selected at random to rate 100 computer games. The results of that poll are combined with the results of previous months to yield a cumulative average for the best plays in gaming. If you receive a ballot, please return it with your ratings so that other gamers and game publishers can benefit from your feedback. SCORE 8.22 TOP ACTION GAMES GAME COMPANY 1 1 Quake II Activision 2 2 Quake Pack 2: Dissolution id Software/Rogue 3 3 Quake Pack 1: Scourge id Software/Ritual 4 4 Jedi Knight: Dark Forces II LucasArts 5 5 Duke Nukem 3D 3D Realms 6 6 Tomb Raider Eidos 7 7 Tomb Raider II Eidos 8 8 Quake id Software 99 The Need for Speed SE EA 10 10 Moto Racer EA 8.84 8.74 8.72 8.48 8.18 TOP ADVENTURE GAMES DE GAME COMPANY 1 1 The Pandora Directive Access 2 2 Gabriel Knight 2 Sierra 3 3 Curse of Monkey Island LucasArts 4 4 Twinsen's Odyssey Activision 5 10 Last Express Broderbund 6 The Neverhood DreamWorks 5 Realms of the Haunting Interplay 8 8 Rama Sierra 9 9 Circle of Blood Virgin 10 * Spycraft Activision 8.16 8.06 7.75 7.52 752 8.08 8.01 7.52 8.00 7.79 7.71 7.45 7.33 SCORE L EA TOP CLASSIC/PUZZLE GAMES V SE GAME COMPANY 1 1 You Don't Know Jack 2 Berkeley Systems 2 2 You Don't Know Jack 3 Berkeley Systems 8.37 3 4 You Don't Know Jack Movies Berkeley Systems 8.15 4 5 You Don't Know Jack Sports Berkeley Systems 7.65 5 6 You Don't Know Jack TV Berkeley Systems 7.55 67 Power Chess Sierra 7.39 Worms 2 MicroProse 7.39 8 8 Lose Your Marbles SegaSoft 6.86 9 TOP SIMULATION/SPACE COMBAT ast GAME COMPANY SCORE 1 2 Wing Commander Prophecy Origin 8.79 2 1 Longbow 2 8.77 3 3 Wing Commander IV EA/Origin 4 4 AH-64 Longbow EA/Origin 5 5 Fighters Anthology EA 7.85 6 6 MechWarrior 2: Mercenaries Activision 7 7 Silent Hunter SSI 8 8 U.S. Marine Fighters EA 99 EF2000 Ocean 10 10 U.S. Navy Fighters EA 7.45 8.24 8.05 7.80 10 SHEROES II 1 2 3 4 5 TOP SPORTS GAMES A GAME COMPANY 1 Links LS Access 2 NHL 98 EA Sports 3 NBA Live 98 EA Sports 4 NASCAR Racing 2 5 Grand Prix 2 MicroProse 6 NHL 97 EA Sports 7 NBA Live 97 EA Sports 8 Triple Play 98 EA Sports 9 Jack Nicklaus 4 Accolade * PGA Tour Pro EA Sports Sierra 8.59 8.47 8.19 7.96 7.96 7.91 7.72 7.54 7.40 TOP STRATEGY GAMES GAME COMPANY SCORE 1 1 Heroes II: Price of Loyalty New World Computing 9.05 2 2 WarCraft II Expansion Disk Blizzard 8.78 33 Total Annihilation GT 1 Annihilation GT Interactive 8.70 4 4 Civilization II MicroProse 8.68 5 5 Heroes II New World Computing 8.64 6 6 Red Alert Virgin/Westwood 7 7 Red Alert: Counterstrike Virgin/Westwood 8 8 Age of Empires Microsoft 8.17 9 9 Civ II: Fantastic Worlds MicroProse 8 .12 10 10 C&C: Covert Operations Virgin/Westwood 8.07 8.30 7 8 9 10 MASISK GAME Dago 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 TOP ROLE-PLAYING GAMES COMPANY 1 Diablo Blizzard 8.59 2 Fallout Interplay 8.30 3 Hellfire Sierra 8.15 4 Daggerfall Bethesda 7.19 5 Anvil of Dawn New World Computing 7.08 6 Lands of Lore 11 Westwood 6.71 7 Ultima Online Origin 5.68 Merdian 59 3DO 5.09 Descent to Undermountain Interplay TOP WARGAMES W GAME coMPANY SCORE 1 1 Steel Panthers II Camp. Disk SSI 8.54 2 3 Panzer General II SESSI 2 Steel Panthers Camp. Disk SSI 8.51 4 4 Sid Meier's Gettysburg Firaxis 8.32 5 5 Steel Panthers II SSI 8.14 6 6 Battleground: Shiloh TalonSoft 7.94 7 7 Battleground: Napoleon TalonSoft 7.92 8 9 Tigers on the Prowl II HPS 7.86 9 8 Battleground: Bull Run TalonSoft 7.85 10 10 Battleground: Antietam TalonSoft 7.83 did not appear prior to this listing 4.00 10 222 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"Games on unnumbered lines are tied with game on line above. * = Top game of genre. Red = New Game, AD = Adventure, RP = Role-Playing, SI = Simulation/Space Combat, ST = Strategy, WG = Wargame, AC = Action, SP = Sports, CP = Classic Puzzle. Games are retired after two years and become eligible for the Hall of Fame. * HOS A SAMEISHER 1 2 Heroes II: Price of Loyalty New World Computing 2 4 Quake II Activision 3 11 Wing Commander Prophecy Origin 4 3 WarCraft II Expansion Disk Blizzard 5 1 Longbow 2 EA 6 5 Quake Pack 2: Dissolution id Software/Rogue 1 6 Quake Pack 1: Scourge id Software/Ritual 8 7 Total Annihilation GT Interactive 9 8 Civilization Il MicroProse 10 8 Heroes II New World Computing 11 11 Links LS Access 12 10 Red Alert Virgin/Westwood 13 11 Diablo Blizzard 15 NHL 98 EA Sports 15 14 Steel Panthers II Campaign Disk SSI 16 19 Panzer General II SSI 16 Steel Panthers Campaign Disk SSI 18 17 Jedi Knight: Dark Forces II LucasArts 19 21 NBA Live 98 EA Sports 20 18 You Don't Know Jack 2 Berkeley Systems 21 20 You Don't Know Jack 3 Berkeley Systems 22 24 Sid Meier's Gettysburg Firaxis 23 22 Fallout Interplay 23 Red Alert: Counterstrike Virgin/Westwood 25 27 Wing Commander IV EA/Origin 26 29 The Pandora Directive Access 27 32 NASCAR Racing 2 Sierra 28 29 Duke Nukem 3D 3D Realms 29 26 Age of Empires Microsoft 30 33 Gabriel Knight 2 Sierra 31 25 Hellfire Sierra 35 You Don't Know Jack Movies Berkeley Systems 33 28 Steel Panthers II SSI 36 34 Civ II: Fantastic Worlds MicroProse 37 36 Tomb Raider Eidos 38 37 C&C: Covert Operations Virgin/Westwood 38 Civilization II: Scenarios MicroProse 40 43 Curse of Monkey Island LucasArts 41 39 AH-64 Longbow EA/Origin 42 40 Tomb Raider II Eidos 43 42 Quake id Software 44 44 Grand Prix 2 MicroProse 41 NHL 97 EA Sports 46 45 Battleground: Shiloh TalonSoft 47 46 Battleground: Napoleon In Russia TalonSoft 48 47 NBA Live 97 EA Sports 49 50 Tigers on the Prowl II HPS 50 48 Battleground: Bull Run TalonSoft 48 Fighters Anthology EA GAME SCORE RAFISMOA ST 9.05 5 AC 8.84 4.5 SI 8.79 4.5 ST 8.78 4.5 SI 8.77 5 AC 8.74 5 AC 8.72 4.5 ST 8.70 45 ST 8.68 5 ST 8.64 5 SP 8.61 5 ST 8.60 4.5 RP 8.59 4.5 SP 8.59 4 WG 8.54 4.5 WG 8.515 WG 8.51 4 AC 8.48 4.5 SP 8.47 45 CP 8.46 45 CP 8.37 4 WG 8.32 4.5 RP 8.30 4.5 ST 8.30 4 SI 8.24 4.5 AD 8.22 NA SP 8.195 AC 8.18 4.5 ST 8.17 4.5 AD 8.16 5 RP 8.15 4 CP 8.15 4.5 WG 8.14 45 ST 8.124 AC 8.08 4 ST 8.07 4 ST 8.074 AD 8.06 5 SI 8.05 5 AC 8.01 4 AC 8.00 5 SP 7.965 SP 7.96 4.5 WG 7.94 5 WG 7.92 4.5 SP 7.91 4.5 WG 7.86 4 WG 7.85 4 SI 7.85 3.5 S PAST FOMESHER 52 53 Battleground: Antietam TalonSoft 53 52 MechWarrior 2: Mercenaries Activision 54 50 The Need for Speed SE EA 54 Silent Hunter SSI 56 59 Twinsen's Odyssey Activision 57 55 U.S. Marine Fighters EA 58 56 Triple Play 98 EA Sports 59 56 Moto Racer EA 60 59 Battleground: Waterloo TalonSoft 61 58 You Don't Know Jack Sports Berkeley Systems 62 61 Crusader: No Regret EA/Origin 63 62 You Don't Know Jack TV Berkeley Systems 64 63 Jack Nicklaus 4 Accolade 66 Jagged Alliance: Deadly Games Sir-Tech 66 72 Last Express Broderbund 63 The Neverhood DreamWorks 62 Realms of the Haunting Interplay 69 70 Battleground: Gettysburg TalonSoft 66 EF2000 Ocean 71 69 Myth Bungie 72 68 Rama Sierra 73 73 Dungeon Keeper EA/Bullfrog 74 71 Circle of Blood Virgin 73 U.S. Navy Fighters EA 76 76 Achtung! Spitfire Avalon Hill 77 Interstate '76 Activision 78 75 Flight Simulator 98 Microsoft 88 PGA Tour Pro EA Sports 80 79 Power Chess Sierra . Worms 2 MicroProse 82 77 Tripleplay 97 EA Sports 83 82 NBA Live 96 EA Sports 84 81 Age of Rifles Campaign Disk SSI 91 Dark Reign Activision 80 Spycraft Activision 87 83 Advanced Tactical Fighters EA 83 MDK Playmates/Shiny 89 85 CivNet MicroProse 90 85 Lords of the Realm Il Sierra 91 87 Fantasy General SSI 92 89 FPS Football Pro '96 Sierra 93. Close Combat: A Bridge Too Far Microsoft 89 X-COM: Apocalypse MicroProse 95 95 Abe's Oddysee GT Interactive 96 92 Daggerfall Bethesda 93 FPS Football Pro '97 Sierra 95 Leisure Suit Larry 7 Sierra 99 95 688(1) Hunter/Killer EA/Jane's 98 X-Wing vs. TIE Fighter LucasArts GAME SCORE RAPINYA WG 7.83 5 SL 7.80 4.5 AC 7.79 NA SI 7.794 AD 7.755 SI 7.73 NA SP 7.72 3 AC 7.71 4 WG 7.67 45 CP 7.65 45 AC 7.63 4.5 CP 7.55 25 SP 7.54 5 ST 7.54 4 AD 7.52 4.5 AD 7.524 AD 7.52 45 WG 7.51 4 SI 7.51 4.5 ST 7.49 45 AD 7.48 4.5 ST 7.47 4.5 AD 7.45 4 SI 7.454 ST 7.41 5 AC 7.41 4.5 SI 7.40 3.5 SP 7.40 3.5 CP 7.39 NA CP 7.394 SP 7.37 4 SP 7.34 N/A WG 7.33 4 ST 7.33 4 AD 7.33 4.5 SI 7.32 4 AC 7.32 4.5 ST 7.314 ST 7.30 4 ST 7.295 SP 7.26 4 WG 7.24 45 ST 7.24 4 AC 7.22 35 RP 7.1945 SP 7.1945 AD 7.19 3.5 51 7.18 5 SI 7.18 3.5 did not appear prior to this listing www.computergaming com COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 223 "


"Adventure Editor Goes Berserk Or, Take My 30 Copies of TEMUJIN—Please! my cube with a post-it comment attached like \"nice try,\" or \"do this again and you're dead.\" One day I even threw a few out the window into the streets of San Francisco, but, like something out of The X-Files, they all somehow managed to come back. I think they might be spawning. Babe: gasping appreciatively Oooh! What's that you have there? Me: ZORK ZERO. Advanced copy. No one else has one. Just me. PC Gamer won't even be around for another five years. Babe: Take me now you viking. Me: Okay. aliens, and you have to go back in time to recover a crystal.\" As I drift in and out of consciousness, phrases like \"beautiful prerendered graphics\" and \"wonderfully acted video sequences\" filter through my ears, until it finally ends, and I find myself back in the room once again, with the designer anxious to hear my opinion of the game. \"Ashley...\" I moan. These days, being the adventure editor seems more like a booby prize. The entire genre (with precious few exceptions) has devolved into cheeseball murder mysteries and quasi newagey mystical searches for some kind of foofy glowing crystal or something. I'm tired of having to sort through so much dreck for a few little driblets of good gaming. So, I hereby declare: No more MYST clones. No more Tex MURPHY clones. I don't want to fix any JEFF GREEN his month, we begin with a mathematical equation. (Note to American kids: Dude, \"math\" involves numbers and other lame stuff like that; ask your parents. It's an inverse law, actually, intended to explain the method in which game companies send new titles to the Computer Gaming World office. The law goes like this: The cooler the game, the less copies we get. I'll give you a good example. Back at the beginning of December, when five QUAKE IIS arrived in Action Editor Elliott Chin's cubicle, there was a near fist-fight among the staff over who would get a copy. It was embarrassing and immature, and I, for one, was appalled at such a barbaric display. All that day, as I played the copy that I had forcibly grabbed out of Denny Atkin's hands after knocking him over and kicking him, I shook my head in dismay over the sorry behavior of my co-workers. On the other end of the spectrum, we have the sad spectacle of TEMUJIN, an FMV adventure game that arrived months ago like a United Nations food drop in three gigantic boxes-containing 10 copies each. As adventure game editor, these 30 TEMUJINS went to me, and let's just say that the giant food drop probably would have been much better received. And I've tried to get rid of them. I've begged and cried. A couple times I'd slip one on another editor's desk when he was out, only to find it back in These days, being the adventure editor seems more like a booby prize. The point of all this is that I'm beginning to feel like I'm getting gypped here. There probably was a time, in the distant past, when being the CGW adventure-game editor was a cool thing. Had I been here in 1988, for example, bet I could've walked into any bar, holding an advance copy of ZORK ZERO, and been el babe magnet supremo (look girls I know Spanish!). I see it going something like this: don't think a week goes by without some company PR reps wanting to come to our office to show me their new SACRED ARK OF TIME (or whatever) adventure game. I try to get out of these meetings by hiding under my desk or by faking some kind of horrifically spastic, tonguewagging seizure, but, invariably, because it's my job, I find myself stuck in the conference room, a polite smile painfully affixed to my face, while some earnest designer walks me through the latest uninspired Myst rip-off. \"It's just like MYST,\" they'll begin, while I daydream of running naked through a field with Ashley Judd, \"only it's set in the Egyptian times, and there are more water pumps, pull any more levers, or search any more alien artifacts to fix any more stupid broken pulleys. And I really, really, really don't want to do any more jigsaw puzzles...ever. I'm not kidding. Don't mess with me. I've got a box full of TEMUJINS here, and I'm not afraid to use them. Start designing some decent adventure games now-or everybody gets one. CGW Me: (sauntering up to the bar next to an Elizabeth Hurley lookalike/ Hey there. Babe: Hi yourself. Arching my eyebrows as / casually bring the ZORK ZERO box onto the bar counter) What Jeff doesn't realize is that hidden inside every box of TEMUJIN, is a pirated, playable copy of WARCRAFT III. That's a joke. And you can complain all you want about it to Jeff at jhgreen@zd.com. Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Ziff-Davis, Inc. One Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016. Subscription rate is $27.97 for a one-year subscription (12 issues). Canada and all other countries add $16.00 for surface mail. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World, PO Box 57167, Boulder, CO 80328 7167. Canadian GST registration number is 89371 0442 RT. Canada Post International Pub's Mail Product (Canada Distribution) Sales Agreement No. 1058649. Periodicals postage paid at New York, NY 10016 and additional mailing offices. Printed in the U.S.A. 224 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD JULY 1998 www.computergaming.com "


"NTRODUCT NAG \"THE Dirty Dozen "


"Intense real-time tactical combat Mountain, Desert, Beach and Snow terrains Name Russell Hancock A.K.A. Inferno Nationality British Primary Skill Explosives/munitions EES Name A.K.A. Nationality Primary Skill Sir Francis Woolridge Duke British Marksman Name Jerry McHale A.K.A. Tiny Nationality American Primary Skill Use of blades/close combat Background Background Very quiet demeanor. Keeps to himself. Explosive temper can result in unpredictable behavior. Cold and calculating character. His commitment to the team intensified after his sister was killed in a German bombing raid. Background Extremely violent temper when provoked. Loves to read poetry to relax. Afraid of dogs. COMMANDOS: Behind Enemy Lines and Eidos Interactive are trademarks of EIDOS Plc.  1997-1998 Eldos. All Rights Reserved. Check out the demo: L/LL LLLLLLSLLLLLLLLLLL 730 N 7.        "


"24 missions throughout Europe and Africa You're in control Commandos work for you! Name Rene Duchamp A.K.A Spooky Nationality French Primary Skill Linguist Name James Blackwood A.K.A. Fins Nationality Australian Primary Skill Champion swimmer/sailer Name Sid Perkins A.K.A Tread Nationality American Special Skill Vehicle mechanic/driver Background Mistrustful character. Has poor relationships with teammates. Loves a fine Cuban between raids. Background Background Aside from an absolute hatred toward Nazis, quite an amiable character. Speaks five languages fluently. Great with women. Dissolute character. Vows to have alcohol problem under control. Could figure out a way to make an anvil float. Potenat ou COMMANDOS this summer Petonating BEHIND ENEMY LINES Go to #276 @ www.computergaming.com/infolink "


"EVERYBODY SHOULD LIVE A LITTLE. 1. EVEN IF YOU GET KILLED IN THE PROCESS. OVE Ultima: Ascension. Take Fantasy to Extremes. www.ultima-ascension.com ORIGIN We create worlds Corright 1998 ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Ulitimo, ORIGIN, We Create Worlds and associated loges are trademarks or registered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. In the US and/or other countries. All rights reserved. Origin is an Electronic Arts company. "

