December 1989

Number 66

Features
Interplay's "Dragon Wars"

16

Scorpia Escapes "Purgatory"

Sneak Preview: EA's "Starflight 2"

18

The Spemin Strike Back / Chris Lombardi

Sneak Preview: Activision's "MechWarrior"

22
24

36
38

Wormholes and New Roles / Omar DeWitt

Scorpion's Mail

40

Game Hints for Frustrated Adventurers / Scorpia

"A-10: Tank Killer"
Dynamix Offers Close Air Support / M Evan Brooks

61

Origin's/CGW's "Omega" Tournament

99

Departments
34

"David Wolf, Secret Agent" from Dynamix / Charles Ardai

Origin's "Space Rogue"

See The U.S.A. In Your "UFO"

30

A "Plane" Wargame / Lt. H. E. Dille

"Popcorn Not Included!"

48

Monthly Tournament Results

New "Flight Simulator" Products / Russell Sipe

General Quarters' "Midway"

"Good Knight, Sweet Prince"

subLOGIC's "UFO" / Daniel Hockman

"Hull-Bent for Leather" / M. Evan Brooks

"Flying Off The Shelf'

46

Broderbund's "Prince of Persia" / Charles Ardai

A 31st Century "Slag-Fest" / Johnny L. Wilson

Microprose's "M-1 Tank Platoon"

Kyodai's "Murder Club"
The Whole "Sleuth" / Dennis Owens

42

Editorial
Contest Results
Taking A Peek
Rumor Bag
Inside The Industry
Over There
Game Ratings/Hall of Fame
Conversions Received
Letters from Paradise
Reader Input Device

4
4
6
8
10
12
52
83
103
104

Contest

Editorial

"If I Were To Design
A Computer Game"
Contest
In CGW #64
(October) we asked
you to come up
with contest ideas.
Well, you did great!
We received some
excellent suggestions (and some stinkers as well).
Without a doubt the most popular
idea (submitted by a number of you)
involved variations on the theme
"Design a New Computer Game, Not
Another Clone". It seems a lot of you
are tired of me-too products and want
to see some new ideas out there (a
few of you listed SimCity as an example of a good new idea for a computer game). So this month's contest
will involve coming up with the best
idea for a new computer game.
However the BEST single idea for a
contest came from Patrick Buechner
of Washington DC. Patrick's idea was
clever and will be fun to judge, but
we're going to make you wait a
month to see it. Look for Patrick's contest winning contest in the January
1990 issue of CGW. Congratulations
Patrick! OK, back to the December
Contest.

Contest #2
In 200 words or less, submit your
idea for a new computer game.
Entries will be judged based on
originality; feasibility (i.e. is it possible
to produce this game on a personal
computer operating with normal configuration standards) and marketability
(i.e. a hummingbird feeder simulator
may be an original idea, but it would
not be marketable). Normal configuration standards for your chosen platform will be assumed to be 640K RAM
with EGA graphics for IBM
(soundboard, joystick, mouse support
optional); 1MB RAM Amiga; 1MB RAM
Apple IIgs, 128K Apple II. Entries
must be postmarked by January 31,
1990. Winners will be announced in
the March 1990 issue. Mail your submissions to:
Computer Gaming World
Contest #2
P.O. Box 4566
Anaheim, CA 92803-4566
The best ideas will printed in CGW.
The reader who submits the very best
idea will receive a three year subscription to CGW. This is your chance to
tell the companies what kind of
games you'd like to see for your computer. Enter early, enter often.

A Changing
Of
The
Guard
am pleased to announce that Johnny
Wilson has been promoted to the position of Editor of Computer Gaming
World. Wilson began his relationship with
CGW as a writer in 1982. In October
1986 he joined the magazine full time as
Associate Editor.

I

What does this mean to you, the
reader? Will there be changes in the way
CGW covers the hobby and industry? Will
there be major changes to the format of
CGW as a result of this move? No, on
both accounts. The reason being that
the current direction and format of CGW
is already as much Wilson's vision of the
magazine as it is mine.
This promotion is, in reality, giving
credit where credit is due. As my publisher responsibilities have increased over the
past 18 months, by necessity Johnny's
responsibilities and authority have grown
so that he is now functioning as Editor
just as I have been functioning as Publisher and Editor-in-Chief. It is time to formalize what has become a reality.
CGW has gained an unparalleled level
of respect and trust in this industry. This
is due in no small part to Johnny's untiring efforts in news gathering and accurate analysis which has served not only
you the reader, but the whole industry as
well. We have always sought, and I
believe with some success, to be not only
a consumer review magazine, but also a
trade style publication that reports on the
industry itself. That is why CGW attracts a
readership that tends to be upscale and
mature (average income $30,000;
average age 29.5 years). We believe you
want more than just the reviews. You

want the inside information on the
games, the people, and the companies
Speaking of inside information, that is
where Johnny excels. When he became
Associate Editor he was quite timid about
calling the companies and seeking information (I can hear a number of Press
Relations people gasping in disbelief). It's
true! But he has learned. These days
when a PR person gets the message that
Johnny is on the line, she/he is likely to
ask themselves "What's going on in my
company NOW that I don't know about!?"
One of my favorite stories concerning
Johnny's ability to get inside information
involves the PR person who, after just
leaving a meeting in which she learned of
a new title her company was going to
develop, picked up the latest copy of
CGW. Intending to check out Rumor Bag
and see what the competition was doing,
she read that her company was planning
to release the game discussed in the
meeting. In another memorable story, a
company CEO was polling company investors to see who might have leaked a
story printed in CGW, only to discover
that he had given us the information himself.
So, what can you expect from CGW
now? Just what you have come to expect
from us already: the most accurate
coverage of the games and the industry
to be found anywhere (and nearly always
the first to press with that coverage).
Congratulations Johnny! Now, I'm
taking a few weeks off. Here are the keys,
don't forget to put out the trash.
Russell Sipe
Publisher and Editor in Chief

e

Taking A Peek

Accolade
550 S. Winchester Blvd.
Suite 200
San Jose, CA 95128
BAR GAMES: The player gets to compete in up to five adult-oriented bar
games including Liar's Dice, Air Hockey,
the always favorite Wet T-Shirt Contest,
Pick-up Artist (girls, not sticks!), and the
last-call, Beer Slide. No cover, no minimum (except maybe age). IBM ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #1.
THE CYCLES: INTERNATIONAL
GRAND PRIX RACING: Accolade

brings their auto racing system to the
world of superbikes in this product.
Racers compete against nine of the
worlds best racers on 15 authentic courses from around the world. Three performance classes of superbikes are available and five skill levels reflect five levels
of racing realism. IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #2.

THE MUSCLE CARS: The Duel:
Test Drive II Car Disk: This new data
disk (you need The Duel: Test Drive II to
play) provides the player with the powerful, muscle cars of the sixties. Cars include the 1963 Corvette Sting Ray,
1968 Shelby GT500 Cobra, the 1967
GTO, the 1969 COPO 9560 ZL-1
Camaro, and the 1969 Dodge Charger
Daytona. IBM ($19.95). Circle Reader
Service #3.

Activision
3885 Bohannon Drive
Menlo Park, CA 94025
GHOSTBUSTERS II: Players take
control of each of the Ghostbusters as
they try to fry the ghostly Scoleri
Brothers, scoop up slime from beneath
the Van Horne Station, escape from
Parkview Asylum, and launch Miss Liber
ty on a rescue mission through the
streets of New York. It's a dirty job .. .
IBM ($44.95). Circle Reader Service #4.
TONGUE OF THE FATMAN: It's
alien fight night and you're the fresh
meat in this sock'em up action game.
Players must duke it out with several
arena-hardened aliens on their way to
the ultimate title fight with Mondo the
Fatman. Players attack with the usual assortment of fighting moves, but they
(Continued on page 66)

Industry News

M

ontreal is probably best known
for good food, beautiful
mademoiselles, and excellent
hockey. I was enjoying some of the Old
World cuisine, flirting with an enchanting
bi-lingual waitress and planning to see
the Montreal Canadiens hockey club
play the Boston Bruins after dinner. I
noticed the president of an entertainment
software firm and one of his investors
entering the crowded restaurant
and couldn't resist the temptation
to play a diabolical prank on
them. Calling to my waitress in
my horrendously broken French, I
motioned her to my table and
whispered my plan into her ear.

waitress and asked her to say something
in English to them. She shook her finger
at me and said, "Oh, you're so-oo-oo
awful!" The businessmen thought so,
too, so I tried to make up for the prank
by offering them a rumor. Panther
Games, the Australian publisher of Fire
Brigade is running late in releasing Fulda
Gap, a new approach to the hypothetical
Central European battle between NATO

The

Rumor
Bag

The idea was that she would
speak only French while serving
the executive and would pass
along to me, preferably in
English, any rumors she happened to overhear. It was
foolproof (I got the rumors, didn't
I?). After the salad course, she
told me that Interplay has signed
a licensing deal to produce the
first computer role-playing game
based on the Lord of the Rings.
There have been adventure
games and adventure/strategy
games, but this is the first
licensed Tolkien CRPG. She even overheard a great story about the fact that
Dragon Wars was held up more than a
week as the programmers chased down
one particular bug. They found it after
viewing hours of videotape showing the
playtesters at work. The "bug" was in the
code involving a magic spell called, appropriately enough, "Insect Plague".

By the time the main course arrived, the
executive had already marinated his filet
mignon with a rumor that Virgin
Mastertronic U.K. has acquired the
rights to publish Monty Python: The
Game. Alas, the US division hasn't yet
decided whether to publish it over here or
not. He also said that their "Medieval
Football" game, expected in the summer
of 1990, would probably be entitled,
Knight Time Football.
Other tidbits about European games accompanied the chocolate truffles and coffee. Data East apparently plans to
publish The Untouchables, an action
game originally published overseas by
Ocean, and Accolade plans to publish a
refined version of Fighter Bomber, based
on the European version published by Activision U.K.
As the two businessmen started to
leave, I greeted them warmly in English.
They turned toward me and one said,
"I'm glad someone in here speaks
English. I'm going to have to learn to
speak French." I introduced our mutual

by
Jean
Jacques
Voltaire
and Warsaw Pact forces. The reason?
They are creating a development system
for an entire series of modern military
simulations, to be called the Flash Point
series. Most people thought they were
going to use the Fire Brigade system for
Fulda Gap, but it's going to be more
user-friendly.
We all left the restaurant in a jovial
mood and as I tried to flag down a taxi,
his investor gave me a business card with
some news about Electronic Arts Distribution scribbled on the back. EAD will
now distribute personal computer versions of Sega Software's Altered Beast,
Crackdown, Golden Axe, and Turbo Outrun, while Mindscape will continue to
market Shinobi, After Burner and the earlier titles.
On the way to the Forum, the cabbie
asked me if I already had my ticket. I said
I didn't and he dropped me off on
"Scalper's Row" (a popular sidewalk near
the Forum). I was immediately intercepted by an enterprising sidewalk salesman who wanted $100 per seat. I
hesitated, so he looked nervously from
side to side and said, "Look, I'll make it
$80 if you can give me a rumor they
haven't heard at my local software store."
I didn't ask how he knew I was the
"Rumor Bag" guy (even painted in "The
Canadien's" familiar red, white and blue,
the bag over my head is a dead
giveaway). I simply told him Psygnosis
was preparing the ultimate "TV game

show" simulation. Entitled The Killing
Game Show, it will feature hi-tech combat between all sorts of organic and
robotic lifeforms in arenas shaped like ancient temples, organic materials, and
mysterious caverns. So, he sold me a ticket and still made a healthy profit.
At the game, I loved the bi-lingual
scoreboard. Glenn Wesley was called for
"hooking" and they broadcast
some neat animation out of the
French word, "accrocher". A
Quebecois sitting next to me said
something that translates,
"Stephan LeBeau hasn't been
hooked like that since he played
SimCity on his computer." The
large fellow in front of him turned
around and spouted a torrent of
French at him which took a moment for me to understand. The
large gentleman was telling him
about SimEarth. He'd heard that
the new game uses Gaia theory
(particularly the work of scientists
like James Lovelock and Lynn
Margulis), an interdisciplinary approach to the ways geology, biology, and anthropology connect.
He says the designers are trying
to do some different climate
modeling and are experimenting
with different time scales (all the way from
geologic eras to the fast-moving ways
humans mess up the planet).
"Speaking of ecological contamination,"
I piped up. "A new crew called Aftershock Entertainment sent me an advanced copy of Space Waste, a fastmoving arcade game with gorgeous VGA
graphics that should be published in
December by Microillusions."
They said they would watch for it, but
they were really more interested in sports
games and simulators, so I told them
about Electronic Arts' upcoming PGA
(Professional Golf Association) licensed
product. At least, I told them there was
going to be one. I didn't have a lot of
details.
Suddenly, the Montreal goalie (Patrick
Roy) made a spectacular save. The
scoreboard lit up with a pun on the
French word for
unbelievable--incROYable. In turn, the fellow next to
me said, "You're not going to believe
what SSI's new flight simulator is going
to be." He told me that it would be called
DragonStrike and would be a dragon
flight/combat simulator.
"Are you sure that's not a lot of hot air?"
I quipped in my best French. Ducking a
left hook, I now know that I either need
to improve my French, learn more about
the Quebecois sense of humor, or get
padding for my bag. Unbelievable!

Industry News

Inside the Industry
News, Notes and Quotes From the
Computer Entertainment Industry
Epyx Files For
"Chapter 11"
Bankruptcy
On October 19, 1989, Epyx
filed for protection from creditors
under Chapter 11 Bankruptcy
Laws. The hearing is scheduled
for December 12, 1989. Informed sources suggest that the
move would be a prudent step,
since the company should have
a pretty fair income stream
beginning in a few months and
needs temporary protection from
its creditors in order to recover.
However, some Epyx
shareholders have alleged that
the company notified them that
the most recently scheduled
stockholders' meeting had been
canceled and then, held a secret
meeting. COW was unable to
reach a company spokesperson
because the Epyx phone line
was disconnected.

Sierra Shows
13th Straight
Quarter of
Revenue Growth
In an entirely different vein,
Sierra On-Line, Inc. reported
on October 26, 1989 that it
had just completed its
thirteenth consecutive quarter
with increases in revenue
(+ $1,854,000 or 33.25%) and
earnings (+ $138,000 or 17.5%).
The increase of $.05 in earnings
per share (+ 20%) is significant
in that there was almost a full
million more shares outstanding
during the latest quarter than in
the previous year's quarter. The
increase itself is even more significant in that Sierra's joint
promotion with IBM delayed
several significant revenueproducing projects.
Sierra President and CEO Ken
Williams has stated that the
delay is over and the company is

Reports, Business Class,
Paintworks Plus, Paintworks
Gold, and others, are the two

Strategic Simulations,
Inc. just signed a licensing
agreement with FASA Corporation to produce a line of
products based on the
"Renegade Legion" series of
game products. The first
product will be Interceptor,
ship-to-ship combat in outer space.
Projected release date is
mid-1990.

Long Awaited
"Harpoon"
Nears Arrival
At press time, CGW received a
playable copy of Harpoon, the
long-awaited game of modern
naval combat from Three-Sixty
Pacific. The game was still undergoing a rigorous debugging
process, but the promise of a
design which would offer a
detailed strategic conflict for the
grognard and an accessible
game for the casual gamer or

Mediagenic
Refocuses On
Entertainment
Mediagenic has announced
plans to divest itself of its two
company owned Presentation
Tool Publishers in order to concentrate on entertainment
products. TenpointO, publishers of Focal Point II and Open
It!, and Activision Presentation Tools, publishers of

Strategic
Simulations,
Inc. Signs
New License

" . .. once again concentrating
on both our new products and
existing line." In a recent conversation with CGW, Williams suggested that the company may be
experimenting with higher density disk storage during 1990 in
order to accommodate more
data for improved graphics and
sound. Informed sources indicate that further advances in
graphics are due toward the middle of 1990, but no official statement has been made. The
higher than expected earnings in
the second fiscal quarter should
pave the way toward these technological advances in the Sierra
product line.

whether to have full ordnance
initially available.

product lines affected.
Mediagenic will continue to
market the products already
developed, but no further research or development is expected.
Currently, Mediagenic is optimistic about its entertainment
products: Ghostbusters Mechnovice seems to be fulfilled. The
detailed database, with commentary by naval warfare expert and
best-selling novelist Larry Bond,
really exists. The windows-style
screen with strategic map, group
display and unit detail is functional. In addition, the game offers
the versatility to play either
NATO or Warsaw Pact sides; utilize possible nuclear disposition;
use snorkeling Soviet subs;
choose realistic weather; opt for
realistic or user-friendly maintenance failure levels; and decide

Warrior, Shanghai, Grave Yardage and others. Further, Davis
told CGW that the company expects to continue to be supportive of CD-ROM products. Manhole was the first ever and Cosmic Osmo (CD-ROM) will be
prominently featured at the
Winter Consumer Electronics
Show . Davis also believes the
company's new "Gametalk" system, as well as a new Infocom
title to be announced in January
that may reposition the brand
name, will offer unique contributions to the market. Asked if the
company will be moving toward
entertainment products in a "Windows" environment to take advantage of future multimedia
products, Davis simply asked if
CGW thought there were 'Windows" of opportunity in the MSDOS world. Without confirming
any specific 'Windows" products,
Davis pointed out Mediagenic's
investment in ZSoft software
and noted that with Atlantabased ZSoft's expertise,
Mediagenic will have 'Windows"based multimedia products
whenever there is a platform.
Also, Davis' statement in the
divestiture announcement said
that ZSoft would not be affected
by the plan. "Its [ZSoft's] highend IBM/compatible graphics
and output device support orientation have considerable
strategic value to our
organization."

Foreign Correspondence

Over There
Of Gods
and Gremlins
European
Computer
RolePlaying
ere is the latest information on
European Christmas game
releases. Mention of availability
refers to the UK market, however they
can be obtained via those addresses
listed last month.

H

The data disk, available now, for the
ever-popular Populous has finally arrived
on a dual format ST/Amiga disk. Five
new worlds are included: Silly Land, Wild
West, Revolution Francaise, Block Land
(seen in the screenshot), and Bit Plains.
Electronic Arts says that each land is
tougher to complete than its predecessor
and that previous strategies, used with
the original scenarios, may not be the
best to complete the game. The price of
the data disk is half of the original game.
Developed by Eldritch Games, for
Electronic Arts, Hound Of Shadow is a
combination of (solo) RPG and a
text/graphic adventure—a concept
developed by Infocom with Journey.
Hound Of Shadow (a pre-Christmas
release) is based in the Oxford
Street/Soho area of the 1 920s, the plot
owing a great deal to the H.P. Lovecraft
style of horror story. The RPG aspect of
the game uses Eldritch's "Timeline" system. After answering some questions at
the beginning of the game and selecting
a relevant profession (which will govern
which skills your character will be most
adept at), the computer generates a set
of statistics according to your answers
(shades of Ultima IV). The RPG-type intro-

duction then gives way to an, apparently,
standard text/graphic adventure but with
puzzles relying more on character interaction rather than object manipulation. In
addition, the graphics are black and
white/sepia which enhances the atmosphere.
Both of the UK's top adventure houses
may have produced their last standard
text/graphic adventure. Level 9 (Knight
Orc, Lancelot, etc) have announced that
their forthcoming adventure, Scapeghost
(all formats, pre-Christmas launch), will
be their last because, according to Level
9's Pete Austin (one of three brothers
who all take part in designing and
programming), "People have been declaring the death of the adventure market for
years, so Scapeghost is an appropriate
final release. It comes from beyond the
grave and you play a ghost."
As an ex-cop who knew too much; was
efficiently disposed of; and framed for a
number of crimes he didn't commit, you
return, in spectral form, with the dual aim
of clearing your name and seeking
revenge upon the villains. Level 9 is now
concentrating upon the new H.U.G.E. system (wHolly Universal Games Engine)
which is more arcade-oriented and may
possibly end up in something of the Zak
McKracken mold.
Magnetic Scrolls' (Guild of Thieves,
The Pawn, etc) position is open to
speculation. However, they are reported
to be developing a system which will take
them away from standard adventures. If
this is so, Myth will be their last adventure. Myth (all formats, available now) is a
mini-adventure which was developed
specifically for the "Official Secrets" club
(more later). It revolves around a rather
inept Poseidon, a god of the sea who cannot swim. As he says himself, "Have you
any idea how difficult it is to look god-like
(Continued on page 101)

I

Review

urgatory
stinks. It reeks
of the dead and
dying among filthchoked streets, decaying buildings, and
open-air cesspools.
Few survive for long
in this noisome
parody of a city and
those who do quickly
lose what humanity
they once had. They
go mad or prey on the weaker inhabitants, always on the lookout for new blood to bully, beat,
or rob. This time, the new blood
is you, dumped naked and unarmed into a hell on earth from
which, so it's said, there is no escape but death . . .
P

Bard's Tale games.
Don't do it! You won't
like the results.
Regardless of level,
they all come over
with physical stats of
16, a couple of skills,
and 10 points for skill
or attribute increases.
This is less than it
sounds, especially if
the characters transfer
with a high level. For
mages in particular, this is a problem, as it costs 10 points for each
Magic skill beyond Low Magic.
The character eats up the points
right there, with nothing left over.
Since you can expect to finish the
game with characters somewhere
between 8th and 10th level on
average, you see where the problem lies in starting with high-level
ones. Their advancement will be
very slow, and the precious points
gained on level increase (see
below) will be few and far between. The only time you might
come out ahead with a transferred
character is to bring over a lowlevel fighter. It simply isn't worth
bringing over a mage. Overall,
you will do better starting with a
brand-new group.

"Dragon
"Dragon Wars"

So begins Dragon Wars, the
latest role-playing game from Interplay. No party of adventurers
has ever started out in a more unpleasant, hostile environment with
so little, which is exactly nothing.
No armor, no weapons, no
money, no spells. "Nada", as they
say on the west coast. It's a chilling thought. Yet, despite the
depressing prospects, there is
hope. Your situation is far from impossible. For the clever, the
brave, and yes, the desperate,
there are ways out of this city of
the damned, and not necessarily
feet first. It all depends on the
risks you're willing to take, and
how good your party of four is with
various skills. The characters who come
with the game are a good bet. They form
a well-balanced group (although you may
want to change their names) and the
necessary skills are well-distributed
among them. These
aren't just demo
characters to get
you started. They
are seriously constructed and carefully planned out personas who are
capable of finishing
the adventure.
Of course, you
may feel happier
creating your very
own people, instead
of using the pregenerated bunch. This is fine, but before
doing that, study the others very carefully.
Note what skills each one comes with. All
of them have a purpose, and some are
critical to success in the game. Each new
character begins with no skills, and attributes of 10. You have 50 points with
which to "buy" attribute increases and

by Scorpia

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Dragon Wars
Apple II (with 128K)
$49.95
Paul Ryan O'Connor & Brian Fargo
Interplay Productions
Costa Mesa, CA

skills, not necessarily on a one-for-one
basis. How you allocate these points is
up to you, but once you're finished, there
is no going back to undo something (unless you want to delete the character and
start again).
Your third option is to bring over one or
more characters from any of the three

Every time a character reaches a
new level, he or she receives 2
more points to put into skills or attributes. These points can be
used immediately or held onto
while you decide where they should go.
Level itself does not confer any benefits
in combat or spell-casting. It is just a way
of marking when you can increase the
abilities of the characters. Once you're
satisfied with your characters, they are set
down in the middle
of Purgatory and
the game begins.
There are many unpleasant people and
critters roaming the
streets and alleys.
Confrontations will
be frequent. In a
Certain Other Series
(heh), this would
spell instant doom
and aggravation.
However, that is not
the case here. You
don't have to fight
unless you really want to (and, at the
beginning, you certainly don't!), since all
opponents start far enough from the
group to allow everyone to run away safely. Expect to do a lot of running as you
explore the city. There is, of course, only
(Continued on page 89)

Sneak Preview

S

omewhere near
the Wee Dipper,
aboard the starship, Ruptured Duck "Captain, we have an
alien vessel approaching from X1 ,Y2." the
Thrynn navigator
hummed in his insectlike buzz. Looking up
from another losing
chess match with the
engineering droid, the
captain slowly tuned
into this existence,
"Huh? Oh...ah, steer
clear and open communications. If it's
those preachy Tandelou
come to convert us
again, I'll scream."

Trading Spaces
Electronic Arts' "Starflight 2"
by Chris Lombardi

When the captain
swung around to face
the com-screen the
Dweenle medic was
slouching before him.
"Uh, excuse me captain, I know I'm bothering you again and you
hate me for it but, I
was wondering if you
could avoid combat as
it makes me very
nauseous. Of course,
you probably don't
care."
"Duodenum, relax a
bit, alright? I hate getting shot at as much as
you do," he said,
wondering if therapy
was being wasted on
this hopelessly insecure
crewmember.
"What! Hate combat?! Combat is life!
Life is combat! Captain, I suggest we attack at once!" screamed the G'nunk.
"Oh God, who woke her up?", muttered the Captain.
"Captain they're not responding to our
hail. We are under fire" said Gabby the
Elowyn with a nervous rustle of her
leafy bouffant hair-do.
"Crap! Sasha, raise shields, arm
weapons, and steer clear of those plasma bolts . . .Sasha? . . . Sasha!" Looking back, the captain could see Sasha
taking another whiff on the Gas Slug.
"Alright! The Gas Slug's off limits until
we return to starbase!"
Sasha slowly emerged from the Gas
Slug's euphoria and swung the ship
around, just avoiding a plasma bolt and
managing with some difficulty to lock
the lasers on the enemy flagship.

Just then, the Dweenle lost control and
proceeded to lose his lunch on the communications console. The Captain suddenly realized that, throughout his explorations, he had never seen anything
more disgusting than regurgitated Nid
Berries.
The chaotic situations, crisis upon
crisis, the distinctive alien cultures and
the creative spark inherent in the introductory fiction are all present in Starflight
2: The Trade Routes of the Cloud Nebula
(SF2). SF2 is a sequel to CGWs Hall of
Fame member, Starflight. Akin to Lucas'
original vision of the Star Wars trilogy,
Starflight had a significantly longer story
from the outset than could ever possibly
be fit into one product. SF2 is just as
stimulating as the original.
History of the Galaxy: Part H
Those who have played Starflight may
remember the Spemin, an egocentric
and hostile (yet technologically impotent)

race of slime bags
(literally). Well, it seems
the Spemin have gone
off and discovered some
bite for their bark. Once
just a dangerous
nuisance, the Spemin
now have powerful new
weaponry and an endless supply of the valuable Shyneum fuel.
They have issued an ultimatum (actually it's the
fourth) demanding the
immediate surrender of
all the peoples of Arth.
The Arthlings have not
complied to these
demands, knowing how
spineless (literally and
figuratively) the Spemin
actually are. The fear is
that the Spemin are
gaining more courage
with each 'ultimatum'
and may attack soon.
The player's mission is
to: 1) find the source of
Shyneum and 2) obtain
the Spemin technology.

Achieving the game's
objectives is a matter of
exploration. As in
Starflight, there is plenty
of it. The "tiny nibble of
universe" to be explored
in the game consists of
approximately 150 star
systems, each with
anywhere from zero to
eight planets in orbit. Inhabiting many of these
systems are 25 races of
lifeforms, six of which
are space-faring. There is enough here to
keep players busy for a long time.
This grand adventure begins at Starport
where players create their crewmembers
and outfit the ship. In creating a crew,
one chooses between the same five races
used in Starflight: Humans, Velox,
Thrynn, Elowan, and Androids. Each race
still has different strengths and weaknesses and creating a balanced crew is
still important. One also needs to outfit
the ship, though the initial funds available to upgrade it won't buy much. One
would think Interstel (no relation to the
computer game publisher located in
Webster, TX) could manage a bit more,
seeing that the goal is to save their skins.
But alas, that would leave out a very
large part of the adventure.
Before venturing forth to save the free
world, players need to max-out their
crew's abilities and bolster their ship's
(Continued on page 20)

(Continued from page 18)

Starflight 2
capabilities. This requires a good deal of
cash. Fortunately, there are several ways
to earn it. The easiest and quickest way
to earn dough is to trade goods between
the sentient races in the general vicinity
of Starbase. Each race buys and sells certain common items, depending on their
technology level, as well as specialty
items that are unique to that race.
The specialty items
have a much
higher profit margin
than the common
goods but there is
usual only one
buyer and seller.
Another less
profitable and more
time consuming occupation is the selling of life-forms
found on certain
habitable planets.
Some of these lifeforms can bring in
some healthy dough but unfortunately
these tend to be the more dangerous
species that have the tendency to attack
and injure crew members. Capturing
these creatures requires stunning them
with the terrain vehicle's laser. (Hint: A
good navigator is a must when on these
safaris as he's the one who fires the gun.)
Mining minerals can also provide a nice
supplementary income, but it too has its
drawbacks. The upper elevations, where
the highest concentrations of minerals
can be found, are often the site of foul
weather that can injure your crew. Getting caught in an electrical storm 40
klicks from your ship can be a disaster.
At any rate, mining can be a good way to
pick up a little cash if you're down on
fuel.

"It's Got Personality!"
Solving the game's objectives is also a
matter of information gathering. Most information will come from interaction with
the half dozen spacefaring sentients. The
personalities of these beings, created for
the most part by Greg Johnson, are one
of the strongest elements of the game.
The Dweenle, a depressive, submissive,
borderline suicidal race of the coreward,
upspin arm of the galaxy, are such a drag
to talk to that I personally found myself
dreading encounters with them. Also, I
had to feel a tad of contempt for the
closed-minded, pretentious religiosity of

the Eschavara and Eschevoy Tandelou,
who happen to be in a bitter battle over
the theology surrounding seven (count
'em!) ceremonial practices out of
800,000 in the Thdok-bryg-ahhh religion.
These caricatures are wonderful and the
game would not be half as good without
the color that they provide.

Unfortunately, not all encounters are enriching ones, since a few races would just
as soon vaporize one's crew as chat with
them. Fortunately, combat is not a major
aspect of the game, a refreshing change
for the CRPG fan. The combat system is
very simple. Once combat is selected
from the Navigator's menu, the ship can
be maneuvered by means of the keyboard and weapons fired with the space
bar. The computer chooses the target
and type of weapon (laser or torpedo).
Then, the captain's job is simply to steer
out of trouble and fire at will. Captains
can also purchase "blasto pods", extremely effective weapons that annihilate all in
their explosive wake. Effective indeed!
The game interface has not changed
much from the original game. It is menudriven, using the arrow keys and the
spacebar to select one's choices. It can
be a little clumsy at first but you soon
memorize common key sequences and
become accustomed to it. Flipping
though the ship's inventory can be irritating. The scrolling is slow and, once an
item is selected, it resets to the beginning
of the list and the player must scroll
through the entire inventory again. While
the interface is under discussion, the
save game procedure should be
criticized. The only way to save more
than one game position is to use a utility
and make a copy of the current save.
Should the entire crew be destroyed, the
game is over and one must rename

these files and restart. This was a conscious design decision that was meant to
create more realistic play, and avoid what
some call 'unethical gaming' (saving after
every advancement and rebooting after
every error). Despite the supporting ideology, it is actually a pain.
Let's be honest.
We don't play these
games for the realistic frustration of
defeat. We play
them for the exhilaration of success.
The game's
graphics are very
strong, and in
many ways improved over the
original game. The
planetary landing
sequence is especially nice. When orbiting a planet a
full view of the rotating globe is shown.
Upon choosing to land, a flat topographical map appears with land form elevations represented by varying colors. After
choosing the landing site, the planet
begins to grow larger until a topographical net is locked-on to the actual landing
site. These sequences, which are unique
to each planet, were creating using fractal graphic routines created by T.C. Lee.

Freedom Flyer
The greatest strength of the game is
the freedom it allows the player. There
are a number of paths and playing styles
that can lead to the game's conclusion.
Personally, I love exploring and spent
most of my time checking out practically
every star system in the game. Consequently, a lot of my crew's earnings came
from recommending planets for colonization, mining and creature collecting.
Those who enjoy the trade aspect will
probably find and milk one of several
lucrative trade routes.
This ability to project one's own personality into the game makes it that
much more enjoyable.
The world of Starflight 2 is one of the
most colorful worlds ever crammed into a
computer. I would recommend this game
to any adventure/role-playing megagamer, especially those burned out on
(Continued on page 82)

Sneak Preview

Knights of Myomer
Activision's "MechWarrior"
by Johnny L. Wilson

Only three of his
hastily loosed missiles
made their target, but
those hit with a
vengeance. One
exploded into one of
the Rifleman's
autocannon ejection
ports, fusing the
ejection mechanism.
The other missiles both
slammed into the radar
wing whirling like a
propeller above the
'Mech's hunched
shoulders. The first
explosion froze the
mechanism in place.
The second blast left
the wing hanging by
thick electrical cables.
Had enough? Justin
demanded silently.
As if in reply, the Rifleman
twisted its torso again. Its
two medium torso lasers
and the one remaining
autocannon fired on their
tormentor. Up and running
again, Justin eluded the
assault, but knew that he
could not hope to avoid
disaster forever. He just
had to make it worth it.
—Michael A. Stackpole,
Warrior: En Garde

piloted by the elite warriors of a
dying culture, high tech descendents of the age of chivalry. I booted
Battletech: The Crescent Hawk's
Inception on my Amiga. I invested
two nights in play, but somehow it
still didn't capture the magic that I
was discovering in Stackpole's The
Warrior Trilogy [Ed: published in
paperback by FASA Corporation] (I
know others who feel more positively about the role-playing game).

elcome to the Battletech
universe. When I first read the
scene above and some of the
fast-moving battle scenes surrounding it,
I was hooked. At game conventions, I
had seen dedicated players intent upon
winning Battletech in its boardgame incarnation and I had even watched a
friend play the Infocom role playing
game, Battletech: The Crescent Hawk's
Inception, yet this 31st Century "lostech"
universe seemed as unreal to me as the
"Transformers" in that Japanimation-style
television cartoon until I started reading
the trilogy.
Suddenly, I realized what the attraction
was. These weren't simply huge robots or
humanoid tanks slugging (or perhaps,
slagging) it out in wars of planetary conquest. Instead, each "BattleMech" was a
huge armored humanoid war machine
held together with myomer muscles and

Then, in the course of preparing
last month's "Christmas Buying
Guide", we received an advanced
copy of MechWarrior and I found
what I was looking for. MechWarrior is a BattleMech simulator.
It allows players to enter the cockpit of a BattleMech and fight it out
like the heroes in the novels. MechWarrior is a real-time simulation
(utilizing a choice of joystick- or keyboard driven action) which offers
realistic looking 3-D scrolling images of opposing and allied Battle- Mechs. The story line centers
around a displaced noble who is
functioning as a mercenary (under an abbreviated name) in order to earn enough
C-bills and learn enough information to
find a particular artifact and be restored
to power. Essentially, MechWarrior offers
a role-playing "shell" (i.e. graphic interface) to facilitate the player's trek through
the Battletech universe fighting a series
of battles. Most battles last about 10
minutes. The player can recruit team
members for his mercenary team; purchase and repair his BattleMechs; buy a
new 'Mech or sell his old ones; observe
what is happening in other parts of the
universe through the News Net (events in
all the Battletech novels occur at the appropriate times); travel to planets belonging to other "houses"; or request a contract from the "house" which governs the
current planet the player's character is on.
(Continued on page 28)

Review

was the night
before
Christmas
and out on the flank
Not a creature was
stirring—not even a
Tank'
The soldiers were
sleeping, lined up
in their cots
When out to the
front rang a series
of shots.
Offensive! Offensive! Get them to
run,
We'll kick Commie butt fore this night
is all done!
First thousands, then hundreds, then
dozens, then one
Sent straight to hell by our trusty Ml!"
-With apologies to W. Clement Moore

Battle Tactics for an
overview of probable contemporary
Soviet tactics.

Graphics

by M. Evan Brooks

One can shift internally between
three out of four positions (driver, gunner and tank commander, but not
loader [whose role is rather limited in
real life]), as well as among each of
one's four tanks. Additionally, one can
select the "outside tank" view; similar
to the "chase plane" view in flight
simulators, this allows one to view the
action from the outside and pan a full
circle. When combat is initiated and
shell explosions begin to precipitate
from above, it is fascinating to watch
the action in this manner (warning:
mesmerization can result in the
destruction of one's platoon and supporting elements!).

M. Evan Brooks is an officer in the
United States Army Reserves. In addition to his test drive of an M1 Abrams
recounted in CGW #60 (June, 1989),
soon-to-be Lt. Col. Brooks has also
successfully passed the army's Advanced Armor school. This "inside"
perspective made him the natural
choice for reviewing Ml Tank Platoon.
M1 Tank Platoon is Microprose's
contemporary armor simulation. For
the first time, a design has recognized
that tanks do not operate in vacuum
and that a solitary tank as an offensive
instrument is a contradiction in terms.
Unlike Accolade's Steel Thunder or
Electronic Arts' Abrams Battle Tank,
M1 Tank Platoon allows the user to control a platoon of four (4) M1 Abrams
MBT (main battle tanks) plus numerous
support elements.
It is interesting to note the reputation of
the simulator weapons systems. Most
grognards can name a famous ace (e.g.,
von Richthofen, Bishop, Ball [WWI], Galland, Bader, Bong [WWII]) or a famous
submariner (e.g., Prien, Dealey, O'Kane),
but how many can name a famous
tanker? Sorry, Patton and Rommel were
Army commanders, not "down-and-dirty"
tankers. In fact, who has heard of the
greatest tanker in history—Michael Wittman (cf. Williamson's Knights of the Iron
Cross, pp. 105-107)? The tank achieves
results through mass action and not the
single exploits of an individual. Therefore,
Microprose has rightly seen fit to present
armored conflict as platoon conflict as opposed to heroism by an individual.

Documentation
The documentation consists of a 200+page manual, a ten page technical supplement, and the keyboard overlay. Ac-

There is no question that the
graphics are the
best currently available for a tank
simulation. Prior
armor simulations
generally had
decent internal (instrumentation) or external graphics. None did both well.
M1 Tank Platoon does an excellent
job of portraying the internal views of
the tank and a very good job of the external environment.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

M1 TANK PLATOON
IBM (384K)
1
$69.95
Microprose Labs
Microprose Software
Hunt Valley, MD

tually, the instructions on how to use the
program amount to only thirty pages and
the remainder of the manual consists of
a tutorial ("training runs") along with a
detailed analysis/exposition of modern
armor, tactics and vehicular information.
The manual is very detailed and successfully introduces the novice to the concepts of armored tactics. However, for the
user without the patience to read the entire manual, there are summaries and
"quick tips" which allow one to gain a
rapid familiarity with the game system
without doing the detail work.
For those interested in further reading,
the documentation recommends a number of sources as well as noting the
military manuals which were most useful.
For additional reading, this reviewer
would recommend F.W. von Mellinthin's
classic Panzer Battles for his experiences
and observations on the Russian fighting
man and William Baxter's Soviet Air-Land

Smoke is rendered by the polygon-fill
technology used by Microprose and
appears as gray-black wedges a la Peter
Max. Although the wedges may not look
realistic, they are functional in portraying
the effect of smoke on the battlefield.
While a hit vehicle or building may yield
secondary and even tertiary explosions
(which are quite interesting), close
proximity to "the bombs bursting in air"
enhances the "Peter Max" effect.

Game Play
Although the program may be installed
on a hard drive, it uses both a key disk
and a vehicle identification scheme. In
what is a commendable user-friendly innovation, one may save his "options".
Thus, joystick options, color scheme, and
sound do not have to be reselected every
time—a simple "tank/o" will suffice and it
can even omit the introductory screens!
M1 may be placed in either single
engagement (blitzkrieg, meeting engagement, hasty attack, assault, defend or
rearguard action) or campaign (all missions placed in a chronological context)
(Continued on page 26)

(Continued from page 24)

sions. However, frustration can occur
when one's elite team is killed and retraining has to start ab initio. If at least one
crew member survives the mission, then
the user can simply elect to reboot and
the mission will be "erased"; however, if
the platoon is wiped out, it is too late. To
avoid this, one may save the following
files via DOS commands to a separate
disk (PACT, ROSTER, OPTS); this is not
mentioned in the documentation and is
in fact a "semi-cheat". Then again, the
computer won't know and who will tell?
mode. One may select opponents as
second line, first line, veteran, or guards
(elite). Even the second line troops are
no push-over and the pell-mell assault
without a well-conceived tactical plan
is doomed to a
quick demise. Designer Arnold Hendrick
notes that the
largest differential in
unit abilities is between second and
first line troops.
Finally, missions
may occur at day,
night, or in rain and
snow as well as "normal" weather conditions.
For the new user,
the defense is
strongly recommended. The
platoon is usually in
a good formation,
and the enemy will
attack; therefore,
the user's mission is
to "stay put and kick
butt". Even the
second-line troops
can sometimes
present a problem, and the elite troops
will generally use an axis of advance that
will present real difficulties. Shifting to the
gunner position will allow one to personally lay and fire the main gun (selecting either sabot or HEAT thigh explosive
anti-tank]). Even with a laser rangefinder, sighting is an art—the computer
automatically accounts for movement of
the enemy, but only as long as you are
moving the sight to bear directly on the
target; eventually, one will learn when
and where the appropriate "lead" is.
Even with the laser ranging system, a stationary tank remains a more stable
weapons platform than a moving one.
In playing the simulation, one does not
portray any particular person in the
platoon. Rather, the player is the "spirit"
of the platoon. One can shift among the
positions, but this reviewer notes that certain positions are more "useable" than

others. The driver will be used to verify
the "hull-down" position of the tank; by
switching between driver and gunner,
one can put the vehicle into a hull

defilade position on the defensive. This
presents a smaller target and is essential
for survival on the battlefield. Also, one
can achieve approximately a ten percent
speed increase over the computer by
directly accessing the driver. The tank
commander is used for spotting enemy
concentrations and possibly engaging
light targets and air elements; it is difficult
to bring down a Hind helicopter, but it
can be done. The gunner is where the action occurs, and assuming one wants to
"get down and dirty", the gunner station
will see the action.
Beginning with a tank platoon of "fair
quality", battlefield success will yield a
maximum of three promotions and three
decorations. Each promotion/decoration
can raise a crew member's expertise level
(inept-poor-fair-good-superior-expert).
Taking an inexperienced platoon and raising it to a "killer team" will take many mis-

While historical experience shows that
tank engagements usually occur at less
than 500 meters, contemporary weaponry is expected to
engage at much farther distances. With
Ml, one can
engage out to 2300
meters or greater.
This reviewer scored
a kill on a BMP at
4200 meters, although it was a
lucky shot. The
more lethal the
range and Pk (probability of kill), the
more likelihood of
survival on the battlefield. While a
scale is not given
on the strategic
map, it is eight
kilometers square.
The West European
battlefield will rarely
have the semi-open
ranges depicted
herein, since it is so
heavily populated,
but the game battlefield was designed
for playability as well.

TACTICAL
SUGGESTIONS
Use of support elements: As a key to
success, air, artillery and infantry can
often win the battle by themselves or at
least place victory within the player's
grasp. Also, while their loss may impact
on one's rating, it is not a severe drain.
Thus, remember—"they were expendable". Often, air support (A-10 aircraft
and gunship/recon helicopters) are somewhat reticent to engage. One can't do
anything about this except gripe about
the "wimpy pilots"; don't worry—this occurs in real-life more than in the game!
Use of smoke: Smoking may be hazardous to your health, but lack of smoke
(Continued on page 57)

(Continued from page 22)

"Once
again I find
my realm
indebted to
your family. I hope the
Federated Suns is ever
worthy of your courage
and sacrifice."
—Hanse Davion to Justin Xiang
Allard in Michael A. Stackpole's
Warrior: En Garde

The game begins with the player's character located on a random planet belonging to one of the five houses (i.e. dynasties) which rule surviving portions (successor states) of the once great Star League
(Davion, Kurita, Liao, Marik or Steiner).
He has a Jenner which needs to be
repaired and a token amount of money.
There are a few clues to be gleaned
toward solving the story line on this
planet, but to follow up on the clues, the
player will have to successfully complete
some mercenary missions and earn
enough money to upgrade his 'Mech,
recruit a crew, and travel off planet.
Then, he can continue with the story.
The fact is, many players will become
so enamored with battling enemy 'Mechs
in the mercenary missions that they will
forget the story line and simply fight on
behalf of their randomly assigned loyalty.
Of course, fighting on behalf of one
house means that the character is building up hostility on behalf of other
houses. You can't keep destroying Marik
fuel dumps and salvaging Marik 'Mechs
on behalf of House Kurita (The Draconis
Combine) without incurring the wrath of
the Free World's League (House Marik).
So, if your character needs to travel to
one of another house's planets after

several mercenary missions against those
very planets, he will get a very chilly reception.
Players request mercenary missions by
clicking the pointer beside the icon representing the particular planet's ruling
house (Not all planets have missions available, but all the initial start planets have a
selection of potential missions). There is
usually a good mix of potential missions
available. Players can use their 'Mechs to
defend bases, fuel dumps, communications centers and the like; pilot their
'Mechs in diversionary assaults; or fight
their 'Mechs through enemy machines
until they recover lost equipment and/or
hostages. The difficulty of each mission
increases proportionately to the player
character's experience, upgrades in equipment, and team recruitment.
It is a good idea to page through the
potential contracts and select the missions which are potentially either the
most profitable or the most winnable.
Each contract will give: an approximation
of the enemy's mechanized strength
(broken down into categories reflecting
the number of Heavy, Medium or Light
'Mech units), a percentage rate which
reflects the mercenary team's "cut" of any
salvageable 'Mechs they should happen
to bring back, and the base fee for successful completion of the mission.
Once the player chooses the optimal
mission and equips his 'Mech(s), he simply clicks beside the "drop ship" icon in
order to be transported (via a beautifully
animated lift-off sequence) to the planet
where the contract is to be fulfilled. Once
on the planet's surface, the player is
shown a map of the combat area, mission objective, and known positions of

enemy 'Mechs. If
the mercenary
team has more
than one member, the player
can access a command screen in
order to give orders to the other team
members. They can be allowed to act on
their own; ordered to move to avoid; commanded to defend; placed optimally for
an ambush; or directed to charge headon for an all-out attack.

Justin most laughed
aloud. es, how stupid of
me not to have seen it
sooner . . . Wolfson almost
fried himself running after
me while firing wildly like
that. Justin flexed the
Centurion's left hand and
looked at the gleaming
blades on the last three
fingers. Smiling to himself,
Justin turned his 'Mech in
the direction of the
Rifleman.
—Michael A. Stackpole,
Warrior: En Garde.

Once the preliminaries are taken care
of, the player is provided with an "
out-the-cockpit" view as though he were on one
of the command couches inside a BattleMech. The outside landscape is rendered
in polygon-filled graphics, but the terrain
features and colors are consistent with
the type of planet the mercenaries happen to be fighting on (In fact, even the
(Continued on page 59)

Review

Flying Off The Shelf
New Products From subLOGIC
by Russel Sipe
fter a hiatus of many months
without a significant release,
SubLOGIC, publisher and
developer of cutting edge flight
simulators has released (or is about to
release) a number of new and interesting
flight simulator products.

Microsoft Flight Simulator 4.0
Developed by subLOGIC and licensed
to Microsoft, Microsoft Flight Simulator
4.0 (FS4.0) was released in September.
Improvements in FS4.0 include the ability
to adjust flight characteristics and create
experimental aircraft; the inclusion of a
sailplane; random weather variations and
updrafts have been added; additional
aircraft fly in your airspace; spot mode
view direction can be changed from the
keyboard; Approach lighting systems
have been added (they look great on
night approaches); air traffic control communications have been added; and last
but not least, improved aircraft flight characteristics.
The "improved flight characteristics and
the dynamic weather makes both level
flight and landing more difficult. However
you can defeat these new features if you
wish.
"Pilots" with 386 machines now have
custom 386 modules that make the program run faster by using 386
microprocessor-specific instructions. However, the one acknowledged bug in the
program affects only 386 users. Near the
end of the demo program the EPIS
navigation module activates. If you go
on to fly the simulation after this, the program can lockup on 386 machines. The
official fix (given by Microsoft) is as follows:
1. Rename FS4.EXE to FS4.OLD
2. Type "DEBUG FS4.OLD". Don't type
the quotes.
3. At the "-" prompt, type "ECS:B33C
90 90 90 90 90".
4. Type the letter "W", hit return, type
the letter "Q", hit return. This writes the
change to FS4.OLD.
5. Rename FS4.OLD to FS4.EXE and
run the program.
Many Microsoft Flight Simulator 3.0

owners are miffed that Microsoft has not
provided for an upgrade policy from 3.0
to 4.0. The debate on online services
such as PRODIGY personal service and
Compuserve has been lively.
When asked, Microsoft customer support explained that FS4 is different
enough from 3.0 that new documentation was required. The cost of upgrading
with new documentation would not be
significantly less than the purchase price
of the new product. Therefore they did
not institute an upgrade policy on F54.0.
For the record: other computer entertainment companies have offered upgrade
policies on new versions of entertainment
products. For example each of the following products were upgraded with complete new packages: Electronic Arts
1.5 ($17) and Chuck Yeager
-EarlWev
2.0 ($24); Mindscape - Balance of
Power 1990 ($25); and Strategic
Simulations, Inc. - President Elect 1988
($10). When one realizes that computer
garners do not make up the bread and
butter customers of Microsoft (as they do
for these other companies), we begin to
understand Microsoft's attitude, even if
we do not agree with it.
In the computer entertainment industry
there is an informal rule that determines
(Continued on page 32)

(Continued from page 30)

Flying Off
The Shelf
the value of a product: if the product
gives you one hour of playing time per
dollar spent it is worth the price. By that
formula FS4 is, without a doubt, an exceptional buy in computer entertainment.
FS4 is available for the IBM ($59.95
retail).

Hawaiian Odyssey
Hawaiian Odyssey (HO) is an add-on
disk to any of the subLOGIC designed
flight simulation programs (Flight
Simulator II, Microsoft Flight Simulator,
Jet, Stealth Mission, UFO or the IBM version of ThunderChopper). Not only does
HO add the magnificent Hawaiian Islands
to the subLOGIC collection of scenery
databases, it also includes some very interesting "fantasy" scenery and a structured adventure.
In the adventure you must find and follow an intricate set of clues scattered
about the Hawaiian Islands that lead you
to your goal: the secret jewel of the goddess Pele. Even if you determine the hidden jewel's location, you may not succeed. The jewel is only visible under certain strict conditions. Make a mistake
during your final approach and you may
get lost forever.
The fantasy scenery places you in some
very unique locations. The most interesting of which include a kitchen and a
piano. Picture yourself in a fly-sized
Cessna and you will begin to understand.

Glide across the keyboard, power up and
fly into the kitchen, buzz the range and
land on the kitchen counter (don't crash
into the drawers!). Hawaiian Odyssey is
or will be available for the IBM, Atari ST,
Amiga, Apple II and Macintosh computers for $29.95.

Instant Facilities Locator
Instant Facilities Locator (IFL) is a time
saver for the serious Flight Simulator
3.0/4.0 user. With IFL you can quickly
and easily load any location in your
database of SubLOGIC scenery disks (ob
viously, IFL only works with hard disks).
After installation, IFL becomes item 8 on
the NAV/COM menu. When you access
IFL, you simply type in the name of the
location you wish to be transported to.
The program performs a binary-chop
search to narrow down your request (i.e.
each keystroke accesses locations beginning with that sequence). In most cases
three keystrokes will either access your
location or get you very close on the display list.
There is a small file "bug" in using IFL
with the new 4.0 version of the Flight
Simulator. After installing IFL on your
hard disk you will need to rename CONFIG.FS3 to CONFIG.FS4 in the
subdirectory containing IFL. Otherwise, the
IFL option will not appear on the
NAV/COM menu.
Although IFL is a nice convenience, at
$39.95 retail its market will be limited to
a small, but dedicated, group of Flight
Simulator 3.0/4.0 "power users".

Scenery Disk #9
SubLOGIC's newest scenery disk covers
the Chicago, St.Louis, and Cincinnati sec-

tional areas in wonderful 3D detail. Over
150 airports are included (many with
Visual Approach Slope Indicator landing
light systems). The city of Chicago is
rendered in much greater detail than in
previous products. The St.Louis sectional
includes the Gateway Arch which you can
add to the list of spans you've flown
under (you HAVE flown under the Golden Gate Bridge haven't you?). The Cincinnati region also includes more than thirty
mountains in the Allegheny region
stretching from Clinch Mountain, Tennessee through Shenandoah National
Park, Virginia to Laurel Hill, Pennsylvania.
The Ohio River is navigable from Wheeling, West Virginia through Cincinnati and
Louisville, Kentucky to it's confluence
with the Mississippi at Cairo, Illinois. Disk
#9 is or will be available for the IBM,
Atari ST, Amiga, and Macintosh computers for $29.95.

Review

I

n 1942, the blood red rising sun of

the Japanese Empire had spread undaunted across the Pacific basin like a
crimson stain. American seapower was at
its modern nadir,
struggling to rebuild
from the debacle at
Pearl Harbor and the
recent stalemate in
the Coral Sea. From a
position of decided
strength, the
Japanese High Command, under the
guidance of Admiral
Yamamoto, pondered
their strategic options.
Three distinct courses
of action were under
consideration: a
westward thrust into
the Indian Ocean; a
drive to the south to
threaten Australia and
New Guinea; or an
easterly push toward
Midway and Pearl Harbor. An American initiative, namely the
Doolittle raid on mainland Japan,
precipitated a decision
for the latter option. A
battle force of over
140 ships, including
four front line and
four light carriers, was
assembled and given
orders to neutralize
the centrally located island of Midway.

and land based air wings. The exclusion
of the smaller ships may ire some purists,
but all things considered, their impact on
the outcome of the battle was insig-

jectives, and conduct searches. The latter, of course, is a major part of the
game since one must obviously locate
and track the enemy before one can successfully engage him.
Three options exist for
detection of enemy
units: airborne reconnaissance via
maritime patrol or carrier assets; visual or
radar detection from
surface ships; or submarine sightings. Submarine engagements
by Lt. H. E. Dille
impact upon the overall outcome, but since
they occur exclusive
of player interaction,
TITLE:
Midway: The Battle
they merit little comThat Doomed Japan
SYSTEMS:
Apple II, IBM
ment herein. Surface
REVIEWED:
IBM
engagements, how# PLAYERS:
1-2
ever, involve
PRICE:
$35.00
DESIGNER:
Dr. Owen P. Hall, Jr.
maneuver, smoke,
PUBLISHER:
General Quarters Software
gun and torpedo
P.O. Box 1429
Torrance, CA 90505
resolution, but are significantly weighted in
favor of the Japanese,
due to the types of
vessels involved. Consequently, as the
American player, it is
necessary to focus
upon the centerpiece
of the game (which
was historically the
deciding factor, as
well), proper employment of carrier-based
air power.

Miracle At Midway
General Quarters' "Midway"

Unbeknownst to the
Japanese, American
intelligence assets had already cracked
the Japanese code. As such, Admiral
Nimitz was able to hastily prepare an ambush for the coming onslaught. Utilizing
his three remaining carriers, Enterprise,
Hornet and Yorktown, Nimitz ordered all
of his assets to sally forth and take the
battle to the enemy. Privately, the Admiral
had little hope for their success. Despite
seemingly insurmountable odds, the
American Task Group succeeded in
destroying Japan's Carrier Group and
forced the Japanese High Command to
abort the operation. This victory did more
to restore the fighting spirit of the U. S.
Navy than any other in the war and came
to be known, rightfully so, as the "Miracle
at Midway".
Midway: The Battle That Doomed
Japan is an operational level simulation
of the conflict that forces players to appreciate the difficulty faced by Admiral
Nimitz and his task force. All major surface combatants, above destroyer size escorts, are represented, as well as all sea

nificant. Furthermore, by excluding them,
the designer has focused players upon
the objectives and made for a more evenly paced, cohesive game.
Game play takes place on a scale map
of the Pacific basin from Pearl Harbor to
the Japanese mainland, with Dutch Harbor and Wake Island forming the northern and southern boundaries respectively. Either historical or random set-up is allowed, but the Japanese forces cannot
be located east of Wake Island nor
American forces west of Midway. The
total force composition is as follows:
JAPANESE
4 Carriers
4 Light Carriers
7 Battleships
14 Cruisers
3 Submarines
1 Troop Transport
Group

AMERICAN
3 Carriers

8 Cruisers
3 Light Cruisers
3 Submarines

Each player may segregate units into
task groups as desired, set movement ob-

Players have the option of conducting
searches every turn,
weather permitting, and must determine
the offensive/defensive mix of their air
wings. Once an offensive strike has been
planned, aircraft must be readied (fueled
and pre-flighted), prepared (ordinance
load out), and launched. All of these
operations require time in the confined
space of a flight deck and, therein lies
the essence. Proper timing of air strikes
involves attempting to catch the enemy
carriers with loaded planes on deck (thereby obtaining secondary explosions and
damage from their own fuel and bombs)
or managing to reach them while their
aircraft are off on another strike (hopefully, not against your carrier). The latter option is just as powerful as the first because the enemy aircraft are often unable
to land on another carrier or "bingo" to a
friendly base ashore.
Further complications for air operations
involve deteriorated weather, battle
damage and wind speed limitations. As a
(Continued on page 81)

Review

Charles Ardai takes a break from the
grueling task of writing short stories for
Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction
Magazine and Ellery Queen's Mystery
Magazine in order to pen the first in a
series of reviews for CGW on "Interactive
Movies".

Ms. Pac-Man, i.e. it consists of a halfdozen arcade-style action sequences
separated by animated 'interludes' [Ed: In
Ms. Pac-Man, the animated sequences
occur every few levels]. The animation
comes as a reward, in effect, for success-

Play: On Land, or
Sea, or Air, Wolf
David Wolf, Secret
Agent is so cinematic
that one almost expects to read a script
treatment such as the
one that follows (Note:
This scene would take
place in between two
that are actually in the
game).

POPCORN NOT
INCLUDED

say the movie segments, are just there
for the player's enjoyment: sit back and
watch. Look at the gorgeous graphics.
Listen to the soundtrack.
The problem with this lies on a
psychological level. Traditionally, the
animated sequences
in games like PacMan were bonuses.
Sure, they were nice,
but they were just
icing on the cake. The
cake was what you
paid your quarter for.

Dynamix's "David Wolf:
Secret Agent"
by Charles Ardai
The "POPCORN NOT INCLUDED" Critical Creed

FADE IN:
INTERIOR: MARCH'S
OFFICE—
NIGHT
CLOSE-UP:

From the start, computer games have aspired to a style and a degree of polish best described as 'cinematic.' Only with today's most
sophisticated techniques are significant advances being made toward
this goal. However, in adopting a cinematic mode, today's games
open themselves up to criticism on a cinematic level. It is not enough
to achieve movie-quality
software; one must also
achieve quality movie-software.
It is from this critical
standpoint that we will consider the new generation of "Interactive Movies." As one
might evaluate separately the
functional and aesthetic appeal of a building, we will
evaluate separately the play
and box office appeal of these
games.

MARCH (The director
is speaking on the
telephone): Wolf? Are
you alright? This is
Director March. Yes,
I'm at the office.
(Pause) No, listen to
me. We need you
back as soon as possible. I can't tell you
over the phone . . .
Oh, are you certain
David Wolf, Secret Agent
TITLE:
the phone is secure?
SYSTEM:
IBM
Very well, it's Bruno
PRICE:
$49.95
DESIGNERS:
Kevin
Ryan, Damon Slye
Vasto. Yes, the same
PUBLISHER: Dynamix
man. He's stolen one
Eugene, OR
of our prototype bombers and now, he has
a ransom demand in
to the White House.
David, he's threatening to drop an atomic
bomb on Washington!
(Pause) What? David,
ful completion of an action sequence.
if we knew that, we wouldn't need you!
Granted, the animation is digitized in this
. . . Yes, we have one lead. I'll tell you
game; each animated interlude is of subabout it when you come in. How soon
stantial length; and each digitized secan you . . . Tomorrow? Excellent. I'll
quence advances the plot; but this just
meet you at the airport.
makes the reward that much more
rewarding. On the level of game type,
both David Wolf and Ms. Pac-Man are
In terms of game play, however, the
fundamentally the same.
most important thing one must understand about David Wolf: Secret Agent is
Why is this of more than casual interthat it is a spiritual descendent of Ms.
est? Because it bears heavily on how one
Pac-Man. This may surprise people who
must interpret the word 'interactive' in 'Inhave never played the game, but who
teractive Movie'. During an animated sehave seen the advertisements. After all,
quence, the player has no control over
events. In fact, the player has no input
isn't David Wolf the first in Dynamix's
line of Interactive Movies? Yes, it is. It is
whatever. The animated segments, which
also a game with a format very similar to
is to say the plot segments, which is to

In an Interactive
Movie, it is the adventure that players "pay"
for. If there are action
sequences to boot—
as in Manhunter or Indiana Jones and the
Last Crusade: The
Graphic Advent ure they are the
bonus. However, the
format of David Wolf
is such that players
are asked to accept
the material that induced them to buy
the game, the secretagent graphics and
story, presented in a
style traditionally
reserved for 'icing'. In
other words, players
expect spy cake with
cinematic-sequence
icing. What they get is
cinematic cake with
game icing. This will
very likely disappoint
some players, which is
why I feel obliged to
spell it out here. This
way, at least, you'll
know what you're getting.

Frankly, David Wolf,
Secret Agent is not an
Interactive Movie. It is,
at times, interactive and it is, at times, a
movie, but never both at once. Players
can in no way affect the plot. They can
merely advance it or fail to advance it.
Whether this is worth a player's time
depends on two factors: how good the action sequences are in and of themselves,
and how good the movie is, as a movie.
Of the action sequences, two are car
chases, two are air chases (hang-glider
and stealth bomber), and two are connected to jumping out of a plane (freefall
and landing on the back of a truck). Out
of these, the car chases suffer the most
from lack of originality; even though the
(Continued on page 55)

Review

Life in the

Fast Frame
Origin's "Space Rogue"
by Omar DeWitt

he

Manchi fighter jumped me just as I emerged from
the wormhole. A glance at the TAC display told me
that the space scum was trying to ram me. Worse
than that, it told me he was only 231 meters away! I hit
the accelerator button as I
jammed the joystick to
the left. The Dart flashed
by. I yanked the stick to
follow and scored a hit
with the laser. It disappeared. Following the targeting info on the screen,
I sighted the Dart again
and got a few more laser
hits while taking a hit on
my forward screen. The
TAC display showed his
armor to be below 100,
so I finished him off with
a SM-1.

T

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
REVIEWED:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Space Rogue
Apple II, C-64/128, IBM
Apple II
$49,95
Paul Neurath
Origin Systems, Inc.
Austin, TX 78716

It turned out there was a
63 Credit bounty on that
ship. Big deal! It might
cover the repairs on my
armor. After setting the
autopilot, I soon was approaching the dock at
Daneb Prime Starbase.
Another Manchi started
an attack run! My armor
was wearing thin by now, so I used
my last Nova heat-seeking missile.
More space debris. After docking, I
thought about going to the Cantina
for a "Green Head", but .. .

I decided to walk to the kitchen for
a Coke®. Maybe I'm getting too old for this kind of life.
Bounty hunting, shoot-outs, smuggling, piracy, trading and
intrigue are all part of
Space Rogue. The path a
player follows to fame and
glory is wide open, but life
is hard in the "Far Arms"
star cluster and none of
the paths is easy.

Choosing A Career
Players who feel like
they're "Top Gun" material
might try bounty hunting.
The credits to be earned
by knocking off the odd Manchi fighter should keep one's
ship in repair and allow an occasional weapons upgrade.

One doesn't have to buy fuel or food (and laser weapons
never run out of ammunition), so a good pilot should eventually end up with an awesome ship. However, a pilot has to
be very good to survive in combat with only his laser. Missiles are great but they will cost "Credits".
Some players will feel like "Piracy" is a good career choice.
It can be lucrative, but since a well-equipped ship is almost a
necessity, it should probably not be attempted in the early
stages of the game.
The documentation suggests trading as the best initial occupation. It certainly is not an easy way to start, however.
Valuable items are not often available and the prices to be offered for one's cargo are quite often less than that paid at
another port. The result is that success in trading is due
more to luck than to planning. The only thing a trader can
be sure of is that if the goods he buys can spoil, they will
spoil. The trader will also have to contend with Manchi
fighters (the Manchi make Genghis Khan and his hordes
look like a Boy Scout Jamboree) and pirates—just two other
ways to lose a cargo.
Fortunately, since there are no levels of difficulty to choose
from in Space Rogue, the play balance is built in and the
early Manchi fighters to be faced are only so much laser-fodder. However, as the player's kill rate goes up, so does the
quality of the opposition. Nevertheless, there are no easy
profits for the novice trader.

Life and Death in Far Arm
The Far Arm is comprised of eight solar systems. Each
solar system has only one or two stations, making trading
within a system either very limited or totally non-existent.
Traveling within each system is done on autopilot only, although the trip can be rudely interrupted by other
spacecraft. The solar systems themselves, however, are
linked by "wormholes". The spacecraft is maneuvered into a
Milar Gate (players discover the location of these by experience) and through a twisting, turning series of circles.
The spacecraft that does not stay within the circles is sent
back to the entry gate. The longer the craft stays in the
wormhole, the more armor is removed from the ship until
the sweet smell of cinnamon tells the player it is time to
reboot.
To this player, the sequence is like finding the "Chief' in
Seven Cities of Gold. It is interesting the first few times, but
soon turns into mere busy-work. On a scale of one to ten,
the fun factor drops to negative three after the first few tries.
If only there were a way to toggle the sequence and get on
with the game.
Once the pilot reaches a given station, it is possible to
trade, repair the ship, and talk to the people or robots who
inhabit the station. The pilot's side of the conversation is
limited to the choices offered on the screen, but the information learned is necessary to fully succeed in the game.

In The End . . .
This is not a game for the "junior joystick" class. If they survive the Manchi fighters, they must still negotiate the
wormholes into another solar system. On the other hand,
there is always the danger that real joystick jockeys may get
impatient with the trading and "social interaction" needed for
success in Space Rogue. Regardless, Space Rogue is an interesting blend of arcade action, role-playing interaction and
economic strategy.

Game Hints

Scorpion's Mail
o

ho ho! Wow, it's that time of the
year again already! Our Christmas
Tree Monster is back in his
corner, tinsel swishing and lights blinking. Fred has his shrunken-head garland
up over the mantel piece as usual (no,
you really don't want to take a close look
at it), and the place is piled high with
gaily-wrapped presents that look suspiciously like computer game boxes. Let's
step out of the rush into the back room,
where things are a bit more peaceful.

H

Before we get on to the hints, I must
tell you about a serious matter regarding
the US Mail. At the end of September, I
found a letter from the Postal Service in
my box, directing me to call at the window for held mail. As it turned out, a postal employee had been arrested for theft
of mail. Apparently he had been taking
various letters and ripping them open,
hoping to find cash inside.
When caught, he had on him a letter
addressed to me from a CGW reader.
The contents, luckily, were intact; I was allowed to take those, although the Post Office kept the original envelope as
evidence. Unfortunately, they could not
tell me how long this had been going on,
or if this person had previously stolen
other mail addressed to me; the one letter was all they found.
So there is a possibility that some letters
sent to me ended up in the trash instead
of my box, courtesy of this person. It isn't
definite, only possible. However, if you
wrote to me any time in September or
before, and never received a response,
this may be the explanation.
Okay, let's get on to a more pleasant
subject here, and see what's in the bag
this month.

Manhunter: San Francisco:
Some people have been wondering why
they can't get into certain places (such as
the laundry). The answer is simple: it isn't
time yet. Don't expect to be able to get
in somewhere the first time you find it. If
nothing works to get you in, then leave
the place for now and come back
another day. Also, keep in mind that the
progression of days is linked mainly to
where you have been (even if you

couldn't get in), so you must visit the
locations picked up by the tracker.

King's Quest IV:
Having found the elusive bridle, a few
folks are having difficulties in getting it
on the unicorn. You can't just walk up to
it and slip the bridle on, as the unicorn
(rightly!) doesn't quite trust you. So you
need a way to make him like you.

Wizardry IV:
A reader told me that he had read in
Quest For Clues II that all he needed to
complete one ending of Werdna was the
crystal rose. This is not correct. You need
more than the rose. In fact, you need all
the items obtainable at the inn. Without
those, you cannot finish the "political" ending of the game (the reader mentioned
above was having a hard time, as might
be expected, but I think he's ok now).

Wizardry V:
Several letters lately have inquired
about the mysterious chained door on
level two. I never found a key for it
myself, but it doesn't really matter. You
can reach the area behind the door from
a stairway on level three. Of course, finding the right stairs is up to you (grin).
However, when you can deal with the
vanishing spirit, you'll know you found
the right place.

Wasteland:
Some readers have found Faran Brygo
to be reclusive. Having visited him once,
they are unable to see him a second
time. Well, that's how it's supposed to be.
Once is enough to obtain the information he has; there is no way (at least that
I know of) to talk to him again. So after
you've seen him once, just go your merry
way, as there are more important things
yet to be done in the game. Also, a
reminder that the hatches in Darwin Base
are only red herrings; there is nothing in
them (except monsters) and you can't
get into them yourself. They are best left
alone.

Tangled Tales:
Much to my surprise, there are folks out
there having trouble with the "magic
word". Now really, it's not that hard. I'll
bet your own moms have reminded
(maybe even nagged) you about it when
you were a kid (maybe even when you
(Continued on page 97)

Review

A

-10 Tank Killer
is the first flight
simulation to
feature the Air Force's
much-maligned close
air support weapon,
the Thunderbolt (better known as the Warthog). Sometimes
known as "Death
from Above" (with
apologies to the Airborne), this plane is
capable of destroying
any tank in the world.
The Army loves it,
while the Air Force
would like to see it disappear.

While close air support is a military
necessity, it is not the
"glory" role that the
Air Force envisions. Instead, it is a dirty vicious mission which
may well be determinative of victory.
Now, no matter how
much the Air Force
dislikes the A-10 and
no matter how much
the Army would like
to add it to its own inventory, the Key West
Agreement (1948—
which stipulates the
respective spheres of
the Army and the
former Army Air
Corps) keeps the planes under Air Force jurisdiction. Note that in
Vietnam, helicopters were strictly Army vehicles due to Air Force
indifference and hostility to close air support (for an interesting fictional treatment of these turf battles, cf. W.E.B. Griffin's Brotherhood of War series).
Documentation
The documentation is adequate but sparse—a manual (43
pages) and a reference card (which interestingly enough, omits
some of the keyboard controls noted on pages 8-9 of the
manual). This reviewer's first impression was that the manual was
insufficient. However, a careful perusal of the manual did reveal
complete game mechanics, buttressed by numerous screen shots
and tactical guidance. This is primarily because the game emphasizes an on-hands experience and not an intellectual gestalt.
Graphics
A-10 relies heavily on digitized photographs—the credits even
list the actors who portrayed the "pilots". This reviewer was somewhat nonplussed by the heavy use of digitization and looks at it
with a sense of foreboding. While digitization may well lead to interesting screen shots (e.g., the instrumentation panel is extremely well done), it does consume large amounts of memory. Is there
a tendency to substitute digitization for programming? Apparently
not, since A-10 offers an excellent program in addition to the
digitized pictures.
The digitization is impressive. Basic weapon loads shift before

his eyes as the user
makes a choice
(preparatory attack,
general purpose, insurgency, etc.). One
is restricted to the program loads, but this
was a design choice.
Generally, one particular load is recommended.

Dynamix Takes
to the Skies
by M. Evan Brooks

The explosion sequences of A-10 are
superb. Hitting an
enemy tank will yield
a crimson fireball
wending its way into
the sky. It looks real!!
Not since Battlehawks: 1942 have
scenes of destruction
been so well executed.
Game Play

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

A-10 Tank Killer
IBM (512K)
$49.95
Damon Slye
Dynamix
Eugene, OR

A-10 is the first
product reviewed by
this reviewer that was
not initially playable
on his machine. With
a CompuAdd 386 20
MHz, A-10 simply was
too fast—a slight
touch to the joystick
was sufficient to wingover into the ground.
In fact, use of the rudder was the only way
to achieve any sort of
controlled turn mode.

It was also difficult to maintain a stable altitude. Due to these
limitations, Avenger gun target acquisition was not possible, and
maneuverability suffered greatly. Slowing down to an 8 MHz (1
wait state) yielded a "clunker". Discussions with other users have
revealed that A-10 would seem to be optimized for a 286 12 MHz
machine. Fortunately, Dynamix, a young company (virtually all
company employees are under 30; Mario Savio is alive and well
and working in Oregon!), has taken note of this problem and will
issue a a revised version. If the program runs too quickly on a
machine, Version 2.0 will allow a toggle switch for slow-down purposes (Shift-1 through 9). The A-10 remains a frisky plane, subject to quick auguring into the ground, but such is the life of the
close air support pilot. If a user has the first version (so noted by
the lack of a version number), a revised Disk 1 will be mailed
upon corporate receipt of the registration with the notation
"Upgrade". Alternatively, one may download the revision from
Dynamix's BBS (503-687-8497). Designer Damon Slye notes
that Version 2.0 will also correct the difficulties of playing the
game on disk with an AdLib sound board, which some gamers
discovered (although those using hard drives had no problem
with the AdLib board).
Also, if the program is running too slowly, a detail window can
be accessed which "speeds up" the simulation, but at some
sacrifice in depth. This type of attention to detail is appreciated by
the user.
Dynamix emphasizes the playability of A-10, stressing its "feel"
(Continued on page 44)

(Continued from page 42)

over detailed historical accuracy. The user reports to "Commander Cord"; since the Air Force does not use such a rank, the
"naval" rank (equivalent to an Air Force lieutenant colonel) seems
somewhat silly. But overall, the program succeeds in imparting
the necessary "feel". It is easy to learn and play. In fact, it is quite
interesting. Just remember, the A-10 is optimized for close support; most flying will be done under 400 feet and this requires
concentration. SAMs (surface-air missiles) are shown with their
"umbrella" of coverage and an optimal approach run should
evade such coverage. If such coverage cannot be avoided, of
course, the first run should be to take out the SAM launch platforms.
The entire product emphasizes playability. For example, take
offs can be accomplished with a single keystroke. Yet, there are
some anomalies. Some will not like the fact that the keyboard
bomb release ("return key") often requires multiple keystrokes
before "taking". However, button number two on the joystick
works flawlessly and should be used if available. Yet, the keyboard controls are otherwise easier to use, since gun tactics utilize rudder keys (,) extensively and the space bar is "just a shot
away" as contrasted with keyboard/joystick contortions. Also, chaff
and flares are extremely effective in missile avoidance, even
though there is no sound or evidence that the flare/chaff has actually been released. Further, a campaign game is available, constituting successful completion of all missions. Although one is
prompted to enter his name, the program still refers to him as
"CPT Buck Ryan" throughout the campaign. Nevertheless, top
scores are saved under the "correct name". Finally, there is an
"edge of the world" syndrome. If an enemy tank exits the strategic
map, one cannot catch up to it. Viewing it through the rangefinder shows the enemy vehicle "outdistancing" the A-10! Just be
aware that the anomaly exists and, if it occurs, switch to an attainable target.
The mission mixture is somewhat abbreviated, with more emphasis on strike than close air support. However, Dynamix notes
that an expansion module will be available in December for
$12.95 (and such modules will be downloadable from the
company's own BBS [503 687-8497] for free, albeit without
documentation updates). The expansion module will consist of a
substitute campaign with an additional seven missions.
Threat levels may be "wimp", "pretty mean suckers", or "major
bad news", the last of which is most likely historical. The most
realistic mission for an A-10 is probably the "Mother Hen"
scenario. In this mission, one must protect four armored platoons
in their drive to open a corridor through the SAM umbrellas.
Once that is accomplished, the A-10 must then penetrate such
corridor and destroy a supply dump. Time is of the essence; a
missed pass with an enemy element may well doom a friendly
platoon elsewhere on the front.

Conclusions
A-10 has much going for it. It is easy-to-use, attractive and fun.
This is not a flight grognard's game, but if you are looking for a
game which you can shake out of the box, boot up, and have a
great deal of fun with, then A-10 (Version 2.0) qualifies.

Review

ote: The writer
of dis review
would like to
thank da wonderful,
kind, intelligent, and
generous members of
da honorable local
chapter of the Cement Shoemakers'
Guild of America for
da helpful assistance
which dey didn't
necessarily provide,
but which if dey had
provided would have
been most valuable.

N

Da Goods on da
New Moidah
Mystery
Kyodai's "Murder Club"

Moidah Club (Ed.:
Murder Club) is
Kyodai's entry in dat
long line of gumshoe
potboilers such as
Detective, Suspect,
Twilight's Ransom,
etc. and it poifectly
recreates the challenge of real-life investigative work. As
detective J. B.
Harold, da player inherits Liberty City's
"most baffling
moidah investigation", which, until his
most unfoitunate
heart attack, had
been handled by
Harold's partner.

Of course, as
everyone discovers
quickly enough, nothing among the people
one speaks with in
Liberty City is unrelated and therein lies
both one of the biggest faults of the
game and one of its
greatest strengths.

"Tell 'em about
da choices,
Dennis!"

by Rocco (As Told To Dennis Owens)

It seems dat local
big fish in a small
pond, Bill Robbins—
womanizer, corporate shark extraordinaire—was found
dead. To wit, dis
poiticular poi-son was found stabbed in da back, having been
obsoived by a security guard who saw little moih dan a blue
car screeching off in the distance.

"Tell 'em about da coroner, Dennis!"
"At present," the coroner's report says, "the investigation is concentrating on the theory that Robbins was killed for reasons related to work or some personal grudge held against him." Unfortunately, as the player will soon find out, practically everyone to
be interviewed has something they didn't like about Bill.
"Yeah," one character admits, "but was it enough to murder him
for?" That is precisely what the player must figure out as he tries
to untangle the hurt emotions and the guilt, the deceptions and
the red herrings, and the motivations of everyone involved in
Robbins' life.
Frankly, players won't receive much help in their attempts to
piece together the events of that tragic night. The prosecutor
wants evidence, hard evidence, and the crime lab will only tell the
player what he has already figured out or explain the evidence
which he has already brought in. In addition, the police library is
almost useless. Players will only find a few seemingly unrelated
stories there.

Murder Club is
menu-driven and
TITLE:
Murder Club
flows much like JourSYSTEM:
IBM
ney or A Mind
$39.95
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
Riverhill Soft
Forever Voyaging
PUBLISHER:
Kyodai Software
through selections
San Rafael, CA
which pop up as
Detective Harold uncovers important information or performs
certain acts. Though
the graphics do include a rough map of
the city, there are only
a few places where
the detective can go
(accessed through the
menus), only certain
people who can be
questioned, and only
a few specific items
which can be mentioned to them. Thus,
irrelevant locations
are left out; whimsical
or impulsive acts are
basically impossible;
and, with the lack of
invention, away flies any suspension of disbelief or sense of the
world inside the machine which is so important to the more successful computer games.

Also lost, is the simulation of reality which the game seems to
try so hard to create. Not simply an adventure story, Murder Club
very vividly recreates the need for footwork—research and conversation—which lies at the heart of any police investigation. As in
real-life sleuthing, most of the game is hard work—which is, in
turn, both a blessing and a curse.
Murder Club is indeed a pleasant change to the usual shoot'em-up, gather all the goodies type games. It does, at least, offer
a chance for players to pretend they are smarter than the bad
guys and imagine for a brief time that they are perceptive
enough to be a detective. Imagine, that is, until they realize that it
is impossible to go wrong. As long as the players direct the detective to talk to everyone possible and to search every location available, it is virtually impossible not to resolve the situation.
Murder Club becomes a race to talk to everyone before the
player falls asleep from the repetition of key-pecking. Search warrants, arrest warrants, etc. will all be doled out when the detective
(Continued on page 95)

Review

GOOD KNIGHT,
SWEET PRINCE
Broderbund's "Prince of Persia"
by Charles Ardai

Prince Valiant
The Sultan is away, fighting to keep barbarian feet on
the proper side of the Tigris, and wouldn't you just know,
his most
trusted Grand
Vizier has
seized the
throne. That
dirty rat Jaffar's
also seized the
Sultan's
daughter and
demanded that
she marry him.
She's got an
hour to say yes
or to join her
lover in the
palace prison
and in a death
sentence.

TITLE:
SYSTEM:

PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Prince of Persia
Apple II (with 128K)
$34.95
Jordan Mechner
Broderbund Software
San Rafael, CA

Speaking of
her lover (let's
call him 'Errol
Flynn,' just to
pick a name at
random), he's
an ordinary
guy, a
wanderer from
a foreign land
who came to
Persia and managed to steal the
princess' heart. Only now he's underground and swordless, with a dungeon
to escape from, a palace to infiltrate, a
heavily guarded tower to conquer, and
an hour to do it in. Three guesses
which character you get to play.

Lots of things could kill our man Errol—a sword-blow, a
three-story fall, impalement on a bed of spikes—but,
wonder of wonders, a push of a button will fill his mangled
corpse with life once more. This power of resuscitation is
unlimited and extremely handy. There's nothing like a
quick resurrection to take the sting out of losing a fight.
The time limit, on the other hand, is not up for debate. An
hour is an hour is an hour. At the end of an hour, Jaffar

will track Errol down and kill
him. Needless to say, when Jaffar kills someone, he stays
dead.
In effect, then, Errol's enemy
is Time Himself, the great foe
of the old-time poets and of
anyone stuck in rush-hour traffic. The old boy's got a
labyrinth of chambers,
hallways and ledges to explore;
portcullises to lift; pits to leap;
turbaned swordsmen to kill . .
. and all this in a real-time
hour. Isn't that cutting it a bit
close?

No, says the game's 'User's
Guide'. "Don't be afraid to explore, and to experiment. After all, you've got nothing to
lose except your life, the Princess, and the entire Kingdom."
Gee, thanks.

Jordan vs. Persia: One Thousand And One
Never mind that a Sultan rules over a Sultanate, not a
Kingdom.
Never mind that it makes no sense to have guards in a
dungeon like this (How do they get there? How do they go
home at night if the blasted thing's inescapable? How do
they get food?
Never mind that the Sultan, who is off killing foreigners,
would probably prefer to see his daughter married to Jaffar
than to a rascally foreigner who's just killed several dozen
of his best guards and his Grand Vizier.
I mean, really, did those old Thief of Baghdad movies
make sense? The point is, they were loads of fun and
Prince of Persia is loads of fun, too. You want logic, too?
Prince of Persia is the brainchild of Jordan Mechner, the
young author of Karateka. Curiously, Prince has less in
common with Mechner's earlier game than with a much
earlier Broderbund offering, The Castles of Dr. Creep. In
that game, players explored rooms patterned after movies
such as Frankenstein and Dracula. Here, players explore
rooms patterned after Ali Baba and The Arabian Nights.
Both games are characterized by an abundance of
mechanical puzzles ("Which tile do I step on to raise the
gate?", "How can I reach that ledge?", and so forth), as
well as opulent, atmospheric graphics. Both also feature
appropriate mood-enhancing soundtracks, though Dr.
Creep's Brahms is a shade better than Francis (nepotism
alert!) Mechner's merely serviceable work in Prince.
The maze of rooms is extremely well-constructed in both
games, giving players plenty to explore and plenty of apparent dead-ends to get themselves out of. However,
Prince of Persia offers something additional (besides being
available, which Dr. Creep is not). To quote the package,
"]Mechner] breaks new ground with animation so uncannily human it must be seen to be believed." This would be
the height of marketing arrogance if it weren't, quite simply, true.
Working from "hundreds of movie clips" and the digitized
poses of three live models, Mechner has crafted the
(Continued on page 64)

Computer Gaming World 's
The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first person perspectives of
real world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take your alter
ego through a storyline or
series of events.
Role-Playing Adventures
(RP): Adventure games that
are based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games In
CGW's Hall Of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated By
Our Readers
Over Time.
They Are Worthy
Of Play By All.

(Continued from page 36)

player gets to fire guns and missiles and
drop oil slicks to shake pursuing cars,
there are many other driving games on
the market, and most are, at least, as
good as this one. A sense of repetition is
further heightened by the placement of
the second driving sequence immediately
after the first.
The hang-gliding
segment suffers from
the most awkward
controls of the
game—it is almost
impossible to aim the
guns and, as in real
life, the hang-glider is
difficult to steer
laterally without a
dangerous loss of altitude. It doesn't help
that this is the very
first segment in the game, nor that the
objective isn't clear. Is Wolf supposed to
shoot down the enemy hang-gliders (he
does have a gun, after all)? Is he supposed to evade them or simply land
somewhere in particular? The hang-glider
sequence gets the game underway on a
strange, uncertain note.
Piloting the stealth bomber, on the
other hand, is the game's climactic challenge. It isn't easy either, but one
wouldn't want it to be. The controls are
simpler than the real thing but complex
enough to give the simulation some
depth. This segment comes off well.
By far the best segments, however, are
the two most unusual, where the player
actually gets to participate in hands-on,
non-vehicular, movie action. First, after bailing
out of an exploding
plane without a
parachute, Wolf has to
catch the freefalling villain who does have
one. Then, he has to
steer the parachute so
that he lands on a truck
passing on the highway beneath him.
The controls in these segments are
transparent (in the sense that they make
intuitive sense and don't interfere with
the action) and the situations are exciting. These two sequences also work well
because their goals not only tie in with
the plot, but are immediately evident. I
have already noted the uncertain goal of
the first segment; but the car chases also

go on and on with no convenient way for
the player to know when they will end.
Even in the stealth sequence where the
goal is explicitly to fly a stolen bomber
back to the United States, there is no
gauge to show how much progress one
has made.
None of the segments are bad in and of
themselves. In fact, they all hit a solid
level of good. However, the excellent
parachute sequences are too slight to
carry the game by themselves. If this is
the sort of material Dynamix will work
with (and I think it should be), they will
need at least a
dozen such segments per game, if
not more. The
vehicle sequences
are meaty enough
to carry a game, but
there the problem is
both quality and
originality. A player
who wants a driving
game, or a flight
simulator, will do better to get a game exclusively devoted to
that pursuit. The
animation will probably be smoother, the
controls more responsive, the options
more extensive, and the world of the
simulation better developed. The inevitable result of trying to package
several different simulations in one
product is that none are as good as they
might be. It is very much to Dynamix's
credit that all the sequences are as good
as they are.

The scene opens on a well-fed, goateed
villain issuing instructions for David
Wolf's elimination. Cut to the opening
credits, which are set against a backdrop
of slick silhouettes: a
sports car, a spyplane, a
sexy woman. As the
credits end, a male silhouette walks onscreen and the female
silhouette spins, walks
across the screen, and
embraces him. Think
"James Bond". David
Wolf, Secret Agent
wants very badly to be a
James Bond movie. All the elements are
there: the tuxedo-clad man of action who
is quick with a gun, a woman, or a wry
one-liner; the agent's solid, anxious Director who lays out the scenario; the beautiful, kidnapped scientist; the megalomaniacal villain with plans to hold the White
House hostage; the henchmen and thugs;
(Continued on page 85)

(Continued from page 26)

decide when and where to employ offmap support to the best advantage.

on the contemporary battlefield is fatal!!
Use it early and use it often!!

Platoon Formation: Learn to use
platoon formations and when not to.
Generally, it is more beneficial to leave a
covering force ("You move, I'll cover!")
and use bounding overwatch. However,
while the platoon leader can give orders
to all four tanks, one must issue orders
separately when the formation is split.
Move, regroup, move again, and use terrain to maximize cover and concealment
(cover affords protection from enemy fire,
while concealment merely hides one from
enemy observation). While placing one's
tank in hull defilade position, remember
to adjust the other tanks individually. In a

line formation, while tank 1 may be perfectly positioned, but other tanks may be
too far forward or back. Therefore, one
must shift to each tank and place it in
the most advantageous position. Finally,
do not give the "Fire at Will" command
prematurely. Tankers have a tendency to
use up ammunition quickly and the corn
puter is no exception.

Use of Artillery: Artillery fires can be
quickly brought to bear. However, Ml
does not allow shifting of fires or preselected firing points. Once a target is
selected, it will be engaged until the artillery unit has executed its fire mission. In
a mobile battlefield, this can occasionally
prove non-optimal. Thus, one must

Interestingly enough, the Soviet forces
seem to lack the mainstay of Soviet
arms—i.e. massive artillery. Historically,
the Red Army has utilized massed artillery
preparatory fires to disrupt and destroy
enemy forces. These artillery fires are not
present in the game, presumably since
there is not much entertainment value in
digging down into the dirt for hours while
the universe seemingly explodes.

Conclusion
There is no question that M1 Tank
Platoon is the best armor simulator currently available on the market. A richlyfaceted gaming experience, it does
portray the interdependence of the
various combat arms. Playable upon different levels (individual or platoon), its
campaign options offer hours of entertainment. [Ed: The outside tank view
provides some of the most thrilling
views of game play we have ever seen
in a computer game. It is nothing short
of outstanding!]
(c) 1989, all rights reserved

(Continued from page 28)

MechWarrior
type of planet is important because heat
will dissipate more effectively on an arctic
planet). At this point, he must decide:
which direction to move and how fast to
do so; whether to take cover behind available terrain or challenge the enemy in
the open; which enemy to target; and
what weapon to use, as well as when to
fire it.
The combat is consistent with the
boardgame with one noteworthy exception. As in the fiction excerpted above,
the boardgame rules apply a formula for
heat build-up in proportion to movement. The MechWarrior design team felt
that this heat build-up made the simulation less enjoyable and held back the action for no useful purpose. Therefore,
they designed the simulation so that heat
build-up is strictly a result of weapon fire
and/or taking damage. Purists may resent
the design team taking this liberty, but
the combat moves more swiftly to its
thundering conclusions without having
that rule in place.
Player characters will face light 'Mechs
(Locusts, Jenners, and Phoenix Hawks),
medium 'Mechs (Shadow Hawks and
Riflemen), and heavy 'Mechs (Warhammers, Marauders, and Battlemasters)
armed with machine guns, lasers of
various intensities, autocannons, short
range missiles and particle projection cannons (PPCs). Each one takes shape as
the range between mercenary team and
enemy 'Mechs closes and the overall effect is incredible. Dynamix has worked
their 3-D technological magic in developing MechWarrior for Activision and the
result is a database full of three-dimensional enemies that can be easily recognized and logically engaged. One doesn't
get the feeling he is fighting geometrical
shapes. Rather it seems like these 31st
Century engines of destruction are heading right at one's own cockpit. Also, the
fast scrolling terrain and realistic way it affects one's speed and aim is some of the
best technological wizardry we've yet seen
in a simulation. Players get a tremendous
verisimilitude of depth and horizon when
marching one's 'Mech over small slopes
and rises or using the 'Mechs jump jets
to fly above the action.

Dan dropped the Wolfhound to
one knee, raised the right arm,
and targeted the golden
crosshairs at the ravine mouth
across from him.

When the lead Panther was
impaled on Dan's sights, he
triggered his large laser. As
sheets of armor vanished from
the 'Mech's right flank, the
Panther twisted to the left to
protect its wounded side and
then ducked back beneath cover.
—Michael A. Stackpole,
Warrior: Riposte

MechWarrior doesn't actually use "golden" crosshairs, but it does utilize an extremely intuitive targeting system. When
the player sees shapes moving at a distance, he simply hits the "Enter" key and
a green rectangle will appear on the
screen, surrounding an enemy 'Mech or

installation (Note: If he "targets" a friendly
'Mech by mistake, the user-friendly simulation provides a double rectangle to alert
the player to potential disaster). This allows him to target that enemy or hit the
"Enter" key yet again in order to move to
a different target. If he is uncertain as to
whether he has effectively targeted his opponent, he can "zoom in" an additional
two magnifications. This simulates the
work of the sensors present within every
BattleMech. Should the sensors be
damaged, the MechWarrior will find himself "blind" while the battle continues unabated all around him.
Strategies in MechWarrior are actually
rather straightforward. As in the
boardgame, the first tactical rule (as well
as Rules #2-#4) is "Never Stand Still"
(noted in "Battle 'Mech Tactics" by Steve
Kerry in Breakout! magazine, March-May,
1988). Also, a la the boardgame, lighter
'Mechs will want to use their speed to get
behind the medium and heavy machines
in order to blast away at their weaker
back armor with impunity.
(Continued on page 77)

Review

UFO
For Real?
IS

SubLOGIC Flings
a
Flying Saucer Simulator
At Us
by Daniel Hockman

W

hat do you do when you have the most incredible
flight simulation program? The one that has set the
standard for the whole industry? If you want to make
more money, you might try to clone it into a few
games/simulations that use the same award winning technology. Right? Well, that's what SubLOGIC is trying to do with
two new releases: UFO and Flight Simulator A.T.P. (Air
Transport Pilot). The latter product is scheduled for a December release. The former was released in late October.

UFO is a very interesting idea for a computer game. You
are in command of an alien flying saucer. Your goal is to harvest Q-energy (rare throughout most of the galaxy but,
wouldn't you just know it, common on earth!). Q-energy is
found in population centers and particularly in sizable buildings. Oddly enough the documentation omits an important
fact that game play is built upon: Q-energy is released when
humans experience fear. Thus, your task is to terrorize the
populations of large cities (especially in large buildings where
people are concentrated) so as to raise the fear level and harvest the resulting Q-energy. It's a lot of fun to watch the
UFO in the demo program terrorize Washington D.C. You
watch as little colored balls (representing Q-energy) slowly
drift up to the UFO from the White House and the Pentagon. The gang at SubLOGIC certainly do have a sense of
humor.
There are two games in UFO: "Energy Trader" and "Earth
Craft Chase". Energy Trader is pretty much described in the
preceding paragraph. In Earth Craft Chase you are given a
limited amount of time to follow and terrorize a number of
human aircraft. You get points by following close and even
more points if you can successfully "scoop" them up with
your graviton tractor beam. Be careful not to turn the beam
up too high or you might destroy the aircraft (messy!). There
is a certain sinister glee one has when you start chasing a
fear ridden human pilot all over the sky. And you just know
what he's thinking when you turn your craft skyward and
shoot out of the atmosphere in mere seconds.
Speaking of leaving the atmosphere, part of the game is
played in low earth orbit (where your mothership is parked,
240 klaks (.94 klaks equal 1 mile) above Southern Florida.
The views of the U.S. you get from here are spectacular (see
photo).
Unfortunately, this is a very frustrating part of the game.
Docking with the mothership is a bear. To be frank, I have

only succeeded twice in dozens of attempts (and I consider
myself pretty dextrous at these things). Even when I pay the
1500 energy unit penalty which allows me to transport to
anywhere in the U.S. (in this case the threshold of the
mothership's docking bay), I rarely can get that blasted craft
to successfully dock. It is a real challenge. Beyond the
problems with learning (if ever) to dock your craft is the fact
that you will have to spend several hours just learning to get
around. A flying saucer does not fly in the same fashion as
all those flight
simulators you have
played before. The
aerodynamics are different. The game accurately reflects this.
Therefore you will have
to learn some new
skills. Using a mouse
provides the best control. Learning to fly the
ship will be a challenge
for some; for others, a
distracting frustration.
Obviously the
scenery in UFO comes
from the SubLOGIC
Flight Simulator
scenery modules. Four
of the most detailed
scenery areas from
SubLOGIC's scenery
library are used in the game as the
four most concentrated areas for
NAME:
UFO
SYSTEMS:
IBM 512K. CGA/EGA/VGA
Q-energy (Miami, Washington
PRICE:
$49.95
D.C., San Francisco, Hawaii). Thus
DESIGNERS:
Bruce Artwick
most of the game will be played in
Hugo Feugen
PUBLISHER:
SubLOGIC
areas of highly detailed scenery
Champaign, IL 61820
(isn't that a nice coincidence?).
Don't expect much from other
areas. Outside of the four major 0-energy sources you will
get little more than city boundary polygons. Not even
Chicago (the highly detailed starting point in subLOGIC's
Flight Simulators) gets decent treatment. No buildings, no
O'Hare International, no Meigs Field! No nothin' (just a
Chicago shaped flat polygon). What a letdown!

Conclusions
UFO needs an option for
easy mothership docking and
some generic buildings for
each of the urban areas.
I wanted to like this game. It
has very colorful graphics (the
cockpit screen is vibrant), the
views from space are spectacular, and the idea behind
the game is not only unique (a rare enough occurrence in
this hobby), it is fun and engaging. But the difficulty in docking the spacecraft coupled with the fact that most U.S. cities
are nothing more than flat polygon terrain left me disappointed.
On the other hand, the game is unique. There is nothing
else like it on the market. If you want something different,
can live with polygon cities, and are willing to tackle some
truly difficult flight demands you might want to give UFO
a try.

(Continued from page 48)

smoothest animation ever seen in a game of this type.
Errol runs, he creeps, he leaps and ducks, he hangs by his
fingertips—and he looks like a real person doing it. Jaffar
and the princess, who are seen in animated sequences
throughout the game, turn and strut, cry, shake fists,
make dramatic gestures—and they look like real people
doing it. Playing Prince of Persia will simply spoil you for
any game whose designers couldn't be bothered to put
this much effort into their product. There's no new technology here, just imagination, elbow grease, hours at the keyboard and TLC. Jordan Mechner deserves all the praise
he's going to get for this one.
Prince of Persia succeeds at being more than a runningjumping game (in other words, a gussied-up Nintendo
game) because it captures the feel of those great old adventure films. In reality, a running-jumping game is what it

is (there's a good deal of sword combat, too), but within
that genre, Prince of Persia is a tremendous achievement.
Make no mistake. Prince of Persia is the lightest of light
entertainment. There's no great brain-drain here and no
social commentary. But what people too often forget is
how difficult it is to be 'merely' entertaining and just how
much fun 'light entertainment' can be. Star Wars was light
entertainment, after all, and Prince of Persia is the Star
Wars of its field.

Taking A Peek
(Continued from page 6)

can also purchase little 'goodies' from
Dr. Kadaver to even up the odds a bit.
And speaking of odds, players can increase their fight purse by wagering on
their own fights. Of course you're wager
ing that you'll win, 'taking a dive' will
only get your arms ripped off! IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #5.
SHANGHAI: An updated version of
the old classic, this new version provides
3-D Tiles, Digitized Sound Effects and
Music, Full Mac II Color Support, an
Identify Tile Option, Faster Tile Removal,
and several other features that let the
player play solo, tournament or time
games. Mac ($29.95 or $13.00 for an
earlier version upgrade). Circle Reader
Service #6.

APBA Game Co.
1001 Millersville Rd.
P.O. Box 4547
Lancaster, PA 17604-4547
APBA PRO BOWLING: If watching
WBF bowling tournaments is your
favorite Saturday afternoon activity, this
product might be for you. Ten-pen
fanatics can choose 2-4 professional
bowlers from a list of 48, set up a
match, tourney, even an entire season,
and watch them bowl it out. The pros
will play their game, each with their individual strengths and weaknesses, and
will nearly duplicate their actual life-time
results. It's useful for recreating a
season, but there isn't much "game" to
it. IBM. Circle Reader Service #7.
APBA PRO LEAGUE FOOTBALL:
The classic board game (played since
1958) comes to the computer. Players
can coach face-to-face, against the computer, or just watch the game unfold in
this stat-based football game. The game
comes with all the bells and whistles
you'd expect from APBA, and even includes a season stat compiler for league
freaks. IBM. Circle Reader Service #8.

Box Office, Inc.
336 Robert Street, Suite
1202
St. Paul, MN 55101
RINGLING BROS. AND BARNUM
& BAILEY CIRCUS GAMES: Players
get to enter the Big Top and perform
Trick Horse Riding, High Wire stunts,
Tiger Taming, or tackle the Trapeze in
this action game. Perform individual
events or enter the International Corn-

petition and compete in all four events.
Amiga. Circle Reader Service #9.

Broderbund Software
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903-2101
THE DARK HEART OF UUKRUL:
Players enter the underground city of
Eriosthe and must fight their way
through the twisty mazes that hide the
tyrant Uukrul and his evil minions. The
usual assortment of weapons and armor
combine with some interesting magic
and prayers to add lots of depth to this
role-playing adventure. Auto-mapping,
graphic tactical combat, and puzzles enrich the game. Apple II family (128K)
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #10.
LICENSE TO KILL: 007 is out for
revenge in this action game that closely

follows the movie. Players track down
Sanchez the drug kingpin, fighting him
with attack-copters, planes, and tankers,
and performing typical Bond feats like
water-skiing on bare feet and making an
in-flight jump from a helicopter to a
plane. Just another day in the Queen's
Service. IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #11.
JOAN OF ARC: SIEGE AND THE
SWORD: Return to the days of the
Hundred Year's War and take the throne
of Charles VII of France. Can you
change history and rid the land of
traitorous French dukes and the hated
English? At first glance, this product
looks much like a Defender of the
Crown clone, yet it turns out to be a
much more detailed strategy game with
an interesting diplomacy element (and
some very tough action sequences
(Continued on page 68)

-_-

Taking A Peek
(Continued from page 66)

thrown in for flavor). In all, a good
simulation of medieval kingsmanship.
IBM (pictured) ($44.95), Amiga, & St.
Circle Reader Service #12.

Bull City Software
P.O. Box 51816
Durham, N.C. 27717
MORIARTY'S REVENGE: Players join
the Scotland Yard Irregulars, a group of
international agents on the trail of
criminals from ten secret societies, in
this educational/adventure game. Much
like Broderbund's Carmen SanDiego
series, players must unravel geographical clues as they track criminals across
the globe. Includes a Rand McNally
Pocket World Atlas used in the detective
work. Mac ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #13.

Bullseye Software
P.O. Box 7900
Incline Village, NV 89450
FOKKER TRIPLANE FLIGHT
SIMULATOR: An all new re-release,
this WWI flight simulator's new features
include digitized sound, better graphics,
control of enemy flying and bombing.
Missions include balloon busting, demolition of enemy fuel dumps, and bombing
runs. Six different airbases are available
for stationing. Mac ($45.00). Circle
Reader Service #14.

Command Simulations
Bldg 3, 297 North Street
Hyannis, MA 02601
WHITE DEATH: The player gets a
chance to play the computer game
adapted from GDW's award winning
board game of the battle at Velikiyi Luki
(Russian front, winter 1942-43). Six
scenarios, modem option, bunkers,
morale, commandos, weather, rockets,
barrage, garrisons, etc. A detailed wargame for the operational East Front fan.
Amiga (pictured) ($59.95), IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #15.

Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404
F-16 COMBAT PILOT: Designed by
England-based Digital Integration,
F16 CP is EA's newest entry in the
crowded but hot category of air combat
simulators. The game's strength is its
well designed head-to-head capability

(via modem or direct connect). When
not flying against your friends, you attempt to become Squadron Commander as you fly five missions against
computer opponents. IBM and Atari ST
$49.95. Circle Reader Service #16.
KEEF THE THIEF: The player takes
the part of an apprentice thief in this
humorous role playing adventure. Firstperson graphics, more than 200
monsters, 25 dungeon levels, three
cities to loot, over 25 magic spells, realtime combat, and the option to choose
Fewer or Easier monsters. Apple IIGS
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #17.
POWERDROME: This in an interesting race game in which players fly a
space ship/race car in a futuristic Grand
Prix of sorts. Two players can hook up
their machines and race head to head,
or a solo pilot can compete against
three computer opponents. There are

six 3-dimensional tracks to race on, and
several classes of racers to fly. Track
and race conditions change, so players
must alter their racer configurations for
optimal racing results. Amiga (pictured)
($39.95) & ST. Circle Reader Service
#18.

Infocom
P.O. Box 3047
Menlo Park, CA 94025
MINES OF TITAN: This new role-playing game from Westwood Associates
(Battletech) takes place on the icy surface of Saturn's moon, Titan. Though it
is basically a remake of EA's Mars Saga,
it is on the IBM for the first time. Players
must find out why all contact with the
mining colony of Proscenium has
mysteriously been lost. Top-down tacti(Continued on page 70)

Taking A Peek
(Continued from page 68)

cal combat, auto-mapping, skill improvement, and auto-combat options nicely
round out this space adventure. IBM
($44.95). Circle Reader Service #19.

Konami
900 Deerfield Parkway
Buffalo Grove, IL 60089
LIFE FORCE: The Nintendo game
comes to the personal computer as the
player fights his way through six different
terror zones, loaded with the obligatory
monsters on his way to conquer Zelos,
the all-engulfing, planet-eating alien.
Capturing pods gives a ship extra
firepower in this joystick driven action
game. C-64. Circle Reader Service #20.

LucasfIlm Games
P.O. Box 2009
San Rafael, CA 94912
THEIR FINEST HOUR: THE BATTLE OF BRITAIN: BOB is the sequel
to the award winning Battlehawks 1982
(CGW Action Game of the Year 1989).
This time Lucasfilm takes us back to
the epic struggle for mastery of England.
The innovative camera replay feature of
Battlehawks has been improved with
VCR like controls and more camera
angles (including one in the bombs
themselves!) BOB adds landing fields,
level bombing missions, additional gunner positions, and more. IBM $59.95.
Circle Reader Service #21.
PIPE DREAM: This is a spatial
strategy game that'll keep you on your
toes. As a Plumber-in-Chief for a chemical company, you've got stay one step
ahead of the flowing 'flooz' as you try to
build the longest possible pipe system.
The pipe segments appear at random
and you've got to use quick thinking
and forward planning in laying the pipe.
As the rounds progress, you'll have to
deal with obstacles, one way pipes, and
faster flowing flooz. One or two players.
IBM (pictured), Mac, Amiga & ST
($39.95), C-64 ($29.95). Circle Reader
Service #22.

Lyric Software
6 Beach Plum Dr.
Northport, NY 11768
WORLDS AT WAR: One or two
players contest this strategic wargame
that is based on naval and amphibious
combat, on a galactic scale. The game
can be played at varying difficulty levels,
with different style boards, (naval or
galactic) and with options that include
hidden movement and night turns. Initial production levels are also adjustable.
IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #23.

Medalist International
180 Lakefront Drive
Hunt Valley, Maryland
21030
SAVAGE: The player takes the part of
a powerful warrior searching for his kidnapped princess. To rescue her, he
must fight through three different
scenarios: fighting giant dragons,
demon-like creatures, and a variety of different monsters, while looking for
weapons and treasures. This is a fast
moving, joystick-driven action game that
has all the prerequisites of the genre. C64 (pictured) ($29.95), IBM, Amiga, and
St ($34.95). Circle Reader Service #24.

Mindscape
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, IL 60062
AUSSIE GAMES: The player par-

ticipates in a six-pack of sporting events
from the land down under. Belly whacking, beer-bottle shooting, marlin fishing,
boomerang tossing, dry-river boat
racing, and beach football will work up a
player's thirst in this joystick driven action game. C-64 ($29.95). Circle Reader
Service #25.

FIENDISH FREDDY'S BIG TOP
O'FUN: Save the circus! If your traveling band of freaks and dare-devils
doesn't come up with $10,000 by the
end of tonight's performance, you're
through. The six circus events (knife
toss, trapeze act, tight-rope walking,
human cannonball, juggling and high
diving) are difficult enough without
Fiendish Freddy (circus imp and
employee of your debtor) trying to trip
you up and spoil your show. The
events are a challenge to master and
the wonderful animated sequences and
(Continued on page 73)

Taking A Peek
(Continued from page 70)

Simulations Canada
P.O. Box 452
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia
Canada B4V 2X6
KRIEGSMARINE: Part of the grand
tactical simulation series from Sim Can
that includes Long Lance and In Harm's
Way, this Atlantic Ocean entry covers
tactical naval combat in the Atlantic
from 1939 to 1944. Nine scenarios are
provided along with a build-your-own system. IBM, Amiga, Apple II and ST.
($60.00). Circle Reader Service #29.

Spectrum Holobyte
2061 Challenger Drive
Alameda, CA 94501
WELLTRIS: The Soviets are at it
again, trying to corrupt our minds with
another extremely addictive spatial
strategy game. In this sequel to Tetris,
players must maneuver block formations
as they fall down the walls of a well, and
try to form vertical and horizontal lines
of blocks on the bottom. As in Tetris,
the speed and levels of difficulty can be
altered to the player's gaming level, and
each level is accompanied by a scene
from Soviet culture. IBM ($34.95). Circle
Reader Service #30.

Star Games
708 W. Buffalo Ave.
Suite 200
Tampa, Fl 33603
gut-splitting antics will keep ya' rolling.
Amiga (pictured) & ST ($49.95), IBM
($44.95). Circle Reader Service #26.

a human opponent might. Mac
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #27

Premier Technology
650 Fifth Street #512
San Francisco, CA 94107

Psygnosis
P.O. Box 483
Addison, Illinois 60101

NET TREK: This intriguing multiplayer
game allows several trekkies to have a
friendly exchange of phaser blasts on an
Apple Talk network. It's every captain
for himself as each commands one of
three types of starships using a very
simple thrust-brake-fire command interface. The main objective is to be the
first to deploy starbases in all nine
galaxies in the game, though a secondary goal might be to vaporize the cocky
captain on terminal #4. The game can
also be played solo, though the computer opponent doesn't appreciate your
nasty ship-to-ship messages as much as

SHADOW OF THE BEAST: This
product is just what we've come to expect from Psygnosis: tough action
gaming with beautiful graphics and
sound. In this game, the player is on a
quest for revenge against The Beast
that captured him as a youth and turned
him into his servant. Psygnosis really
pushes the Amiga to the limit in this one
with 350 screens of action, 132
monsters, 900k of music and 2Mb of
graphics. The multi-layered 3-D scrolling
effect is nothing short of amazing.
Amiga ($49.95). Circle Reader Service
#28.

TARGHAN: Travel mystical lands with
sword in hand, journeying toward the
castle of the Evil One to uncover his
secret. Along your jaunt to the evil guy's
place, you'll meet gorgeous nymphs,
minotaurs, and dragons. Beautiful
graphics and typical hack and slash action mark this adventure-action import.
IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service
#31.

XOR
7607 Bush Lake Road
Minneapolis, Minn. 55435
ROBOMAN: In this action game,
players maneuver Roboman around the
screen, using elevators and
springboards, popping balloons for
points and searching for the key to the
next level. Quite frankly, this game looks
like something that could have been
published in the early 80's. IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #32.

I

(Continued from page 59)

MechWarrior
In MechWarrior, though, there are
some nice refinements. All the 'Mechs in
the simulation have an AWS (Automatic
Weapon System). This beauty opens up
an incredibly devastating tactic,
Peterson's Prodigious Punch-out (used
by boardgame guru and author of the
documentation, Steve Peterson). To use
this tactic, one simply leaves every potential weapon hooked to the AWS; lines up
the crosshairs on one of the enemy
'Mech's legs; and hits the "Tab" key. This
fires every weapon at the player's disposal
in sequence, faster than the player himself possibly could, until that point at
which the heat build-up shuts down the
reactor long enough for it to cool down.
Another advantage of the AWS is to link
all the weapons except the short range
missiles and machine guns to it. Then,
one can use the relatively inexpensive
lasers to range in on the enemy as he
closes range. In this way, one doesn't ex-

pend ammunition which has both a
limited range and must be replenished at
a cost to the player until it is certain to
have some impact on the battle.

that some 'Mechs like: Valkyrie, Centurions, Spiders, Hunchbacks,
Wolfhounds, Ostsols, and Crusaders are
not included (However, the design team

Irritation shot through the field commander's voice. "Harkness bought it
when he marched his Marauder into a Liao militia ambush. They had
inferno rockets and roasted him alive."
Alanna felt as if an icy dagger had been thrust into her stomach. What a
way to die! Inferno rockets exploded just before they hit their targets,
covering a 'Mech or building with a jellied fuel that burned like hell
itself. The heat buildup was enough to render a 'Mech inoperable.
Alanna shot a glance at her own heat monitors and felt a cold trickle of
sweat run down her spine.
—Michael A. Stackpole, Warrior: Coupe
Some hardcore Battletech aficionados
will feel like MechWarrior is not complete
enough. For example, they will point out
that there are no inferno rockets in the
game. Further, they will be disappointed

plans to develop a sequel with more
'Mechs should this product prove successful). They will undoubtedly lament the inability to customize one's 'Mechs within
(Continued on page 79)

(Continued from page 77)

MechWarrior
for minutes and
I've played it for
hours. It wears extremely well.

the bounds of
the simulation.
Yet, they will be
missing the point.
MechWarrior is
so easy-to-use,
fast-to-play, and
absolutely mesmerizing in its
presentation that
it forces the
player to suspend
his/her disbelief
like no previous
product. I literally
shuddered when
the cockpit view
shook from
enemy attacks. I personified those enemy
'Mechs and shouted derisive unprofessional epithets at them as we engaged in
battle. I hung my head in shame when
the "Defeat" screens admonished me and

I lifted my hands "Rocky"-style when the
"Victory" screens offered their glorious accolades. In short, I found myself booting
the game and fighting through a mission
during every spare moment. I've played it

Whether you are
already a fan of
the Battletech
universe or you
are simply looking
for the next "hot"
simulation, you
should consider
MechWarrior. If
you're not a fan,
MechWarrior will
make you one. If
you already are a
fan of Battletech,
it will rejuvenate your enthusiasm for a
fascinating science fiction universe.
Quotations from The Warrior Trilogy
used by permission of FASACorporation.

(Continued from page 34)

Midway
rule, general wind patterns in the Pacific
basin favor the Japanese player by allowing his carriers to continue to steam
toward their objective while launching
aircraft, whereas American carriers must
turn away from the advancing Japanese
fleet to come into the wind envelope for
flight operations. Indeed, every aspect of
the game seems weighted in favor of the
Japanese, despite the historical outcome
It is possible to recreate history, but it requires a lot of patience and no small
measure of good old luck.
Overall, General Quarters Software
has succeeded in providing war gamers
an inexpensive way to strive for a miracle
Midway is a fine achievement for the
fledging firm, offering challenging (if not
balanced) game play, smooth operation,
adequate graphics, and a very strong
computer opponent. It is certainly worth
the purchase price.

(Continued from page 20)

Happy Juice to the Teeelveee (downspin
edge of the cloud). While there, you can
lasso a few eight-legged rhino and sell
them for some petty cash.

Starflight 2
hack n' slash gaming. It is a great sequel
to a great game.

Game Hints
The following information was purchased from a Humna Humnan ambassador by Capt. Johnson of the Interstel
Corporate Police [Known on Earth as
Greg Johnson, lead designer of the
Starflight series.]. Rumor has it, the captain paid dearly for these precious tidbits;
including a few hundred meters of
Shyneum, several Running Fungi, and a
crewmember to be named later. (Note:
Commanders who wish to eschew
hints should skip this section.).

Getting off to a good start:
• Class armaments are useless and
will only get you into trouble. The money
tied up in them would be better used as
trading capital. Sell them.
• It doesn't hurt to swallow that pride
and be OBSEQUIOUS with some sentients, especially the Tandelou.
• Recommending planets is a great
way for the more adventuresome captains to gain some working cash. Check
out the class M system next to starport
and the class M system at the Top of the
Wee Dipper.
• According to the chatter on the
Humna Humna com-lines, hefty profits
can be earned by trading Tandelouvian

• A good set of thrusters can keep you
out of trouble. Work on obtaining class 5
engines first. If you keep your nose out
of trouble, you really shouldn't need
armor and weaponry until later.

Staying alive with mature crews:
• A handy little gadget is the Encounter
Scan, produced by the Humna Humna
in a back-water star system somewhere in
the area of 237,88. You might want to
bring a little LiveLong for PR purposes.
• Jump pods can save travel time and
fuel. They're a bit risky unless you know
the trick. Their accuracy is related to the
level of gravity in the target area. Select
your destination as close as possible to
as many stars as possible. The middle of
a cluster is best, but not directly on top
of a star.

• The Humna Humna have the most
useful info (as this list shows). Visit them
in their sector in the Downspin, Coreward
corner. Obliging their request will make
them friendlier, but refusing will not
upset them.
• Avoid travel in the Cloud, it's rather
nasty in there.
• When you enter an encounter with
an alien vessel, the first thing you should
ALWAYS do is maneuver away from
them until you are at a safe distance.
This will give you much more reaction
time if they decide they don't like the
color of your starship.
• If you acquire a G'nunk crew member, be "Hostile" every now and again in
communications to keep her happy and
don't ever be Obsequious.

Conversions Received
Bad Dudes (Data East) Amiga, Apple
Beyond Dark Castle (Activision) C-64
Boot Camp (Konami) IBM
Carrier Command (Microplay) IBM
Don't Go Alone (Accolade) IBM
Downhill Challenge (Broderbund) Amiga
Dr. Doom's Revenge (Paragon) Amiga
Empire (Interstel) C-64
Grand Prix Circuit (Accolade) Mac
Fast Break (Accolade) Apple IIGS
Hillsfar (SSI) Amiga, ST
Indiana Jones & the Last Crusade
Action Game (Lucasfilm) Amiga, IBM
Indiana Jones Graphic Adventure

(Lucasfilm) Amiga
Jack Nicklaus 1989 Course Disk
(Accolade) Amiga
Jetfighter (Broderbund) IBM
Keel the Thief (EA) Amiga
Maniac Mansion (Lucasfilm) ST, IBM
Monopoly (Virgin/Leisure) IBM
Obliterator (Psygnosis) IBM

Paperboy (Mindscape) Amiga, ST
Perils of Rosella (Sierra) Apple
Pirates (Microprose) ST
Qix (Taito) Apple
Renegade (Taito) Apple
Robocop (Data East) Amiga, IBM
Sargon 4 (Spinnaker) IBM
Shinobi (Sega) IBM
Space Quest III (Sierra) Amiga
Star Command (SSI) Amiga, ST
Starglider II (Microplay) IBM
Stellar Crusade (SSI) Amiga
Strike Zone (Melbourne) IBM
subLogic Scenery Disk Amiga
Super Hang-On (Data East) Amiga, ST
Tangled Tales (Origin) IBM
Three Stooges (Cinemaware)
Apple IIGS
Thunderchopper (subLogic) IBM
Where in the USA is Carmen Sandiego

(Broderbund) Amiga
Windwalker (Origin) IBM

(Continued from page 55)

and the international locations, including the obligatory casino.
Dynamix has imitated one of the most successful movie formulas of all time and, at first, they seem to have done it well.
The first scene (preceding the hang-glider segment) is tightly
written and crackles with wittier dialogue than we've seen in the
last three Bond films. The actors are well-cast for their roles,
and the sets are convincing. David Wolf comes off as a gradeA production. Unfortunately, the initial level of the dialogue
doesn't last. What starts as genuine, refreshing wit ends up at a
surprisingly low level (calling the villain "Mr. Fatso" as a half-pun
on the name "Vasto," for instance). When the script tries to be
funny, it usually is, but when it tries to play it straight, it ends
up being funny anyway, in the way James Bond plots become
increasingly comical in proportion to how serious they try to be.
Here, however, the viewer isn't certain how to take the material.
Is it a parody of James Bond (which is, by now, self-parodic), as
a straight comic adventure (imitation Bond as opposed to
parody), or as a serious thriller. It is hard to take the strictly formula plot seriously, but several of the scenes suggest that one
is supposed to. I suspect that the screenwriters never quite
decided which direction to take, and hoped to be able to do a
little of each. This can't possibly work. You can't both parody a
genre and, at the same time, place yourself firmly within that
genre, because the resulting self-parody looks embarrassingly
unwitting. Certainly, you can't do this and expect to be taken
seriously. Airplane! couldn't ask us to take seriously its disaster
plot and Young Frankenstein didn't try to make viewers cry over
the monster's plight, but this is what the designers of David
Wolf seem to be doing.
So, while the casting is first-rate, the performances are not.
Rather, they are loaded with goofy, exaggerated gestures and
expressions. All the actors seem to be stepping outside their
roles, as though to say, We know this is a formula movie,
we're not fools." Or worse: "This isn't a movie, it's only a computer game."
Let's face it: Goldfinger can't know he's an exaggeration; Lt.
Frank Drebin can't know he's a buffoon; and actors can't let on
that they know their characters are anything less than real
people. David Wolfs actors are never submersed in their roles.
It is clear that they don't take the story seriously, so how can
we?
This is not to say that there is nothing to enjoy after the first
scene. Wolf's briefing is well-written and juicy; the payoff to the
freefall sequence (which is given away on the package) is nice;
the launching of the stealth bomber is capped by a clever bit of
action; and there's always Kelly's bondage scene, if you're into
that. Besides, all of the scenes (I calculate about a half-hour of
"footage," total) are fun to watch just for the sheer joy of seeing
digitized images on your PC.
Alas, the sheer joy wears thin after a while, and neither the action nor the movie is strong enough to rescue David Wolf.
What Dynamix has done with David Wolf, Secret Agent has
probably taken the genre about as far as it can go. Unfortunately, the problem is that the genre makes for games that you
won't want to play or watch twice. Despite this inherent limitation, David Wolf is unique and worth a look for only one
reason: it is visually stunning and executed with flair.

(Continued from page 16)

Dragon Wars
so much running one can do; eventually,
fighting becomes necessary. The trick is
to take on the weaker opponents, those
you have a fair chance of defeating with
bare hands. Soldiers and guards do not
fall into this category! Born losers might
be a better choice.
Combat is totally menu-driven. When a
confrontation occurs, a picture of the
closest foe is displayed on the left, and a
main option menu comes up on the
right. This is where you choose to Fight,
Run, or Advance. Advancing moves the
party forward ten feet. Running causes
each party member to flee individually.
This can be dangerous in close combat,
as some monsters may be faster than
some characters and hence, get in a shot
or two as they run away. Fighting, of
course, brings up a sub-menu of choices
for each character, one at a time. Essentially, you can attack, dodge, block, cast
a spell, use an item, run, or move forward or back in line. Additional submenus appear when "Attack" or "Cast a

spell" is chosen. Casting a spell requires
the most decisions, as you must choose
the type of magic, the type of spell, and
finally, the spell itself. While this is a lot to
wade through, familiarity makes it go
faster, especially since you only need to
type in the first letter of each choice (plus
return). Also, you will probably have a
small selection of favorite spells to use in
combat, thus casting can go very quickly
indeed. When there is more than one
group of opponents, you also have a
choice as to which one you want a particular character to attack. Range (which
is given) is extremely important here,
both for spells and distance weapons
such as bows. Different spells have different range limits, so keep the manual
handy to make sure you aren't wasting
magic on someone unreachable. The
same holds true for distance weapons;
i.e. a long bow can shoot farther than a
regular bow. As you experiment with different ranged weapons, you will learn
what the optimums are for each one.

Health is always important and, once all
combat choices have been made, the
menus are replaced by the names of the
characters with bar graphs beneath them.
The first bar, in red, represents hit points.
Should this reach zero, the character is
dead (and you can be dead a long time
in this game). The second bar, in green,
shows stun. If this goes down to zero, the
character is alive but unconscious. He
can be revived during combat with a healing spell or potion. Should none be available (or there's no time to use one), the
character is restored fully (as far as stun
goes) when combat is over. A character
always takes stun damage when hit, and
stun is always twice the physical injury.
Thus a blow that causes three points of
damage on the red bar will do six on the
green bar. In many cases, a character will
drop from stun damage instead of death.
The third bar, in blue, appears only for
mages, and measures how much magical
energy remains for spell-casting. If this
goes to zero, or close to it, that character
is unable to cast spells. Magical energy
does not regenerate automatically; you
need a dragonstone or magic pool to restore it. Should the entire party become
(Continued on page 90)

(Continued from page 89)

Dragon Wars
stunned, it is not the end. You are simply
turned around and moved away from the
combat square, just as though you had
run. Physical damage remains, but the
stun bars are renewed, and everyone
(who didn't die in combat) is still alive. Of
course, if everyone does die, you'll have
to restore to your last save and try again.
In this game, death is even more necessary to avoid than in other games. There
are no spells, no handy temples, no
wandering priests to bring back the
deceased. There is one, and only one,
place where resurrection is possible. It is
not easy to reach or find. Should someone die, my recommendation is to restore the game, because you need all the
people you can get.
Magic, as you've probably guessed by
now, is no longer a case of "nuke 'em till
they glow". Those days are over. Combat
spells are much more restrained. The

majority of the group-effect spells do a
maximum of 24-36 points of damage.
There are a few spells which can be more
potent, by virtue of the points put into
them (Inferno comes to mind as an example), but don't expect to find anything
of god-like power (even if you get it from
a god).This is true of goodies in the
game as well. There are many neat
things out there, waiting for your hot little
hands, but you won't be stumbling over
swords (+50) or armor (+90), since there
aren't any. Further, combat gives you experience points (and sometimes a little
cash). Anything beyond that has to be
found. No chests with mega-items will be
presented after you slaughter the goblins
. . . or anyone else for that matter. The
good stuff is tucked away and you'll just
have to ferret it out on your own.
Some of the Neat Things out there are
NPC's you can add to the party. Up to
three of them can be included in the

group (giving you seven characters in
all), and you would be wise to take in
some extra help. They fight, cast spells,
use items, etc., as you direct them to, so
there is little difference between them
and the regular party members. NPC's
also go up in level, just as the characters
do, thus they, too, improve over time. In
general, the game works very well. Combat is properly balanced, and you will
need a mix of muscle and magic in most
encounters to prevail.
Treasure is equally balanced. All of it
has been placed specifically with no random items in the game. This is a brilliant
stroke, as it prevents the "Monty Haul"
syndrome, while still providing everything
the party needs to complete the game.
The designers have been generous, but
not outrageous.
Also, there are many subplots in the
game, though their overall effect is relatively minor. For example, if you manage
to destroy the city of Phoebus, it will not
materially affect your chances of success.
On the other hand, you certainly won't
(Continued on page 93)

(Continued from page 90)

Dragon Wars
be able to do anything in Phoebus again,
since it isn't there any more (ah well, this
is why we have save games . . .). Still,
these various subplots add a great deal
to the game. There's nothing like being
drafted into the enemy's army to make
you sit up and take notice! Selling yourself into slavery (horrible thought!) as one
way out of Purgatory leads to a simple
but complete adventure of its own. It
doesn't change anything, but you'll certainly have some nervous moments as
you sneak around in chains trying to escape. Everything builds to the moment of
your final confrontation with Namtar.
Make no mistake, this is a mean one.
Forget all those wimpy evil-doers who
drop dead in the first round of combat.
Namtar is one tough customer and you
will remember this fight for a long, long
time. It is probably the best end-game
battle of any CRPG I've ever played.
Decide that one for yourself when you
get there. Those who hate mapping (and
they are legion) will rejoice over the auto-

map feature. It automatically records all
places you have been (unexplored areas
are black) and remembers them, as well.
Outdoors, indoors, town, dungeon,
wherever, the auto-map will faithfully
record it for you, along with significant
land features (trees, walls, doors, etc). Of
course, it only shows your current area. If
you're inside a city, for instance, the map
is only of the city. If you're in the outdoors, the map is of the outdoors, although you will see the landmarks on it
(the ones you've visited, that is).
The graphics (Apple double hi-res) are
excellent. While the monster pictures are
not fully animated, they do have movement (some of it quite subtle). Since combat is not in real-time, take a moment
when an encounter begins to enjoy the
pics (it will probably be the only chance
you have to do so). When you're not
fighting, the display shows your current
location, with 3D view.
On the down side, the most important

factor is the lack of conversation. While
there are many very nice paragraphs in
the manual to read, there is no real
dialogue between the characters and
people they meet (as one would have in
an Ultima or Magic Candle). More interaction is needed in this area. There are
some minor annoyances: you don't know
anything about an NPC until you've
taken him into the party; having items examined at a store reveals nothing about
their special powers (if any); if a bow is
unequipped, its arrows or bolts are also
unequipped; requiring two rounds in
combat to re-equip them both.
Fortunately, none of this is very
detrimental to playing the game. In spite
of a few rough edges, Dragon Wars
leaves the "Bard" series in the dust.
Tighter design, attention to detail,
balanced combat, and a carefully constructed plotline all combine to produce
a CRPG well worth playing.
Bottom line: Highly recommended,
especially for those tired of hack and
slash epics.
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

(Continued from page 46)

Murder Club
has talked to the right people, brought in the correct people for
questioning, and so forth.
Such cannot be what the programmers intended; indeed, it is
very apparent from playing the game that they tried to create a
tight world, a single-minded investigator, lots of intrigue, and
even double-plotting. All of that is there. It is present in the
game. Unfortunately, however, playing Murder Club eventually becomes sort of like playing Ultima 1I1 a second time. One takes
the necessary steps and tries to pretend that he doesn't already
know the secrets to the game.

"Tell 'em about da pictures, Dennis!"
Fortunately, Murder Club augments its deterministic plot with
some interesting graphics. Each location has its own scene, but
one should be aware that the scene is more of a picture than an
interactive environment. Nothing in the picture can be manipulated because, of course, the game is really a text mystery with
menus.
Curiously enough—since the pictures are included at all—almost all of the backgrounds in the scenes are splashed one
color: the orange/yellow of "The Hungry Fisherman", for example,
or the gray of Dr. Beckert's clinic. If the designers of Murder Club
set out to beautify a menu-driven text mystery with graphics and
decided to fill three disks in the process, shouldn't they have
finished the job and added multiple colors to the scenes?

"Tell 'em da good part, Dennis!"
On the plus side: the mystery is tight, the characters are all
plausible, the conversations seem realistic, and the personalities
of the characters seem individual. The plot is well-written and of
fers some depth. The manual is both helpful and clever, as well.
Possibly intended for beginners and players who don't have the
patience to finish traditional adventure games, Murder Club is
nonetheless not recommended for young minds. Though no sex
is involved, many of the emotions the characters reveal may be
too destructive and intense for the less mature mindset.

Da Goods On Da Game
Da goods on dis game iz dat, if youse can fuhgit dat dis iz
nuttin' but a compudah game, which da game in no ways lets
youse fugit, den youse might finds its to be sum kind o' complex moidah mystery.

(Continued from page 40)

Scorpion's Mail
were a little bigger than a kid). Then
again, maybe politeness is becoming a
lost art .. .

Ultima III:
This game is definitely enjoying a
revival, going by the increase in mail on
it. One problem that seems universal (so
to speak) is locating the Mark of the
Snake. This is not easy, as there is only
one dungeon where the mark may be obtained, and it's not on the main continent. Also, there are several rods at the
bottom, which give other marks and may
fool people into thinking the snake mark
isn't there. So, make sure you tour the
dungeon well and try all the rods on the
bottom level.

Ultima V:
Some people have asked if you need to
have all characters at level eight to finish
the game. No, it isn't necessary, although
it certainly doesn't hurt (grin). However, if
you've done everything else in the game,
there's no need to put off the big rescue
just because the party members are not
at maximum level. Also, in the room
below the sandtraps in the final dungeon,
you must kill off all the monsters before
you can make the bridge appear. Then,
of course (hehe), you have to find the trigger for it. Deft hurling of magic axes
should do the job.

powerful and you need some heavy-duty
stuff to defeat him. So, if you find yourself a wreck after going up against him,
just back off and leave him be for awhile.
Eventually, you'll have what you need to
do the job.
That's about it for this dip into the mailbag. Fred and I wish you all a very happy
holiday season, and may Santa Gru .. .
err . . . Claus, bring you all the games
you want (all the good ones, anyway!
grin). In the meantime, if you need help
with an adventure game, you can reach
me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Stop by the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie: Visit the Games RoundTable
(type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
By US Mail (and please remember to
enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the United States!):
Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station,
New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!

Neuromancer:
Greystoke is something to be left until
late in the game. He (it?) is extremely

Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

Origin/CGW Omega Tournament

Origin/CGW
Omega
Tournament
Report
AUSTIN (CGW) -- The
Origin/CGW OMEGA Tournament continues with 48
entrants in the October
Monthly Tournament.
LASSWAN, designed by
Stuart Eastman of Aurora,
Colorado took top honors.
LASSWAN (clever name
since he was the 'last one'
on the battlefield) defeated a
strong field of competitors

by exhibiting aggressiveness
with a capital 'A'. However
he knew when to clear out.
He slugged it out until sustaining a certain level of
damage. He then disengaged and went off to do
repairs, and returned to create more mayhem. Other October finalists were: from
Westminster, Maryland,
Donald Cole's PHANTOM
(2nd place: used tactical
retreats to his advantage);
from Port Coquitlam, British
Columbia, Julio Trujillo's
MOODYB2 (3rd place: liked
clear field of fires; took out a
lot of obstacles); from Culver
City, California, Chris Bruck's

VULTURE (4th place: fights
until he is hurt, and then
retreats); Trujillo's
MOODYBI (5th place: like
his brother, he hates
obstacles); and Eastman's
HUNTER (very persistent, he
moves with purpose). The
designers of each of these
cybertanks have earned the
right to participate in the
Championship Round to be
reported in the April issue of

Computer Gaming World.

Comments from OSI
Officials
We were very pleased that
cybertank engineers participating in the October

tournament created much
more aggressive tanks this
month. Overall, the cybertanks seemed to use their
equipment better, and there
was a definite increase in the
intelligence of the tanks.
More intelligent use of terrain will probably be important for future competition.
The deadline for submissions to the December
monthly tournament is 9AM
December 28, 1989.

(Continued from page 12)

Over There
Of Gods & Gremlins
and awe-inspiring clad in a pair of red
water-wings?"

England, CM21 9PH. Telephone 01144
279 600204.

The luckless Poseidon is selected, by
Zeus, as the first of the gods to prove
their worth. The task being to steal
Hades' helmet of invisibility from the
throne room of the underworld palace.
Packed with humor and a selection of
quality graphics, Myth might prove to be
a fitting farewell.

Bomber (Amiga, ST, PC, C64 - preChristmas launch) is causing a stir over
here. Developed by Vektor Graft for Activision, Bomber is a flight simulation
which places the emphases on the action
rather than the simulation. Set in the
American mid-west, you must fly a tactical ground attack aircraft in an effort to
win the coveted Curtis E. Le May Trophy.
With a choice of six aircraft (including the
Tornado, SAAB Viggen and MiG 27),
Bomber is resplendent in solid 3-D
graphics which, says Vektor, includes
routines to cut the corners out of circles
usually found in other, angular, 3-D
games. Features include a detailed
landscape, in-flight refueling from a KC10 and DIY missions.

The above mentioned "Official Secrets"
club was set up by Tony Rainbird, the
man who founded Rainbird Software
(now under the control of Microprose),
Tony Rainbird. Upon joining the club
(£30.00 in the US) you receive Myth and
Gnome Ranger (from Level 9) or a
surprise alternative. Also included is a bimonthly magazine and access (for a
nominal fee) to a large mail-order facility
which is reasonably priced. The address
is: Official Secrets, PO Box 847, Harlow,

Quest For The Time Bird (QTB—ST,
Amiga & PC —available now) comes

from the French software house Infogrames. Your quest is to stop the
rogue god Ramor from escaping his
prison—a conch (no, I don't know why
either) and wreaking general havoc. You
control up to four characters in this
graphic adventure. Controlled, principally,
via point-and-click actions and menus,
QTB includes quality graphics and atmospheric sound effects.
European Space Shuttle, by France's
Cocktel Vision, has similarities to Space
M+A+X in that you must, after choosing
a mission and organizing a flight plan,
launch your Space Shuttle (which looks
very similar to the European Hermes
project), set up an orbit and build a
space station. Apparently, re-entry and
landing procedures are also included.
Finally, a few snippets. Argonaut
Software and Ocean Software are both
developing solid 3-D flight simulators
called Aggressor and F-29, respectively.
Empire has produced a 3-D RPG where
you walk amongst the characters, called
Let Sleeping Gods Lie. Finally, Germanbased Dragonware has released a
text/graphic adventure with high quality
sound effects called Ooze. Phew!!! See
you next month!

Letters

Covering The Baseless
heard a rumor from the Origins game
convention that CGW and, at least,
one other national game review
magazine sells their covers, meaning that
for a fee you will feature a particular
game on the magazine cover and include a feature article on it. My questions are:
1) Is there any truth to this rumor?
2) Is this a common practice in the industry?
3) Doesn't this practice compromise
the integrity of an independent review
magazine like CGW?

I

to leave your magazine on my coffee
table when my friends come over.
Thank you for many hours of entertainment,
William R. Lowry
Bremerton, WA

Jeff Petraska
New Boston, MI
No, no and yes! This baseless accusation began at Origins with an offhand comment by Chris Cummins,
publisher of Fire & Movement and
The Wargamer. Chris stated matter of
factly that F&M sold their cover. His
philosophy is that it is the most valuable
space in the magazine. Hence, it is
worth the money. This was followed up
with a comment that this was, allegedly, a common practice in the industry.
In this way, gaming publications who
oppose such a compromising mercenary
practice were tarred, without evidence,
with the same brush of journalistic compromise which F&M gladly admitted to.
The facts are: I) CGW has never
agreed to feature any game on the cover
in exchange for direct payment or, even
implicitly, in exchange for advertising; 2)
we are unaware of publications other
than F&M which make this a practice;
and 3) we don't even promise a
favorable review to companies in exchange for the cover art, since even that
could feasibly color a review.
It is even more important to clarify this
since we have recently gone to a single
piece of game artwork on each cover.
We are very proud of the new look, but
the facts haven't changed. Unfortunately, there may have been a different problem with our November cover. Apparently, a number of labels came unglued in
the mail. If you did not receive November, we will gladly replace it.

I

Inadequate Coverage
think you have the best computer
gaming magazine on the market. It is
so good that I don't feel it needs scantily clad females on the cover to attract attention. Let's leave the pin-ups to
Playboy and stick to computer games. I
would hate to have to cancel my new
subscription because I am embarrassed

Broadswords & B[r]easts? Now, did you
realize what you were doing?

Sporting Views

S

houldn't CGW have a "Sports"
category when rating the games? It
seems sad to cram golf, hockey,
football and baseball with Hostage and
Airborne Ranger.
Actually, it would probably be confusing to have a separate sports
category, since there are action
games, strategy games and mixed
genre games within that category.
Currently, for example, NFL Challenge is listed as a strategy game
while Jordan vs. Bird is listed as an
action game. They each compare better with the games in their respective
categories than they would compare
with each other in a separate "Sports"
category. Where both action and
strategy elements are present in a
sports game, (i.e. TV Sports Football,
- Wayne Gretzky Hockey, Jack Nicklaus'
golf, and World Class Leader Board, they
are listed as both action and strategy
games.

Unsigned R.I.D. Card
Actually, we do stick to computer
games. The artwork used on CGW's
covers are taken directly from computer
game packages. We don't deliberately
choose art that is inappropriate to coffee
tables. What we really look for is a hot
game with good artwork that is likely to
have significant distribution. Of course,
the subliminal "r" implied in the September theme (i.e. Broadswords & Beasts)
undoubtedly means that we'll be hearing from Jesse Helms.

Super Oversight
by are there no super hero role
playing games? There is nothing
wrong with fantasy, but a change
would be nice.
Mark Wilkerson
Austin, TX
Though there have been a number of
"action games" based on superheroes
(i.e. Batman: The Caped Crusader, Dr.
Doom's Revenge and Superman), it does
seem that the idea of super hero role
playing game on the computer has been
neglected. It might be that there are so
many different "super powers" (i.e. skills)
that would have to be programmed in
so many different ways that the
programming challenge would cost
more in terms of time, energy and cash
than the projected market would bear.
Then, again, maybe there's one in the offing that we have failed to uncover with
our X-Ray vision.

The Ties That Bind

W

hen are we going to see
some binders for all those
back issues that are stacked to
the ceiling?
Roger Batchelder
Palm Bay, FL

The official Computer Gaming World
back issue binders are currently being
manufactured. An official advertisement
with full purchasing details will appear
in our January issue. They look great
and for those who are concerned, there
are no scantily clad females on the
cover.

Ratings Game

W

ell, you don't have to do this,
but maybe you could give a
rating (e.g. graphics (1-10),
playability (1-10), sound (1-10) etc.). Actually, the idea is pretty stupid, so scrap it.
Cedric Lo
Vancouver, British Columbia

Actually, the idea isn't stupid. It would
be useful information. Unfortunately, the
more complicated a survey process becomes, the less actual responses it tends
to garner. Since we want as many
responses as possible, we'll try to keep
it simple. Actually, answering this letter
is pretty stupid, so let's forget it.

Reader Input Device

