VOL. 3 NO. 1

Jan.-Feb. - 1983

Features
TEST PILOT
Fiction

THE TWISTS AND TURNS OF SERPENTINE
Review of Broderbund's Game

COSMIC BALANCE
Review and Analysis

S.E.U.I.S.
Strategy and Arcade Combined

ARMOR ASSAULT
Epyx's Armor Game Reviewed

THE LEARNING GAME
A New Column

THE ARCADE MACHINE
A Game Generator

THE ATARI ARENA
A New Column

INDEX

12
John Vornholt
20
Michael Cranford
22
David Long
26
Dick Richards
28
Floyd Mathews
30
Bob Proctor
32
John Besnard
34
Allen Doum
48

Volumes One and Two

Department
Inside the Industry
Letters
Taking a peek
Real World Gaming
Route 80
Silicon Cerebrum
Microcomputer Mathemagic
Micro-Reviews
Reader Input Device

2
4
6
36
38
40
41
42
46

INSIDE THE INDUSTRY
by Dana Lombardy,
Associate Publisher Game Merchandising

1982 COMPUTER GAME RELEASES
The following extensive list was compiled from a mailing to over 130 different software publishers. Over 80 responded to
the survey, of which 76 had game software releases in 1982. The total was 384 new game software titles, not including old
games translated to work on different personal computers. This works out to about 5 new games per company. Phone
follow-up surveys will be done to try and complete the data, but almost every major software publisher is listed here.
This is your chance to participate in selecting the top computer game of 1982. Using this list as a guide, you should vote
the three (3) titles you feel should be nominated for the final ballot on the Academy of Adventure Gaming Arts& Design
awards form for 1982. Your three nominations should be sent to: Bill Somers, P.O. Box 656, Wyandotte, MI 48192. Use form
provided. Deadline for nominations is March 31, 1983.
Only members of the Academy may vote on the final ballot. If you're interested in joining the Academy, address your
inquiries to Bill at the above address. Tell him you read about the Academy in COMPUTER GAMING WORLD.
We'll have a follow-up report after the phone survey, and the list of the publishers who put out the most new titles in 1982.
Good gaming!

Dear Editor:
I was pleased to read in your
Letters column a letter by Leona
Billings about the ethics of piracy. In
it she states "If the software publishers ask too high a price, there is a
proper (decent, honest, ethical)
response: don't buy the item.
Publishers will then lower the price if
they can or stop making the
product if they can't."
I've been saying this for years,
and it's nice to see someone agree
with me. (And a philosophy teacher
at that).
Robert Woodhead
Sir-tech Software

Dear Editor:
I wanted to drop you a short word
of praise for the good magazine
you have going.
In particular a belated thank you
for the review of Wizardry last spring.
I had had the game for nearly six
months, but could never get anywhere; I kept getting killed! After
your article and the encouragement to stick with it that the
reviewer included, I went back to

the game and eventually succeeded in achieving the final goal,
killing Werdna.
What I need now is a review of
Knight of Diamonds that gives a
hint or two about the 6th level of
the dungeon.. .
Thanks again and keep up the
good work
R. David Long
San Jose

ED. — Thank you for asking about
hints, It gives me an opportunity to
tell you about something we have
been thinking about.
We have been kicking around
the idea of having a regular "Hints
and Tips" column in which we
would print hints and tips on a
variety of games. The idea would
be to have readers send in their
hints and/or tips and we would
print the best ones (with due
credits). Hints would be in slip code.
Tips can cover any kind of game. If
you or any other readers think this is
a Good idea let us know and send
in a tip or two. As far as the 6th
level of K.O.D. goes — anyone have
any hints for Mr. Long?

Dear Editor:
First, let me say how much our
family enjoys your magazine. We
think it is done in a highly professional and enjoyable manner.
We noted with interest your brief
note concerning "Picnic Paranoia"
in your Nov.—Dec. magazine. My
family has thoroughly enjoyed the
game and we've been looking for a
review of it to see if others feel the
same way. The thing that we like
about it is that its totally different
from all the other games. When I
first bought it I thought only my
young children would enjoy it.
However, we've found that when
teenagers visit the house that's the
game they want to play.
I'm hoping that you'll present an
in-depth review in your next edition.
Stanford Siegle
Pittsburgh, PA
ED. — See "The Atari Arena" for
more information on Picnic Paranoia.

In addition to games mentioned elsewhere
in this issue, the following products have been
received by CGW. Some of these products will
receive more detailed attention in future issues.
Readers wishing to review any of these
products should contact CGW.
Adventure International
P.O. Box 3435
Longwood, FL 32750
(305) 862-6917

computer answers each question for
themselves and then enters what answer
their partners entered (all done in secrecy
at this point). After the test is over the
program tells the couple in what areas
there is significant differences. You can
even review the test question by question if
you wish. Although not as thorough as a
"real" personality profile L&S does provide
grounds for communication about a
couples relationship.

in graphic form. Other stock market
programs on the market are games, this
one is a simulation. Apple II & Ill ( $79.95):
IBM PC, Osborne and other CP/M systems
( $99.95).

STRATOS: A Mission Command type game
for the Atari 400/800 (32K) and TRS-80
computers, Invaders must avoid your
Armageddon cannons, bomb the force
field to reduce it, and then bomb the city.
Meteor showers make your job even more
difficult. Good graphics and sound in the
Atari version

Broderbund Software
1938 Fourth St.
San Rafael, CA 94901
(415) 456-6424
Arisoft
P.O. Box 9184
Whittier, CA 90608
(213) 944-2024

SEADRAGON: You pilot your submarine past
sensor released mines in an effort to dive
deep and destroy the master mine. The
Apple version has a nice talking introduction. Available for the Apple, Atari
(great sound), and TRS-80.

MIKE CARO'S VIDEO POKER: A program that
includes two games. The first is Jackpot
Video Poker which, according to the
documentation, is"functionally identical to
popular machines found in casinos, but
more sophisticated". The second game is
Poker Flurry which is a two person, or one
person versus the computer, competitive
version of video poker. Players compete in
rounds trying to mass the most points by
acquiring the best poker hands. Apple II.

CHOPLIFTER: The popular apple game is
now available for the Atari. The graphics are
a carbon copy of the Apple version, the
sound is better. You are a helicopter pilot
rescuing 64 hostages from a hostile
government. See the review of Choplifter! in
Vol. 2 No. 4 of CGW.

BANK STREET WRITER: Billed as "the first truly
home-oriented word processing system".
BSW is a very user friendly word processor
that includes features found in more
expensive and complicated word processing programs. The menus are clear and the
commands easy to use. Apple ( $69.95).
Alpine Software
2120 Academy Circle, Suite E
Colorado Springs, CO 80909
(303) 591-9874
LOVERS OR STRANGERS: An Apple program
that calls itself "a computer game with a
serious side". L&S is a popularized version of
a typical personality profile test typically
given in counseling sessions (material,
career, etc.). The program asks a series of
questions related to such areas as love, sex,
values, work & money, spirituality. The

Blue Chip Software
19824 Ventura Blvd., Suite 125
Woodland Hills, CA 91364
(213) 881-8288
MILLIONAIRE: A well done stock market
simulation in which the player (its a solo
game) manipulates as many as 15 different
stocks such as IBM, Exxon, Bendix, etc.. The
game allows a number of transaction types
(buy, sell, put options, call options, buying
on margin, borrowing against net worth,
and others. One very nice feature is the
ability to have a variety of reports displayed

A.E.: A Space Invaders type arcade game
with outstanding graphics. The graphics
create the feel of a three dimensional
battle between your mobile gun and the
invading A.E.s (manta ray like creatures). A
different screen is used for each level of
play. The A.E.s come in from the horizon
circling closer to you, diving behind
obstacles, seeking to destroy rather than be
destroyed. A nice twist to the Invader type
game. Apple II ($34.95).

DataMost Inc.
9748 Cozycroft ave.
Chatsworth, CA 91311
(213) 709-1202
AZTEC: AZTEC takes the animated graphics
of SWASHBUCKLER and adds to that an
adventure game set in a lost Aztec
pyramid. A nice attempt at combining hires animation/arcade and adventure
gaming. The fiction is inspired by Raiders of
the Lost Ark. Apple II. $39.95,

CRIBBAGE SOLITAIRE:Five card games for the
Apple Original Cribbage, Klondike
(Regular and 3 Card), Picture Frame
Solitaire, and Pyramid. $34.95.

Edu-Ware Services
P.O. Box 22222
Agoura, CA 91301
(213) 706-0661

THE ELEMENTARY APPLE (Book): If you are a
beginning programmer and find the
Applesoft-Tutorial to be less helpful than
you would like, take a look at this
programming guide. It is user-friendly.

PRISONER 2: Here is a game not quite like
any other. This "science fiction nightmare"
is sort of an adventure game, but not really.
Well, it is — maybe. Get the picture? If you
like mental puzzles this game will be of
interest. Prisoner 2 is an improved version of
the original PRISONER.

TUBEWAY: Arcade game based on the coinop game TEMPEST. Tubeway does a pretty
good job of giving you the "feel" of Tempest
but is not as sophisticated as the coin-op
game (but then none of the "copies" are
able to be as sophisticated as the coin-op
versions). When you complete a round you
simply are placed in a new geometric form
(there is no accelerating down the arms
avoiding spikes). Apple II. $34.95.

EMPIRE II - INTERSTELLAR SHARKS: This is the
second game in the EMPIRE trilogy. Ell is set
at the summit of the Empire's history. You
play the role of a pilot, businessperson, or
diplomat as you attempt to outfit a
spacecraft to take you to the planet
Triskelion.

Epyx/Automated Simulations
1043 Kiel Court
Sunnyvale, CA 94086
(408) 745-0700
RESCUE AT RIGEL: VIC-20 version of the
game which originally came out for the
Apple not long after the Iranian Hostage
Crisis. The game plays off that incident with
it's theme that a high Tollah has taken ten
men and women prisoners and the player
must free them. Cassette, 16k expander
required.
SWORD OF FARGOAL: A game designed for
the VIC-20 (not a translation). SOF is an
adventure game in the tradition of other
Automated Simulation Adventure game.
The player searches a dungeon of darkness
in search of the Sword of Fargoal. As you
explore the dungeon your character gains
experience points and battle skills. Rules are
typical of Automated's games, i.e. well
done. Cassette.
H.A.L. Labs
4074 Midland Rd. Ste. 23
Riverside, CA 92505
(714) 359-8480

VORTEX: An arcade game in which the
enemy ships are caught in a gravity well
and spiral down towards you. You defend
from your base at the center of the gravity
well (i.e., the Vortex). Not as good as the
other DataMost games listed here.

EMPIRE I — WORLD BUILDERS: The first in a
trilogy of games which are set in the future,
where the rise and fall of an intergalactic
civilization is played out. WORLD BUILDERS,
the first game in the trilogy, covers the down
of the EMPIRE, during the period of
colonization. The player takes on the role of
either a miner, missionary, or homesteader.
Play involves traveling around the galaxy
plying your given trade to survive and
prosper.

SUPER TAX MAN 2: Remember TAXMAN? This
is a new "improved" version. Actually this is a
version that looks a little less like PAC-MAN
than the older version (by Atari's request no
doubt). It still is the personal computer
game that comes closest to looking like the
popular coin-op game. As with the older
version you can play by keyboard. In the
new version you can use an Atari joystick if
you use a H.A.L. Lab "Gismo" which retails
for $15.00 ($10.00 when you use the $5.00
discount coupon included in STM2);
compatible software is required to use this
hardware arrangement. Apple II.

Hayden Software
600 Suffolk St.
Lowell, MA 01835
BULLDOG PINBALL: A pinball arcade game
for the Atari 400/800, This cassette game
has a tilt feature and variable speed
control. $29.95.
Insoft, Inc.
10175 S.W. Barbur Blvd., Suite 202B
Portland, OR 97219
(503) 244-4181
GRAPPLE: One of a series of games written in
GraForth (an Apple graphics language).
An arcade game in which your android
guard must stop a jailbreak by numerous
alien types. In early rounds hitting the alien
anywhere will be effective. In later rounds
you must go for a head shot.

SPIDER RAID: Another GraForth game. You
are a spider trying to eat flies while avoiding
poisonous beetles (actually insect spray
cans).

WORDTRIX: A word game for the IBM PC
which is similar to the popular game
BOGGLE. You find words in a 4-by-4 grid,
while competing against the computer.
IBM PC 64K.
Morningstar
39 Florence St.
San Francisco, CA 94133
(415) 441-2535
ICE DEMONS: An arcade game that is
much better than the packaging the game
comes in. The game deserves a better
presentation. ID can be played solo or in
competition or even in team play with a
second player. The object of the game is to
shoot (with arrows) the ice demons as they
come out of the ground. Apple II.

Omega Microware, Inc.
222 S. Riverside Plaza
Chicago, IL 60606
(312) 648-4844

GOLF CHALLENGE: A golf game for one to
four golfers/gamers. A joystick is required for
each player. You use the joystick to walk
your player up to your ball. Joystick is also
used to hit the ball. Lining up square to the
ball and learning the length of backswing
to use are the important skills to develop.
Atari 400/800 16K Tape.
LUNAR LEEPER: An arcade game in which
you attempt to rescue men from the Lunar
Leepers. In the first stage you fly overland
picking up men while avoiding the leepers.
If you're not careful the leepers will jump up,
grab and eat your ship as you fly overhead.
In the second stage you negotiate your way
underground and try to destroy a giant
eyeball (the leader of the leepers?). Your
ship has no brake thus you must allow for
inertia. Apple II.

NIGHT FALLS: A Space Invaders type game
but with numerous additions that allow a
more detailed strategy. Contains a 22 page
rule book that explains the various aspects
of the game, gives strategy tips, and
provides programming information. The
program is not copy protected and an
uncompiled version of the game is
available for modification (the booting
copy is a compiled Applesoft program).
Apple II.

PEST PATROL: A well done Space Invader
type game. There are 39 levels of play. Each
level is made up of a different attack
pattern. There is a practice option available
which allows you to practice any of the first
29 levels, The last 10 levels can only be
reached in the play mode. Apple II.

ZARGS: GraForth game which has
similarities with FROGGER, You take your
shipntoacevdgriusothflyn
objects, dock ith the Zarg base and from
there destroy alien ships,

Sierra On-Line
36575 Mudge Rance Rd.
Coarsegold, CA 93614
JAWBREAKER: This is the "All New Version" of
an old favorite. In this version the "monsters"
( i.e. happy faces) roll along horizontal
corridors as you (the dentures) try to eat
energizers and then eat the happy faces. If
you are caught by a happy face and are
not energized you will lose your teeth (just
think — the same machine that plays this
game can also run detailed tax programs).
Apple II.

,

Sirius Software
10364 Rockingham Dr.
Sacramento, CA 95827

tries to steal your compass and mapmaking
tools). Choose from any of 26 mazes. Well
done.

BANDITS: An Atari 400/800 Space Invaders
type game. Good graphics. Your job is to
guard supplies at a lunar supply base. Alien
bandits use a variety of methods to steal the
supplies. Some aliens have heat seeking
bullets, others have napalm bombs, etc..
There are 28 levels of play.

REPTON: A Defender type game in which
you defend Repton from invaders. A variety
of alien types keeps this game interesting.
Available on the Atari 400/800 and Apple II.

THE BLADE OF BLACKPOOLE: A hi-res
adventure game that can handle short
sentences ( as opposed to two word
commands). The object of the adventure is
to recover a magical sword and return it to
the altar from whence it was stolen. Apple II.

Software By H
P.O. Box 6592
Rochester, MN 55901
(800) 328-9002
PILLBOX: Similar to the coin-op game
BATTLEZONE. However PB has no intervening
terrain (just the hills in the background).
Play involves finding the radar blip of an
enemy tank, turning your 360 degree turret
to the location, sighting the tank, and
shooting it. All this must be done before he
fires at you. Your location is stationary. If
possible, look at it before you buy. Apple II.

Sir-Tech Software, Inc.
6 Main St.
Ogdensburg, NY 13669
(315) 393-6633

FREE FALL: An arcade game in which you
must maneuver your man from the top of
the screen to the safety holes at the bottom
of the screen. Girders can be held onto and
ascending needles must be avoided.
Apple II.

WAYOUT: The graphic animation of Wayout
is without doubt the most amazing we have
ever seen. The Atari version (which we
looked at) has walls that appear solid. The
walls in the Apple version are line drawings
(see cover of game for Apple graphics).
Wayout is a perspective 3-D maze game in
which you try to escape the maze while
avoiding the Cleptangle( a creature which

GALACTIC ATTACK: A real-time space
combat game which combines arcade
elements with strategic planning. Using
keyboard commands you control speed
and direction as you seek to recapture the
planets of the solar system from invaders.
The primary weapons (torpedoes) and the
secondary weapons (phasers) are fired in
the direction entered at the keyboard. This
game does a good job of combining
strategic game elements with pleasing
graphics. Apple II.

Software Familiars
1065 Brighton Dr.
Menasha, WI 54952
RUNE FIGHT!: RF is a computer aid for
RUNEQUEST (a role-playing game by
Chaosium Inc.). RF performs almost all the
dice rolling and bookkeeping chores
related to physical combat in a game of
RUNEQUEST. Runs on Apple II 64K ( $25.00). A
48K version is supposed to be in the works.

Software Productions, INC.
2357 Southway Dr.
P.O. Box 21341
Columbus, OH 43221
(614) 486-3563
MICRO MOTHER GOOSE: An Apple II
product designed for ages 3-9. Program
includes nine Mother Goose Rhymes (with
music and animation) and three games.
Programs are designed so that they can be
run by the children. The detailed documentation is for the parents. Package includes
several little extras such as Mother Goose
stickers and Computer Do's and Don'ts
Poster, If you have young ones check this
program out.

Strategic Simulations, Inc.
465 Fairchild Dr., Suite 108
Mountain View, CA 94043
(415) 964-1353
BOMB ALLEY: A game based on the
Mediterranean Campaign in Summer 1942.
Written by Gary Grisgby, it uses the same
game system as his very popular GUADALCANAL CAMPAIGN. Apple II.

BOLO: A tank warfare game based loosely
on the tanks of the same name in several
works by Keith Laumer. Your task is to use
your Mark XXV tank to destroy enemy bases
which produce robot tanks. Four levels of
difficulty can be combined with any of five
levels of maze density to create any of
20 different versions of play. Apple II

scored. Documentation goes into details on
how to interpret the data the computer
gives you. Apple II,

STAR MAZE CONTEST
Sydney Development Corp.
600-1385 West 8th Ave.
Vancouver, B.C.
Canada V6H 3V9
(604) 734-8822
EVOLUTION: A game that is really a series of
arcade type games linked together by the
common theme of evolution. Each phase is
a different arcade sequence in which you
seek to climb the ladder of evolution. You
begin as a single celled amoeba, then work
your way successively up through tadpole,
rodent, beaver, gorilla, and human. Apple

Wadsworth Electronic Publishing
Statler Office Building
20 Park Plaza
Boston, MA 02116
(800) 322-2208
THE SURVIVAL KIT FOR APPLE COMPUTER
GAMES (Book): A book that reviews Apple
computer games. Twenty-four Apple
games are treated (14 of the games can
also be run on the Atari, 4 on a TRS-80, and 4
on an IBM-PC). The games are grouped into
four categories; Adventure, Arcade-Type,
Fantasy, Strategy. $9.95.
Rantom Microcomputer Software
P.O. Box 5480
Avon, CO 81620
(303) 949-6646
THRAX LAIR: An Atari arcade game in which
you control a Pterodactyl type creature on
a raid into an underground "Thrax Lair"
( insect like creatures) The game, which has
nice scrolling and sound effects, runs in 16K
but looks better than many Atari arcade
games that require more RAM.

Synergistic Software
830 N. Riverside Dr., Suite 201
Renton, WA 98055
(206) 226-3216

Wow! It looks like STAR MAZE is
tougher than we thought! In our
last issue we announced a STAR
MAZE contest in which you could
win up to $100.00 from Sir-tech
software. The first place prize has
been won by Roe Adams (he's
going to donate the games to
Thatcher Montessori School near
his home in Hyde Park, Massachusetts). However the second
place prize of $75.00 in Sir-tech
products and the third prize
($50.00) have yet to be claimed.
If you still want to take a shot at
it, here again are the rules:

CONTEST RULES
1. Each contestant will submit
a map of the 16th level of SirTech's STAR MAZE game. The
map should be of sufficient
detail so it is clear to the judges
that the contestant has indeed
gotten to and mapped the 16th
level.
2. Tie-breaker: Some shapes
closely associated with the two
authors appear on a certain
level or levels. What are the
shapes and on what level(s) do
they appear?

CRISIS MOUNTAIN: An animated adventure/
arcade game. Your task is to defuse bombs
left by terrorists in mountain caverns. Your
time is limited as the bombs are ticking
towards detonation. Nine levels of play.
Apple II.

3. Each entry should include
your name, address, and phone
number.
Pickam Software
312 South Los Angeles St.
Los Angeles, CA 90013
THE PREDICTOR: A statistical program
designed to help predict the outcome of
sporting events. Versions exist for Pro
Basketball and Pro Football. In the
basketball version you must enter the data
for 40 games before predictions can be
made. You enter teams, points scored, and
identify the home team. The Predictor will
tell you what the point spread should be for
any match-up as well as the total points

4. Entries should be postmarked
no later than February 23, 1983.
5. All correct entries will receive
a one year subscription to CGW.
To this end, please indicate if
you are a current subscriber or
not.
6. Second and third place
winners (if there are any) will be
announced in the March-April
1983 issue of CGW.

TEST PILOT
John Vornholt

I fingered the laser blaster. Something about it felt
unreal. But there was nothing unreal about the two
Garanian warriors who had rounded the slanting pile of
rubble in front of me. Had that building once been a
tram station or a detention hall? I couldn't remember.
My attention returned to the two Garanians who were,
I knew, looking for me. In the cobalt blue of the Lipidus
sky, they stood out like two giant brown tree trunks—all
and legs. They moved slowly, due more to the heavy
atmosphere of Lipidus than to any fear of me. They were
easy targets, but I had to suppress my urge to blast them;
a shot from my laser might catch a gas pocket, resulting
in a huge fireball. I had seen that chain-reaction twice
now and had seen it melt both my companions. I didn't
want to see it again.
How, then, to get rid of these two gorillas? I tried to think
back over everything that I had learned in my two days
on Lipidus. The Garanians were strong, much too strong
for hand-to-hand combat. Besides, I was outnumbered. I
couldn't shoot them, for fear of a fireball. Then it struck
me! What good was this damn laser blaster anyway? Not
any good that I could fathom. I turned the weapon over
in my hand, looking desperately for an over-load switch, I
knew it had to have one—every blaster that I had ever
seen had had one. Finally, I found a pin on the bottom of
the pistol grip. I yanked it out and the damn thing began
to hum and vibrate.
All right, I thought, let's hope it has at least a sixty
second delay. I set the blaster gingerly on the sidewalk
(yes, Lipidus has sidewalks), and back slowly away while
counting to myself. At fifteen, I decided to let the
Garanians see me. I quickly darted out into the street
and pretended to look startled when I saw them. One of
the Garanians lifted his weapon to fire at me, but the
other knocked his hand away and growled. I ducked
back into the alley and they gave chase on foot.
I ran like hell, and it wasn't pretence. Being lighter than
the tree-trunk Garanians, I wasn't afraid that they would
catch me. But I did know something horrendous was
about to happen when the laser reached melt-down. I
hoped that I would be far enough away for it not to
happen to me.
The sides of the narrow creepy alley shined black, like
the skin of a seal. Oblong openings about three feet
across lined the slippery walls. It suddenly dawned on me
that I didn't know where I was going and, that I might

end up in worse trouble than I'd left. At that moment, a
tentacle whipped out from one of the openings and
slammed me across the face. I went down — hard. The
damn thing was curling around my neck before I
regained my senses. As I ripped at it with my gloved
fingers, I thought, great, out of the frying pan and into the
fire.
Somewhere in the recesses of my brain I remembered
that the denizens of Lipidus disliked light. I fumbled in my
holster for my flashlight (the handiest utensil to have on
Lipidus), flipped it on, and drew it out with one quick
motion. The monster squealed at the powerful beam
and recoiled instantly. I staggered to my feet, leaned
against the wall for support, and tried to catch my
breath.
Then it happened. There was a soundless sound, and a
huge force suddenly sucked me off my feet. The blast
came a millisecond later, singeing my face and beard. I
looked back down the alley just in time to see a
monstrous fireball completely engulf the two frenzied
Garanians, turning them into limpid pools. I got to my
feet, thinking that was a more dignified position from
which to meet my maker. I paused in reflection for a
moment, watching the fireball rush towards me like a
glowing freight train. not a bad game — not bad at all.
I, of course, died without any pain and found myself
back in the chamber. I pushed open the door, and
Peterson warmly grabbed my hand.
"Great game, Mitchell!" he shouted. "Great game!"
"Thanks," I mumbled. I was tired.
"Forty-nine hours!" Peterson screamed. "Forty-nine
hours!"
I was beginning to wish he'd shut up, or at least lower
his voice. "I've got to sit down," I said, "and get a drink of
water."
"Real water?" Peterson smiled.
"Please."
Peterson fetched me a tall cool glass of H20. No matter
how much they improved the opticals, I mused to myself,
they never got anywhere with the savories. Game food
and drink was at best, lousy and to be avoided at all cost.
I usually didn't bother with it anymore, since training
myself to go up to seventy-two hours without food or
drink. I still got thirsty sometimes, but never hungry; no

food was preferable to that pasty protein stuff disguised
in the mind as real grub. My body wasn't that easily
fooled. Besides, eating and drinking slowed down the
play of the game.
Peterson watched me eagerly, "So what did you
think?"
"You'll get a full report," I answered between gulps.
"Aw, can't you talk about it a little bit'?" he prodded.
I set the glass down and wiped my lips. I knew it was not
a truly great game, because I didn't feel emotionally or
physically spent, as I did with the truly great ones. That
would be in the full written report. On the other hand,
there were some nice things I could say about "Lipidus."
"Great opticals," I said. This was no great surprise, as
Peterson's company was noted for its visual effects. "The
planet and inhabitants were very realistic. And the
sensory effects were quite good too. When that damn
tentacle, hit me across the face, I thought it had broken
my nose. I'll never figure out how you do that with just
changes in air pressure,"
"The negatives," Peterson said, very seriously. "We
know what's right with it. What's wrong with it'?"
"To begin with," I asked, "what's the deal with the laser
blaster'?"
"The laser blaster'?"
"Yeah," I replied. "What good is it to have a laser
blaster when you can't use the damn thing?"
"All games have laser blasters," Peterson said
sheepishly.
I nodded. "That's just the point. You put it in because all
the others have it, even though it not only serves no useful
purpose, but is downright dangerous to use. It works
against other features of the game. If anyone was really
going to Lipidus, knowing about the gases there, they
would never take an incendiary weapon. A crossbow
would be better."
Peterson looked stunned. "A crossbow. . .in a space
game?"
"Then invent a new weapon," I said."I'm only a test pilot.
My job is to play 'em and spot the flaws — I don't design
them. But that laser blaster never felt right to me. I think
whoever designed it, knew it belonged in another game;
not this one."
Peterson was thin-lipped, "I designed it myself."
"Well," I muttered, "I had fun blowing it up." I stood and
stretched, ready to call it a day — or should I say — two
days.
"You didn't like the game at all, did you?" Peterson
asked gravely.
"You'll get my full report," I yawned
Peterson's eyes narrowed behind his horn-rimmed
glasses. "I'm ruined with the company if that game
doesn't pass," he said.
I yawned again, mumbling, "That's not my decision."
"It can be, depending on what kind of report you turn
in."
I was getting irritated now and turned toward the
engineer with a weary frown. "Look, Peterson, if you. . ." It
was then I noticed the needle gun in his hand.

"Get back into the hologram chamber," he
commanded.
"What'?"
He waved the Ngun pointing it toward the chamber.
"Get back in. You're going to try it again."
I tried to summon some authority to my voice. "You
can't do this, Peterson. Besides, playing the game again
won't make me change my mind. It's not a bad game,
and I was never going to give it a bad report."
But the crazed software engineer wasn't listening.
"Back into the chamber," he hissed.
As Peterson's gun hand was shaking rather badly, I
decided not to test him. Re-entering the holo-chamber, I
already had my strategy worked out. Peterson couldn't
stay awake as long as I could — nobody could — and I
would simply manage to get myself killed every now and
then on the chance of finding him napping or out of the
testing room. The worst he could do to me while I was in
the chamber was to restart the game.
I watched him fumbling with a cartridge in the game
slot, then the door closed.
The first few seconds in a holo-chamber were always
strange. The walls, ceiling, and floor were a combination
screen projector made up of millions of tiny glistening
refractor chips — it was like the walls were covered with
sequins. Then, colors began to emerge, blending and
folding in with one another like an old-fashioned
kaleidoscope. The walls melted away. the colors
becoming definite hues, and shapes to take distinct
form. I expected a laser blaster to appear in my hand, as
my spaceship hurtled out of control toward the planet
Lipidus. Instead, I found myself in.. .
A cocktail party!
Yes, indeed. Some very hip synthesized music was
blaring from the floor, and twenty or thirty cool people
were milling around with drinks in their hands. I looked
down at my own hand and saw some tall orangish
concoction, with a little pink umbrella sticking out the
top of it. I also seemed to be dressed better than usual, in
a blazer of some purplish color. While still taking in the
surroundings, a beautiful — almost impossibly beautiful
— blond strode up to me and stopped two inches from
my chest. At least her most forward aspects stopped
there — the rest of her stopped some distance back.
"Hello," she said.

All right, I said to myself, I'm in some kind of erotic
adventure. I didn't know how Peterson had gotten the
cartridges switched, or even if he was aware of it, but I
knew my plan was out the window. It's very difficult to get
yourself killed in an erotic adventure. Practically
anything else, though, was possible.
"You're shy," smiled the beautiful blond. Of course, she
had been programmed to say that to anyone who didn't
talk very much.
I ignored her and just kept on thinking. My experience
in these kinds of games was limited; I usually found
myself avoiding monsters and peculiar aliens. I didn't
know who tested erotic adventures, but it certainly
wasn't me. I suspected it was the president of the
company.
I studied the girl. She must have been given a fairly
complex artificial intelligence, I decided, in order to hold
a conversation with a complete stranger. Maybe if I
asked the right questions, she could help me get out of
this jam.
"What's your name?" she cooed.
"Mitchell," I said. "What's yours?"
"Alice."
Funny, she didn't look like an Alice. More like an Inga.
"How do I exit this game?" I asked her.
"Exit?" she smiled. "But you only just got here." She
batted her eyelashes and gently touched my chest.
"But it's important I leave now," I answered. "I have a
phone call to make, then I'll come right back."
"It can wait, I'm sure," purred Alice. She suddenly
grabbed my free hand and began swaying to the music.
"Let's dance!"
"No!" I shouted. I grabbed the vacuous blond and
shook her violently. "I want to get out of here,
understand?"
A look of understanding did come into Alice's eyes.
"Maybe you'd like to meet my roommate, Marsha. Or my
other roommate, Trisha. She's a airline stewardess."
I swore under my breath.
"If that doesn't suit you," Alice continued, "there's my
hairdresser friend, Felipe."
"Excuse me," I said, walking away.
I got about eight steps before a sultry brunette
grabbed my arm. "Got a light?" she asked, waving what
looked like a hand rolled cigarette marijuana joint in my
face.
I started to say no, then I realized that my purple jacket
probably came equipped with a few choice utensils. I
reached in and drew out several objects: one was a set of
keys to God-only-knows-what, another was a small vial of
white powder and a third was a gold-plated lighter. I lit
her funny cigarette.
"You don't like it here, do you?" she asked.
I declined her offer of the pot. "No. I'm looking for a way
to get out."
"My apartment is only a few blocks from here. My car is
right out front."
So is mine probably, I thought to myself. "Who knows
how to exit from the game?" I asked.

She pointed toward a large man with a completely
bald head. "That's Hubert. This is his place and his party.
He knows everything."
I strode over to Hubert. "Hello, Hubert," I said.
"Hello, Mitchell," he replied. "Glad to see you could
make it."
At first, I was stunned that he knew my name, then I
realized that I had told it to the blond. By now, everybody
in the place knew my name.
"How do you exit the game?" I asked
"Don't you like it here?" Hubert asked smugly.
"Everybody finds my parties so. . .interesting."
"Interesting is not what I'm looking for right now," I
answered. "I'm tired, and I want to go home."
"Go home then. You live just down the street."
"Home, Hubert. My real home. How do I exit the
game?"
Somebody passed Hubert a joint, and he took a long
drag. "you automatically have that option after an
encounter."
"I want to go now," I repeated, emphasizing the
"now."
"Out of the question," Hubert replied with a toss of his
head. He gave me a very fruity grin.
I hadn't been playing action-adventure games as a
living for six years for nothing. I merely picked up a bar
stool and smashed it across Hubert's idiotic face.

Hubert lay on the floor in a pool of real-looking blood. It
suddenly dawned on me that a little sado-masochism
might be written into this game, and I wasn't wrong. Two
musclemen-types quickly came at me. One I
dispatched with a whiskey bottle, but the other one
landed a left hook to the side of my face. My ears
buzzing, I rammed him in the gut with my head, then
dropped him with a knee well below the belt. Gee, this
game was sort of fun.
There were no other takers. In fact, everyone froze as a
voice came from the stereo, saying, "If you wish to
continue the game, please be seated. If not, please
remain where you presently are."
I remained standing. Apparently, beating somebody
to a pulp, in this game, was the same as an erotic
encounter.
Within a few seconds, the walls around me began to
dissolve, and the curvacious blonds and brunettes
became, once more, mere refracted light beams.
Gingerly, I pushed open the door of the chamber and
stepped out.
Peterson's back was toward me, and he was immersed
in watching figures dance across a computer video
screen. Apparently, in his madness, he thought I really
would play his silly game all over again. And just as
certainly, he must not have known about the switch of
cartridges.
The gun lay beside him, on top of an oscilloscope.
In two bounds, I was across the room and had the
pipsqueak programmer by the throat. He scrambled for
the gun, but I was able to drag him out of his chair and
half-way across the floor. It was then that Peterson
surprised me with a swift bony elbow to my ribs. I doubled
over and just managed to catch him by the scuff of the
neck, as he hurried back toward the gun. They say that
mad men have the strength of ten, and I was beginning
to believe it. Peterson and I thrashed about on the floor
for awhile until I realized that he was more than I could
handle. While still able I maneuvered him to the door of
the hologram chamber, kicked it open, and hurled both
of us inside.
I pinned him to the floor as the door slowly shut. Closing
the door activated the game, and the door would
remain shut and locked until the game was over. This
wasn't for the player's sake, but to avoid damaging the
circuits.
Peterson jumped to his feet and threw himself against
the door, howling like one of his Garanians.
"Calm down," I said. "You know you can't get the door
opened. Sit back and enjoy the game."
"We'll be out of here in a second," Peterson snarled,
"Lipidus is a single-player game, and it won't activate
with two people."
Just then, the walls began to melt away into a lovely
magenta haze. Something had told me that Hubert's
Party was a multi-player "game". "What were you
saying?" I asked.
Peterson shrank to the floor, watching with utter horror
as the chamber was transformed into Hubert's chic
livingroom. The guests strolled past us, tinkling the ice in
their cocktail glasses.
"Where are we?" Peterson gasped.

"Lipidus," I smiled. "Don't you recognize it? This is a
great game you invented, Peterson, I especially like hors
d'oeuvres."
A tall willowy redhead began to hover near us, as if
deciding how to approach these two weirdos, one of
whom was cringing on the floor.
"Hi, Sweetheart!" I piped up. "I want you to meet a
friend of mine. His name is Peterson, and he's a load of
laughs."
"Hi, Peterson," she cooed. "I'm Trisha."
"I think I know your roommate," I said. "Blond girl,
right'?"
"Alice," beamed Trisha. "Shall I get her for you?"
"No, you take care of my friend here. I'll go find Alice."
As I moved off, I could hear Peterson whimpering in the
background.
I pretty much ignored him after that. I made a bee-line
toward the luscious Alice, dragged her straight away
and found a much easier way to exit the game than I'd
had the last time through.
Two security guards were waiting outside the
hologram chamber with me when Peterson finally
exited. He was quiet, almost docile, and I remembered
him saying, as they led him away: "I guess that you
really don't have to have a laser pistol."
I yawned and grabbed my old windbreaker from the
coat rack. Any more days like this, I thought to myself,
and I might have to look for another line of work.

!

THE TWISTS AND TURNS OF SERPENTINE
By Michael Cranford

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Serpentine
TYPE:
Arcade
SYSTEM:
Apple II or Apple II+ (48K)
FORMAT:
Diskette (DOS 3.2 or 3.3)
# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
David Snider
PRICE:
$29.95
PUBLISHER: Broderbund Software
1938 Fourth St.
San Rafael. CA 94901

Broderbund has earned a level of
distinction for the quality of its past
software, a recent example being
CHOPLIFTER, which has done whirlwind sales at the computer stores.
But, an even newer game, SERPENTINE, is an arcade game of exceptional appearance who's maze-routine
graphics are much better than most
games on the market.
At the start of the game, you
command three tame blue serpents.
Your objective is to rid the maze of
the enemy serpents while laying
eggs in hope that, when you
vanquish your 1st foe, you will get a
new serpent. Each level (maze)
starts off with three orange serpents,
who strive to eat you while laying
young of their own. The gist of the
game is that big serpents eat little
serpents. You start off with three
body-segments, and your foes with
six or seven, so you must chase them
from behind and swallow them up
until they're smaller than you, at
which time they change color to
green. You may then eat them from
the front, which will make you one
body-segment longer. Eating enemy
eggs will also gain you a segment.
Eating frogs, which hop around in

search of eggs, are also good for an
extra length. But beware. . .enemy
serpents can grow a segment by
eating frogs or your eggs too, though
no serpent can grow longer than
seven lengths. Neither can it be less
than two (head and tail), otherwise
it will die.

All serpents lay eggs. Upon doing
so, they lose a segment of length.
Your foes eggs are speckled, and will
eventually hatch into new serpents
(though there will never be more
than three on the screen at once).
The newly-hatched snakes are only
two segments in length.
The game tends to be based on
foresight and dexterity, rather than
the memorizing of patterns which
can be used with so many conventional maze games. The serpents
grow deadlier as one ascends the
various levels, in that they move
faster and faster and become more
accurate in tracking your blue
snake. There are a total of twenty
separate levels (all of which are
stored initially in memory. . .there is
no disk-drive action during the
game). After reaching the twentieth
level it returns to the first maze..
though the game certainly does not
return to level one difficulty! After one
masters the upper levels (17 and on),
the game does not get noticeably
harder, but it's so easy to make an
error that I believe SERPENTINE Is not a
game that one can sit at all day
without a loss, no matter how great
his gaming expertise.

To pave the way for future garners,
I offer some insights and strategies:

1. On the first level try to chew
down all the serpents a bit,
then aim for frogs to gain
length. . Eating green snakes
from the front are worth a
goodly number of points.
2. Don't drop your egg on a path
in the maze that is on the edge,
otherwise a frog may enter the
maze and eat it before you
can recover.
3. Don't kill the last enemy
serpent before you've hatched
a new egg.
4. When starting a new level
with an old serpent, you tend
to move slower than if you die
and start again with a brand
new serpent.
5. Strive always to keep your blue
snake a minimum of three
segments in length.
6. Cutting into an enemy snake
just after his head has passed
will cut him off at that point.
A good score would certainly be
anything over 100,000 points, but in
SERPENTINE it is possible to sit on one
level fora long time and accumulate
an impressive score with little
accomplishment. Measure yourself
instead against the highest level you
can achieve. I've made it to 31..
The author, David Snider, is more
notably responsible for his pinball
game, DAVID'S MIDNIGHT MAGIC. I
spoke with him and learned that he
was working on converting MAGIC to
the Atari, and then would start on
SERPENTINE. After commending him
on the originality of SERPENTINE, he
told me, "I was trying to capture the
best parts of Pac-Man and Centipede in an entirely new way." In my
opinion, SERPENTINE Is far better than
the sum of its inspirations.
❑

COSMIC BALANCE: Review and Analysis

before your very eyes, but the
execution phase does give an
excellent simultaneous movement
display with a blow by blow and
verbal graphic attack damage
readout. This, combined with an
extremely flexible shipyard (build to
your own design) section and just
about the most detailed status
display that a Starfleet Commander
could ask for, makes this one space
battle game that should keep you
playing for quite a while.
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS:
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

Cosmic Balance
Tactical Space Combat
Apple II and Atari 400/800
Disk
1 or 2
Paul Murray
$39.95
Strategic Simulations

INTRODUCTION
When I bought my Apple two years
ago, the very first game I bought for it
was Paul Murray's WARP FACTOR. I
took an Alliance starship named
Enterprise against a Klargon
opponent, and was quickly blown
away!! "No fair," claimed I, "that
Klargon had me outgunned!" Well,
Commander, now you have no more
excuses. The long awaited "sequel"
to Warp Factor, Cosmic Balance
(CB), is out.
Actually, CB goes far beyond
being a mere sequel to Warp Factor
(WF). One of my biggest disappointments with WF was the lack of
animated graphics. I wanted to see
my ships fire their phasers, torps, and
disrupters, and to see the enemy
explode. Well, they still won't explode

Six different technology levels are
reflected in this game design,
allowing you to vary the impact of
electronic warfare on the battle, or
to create mismatches between
"sophisticated" and "primitive"
starfleets. A Tech Level six dreadnought can, with your proper
command, defeat two or even three
enemy ships of equal size, but lower
technology.
Four levels of solitaire play are
presented, and I'd suggest that you
start at the easiest, level four. You'll
then have a choice of six different
scenarios; five of which can be given
an infinite variety of participants.

THE SCENARIOS
Scenario One, the Deepspace
Encounter, is the only scenario with
both sides fixed. The Enterprise,
presumably on her five year mission
to explore strange new worlds and
boldly go where no man has gone
before, finds that someone, or
somethings, has indeed come
before, The Reliant (a loose translation of the unpronounceable true
name), crewed by the alien Brotherhood and sworn to destroy all
humanoid life, attacks and fights to
the death.

Other scenarios presented are
Planetary Raid, Commerce Raider,
Invasion, Dogfight, and Ambush. The
first three are samples of many
typical combat actions that will arise
in an upcoming strategic space
conquest game which will use the
CB system to resolve battles. You can
destroy a planet, raid a convoy, or
invade and conquer a planet,
depending on what else you have
going on any particular evening. The
first two have a time limit of ten turns,
which should make you hustle!
Dogfight is the obvious confrontation between from one to four
opposing starships. You can test your
designs against each other with this
kill or die scenario. The cleanest of
the options, this one should be
chosen for practice.
The last choice is Ambush, which
again pits from one to four ships
against from one to four opponents.
The difference between this and
Dogfight is that here you select the
first team, and the computer
randomly selects the second team
from ten pre-constructed dreadnoughts on the same disc. Some of
them are very tough, so be careful!

THE SHIPYARDS
Designing a ship is an uncomplicated process, so don't let the
thought scare you. After all, you
don't really have to fly it into combat.
First you have to select the tech level
and size of your ship, and are then
presented with a Design Display. The
Design Display gives you the total
amount of space in your ship, and
you can select from among a wide
variety of weapons and auxiliary
equipment to fill that space. The
game rules do tell you how much

space each of the many options will
use, but it's probably easier to just
play with the display until it looks the
way you want it, and then hope that
you can win with it.
Perhaps the simplest weapon to
use, and the most tempting to
include lots of, is the fighter
squadron. It flies 32 mk per turn
towards its target, attacks every turn
from then until destroyed, and will
score a lot of hit points on the enemy.
Unfortunately, it is also extremely
costly in terms of space so that a
dreadnought, with four fighter
squadrons, may have room for very
little else.
Other optional equipment includes both heavy and light seekers
(drones), tractor beams, heavy
armor platings, marines and transporters (rather important if you're
playing the Invasion scenario),
defensive belt satellites, and, of
course, a wide variety of weapons.
Ships have room for up to 12
weapons, and each can select from
eight different covered arcs of fire. If
you want a weapon to fire in all eight
directions, fine, but it takes up space.
There are light, heavy, and siege
phasers, disrupters, photon torpedoes, and plasma torpedoes. Your
only limitation is a maximum number
of weapons which may fire out of
each covered arc, and this varies
with the size of your ship.
The last thing you will normally
deal with in the Shipyard section is
your shields. These should be as
strong as you can possibly make
them.
When you get everything so you
are satisfied, save the ship, and go
on to the next. Don't plan to
combine ships with the same first
letter on the same team (you can't)
but otherwise, just about anything
goes. Play with this section and the
Dogfight scenario, and the only limit
is your imagination.

THE COSMIC BATTLE
After selecting your scenario, and
if necessary, your ships, you will move
to the orders phase. The status
display can be viewed for any of your
ships, and the map size varied to
include all combatants on the same
screen.
Perhaps the most dramatic improvement in the game itself is the
fantastic increase in speed. In most
cases, the mere touch of a key will
give instantaneous results, You can
charge and fire each of your

weapons individually or in group,
can charge individually any one of
your eight screens, and vary course
and or speed on any of the 16
timepoints that compose the turn.
(As in Warp Factor, the order to fire
can be given on a specific time
point, at a specific range, or at the
last instant, which basically calls for
the computer to take its best shot.)
Another change from WF, is that
CB allows you to enter your course,
and then go back to the map and
advance it one time point at a time,
if you desire, to see the ship's
projected position throughout the
turn. This is an excellent way to allow
you to calculate your ship's position
to set as close as possible to the
enemy before firing, and to avoid
inadvertent fire in mid-turn caused
by his evasive tactics.
Shields, too, are more realistic in
CB than they were in WF. All true
outer space battle fans can envision
a strained voice in a deep Scottish
brogue complaining, "Captain, the
shields are buckling, one more blast
like that and they'll blow!!" Well, now
the shield will buckle, and you'll
suffer damage (perhaps), but you'll
still be able to reinforce them, and
even drain other shields for power,
until all your shield batteries are
destroyed.
After you have given all your ships
all of their orders, you enter the
execution phase, so-called because
if you have designed your ship
poorly, the enemy will execute you.
This is where I was really stunned by
the speed of this program. I entered
my last command, pressed return,
and started to go get another beer.
There wasn't time. Total lag time
between the completion of my
orders and the beginning of action
has to be measured in tenths of a
second. Coming after two years of at
least five minutes per turn wait for
Warp Factor, this speed is quite
impressive. It's also dangerous. The
tendency is to try to play just as
rapidly as the computer does but, if
you do, you'll lose, and lose quickly.

SUGGESTIONS
In designing your ships, be sure to
give them a range factor of at least
one. This will enable you to use those
prototypes in the strategic game to
come, and will also keep them
somewhat in line with the last
surprise ships in the Ambush scenario.
The first ships that I designed had no
range factors at all, which does

make them very strong, but also
immobile on a scale of light years.
Another point is that a ship with a
speed over 50 is virtually unhittable
by known weapons systems. Accordingly, the Risellian Pact of 2438
outlawed all starships with a speed
of faster than Mk 30. So, unless you
wish to be a war criminal, keep your
speeds in line.
Some far-fluns starship designers,
specifically from the northwestern
sector of our galaxy, have reported
the creation of "monster ships" of far
greater than dreadnought size, but
this writer will leave you on your own
in that regard.

TACTICS
Get your speed up, concentrate
your fire, and use occasional evasive
action to set those Last Minute shots
of your enemies to go off prematurely.
Don't be afraid to mix up your fleets.
Try a dreadnought "aircraft carrier"
with four or five fighter squads, with a
cruiser and destroyer escort, or a
plasma torp armed speedster to
play a hit and run game.
Test yourself, against your friends/
enemies, and against your computer.
And Remember, for every great ship,
there is a countership that will be
able to successfully smash it. Or, at
least, so goes the prevailing thought
at the Alliance War College.
For every two designers, there are
at least two, and more likely five or
six, different viable designs. One
friend of mine likes phasers that fire
from arcs 1, 3, 6, and 8, and photon
torps to cover his stern. Design your
best four ship fleet and let CGW or SSI
know about it. Perhaps a tournament
could be forthcoming. Stand up,
Commander, and be recognized!

CONCLUSIONS
Although billed as an update of
Warp Factor during its development,
CB is, in truth, a completely new
game with its own flavor and style.
The speed of the game may
encourage some 'arcaders' to get
into strategic gaming, but if you're
looking for a true arcade game,
better look elsewhere.
CB is a tactical simulation, one
which plays very smoothly and, as
noted earlier, almost too quickly. The
shipyard. options and the number of
scenarios available will keep this one
out and in use for a long time. In the
meantime I look forward to the
strategic galactic conquest game
with CB as its combat resolution
interface.
❑

S.E.U.I.S.: Strategy and Arcade Combined
Dick Richards

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
S.E.U.I.S
TYPE:
Strategy/Arcade
SYSTEM:
Apple II 48K
FORMAT:
Disk
# PLAYERS: 1 or 2
AUTHOR:
John Lyon
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations
465 Fairchild Dr.,
Suite 108
Mountain View, CA 94043
S.E.U.I.S. (Shoot 'Em Up In Space) is
the first viable combination of a real
strategic game and truly challeng-

ing arcade-type game that this
writer has seen. You and your
opponent, human or computer,
battle for control of the Ozgortian
sector of the galaxy in the 24th
century. Some may remember from
history books that ancient conflict
between the kingdoms of Northwold
and the Far Reaches in the Andromeda Galaxy, as chronicled in
THE SHATTERED ALLIANCE (SSI 1981).
SEUIS puts you in command of a 24th
century fleet battling to either
destroy your opponent's fleet or
capture all of his production centers
before he/she/it can do the same to
you.
The Strategic game is played on a
star map with each player moving
squadrons before the countdown
clock runs out, and when opposing
squadrons meet in the same "hex",
the scene changes to allow you to
battle it out with the enemy in highspeed arcade-type combat.

THE FLEETS
Each player's fleet is composed of
a varying number of squadrons
which are individually depicted on
the star map. The three types of
squadrons (light, medium and

heavy) are shown by three different
symbols on the star map. The
squadrons, however, can be of
differing composition (more on this
later) so you usually won't know
exactly how tough the "bandits"
really are.
Light fleets are composed of only
fighters, medium fleets of fighters
and cruisers, and heavy fleets of
cruisers only. As one might expect,
the light fleets are the fastest, while
heavy fleets move rather slowly. . .but
are very powerful.
There are three different levels of
fighters (destroyers, escorts, and light
fighters) and three levels of cruisers
(light or heavy cruisers and battleships) and with the create-your-own
game options you can vary the
composition of your squadrons to
suit yourself. For example, the
standard light squadron #3 has three
fighters, two class d's and one class e.
But if you want five class d's, you can
have them.
Each ship within a squadron has a
given amount of total energy
available, and a specified midships
value. Energy is allocated between
weapons, shields, and rate-of-fire at

the start of each combat phase, and
can be different each time the ship
joins battle. When your midships
value reaches zero, the ship explodes!
I could go on for the next ten
pages talking about the capacity to
change parameters and create new
game situations, but fortunately for
you, I won't. Suffice it to say that you
can do almost anything you want,
including changing total energy
available, midships, production
point, frequency of production,
composition of the squadrons, size of
the fleet, timing of reinforcements,
and, of course, the star map on
which the battle will occur.
Another nice feature is that four
different levels of solitaire complexability are presented; from beginner
to ace. My first game Scenario Two,
The Great Battle, was, of course, at
beginner level. My strategy was
superb, and I easily maneuvered
one of my medium squadrons into a
vicious attack on a (supposedly)
defenseless enemy light squadron
and got slaughtered. In fact, my first
few games usually resulted in
throwing down the paddles in
disgust, snapping off the computer,
and deciding that "this dumb game
is impossible!"
Well, it isn't impossible, just
challenging. So, you might try
cheating. The change parameters
options make this quite possible. I
simply changed the parameters of
one fleet to make it 20% to 30%
stronger than my proposed opponent. Beef up the midships and total
energy available for this 'super' fleet,
and even the production points of
the resource centers, and then go
back and smash the (now Puny)
enemy.

productive are the Bright Stars, then
Major Stars, Minor Stars, Small Stars,
and Single Stars. All except single
stars require a reduction in speed by
squadrons which pass through them,
and the first three all add production
points to your resources at varying
time interval.
Six different star maps are presented for your fighting pleasure,
three of which are used in the
existing scenarios and three additional ones for use in building your
own games. At the start of the game,
stars and systems controlled by the
left side (purple ships) are indicated
in blue, while those controlled by the
right side (green ships) are orange.
As you conquer enemy stars, or they
conquer yours, the colors change to
reflect their new loyalties.

PRODUCTION POINTS
As mentioned above. Bright,
Major, and Minor stars all act as
resource centers; adding production
points (PP'S) to your total. As the total
PP's available reach a level which
would allow you to build additional
squadrons, these are produced and
placed on the map (somewhat
randomly) at one of your resource
stars. As the weaker squadrons cost
less to produce, you will usually end
up with more light squadrons than
anything else. But have patience,
medium and heavy squadrons are
produced from time to time.

COMBAT

THE STAR MAP

When you and your opponent
both have ships in the same "hex",
combat will occur. First, you will have
to allocate your total energy to
weapons, shields, and rate-of-fire (I'd
suggest the maximum to weapons,
then to shields, and whatever's left
over to rate-of-fire. At this point you
choose a champion to fight your
opponent's champion, And from
there on, you battle on the arcade
screen with your beam weapon (I
call it a laser) and automatic guided
missiles. The missiles are computer
controlled for both sides and cause
the bulk of the damage in the battle.
But, the crucial and normally
deciding factor is your laser. Once
fired, it needs to recharge before you
can fire again, and I'd suggest you
hold your fire for the really good
shots. Many times I have fired (and
missed!) only to end up with a great
shot only seconds later which I
couldn't take because my laser was
uncharged.

The strategic map has five types of
"terrain." Largest and normally most

Another alternative in combat is
the battle royal, where all your ships

After a while you'll notice that
you're winning every battle. So then
go back to a balanced battle, and
when you start winning at that level,
then give the computer the super
team. When the time comes that
you are again winning, move up to
intermediate level and take the
super team again. This should help
you avoid the rather unpleasant
experience of losing every battle.
When you get to a point that you are
beating the computer at the ace
level while using the inferior team,
write in and let SSI know, because
game designer, John Lyon, says he
rarely beats the Ace level in even
battle!

fight at once. This is quite chaotic, as
the computer controls all of the
enemy's ships and all of your ships
except one. You change which of
your ships you control through the
keyboard — and GOOD LUCK! There
is also a 200 production point
penalty (-100 to you, +100 to the
enemy) for violating the rules of
civilized warfare if you elect the
battle royal,
During individual combat the bar
graphs to the right of the screen
reflect the remaining midships
values of the combatants, while
during the battle royal the graphs
reflect total midships of all ships in
the battle.

OPTIONS AT START
As in virtually all of SSI's games, you
can play either side against the
computer; against a human opponent; or even watch the machine
play against itself. You can also,
change the countdown clock to
speed up the computer, or give
yourself or an inexperienced opponent more time to think. Another
feature, which my wife will love, is the
optional turn the sound off, so the
exciting sound effects don't keep
everyone in the house awake until
three A.M. while you defend the
galaxy.
Finally, since the combat section is
indeed challenging, there is an
option to allow you to practice
combat before beginning a real
game.

CONCLUSIONS
The biggest fault I've found with
combination arcade-strategy games
is that they are usually primarily one
or the other. You will either find that
the strategy game is too simple or
conversely, the arcade game is too
slow. SEUIS seems to avoid this
dichotomy. The strategy game
could easily stand alone with a
combat resolution system similar to
SHATTERED ALLIANCE, while the
arcade type combat is easily as
challenging — probably more so —
then many of the space battle
games with which we are all familiar.
The combination is highly payable,
and the overall feel of the game is
quite positive. With the wide opportunity to change parameters and
create your own games, this game
will maintain its attraction over the
long haul.
I can think of only one real
negative to the game. . .its name.
Whether you call it SEUIS, or Shoot 'Em
Up In Space, it sounds dim. But, if
every game I buy plays as well and
offers as much flexibility, then I really
don't care what it's called.

ARMOR ASSAULT: Review and Analysis
Floyd Mathews

are no air, artillery or infantry units.
You can also set mines. There are
several kinds of terrain which have
different movement costs, may
block lines of fire, or provide some
defensive cover for your units.
There are two types of fire: direct
and opportunity. You can plot only
one type of fire for each of your units
each turn. Direct fire occurs after all
units have finished moving. opportunity fire occurs during the movement phase. You simply plot an
opportunity fire line from your unit,
and it will shoot at any unit which
crosses or moves along the line.
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS:
AUTHOR:
PUBLISHER:

Armor Assault:
Wargame
Atari 400/800 40k
Disk
1 or 2
John Weber
Epyx

Armor Assault by Automated
Simulations is a very simple but
enjoyable game for one or two
players. It simulates hypothetical
tactical level armor warfare between NATO and Soviet forces in the
very near future. Although it is not a
very realistic simulation, this is an
entertaining game and the program
has many interesting features which
could be used in other types of
computer wargames.
In addition to the twelve scenarios
included in the game, the program
allows you to create maps and
design tanks for new scenarios. Each
player uses a joystick to secretly plot
orders for his units and then the
program displays simultaneous
movement and fire for all units. Each
player commands up to six vehicles,
such as tanks, trucks and jeeps. There

Opportunity fire is a realistic way to
simulate simultaneous movement
and fire in a tactical game, and I
hope more game designers will use it
in the future. My only complaint
about opportunity fire in this game is
that a unit will fire many rounds
during the same movement phase if
several targets cross or advance
along its line of fire and this
represents an unrealistically high
rate of fire. You can partially
eliminate this problem by designing
new units with lower structural
strength as discussed.
A typical game lasts about one
hour. Most scenarios have a geographic victory objective which one
player must seize or destroy within a
certain number of turns. Victory can
be very much in doubt right up until
the final turn, and there can be very
exciting finishes. Most tanks have
weaker armor on their sides and rear
than in front, so it is feasible to try
flanking maneuvers or set up
ambushes. The situation can change
quickly if one player runs low on
ammunition, or blunders into a
minefield or ambush.

You must be careful in plotting
your orders, because the joystick
control subroutine is very delicate
and there is no command for
correcting a mistaken entry.
My only major criticism of this
game is that it is not a very realistic
simulation of modern armor warfare.
If it purported to be a science fiction
game, I would have no criticism at
all. If you don't care about realism,
then this won't bother you. If you do
prefer more realism, I have some
suggestions for designing new
scenarios which are more realistic.
First, the standard tank designs in the
game can take as many as ten hits
to be gradually destroyed. But in real
life an armor-piercing round will
either glance off the target with no
damage, or penetrate with results
too gruesome to describe. Even a hit
in the tread area will either
ricochet, or cripple the vehicle,
making it a sitting duck. You can
better simu late this "
first-penaoqulki"spectbyrdngh
structural strength of the standard
tanks to about 30. This also makes a
faster more exciting scenario due to
the possibility of sudden death.
Second, modern sighting devices
can get first round hits at extreme
long range, therefore, most of the
field maps portray combat at absurdly short ranges. I suggest that you use
or modify the urban map, as it is
more realistic for tanks to engage at
short range in a street-fighting
action. I also recommend raising the
accuracy of all units to .53, as no one
could miss at these ranges. Third,
only tanks, trucks and jeeps are
provided, while it is unlikely that
these vehicles would be committed
to an assault without infantry
support, or without encountering
enemy anti-tank gun emplaceContinued on p. 45

the
learning
game
by Bob Proctor
If we examine the learning process
in very general terms, it breaks down
into two major areas of study. Instructional Theory is the "how we learn"
part of it and Motivational Theory is
the "why we learn" part of it. Almost
every researcher who ventures
an opinion agrees that motivation is
the more important factor. We
humans just don't learn very well
unless we WANT to.
An example that illustrates this —
because we've all known or been
one — is the child who just doesn't
seem to read very well in school.
There's no physical or emotional
problem, just a lack of motivation.
There comes a day when this child
gets his (or her) hands on a comic
book. ZAP! POW! Bright colors! Interesting monsters or whatever —for the
first time in his life this kid WANTS to
read, and does.
This is what I call the comic-book
syndrome. Of course the incentive
could come from almost anywhere;
it could be a Hardy Boys mystery or
Robert Louis Stevenson. Nowadays, it
might well be a desire to read the
rules for Dungeons and Dragons or
some other game that "everyone is
playing."

The point, of course, is that results
are not achieved until there is sufficient motivation. I am writing this
column because I feel strongly that
games can be an important motivator in education. My intent here is to
review educational games for home
computers; along the way talking
about a number of issues in both the
instructional and motivational areas.
I certainly plan to give you some of
my own opinions, but my major goal
is to give you enough information to
make intelligent choices when buying games. I am reminded of a certain movie critic whose reviews
always give me a good idea of
whether or not I'll like the movie — I
almost always disagree with him! If I
can do as well for you, I'll be happy.
What do I mean by "educational
game"? The concept is certainly
fuzzy since every game teaches
something, even if it's just eye-hand
coordination. The designers intent is
an important factor but sometimes
hard to judge. When Dan Bunten
designed CARTELS & CUTTHROATS,
he was obviously thinking of teaching business concepts but was he
also thinking of teaching math?
When the original ADVENTURE was
taking shape was anyone thinking of
teaching children about problemsolving or risk analysis? In short, by
"educational game" I mean ANY
game; I don't want to restrict the
scope of this column. I will emphasize games which aren't likely to be
covered elsewhere in CGW, games
which supplement formal education,
and games for younger age groups.
From time to time, however, I'd like to
examine the educational value of
games which aren't generally considered educational. I may even look
at educational programs that are
not considered games IF there is a
point to be made.
To begin, here's a look at two
games which improve typing skills.
MASTERTYPE which has been a bestseller for a year now and, TYPE
ATTACK, a new entry in the field.

Mastertype
NAME:
Typing game
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
Apple II, II +, or Atari 800
Diskette
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS: 1
Bruce Zweig
AUTHOR:
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Lightning Software
P.O. Box 11725
Palo Alto, CA 94306

NAME:
Type Attack
TYPE:
Typing game
SYSTEM:
Apple II or Apple II +
FORMAT:
Diskette (DOS 3.3)
# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHORS:
Jim Hauser and
Ernie Brock
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Sirius Software
10364 Rockingham Drive
Sacramento, CA 95827

Wow, two typing games for the
same price, both with lessons
graduated from learning individual
keys to full words, numbers and
special characters. Both allow you to
create your own lessons to practice
whatever you want to practice. With
so many similarities, most people
probably won't want both, so let's
look at the differences.
There are two major differences
between these programs. One is the
way in which lessons are presented
and the other is the way the screen
looks. These factors combine to give
the games a different feel, and this
will determine which of the two you
will prefer. The first is probably the
most important difference, but let's
start with the graphics, as this will let
me explain how the games are
played.
In MASTERTYPE, you have a "ship"
in the center of the screen. Things to
type — letters, words, numbers,
symbols — appear in each of the
four corners with a little missile,
satellite or fireball near them. These
objects begin to creep toward your
ship; when you type a "word" a
beam of energy shoots toward the
corresponding corner, either destroying the object or knocking it back to
the corner. If you destroy it, a new
word will appear in that corner. If you
only knock it back, you must type the
same word again until the object is
destroyed. Of course, if you spend
too much time on one corner, a
missile from another direction will
sneak in and blow up. You have
shields to protect you from these
nasties, so the first one will not
damage the ship but it will destroy
the shield that protects that quadrant. If you take another hit from that
direction the game is over.
Each lesson is 40 "words" (in the
early lessons they are just single
letters) and is broken down into four

waves often, to give you a chance to
rest. At the end of the game, whether
you win or get blown up, you will see
a summary page that gives you a
score, your typing speed in words per
minute, the total number of mistakes
you made and an evaluation. This
last may tell you you're doing pretty
well and need to increase speed. it
may simply encourage you to keep
trying. It is never discouraging or
abusive. There is a menu which lets
you change speed, lesson or turn
the sound on or off between
games. Changing lessons requires
rebooting the program and takes
over 30 seconds, a long time to
wait when you're eager to get on
with it.
TYPE ATTACK uses a format that will
be very familiar to SPACE INVADERS
fans. Your laser cannons at the
bottom of the screen blast away at
letters and words on the screen. You
don't have to aim, just type; you
keep playing until you use up your
100 points of energy.
Each lesson is divided into two
parts. In Character Attack, you're
faced with a phalanx of letters which
creep back and forth and down just
like the aliens in SPACE INVADERS.
Only the letters at the bottoms of the
columns can be shot; if you type a

letter that isn't vulnerable, you lose a
point of energy. If a letter reaches the
bottom of the screen, you lose 35
points! In Word Attack, words using
the letters of all lessons up to the
current one appears at the right
edge of the screen traveling to the
left. You must type them and press
the space bar. If they make it to the
left edge, they wrap around to the
right to give you another chance but
you also lose more energy. Your typing
speed is shown by a thermometer on
the left edge of the screen and your
remaining energy on a similar scale
on the right. You can change the
speed or the beginning lesson from a
menu between games.
The big difference is that in
MASTERTYPE, when you are done with
a lesson the game is over whereas
TYPE ATTACK will automatically load
the next lesson and continue (unless
you hit CTRL-R to repeat a lesson).
This means that your score, in the
former, is a score for one lesson only
and can't be compared with the
score from a different lesson. In the
latter, your score is a score for the
whole game and can be compared
to any other. The highest scores in
MASTERTYPE will come from doing
Lesson one in Beginner mode. It can
be discouraging to move up to
harder and harder lessons and have

your progress rewarded by lower and
lower scores. You must remember
that progress is its own reward as well
as the object of the exercise. In TYPE
ATTACK, on the other hand, the
highest scores will be obtained by
starting with Lesson one and progressing through as many lessons as
you can. The faster the speed and
the fewer the mistakes, the higher
you score.
This difference is important. As the
desire to get a high score is what
distinguishes these games from a
program like TYPING TUTOR, it's best
to have a high score indicate high
overall proficiency; not just skill with
one small portion. For this reason —
and because of the excellent
animation and nice game features
(like a pause function and sound
toggle) that are typical of Sirius'
games — I think TYPE ATTACK is a
better game. For typing practice,
however, especially if you want to
create your own lesson(s) and
practice them over and over,
MASTERTYPE would be better.
That's all for the first of, hopefully,
many columns to come. Please feel
free to send in the name of any
games or programs which you feel
are appropriate to review in upcoming segments of The Learning
Game.

shapes and put them into arcade
game situations. Don't we all have at
least one or two suggestions for
improvements on even the most
polished game products? THE
ARCADE MACHINE (TAM) makes
changing a game virtually as easy
as changing your mind. Put in a
feature or take one out, then
instantly see the results. If marble or
canvas were as forgiving, Michelangelo could have painted the
Sistene Chapel in a week!
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
The Arcade Machine
TYPE:
Arcade Game Generator
SYSTEM:
Apple II (48K)
FORMAT:
Double-sided Disk
# PLAYERS: 1 or 2
AUTHORS:
Chris Jochumson and
Doug Carlston
PRICE:
$44.95 or $59.95
[I've seen both)
PUBLISHER: Broderbund Software
1938 Fourth St.
San Rafael, CA 94901
(415) 456-6424
Being an artist is a dream of most
human beings; a dream that is very
seldom turned into reality. The
problem is not that, as individuals,
we have no artistic talent. Everyone
has their share. The problem lies in
the medium of expression. Oil
painting is an additive medium,
while marble is a subtractive one. It is
virtually impossible to chip a piece of
marble back on to a statue, just as it
is very hard to remove paint once it
has been applied. What we all
needed was an interactive medium.
The computer, in this consideration,
is a natural. It takes no more effort to
display a pixel of color than to delete
it — that is, of course, assuming you
have an advanced knowledge of bit
mapped, byte packed, refresh
graphics techniques.
If these techniques are not second
nature to you, then Chris Jochumson
and Doug Carlston are coming to
your rescue. Their ARCADE MACHINE
not only makes it easy to create
pleasing artistic shapes, but allows
non-programmers to animate those

If you can dream up a Masterpiece, you can probably make a
reasonable approximation of it using
TAM. As an example, I created a
recognizable copy of the arcade
game 'Phoenix' in about three
evenings. Called Another City in
Arizona, it has all five different
scenarios presented on the original.
It's a flagrant rip-off and, thus, could
never be sold. But, it's great to play it
for myself; keeping my quarters for
my other little vices.
TAM is a menu-driven piece of
software that creates a table-driven
game. The menu approach makes it
relatively easy to use the product.
Users are given the choice of:
Creating shapes (up to 24 different
ones), Creating paths for the shapes
to follow (up to 50), and Creating a
suitable background on which to
play.
The user also has control of game
options for each of the five different
levels available. Having a 'moving
stars' backdrop for your new space
game is as simple as entering your
response to three entries in the level
tables; STAR SPEED, STAR DENSITY
and STAR MOVEMENT. The tabledriven nature of the game itself
allows the user instant feedback on
the result of his changes — no
assemblies or compiles are required.
It's amazing how easy and natural it
is to adapt to this feature. A user will
soon be much more cavalier in his
approach to the computer. Rather
than doing an extensive amount of
preplanning, as is required in normal
software creation, you just boot-up
TAM, stick some feature in and see

how it looks. If you like it, you can
leave it. If not, fixing it is usually only
two or three keystrokes away.
Partial creations may also be
stored on a separate data disk. Each
data disk can be used to store up to
five different games. And, if you want
to use the creatures from one game
in another, each of the separate
tables maintained by TAM can be
retrieved separately. Just try doing
that with oil paints!
TAM makes use of the nature of
Apple graphics; its rather BEZARE
(sic) color scheme and byte mapping to allow the user to easily create
seven versions of each shape (that's
like having 168 different shapes at
your disposal). As a shape moves
from left to right on the screen, each
of the seven versions is displayed in
turn. Wheels can be made to 'spin'
and little legs can really strut. One set
of shapes can be commanded to
mutate or transform itself into
another (again with just a few
keystrokes). Hatching eggs into
space monsters is a natural here.
Our very handy feature of TAM
allows points to be assigned to each
of the shapes in play. The player gets
points for shapes with a positive
score and loses points for those that
are negative. He can't shoot, but
must not touch those shapes with a
zero score. Each round ends when all
of the positive score pieces have
been eliminated. You can thus
make it impossible to end a game, if
you keep a positive valued piece out
of view.
TAM plays on a virtual board that is
about twice as big as the Apple
screen. This allows shapes to wait off
screen until their cue to emerge.
And, when they do emerge, they do
so one bit at a time. This feature may
not sound like much, but it looks
great and is just an example of the
care put into this product. Naturally,
the game has a control-S sound
toggle and a pause feature. It also
has a single step feature that's great
for debugging paths and can be an
Continued on p. 45

The
Atari
Arena
Allen Doum

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Protector II
TYPE:
Arcade
SYSTEM:
Atari 400/800 32k
FORMAT:
Disk or Tape
# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
Mike Potter
PUBLISHER: Synapse Software
5327 Jacuzzi St.,
Suite I
Richmond, CA 94804
Claim Jumper
NAME:
TYPE:
Arcade
SYSTEM:
Atari 400/800 16k
Disk or Tape
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS: 1 or 2
AUTHOR:
G. Ghang
PUBLISHER: Synapse Software
5327 Jacuzzi St.,
Suite I
Richmond, CA 94804
Picnic Paranoia
NAME:
TYPE:
Arcade
SYSTEM:
Atari 400/800 16k
Disk or Tape
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS: 1 or 2
AUTHOR:
Russ Segal
PUBLISHER: Synapse Software
5327 Jacuzzi St.,
Suite I
Richmond, CA 94804

Tax Dodge
NAME:
TYPE:
Maze-Chase
SYSTEM:
Atari 400/800 32k
FORMAT:
Disk
# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
Jon Freeman and
Ann Westfall
PUBLISHER: Island Graphics
Box Z
Bethel Island, CA 94511
Have you ever wondered about
some of the strange things you have
to do in some games? Eating ghosts?
Shooting mushrooms? Destroying
fuel tanks in order to be refueled? the
players of PROTECTOR II, for instance,
have to use their ship, a needlefighter, to rescue people from a city
attacked by aliens. As the aliens
drop the friendly population, one by
one, into a nearby volcano, the
player "hooks" his charges to the
bottom of his ship and flies them over
the volcano to another city that the
aliens aren't bothering to attack.
Once all the people have been
deposited, one way or the other, the
volcano erupts, sending a stream of
lava toward the second city. At this
point, the player will have to rescue
the people again taking them this
time to a safe fort. Why not take them
there in the first place? Silly question.
Because the fort has been behind a
force field u ntil the volcano erupted,
of course.
Protector II, like many programs
with "silly" scenarios, has the saving
grace of being enjoyable — a trait
which has saved many an otherwise
ludicrous game. The play-action of
flying a "needlefighter" is similar to
the arcade game DEFENDER, but the
goals (described above ) and
hazards are quite different.
The hazards come in several forms:
Xytonic Pulse-trackers (mines), the
indigenous Chompers (bouncing
mines), meteoroids (falling mines),
rocket bases, and the Laser Fields of
the Straak (ground batteries). No
explanation is provided as to why all
of the ground batteries are helping
the aliens. All the while the Fraxullan
Mother Ship is picking up people

with its' tractor beam (which can kill
you) and dropping them into
Dragonmaw, the Volcano of Death
(which can also kill you when it
periodically erupts). These hazards
have arbitrary effects. For instance,
you may fly through the buildings of
the cities, but not at your own base.
Some of the hazards may be shot at
any time, some only at certain times
and several cannot be shot at all.
The graphics are good, and the
sound, animation and scrolling are
very well done. Play may begin with
either three or five ships at any of six
difficulty levels —although I doubt
that anyone is expected to play at
the higher levels. Even at the lower
levels, PROTECTOR II moves fast
enough that most players won't
have time to realize that what
they're doing doesn't make much
sense.
The CLAIM JUMPER scenario looks,
at first glance, to be more sensible.
Two players each control a "cowboy" A gold bar appears randomly
on the screen, and if either cowboy
takes it to the assay office at the top
of the screen, the goal vanishes and
a ten dollar bill appears nearby.
Each player has his own bank in
which to deposit the money, and
after ten bills have been deposited,
the player receives a house worth
20,000 points. A second house is
worth 30,000 additional points but,
since the game ends at 25,000, that
seems inflationary. The two cowboys
can shoot each other, the victim
going to one of two hospitals in the
upper corners of the screen.
What makes CLAIM JUMPER strange
are the snakes and tumbleweeds.
The snakes follow one cowboy, the
tumbleweeds the other. If caught, a
cowboy will be paralyzed for a few
seconds. However, if he shoots
whatever is chasing him, it is
converted into whatever chases his
opponent: snakes into tumbleweeds;
tumbleweeds into snakes. Each
cowboy can also leave "seeds" (or
"eggs") on the screen that will also

convert his pursuers. A player scores
100 points for each snake/tumbleweed converted by any method.
Game variations include a headstart of $50 already deposited, and
the necessity of buying bullets with
the money in addition to the
houses. Either or both variations can
apply to either or both players. A
solitaire game (with two levels of
difficulty) has one cowboy trying to
shoot all of the snakes and tumbleweeds, while having to buy bullets.
The solitaire game, however, is just
practice. Both are easy enough to
beat that, once a player learns to
shoot properly, there isn't much of a
challenge.

Food pushed off the screen is gone
for good, although George can push
food back onto the tables. When
5,000 points are scored, and at
10,000 point intervals after that, you
get a can of bug spray that will kill all
of the bugs on the screen, but no
points are received for doing so.
Timing the use of the spray is the most
important" strategic" decision the
player has.
Either one or two players (alternately) may start at any of the first
five rounds. There is a "night" option,
but since whatever the insects are
walking on is illuminated (fire-ants?),
it is actually easier to play than the
"day" game, and not as pleasing
graphically.

The graphics and animation in
CLAIM JUMPER are very good but,
while there are sound cues for most
game actions, the sounds are not
very imaginative. There aren't many
interactively competitive two player
arcade-style games, so it is nice to
see a company like Synapse release
a game like CLAIM JUMPER which
fills that need so nicely.

Animation and graphics are
excellent. George, the wasp, and a
multitude of ants all move smoothly
around the screen, though the
spiders suffer by comparison. Sound
cues for walking, being stung, the
wasp, and for food being pushed are
all well done. The music that
accompanies the copywrite screen
is great, even by Synapse standards.

Also by Synapse is PICNIC PARANOIA.
Here, the player is George, guarding
four full picnic tables which armed
only with a fly-swatter and an occasional can of bug spray.

As whimsical as this game is, it
actually makes more sense than any
of the games reviewed so far.
Admittedly, it is not very realistic to
have three ants carry a bottle of
ketchup, but it has the edge on
turning tumbleweeds into snakes by
shooting them.

Ants soon crawl on-screen and in
character, attempt to carry the food
away. Spiders that lay delaying webs
show up on round two, and can sting
George, paralyzing him, if the player
isn't careful. A flying wasp, which also
stings, appears at random. Points are
awarded for swatting any of these
marauders. Each round lasts a
minute and a half and, at the end of
each round, bonus points are
awarded for any remaining food. As
soon as all food is pushed off of the
screen, or a round ends with no food
still on any of the tables, the game
ends.

How's this for a scenario: You are a
Taxpayer who, during a year, scurries
around collecting income. You are
harassed by Taxers, who if they can
catch you will carry some of your
income back to the IRS. You may
accumulate deductions to reduce
your losses, but there is no defense
against inflation; "the cruelist tax of
all". If all of this sounds depressingly
familiar, imagine yourself playing a
kind of PAC-MAN variant and you will
end up with TAX DODGE.

In TAX DODGE, each round lasts at
most just over two minutes and
represents one tax year. A small
calendar at the bottom of the screen
shows the passage of the months,
along with your earnings, annual
goal, accumulated deductions and
savings. As you move through a
maze you must pass over what looks
like stacks of coins (income).
"DEDUCTIONS" and "INFLATION" are
spelled out in large letters along
some of the paths, and each time
you cross a letter it will take effect.
(each deduction can only be taken

once, of course). Other special
features are spelled out this way and
only appear in certain years. These
include an accountant that can get
you a tax shelter and a lawyer who
can help you in court. They also
include an occasional audit and a
tax court that are strictly bad news.
Graphicly, the game does not
resemble PAC-MAN at all. Both the
Taxpayer and the Taxers are figures
of men. The maze is larger than the
screen, and will scroll to keep the
Taxpayer visible. The scrolling is
under partial control of the player, so
he or she can attempt to keep an
eye on the Taxers. The scrolling is
done very well, and the animation
and graphics are adequate, but
nothing special.
Each year is more difficult, with a
higher goal and greedier Taxers. If
the player does not reach the goal,
the game ends. If the goal is
reached, the money goes into
permanent savings and does not
effect further play. Savings are, of
course, your score and the high score
is saved from game to game.
As a game, TAX DODGE starts easy
but becomes quite difficult starting
with the fourth year. From there on
out, players are going to have to
work out patterns and, tricks to stay in
the game. My only real complaint is
that it seems much harder to
"corner" in this game than in most
games — even with practice. TAX
DODGE is a good, solid game that
makes the most of its' theme and
somewhat overdone play mechanics.
While this column is edited by Allen
Doum, we will gladly print worthwhile
contributions from others. Send
contributions to:
ATARI EDITOR
c/o COMPUTER GAMING WORLD
That about wraps it up for this time.
I will leave you with one of the most
important questions to face mankind:
What is the value of a single life?
Usually about 10,000 points.

REAL
WORLD
GAMING
Dan Bunten

MODEL DEVELOPMENT
"Nothing is certain (except
death and taxes)".
The quote above would be the first
law of simulation games if there were
laws governing this field. In games
that mimic the real world, we must
include uncertainty in the outcomes.
The data collection phase of game
development (discussed last time)
was not an attempt to remove uncertainty. It was an attempt to discover
the type of uncertainty that occurs in
the field of interest for your game.
Good data collection should answer
some questions about the system
you wish to simulate.
How often do things happen? Very
few things happen all the time. In
general, things happen with a

certain probability or frequency. The
things that happen are called
outcomes. Data collection used to
create a simulation game must
determine what the outcomes are
for certain occurrences. It must also
give some measure of the frequency
for each possible outcome. For
instance, in a football game an
offensive pass play could be considered to have four outcomes: the
pass could be caught; it could be
intercepted; the quarterback could
be trapped in the backfield; or a
penalty could be called. (There are
other outcomes of lower significance
that are ignored in this example).
Using the list of outcomes, we would
need to determine the probability of
each one happening in order to
complete the data collection.

What quantity of things occur? This
is another question that data
collection must answer before we
can continue to the next phase in
game design — model creation. The
probability outcomes mentioned
previously are important, but there
are places where the question is not
"will it happen?" but "how much will
happen?". Using the football
example from above, this question of
"how much" would be important if
the pass was completed. How many
yards would the play gain? In most
real-life situations, amounts are just
as uncertain as are outcomes.
Included in the last installment of this
column was a discussion of normal
distributions (or bell shaped curves).
For quantitive outcomes that fit this
type of curve, all you need is an
average and a standard deviation
to describe your data. Another type
of quantitative distribution often
used in games is called the uniform
distribution. This type is appropriate
where quantities are equally likely to
happen over an entire range. Data
collection to generate this type of
distribution consists of simply finding
the upper and lower limits of the
outcomes.
So far, data collection should have
answered the questions "How often?"
and "How much?", but more information is needed. There are often
conditions that affect or even
determine the probabilities and
quantities of outcomes. Understanding these conditions and influences is essential to the creation of a
model of the real world. This final
question could be phrased as "How
do things affect other things (probabilities and quantities)?". The

answer to this question is often
vague. it's not like counting the
number of times a certain thing
happens out of a total number of
observations (frequency). The mathematical techniques used to determine how (and how much) things
influence other things are regression
analysis and analysis of variance. A
discussion of the specifics using
these approaches is outside the
scope of this series. However, for the
purpose of a game, it is often sufficient to use a mixture of 'trial and
error' and intuition. (A fancy name
for this technique is heuristic modeling). Using the football example
again, the factors that affect the
outcome of a passing play are the
type of pass pattern, the defensive
alignment and the quality of the
players on both sides. To reflect the
differences caused by the pass
pattern and the defensive setup, we
could limit the number of options
available to both sides. For each
combination of offensive play
against defensive play, there could
be different probabilities and quantities. The play choices would then
be the main determinant in creating
the outcome. Your data collection to
simulate this factor would consist of
observing and recording the results
for play combinations.
The other factor which impacts upon the outcome of a football play is
the quality of the players. To discover
the amount of influence the quality
of a team has on a passing play you
could use a combination of intutition and "rules of thumb". In
"Computer Quarterback" I used a
formula like this to adjust the
probability and quantity of the
outcome:
Factor = ((QB*2+RCVR*2+
OFLN) /5)
(( DFLN+LNBKR+SFTY*
SHY` 2)/4)
Where:
QB

= Quarterback quality
(in the range .7 to 1.3)
RCVR = Receiver quality
OFLN = Offensive line quality
DFLN = Defensive line quality
LNBKR = Linebacker quality
SFTY = Safety (deep) back
quality

The factor arrived at via this calculation was then multiplied by the probability of completion for the play
Continued on p. 45

REVIEW ROAD
GREETINGS, TOURISTS! This month, our journey
to TRS-80 Adventure is going to start on REVIEW
ROAD, a street which, hopefully, will become
well-worn with use. The buildings in this
neighborhood are varied. Some are nothing
more than shrink-wrapped pieces of cardboard
supporting a cassette tape cartridge, while
others are magnificent structures: large, sturdy
boxes with dazzling art work hinting at the
excitement and thrills inside. But just as you
can't tell a book by its cover, or a car by its paint
job, you can't tell a game by its package. So to
reduce the confusion and increase the value of
your computer gaming dollar, we're going
inside to see what's behind the packaging.
We'll explore from the attic to the basement
and from the kitchen to the hall closet to give
you the information you need to get the most
bang for your buck!

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME: Time Runner. Apple Panic,
Mad Mines, Black Hole,
Babel Terror
TYPE:
Arcade Action
SYSTEM:
TRS-80 MODS. I & Ill
FORMAT:
Disk and Tape
# PLAYERS: 1 or 2
AUTHOR:
Yves Lempereur
PRICE:
Tape — $19.95 (Exc.
Time Runner: $24.951
Disk — $24.95
PUBLISHER: Funsoft
28611 Canwood St.
Agoura, CA 91301

Our first stop is a group of five arcade style
games, all from the same company, Funsoft, of
Agoura, California. Unfortunately, when
reviewing a group of new games from one
company and one author, it's hard to avoid the
feeling that they are all somewhat alike. Programmers develop certain routines, input
methods and screen displays that work well for
them, Naturally, they will use these same
techniques in many of their products, just as a
novelist develops a certain identifiable style
which appears in most of his writing. But
reading five books in a row by the same author
may produce the feeling that you are reading
the same book five times. So it is with computer
software, and so it is, to a degree, with these five
games.
The games are Time Runner, Apple Panic,
Mad Mines, The Black Hole, and Babel Terror.
They all have certain features in common, so
let's examine those first. All are available in
either cassette or disk format and will run on
either a model I or model II TRS-80. The
cassette versions require 16k, while the disks
need 32k. A nice touch to the package is that
the back cover contains photos of the screen

displays of each game, so that you know, in
advance, what kind of graphics you can
expect. Each game has some desirable
features which demonstrate the programmer's
awareness of consumer needs. Each can be
played with either joy stick or arrow-key
movement inputs. This helps avoid keyboard
callouses. There is also a demonstration mode
for each game, which initiates itself if a few
minutes elapse without keyboard input. Each
one also has sound available, although the
package ad copy is a little misleading about
the sound capabilities. All five contain the
usual pows, zings and zaps of alien warfare, Two
programs, "Apple Panic" and "Time Runner",
also provide a melodious musical salute
between games. But, the cover description of
"Apple Panic" indicates a star burst proclaiming the inclusion of voice as well as music. Here
is where ad-writer enthusiasm exceeded
programmer capabilities. The only actual voice
reproduction is a very scratchy, barelyintelligible Apple Panic, pronounced during
the opening credits. Babel Terror has a similar
voice introduction, but the package designer
must have had second thoughts by then, as
voice is not mentioned in the advertising copy
for it. Don't grab for these if you're looking for full
vocal support of the play action. You'll be disappointed. One final feature, available on all but
"The Black Hole," is a routine which maintains a
permanent record of the top ten scores,
Time Runner is laid out on a checker board
playing area containing 20 rectangular boxes.
objective is to scoot around the edges of the
boxes, staking out each one as your own
territory. As each box is circled, its interior is
shaded in and your score is increased, Your
video screen alter-ego is a button-nosed little
character who appears to be a close relative of
Leo Christopherson's DUELING DROID. Part of
the family resemblance is in his eyes, which
roam about, pointing in the direction he's
moving, and give him a generally mischievous
appearance. His nose is just a small square in
the middle of his face, but it has a value of its
own. It marks the pivot point of his body. Be sure
to have it lined up with the box edges as you
negotiate corners. If you don't, you may find
yourself vainly punching arrow keys but not
moving because you're out of alignment with
the new box edge. All of his activity is
complicated by defenders who scurry around,
trying to stop him. One contact with a defender
and zappo. . . That's it for our friend! He does
have one advantage though. A touch of the
space bar freezes the little critters in position for
a few moments while the hero escapes. Like
time-outs in football though, you only get three
of these escapes in a game, When the entire
checkerboard pattern is encircled, your score is
calculated based on your elapsed time. Higher
levels provide more defenders and different
values for each box. These values begin to
decrease the moment you begin to circle a
box, providing the added challenge of having
to immediately complete a box once you start
it, otherwise it may be worthless when you
return to it later.

Time Runner may hold out some challenge to
nimble-fingered whiz kids, but in my book it only
rates about a 5 out of a possible 10 for arcade
games.
After playing Time Runner, Apple Panic
creates a deja-vu, I've-been-here-before,
feeling. It uses the same arrow key or joystick
input for movement, has the same hero, and
the same group of crazed defenders chasing
the hero. The major difference is that the screen
display represents a vertical surface rather than
horizontal in "Apple Panic", the hero climbs
vertical ladders to five levels of brick floors. He
digs holes in the floors and then waits for a
defender critter to fall into the hole. When that
happens, he rushes to the scene and jumps up
and down on the defender's head, causing
him to fall through the hole to his doom. On my
scale of 1 to 10, "Apple Panic" gets a 4.
Mad Mines is a "Galaxian" variant. A line is
drawn across the screen about 1/3 of the way
down from the top. This represents a protective
force field. Above this line, space mines roam
back and forth as in the typical "
Invader-Galaxian" type game, you have a cannon
which you move horizontally across the bottom
of the screen, Shooting at the mines disturbs the
force field and allows the mines to come
screaming down upon your cannon in attack
waves. If you destroy the complete initial
waves, higher levels place the protective line
lower and lower, allowing less time to react to
each succeeding attack. The originality is
pretty low here, so Mad Mines also gets a 4.
The Black Hole has more originality than Mad
Mines and also the added advantage of
having three phases to the game. Each phase
has its own separate screen display. The player
controls a single space ship which moves horizontally across the bottom of the screen. The
first phase propels the ship through a long, evernarrowing tunnel. Hurtling down the tunnel
toward him, are increasing numbers of
projectiles. To navigate the tunnel, he must
dodge or destroy these projectiles while
avoiding contact with the walls. As a last resort,
he may deploy a protective shield to safeguard
himself from the missiles, The shield should be
employed sparingly however, as its' availability
is limited,
The second phase of Black Hole is a form of
BREAK-OUT. After emerging from the tunnel, the
space ship is confronted by a wall protecting..
Guess Who!... another of the little defender
critters! To get to him, you must blast your way
through the wall before your time runs out,
avoiding occasional dropping bombs in the
process. If you make it, you enter the third
phase, which requires an attack on the bottom
of a large mother ship, similar to the final state
of the arcade game PHOENIX.
One of the drawbacks of Black Hole is that
you receive no score unless you succeed in
negotiating all three phases and finally
dispatch the "Head Critter" inside the mother

ship. Anything short of this simply ends the
game and you start all over again, it's either all
or nothing, so there's no way of comparing skill
levels.
A couple of interesting notes: when you first
boot up Black Hole, you are given the option of
reading the introductory scenario in either
English or French. Very chic! After the
introduction, the game automatically goes
into a demonstration mode. To begin the
playing mode you must press "Enter", an
obviousness that is not mentioned in the
instructions and which escaped my notice till I
had spent 1/2 hour banging keys trying to get
the game started.
Black Hole is just an average arcade game
but considering the variation provided by the
three separate phases I would rate it a 6.5 out of
10.
The final game from Funsoft is a maze called
Babel Terror. The printed instructions indicate
that you are a knight returning to your castle
from the crusades, and that your objective is to
find 10 crosses located somewhere in the maze.
But the instructions written into the program
itself refer to you as a "ship", through the
passageways. Periodically, you encounter
"babels" and other monsters which can spell
your doom. Fortunately, you can be protected!
If you pass over one of the 10 "Crosses". . . or
"Stars", which are your objectives, you gain
temporary immunity from your foes. You can
also gain fleeting invisibility by quickly pressing
the space bar when a monster is heading in
your direction, Of course, you have a limited
number of opportunities to acquire invisibility. I
encountered some difficulty with this. Sometimes my invisibility worked and sometimes it
didn't. Occasionally I was simply shown a view
of the total maze and then immediately
zapped by the monster I was trying to avoid. I'm
not sure whether I missed something in the
instructions or if this is a bug in my program
copy. In either case, I gave Babel Terror a 6 out
of 10.
Continuing down the block on Review Road,
there are three more neatly packaged disks.
These are all from Computer Shack in Pontiac,
Michigan. The titles are Demon Speed, Jovian
and Cyborg. All are written for the models I and
Ill TRS-80, and like the previous group, all are
packaged in colorful folders, have a good
assortment of sound effects, save high scores to
disk and allow use of a joystick.

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:

Demon Seed, Jovian,
Cyborg
TYPE:
Arcade Action
SYSTEM:
TRS-80 Mods. I & III
FORMAT:
Disk & Tape
# PLAYERS: 1 or 2
AUTHOR:
Bill Dunlevy
PRICE:
$20.00
PUBLISHER: Computer Shack
1691 Eason St.
Pontiac, MI 48054

Demon Seed is a rather direct copy of the
arcade quarter-grabber PHOENIX. It begins like
many other games of this genre, with the
enemy stacked above, and the player's artillery
scooting back and forth below, trying to pick
them off. This time, it's waves of small birds
which are attacking your firing position. If you
survive two waves of birds, you are then faced
with a group of circling eggs which hatch into
ugly predators with large wing spans. These

relentless birds of prey swoop down with a very
realistic chirping sound. If your finger dexterity is
anything like mine, these ill-tempered vultures
will probably peck you to extinction before you
ever reach the final, "Mother Ship" stage of th
game. Although the concept is not original, it is
well executed, with fine graphics and
interesting sound. I rate it a 7 out of 10 overall.
The other two games from Computer Shack
provide some entertaining originality. Jovian is
a space adventure in which you maneuver
around a variety of moving and stationary
space objects to attack an enemy space
station. The screen display provides continuous
scrolling, both vertically and horizontally, with
very smooth, fast graphics. Only about 1/8 of
space your universe is displayed at one time
but pressing "break" gives you a quick view of
the entire area, Your score is based on the
elapsed time needed to shoot off all the pods
on the enemy station. Success requires some
strategic planning, quick thinking and adroit
maneuvering.
As you progress to higher levels of the game,
the enemy stations grow larger, the amount of
space junk increases and the total time
available decreases. The game is definitely
challenging and can become addictive I rate
it a solid 8 out of 10.
The final game is Cyborg, described as a
space-age gladiator testing arena. It has a
large, open playing field dotted with a variety
of obstacles and small mazes. As in Jovian, the
monitor screen displays about 1/8 of the
playing area at a time, but you have the option
of obtaining brief, birds-eye views of the entire
field. Movement to the edge of the screen
produces fast, smooth scrolling in all four
directions. Hidden among the obstacles and
mazes are several target positions which your
space sled must contact in order to score
points. Protecting the targets are a large
number of fixed and moving explosive mines
and robots which will demolish you on contact.
The input controls of Cyborg are almost
identical to Jovian, described earlier, except
that the space bar firing control of "Jovian"
becomes a defensive shield deployer in
Cyborg. This shield gives you temporary
immunity from the explosive devices. Using the
shield has a disadvantage, however. It causes
the maze and obstacle walls to become
invisible until you hit the next target position. In
the meantime you stumble along, bumping
into walls and generally losing a lot of time,
Time is important! Your total score is based on
elapsed time. The longer you take to find all the
targets, the lower your score will be. If you are
too slow and careful, your turn will end before
you can find and hit all the targets. There are
two different playing areas which alternate as
you progress to higher levels. There are twenty
different levels with more explosive devices and
faster movement speeds at each level.
Cyborg is an interesting, challenging arcade
game with beautifully smooth action graphics.
I give it a 7.5 out of 10.

POST OFFICE
That completes our trip down Review Road
for this month. Let's drive over to the post office
and pick up the mail. Quite a bit of correspondence has accumulated since the last
column. . . Some with comments, some with
requests,... all complimentary (thanks, gang!).

Larry Beatty, 1229 Porter Rd., Norfolk, VA
23511, is looking for good war and/or sports

simulations for his TRS-80 Computer. Drop him a
line if you can help. I'd appreciate a copy of
any letters you send him. Also Larry, have you
looked at "VC" from Avalon Hill? I understand
that Avalon Hill will be supporting the Color
Computer with more simulations.
Dwight, from Torrance, CA is looking for an
overlay program to reduce programming time
and command entry on the Color Computer. If
you know of such a program, drop me a note
and I'll pass the information along.
To Frank in Colfax, Wash.: A TRS-80 version of
"Zork" is available from Personal Software, 1330
Bordeaux Dr., Sunnyvale, CA 94086.
To Paul in Sacramento, CA: a TRS-80 Pac Man
version called "Scarfman" is available from the
Cornsoft Group, 6008 N. Keystone Ave.,
Indianapolis, IND. 46220 and I have just heard
of a TRS-80 version of Donkey Kong available
from Software Magic, Bramalea, Ont., Canada
L6T 3S4, although I haven't reviewed a copy of it
yet.
To Chris Farley in Utica, N.Y.: Nice to hear from
you! I intend to run a group of reviews on
adventure games in the near future! I'm
checking on your question about TRS and will
have an answer for you next issue,
This is the end of a long road for this issue. We'll
see you again next time! Keep writing!

THE SILICON
CEREBRUM
by Bruce Webster

INTRODUCTION
I hoped to have the long promised
weighted map diagrams in this issue.
It did not work out that way. Instead, I
am going to talk about some simple
techniques for helping programs to
"learn". (Ed. — I am taking odds on
whether the weighted map diagrams will appear in Bruce's next
column.)
"Learning" ties in closely with some
of the decision-making approaches
that were covered in the last column.
Bayes decision theory (BDT) needs
information, about the likelihood of
events or choice. The better the
information, the more effective BDT
is. In certain cases, though, that
information may not be available
until the game is actually being
played. For example, the program
might try to anticipate its opponent's
moves. It can use "hard-wired"
information to determine what move
would be best in a given situation,
based on the designer's analysis of
the game. There's a problem, though.
If the human opponent has different
ideas about what is "best", the program will prepare for the wrong
moves and may fall on its nonexistent face.
To avoid this problem, the program
needs to gather data during the
game and use it to modify its decision making. In other words, it needs
to learn as it goes along. Let's look at
some ways in which a program can
learn.

BASIC TECHNIQUES
Let's start with a very simple game,
which we'll call WAR. In WAR, each
side starts out with the same number
of identical units. . .say, 100 mastodons each. WAR is fought in a series
of rounds. During each round, both

sides secretly pick one of three formations — line, column, or wedge —
and reveal their choices simultaneously. If both pick the same formation,
each loses one mastodon. Otherwise, line beats column, column
beats wedge, and wedge beats line.
The loser must eliminate a number of
mastodons equal to the winner's current count minus his own current
count. If that difference is less than or
equal to zero, he loses one. Let's suppose that side A has 20 mastodons
and side B has 15. If A loses, then he
eliminates 1 mastodon, while if B
loses, he must remove 5 mastodons.
The first side to run out of mastodons
loses. It's a bizarre game, admittedly,
but it will serve our purposes.
Now let's design a program to play
WAR against a human (or, if you
wish, non-human) opponent. The
easiest approach, of course, is to
randomly pick a formation each
round. This approach is more effective than you might think, especially
for a simple game like this. If the
human thinks the computer is
planning its moves, then the results
can be entertaining indeed. Also,
the program will want to be able to
choose randomly in situations where
it can't decide what the human is
going to do next. But let's examine
how it might be able to decide.
The program's goal is to guess
what formation the human will pick
for the current round and to choose
its own formation accordingly. To do
this, it must gather information on
how the human is playing. One
simple approach is to keep track of
how many times the human has
chosen each formation. Once it has
accumulated a sufficient number of
choices (say, 10 or so), it then
assumes that the next formation will
be that chosen most often. For
example, let's suppose that the
human has chosen "line" 7 times,
"column" 4 times, and "wedge" 6
times (we will represent such
distributions as (L7,C4,W6)). The
program would then assume that
the human is going to pick "line"
again and would select "wedge" as
its formation. In case of a two-way
tie, the program will pick the safest
option. For example, if the human
has chosen (L10,C10,W6), then the
program would choose "line", since
that would give it a tie if the human
chooses "line" and a win if he
chooses "column". In case of a
three-way tie, such as(110,C10,W10),
the program would choose randomly.
There are some problems with this
approach. If the human is aware of
what the program is doing, he can

simply keep track of his choices and
force the computer into certain
decisions. If he can get an initial
edge, then he can probably "set up"
the computer for some bad losses. So
let's see how we can help the computer out.
We can make two changes
without gathering any additional
information. First, we can redefine a
"tie" to mean a difference less than
or equal to some value, which we'll
call "E". If E equals 2, then
(L12,C10,W6) would be a two-way
tie, and (L15,C17,W16) would be a
three-way tie. This will help to
eliminate some (but not all) of the
predictability of the computer.
Alternately, we can always pick
randomly, but use the tally to bias
the pick. For example, let's say that
20 rounds have been played, and
that the human has picked
(L10,C6,W4). We then convert each
tally to a probability by multiplying it
by 100 and dividing it by the number
of rounds that have been played.
This would give us (L=50%, C=30%,
W=20%). This can then be converted
to a set of ranges: (L=1 to 50,C=51 to
80,W=81 to 100). The program then
generates a random number from 1
to 100 and matches it against the
ranges. It assumes that the human
will pick the corresponding formation
and reacts accordingly.

SOME ENHANCEMENTS
Suppose we find the preceding
methods just aren't good enough.
How can we improve them? One of
the simplest ways is to gather additional information. The program can
note context and history as well as
the actual choices. For example, we
might keep track of the last 10 or 20
moves and look for patterns. Suppose the last 12 moves were
(L,W,W,C,W,L,W,W,C,L,L,W=last
choice). If we take the last two
choices (LW) and go back looking
for that pattern, we find it occurring
twice before. . .and at evenly spaced
intervals! In both cases, the next
choice was (W), so the program
might weight its choices toward (W).
The player can note context by
saving information about when the
player made each choice. Suppose
the current tally was (L15,C10,W8).
The program would probably assume
that the human would pick (L) as his
next choice. Now let's assume that
the computer has also kept track of
whether the player won, lost, or tied
on the previous move, and that the
distribution is (L5/3/7,C2/8/0,W4/2/2).
Continued on p. 47

Okay, okay, so the first number trick
in the first Micromagic column (see
the last issue of COMPUTER GAMING
WORLD) is nothing but the old
" casting out nines". It still is a fun
trick, isn't it?
For those not familiar with casting
out nines, the idea in the trick is that a
number and the sum of its digits both
leave the same remainder when
divided by 9. For instance, take the
number 1148. The sum of its digits is
1+1+4+8 = 14. If you divide 1148 by 9
and 14 by 9, you will find that in both
cases the remainder is 5. (Don't take
my word for this! Check this!).
When you subtract the sum of the
digits from the original number, the
result must therefore be a multiple of
9 (that is, there is no remainder, or the
remainder is 0). So, by the same
reasoning, the sum of its digits must
be a multiple of 9 as well. The
computer program simply computed
what the missing digit must be to
make a multiple of 9.
For instance, continuing with 1148
as an example, if you subtract the
sum of the digits, which in this case is
14, you get 1134. Notice that the sum
of the digits is 9 (a multiple of 9). If you
single out the digit 3, the other digits
are 1, 1 and 4 which have a sum of 6.
The computer program in the previous
issue essentially instructs the computer to find what digit is needed to
make the sum of all the digits a
multiple of 9. In this case, a 3 would
be needed.

ON TO SOMETHING NEW. . . .
This month I will offer a new
program which has some element of
strategy for you to discover. In the
next issue I will offer one of my all-time
favorite recreational mathematics
problems (the first professional one I
created) for readers as a programming challenge.
Our new program deals with a
game called "Fifty". It is played either
with one or two humans against the
computer but, I have to warn you, the

computer is a strong opponent! The
object of the game is to be the first
player to score a total of exactly 50.
Players take turns choosing a whole
number from 12 to 6 (like rolling a
dice, but without the chance element involved). The computer keeps
a running tally in both versions of the
game. In the computer version, the
computer gets to go first, and you
may select whether the computer
plays partially randomly or completely logically (unbeatable). Just so you
get the idea, suppose two human

players (called #1 and #2) play, with
#1 picking a 3 first. If #2 now picks a 2,
the computer will display the tally
after #1's first turn as being 3, then it
will display the tally after #2 goes as 5
(from 3+2), and this will continue. The
program itself has a number of input
error and other such checks, as well
as full documentation. If the reader
wishes to save some typing, he may
omit those PRINT statements which
are just instructions, but I recommend
keeping them in for future reference.
Continued on p. 47

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Flockland Island Crisis
ARCADE
Apple II 48K DOS 3.3

FORMAT:
Disk
# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
Kevin Bagley
PRICE:
$34.95
PUBLISHER: Vital Information, Inc.
7899 Mastin Drive
Overland Park, Kansas
66204

You've just lost 47,355 tons of island
paradise to the offenders scattering
1586 sheep to the hills!!! You hit 150
out of 172 launched by the offenders.
And it only took you 243 shots for a
shooting average of 61%.
And that is the end of a game of
FLOCKLAND ISLAND CRISIS. Depress
any key and view the top five scores
to see how you compare. This is an
arcade game requiring much
patience and concentration in
addition to very good hand/eye
coordination. The graphics in FLOCKLAND ISLAND CRISIS depict a narrow
vertical island in the center of the
screen which bears no resemblance
to a well known South Atlantic island.
In defense of your island you have an
OID (defender) on each side which
you can move upward or downward.
You have a choice of dual or
independently controlled OIDS.
Independent control of OIDS net
double points, however, the difficulty
of play is considerably higher.
Keyboard letters Q and A move the
left OID upward and downward, P
and L move the right OID. The space
bar is used to fire the OID QUOTONS
to destroy the OFFENDERS which
attack simultaneously from both

sides. There are three levels of play to
chose from, each progressively more
difficult than the previous. Typically,
a first time player would choose play
level #1 and dual control of the OIDS.
The offenders attack, one each, from
the left and the right. Using the
direction keys to position the OIDS
relative to the offenders you then fire.
Each depression of the space bar
fires both OID QUOTONS in the dual
control mode. Rarely do both OIDS
line up to shoot at their respective
offenders so, provided you hit one,
the other is still attacking. Offenders,
by the way, attempt to land on your
island paradise and steal an invaluable commodity, PETROLANOLINWEALTHURNIUM. When the
OFFENDERS have landed five ships,
loaded up, and departed, the game
is over. Whenever you fire the OID
QUOTONS, in the dual mode the
OIDS stop moving, thereby causing
you to have to use the direction keys
to renew their motion.
A running score is kept at the
bottom of the screen and bonus
points are given for each phase of
play. Documentation indicates that
no bonus points are given for level #1
play. However, our version gave a
bonus on level one. After you have
mastered the three levels of play
using dual control of the OIDS, then
you can advance to the independent control of OIDS and receive
double points. No problem! Right?
Wrong! With independent control
you may set only one OID at a time to
encounter the unlucky offender. I call
this one unlucky, because, as this
one is being shot at, the other
offender is zeroing in on your turf
unchallenged.
The graphics are alright, sound
effects are reasonable and documentation is adequate except for
the discrepancy about bonus points.
Another dimension in the play that
would have accommodated a real
master at hand/eye coordination
would have been to have more than
one offender attacking from each
side simultaneously. But, all factors
considered, if you enjoy demanding
hand/eye coordination arcade
games, then you will enjoy FLOCKLAND ISLAND CRISIS.
Stuart Gorrie

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Night Mission
TYPE:
Pinball
SYSTEM:
Apple II/II+
FORMAT:
Disk
# PLAYERS: 1-4
AUTHOR:
Bruce Artwick
PRICE:
$29.95
PUBLISHER:
Sub Logic
NIGHT MISSION (NM), Sub Logic's
addition to the video pinball craze,
puts together the best features of the
finest pinball games for the Apple. It
has the smooth ball animation of
Budgeco RASTER BLASTER (RB), with
the complex machine design of
DAVID'S MIDNIGHT MAGIC (DMM) by
Broderbund, and more features than
the other two combined.
NM's graphics are incredibly smooth,
especially considering the tremendously high ball speeds, DMM, on the
other hand, has a tendency to slide
the ball into a path when it shouldn't,
or bounce it out before it should.
While NM and RB don't have these
problems, RB doesn't have nearly as
well-designed a machine as either
NM or DMM, making NM a strong
contender for the best of Apple
pinball games.
DMM has bumpers, roll-overs,
multiple-ball play, tilt, up to four
players, and a sound switch. NM
contains all of these features, while it
adds free games by high score or
match, adjustable numbers of balls
per game, ball speed, bumper
impulse, flipper power, and over 30
others. The players can adjust the
ball speed, tilt power, number of
balls per game, bonus count rate,
maximum bonus count, delay before
new balls, bumper impulse, sound
effects, and power in each flipper
separately. The player also has
options which make it easier to
place the ball on certain paths, and
easier to achieve multi-ball play.
These are only the major adjustments.
There are many others which make
the game definitely the most
versatile pinball game in history.
But, features are not only things
that make NM stand out in the
pinball field. The ball speed is
incomparable to that of any other
pinball game, computer or real.

While the speed can be set high, it
can also be reached in normal play
by hitting just a few bumpers in a row,
Speed in a game can not be well
described, so we will just say that it is
definitely faster than anything
you've probably seen. So great is the
speed potential, that we advise you
to hit your flippers before you think
you should. This will usually result in
perfect timing, as the ball can be
quicker than the eye.
NM, as most pinball games, will not
keep you constantly excited. It gets
boring eventually, but it's sounds
and speed keep you interested in it
longer than most pinball games.
Mark Rhodes
Barry Gittleman
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:

Probe One:
The Transmitter
TYPE:
Actionadventure
with graphics
SYSTEM:
Atari 400/800 40k
Basic Cartridge
Paddles or Joystick
FORMAT:
Disk
# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
Lloyd D. Oilman, Jr.
PRICE:
$34.95
PUBLISHER: Synergistic Software
830 North Riverside Drive
Suite 201
Renton, Washington 98055
(206) 226-3216
Probe One offers something for
both the adventure and arcadeaction enthusiast. In this science
fiction based actionadventure, you
explore room after room of a spacy
colony research center. Your objective: find the transmitter and
escape. As with most adventures,
you go in compass directions, take,
drop and use objects. In short, you try
to figure out how to get from her to
there without getting killed.
Menacing droids that wander into
the rooms spice up the adventure.
And, if you're not quick on the stick
(joystick, that is), they will knock you
unconscious and drag you back to
the antechamber (square one). To
make things a little more interesting,
and a quite a bit more difficult, some
of the droids are invisible. Invisible
means they are the same color as the
background, so that you can see
them only when they pass in front of
other objects.
The action part of the game
consists of moving a gun horizontally
across the bottom of the screen (just

above the text window) and pressing
trigger button to shoot at droids.
These robots move onto the screen
quickly, then pause briefly before
bumping you back to the antechamber. Sound easy? Wait until you
try to type, keep an eye out for
invisible droids, maneuver, and
shoot within a few seconds.

accepts only a limited number of
commands. Type in a "g" and the
word "Go" appears on the screen.
Type "N", "North" appears. For other
commands, such as "Take" and
"Drop", the single letter command
("T" or "D") must be followed by the
name of the object. This makes
inputting commands easy.

The game greets you with a welldone high-res graphic of a planetscope with animation of your ship
landing on the planet's surface.
Unfortunately, the quality of this
graphic is not repeated. You then
select the reaction time of the droids
at which you'll be shooting. Selecting
the slowest reaction time means
you'll be able to quickly dispose of
the visible droids and you'll stand a
slim chance of knocking off the
invisible ones. In fact, the game is
probably best played with two
cooperating players; one on keyboard and one on joystick (or
paddles).
The game maker has included a
feature that some adventurers find
makes replays more interesting and
that others find annoying: the
locations of objects and the layout
of the rooms changes slightly from
game to game. This makes map
making difficult if not useless. The
challenge of exploration is increased even further because of the
"grayshafts." You occasionally fall
down de-activated gra yshafts when
going from one room to the next. An
injury usually results,

Scoring for the game is based on
the number of items you have in your
possession at the end of the game
(maximum four) and how many
droids you knocked off. Additionally,
you get one hundred points if you
escape with the transmitter. (I never
did, but I haven't given up. , .yet).
Your score displays when you die or
escape with the transmitter —
there's no way to find out how you're
doing until then. So, competition
play for points is somewhat
hampered.

You can get yourself killed in just a
few basic ways. Three falls down a
gravshaft will do it every time, as will
enough successful attacks by the
droids. There may be other ways to
do yourself in but, if there are, I have
yet to find them.
The game has what might seem as
flaws; whether or not they are serious
you should decide for yourself. First,
after you die you must re-boot the
entire program. This entails waiting
for the nifty animation mentioned
earlier, selecting a difficulty level,
then waiting for the main program to
load. Since there is no "save game"
feature, be prepared to die and reload the program many times before
you find the transmitter and escape.
Second, there appears to be no
logic for using the objects, such as
the translator or the crystals that you
find. This means you don't do a lot of
figuring things out as in some
adventures. However, the author has
seen to it that the number of
combinations that you must test are
few. This is because the game

Probe One will appeal most to
adventurers who prefer path-finding
to solving riddles and puzzles. It is
billed as the first in a series of science
fiction adventures. It's not a bad
start, but like all else in this universe, it
could have been done better.
David Stone
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SUBJECT:

Atari Games & Recreations
Book
Atari 400/800
game design
AUTHOR:
Herb Kohl & Others
PUBLISHER: Reston Publishing

Atari Games & Recreations is a
well-planned book, covering game
design on the Atari 400 and 800. It
says "For beginners and advanced
programmers too. . ." on the cover,
although this might be too bold a
statement, as the book seems
specifically geared to those who
know little more about programming
than plugging the computer into the
wall. But, in considering this book
from the beginner's standpoint,
Games & Recreations is one of the
finer books out on Atari programming.
The book is clear in format and
layout; using descriptive cartooning
to accentuate the lessons it conveys.
It begins by going over the basics of
the Atari computer, including the
editing functions, which the future
gaming programmer will no doubt
access frequently.

The random number function, the
key to many programs, is fully
explained, and how it may be used
in combination with simple graphics
to make various games. Guessing
games, dice throwing, NIM, and
secret codes are all examples of
games that one can make using the
basics of the Atari 400 or 800.
After the section entitled The Atari
Special, the book begins to give
more detailed information on game
design, covering more advanced
graphic routines and some excellent
sounds (including your own siren,
rocket launch, or explosion!). If the
advanced programmer is to draw
anything useful from this book, it
would be from this section.
If I sound a bit negative on this
publication, it is only because I had
hoped for more information and a
deeper more intricate, look at the
gaming functions of the Atari
microcomputer. In any case, the
book is very well done and should
prove to be a great asset to the
beginner. For those with a more
advanced programming background, skim through this one before
you buy it.
Michael Cranford
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:

Valley of the Kings
Action-adventure
with graphics
SYSTEM:
Atari 400/800 48K
Basic Cartridge joystick
FORMAT:
Disk
# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
T. M. Krishchan
PUBLISHER: Dynacomp. Inc.
1427 Monroe Ave.
Rochester. New York 14618

In this action-adventure, set in
ancient Egypt, you guide an
animated character through a
maze of passages, picking up
objects of value, and fight or
maneuver around an array of
guards, trolls, and other beasts. The
documentation is well written. No

one should have any trouble knowing what to do.
The adventure consists of three
distinct phases. In the first phase, you
pick up all the valuables and
weapons that are to be found in the
adventure. In the second phase, you
travel through a maze of crossroads
that double-back on themselves.
And, in the third phase, you try to
out-maneuver a couple of crazy
critters that want to zapp you back
to first room in phase three.
This game has a number of
features that make it interesting and
a little different from most adventures. First, the character that you
move about has internal animation
(even though he's only one color).
Next, the game maker has devised a
clever way of revealing clues and
the identity of objects to you: just
pass the character over the object
and it's identity appears in the text
window. The text-window message
continues to re-appear, even if you
don't want it to, until you are clear of
the object. If the object is of some
use or value, it is automatically
added to your inventory.

score at the end, but are of no
particular use in the adventure.
Curiously, you gain all the points
that contribute toward your score in
the first phase of the adventure. From
there on, you can only loose points.
It's a matter of holding on to what
you've got.
The author provides a number of
tips for adventuring and scoring
high. These include waiting and
watching the movements of each
villain before attempting to out
maneuver him, never fighting with a
villain unless told to do so (or you'll
get zapped back to an earlier room)
and, if the bad guy gets too close,
running out of the room.
You can see your inventory, your
score, a listing of the characters in
the adventure, or even light a
match, under joystick control or by
typing an appropriate letter. Accessing these features with the joystick is
a little difficult, The game does not
require you to type-in directions or
commands and there's no "savegame" feature (nor is there a real
need for one).

Through a programming technique called "page-flipping", the
rooms, passages, and other locations
appear fully drawn. Just move your
character off-left and blip! he's on
the right side of the screen in a
brand-new location. Of course, this
also works with right, up and down.
The locations and characters do
not adequately convey or carry the
Egyptian theme of the adventure.
For example, what's a troll on a
bridge doing in Egypt? With a little
more thought, the author could
have used appropriate mythical
characters. And, he could have
decorated the borders of the rooms
with Egyptian motifs, such as palm
fronds and hieroglyphs. As is, there's
nothing on-screen to really reinforce
the theme of the Egyptian setting for
the adventure.

This is not, I repeat, not a heavyweight adventure. In fact, it can be
completed in less than an hour. But
this doesn't mean that it isn't fun. It
is, and it's probably especially so for
new or younger adventurers. Adventure conventions, such as finding
matches (or some other light source)
and using them to light dark
passages, are not treated as puzzles.
The instructions clearly tell you that
you've got to find matches. And, at
least one of the places where you
use them is clearly labeled. However,
since it's play-value is not derived
from solving riddles and puzzles, but
rather from maneuvering the onscreen character, there's plenty of
fun to be had by replaying the
adventure to try to beat your last
score.
David Stone

The game begins by offering you
an option to read a brief scenario
summary. Once past that, your
character appears on a road with
two signs; and you're off on your
adventure! You read the signs, then
move your character along the
roadway, picking up coins, rings,
and swords. Unlike most other
adventures, there's no limit to how
much you can carry. Also, many of
the objects have point values (such
as rings and coins) that will help your

PLEASE
TAKE TIME
TO FILL OUT
READER INPUT
DEVICE

ARCADE MACHINE (from p. 32)

ARMOR ASSAULT (from p. 28)

REAL WORLD (from p. 36)

interesting variation of a game itself.
The player also has a choice of
keyboard, paddle or joystick control
for game play. Try playing a game,
using the joystick, with a friend
pressing the single-step key. You'll be
in for some laughs.

ments. Fortunately, the unit design
program gives you lots of options
and, you should have no problem
cooking up new infantry units with
lots of structural strength, no armor,
little movement and limited firepower. You can likewise design new
anti-tank gun units with small
structural strength, no armor, zero
movement and large firepower.
Fourth, you can better simulate the
"fog of war" if you design your units
and enter your orders in secret. In a
real firefight it is, of course, very
difficult to get precise information
about the status and location of
enemy units.

combination to get the final chance
of success for a pass. A basic rule of
human engineering was also used in
this design. That rule says that in any
field of human endeavor, the range
of performance for almost all participants will fall within 30% of the average. Football players are no exception. The range of pass completion
statistics for quarterback is from 70%
to 130% of the overall average. So, if
the average completion percentage for a certain pass is 55%, a great
offensive team (with 1.30 rating in all
the factors used in the formula
above) against an average team
(with 1.00 in all defensive categories) would complete the pass 71.5%
of the time — 1.30 55%. Although
unable to find any "hard data" to
support (or oppose) the specific way
I chose to handle team quality, I am
satisfied with the way the game
plays (and apparently so are a
number of other people).

TAM is flexible enough to allow
non-game animation in addition to
its many other features. A particularly
difficult four level game could easily
be culminated with an animated
cartoon in level five celebrating a
player's victory. Put all the pieces at
zero score value, and the player
need only sit and watch.
(Don't be confused by the numerous references to the player as it only
takes four keystrokes to turn any
game into a two player version.)
The software is certainly up to the
high standards normally achieved
by BRODERBUND. For as complex a
product as this, it is virtually bug free.
There were a few areas that I
thought, at first, were definite
glitches. But these proved to be well
thought out features of the product.
My initial confusion stemmed from
the rather skimpy documentation
provided. Thirty-eight pages is just
not sufficient to clarify the entire
program. The documentation could
also be divided into a tutorial section
and a reference section. A new user
could then follow the tutorial and
see the effects of his initial efforts.
Once a person becomes experienced with the product, a well laid
out reference section would display
the meanings of the various table
entries. Unfortunately, BRODERBUND
tried to combine these two functions
into one section.
The product itself provides a
tremendous amount of power to the
user. Try a few of the demo games
supplied on the back of the disk to
see the versatility potential of the
product. I have a tough time
keeping the kids away from 'PIZZA
MAN' (What's a rhinoceros doing in
a pizza parlor, anyway?) After you've
'fixed' these demos to your own
standards, you're ready to create
your own piece of art. In this age of
standardization, it's comforting to
know you can create a completely
custom present for your own special
computer friend. Yes, the Arcade
Machine even allows you to create a
quick load copy of your creation!
Just imagine his face when he boots
a disk that says "Happy Birthday
Mike."

This game has many positive
features, but it fails to recreate the
"feel" of the most interesting feature
of armor warfare — mobility. Blitzkrieg is a fluid tactic of maneuver,
not costly frontal assault. Ideally,
armor units should not be committed
to such bloody assaults. Instead,
they are best used in bypassing
strong points to strike deep into rear
areas cutting communications and
supply lines, probing for and seizing
weak spots, and encircling frontline
enemy units. Unfortunately, the map
in Armor Assault is only one screen
large. This limited space is simply too
small for realistic flanking and
enveloping maneuvers. A multiple
screen scrolling map, as in the
classic Eastern Front, would be
greatly preferable.
Ironically, the positive features of
ARMOR ASSAULT do give a vivid
"feel" for other kinds of combat. For
example, if you design a new
scenario using only infantry units as
discussed above, you can develop a
very realistic infantry street-fighting
game reminiscent of World War II
struggles in Stalingrad and Berlin.
Even the unrealistic multiple opportunity fire and "vehicle collision"
features of this game seem realistic
in an infantry close assault situation.
Additionally, many features of this
program are reminiscent of tactical
Civil War naval engagements in the
era of the first ironclads.
All factors considered, Armor
Assault is a game with many good
features, the best of which are the
ability gives of during a wide range
of scenarios and the inclusion of
simultaneous movement and opportunity fire.
❑

Thus, often data collection is much
more than "number crunching". You
may be called on to make judgments and guesses. In such cases,
the more familiar you are with the
system being simulated, the better
will be your intuition concerning its
functions.
If you can answer the three questions listed above (in all their various
forms) with specific numeric answers
then you have finished data collection. In addition, you have probably
completed development of the
model except for a few loose ends.
All that is needed once you have the
data collected is to reduce the
numbers to formulas. For instance, if
your observations indicate that a
certain outcome occurred 15 times
out of 17, then all you do is divide 15
by 17 to get the probability of that
event. You should calculate the
average and standard deviation for
any quantitative data that seems to
fit a "bell shaped" curve. List the
highest and lowest value of any
items that vary equally over a range.
Finally, create equations that reflect
the influence of one factor over
another according to your best
guess of how the system works.
Although this process is by no
means trivial in a large scale system
simulation, if you did a good job of
the earlier steps in development
(system definition and data collection) then creating a model is
straight forward.
Next time we will cover programming your model.
❑

OVERVIEW OF R.I.D. #5
There were 154 R.I.D.s turned in by press time for this issue.
The breakdown of users was: Apple (58%): Atari (36%):
Others (6%). As the more observant readers will note, in RID #5
we did not ask you what kind of computer you use. An
oversight on our part. How then do we figure out the user
breakdown? Except in a very few cases we could tell what
machine each respondent used by the pattern of his
evaluations (i.e. reviewed only Apple games, etc.) or from a
statement of the respondent as to what machine he/she had.
For a game to be included in the results it must be
evaluated by at least 20% of the respondents in the user
groups( s) to which the game relates. 27 of the games from
RID #5 had the necessary 20%+ play level,
The overall ratings were lower this issue than in any other.
The mean score for RID #5 was 5.95. On RIDs #2, 3, 4 they were,
in order 6.59, 6.17, 6.80. Anyone familiar with statistical analysis
will quickly see that there are inherit difficulties in comparing
the score of a game in one RID with that of a game in
another RID. Since we must needs compare scores between
RIDs to arrive at our CGW TOP 10 we need to be able to
compare these scores. By figuring the mean score of a RID we
can compare the score of a game in that RID with the mean.
We can then adjust the score to an overall average score for
all RIDs and thereby come up with a rating that can be
compared in a fair manner to other games in other RIDs. For
example a game rated at 6.20 in RID #4 (which sports a
generous 6.80 average) should not be considered as strong a
game as a game rated at 6.20 in RID #5 (with a stingy 5.95
average score). The adjusted score will rate the 6.20 game in
RID #5 as a better game than the 6.20 game in RID #4.

COMPUTER GAMING WORLD TOP 10
Wizardry continues to dominate the TOP 10 chart, with the
companion adventure, KNIGHTS OF DIAMONDS, just barely losing out to CHOPLIFTER! for the number 2 spot. SSI continues to
dominate the list as a manufacturer with 4 titles. GUADALCANAL CAMPAIGN has taken little time in establishing itself as
a TOP 10 resident, COMPUTER BASEBALL has slid several positions from the last accounting but will probably bounce back
in the spring. The only new addition to the list is DEADLINE by
Infocom. An Atari game, SHAMUS, just missed making it into
the TOP 10. We'll give it another opportunity in RID #6.

In addition, games in the TOP 10 are automatically
resubmitted for evaluation in the next RID. The adjusted score
of a game in the TOP 10 will be an average of its adjusted
ratings for the various RIDS in which it appears. In summary,
the ratings listed for a game from now on will be adjusted to
an overall standard, For anyone interested the standard will
be 6.37 which is the mean of the means of the first four RIDs.
This number will be the fixed mean for comparison purposes in
future RIDs.
In our next issue we will give the adjusted scores for ALL the
games from the various RIDs.

THE RANKINGS
The adjusted scores have had .42 points added to them to
adjust them to the overall RID rating system. To compare a
rating to that of a game in another RID you must adjust the
score of past RIDs. RID #2 results — subtract .22 from all scores;
RID #3 — add .20; RID #4 — subtract .43.

R.I.D. #6 (Use business reply card provided)

GAMES
Rate the following games using a scale of 1 (terrible) to 9
(outstanding). In marking your evaluation be sure to consider
the following aspects of the game: PRESENTATION (this
includes such things as graphics, sound, packaging,
documentation); GAME DESIGN (apart from the presentation,
is the game well designed, playable, interesting?); LIFE (does
the game wear well?).
Leave blank the box of any game which you have not
played or have not played enough to have formed an
opinion.

ARTICLES
Rate the following selected articles on a scale of 1 (terrible) to
9 (outstanding). If the article does not interest you enter "0".

SILICON (from p. 40)
Now we have three sets of figures to
use. If the player won the previous
round, we would use (L5,C2,W4); if he
lost, (L3,C8,W2); and if he tied,
(L7,CO,W2). Other tyes of context
that the program could save include
whether the player is ahead, behind,
or even, and what he has chosen in
the last 10 moves, 20 moves,
etcetera.,
All of the "learning" that we've
looked at so far is really just gathering statistics and using them to
computer probabilities. Performance
improves with a greater amount of
data, so the program will want to
save information from game to
game and, probably, from session to
session, Furthermore, the information
should be keyed to different human
players, that is, the program should
save one set of data for me and
another for you, since we probably
play differently.
If we want to, we can introduce a
higher level of learning. Let's say that
the program produces three guesses
each round using three different
methods: total distribution (L,C,W);
pattern matching; and won/lost/
tied distribution. It assigns each
method as initial weight of 100. It
gets the three choices and selects
the choice with the heaviest total
weight. After the player enters his
actual pick, the program checks
each method to see if it was right or
wrong. A method that made the
right choice gets its weight increased
by some amount; any that made

wrong choice has its weight decreased. After a period of time, the
program starts to "learn" which
method (if any) works best. Again,
we may want to save weights for
each player to take advantage of
individual tendencies.

CONCLUSION
I've described some very simple,
statistic-based methods for program
"learning". They provide a way for
progr ams to improve their play
against human opponents. They are
based on learning to anticipate a
given opponent and work best when
information is saved and the same
person plays over and over again.
Properly implemented, they may
help to avoid the quick boredom
that often sets in when a player finds
himself quickly mastering a given
game. We'd be interested in hearing
from any of you who have played
around with these or other learning
techniques.
MATHEMAGIC (from p. 41)
Why not type in the program listing
and give the game a try? (Don't
worry, I'll still be here when you come
back!)
Having played, I wonder whether
you noticed a strategy for winning.
(No fair scrutinizing the program that
closely!) Can you see how to win
against another human opponent?
Who has the natural advantage?
How do you win?

Of course, there are other questions
that can be asked, and perhaps
some reader would like to explore
some of these. For instance, what if
you play for a larger sum as goal?
What if you allow players to pick
different numbers, say from 1 to 10?
. . . or from 2 to 5 only? Who has the
advantage? What is the strategy to
use in these cases?
As always, I would welcome hearing
from readers who have programs
which are superior to the ones used
here, or interesting problems, comments, observations, generalizations,
interesting special cases, some
knowledge of the history of any of the
problems used here — in short,
anything that relates to the exciting
world of recreational mathemagical
m icrocomputing. Write to me directly:
Dr. Michael W. Ecker
COMPUTER GAMING WORLD
Luzerne 8
Viewmont Village
Scranton, PA 18508
Enjoy the mathemagic! I hope to
hear from many of you very soon!
Mike
Dr. Michael W. Ecker is Assistant
Professor of Mathematics at the Pennsylvania State University's Worthington
Scranton Campus. When not playing with
his TRS-80 Model 3, he is involved in other
areas of recreational mathematics and
problem solving as the Problem Editor of a
collegiate mathematics journal and as a
member of the Mathematical Association
of America's Committee on High School
Contests.

