December 1990

Features
Sneak Preview: Command HQ
Coloring Your Phone Red / Alan Emrich

Sneak Preview: Secret Weapons of the
Luftwaffe
Infiltrating LucasFilm's Top Brass / Russell Sipe

Wing Commander, Wow!

Are You a Glutton for Punisher?
14

SSI's fast-"scaling" DragonStrike / H.E. Dille

All the News that Fits...
An Industry Update

Game Tips: Star Control Tactics, Part II

Inside Origin's Bad Blood / Greg Malone

The Gaming Dilemma: Guns or Butter?
Chris Crawford's Latest Challenge / Chuck Moss

Their Finest Holiday

16
18
22

Electronic Arts' Stormovik SU-25 / Stanley Trevena

Cinemaware's Wings
A Spot of Fun for Everyone

Interstel's D.R.A.G.O.N. Force

52
56
60
62

84
88

Virgin/Mastertronic's Spot Reviewed / J.L. Wilson

32
48

75

A Soaring Cinema Serial / Allen Greenberg

Special Bonus Cartridge Coverage

An IBM Sound Board Support Survey / Rich Heimlich

Top Gunski?

Competitive Bombing
An "on target" review of Strike Aces / H.E. Dille

26

"Battle of Britain" Tournament Results / Russell Sipe

Turn On and Tune In

72

RAF Strategy in Their Finest Hour / Roger White

More Details from the Designer / Paul Reiche

Transfusion Department:

68

Paragon Unleashes Marvel's Vigilante / Charles Ardai

Beware the Hun in the Sun

The Origin of Space Cadets / Dennis Owens

Take a Serious Breather

Number 77

93

Ys Books I & ll and Final Fantasy Reviewed

102

Sgt. Damon & His Howling Commandos / Jesse Cheng

GenCon's Disk-Connection

106

A Game Convention Computer Report

Departments
Taking A Peek
The Rumor Bag
Over There (European Games Report)
Scorpion's Tale (Monkey Island Previewed)
Scorpion's View (Altered Destiny)
Game Ratings (100 Games Rated)
Hall of Fame
Letters from Paradise
Free-For-All (Win Prizes)
Reader Input Device
Editorial

10
12
20
41
46
64
65
108
110
124
128

a

a

Taking a Peek

Accolade
550 S. Winchester Blvd.
San Jose, CA 95128
STRATEGO: Fans of the classic
"Stratego" boardgame from Milton Bradley will be very pleased to see the
wonderful computer translation done by
Accolade. A graphic delight featuring different styles of boards and pieces, plus a
catalog of initial set-ups, three clever new
tournament rules, and a campaign game.
All give this game everything but (alas) a
two-player option. IBM and Macintosh
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #1.

Electronic Zoo
3431-A Benson Avenue
Baltimore, MD 21227
TENNIS CUP: This game features just
about every gimmick imaginable for the
true tennis aficionado (spins, smashes,
drop shots, four different styles of courts,
32 seeded opponents plus
design-your-own opponents, doubles or single play
for one or two players). Unfortunately,
it's just so hard to hit the ball back unless one is adept at arcade games! Nice
split screen effects for watching both
sides of the court at once. IBM, Amiga
and Atari ST ($39.95). Circle #2.
Interplay
3710 S. Susan, # 1 00
Santa Ana, CA 92704
CHECKMATE: Yes, Virginia, there is a
chess program that can beat the snot
[Ed. — Dave, change "snot" to "heck"]
out of you! Like Spock's chess computer
on Star Trek, this program actually
learns as it plays, adding more and more
opening moves to its initial book of

300,000+. Fast-playing, with plenty to
offer beginners and lots of clever features, this might be the strongest entry
yet into the computer chess game
market. IBM ($54.95). Circle #3.
Psygnosis Ltd.
South Harrington Buildings
Sefton Street, Liverpool L3 4BQ
United Kingdom
MATRIX MARAUDERS: This is a combination race and arcade game with plenty of shoot-'em-up action. While the
graphics are not state of the art, the campaign game competition and null modem
play capabilities give this game something to offer the market. Amiga. Circle
Reader Service #4.
Silmarils
c/o Odyssey Software, Inc.
PO Box 367
N. Eastham, MA 02651
COLORADO: Made in France (with
English and German rules for some
reason), the scant documentation leaves
(Continued

on

page 126)

Rumor Bag

(Continued from CGW #76)

he

interrogator's eyes glistened with sadistic glee
as he loomed over me.
He flashed a bright light directly into my eyes as though
he were trying to prove
there was something worse
to look at than CGA
graphics. "And what do you
know about Spectrum
HoloByte's Pearl Harbor
game?"

T

"Look," I stammered, "I
don't know anything. I
heard Alan Zimm, the designer of Action Stations was
working with them on such
a project and I heard the
marketing plan was to tie in
with the 50th anniversary of
the attack itself. Kind of a
banzai marketing ploy
trying to sneak up on a
sleepy wargaming market if
you ask me." He frowned as
I uttered the last sentence.
Guess my humor had bombed. My mind
went into a tailspin and I knew I was sunk.
— Groan.]
Speaking of going into a TaleSpin, I suddenly remembered that Disney had just
licensed the computer game rights to their
hot new cartoon series to Capcom. Capcorn is presumably planning on creating a
Nintendo cartridge and possibly a diskbased game. In fact, they even managed to
get the GameBoy rights to DuckTales and
Who Framed Roger Rabbit?. Fortunately,
my captor didn't ask me anything about
that or I would have sung like a
mouseketeer on 'Talent Roundup Day." He
grabbed a large pot of what I presumed
was a hot liquid and prepared to throw it

by Felix Ian Bond
on me if I didn't cooperate.
"Now, what we really want
to know," he glared with a
expression that was even
more hideous than that of a
marketing executive after
he's just read a negative
review of one of his
products, "is what happened
to all those space games?"
I swallowed with great difficulty. "I don't suppose you
mean Star Fleet 2: Krellan
Commander (Version 1.5)?
I mean, they're trying to get
every known bug out of it."
He shook his head slowly
and prepared to dump the
liquid on me. "Did you
mean Interstel's Armada
2525? They've postponed it
until the first quarter of 1991." The pot
moved inexorably toward me. "I can tell
you about the secret mission disk for Wing
Commander. It seems the Kilrathi have an
ultimate weapon. Get it? That's the key to
the secret mission. You have to destroy
their ultimate weapon."
I guess it wasn't a good enough answer. I

was suddenly soaked with more water than
they'd pour on a girl named Bambi on a
"Wet T-Shirt Night." I could have started
swimming except for the fact that the seat
they had placed me upon had started to
rise toward the ceiling.
"Tell us about Wing Commander 2," my
tormentor demanded.
"It's due in the first quarter of '91," I
shouted as my chair rose ever higher. "It's
going to be a stand-alone game and Origin
might be doing a complete series using the
game system." He frowned. The chair kept
rising. "They're working on adding tailgunners," I shouted. It kept rising. "They're
upgrading the technology of existing ships
and adding new ships for this one." I was
ducking as the chair neared the ceiling.
"They're even kicking around the idea of
placing a neutral alien race into the game.
These aliens could either help you under
certain conditions or join the Kilrathi under
other conditions." I scrunched myself low in
my chair and closed my eyes.
My interrogator laughed hideously as the
ceiling opened and I found myself seated in
front of the main bar in the Safe House. "Enjoying yourself?" asked the bartender. I
opened my eyes and realized that Lord
British, Mike Stackpole (of Wasteland
fame), Dave Arneson (working on Bard's
Tale IV for Electronic Arts) and Rick Mul-

ligan (in charge of on-line
games for GEnie) were all
standing around laughing at
me. Sitting upright in my chair,
I tried to regain my normal
stoic composure. I realized I'd
been set up when I started
chasing down this Allen Varney Games
rumor.
"Come on, guys," I complained, "enough's
enough. I'm a reporter, for goodness sake,
not a spy. How am I supposed to write a
column if you guys don't give me the
straight scoop?"
They decided that was fair enough, so
Stackpole told me this great story. It seems
that some of the Phoenix Cardinals were attending a literacy rally at a local comics
book shop and someone mentioned roleplaying games. One of the running backs
for the Cardinals was explaining what RPGs
were to Dave Galloway, a defensive end for
the Cards. "I get it," said Galloway, "I've
been playing a computer game like that.
It's called Wasteland." The football player
turned to Stackpole and said, "Have you
ever played Wasteland?"
Now, normally, you understand, Stackpole would have said something sarcastic
like "Buy a vowel, guy! I wrote the game."
But even Stackpole doesn't get sarcastic
with a 250-pound lineman.
"It's a humorous situation," I admitted to
Stackpole, "but it isn't the kind of stuff my
editor looks for. Couldn't you tell me something about some of those secret projects
at Interplay?" Wouldn't you know it? That
was the second time I ever knew of Stackpole being speechless. All I knew of
Interplay's future plans was that they had
completed a deal to publish European publisher Delphine's sequel to Future Wars,
Operation Stealth as a James Bond adventure. Only the U.S. version will utilize the
James Bond license.
Lord British had news, however. "Good
subjects," he jovially remarked, "I hath
recently glanced a missive concerning the
Worlds of Ultima series. Wouldst thou care
to know the name of the ultimate bad
guy?" When we all assented with good
cheer (some with a hearty "Cheers!"), the
sovereign of Britannia declared that Johann
Spector™ will be the UBG throughout the
series.
As the hour grew late, I asked if my
restraints could be removed. The group of
designers mumbled among themselves and
finally, Lord British proclaimed that I might
be released if I could offer one more bit of
information. "All right, milord! But do not
shoot the messenger, I prithee. One of thy
mightiest competitors doth expect to spring
forth with Might and Magic III in the late
Spring." His majesty smiled as he signaled
the rest to release me. He told me he actually hopes it's a major success.

Sneak Preview

When You're in Command,
Command!
An Intelligence Scan Of Microplay's Command HQ
by Alan Emrich
To the Commander-In-Chief Allied Sector:
Our agent has returned from his clandestine operation
deep within Ozark Softscape. This mission was a complete success (codename "Ranger" has never failed us)
and his G2 (military intelligence) report follows. Note that
this report is being filed while Command HQ is still under
construction (Alpha and Beta copies were examined), so
some elements are subject to change. [End of message].
A few hours prior, back in the debriefing room. ..
"Well, Ranger," the Commanding Officer (C.O.) began in his
usual crisp, no-nonsense manner, "what did you find out from
Operation Ozark?"
"Plenty, sir. We'd better brace for massive telephone calls.
Christmas, Mother's Day, Thanksgiving Day — they'll seem
light to the phone companies once this software is released.
We could be looking at a complete collapse of telecommunications as we know it. An overload, sir. There's more
there than we thought. A lot more. . ." With that, I began to
explain the following:

Situation Report
Command HQ is a strategic level (armies, fleet and air forces) strategy game ("wargame," if you will) of global conflict
in the 20th and 21st centuries. While a plethora of strategy
options and unit types are available to participants (during
both the actual wars and their cold war preludes), the interface is miraculously simple and the mechanics well explained
in the simulation's documentation. With modem play as its
heart and soul, Command HQ can be played two-player via
direct calls, networking, at the same computer or, of course,
solitaire.

Global Perspective

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
II PLAYERS:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

As one views the monitor and takes in the
map-at-a-glance view of the entire world, the enormity of
global campaigning becomes apparent. Where are
the objectives concentrated? Where will the vital maneuver
choke points be? How should one's forces best be deployed and
marshalled for attack and defense?

The world is a big place, and there are four distinct objectives
on the Command HQ geography. Of primary concern are the
two capitols, one belonging to each opponent. Like capturing the
flag in Stratego, capturing an opponent's capitol wins the war.

Logistical Support
Nevertheless, wars are fought, above all, with money. To that
end, the vital economic terrain of cities comes into play. Each
city, in addition to offering defenders a combat advantage and a

place to base one's air forces, produces $5,000,000
per turn. Bases, too, are an important terrain feature.
Similar to cities in that they offer strategic anchors
for defending one's position in addition to functioning as vital airbases in remote areas (which becomes
important when "staging" aircraft to new locations),
bases, however, generate no revenue.

Command HQ
IBM
1-2 (Modem)
$59.95
MicroProse
Hunt Valley, MD

Finally, there is oil. While of no consequence during the earlier
scenarios, oil becomes a crucial element in the modern games. It
is oil that allows the cities to contribute their revenue to the war
effort. Oil keeps the troops marching and the air force flying.
(Ships, however, are all "nuclear powered" and require no oil).
When a shortage ensues and one's reserve is depleted, the consequences become rapidly apparent. While not enough to cause
the collapse of the entire war effort (depending on the severity of
the oil shortage), the "squeezing" effect on a player's war
(Continued on page 39)

Sneak Preview

by Russell Sipe
cording to what kind of damage you sustain. Additionally, there are more visual
clues to damage such as bullet holes, oil
splattering on your windshield, engine
fires, smoke, et.al. There is a more
detailed world in SWOTL. The ground features are much better. Take a low run
over a factory to see what we mean.
Speaking of graphics, SWOTL is the first
game in the series to support VGA
graphics, which means more detailed
planes, gradient skies, etc.
The flight dynamics are more realistic.
This time around there is an expert
mode which gives the player separate
rudder control. By the way, for a real challenge, try surviving a tour of duty flying
the squat little Me-163 rocket plane. It
had skids for a landing gear! More pilots
were killed learning to land the plane
than were ever killed in combat. Landing
a rocket plane on skids? Piece of cake!
Finally, there is a more detailed
strategy game. As the German player
you must allocate R&D (research &
development) points in order to bring experiential technologies (such as jet
aircraft) into being. The German also has
the task of staging his various aircraft
Gruppen within range of where he expects the Allies to attack. The US player
must decide which German industries to
attack (oil, transportation, aircraft assembly, aircraft engine, etc.).

T

o paraphrase the old Movietone

newsreels "Larry Holland Marches
On". First it was Battlehawks 1942
(CGWs Action Game of the Year 1989),
then it was Their Finest Hour (CGWs Action Game of the Year 1990). Now Larry
has brought us another in his boffo line
of hits: The Secret Weapons of The
Luftwaffe (SWOTL).
Think back to the scene in Lucasfilm's
Raiders of the Lost Ark when our hero,
Indiana Jones, dukes it out with a World
Wrestling Federation-sized Nazi while a
Nazi flying wing taxied out of control as
a backdrop. Lucasfilm has always been
fascinated by that plane and their hero,
Indiana. The box artwork for SWOTL (the
full box, not just the painting reproduced
here and on our cover) looks like it
should be entitled "Indiana Jones and the
Secret Weapons of The Luftwaffe". Hey,
those guys in marketing at Lucasfilm

Games know what they are doing, right?
Indiana versus Nazis is a guaranteed
marketing hit. OK, so they got you to
pick up the box and look at it. Next, you
turn the box over and see that while Indiana is no where to be found, the flying
wing lives!
SWOTL recreates the daylight bombing
raids in Germany from 1943 to the end
of the war. In addition to exotic new
planes such as the Me-262 jet fighter, Me163 rocket plane, and Gotha 229 flying
wing, you get to fly other favorites such
as the P-51 Mustang, P-47 Thunderbolt,
FW-190, and last but not least, the B-17
Flying Fortress.
There are numerous improvements that
Holland has made in SWOTL. There is
more detailed damage. Damage is allocated to various aircraft systems and
flight/combat performance changes ac-

In connection with the strategic element
in the game, Lucasfilm Games brought in
one of the leading US authorities on the
Luftwaffe, Dr. Williamson Murray, author
of Strategy For Defeat: The Luftwaffe
1933-1945 as a consultant. In addition to
his expertise in the history of the
Luftwaffe, Dr. Murray also understands
gaming (he is the faculty advisor for the
Ohio State Wargaming Club). CGW was
invited to sit in on a design session of
SWOTL. In addition to "eavesdropping"
on Larry Holland (designer) and Dr. Murray, we were invited to ask questions.
Here is a portion of that session

SWOTL Design Session
Holland: SWOTL will have a strategic
side to it. You will have control over the
production and strategic disposition of forces. Therefore I want to build a simplified
model on how the war economy in Ger-

Sneak Preview

many worked and its implications for the Luftwaffe.
Raw materials, manufacturing centers, the whole web
of interconnected things.
For example, in yesterday's
session you mentioned the
value there would have been
if we could have destroyed
Germany's electrification sys
tem. I want to identify what
those important elements
are so that the players of
SWOTL can target different
sectors of the economy.
Murray: From the mid
1930's on, the U.S. Army
Air Force studied these
aspects of economic warfare
which you are asking about.
These studies were put to
use during WWII and again
studied in great detail after
the war was over. There are
many things that we can
draw on here which will make the game
more realistic.
Very clearly oil was a crucial link in the
German economic system. The problem
was that to get at the oil effectively you
needed a force structure that could attack a wide variety of targets. In 1943
that force structure wasn't big enough.
Holland: What about oil production?
Murray: Rumania had large oil fields
that supplied the crude for the refineries.
[Ed. — The Ploesti raid will not be in
SWOTL, as it falls outside of the scope
of the game.] Oil production in Germany, however, was synthetic-based
(from coal). Great refineries such as Magdeburg processed coal into oil products.
Holland: Were the German refineries located at the coal deposits or was there a
significant transportation factor involved?
Murray: There was a significant
transportation factor. Magdeburg was located away from the Ruhr for a strategic
reason; it was much deeper in the Reich,
making it harder to attack.
I think that if the Allies had started hitting oil in 1943, particularly given the
size of Leuna, they could have done
some significant damage (because the
Germans were desperately short of oil in
1942/43).
CGW: Is part of the reason that we did
not attack the oil in '42/43 because we
were not aware that the Germans were in
such difficulty?
Murray: Yes.
CGW: How do you plan to handle that
"fog of war" question in the game design?

dams were destroyed the
Germans rebuilt them in
summer and fall 1943.
You've got thousands of
workers, huge amounts of
concrete being poured, platforms everywhere. All you
needed was one 500-pound
bomb to blow the whole
thing to smithereens. Not a
single aircraft was sent in. I
don't know how you would
work that into the game, but
the incapacity or unwillingness to return to targets was
significant.
Holland: That will be fairly
easy. The targets are real targets. They have the
capacity to rebuild. I wanted
to put this into Their Finest
Hour [but did not].
CGW: Why didn't the allies
go back to these targets?
Holland: I haven't worked that out at
this point. Certain things, like oil, are obvious targets given the hindsight of history. However, how the Germans defend
the oil could be variable, for example.

Holland: Yes, there is a whole web of
interconnections in the German
economy. That is what I am trying to
work out. For example, oil is important
but harder to hit in 1943 because the
force structure is too small to penetrate
to the inland refineries. Given that, I ask
myself "what other segments of the German economy are linked to oil that could
be neutralized given the force structure
available?". One would be transportation.
The railroads are accessible and are important targets themselves.

Murray: Inquiring minds were required
[but were lacking]. After looking at the
motion pictures from the air of the B-17
raids you see these huge bombing patterns on the ground, such as at Schweinfurt, and you say, "nothing lived. They
beat the hell of the target, write it off'.
[Schweinfurt was attacked again, but not
until three months later]. The problem is
that the allies should have been asking
themselves the question "What evidence
do we have about the capacity of targets
to regenerate themselves after substantial damage had been done?" If they had
asked that question they could have
looked at the example of Coventry,
which is a major industrial center, and
asked themselves "how quickly did the industries and city recover?" Unfortunately
they did not pay attention to the lessons
of history, even their own recent history
in the Battle of Britain.

Murray: After the war it became apparent that the German electric industry
was an enormous weak link. The dam
raids in May 1943 are a very significant
aspect to all of this. If they could have
taken out that third dam, the Sorpe dam,
then the Ruhr would have had no water
and no electricity. [Ed. — 617 Squadron
used skip bombs to take out the
Mohne and Eder dams on May 16,
1943. The attack against Sorpe dam
did not succeed.] If you could work that
into the game it would be good.

Holland: Having just done a Battle of
Britain game, the parallels [with the
strategic bombing offensive against Germany] are amazing. The Germans
needed air superiority prior to the invasion of England. The Battle of Britain
was Germany's attempt to gain that superiority. You can just flip that around to
what the Allies wanted in 1944, which
was essentially to gain air superiority, not
just around the beaches but the whole
area. This is a simple yet striking parallel
between the two periods.

The irony of the dam raids was the fact
that after the Brits took out the two dams
they marked them off their list. The air
forces had an unwillingness to go back
to targets after they hit them. After the

Murray: One of the great ironies of the
war was that strategic bombing by itself
was supposed to be decisive in and of itself in what it would do to the enemy
(Continued on page 123)

CGW: Is it possible that the game could
include a variability on the importance of
oil as opposed to hitting, say, transportation?

The Claws of the Tiger
by Dennis Owens

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
SOUND:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Wing Commander
IBM with 640K
Hard Drive Recommended
AdLib, Roland , Sound Blaster
$69.95
Chris Roberts
Origin
Austin, TX

rom the opening scene with
the conductor tapping his
podium for the attention of
his orchestra to the closing moments of the final mission's
dynamic battle, Wing Commander offers a stirring display of
stylish pacing, stunning graphics,
inspiring sound and exhilarating
space combat action. Pushing the
envelope to the very edges of the
galaxy, the latest in a long tradition of space combat simulations—
stretching back before even
Rainbird's Elite—is a swirling.
zero-G dash through blazing
space cannon, dazzling plasma
blasts and missiles going "zing."
Beautifully designed graphics, a
storyline almost cinematic in
scope, and a musical score alternately inspirational and laden with
the angst of being far from home
and isolated in deep space all
combine to create a stellar warfare adventure in every sense of
the word.
Wing Commander shares characteristics of Star Fleet I and
Deep Space, but surpasses both—and indeed, all space flight warfare simulators—in every way imaginable, from variable views of
the inside of different starfighters, to the explosions of enemy targets, the handling of space flight, and the amazingly poignant
comments from NPCs as the player's character advances or
ends up being demoted.
The soundtrack shifts from location to location, event to event
and even intensifies or lessens during battle, according to the circumstances or to how the solar winds blow.
Wing Commander's fiction seems simple and fairly standard;

the player's character begins as a
rookie starfighter assigned to the
most decorated spacecraft carrier
in the Terran fleet. However, after
the player names his character,
assigns his "pilot" a callsign, and
finds himself in the bar, everything standard about the fiction
falls away. Familiar gaming
devices such as the saved game
(to be discussed later in the article) are so neatly tucked into
the gameplay that, instead of interrupting the suspension of disbelief, they frequently add to it.
For instance, training in handling a starfighter, at which the
character is already supposed to
be, at least, minimally proficient,
is afforded to the player through
the use of a flight training
simulator. Essentially, a video
game within the larger fiction of
Wing Commander (set up in the
bar, no less, a la The Last Starfighter), the trainsim does serve a
valuable purpose. It is there
where, for a bargain price (free!),
the character can ostensibly bone
up on the latest tricks and moves
of the enemy he will be facing
(while the player is, in actuality,
familiarizing himself with the
basics of starfighter flight). But
Wing Commander supports that
fiction, because it is, after all, better to learn in the trainsim than
flying unshielded and unarmored into the teeth of a Gratha.
In other areas, as well, the game ingeniously combines the
needs of the player with the fiction of the character. The barracks area, for instance, is the only location in the game where
the player's game can be saved. Wing Commander allows the
player to access any of the game's eight save positions by pointing and clicking on any of eight beds arranged in the room. Clicking on the foot of the bed indicates that the player wants to
sleep/save and clicking on the head of the bed indicates that the
player wants to awaken/restore. Wing Commander is loaded
with such inspired and player-friendly touches.

Review

These, however, are just the peripheral characteristics of Wing Commander. At its heart, of
course, is the spaceflight and the combat. It is
when the starfighter leaves the carrier that the
game really begins.
The enemy cat-like creatures called Kilrathi
are good, shifty fliers, determined, maniacal
and hostile. In fact, there can be no questions
of politics in Wing Commander. The enemy
are the enemy. They will destroy a character's
starfighter without a moment's hesitation, given
the opportunity. Their starships are powerful—in
some instances, more powerful than any in the
Terran fleet—and their pilots are generally
skilled and well-disciplined.
In combat, combat in that cold, deep, dark
and unforgiving space, ships' engines keen and
wail as they pass. Thrusters hiss. Electrical systems spit as they burn out. Missiles and incoming laser blasts do, indeed, flash as they hit.
Weapons have their signature noises as they
are fired and Kilrathi ships (alas, unfortunately,
Terran ships as well) explode in huge balloons of fire and shrapnel. The action is all bit-mapped and, at least at 16 Mhz and
higher, is smooth and responsive.
The starfighter screen, variable between front, back, left and
right, features all the necessary information: speed, weapons sys-

tems, enemy targets, a type of radar, communications videos (for machines with expanded memory) and, interestingly enough
(again, almost an intuitive design decision), a
display of the pilot's hand on the joystick which
moves in conjunction with navigation and firing
instructions (another "expanded memory"-only
feature).
Although combat is frequent, it is not always
desirable, especially when a distant transport
needs an escort. Lest Wing Commander be perceived as little more than the video game disguised in the training simulator, it should be
pointed out that the valued officer also displays
good judgment. That is, he knows when to fight
and when not to. So Wing Commander is, in
some ways, a strategy game, as well.

After-Action Report
Both George Sanger and Dave Govett must
be commended for their moving musical score.
Further, this is the first of many games to be
released by Origin which make use of branching musical phrases dependent upon game performance, a truly
innovative feature. [Ed. — We call it "subliminal interfacing."]
Thus, Wing Commander is an innovative, intense, graphically
lovely, and aesthetically pleasing game with enough action and
variety to please almost every gamer.

The Human Interface In Wing Commander:
Some Food For Thought
One of the interesting features in Wing Commander is its fictional "campaign". The strategic map of Terran- and
Kilrathi-controlled space gives players a solid visual frame of reference
for where the battles are taking place and how close they are
to the heart of the empires in conflict.
This "strategic situation" is an important element in the game.
Which star the Tiger Claw settles at determines the nature of
the missions which the player will conduct there. Are there
friendly bases there to protect or enemy ones to attack? Is this
a major jump point which must be secured? The significance
of one's strategic location is described at two locations in the
game: in the bar (as the player garners the latest scuttlebutt)
and in the briefing room (where the missions are assigned).
This star map of the Vega Sector represents the skeletal
bones upon which the entire storyline of Wing Commander
hangs. No doubt Wing Commander I! (rumor, rumor) will feature a different sector of space, new enemies which threaten
humanity, and the thread of a new storyline running through it,
giving the game its own life apart from the original.
It is at this point where one must take a good look at the
Vega sector map included in the game, and notice that it is approximately two-thirds Terran space, and one-third Kilrathi
space. The detectives out there will have probably deduced
that there is a reason for this, and they are correct. There is a
"tolerance" factor built into the game. New players, it is assumed (as this game has appeal beyond hard-core flight

simulator fans), will make mistakes early on, fail in several missions, and want to keep campaigning to set things right. It
speaks well of Origin, therefore, to include in their game a certain amount of "beginner fall-back positions" from which to
keep playing. Another indicator of Origin's prediction of what
player skills will average can be garnered from the Mission
Board in the bar. Notice the different pilots ratios of missions
flown to kills scored.
Now, let's talk about the real world. Too many players will
cheat themselves out of discovering the entire campaign game
that is Wing Commander. They do this every time they restart
a saved game after a less than successful mission. It is the nature of many players to repeat a mission over and over "until
they get it right" in order to garner all the medals and get the
better fighters (and wingmen) right away. These people are
missing out on the extraordinary depth designed into this
game!
What does CGW propose for the countless times this situation is presented in these sorts of games? An "auto save" feature after returning home from each mission would do the
trick. Before the mission debriefing, the game would automatically save over that player's previous position, without the opportunity to repeat the last mission. In this way, an "honest"
campaign is assured, and players will have to fight their own
learning curve with the different elements of the game, as well
as the computer enemy in space.

Foreign Correspondence

Over There
Murder and Mayhem
by Paul Rigby

ding), is a sort of souped-up Clue-type
game played in a 3D isometric environment. Using period-style gray-scale
graphics (with spot sound effects such as
taps dripping, etc.), you play an amateur
sleuth who has two hours to solve a
variety of individual murders, all of which
are set in an Edwardian-style house.
Choosing the murder of your choice is
done by selecting a date shown onscreen (1914-1942). One of eight different houses is selected, from one of
four skill levels (novice to super sleuth),
and you can see a mini-portrait of yourself before you dive into the game. (This
portrait can be altered to your liking,
though, via a simplified paint routine.).
During the game you will see the
wandering characters who make up the
occupants of the house, plus the dear
departed lying on the floor. Clicking on
NPCs brings up a picture of the same,
along with their stats, name, portrait and
inventory. You can engage them in conversation in order to ask them about
other people or objects you may find
lying around.
You have the ability to make notes,
cross-examine, and store fingerprints for
future reference. The maximum number
of rooms in each mystery is 64; up to 36
objects can be "active"; and 12-28 characters may make up the cast. After you
have checked out the possible suspects
and murder weapons, you can accuse
someone. Available now for the Amiga
and ST, from UK software house US
Gold, for £24.99.

hen Dungeon Master arrived on
the scene, everybody sat back
and awaited the arrival of the
stream of clones that would surely appear on the coattails of FTL. Two clones
have already appeared in this column,
Xenomorph and BSS Jane Seymour.
Both, strangely enough, removed from
the usual medieval-type fantasy world
and based in the outer reaches of space.
The space race really is on, however, because we now have a third Dungeon
Master clone based in, you guessed it,
the wild black yonder.

W

From UK-based Core Design comes
Corporation, an adventure that places
you in the guise of a Zodiac agent
(espionage a specialty) in the Libra chapter (signifying balance). The latest area
of Zodiac interest is the UCC, famous for
its range of robots used in the home, industry and in agriculture. However, news
has reached you that, via biogenetic research, the UCC is developing the ultimate killing machine. This, of course,

must be stopped. However, such is the
delicate nature of the "problem" and the
importance of the UCC to the planetary
economy, the matter must to be dealt
with in a subtle manner. You must infiltrate the corporation complex, therefore, and remove the embryo which will
herald the arrival of the killer. Only then
will the UCC be persuaded to desist from
their crazy research scheme.
Seen in a first-person perspective, Corporation includes some interesting
natural light effects, realistic movement
(characters "roll" when they move instead of gliding, and turning can be
achieved on a curve instead of the usual
90-degree turn). Even the animation for
monsters/creatures/aliens is smooth and
the graphic and aural quality promises to
be high. Available now on Amiga/ST for
£24.99 and for the PC in February '91,
£29.99.
Murder or Molder, as this game is likely to be renamed in the States (just kid-

Operation Stealth is the second game
in the French software house Delphine's
animated graphic adventure series (the
first, of course, being Future Wars).
You play Agent John Glames on the
trail of a stolen Stealth fighter. After an
excellent introductory sequence (showing
the theft of the fighter by the enemy
pilot), the game shifts to an airport where
the game begins in earnest.
As in Future Wars, the action is very
much reminiscent of a Sierra game.
Also, the command menu still consists of
six options: Examine, Take, Inventory,
Use, Operate & Speak. The good thing
about this menu is that it is sensitive to
the mouse pointer. You can, therefore,
have the mouse pointer anywhere on the
screen and if you press the right mouse
button the mini-menu will always open
next to the pointer.
One of the criticisms of Future Wars
was that you needed to move your char(Continued on page 118)

Review

Flights of Fantasy
by H. E. Dille

Mustafa's boots were two shades whiter from the dust on
the plains of Neraka. A land once green and fertile, it now
lay wasted, its soil parched and cracked by Dragon's breath.
A light rain began to fall, splattering in ugly dark clots,
hesitant to enter the arid soil. Like the gods, Mustafa felt
tears in his heart, tears of remembrance for his home land of
Solomnia . . . and tears of bitterness for brothers lost in the
skies above Krynn. Fear, once a stranger to the Knights of
Solomnia, crept in the shadows of his thoughts, unspoken
lest it gain life. "How easily the Dragon Highlord unseated
me just yesterday . . .," he thought, fingering his Ring of
Featherfall absently.
Rolling thunder clouds eclipsed the horizon. Mustafa turned
to Thew, an ancient Gold Dragon, and began the ritual of adjusting the girths on his saddle. Both rider and
mount sensed the presence of the flying citadel
Title:
within the maelstrom that approached, a
Systems:
monstrosity held aloft by unspeakable magic.
Price:
Developer:
Thew's nostrils flared as the flat stench of the
Publisher:
old Red Dragons reached them, borne on an ill
wind. Mustafa stroked the quivering
flank of his friend, taking care to
avoid the fresh scars, which were all
too plentiful. "Yes, old Thew, I feel
your anticipation. It will not be long."
Straddling the Gold, Mustafa
cinched the ring that bound the
Dragonlance to his saddle and urged
Thew skyward. With two thunderous
flaps of his wings, the Gold Dragon
sprung into the air, his long neck
strained forward to catch a first
glimpse of his adversaries. Mustafa uttered a small prayer, quickly swept
away by the wind whipping through
his hair.
he success of fantasy, in any of
its forms, is often dependent on
wholly and completely immersing
its participants in an alien environment.
Prose, no matter how vivid, requires
readers to visualize and use their imagination to fill the tapestry of fantasy
worlds. Pen-and-paper games provide interactivity, but are even more dependant on the minds of the players to
suspend reality. Computer RPGs, such
as Ultima VI, have become increasingly able to depict believable universes, in
which fantasy players interact (more or
less) freely with the story's world. Enter

DragonStrike, SSI's latest addition to their AD&D gold box line
(previewed in CGW #71). Unlike its predecessors, which
focused upon role-playing and "quest busting," DragonStrike is
a first-person perspective of tactical air combat in the Dragonfilled skies of Krynn (setting of the DragonLance books).

Bo Knows Dragons (Do You?)
Before strapping on one's Nikes and Solomnic plate armor, it's
always a good idea to know what to expect. Fortunately, SSI has
provided novice players with a concise and comprehensive
primer for Dragon riders. The game's manual clearly delineates
how to control one's mount via keyboard, joystick or mouse. Keyboard commands may be customized to suit individual tastes,
and all control modes interface smoothly with the program. For
the most elegant and efficient flight control, this reviewer recommends using a mouse.
DragonStrike
Amiga, C64, and IBM
$49.95 (c.64, $39.95)
Westwood Associates
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA

"Never heard of a Draconian," you say? Not to
worry. Each type of adversary one might encounter is explained in sufficient detail to gather
an appreciation for its strengths and
weaknesses. Twenty separate foes are
depicted, including juvenile, mature and
ancient types of each of the Evil
Dragons: White, Black, Green, Blue and
Red. Each is rated for maneuverability
(turn, climb rate and speed), damage,
hitpoints and armor class. Happily, the
latter categories are transparent to the
player, randomized and manipulated entirely within the program. One does not
know exactly how effective their
mount's bite attack really was. To this
end, one can expect to find an occasional "tough" Dragon who seemingly
brushes a Cone of Fire attack. By keeping damage, hitpoints and armor class
hidden throughout the game, an element of "fog of war" is preserved.
By virtue of their nature, some
Dragons are immune to certain breath
weapons (i.e., Silver Dragons are unaffected by the Cone of Frost from White
Dragons). Fortunately for the player,
each of the good Dragons (Bronze, Silver and Gold) also possess secondary
breath weapons. Although of shorter
range, these gas clouds are most useful
for ridding one's tail of unwanted pursuers. To accomplish this, use the rear
view to determine when an opponent is
"on your six" and closing for the kill.

Review

Simply breathe and fly through the
cloud created by the secondary
weapon. Generally, the Evil Dragon
will not be able to avoid the cloud and
will take damage accordingly. Paralyzation gas is best used when flying at
low altitude because of the short duration of its affect. At high altitudes, opponents under its effect will often
recover prior to striking the ground.

Bernoulli, A Solomnic
Knight?!
There are many similarities to dragonriding and air-to-air tactics in aircraft.
Altitude and airspeed are still the
staples of maneuver. Try to meet oncoming foes from a slightly higher altitude in order to get in a good claw
rake and perhaps dismount their rider.
For this same reason, don't fly too low
into an attack.
Maintaining sufficient airspeed is also
vital to opening the range after an attack. It is absolutely necessary to
open range in order to allow one's
breath weapon to recharge or to be
able to maneuver for an advantageous
position for a follow-up attack. Fuel
consumption, which rarely plays a factor in most flight simulators, is replicated in DragonStrike in the form of
the "power bar," which drops as the
Dragon expends energy to climb or
maneuver. When this reading gets too
low, it's necessary to glide for a while
to let one's mount to "catch its breath."
Speaking of breath, once a Dragon
uses its breath weapon, it takes some
time to recharge it. In terms of game
tactics, this means that the best time
to make an attack run is right after
one's opponent breathes. This is not always possible, however, as one may
face up to nine opponents simultaneously. When so engaged, the
Dragonlance becomes the weapon of
choice, as crossing targets are often
difficult to lead for breath attacks. The
lance may be replaced by a set of
cross hairs, which allow somewhat
easier targeting of the breath weapon, but also cause a depth perception problem for targeting the lance itself.

What's In A Name?
Sidar, a mature Bronze Dragon, will initially accompany the
player into battle against two White Dragon scouts. This mission
should familiarize players with all the mechanics of the simulation and provide a quick decisive victory as well. It is possible to
finish the game while advancing to the title of "Lord Warrior"
within the Order of the Crown, but this reviewer advocates transferring to the Orders of the Sword and Rose as soon as they are
offered (it's the only way to ride the more powerful Silver and
Gold Dragons). Completing the game as a Knight of the Sword

yields the title of "Lord Clerist." while
doing so as a Knight of the Rose
makes one a "High Justice."
Each mission is prefaced by a briefing and some static artwork which, in
VGA, rivals the best in fantasy art this
reviewer has seen. The missions become increasingly difficult as one
progresses through the orders of knighthood. Enemies become larger,
stronger, more cunning and more
numerous. One might be surprised by
unexpected occurrences, such as lancing a gas spore and having it blow up
in one's face. Also, it is likely that experienced riders will see the spectre of
the dreaded Death Dragon rising to
give combat (immune to all breath
weapons and usually requiring several
lance hits to kill). Undaunted players
also have the option of designing their
own missions against up to ninetynine opponents (all of a single kind,
with a maximum of nine on screen at
a time).

The Dragon's Tail
The essence of good interactive fantasy is to provide players the ability to
interject their personality into the character and therefore, develop an affinity
for the persona as a healthy, imaginative extension of themselves. This
reviewer has witnessed pen-and-paper
players lapse into catatonic states or
become manic-depressive at the loss
of a "favorite" character to the ruthless
minions of a sadistic Dungeon Master
(why do you think computer RPG's
have "save game" features?). In fact,
one of the nice developments within
the computer RPG genre has been the
ability to port characters from game to
game so that favorite characters did
not have to be abandoned.
Although DragonStrike does not portend to be a role-playing game in the
true sense, it is interactive and it is fantasy. How difficult would it have been
to allow players to port their own characters into the game? Certainly nothing in the code precluded a Champions of Krynn character from straddling a Dragon's back. Had
this been allowed, players would feel a greater pang at the sight
of the dismounted warrior plummeting to his death, as well as
greater joy at promotions and bestowments of magical items.
Taking those same characters back into a new module of AD&D
would not have been difficult, either. One can only hope for
these inclusions in an update or sequel.
What do these minor shortcomings mean to the success of
DragonStrike as currently marketed? Hopefully, nothing. It is a
superlative and innovative product and it deserves to be recognized as such. It is a hybrid that appeals to both fantasy garners
and simulation enthusiasts with equal fervor.

Industry Update

Fusion, Transfusion
or Confusion
Future Directions In Computer Entertainment

hey call it "The Big Easy," but as
the movers and shakers in the computer software industry gathered in
New Orleans for the annual Fall Conference of the Software Publishers Association, accurate projections for the future were not "easy" to come by. Some
saw the future in optical storage (CDROM, CD-I, CDTV, DVI or Laser Disc-Interactive). Others saw 16-bit game
machines like Sega's Genesis machine
or next year's expected debut of
Nintendo's Super Famicom into the
American market as low-risk means to
broaden the market for entertainment
software. Still others were so optimistic
about the PS/1's fast start in the market
that they felt that MS-DOS market for
entertainment software would get even
stronger.

Merger Mania
There was plenty of talk about a confluence of the video game and computer
game industry. Executives on both sides
are recognizing that both sides of the industry deal with entertainment and both
sides expect that there will be some kind
of conjunction between the two types of
platforms in the future. Allan Epstein of
Accolade noted that video game systems are becoming more capable. He expects more entertainment software publishers on the "floppy" side to move into
the video game market, but observes
that there is still a substantial difference
in terms of audience and, hence, the
types of games that do well. Epstein ob-

served that products which play very well
on video game systems appear "inferior"
on personal computers because of the
latter's use of small screens, lousy joysticks and horrible sound compared to the
larger television screens, hand-held controllers and television sound with the
video game machines.
Most software executives saw the video
game platforms as a chance to "port
down" rather than an opportunity to convert software from video game to floppy
disk. Lt. Col. "Wild Bill" Stealey of
Microprose spoke directly to transferring
computer games to other platforms when
he commented that "All of our current
product is being produced with a view
toward video game and coin-op versions."
Emil Heidkamp of Konami sees the opportunity as working both ways, but he
observed that the straight conversions of
Konami's early efforts did not work in
the floppy market. Instead, he stated that
Konami is committed to developing PCoriented software because, "We really
believe that, somewhere down the line,
maybe in two or three years, PC software
and video game software (possibly with
CD-ROM-based platforms) will come
together on a collision course." Reflecting
on the softening of the pure video game

market, Heidkamp observed that "[profit]
margins are better on PC software [than
on cartridge development], so the PC is
going to continue to be a large part of
the market." Such a statement by one of
the leading, if not the leading, Nintendo
publishers should make IBM computer
gamers breathe more easily. Rather than
perceiving the dedicated game machines
as a threat, Heidkamp urged software
publishers to look at games like Hollywood looks at films (viable products in
many forms: theatrical, cable, videotape
and Spectravision).
This confluence of entertainment
software and computing systems was
variously referred to in the course of the
conference as a collision, fusion, and marriage. In the long run, it appears that a
majority of software publishers hope that
CD storage may bring all the platforms
together like VHS brought the videotape
industry together.

Nintendo Marches On!
While one would have had to have
been exiled to Siberia in order to have
missed the cultural impact of the firstgeneration Nintendo machine, time marches steadily onward. Yet the Big N has
not been sitting idly, in spite of Sega's introduction of the Genesis machine and
NEC's unveiling of the TurboGrafx 16.
Nintendo continues to improve its technology. For one thing, the size of the
game cartridges themselves have increased geometrically. Super Mario
Brothers 3 is a three megabit cartridge

Industry Update

(that's bit, not byte, so you have to
divide by 8 in order to compare the size
of the cartridge to personal computer
memory) and many of the games slated
for the first quarter of 1991 are four
megabit cartridges. The company has
continually upgraded its MMC chips: The
MMC 2 allowed them to increase character size; the MMC 3 chip brought vertical
scrolling; and the MMC 6 chip considerably improved screen handling. The challenge for Nintendo has always been to
remain user-friendly while upgrading technology. At the same time, the company
has always believed that the price point
is critical.
The goal at Nintendo has always been
technology for the masses (millions), not
the few (thousands). Thus, the eight bit
NES system has penetrated to 30% of
American households compared to a
maximum of 23% penetration of computers counting all other platforms
together. Where, then, is the Big N
going? Bill White of Nintendo's emerging technologies group says that in the
near future, we'll see the 16-bit system,
networking (they may call it play phone),
and CD-ROM. In the far future, Nintendo
has not ruled out involvement in DV-I, CDI and virtual reality. The key to making
any technology work according to
Nintendo's formula is relative simplicity
for the user combined with high perceived value.

Apple's Forbidden Fruit
This year's Fall Conference was much
more upbeat than the one in Montreal,
Quebec during the Fall of 1989. Entertainment software sales were up 32% in the
first six months over the previous year
and even conservative estimates place
the annual growth at 18% or higher.
There were numerous companies who
had thought the market was declining
but discovered that there were possibilities for new growth this year. This is
primarily because inventory has been
carefully controlled on the publisher side,
the retail stores have been better about
stocking the shelves and retail prices
have not been as subject to "cut-throat"
discounting to the degree they were in
1989. It is probably also due to the fact
that the floppy disk side of the entertainment software market is predominantly
divided into two dominant formats: MSDOS (65% of the market) and Amiga
(10% of the market). All other formats
are below 10% and declining.
The worst news for some is the fact
that the "so-called" low-cost Macintosh is
"too little, too late." Apple unveiled its

personal computers to shift time (i.e.
bring work home from the office). One
wonders why consumers need audio/joystick peripherals and VGA graphics to
"work" at home.

three newest Macintosh lines at the SPA
meeting, but the new machines were
greeted with skepticism. Computer
garners and home users are not going to
want to buy the Macintosh Classic (barely under $1,000 list price) because it is totally black and white, has no hard disk
(although one can expand it for $500
more) and only offers slightly more
speed (about 25%) than the Mac Plus.
The Macintosh LC (presumably standing
for "Low Cost," though some wags
describe it as meaning "Last Chance")
does offer color and a 40MB hard disk
with 68020 microprocessor and 2MB of
RAM at $2500, but customers will have
to shell out an additional $500+ for the
color monitor, bringing the price to over
$3,000 for a machine many will compare
unfavorably to the IBM PS/1 with VGA at
around $2,000. Add another $1,000 or
$2,000 and it is possible to purchase the
Macintosh Ilsi ("Simply Irresistible," says
Apple). The latter has a 20Mhz 68030
microprocessor, allows implementation
of UNIX applications, has built-in video
support for Apple monitors and comes
standard with a microphone useful for
voice mail and document applications.
However, there is worse news, even for
those who would still consider spending
the extra money to purchase a Macintosh LC or Ilsi as a game machine. It
seems that many developers asked
Apple to include a joystick capacity on
the new machines. Apple refused, one executive allegedly answering, "No, then
people will think this is a game machine."

No Shame, Game Machine
Unfortunately, Apple is not the only
hardware manufacturer (software executives often call them "iron makers") that
is loathe to admit that people play
games on their machines. IBM's Anthony
E. Santelli (Vice President in charge of
New Business Development) commented
on how seven out of ten customers for
their new PS/1 were opting to pay an additional $500 for VGA graphics and how
the audio/joystick accessory was selling
extremely well. Then he proceeded to
state that people do not buy computers
to play games. He stated that people buy
game machines to play games and buy

Surprisingly, one executive "iron
maker" did not "pooh, pooh" the idea of
games on his machines. Though one
does not usually think of games for
"workstations," Scott McNealy (CEO of
SUN Microsystems) indicated that he
would welcome games running under
XWINDOWS on his system. He jokingly
observed that a flight simulator could
probably go "Mach 48" on a SUN
workstation and that the prices were continually coming down. CGW would have
discounted the reference as grandstanding, however, were it not for some additional information leaked to us during the
conference. We were told that DUX Corporation, publishers of the Quintet package of applications for SUN workstations,
is about to establish a Time-Out
Software line of entertainment software
under UNIX. The first two releases are expected to be announced at Comdex.
They will be Ishido and Solitaire Challenge (an upgrade from Solitaire
Royale). The scoring system of the latter
will be significantly changed and the
"Tour" can be customized by the player.

Optical Delusion
Compact Disc-Interactive, the overdue
technology from a consortium of
electronics companies, is preparing
products for "late next year" (yes, you've
heard this before) with the help of ABC
Sports (a golf simulation), Caesar's
Palace (a gambling simulation) and
Children's Television Workshop (a preschool educational experience). Yet it
looks like both this technology and
Commodore's CDTV (Amiga 500 with
CD-drive), which missed its Christmas
launch date, may be too late as AT&T's
new DSP technology threatens to enter
the market and drive prices dramatically
downward. The question is whether these
intermediate technologies have lost their
window of opportunity or not.
Nevertheless, whether the future is CD-I,
DVI, CDTV, Tandy's multi-media
machine being developed in conjunction
with Microsoft or DSP, the future looks
bright for interactive entertainment with
full-motion video, high-quality audio and
a non-threatening interface that may, indeed, fulfill the entertainment software
industry's hopes for reaching the masses
in the millions rather than the technologically literate in the thousands. The future
may not be easy, but it just might be big.

Game Hints

Blasting VUXs, Etc. Part II
Star Control Strategy and Tactics
by Paul Reiche III, Designer
n part one last issue, we examined the Hierarchy Fleet and
presented the Tactical Analyzer
("Greg-O-Matic"). Now we present
the Alliance Fleet and specialized
tactics to improve one's play. Blast
off!

I

time two weapon strikes. The first is
designed to force you to bring up
the shield and the second is timed
to strike just when your shield flickers off. By all means, remember
that your shield has no effect
against VUX limpets!

The Alliance Fleet

The Mmrnmhrm X-Form is a
workhorse. Given its moderate price
and its dual combat configurations,
you can hardly ever go wrong
buying one of these transforming
starships. In general, remaining in
the Y-Wing form is safest, since you
can damage the enemy from a safe
distance, as well as dart off in a
hurry should anything dangerous approach you. Tip: To make a quick
turn, transform momentarily to Xwing configuration, rotate to the
desired facing, then switch back to
Y-Wing form.

The Chenjesu Broodhome is
dominant against just about any
ship, except the Ur-Quan. The main
weapon of the Chenjesu, the photon
crystal shard, is versatile in both offense and defense. As long as you
have the fire control pressed, the
shard will continue on its way. While
it's better to hit an enemy with the
whole crystal, missing by a tad will
still do some damage. Crystals do
not harm the Chenjesu, they can be
exploded at point blank range to create a kind of Ack-ack, which is useful for cleaning off incoming UrQuan fighters or inflicting some
damage on ships which have
maneuvered behind the Chenjesu.
Sometimes it helps to rotate as you
detonate the crystals, because this
disperses them over a wider area.
Whenever you aren't pressed, launch
DOGIs. These autonomous little pests
can really annoy your enemy, especially
if he is a heavy energy user like the
Ur-Quan, Mycon, or VUX. If you are fighting
a VUX and he appears right next to you,
your only hope is to have a DOGI bump
him off-line and steal his fuel to give you
time to escape. Even if you are fighting a
Spathi-class ship, which is generally unaffected by DOGIs, it is a good idea to get
those DOGIs out there if there is any possibility of additional ships appearing in
the battle along with the Spathi. If you do
keep "them" DOGIs movin', your little
buddies will be all over the next ship in a
second, the moment she appears.
Like the Ur-Quan, the Chenjesu is an expensive ship, so protect your investment
with colonies, and give planets a wide
berth whenever engaging a home fleet in
battle.

The Yehat Terminator is a strong, ver
satile ship which can deliver either
moderate damage over a wide area at
medium range or heavy damage at
close range. The distance you will want
to maintain between you and your target
depends on your enemy's kill zone—the
area in which he can hit you effectively.
If your range is superior, don't bother
closing. Strike from afar.
The only trick to using the Yehat effectively is not to grow over-confident of its
protective shield. Often, your barrage of
ion-cannon missiles will be just as effective in stopping incoming threats and
will, in turn, have the added bonus of occasionally striking the enemy ship as
well. Your shield's weakness, particularly
versus the Mycon, occurs during that
period when it flickers off for an instant.
If you are maintaining the shield continuously, this interval of vulnerability is
predictable and a skillful opponent will

The X-Wing form is best at taking
care of the Mycon, because the Podship can regenerate crew faster
than the Y-Wing can eliminate them
with its missiles. The llwrath is also
best dealt with in this form, because
the Y-Wing's missiles will not track
on the enemy vessel when it is
cloaked.
Star Control Trivia #2: When I first
named the Mmrnmhrm, they actually
had a pronounceable name, with
vowels and everything. Then, in a
sketch for the captain's window illustration, I forgot to give them a
mouth. Later, someone saw the sketch
and asked me how they talked, so I
clamped my lips shut and said something like, "mrrk nsss," thereby instituting a taboo on vowels in anything related to the alien race. Though the
Mmrnmhrm ended up looking more
like Daleks than Humans, the name
stuck.
The Arilou Skiff is best played after
drinking 4 or 5 cups of coffee. Your success with this ship relies almost entirely
on fast reflexes and snappy threat evaluation. If you hyperspace away every time
the enemy fires his weapon, you will
never get close enough to unleash your

Game Hints

laser weapon. If you get hit a few times
with any weapon, you're vapor. If you
get a good strike on the opponent's vessel, don't hang around pinging his ship.
Retreat, recharge, and return for another
attack run. If you find it difficult to control this ship with a joystick, switch to the
keyboard. It's much easier.

code. Since then, we haven't had a
single problem. I mean, everyone has
a disk crash two nights before a program is final, right? And hey, accidents happen. Brake pads just don't
last forever! My limp is really not that
bad, and Greg is almost speaking normally these days.

the different suggested tactical
maneuvers to best insure that success.

It is always a good idea to keep at least
one Arilou around in a Full Game to
"pop" Mycons, which should be relatively
easy once you've mastered tactic H, the
"Homing Weapon Ha-Ha." It is also possible to make an uncontested lightning
strike against the enemy, provided he
has forgotten about the Arilou's ability to
move through enemy Forts, and has left
a route to his Starbase (or other key installation) unguarded.

The Earthling Cruiser is a high-tech
expression of that famous ancient
Human adage, "Run away from the bad
guy, pick up a rock and throw it at his
head, then repeat this until the bad guy
falls down or goes away." In other words,
stay away from the enemy ship, and fire
your seeking nukes constantly! Use a
Gravity Whip if necessary to keep your
distance, but be careful not to collide
with the planet.

B = Spathi Charge
Turn and flee. When your opponent
chases you, turn (without thrusting) and
fire backwards. Your effective range is increased, while the enemy's is diminished.
When the enemy tires of this situation,
taunt him until he is willing to recommence the chase.

The trick to using the Syreen
Penetrator is to get close enough to
your enemy to use your Syreen Song
repeatedly, while simultaneously blasting
away with the Syreen's main weapon.
The reason for the combination strike is
to take care of the last one or two crew
members who will not leave the enemy's
ship. Remember that, in the Full Game,
any crew left floating in space after a battle will be retrieved automatically by the
victor. Nevertheless, concentrate on
destroying the enemy ship, not on retrieving his crew (unless it is absolutely
safe). Don't succumb to "crew greed."

The only reason ever to get close to an
enemy vessel is to make an honorable,
point-defense laser "coup de grace", to
eliminate the opponent's last crew member.

Star Control Trivia #3: It was an afternoon late last October in San Francisco when Fred Ford, Greg Johnson and
I sat around a monitor trying to name
the latest ship design for our new
game. The space vessel on the computer screen looked like a copperplated cross between Tin Tin's "Destination Moon" rocketship and a ribbed
condom. Needless to say, we felt compelled to christen this ship carefully,
with due consideration for both our
customers' sensibilities as well as our
artistic integrity. "How about the
Syreen Penetrator!" Fred suggested
without hesitation. Instantly, the
ground did truly rise up and smite us!
WHAM-rumble-rumble-WHAM! We were
thrown around our office like the
bridge crew of the starship Enterprise
under fire by the Klingons. I dimly
remember standing in a doorframe,
watching the room flex like a cheap
cardboard box and shouting, "Maybe
that's not such a great name!" and
"Gee, do you think San Francisco's still
standing?" Of course, once the earth
stopped moving, we blithely ignored
the dire portent, and the Syreen's ship
name, "The Penetrator," was graven in

A = Attack!
Engage in relentless pursuit of your
enemy. Open fire as soon as you are in
range, and maintain until the enemy is
destroyed.

C = C.U.R.R.R.
(C)lose with enemy, (U)unload weaponry
until fuel is depleted, (R)etreat out of
enemy's attack range, (R)echarge your
fuel supply, and finally (R)epeat this
maneuver.
D = Duck Hunt
Sit still and take pot shots at the
enemy's ship as he approaches to attack. If he gets behind you, thrust away,
then turn, slow to a stop, and continue
shooting.
E = Pack o' Hounds
Launch D.O.G.I.s immediately and continuously. In sufficient numbers (a maximum of 4) their interference with your
enemy will give you a strong tactical advantage.
F = Fighter Removal
Put the planet between you and an oncoming wave of fighters, forcing them to
collide with the planet.

Shofixti Scouts are great for colonizing and mining in the early stages of a
Full Game due to their low cost. They
can also be effective against the most
powerful enemy vessel, if they attack in
a squadron of 2 or 3 scouts, and can get
close enough to do near-maximum
damage with their self-destruct explosion.
Three good Shofixti kamikaze attacks
will destroy an Ur-Quan Dreadnought,
eliminating twice their worth in Starbucks.
Shofixti ships can defeat slow or shortrange enemy vessels, if you are very
patient and are content to use the
Shofixti's light weapon from long range
and slowly "plink" your enemy to bits.

Specialized Tactics
The Tactical Analyzer lists the indicated
percentages of success for combat between any two opposing ships in the
game, as explained in part one of this article. What follows is an explanation of

G = Leyland Gravity Whip
To exceed temporarily your ship's normal maximum velocity, pass near the
planet while thrusting in a single direction. To decrease speed, turn and thrust
in a different direction. Warning! This
maneuver can cause a ship to travel
faster than its launched weapons and
may result in a ship being damaged by
its own attack! To avoid this effect, turn
to face backwards (without thrusting)
and launch weapons to the rear. When
traveling at high speeds, beware striking
the planet. If you get caught in the
planet's gravity, don't thrust directly
away from the planet. To escape, thrust
in an outward spiral around the planet,
until you leave its gravity field.
H = Homing Weapon "Ha-ha"
Using your superior mobility, you can
lure an enemy's homing weapon back
upon him. Execution: as you approach
your enemy, he may fire a homing
weapon. Instead of fleeing away from the
enemy, maneuver around his homing

Game Hints

weapon, toward the enemy vessel. Move
to the far side of the enemy ship and
maintain this position until the homing
weapon strikes the enemy ship, then
laugh like this: "Ha-ha!"
I = Bob and Weave
Use your ship's superior maneuverability
to keep the enemy from getting a good
bearing on your vessel. Change course
often. Note: the computer player is less
affected by this tactic than a human opponent.
J = Just Out of Range
Your weapons have a longer range than
your enemy's. Try to stay in your kill
zone, without entering your enemy's by
continuously circling his ship at a fixed
radius.
K = Kamikaze!
You can do more damage by selfdestructing than with your light missile
weapon. The closer you get to your
enemy, the more damage you will do.
On your final attack run, fire your main
weapon as you come in, then
WHABOOM right in his face. If you are
playing against another person, some

kind of scream ("Ai-Yeeee!" will do) or
other expression is recommended.
L = Launch Fighters!
Launch fighters from medium and long
range. For best results, launch a wave,
then turn 180 degrees and accelerate to
catch the enemy (who is probably fleeing) from behind.
M = Maintain Maximum Range
Keep your ship out of danger by staying
as far away from your enemy as possible. Use your long-range weapon to inflict damage on your opponent. If your
opponent is faster than you, consider
using the Leyland Gravity Whip (tactic G).
= Blaze!
Your blazer form is very effective in this
particular situation, so use k continuously, unless your opponent is moving so
fast you can't catch him. Should your opponent have the speed advantage on
you, simply stop and save up fuel. Then,
hope he slams into the planet.
0 = Drop Weapons in Oncoming
Enemy's Path
Maneuver in front of your enemy's line of
travel and deposit homing weapons.

P = Point-Defense!
Your point defense laser can be of great
use in this fight. Remember, it is not effective against powerful missiles, though
can be used to destroy fighters or any
enemy ship with only 1 or 2 crew remaining.
Q = Crystal Ack-Ack
To avoid being overwhelmed by multiple
incoming threats, explode many crystals
at point-blank range while turning. Continue until threat is eliminated.
R = Dodge with Retros
Use your unique retro-propulsion system
to dodge incoming guided weapons.
Jump perpendicular to the path of the
missile, activating your special power at
the last moment before the missile hits,
and only for a short duration.
S = Sing Syreen Song
Your ability to lure enemy crew from his
ship is your most effective weapon in this
battle. Remember, you don't always need
to pick up your enemy's affected crew;
his loss is often bad enough.
T = Bubble Cloud
Travel in a tight circle, launching bubbles

Game Hints

continuously. Stay inside the resultant
cloud until the enemy charges in after
you, or until the situation changes and
you can make effective use of tactic N or
0.
U = Use Both Forms
The enemy is susceptible to both
Mmrnmhrm ship forms. If the
enemy nears, blast him with the
twin lasers of the X-Wing, otherwise whittle him down with the
long-range missiles of the Y-Wing.
V = Limpet Opportunity

Your opponent is especially open to limpet attack. Even if you lose your VUX,
remember that any limpets which hit
remain attached to the enemy ship, so
your subsequent attackers in this battle
will have an advantage.

W = Intercept Weapon
Use your weapon to intercept the
enemy's incoming missile. It is easiest to
hit an incoming threat in the moment
just before it strikes your ship.
X = X-Wing
Your X-Wing form is the most effective in this match-up. Use the YWing form only to escape otherwise unavoidable dangers.
Y = Y-Wing
Remain in your Y-Wing form whenever possible.

When You're in Command, Command!
(Continued from page 14)

machine will almost certainly damage his own morale, in addition to the combat effectiveness of his troops.

Reconnaissance Data
The map is laid out on a huge square grid. Units, while their
larger icons occupy nine squares in a square grid when seen on
the map, only physically exist on their center square (for all you
board wargamers, this gives each unit a kind of "Zone of Control" feel). Terrain includes deserts, jungles, polar wastes and
lakes (which all cause attrition); forests and mountains (which,
like polar and jungle, are all slow growing); plus the aforementioned objectives, plains (i.e., "clear" terrain), docks and oceans.
Finally, there are the player-created nuclear wastelands.

Procurement
As the money rolls in, players are able to go shopping for reinforcements. There are six basic combat units which a player can
build, plus five other specialized units and options. Costs vary
from 5 to 20 billion dollars, so patience (while waiting for one's
economy to generate enough funds to purchase units) is an excruciating must. Time, too, is a crucial element, as newly purchased units take their city or base of construction offline for future purchases for fixed amount of time. Thus, all the money in
the world will not raise an instant armada in a single city for the
player.
Land combat units come in two flavors: infantry armies and
tank armies. Tank armies are considerably faster and serve as superior fighters in the open plains and deserts. Additionally, armor
has the ability to find the hole in the enemy's lines and push
through toward their rearward objectives. Infantry, on the other
hand, is very steady on both attack and defense. When left alone
(Continued on page 41)

Game Hints

Scorpion's Tate
Heretofore Untold, Scorpia Reveals

Warning: Although 'The Scorpion's
Tale" is a warm and comfortable
tavern of the mind with a nice cozy
fire of vibrant images, our resident
storyteller conjures up illuminating
hints about games. If the gentle
reader eschews hints, let him beware!

S

o, here we are, in December.
Fred's given up on finding that
lost month for now. He's busy
with all sorts of holiday preparations
(don't ask . . .). But, he says he'll start
looking again sometime in the spring.
Good luck, Fred, you'll need it. Speaking of looking, this is the time of year
many people look for a warm spot to
spend a couple of weeks away from
the winter's cold. If you're one of
those, I know this great little spot in
the Caribbean .. .
The Secret of Monkey Island, from
Lucasfilm, is the saga of a pirate wannabe, Guybrush Threepwood. Really.
I'll just call him Guy from now on, it's
easier all around.
The game is fairly easy, too. In terms
of difficulty, it's about a step and a
half up from Loom. Much more to do
and more puzzles to solve. Also,

there's plenty of humor in Monkey Island. Basically, the game is played for

laughs and it comes off well. This is a
funny adventure.
The graphics are nice, although not
quite so good as Loom. I now have a
sound card (yay!), and found the musical scores (real tunes, not just sound
effects) to be quite good (the jazzy
jungle beat is my favorite). I have to
admit, real music in the right places
does add some spice to a game.
This is also smart software. It knows
what graphic card and sound card (if
any) you have and activates them
automatically. No tedious menus to
wade through while answering questions about your system. I like that. Of
course, if you do want to change anything, there are instructions for doing
that manually.
The interface is simple, much like
the one in Loom. The best part is that
there is no silliness about "you're not
close enough" to pick up an item.
Just click on it, and Guy will walk
over and grab it (unless obtaining the
item is part of a puzzle). This is one
game where you don't have to worry
about maneuvering your character
precisely around the screen.
(Continued on page 43)

When You're in Command, Command!
(Continued from page 39)

for the
shortest
amount of
time, they
will
entrench,
giving
them considerably
more backbone
against all
but nuclear
attacks. Additionally,
they pose
a wonderful offensive threat
when
employed
en masse
(they cost
$10 billion,
to armor's
$20 billion, and so are often more numerous in battles). While
they do not infiltrate, as armor does when "overrunning," they
can be airdropped a short distance by aircraft units. Popping in
on an ungarrisoned enemy objective or attacking his lines from
the rear is often the decisive tactic performed by the "poor,
bloody infantry."
While there is only one type of air unit (and it is expensive at
$20 billion), these may be based in quantity at
cities/bases/capitols or one may be placed on each aircraft carrier. Air units extend the range of one's spotting capabilities considerably, and can conduct airstrikes, transport infantry and
stage to new bases.
Navies consist of the aforementioned aircraft carriers (costing
$20 billion apiece), surface fleets (called "cruisers" and costing
$10 billion) and the dreaded submarines (also $10 billion). The
carrier, even without an air unit, has a long striking range during
game play. Both carriers and cruisers can pull up near enemy
land units on coastal spaces and "bombard" the daylights out of
them. In fact, spending a few turns bombarding a target near the
coast prior to and in support of invasions is an important key to
victory. Submarines, on the other hand, are nearly invisible. They
are virtually undetectable when not moving, and have a good
sighting range. When they get near a "transport" (any land unit
floating around at sea), they can sink them quicker than you can
say "surprise!" As on land, combined arms tactics work best.

Evaluations And Dispositions
There are five scenarios provided with Command HQ. The
WWI scenario takes the situation in 1918 after the collapse of
Russia, with the Kaiser's armies shifting west for the "final offensive," while the American boys cross the Atlantic to turn the tide.
This game uses only infantry armies, cruisers and submarines
(Continued on page 121)

Scorpion's Tate
(Continued from page 40)

Anyway, our boy wants in on all the
glamor, excitement, and plunder that
goes with a pirate's life. So he ends up
on Melee Island ™ looking for action, or
at least some directions on how to be a
pirate. It isn't long before he finds his
way to the SCUMM (not a misspelling,
but an amazing similarity to the name of
the Lucasfilm parser/interface) Bar. Inside, are a bunch of important-looking
pirates, who saddle him with three tasks
to perform. If Guy can pull them off, he's
a pirate.
Now, it's not the ordinary thing for
pirates to bother with a know-nothing, inexperienced kid. Ah, but these are tough
times for the buccaneers of Melee IsIand™. There used to be a nasty pirate
by the name of G.P. LeChuck. Then, he
died. Now, he's back ... complete with a
ghost ship and a ghost crew. Frankly,
he's making life . . . well ... hell on earth
for the living pirates. No wonder they're
so desperate that they'd take on someone like Guy.

Anyway, Guy isn't daunted in the least
(brave, but maybe a trifle on the naive
side). So, off he goes to complete his
three quests: stealing the Idol of Many
Hands from the Governor, finding the
Legendary Lost Planet of Mag—err, that's
The Legendary Lost Treasure of Melee
IsIand™, and defeating the Sword Master
in single combat. Why, I'll bet he could
do all of that in a single night without
working up a sweat (especially since the
clock is always at 10 PM!).
The first thing Guy needs to do is get
his bearings by wandering around town,
going everywhere, talking to everyone,
and snarling everything that isn't nailed
down. His inventory is bottomless, so
there's no worry about overload. If Guy
isn't sure about what to say to someone,
you can always save the game, even in
the middle of a conversation (handy if
you want to see what reactions will come
from making a smart remark or two).
The governor's mansion looks like a
tough nut to crack. The path to it is
guarded by a pack of vicious, deadly
piranha poodles! Guy doesn't want to get
too close to those. Maybe he could come

back later, with a tactical nuclear device
or something equally effective.
Then again, finding that treasure may
not be so easy, either. There's a suspicious-looking man standing on a street
corner, with a rare map to the treasure.
Of course, he's not handing them (oops)
it out for free. Shovels cost money, too.
Well, how about the Sword Master?
Gosh, seems like only one person in
town knows where she (yes, she) lives,
and he isn't telling. Not to mention the
fact that the Sword Master isn't particularly interested in having a duel, or even a
chat, with our boy. What's a pirate wannabe to do?
Maybe some further exploration will
help. There's more to Melee Island™
than just the town. Back up the cliff path
and past Lookout Point is the rest of the
island, with several interesting places to
visit. The circus, for instance. Now, here
is where Guy can make some quick
bucks, if only he had a helmet. Or at
least something that would pass for a helmet. Then, he could buy the map and
anything else he needs.

Game Hints

Wandering around in the great outdoors, Guy might even find a little something to help with those nasty poodles.
However, there doesn't seem to be
anyone who can instruct him in
swordplay (can't beat the Sword Master
without it). Unless that person happens
to live beyond the bridge. You know, the
bridge guarded by the Troll (so, we know
what kind of bridge it is, right?).
All Guy has to do is give the Troll what
it wants. He (it?) doesn't want money,
which sounds a little fishy to me.
Whoever heard of a Troll that wanted
something useless? But hey, maybe he's
telling the truth (in a game like this, anything could happen!).
Sure enough, once past the bridge Guy
happens on Captain Smirk's Swordplay
School. Fortunately, Guy has enough
money to learn, at least, the bare essentials of handling a sword without cutting
himself into sashimi. However, Guy isn't
quite ready for the big one yet. He still
needs to prove himself in a few fights.
Those are easy to come by and Guy will
know when it's time to visit the Sword
Master. If he can find her.

Remember, only one person knows her
location and he ain't telling. If Guy just
stands there with his teeth in his mouth,
he'll never have his big chance. A word
to the wise, and all that.
Oh, did I mention the prisoner? The
one being held in the jail? No? Well, now
I have (heh). Guy is gonna' have to get
him out. There are no pardons available
and there is no key. You might say this
one's the acid test of Guy's ingenuity.
Well, it's been a busy night and about
to become even more so. 'Cause as Guy
returns from his last task, he's met by
the lookout, with some disturbing news.
Our friend LeChuck has just kidnapped
the Governor (he's had a "pash" for her
for years and being dead hasn't changed
things) and sailed off with her to his
secret hideout on Monkey Island™.
There's only one thing for our boy to
do now, and that's play hero. Shouldn't
be too hard, just get a ship and a crew
and sail off after LeChuck. Funny,
though, how the SCUMM bar is suddenly
deserted, with only the cook left behind.
Wonder where everyone went? Surely
there's someone or other around Guy

can con . umm, persuade into helping
him. As a matter of fact, there are three
people on the island who are willing
(God knows why) to go along. Now, it's
just a matter of obtaining a ship, and we
all know there's only one place for that:
Stan's Previously-Owned Vessels.
Dealing with Stan is, well, a pain in the
nether regions. He's the epitome of all
fast-talking salesmen, so you know what
that means. "I'm not happy unless you're
happy, and I know you're gonna leave
here happy today". (gak) Alas, there's no
way around it. Much though Guy would
rather strangle this twit with his own
words, he'll have to spend time (maybe a
long time, sigh) haggling over the price
of the ship. Well, no one ever said being
a pirate was all bottles of rum and pieces
of eight. Sometimes, you just have to do
some dirty work, too.
Speaking of work, poor Guy has more
cut out for him. His choice of crew (if he
had a choice) may not have been the
best. Once on board, the trio decide the
Governor can take care of herself; they'd
rather cruise the Caribbean and work on
(Continued on page 116)

Scorpia's Column

Scorpion's View
Scorpia Experiences An Altered Destiny

t's time again to look into the crystal ball. I see ... yes, I see
that, at last, the new games are starting to arrive. The
Christmas market is finally beginning to heat up. Good thing,
too; even my crystal ball can't reveal details of a game until it actually exists.

I

Altered Destiny is one of those adventures that leaves me with
mixed feelings.
On the one hand, it is great to see Mike Berlyn (Oo-Topos,
Cyborg, Suspended, and Infidel) back in action again. However,
on the other hand, the game suffers from a few problems that
make it less than a joy to play.

Mechanical Drawing (Hardware and Interface)
The first difficulty I encountered was getting the game to run at
all. After installation, a separate setup program comes up with
menus for choosing graphics and sound. Having a super VGA
card, I naturally chose the extended graphics. The game refused
to boot. All I saw was a blank screen, and no activity on the hard
drive.
For the time being, I re-ran the setup for regular EGA/VGA, but

eventually I got hold of Mike and discussed the problem with
him. Altered Destiny needs a lot of free memory. A lot. Even .
with my buffers knocked down to 15, I couldn't run the extended
graphics. The only way I found to do it was to re-boot DOS
(v3.3) without the high-memory managers (my 386 has 2 meg
RAM). Then, the game ran and I had no further problems in this
area. My Sound Blaster card, by the way, worked perfectly from
the start using the Adlib choice from the menu.
However, before you hurry to re-do your CONFIG.SYS, make a
copy of it. You may find that some of your other programs won't
run without high-memory management. My Deluxe Paint II Enhanced, for instance, wouldn't operate in any of the high-resolution modes (such as 640 x 480 with 256 colors) until I re-booted
my system with my original config file that installed the extended
memory programs.
The real question is whether or not all this fuss is necessary.
The extended VGA graphics (which are actually MCGA) have a
little better resolution than the regular type, but that's about all.
You can run Altered Destiny under standard mode and really not
miss anything spectacular. In fact, while the graphics (either
mode) are okay, in my opinion they don't really do justice to the
many imaginative conceptions in the game.
(Continued on page 66)

Designers' Notes

eff George penned the
story for Bad Blood and
believes strongly in its social significance. This article is
designed to both clarify the
"message" of the game and provide hints for those who have
not yet completed the adventure.

named Dekker (born to mutant
parents), Jakka (a quick and aggressive female hiding a powerful
mutant secret), or Varigg (an immensely powerful, seven-foot tall,
green-skinned mutant). The multifaceted citizens populating the
world of Bad Blood interact with
you in different ways, depending
on which character you represent.
Those who choose to be a
mutant character will have to
pose as a slave in order to move
through the city and will find
most of the misguided townsfolk
to be contemptuous toward the
character, at best. Of course, if a
human character or a human-appearing mutant has been chosen,
the player will have to guard
against showing the slightest hint
of pro-mutant sentiment in a conversation or action, since such behavior results in a swift response
from the military guards who
serve the bigoted interests of Lord
Dominix.

J

Centuries ago, mankind
destroyed his green and bounteous world in a fiery holocaust,
now remembered as the Great
Fires. Yet, neither mankind nor
his world was utterly consumed in
the disaster—both survive, but in
a very different form. Today, the
world is covered by barren plains,
shifting sands and rocky peaks.
Bizarre monsters, hideously
mutated descendants of preholocaust animals, stalk the
countryside in search of prey. The
lakes and seas are slimy and contaminated, though they are still
home to their own dangerous
predators. All that remains of the
ancient cities are crumbling ruins,
haunted by the desperate and insane.
The descendents of those who
destroyed the world are now
divided into two groups—the pure
humans, in towns built from the
ruined cities, and the mutants (or
"mutes"), in their villages on the
open plains. For
generations, the two
groups have warred
with one another
over the limited
resources of this
blasted world.

The Clue Path
Before the protagonist ventures
from his/her home village, the
Himukk (the tribal leader) urges
the adventurer to seek the Oracle.
In conversations with fellow villagers, one learns that the
Shaman of Nivvik
(another mutant village) visits the
Oracle from time to
time. If the adventurer is able to survive the dangers of
the wilderness,
he/she will find the
village of Nivvik and
discover that the
Shaman has been captured by Kejek
slavers. The Kejek are, naturally, an evil
tribe of mutants who make their living by
capturing free mutants for sale to human
slave traders. Locating the Kejek camp, it
becomes the player character's task to
rescue the Shaman. In turn, the Shaman
reveals the path to the Oracle's remote
hut—across the Nivvik lake and far back
into the canyon lands.

DESIGNERS ' NOTES
Inside Origin's Bad Blood . . .

Humans see in
their mutant
cousins—and in
their own mutant children—the end of
their race, yet they need the labor of
mutant slaves to build and maintain their
towns. Mutants, on the other hand, resent
their enslavement to the "purebloods",
and they long for the technology which
the purebloods are rediscovering behind
their town walls. In an attempt to quell
the growing mutant discontent, Lord
Dominix, ruler of the pureblood town of
Yvrium, is planning an assault which
may wipe out the free mutants in the villages on the plains. One such village,
Mardok, will send a single adventurer in
search of a way to stop the war and overcome centuries of Bad Blood . . . that adventurer is, of course, the player's character.

by Greg Malone & Jeff George

Travel Tips
The player's interaction with the many
characters encountered in the world of
Bad Blood is both complex and varied,
depending in large part on what type of
character the player chooses to become
at the beginning of play: a human male

Enroute to the home of the Oracle, one
encounters the terrible Urse, a 12-foot
tall, sharp-fanged bear-like creature best
described as "walking death." A character who is courageous enough to overcome the attack of the Urse will be
rewarded by the acquisition of an
"oozee," a rapid-fire submachine gun.

Designers' Notes

Crossing the polluted lake with the aid
of a rubber raft, which must be acquired
along the way, one at last finds the
Oracle cloistered away. The Oracle sends
the character on a quest after an ancient

Future Fascination
"Filtered through a toxic haze of
iridium, cesium and depleted ozone
molecules, the red sun relentlessly
beats down on the barren planet below.
What was once a flourishing green and
blue world has been replaced by a searing wasteland populated by a society of
sentient beings through whose veins
flow another form of toxic waste ... racial hatred and bigotry."
—excerpt from an early draft of the
Bad Blood story line not in the final version
Not a pretty picture? Definitely not.
Popular film releases like Total Recall,
Road Warrior, Mad Max Beyond
Thunderdome, and Hardware all paint
similar grim destinies for a world which

artifact, worshipped by a cult of fanatics
in Zero Town, a heavily irradiated,
bombed-out city. When the cultists welcome the protagonist into their midst, it
is only to discover that their "idol" is an

old computer known as "the Apple of the
Ancients." In order to succeed, one is
obliged to take this 8-bit "god" back to
the Oracle. Naturally, this cannot
(Continued on page 126)

didn't learn its lessons soon enough to
avert global disaster. Television
programs such as Alien Nation, Star
Trek: The Next Generation, and
Beauty and the Beast frequently deal
with the unpleasant aspects of racial
division and the pervasive
misunderstanding between different ethnic groups. So why is it that many of
the world's filmgoers, readers of science
fiction and television viewers seem transfixed by such depictions of an inhospitable dark future? The fascination
with "doom and gloom" scenarios has
historically been an obsession of organized societies. This phenomenon
hearkens back several millenia to the
psycho-religious visions passed on by
the societies' respective prophets who
universally depicted mankind's eventual
punishment for its blind pursuit of folly.

"Multitudes, multitudes in the valley

of decision . . . The sun and moon
will be darkened, and the stars no
longer shine."—Joel 3:14-15
Bad Blood is one of a handful of
recently published software "worlds"
elaborately designed to give its users an
interactive taste of this desperate,
though adventure-filled, future. Last
year's successful computer game Wasteland established the acceptability of
such a powerful topic in a computer
software medium. Today, Bad Blood
takes that vision another step, as it
foretells a merciless system of social
apartheid set against the backdrop of a
chaotic war-ravaged world we all hope
will permanently remain in the realm of
fantasy and science fiction.

Review

Economic
Mindscape's The Global
by Chuck Moss

ing the opposition. To do this, the player must build up an
economy capable of supporting a victorious military
machine. To do this, the player must manage the flow of
resources and production, moving up to more complex
technologies whenever possible.
The player turn consists of three phases. First is the
"diplomatic" phase, where the players—human and computer—join into "unions," which merge their productive
capacities. Central to Crawford's model are economies of
scale. The bigger the economy, the more food or weapons
one can build per input of production. Unions are a quick,
cheap way to boost strength and also function as military
alliances.

S

inglehandedly running an industrial economy is no bed of
roses, as the folks in Eastern Europe have found out. Still,
programmer/designer Chris Crawford (Balance of Power
and Balance of the Planet) enjoys presenting tough challenges.
So his latest computer game, The Global Dilemma: Guns or
Butter (G/B), permits a player to do precisely that. Combining a
detailed economic model, rudimentary aspects of war and
diplomacy, and a Risk-like feel, G/B aspires to simulate the
dilemmas of "Ceaucescue, Castro, Thatcher" (as the package
blurb expounds to the casual shopper's eye).
Unfortunately, the game—while very good in many respects—
falls a bit short of that high ambition.
First, the good news. G/B is an elegant and fascinating computer game. It is easy to master, with generally superb graphics,
a simple interface, three levels of difficulty and a save-game feature. Crawford has become famous for crafting computer simulations with social and political significance, and G/B is no exception. G/B is intended to force the player into devising economic
strategy and making difficult choices.
In this game, a player must manage the economy of a
hypothetical nation, surrounded by a continent of other similar nations. The geographical set-up is randomly generated, each nation having certain resources within its boundaries. The other nations are led by artificial intelligences, each with its own personality and facial expressions.

The Dilemma (Game Play)
The object of the game is to conquer the continent, vanquish-

Player unions are an important part of Crawford's
scheme. As an alternative to international trade, they exist
for one turn. During that turn, however, the player—human
or otherwise—who proposed the union gets control of all
the players' economies combined. So those who join a
union skip the next step: economic planning.
The second step (economic planning) is the heart of the game
and Crawford's model makes resource allocation simple. A series
of resource inputs (iron ore, coal, lumber) are allocated, via a
flow chart, to be channeled through the production process and
thus make more complex inputs (pig iron, steel). Then, these inputs can be channeled into the production of final products
(swords, farm tools). These, in turn, show up as food production
and military strength. The amount of production is varied by the
amount of labor allocated.
Therefore, if the player wants to make swords, he must allocate
enough labor to mine the ore, cut the trees, make the charcoal,
mix it all into pig iron, and then forge the weapons. At the same
time, he must build enough farm tools to feed the people and,
hopefully, produce a surplus that allows the population, and
hence the economy, to grow. A shortage of one material (e.g.
iron ore) rebounds throughout the whole economy, causing
shortages of everything else. There is no free or black market.
Both the flow chart and a Summary Page display the surplus or
shortage of each item. Players juggle labor to reduce both
surplus and shortages, until an efficient production mix smoothly
fills both the needs of people and military security.
Of course, swords and farm tools are the bottom of the technological ladder. Players can move upward through increasingly
advanced and effective technologies, through muskets and iron
plows, up to cannon and irrigation or tractors and tanks. But woe
to him who shifts technology prematurely!
The next step up in technology is twice as effective as the pre

Imperative
Dilemma: Guns or Butter

vious, but one must keep in mind
the fact that early production
runs are smaller! 200 swords
(firepower 200) can beat 50 muskets (firepower 100), and like an
Isaac Asimov character, you can
be defeated by the inferior
science of your enemies.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

The Global Dilemma:
Guns Or Butter
IBM, MacIntosh
$49.95
Chris Crawford
Mindscape Inc.
c/o The Software Toolworks

The third step is military movement. All the weapons produced
are shown on the map and players shift forces around in order to
attack and defend. There is a strong pro-defense bias to the
game—attacking down a road takes a minimum of 20 "armies"
to succeed, and attacking overland quarters one's force through
attrition, then subtracts ten more points. However, movement between friendly provinces carries no penalty. Successful conquest
is rewarded with shifting borders and increased population and
resources.
At least theoretically, then, G/B is a game of shifting alliances,
macro-economic management and military conquest. How does
it work in practice?

Principles of Macroeconomics
(Specific Game Hints)
G/B has some very basic formulae that govern strategy. Alas,
the manual suffers from terminal cuteness, wasting 40% of its
space in a too-too San Francisco chat 'tween Devil and Lady
God that buries crucial data. This reviewer recommends that
players go through these convoluted dialogues with a yellow HiLiter, picking out the equations and studying them in the context of the game.
First, one must either generate an agricultural surplus on the
very first turn or join a union. Since there is no way to know
one's starting situation in advance, it is a good idea for players
to stay out of a union on the first turn and scrutinize the initial
economic position. If one is in bad shape, rebooting becomes
the better part of valor.
Once in a union, one should play the field ruthlessly. The
primary objective must be to conquer as much territory as possible in order to build a resource base sufficient to support a
large military machine during those inevitable times when the artificial personalities gang up on the human player. It is useful to
pay close attention to who is in what union, because the unions
limit who can and cannot be attacked.
Often, the union dynamics will leave human players unable to
expand. It happens. In those cases, one should simply wait it
out and hope for the best.

Butter (Positive Strokes)
Let's start out with a big hurrah for the economic model. It may
lack certain subtleties connected with real-life economies like
declining marginal utilities, demand curves of any sort, and inevitable waste and "friction" (let alone infrastructure investments
like education, sanitation and housing). It treats human beings as
simple production units to be shifted from agriculture to steelmaking at the click of a mouse. No matter. Even SimCity fails
to present a total picture.
The simplicity, elegance and ease of G/B's economic interface
make allocating resources and charting production processes
quick and easy. The economic model itself functions smoothly
and understandably. The production summary allows the player
quick access to data, identifying bottlenecks swiftly. This part of

Second, players should remember that defense is king. A minimum of 20 armies is needed to conquer along a road, 50 overland. One should garrison their borders with maximum
economy of force, shifting armies around to meet possible
thrusts. Unions generally (but not always) attack only their
declared enemy, leaving you safe and able to concentrate on
food production and resulting economic growth.
Third, players must not shift technologies prematurely! The
crossover point is 340 tons, where it's more productive to make
a higher-tech weapon or farm tool. Since the production curve
will usually lag weapons behind agriculture, one should never
shift until weapons production reaches 300 tons. Otherwise, one
is likely to be pounced upon and overwhelmed.
Also, it is advisable to shift both military and agricultural technology together. No one has a sufficient labor pool to sustain
two-tier technology.
Fourth, mountains should be one's primary objectives in terms
of military targets. They have the most resources to offer.
In short, one should use unions intelligently so that, with luck
and adroit switching, one can build a sufficient resource base for
development. Borders must always be secured. Expansion is
mandatory. And, above all, one must beware the character
"Tigar." He's the meanest, as well as the ugliest.

the game program is a leap ahead of anything this reviewer has
seen on the market, except for Balance of the Planet. Unlike
Balance of the Planet, G/B's model actually allows the player to
achieve positive results quickly. This game is loads more fun.

Guns (Negative Shots)
Unfortunately, the other elements of the game aren't quite as
breathtaking as the economic model, and hold down the satisfaction level. Many players will be concerned about the continent
generator. Since, the player is always placed in the northern
region, invariably between players Gillig and Kublai, there does
not seem to be the randomality one would expect in a game that
is designed to be replayable. This, however, may not be very significant because the continents do not always have the same allocations of resources in the same locations and the opponents
(whether named the same or not) do not always have the same
strength, disposition toward the player or strategies from game
to game.
The second disappointment concerns the computer players. Although Crawford devotes much effort and disk space to these,
they do not seem like very clever opponents. The Als are really
too hawkish to negotiate with
and make irrational alliance
partners. Worse, they almost
never advance technologically,
so joining their unions and putting your economy in their hands
is a dead-end guarantee of stagnation. Worse still, if one joins a
union for even one turn to gain a
brief economic advantage, all of
the player's production levels will
have been reset to the lower technologies of the union when one's
economy returns to player control. [Ed: Crawford points out
that the unions do not advance technologically as much
as human players because the
unions are so "hawkish" that
they are not concerned with
technological advancement.]
Third, the iconography for the economic phase is very attractive, but many will feel that the computer players' faces look like
an 8th Grader's illustration for the Middle School Yearbook. This
is something of a drawback, now, but one should also be aware
that this is the first generation of a "face technology" which Crawford is developing, using object-oriented programming rather
than bit-mapped graphics. It may lose something in the translation in this game, but it is also something of a trade-off. The object-oriented "face technology" allows the computer characters to
have a library of about 100 different facial expressions. To bitmap the same number of expressions would have required over
300K of bit-mapping that would have taken away from other portions of the game. Further, Crawford's tendency to simply
"colorize" Macintosh graphics with fill routines (previously harangued in Balance of the Planet, CGW # 72, p. 19) is also
present in G/B.
Another quibble lies in the dynamics of technology shifts—going
from swords to tanks. This is the really entertaining portion of
G/B: working the bugs out of the system, finding bottlenecks in
wire and pipe production, fine-tuning that military-industrial com-

plex like Albert Speer . . . But the way the game shakes out, a
player is almost never able to afford those shifts until he has a
preponderance of military strength and the tech shifts are moot.
The enemies continue making swords and often surrender while
the player is still at rifle levels. One should never expect to have
two industrial machines battling with tanks! [Ed: Tanks are a
designed ceiling in the game. They are the high point of technology and Crawford believes that having a tank vs. tank
confrontation would be both a failure in play (because
anyone who gets to tank technology should have won conclusively as a reward for developing the technology that
high) and in game design (because the ceiling would be too
low and the challenge would be missing).]
Perhaps G/B's greatest negative facet is an apparent failure of
the game to deliver on its own stated objectives. G/B is billed as
an economic simulator where players can work out their own
development strategies. In the manual, it is specified that a
player, devoting all his resources to food production at the lowest
level of technology, can achieve a 30% surplus. This makes
sense, as allocating that surplus makes for the economic choices.
Unfortunately, the game almost
never gives the player a starting
surplus at all. In fact, the usual
starting situation leaves one with
severe shortages in all raw
materials and in total food
production! This reviewer found
no way to jump-start an
economy or make any choices
about development. The perception is that one must join a
union and hope for the best.
This is definitely true if a player
continually makes choices on behalf of the military-industrial complex. It is sometimes true if a
continent poor in resources is
generated. From this reviewer's
perspective, it is too often true.

Leading Indicators
(Conclusions)
This doesn't, of course, mean The Global Dilemma: Guns Or
Butter is worthless. Far from it. This reviewer thought he hated it
the first time he played. In fact, he thought he hated it the
second time, and the third, etc. However, by the tenth time he
played it, he asked the inevitable question: "If I hate this game so
much, why do I keep booting it up?" Like other Crawford games,
G/B sneaks up on you.
It's a valuable model for demonstrating the connectedness of
things in an economy. It teaches lessons of production processes. It is, frankly, a socialist model, but wouldn't the ultimate conservative game be a free-market simulator where the player sits
back and does nothing? G/B would be invaluable as a classroom exercise. Indeed, to the player who takes the time to
master the quirky system and accept it on its own terms, The
Global Dilemma: Guns Or Butter is challenging, rewarding and
enjoyable in repeated play.
Nevertheless, to be totally fair, it is an uneven product, one
whose military and diplomatic components do not measure up to
its groundbreaking economic model. In a classroom, G/B would
probably get an A+ for effort, but an overall B+ in result.

Contest Results

iggin

Hill. Middle Wallop. Thorpe
Abbotts. Duxford. North Weald.
Seething. The English have such
great place names. They are fun to read
and even more fun to pronounce. These
names have character. These names
have "history". But we're getting ahead of
ourselves.

B

Earlier this year, Lucasfilm Games
and Computer Gaming World co-sponsored a nationwide Their Finest Hour:
The Battle of Britain Tournament.
Hundreds of entries from all over the U.S
and Canada were received.
In the first round, contestants were
asked to submit a disk containing a file
for a pilot of their creation who had
amassed a minimum of 1000 points in
the game. From these disks 100 were
randomly chosen to compete in the semifinals.
The 100 semi-finalists were required to
submit: 1) a winning campaign commanding the RAF and 2) a custom mission flying any of the Luftwaffe aircraft. A
"winning campaign" could be ac-

complished in one of two ways: 1) survive until September 16, 1940 (thus
postponing Hitler's Operation Sea Lion);
or 2) defeat the Luftwaffe to the point
where the German pilot or aircraft resources fall below the minimum level and
they can no longer continue their air assault. The contestants with the five
highest scores went to the finals.

Roger Besaw prevailed with 1335 points
(but only by the skin of his teeth). Mike
Griffin came in a close second with 1300
points. The ironic thing is that Mike
"choked" on his own mission, a mission
which he said he could "fly in his sleep".
Unfortunately, he wasn't allowed to sleep
during the finals! Just kidding, Mike. War
is hell!

The five finalists were: Roger Besaw
(Columbia, MD; who played his final
round at Software Advantage, Rockville,
MD); Mike Griffin (Lubbock, TX; played
final round at Walden Software); Steve
Piotrowski (Willowdale, ONT, Canada;
played at Beamscope); Steve Smith
(Bloomfield, NJ; played at Walden
Software, Paramus, NJ); and Vaclav Ujuk
(Hermosa Beach, CA; played at Super
Computer Center, Torrance, CA).

Here are the six missions with Tournament winner Besaw's comments in
quotes.

Each finalist flew the five custom missions designed by the finalists (including
their own), as well as a mission created
by Their Finest Hour designer Larry Holland.
The competition was fierce and tense.

In JIM2 you fly a Bf109 with two ace
wingmen with orders to fly CAP (freeranging). A second German crew was
also in Bf109s flying free-ranging CAP. A
third German flight group was made up
of 3 JU88s with pretty decent crews.
Their orders were to perform a level
bombing attack on Dover CHL radar station. Your forces were opposed by three
flights of British fighters. Since the custom mission design utility allows you to
assign "waves" to each flight (i.e. when
all the planes in a flight are shot down
the computer generates another "wave"

Contest Results

of the same flight) there could be up to
37 British planes opposing you in this
mission. "This mission wasn't that difficult. You didn't get harassed that bad. I
picked off fighters on the way home."
In SWEEP1 you fly a Bf109 with a
novice wingman. Your orders are to fly
free-ranging CAP. You are opposed by
three flights of Spitfire Mk2s. A maximum of 13 enemy fighters could appear
via activating the "waves". "This mission
was a little tough. You have to fly with a
novice wingman, which puts you in
greater peril. You have to watch your fuel
and ammo on this one. You are a long
way from your base."
In TOUGH2 your task is to dive bomb
Ventnor CHL radar station. You have a
lone Ju-87 Stuka bomber and are opposed by two flights (two planes and two
waves each) of Hurricane Mk1s. "The Ju87 is slow and vulnerable. As soon as I
detected the fighters I climbed to gain superior altitude. You had to engage the
enemy fighters, you could not succeed in
this mission unless you took out the Hurricanes. This became a battle of tactics.
You attempt to turn inside the computercontrolled Hurricanes using good deflection shooting. You have to pick your
shots carefully. I enjoyed this mission."
In LORDHAHA (Roger's mission) you
fly a lone Bf110 Messerschmitt. Your rear
gunner is a novice. Your task is to strafe
and bomb Stanmore Fighter Command
HQ. You are opposed by four flights of
Hurricanes and Spitfires. Two of the
flights start on the ground (one at
Hornchurch and one at Northolt). The
other two flights patrol areas that you fly
through on your way home. "You had to
fight your way in and fight your way out
in this mission. To accomplish your mission meant flying low over the target.
The initial British fighters would be low
(having started on the ground). The later
flights were at altitude patrolling your likely flight path home."
WINNER (a pretentious mission name if
ever there was one) was the odd mission. "It should have been thrown out,"
said Besaw. You fly an HE-111 bomber
with orders to bomb three targets (Dover
CHL, Hawkinge, and Lympne). Two
flights of enemy fighters were simply ordered to land (making them sitting ducks
for the pilot who stumbled upon them, or
knew where to go look for them). One
flight of Spitfire Mk2s flew CAP (ignore attack).
SUICIDE was Larry Holland's mission.
True to its name, the mission starts with
two flights of Spitfire Mk2s right on top

of you. Thanks a lot, Larry. We wonder if
he would have been this' cruel if he had
to compete against the mission? You fly
a Bf110 with a strafing and bombing mission (Dover CHL radar) but 6 Spitfire
Mk2s (top aces all) are on you from the
start. "I knew this was Larry's mission
right from the start."

Roger and his guest (his father) were
treated to an 11-day Aviation Buffs' Tour
of England as the tournament champion.
He was accompanied by CGW
Editor-nChefRuslSpadMr.ie

The tour had a dual emphasis. On the
one hand we were there to celebrate the
50th Anniversary of the Battle of Britain
(1940). On the other hand, we visited
many airfields and sites associated with
the American 8th Air Force, where the
emphasis was on events in 1943-1944.
The tour encompassed airfields,
museums, airshows, and non-aviation
sightseeing (such as visits to Blenheim
Palace, Wilton House, and Winston
Churchill's burial site).
Our tour guide, Bob Reynolds, was a
Lancaster bomber pilot during the war

Contest Results

and lived in the London area during the
Blitz. His stories and observations made
the tour come alive for us. Additionally,
the people that lived in the areas we
traveled often had fascinating wartime
stories to tell as well.
Many Americans have their stories of
what life was like on the "Home Front",
and those stories are often fascinating.
But when you listen to the English tell
their stories about the war you realize
that their "home front" was The Front.
For example, when we were in London on September 15 for the 50th Anniversary Celebration, we had a fantastic vantage point standing on the
Waterloo Bridge to watch the 50th
Anniversary Battle of Britain
fireworks show (complete with air
raid sirens and search lights).
From our vantage point the dome
of St. Paul's Cathedral stood out
against the night sky across the
Thames with the fireworks
mimicking the Battle bursting
seemingly all around the church. But
(Continued on page 114)

Survey

Re-Sounding
Personal
Computers
A Sound Board Buying Guide
by Rich Heimlich

Rich Heimlich is President of TSCS,
Inc., a quality-assurance testing firm
that specializes in entertainment
software.

C

omputer gaming on the IBM continues to enter new realms of discovery and fascination. With the
advent of VGA graphics and the seemingly endless capabilities of CD-ROM, computer gaming has taken a giant step forward. Improved sound via new sound
cards has led the way in these longawaited changes. The problem is fast becoming not why to enhance the sound
ability of one's PC, but which card to buy
in order to do so. Here are some observations that may help.

The Wondrous Days Of
Yesteryear
In the early days of PC sound cards
(circa 1988), the world openly accepted
the only card available at an economical
price: the AdLib card, along with its Personal Computer Music System software.
The AdLib promised no more annoying
beeps and boops emanating from computer games and did this so well that,
even today, it is still considered the standard in affordable sound cards.

Sierra Online, makers of the popular
King's Quest series, helped lead the way
in bringing incredible sound to the IBM
computer. They not only supported the
AdLib card but also the Roland MT-32
and IBM Music Feature Card. Other
developers caught on and it has become
the standard to find games enhanced by
quality sound board support.

Scripting An AdLib
The AdLib card has remained virtually
the same since it came out in August,
1987. It is based on a technology called
FM synthesis, provided by an integrated
circuit chip from Yamaha which uses
FM sound. Basically, this chip provides
11 "voices" or channels of sound, meaning that the card can play 11 instruments
at one time as compared to only the
single instrument on a standard PC
speaker. Of the technologies represented
in the sound cards available today, FM
synthesis is the least expensive method
of generating quality sound. AdLib cards
also come with a quarter-inch stereo
speaker jack (soon to be changed to an
eighth-inch mini jack) for headphones or
speakers, and a dial so that you can adjust the volume. AdLib has also made it

possible for the card to play back
recorded sounds called "digitized
samples" in an acceptable 6-bit format.
An AdLib card can be purchased in
stores for about $100 or less and includes AdLib's Juke Box program. For
those interested in music composition,
one can also get the Personal Computer
Music System which consists of the
AdLib board, Visual Composer (a composition program), Composition Projects,
and Juke Box. The PCMS retails for $219.

Roland (MT-32) Blows His
Horn
As the market for sound enhancement
products grew, other manufacturers
created their own boards. One of the earliest AdLib competitors was the Roland
MT-32. The MT-32 is a familiar product
in the professional music industry.
Musicians typically write many songs
using an MT-32 and software like Sequencer+ from Voyetra. Roland also has sold
far more of these cards than any of its
competitors. However, most of these
cards are used by musicians as opposed
to gamers. Roland realized that this card
could be adapted to the gaming environment and, with a little help from Sierra,

patible. Since this compatibility
is completely transparent, a
game which supports an AdLib
supports the Sound Blaster
whether it knows it does or not.

entered the market when King's Quest
IV came out. The MT-32 is based on
MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface), a standard already established in
the music industry. It uses a technology
known as linear Arithmetic Synthesis
which enables the MT-32 to generate 32
voices of sound. Not only does the MT32 have 21 more voices than an AdLib
card, but it also benefits from the superior LAS technology. This allows for the
most realistic sound available in computer gaming today. The MT-32 is like
having a complete orchestra in your computer. It is so impressive that when this
reviewer recently played Space Quest III
using an MT-32, his jaw almost dropped
to the floor. The experience is like living
a dream. Unfortunately, all this technology does not come cheap. The MT-32
(with an exterior box), and another
Roland sound card, the LAPC-1 (which is
strictly an internal card) cost about the
same at $595 retail (although one can
purchase a Roland for $550 direct from
Sierra).

Having A Blast With Game
Blaster and Sound Blaster
Two of the newer cards on the market
are from Creative Labs. They are the
Game Blaster and Sound Blaster.
Game Blaster was an attempt to compete with AdLib by providing acceptable
sound quality at a much lower price. The
problem with the Game Blaster is that it
does not meet acceptable quality standards. Developers have supported it in
some titles, but all of these titles support
the better FM synthesis technology more
efficiently.
Sierra, one of the developers to support the board, suggested that Game
Blaster was not quite what everyone was
looking for and strongly requested some
guidelines for a new board. (Sierra is
very serious about sound support.) Enter
the Sound Blaster. This new card personifies the expression "
bigest-anforhuck."Fistdemo,uh
same FM synthesis chip as the AdLib
board. Hence, it is fully AdLib com-

The Sound Blaster also comes
with everything you need to
record and play digitized sound
effects and voices. The card is
also capable of handling the better sounding 8-bit samples more
prevalent today. AdLib's 6-bit
samples sound quiet and tinny
compared the 8-bit samples. The Sound
Blaster also has text-to-speech capability
and can read ASCII text files back to the
user. Another important benefit of a
Sound Blaster is the built-in game port,
thus saving a slot and some money. One
word of caution, however, is that this port
is not "386 aware" yet. Thus, it may not
be useable in faster 386's. The joystick
port can be disabled so that a separate
game port can be used. The Sound
Blaster is also MIDI-compatible and an optional MIDI package can be purchased
(should one wish to compose directly
from a musical keyboard). This reviewer
has found this board in stores for around
$179, which includes many programs
that give you complete control of every
part of the board.

About The Others
Since the inception of quality PC-based
sounds, other cards have come and, in
some cases, already gone. Covox has

developed a few products like Speech
Thing, Sound Master, and Voice
Master. The Voice Master is used by
quite a few developers to record digitized
voice samples. The other products have
had minimal support, at best. Also in this
category is the Innovation card which
never really had a chance and M-Sound
which has an interesting history in and of
itself.
Advanced Gravis, makers of excellent
gaming peripherals, bought a company
called Mountain Sound, who were
developing a product called M-Sound.
Developers interviewed described the MSound like it was a dream come true.
The problem was that nobody had actually seen one yet. M-Sound was supposed
to provide CD-quality sound with 32
digitized voices and was to be AdLib compatible. When M-Sound finally showed up
in developers' hands, not only wasn't it
AdLib compatible but it also only supported 4 digitized voices! Beyond this,
the original price was reported to be
under $100. It is now selling for as much
as a Sound Blaster. A major discount
software chain apparently bought
thousands of the boards and appears to
be contacting developers in hopes of getting them to support M-Sound.

Counting Your Money
Making the decision as to which sound
board to buy can be a trying experience.
(Continued on page 91)

Review

Stormovik Over Europe
Electronic Arts' Stormovik: SU-25 Soviet Attack Fighter

.
A

by Stanley R. Trevena

the Cold War thaws, the
world is faced with a new
crisis. After all, now that the
Soviets are suddenly "on our side,"
we need a common enemy, a bad
guy to rally against. Does Saddam
Hussein have the muscle to really
stand up against the combined
might of the U.S. and U.S.S.R.? As
it is, perestroika and glasnost have
already affected the movies we
watch, the books we read, and
now, the games we play. Tetris
was only the start of this Soviet invasion. Now, Electronic Arts is asking the gamers of the United
States to fly the friendly skies of
the Soviet Air Army in Stormovik:
SU-25 Soviet Attack Fighter (Stormovik).

central Germany. Once the time
period is chosen, the pilot is given
a selection of missions. There are
ten missions for each year of the
war, along with one practice mission (free flight).
The mission objectives are given
and an approximation of possible
opposition strength is presented to
the pilot. This information is very
important to players in the next
phase, arming one's aircraft.
The SU-25 can carry five tons of
ammunition. There are ten
hardpoints on the SU-25 and the
symmetry of the weapons load is
very important to a successful conclusion of a given mission. The
hardpoints are numbered one to
ten from the left wing tip to the
right. The "Q" key cycles choices
toward the fuselage, and the "W"
key cycles out toward the wing
tips. For example, starting at the
left wing and pressing "Q" repeatedly would cycle through hardpoints
1, 10, 2, 9, 3, 8 . . . etc ... This
may not seem of great importance
until one flies his/her first mission
and finds that he/she is cycling
through hardpoints unnecessarily
because of sloppy preparation. For
those who have few preferences in this
regard, there is always a mission default
weapons load that can be selected.

It seems, in the alternate history
associated with this product, that
perestroika and glasnost are
having a negative effect on the
profitable business of war. Thus,
there is a group of individuals who
have formed a partnership to bring
life back to the war effort. These
dissidents come from the upper
ranks of national defense industries and will use whatever
tools are at their disposal to destabilize relations between East and
West. The tool of choice is terrorism and
the recruits come from such training
grounds as the U.S. Central Intelligence
Agency, the National Security Agency,
the KGB, and the Secret Police. These terrorists are well supplied with the latest
weapons from both sides. The player's
role is to mount a counterattack on the
terrorists that are responsible for border
skirmishes during the reunification of Germany. Failure to quell this violence could
pull the world into World War III.

Stormovik supports CGA, EGA, MCGA,
VGA, and Tandy 16 color graphics. The
SU-25 can be controlled via the keyboard, mouse, or joystick. Two settings
are provided for mouse users: standard
and high-resolution. I found that my
Logitech mouse was a little too sensitive
for the game, especially at low altitudes.
Keyboard control is adequate, but most
will find that the joystick provides the
The player must first enlist in the elite
best overall control. Further, computer
Red Guard Strike Force. There are four
gamers are strongly advised to run Storempty slots in the roster for new pilots.
movik on the fastest machine they can find. It takes at least 8
The player enters his name and has the option of adjusting his
Mhz to speed this program along efficiently. Fortunately, there is
rank. Rank directly affects the type and amount of weapons alloan option in the setup menu to adjust the
cated to the player's plane. Then one selects
level of detail in the program. This can coma time period in the German Reunification
TITLE:
Stormovik: SU-25 Soviet Attack Fighter
pensate somewhat for a lack of processor
Conflict: 1991, 1992, or 1993. Each year inSYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
speed. Finally, enhanced sound support is
$49.95
creases in difficulty as the front line of the war
DESIGNER:
Paul Grace
provided for AdLib and Tandy sound.
advances from the Polish border toward
PUBLISHER:

Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

(Continued on pa ge 70)

Computer Gaming World's
See Reader Input Device on page 124

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem-solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first-person perspectives of
real-world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take an alter ego
through a storyline or series of
events.
Role-Playing Adventure (RP):
Adventure games that are
based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.
Games are often listed in more
than one category. In this
case, the first listed category is
considered primary. In order
to be recognized as the 'Top
Game" in a given category, a
game must be listed as being
primarily of that specific type.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games in
CGW's Hall of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated by
our Readers
over Time.
They are Worthy
of Play by All.

Scorpia's Column

Scorpion's View
(Continued from page 46)

The music, however, is very good. As I mentioned in my other
article ("Scorpion's Tale"), the right music can add much to the
enjoyment of game play, and the tunes here are just right. Eerie,
lively, ominous, or dramatic, the music is well-matched to mood
and circumstance.
You do need a sound card, though, to hear the music at its
best. I inadvertently hit the wrong choice during the initial setup
and found that the PC speaker just doesn't cut it.
The interface is essentially the same as that in Search For The
King: you use the mouse or arrow keys to move the main character around the screen and type in commands on the keyboard.
This brings me to my next complaint.
Many times it was necessary to do a lot of intermediate
maneuvering to get the character from one spot to another on
the same screen. Click here. Click there. Now, click somewhere
else to get him where you want him to be. Further, it was also
necessary to be practically on top of an object before it could be
picked up, or those dreaded words "you're not close enough"
would appear.
This is ridiculous and frustrating. As The Secret of Monkey Island amply demonstrates, it is perfectly possible to program the
character to move intelligently. Click where you want him to go,
and he walks there on his own, avoiding intervening obstacles
such as trees or tables. Tell him to pick something up, he walks
over and picks it up.
Of course, this does not apply when getting somewhere or obtaining an item is part of a puzzle. However, most movement in
these games is just going from one place to another, and should
not require intricate maneuverings. The same holds true for acquiring objects. Getting them shouldn't be an exercise in exasperation as you try to move the character to the proper position.
Inventory management is important in this game. While the
manual doesn't say so explicitly, P.J can carry a maximum of
only seven items at once. This can be a real nuisance at times,
requiring much running back and forth (or even restoring the
(Continued on page 92)

Review

Crime and Punishment
Paragon Software's The Punisher
by Charles Ardai

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

T

The Punisher
IBM
$39.95
Andy Miller, Glenn Dill,
Ann Gruss, and Mark Serernet
Paragon Software
Greensburg. PA

here are two New Yorks.

One of them is a lot bigger,
nastier, and more colorful
than the other. One is the New
York of the movies, of television
cop shows, of Andrew Vachss
novels, and of comic books like
The Punisher. The other is the
place I live. I'm not going to say
which is which. At least, not right
away.
Not too long ago, I spent a night
lurking in some of the darker doorways of Times Square. Around
midnight, I saw a man get
mugged at the point of a butterfly
knife. I didn't do anything but
watch. The man didn't get knifed. Neither did I. The mugger got
away with it and I'm absolutely certain he has committed the
same crime since, probably many times. If he hasn't knifed
anyone yet, eventually he will. That's New York.
Yesterday morning, just after dawn, I walked down by the
Bowery. There were bodies sprawled on the sidewalks and in the
street like your worst nightmare of an urban battlefield. The air
was heavy with the stink of evaporated alcohol and hazy with a
mix of marijuana smoke and pollution. There were old men with
grey beards and wrinkled fingers in the gutters, riding the hard
drugs in their veins, wincing behind closed eyes. Some of them
never woke up, I expect. That's New York, too.
Then, today, I booted up The Punisher, Paragon Software's
computer game riff on characters and themes from the
much-in-demand Marvel comic book (now a major motion picture, they
tell me). In the game, I wore the gloves, boots, and ammo belt of
a self-styled uber-vigilante named Frank Castle, whose mission in
life (ever since the brutal murder of his family at Mob hands) is
to rid New York of its criminal element. From a safe seat fifteen
stories above the street, I iced drug dealers with relish, raced
through the best and worst of New York neighborhoods, traced
the drug scourge to its source and faced off with the kingpin himself, a huge juggernaut of a man—part Sydney Greenstreet, part
Satan—appropriately named 'The Kingpin.'
When I left the computer, I felt good. Why? Because The
Punisher is wish-fulfillment of the highest order, a Death Wish
revenge fantasy mixed with an honest cry from the gut for justice. Here, in the Punisher's character, is a man who doesn't have
to shrink into doorways rather than confront criminals. Here is a
man who is doing something to change the conditions that put

men and women on the streets in the Bowery.
The things the Punisher does are stupid, even insane—they would accomplish nothing in the real
world other than to get Frank Castle killed, and
quickly at that. Still, the idea, the fantasy, is an
extremely attractive one.
For real New Yorkers dealing with an
all-too-real "unprecedented orgy of crime" (as the game's manual puts
it), The Punisher scratches some major itches. So, I predict
strong sales of The Punisher in urban areas around the country,
for reasons of catharsis alone.
The real question, however, is whether the game will have
much to say to people who do not have their own Punisher complexes implanted in them by their environments. In other words,
the question is not only "Will it play in Peoria?", but "Will it play
anywhere outside Manhattan?" The answer is a qualified "yes."
Not only is there no one so isolated as to be entirely untouched
by crime and not only does the wide appeal of The Punisher
comic books promise a similar appeal for the game, but
Paragon Software has wisely crafted its product in such a way
as to attract the widest possible audience.
For players who like top-down, combat-heavy RPG's, there's
some of that. For players stuck in an arcade-action mode, there
are first-person car chases and side-view underwater battles. For
comic fans there are comic book-style narrative panels to introduce key points in the story.
For sensualists, Paragon offers really fine animation and
digitized sound. For strategists, there are "macrogoals" (getting
to the Kingpin, maintaining good relations with the police, keeping the battle van in good shape, etc.) which sometimes dictate
sacrifices in individual action sequences.
For die-hard garners, Paragon has an eight-dollar "Eternity
Disk" containing fifty extra missions and a do-it-yourself construction kit. There's something for everyone, all presented with consummate skill and agreeable flair. (Such touches as the freedom
to drive up on sidewalks and make on-a-dime U-turns show the

Review

designers' commitment to creating a comic book level of excitement.)
So, why do I say a "qualified" yes? Because for all the excellence of the design, the game feels rough-hewn. Controls, especially, show insufficient forethought. Generally good graphics are
occasionally wretched. The anti-piracy gambit is the most annoying one I have yet encountered. Worst of all, the product still
seems to have bugs in it, not to mention errors of fact. (For instance, Carl Potts is credited prominently as the "creator of The
Punisher", when devotees know that the credit should go to
Gerry Conway and Ross Andru, who created the character in
issue #129 of Spider-Man.)
To take these in order:
Control Freaks: There are three types of action sequences, as
described above. The underwater battles only take place when
the Punisher has to track criminals down on the fringes of Manhattan—in other words, infrequently. The action is enjoyable, if
rudimentary. One swims until the computer decides one has
swum far enough, dispatching villains along the way with a big
knife.
The problems crop up in the car chases (getting to the scene
of a crime) and the top-down (carrying out a mission) segments.
In the former, one has to get out of driving mode in order to use
the van's weapons, then select from among the three weapons
(guns, grenades, and smokescreen), and then fire. This threestep process takes a lot of getting used to and never really becomes natural. Too often, one ends up with a smokescreen when
one wants a grenade, or vice versa.
Similarly, there is a segmented combat process outside the
van: one selects a weapon from inventory, loads it (as necessary), and fires/uses it. Too often, a player will forget which
weapons he has and whether they are loaded, and the middle of
a gun battle is no time to be checking one's inventory. Paragon
recommends "jotting down key data," but this is hardly a solution
since the data in this game changes so quickly.
The problem is complicated when the Punisher has to use a disguise to enter a hood's lair—then the player must remember to
drop the disguise before trying to fire a weapon, since it won't
work otherwise.
Movement is relatively smooth and, all in all, the sequences are
enjoyable—it's just that the controls never become transparent. A
less cumbersome combat process would have made the difference between a game that one wants to make excuses for and
a game that one could recommend without reservation.
Graphic Violence: One has a similar resistance to recommending the game on the basis of its graphics. After a gorgeous (if
oddly colored) opening sequence, the game's images are generally undistinguished. Buildings speeding by look like buildings; little
effort has been made to make New York's landmarks stand out.
Character animation is excellent in the underwater sequences,
but the environment is completely bland. The top-down graphics
in the mission segments are off-the-rack stuff—attractive, but imitative of any number of RPG's.
What will bother Punisher fans the most, however, is the
violence that has been done to their hero. Frank Castle is often
shown in the comics to have a certain madness about him, but
the game takes unjustified liberties, painting him at times as a
wide-eyed, grinning goon; a cartoony, trigger-happy nut; and a
brooding, neckless Schwarzenegger. The Kingpin comes off even
worse, when we finally meet him; a comic artist I lent the game
to (who, understandably, asked to remain nameless) commented

that he couldn't even have recognized this most famous of Marvel villains from his full-screen portrait, were it not for the character's giveaway baldness. The game's package art is incredible.
Fair warning: it goes downhill from there.
Piracy, Errors, and Bugs: Before the game starts, players are
asked to input a randomly selected word from the Player's
Manual or the Technical Supplement—nothing too unusual these
days, though since both documents are printed in black-on-white
text (and therefore offer no obstacle to photocopying) the value
of this annoyance is questionable. The real problem, however, is
that the nature of the layouts makes the computer's instructions
ambiguous. "Word 4, Page 16, line 20"? Possibilities include:
'can,"be,"he,' and 'smoke,' depending on where you start counting. One has to be prepared to reboot several times before being
allowed into the game, which is quite an indignity for legitimate
buyers and only a trivial nuisance for pirates. Paragon should
have been able to come up with something that penalizes pirates
more than paying customers, I think.
Then, too, there are the occasional annoying errors: in my New
York City (for instance) the numbering of buildings starts at Fifth
Avenue, not at the East River (hence, the distinction between an
"East Side" and a "West Side." The game wants to retain this distinction, but numbers its buildings straight across from First
Avenue to Twelfth. New Yorkers will have to re-learn their geography to play this game, and non-New Yorkers will if they ever intend to visit the real thing. (Though playing this game would certainly not be approved by New York's Bureau of Tourism.)
Most annoying of all are what appear to be genuine,
honest-to-gosh bugs. My first copy of the game froze my keyboard as soon
as I got to the main menu screen. My second gave me a hard
time with disk swaps, insisting that I hadn't yet inserted Disk B
when, in fact, I had. My artist friend tells me that his keyboard
froze in the middle of a game, to the point that though he could
aim his guns, he could not fire. Some of this I expect can be
blamed on my hand-built-from-spare-parts system, but just how
much I'm not sure.
Regarding all of the above, then: fair warning.

Still and All
All things considered, comic-based computer games have not
fared very well. Consider, for example, the various Superman action games that have come out over the years, not to mention
the miserable adventure-game versions of The Incredible Hulk
and Spider-Man. There seems to be a difficulty in translating the
graphic narrative form to the computer screen: one either ends
up with shallow arcade action or dry, plodding "interactive fiction"—or, worse still, some wilting hybrid that fails on both scores.
The Punisher is the first such hybrid that succeeds, and, as
such, is the best comic-based game currently available. It
sacrifices a good deal of the original's moral complexity, though
not all, and something in the way of depth of plot, but it still
provides a fast-paced and refreshing entertainment. I will be very
surprised if the forthcoming movie is any more successful at
recreating the world of the Punisher than the game is, or if it is
any more enjoyable.
Paragon Software has successfully captured the spirit and intent of The Punisher comic book, a difficult task for which they
deserve high praise. Those problems that the software exhibits
are all the sort that could easily be corrected should strong sales
make the release of an updated version feasible.
The Punisher 2.0, anyone?

Review

Stormovik Over Europe
(Continued from page 62)

Stormovik is billed as using 3D polygon graphics with up to
256 colors. The disappointing truth is that this is only exploited
in the introductory screens and cockpit; all external views are, at
most, 16 color. The 16 colors are from the 256-color palette on
VGA systems, but the out-of-cockpit view and all external views
are virtually indistinguishable from those of the EGA mode. [Ed:
Designer Paul Grace noted that Stormovik does not use
gradient-filled skies (i.e. the game has a one-color sky) and
stated that they decided against gradient-filled skies as a
trade-off for a faster frame-rate. If the sky is gradient-filled and
the horizon banks during flight, the mathematics require addi
tional calculations for each variation in color. Thus, it slows
down the simulated air speed of the vehicle. It is obvious that
this can be a problem for those who absolutely must have
the best of all possible graphics, but Paul felt that frame rate
was more important than sky color in terms of playability.]
Another shortfall is in the design of the cockpit. A great deal of
shading is used to give the interior of the cockpit a slick 3D look;
however, the detail of the lights and gauges were sacrificed for
this look. The numbers on the gauges are almost unreadable
and the indicator lights and waypoint selector have no markings.
Maybe the designers felt that English alphabet markings on the
gauges and indicators would have diminished the feel of the
game. In fact, the lack of identifiable markings on the gauges
and indicators actually impairs game play. Even the pseudo-Cyrillic script of the Russian sub in 688 Attack Sub, another Paul
Grace design, would have been better than no markings at all.
In Stormovik, the player does not encounter the wide dispersement of enemies that populated the battlefield in LHX Attack
Chopper. Rather, there are strong, dense pockets of resistance
to contend with. Often during a flight the player gets the sense
that the terrorists are far more numerous and better armed than
expected. In fact, one aspect of the game that is unnerving is the
presence of F-117 Stealth Fighters. These planes do not appear
on your radar and you will not know that they are there until it is
too late. One of the missions in 1992 actually involves tracking
down and destroying two F-117's visually with the player only
knowing their point of origin and approximate destination.
In flying the SU-25, the player does sense that he is not flying a
small plane. Controls are not as quick or responsive as the small
jets some desktop pilots may have earned their wings flying. Further, the player will find that landings are far too easy, even at
the highest levels and ranks. This reviewer once brought a plane
in at too steep a descent and bounced it off the runway. The
game still regarded the plane as having been landed undamaged. Believe it or not, this occurred even at the highest
rank with "easy landings" disabled.
It is apparent that Stormovik is a direct descendant of LHX Attack Chopper. Unfortunately, "recycled" may be a better term for
describing Stormovik's relationship to LHX. There seems to be
too much old and not enough new material in this game. If Stormovik is to succeed it must differentiate itself from the simulation market and seek out its place among the action games. This
program is not a simulation. Flight simulation fans should be cautioned against purchasing this program. However, all fans of LHX
Attack Chopper will feel right at home in the cockpit of the
SU-25. Deficiencies aside, this writer found it strangely appealing to
roam the skies over Germany, hunting down and destroying
both NATO and Warsaw Pact hardware.

Strategy

"Blimey, it's hot. Bad
enough the sun's got
us, much less the
whole bloody Luftwaffe
wantin' to play tag."

Hammering Herman
Seven Swords Straight to the Heart
of the Luftwaffe in Their Finest Hour

"Now don't cause a
fuss. There's nothing
we can do about
either. Be glad it's a bit
slower today and
we've got time to use
the W.C. between missions for
a change."

by Roger White

"It's when you canna' use it
that you'll be most needin' a
change, laddie."

Don't be tempted to fire at long
range. Those Luftwaffe level bombers are big planes, and the
natural tendency is for one to
shoot them while they are still
out of range because they start
filling up so much of the screen
compared to fighters. Resist the
temptation and get in close
before opening fire! Rule of
thumb: never start shooting
before the enemy plane does.
They always open up at the
longest possible effective range,
so by shooting first it's almost certain that the target isn't close
enough yet.

'The Major's looking shagged.
What's his secret, you know?
'Ow'd he get all them kills, eh?
That's what I want to know."

Playing the RAF
Playing the Royal Air Force
(RAF) in LucasFilm's Their
Finest Hour is fighter combat at
its purest. RAF Fighter Command isn't concerned with anything on the ground. The challenge comes in learning to deal
with the idiosyncrasies of the
seven kinds of Luftwaffe aircraft
that come flying over the channel.

Tip One
Luftwaffe bombers are hurt most easily
by diving attacks head-on and to their
sides. The Luftwaffe will approach the target from several directions and at several
altitudes, so to get the most opportunities for head-on and side attacks,
stay in the immediate target area until
the last wave has come. Use the in-flight
map to keep track of who's coming and
who's going. If there is a momentary lull
in the melee, use half inside and half out-

"Achtung, leute. Der
bad news iss ye are
going down. Ze Fuhrer
expects each of you to
take der 500lb bomben
mit you as you bail. Ze good
news iss you vill die glorious
heroes of ze Reich. Sieg heir

Tip Three

The laughter died down as
Major Hawkins trudged across
the field to the aerodrome with
a tired but measured tread. His
grim expression and fatigue
sobered the other pilots.

The goal of the RAF in campaign mode is to survive the
Luftwaffe onslaught. If the Fighter
Command, the fighters and their
airfields survive, then the Germans won't invade Britain. For the player
as RAF Commander to survive, one
must not only have to shoot down
Luftwaffe planes, but also keep the RAF
aloft while spoiling Luftwaffe bombing
runs.

away, and all the while
its bombs were being
dropped! One can almost hear the captain of
that doomed Luftwaffe
craft speaking to his
veteran crew:

Tip Three-and-a-half

side loops to climb to 10,000 feet so as
to be ready to dive down again.

Tip Two
Incoming bombers are easy to approach and, if disturbed sufficiently by attack, they will drop their bombs before
they get to their targets or, if they do
drop on target, have a higher percentage
of misses. Be sure to concentrate on incoming bombers. Once a bomber drops
his payload, drop it as a target and find a
fresh, incoming one. Don't be too
tempted to finish off wounded bombers
until after all the incoming targets have
been properly harassed.
This is a difficult art to master. On one
occasion, this reviewer saw a bomber
crew bailing out, its rear gunner still firing

Save your ammo because there
are a lot of targets out there in a
melee and it takes a lot of lead
to bring down the level bombers.
The way to save ammo is to get
in close before shooting. Since
British fighters fire "harmonized"
bullets, whenever attacking close
in they impact the same point on
an enemy plane and do lots of damage.
Remember, get in close, then shoot!

Tip Four
Turn tight, because that is the speciality
Df British fighters. Tip the wings to vertical, pull back on the joystick and scream
through those 360 degree turns in
seconds flat. Tight turns are guaranteed
to shake off any Luftwaffe pursuer, but
when seeing bullets whizzing by from behind, be sure to turn away from them
and not into them!

Tip Five
Dare to slow down because RAF planes
are faster than most Luftwaffe planes and
can turn "inside" (tighter than) all of
(Continued on page 114)

Review

Bomber, Man
Targeting Accolade's Strike Aces
by Lt. H. E. Dille

Title:
Strike Aces: International Bombing Competition
Systems:
IBM, Amiga, C-64/1 28
Price(s):
$49.95 except C-64/128 ($39.95)
Designers: Andy Craven, Ciaran Gultnieks, Ian Martin (Vektor Grafix)
Publisher: Accolade
San Jose, CA

he

aviation simulation market is more crowded than the
holding pattern at New York's JFK International Airport on
Christmas Eve day. As such, new arrivals must jockey for
position from the time they are first conceived or face domination by the accepted "classics" of the genre. To be successful in
this endeavor, these products must be innovative in concept or
design, and offer new features or improved graphics. Strike Aces
incorporates the first principle quite well, particularly in terms of
diversity. Players may pilot one of six aircraft types against up to
seven different "enemy" airframes. Additionally, the non-violent
premise of an international bombing competition will appeal to
some players, despite the fact that destruction still occurs onscreen. (The manual disclaimer states that this is so players
could "see what would have happened if it had been real".) The
program is less successful, however, in terms of mechanical or
graphic improvement over prior releases.

T

Pre-Flight Briefing
When a player pilot is first ready to begin, he will have the option of choosing which aircraft to fly from the following list: F-4E,
F-15E, F-111F, MiG-27 Flogger-D, Panavia Tornado IDS (RAF
and Luftwaffe) and the Saab AJ37 Viggen (Royal Swedish Air
Force). There are both two-dimensional and three-dimensional
representations of each aircraft in the selection process. The 2-D
screens are beautifully detailed bit-map renditions of each aircraft
profile, while the 3-D display gives a rotating cinema shot of the
aircraft (using polygon graphics) taxiing down a runway and
taking off.
Once an aircraft is selected for that pilot, he is unable to fly any
other aircraft, regardless of mission. All of the other aircraft types
may still be flown, but each must have its own specific pilot. This
precludes players from making their character's pilot into a

"Super Jet Jock," capable of flying anything faster than the
speed of sound. This restriction, which may seem unnecessary to
some players, is both realistic and important to the balance of
the overall game. This is because in order to progress to the title
of Strike Ace, players must complete sixteen missions in linear
order. Some missions are "easier" for some aircraft types than
others, and vice versa. As such, restricting pilots to one aircraft
balances the campaign, regardless of the type of aircraft flown.
Prior to each mission, players select the aggressor force they
will face from the following list: F-14, F-16, F-5E Tiger II, Mirage
2000, MiG-29, MiG-31 and Su-27 Flanker. Although players may
determine the ordinance mix for their aircraft, they are unable to
interface with aggressor aircraft in any way other than through
their HUD (Heads Up Display) during an engagement. Understanding the strengths and weaknesses of both friendly and aggressor aircraft will allow players some degree of control over the
difficulty of each scenario. As an example, if one is flying an F15E against a Su-27, things will be a lot easier than when facing
opposition from a MiG-31. It is important to remember, however,
that there are no bonus rounds for shooting down the enemy
CAP exclusive of mission accomplishment. Ideally, one should
strive to get to the target without engagement, accomplish the
mission and return home to use the aircraft another day. Unfortunately (or fortunately, depending on your point of view), this is
difficult to do. Players will find it difficult to get to the drop point
without being "bounced" by the enemy fighters.

Intelligence Report
Before any "Hot Stick" enters the actual competition, it is a
good idea to spend some time in the "free flight" portion of the
program. The Mt. Rushmore scenario is cute, and begins by hurtling the player on a collision course with the famous four faces.

Review

After that disaster is averted, players may use this segment of
the game to practice takeoff and recovery, high-altitude
maneuvers, bombing runs and even in-flight refueling. The latter
segment is as critical in later missions as it can be in the real
world. To be successful, one must exactly match altitude and
airspeed, carefully refining one's position "in the slot" until the refueling probe is seated in the drogue. It is tricky even for
seasoned pilots, so practice while the opportunity presents itself.
Within the competitive missions, there are four categories:
Covert, Tactical, Strategic and Offensive. Each category has four
missions of ascending complexity. Beginning with "milk runs,"
the player will find that things rapidly become more complex.
Friendlies are often co-located with the desired target, requiring
pin-point precision to avoid disaster. Enemy air support becomes
both more prominent and more persistent. Exact navigational information is not always available, making timing and coordination more difficult. In-flight refueling will become second nature
and one must master mission planning to ensure the proper
weapons mix for the target objective.
As one gains familiarity with the nuances of mission planning
brought out by the scenarios, it is inevitable that players will
aspire to create scenarios of their own. Accolade has anticipated
that contingency. Strike Aces includes a Mission Design Kit that
allows players to create new missions on the existing area map.
Starting and landing airfields are selected, targets are placed and
designated, refueling points are added (if needed or desired), and
one can attach text to targets, as well as input Mission text. The

interface is mouse-driven and a scenario can be designed, loaded
and run in a few minutes.

Bombing Run
This reviewer would rather sit through twelve hours of "Zamphir
Plays the Classics on the Pan Flute," head encased in cheap blue
plastic airline headphones, than watch one more on-screen explosion represented by spinning, expanding red triangles against
a black dot background. Didn't anyone at Accolade listen a
while back when everyone raved about the bit-mapped explosions in Dynamix's A-10 Tank Killer? Without getting petty
about this single issue, the underlying point is that Strike Aces
does nothing whatsoever to advance graphic standards. The bit
map cockpits are nicely rendered, but standard polygon-fill
routines portray both the landscape and the external views of
aircraft. While features such as Mt. Rushmore and the scenic
dinosaur replica in Rapid City, South Dakota are nice touches,
the vast majority of the terrain is flat and featureless. Mountains
leap straight out of the ground, resembling pyramids to such a
degree that one expects to fly by and see some New Age cultist
perched on top awaiting the return of the UFO's. Although there
is a noticeable improvement in the frame scroll rate over
Accolade's last foray into the aviation world, Blue Angels,
sophisticated users will find that graphics alone will not draw
them to purchase the product.
Also, as audio quality becomes increasingly important and
users spend hard-earned dollars on sound board additions, it is
disturbing to read the back of the box claim to support a given
(Continued on page 82)

Review

board (the AdLib in this case) simply because the opening
theme and one or two other infrequent screens use it (while the
majority of the program uses the internal speaker). Since this
limited sound support is the case, then, the product's packaging
should read something closer to the truth, such as: "Actual AdLib
support time less than one minute per play session." That way,
at least, consumer expectations will not be led astray. As it is,
once the player enters the cockpit, the "engine noise" produced
by the internal IBM speaker is a mind-numbing white static that
players will almost certainly toggle off immediately.

Tally Ho!
Although one might gather that Strike Aces has "struck out"
from the prose up to this point, that's not entirely true. As stated
in the introduction, diversity is one of the strengths of this
product. Many players have already flown other simulators for
the F-15 and the F-111 (Strike Eagle and Thud Ridge, respectively) but few have had an opportunity to joyride in any of the
other aircraft depicted. In the spirit of glasnost, a MiG-29 recently
performed at the International Air Show in Dayton, Ohio. This unprecedented event is echoed in the software industry as many of
the major developers are planning products based on Soviet
aircraft. Strike Aces will be remembered as the first to accomplish that milestone.
As to the other airframes depicted, each has unique qualities
that may be discerned through repeated play. The Tornado is a
joy to fly, as an example, and much easier to land, due to a better lift ratio, than the F-15, which drops out of the sky like a

slightly buoyant rock. Unfortunately, since all of the aircraft flight
routines are driven off a single program engine, every characteristic is not as discernibly different as one might like. Turn rates
are particularly homogenized, but there are enough dissimilarities
to keep dogfighting a challenge.

On Final
Computer gaming enthusiasts are not unlike their counterparts
in other endeavors; they tend to associate brand name to quality.
Accolade's strong reputation has been built on a long list of topnotch products and, at first appearance, it would seem that they
did not live up to their own standards on this product. In all fairness to Accolade, however, this was not entirely their fault.
Strike Aces was originally released in the UK under a different
title by another company. After agreeing to distribute the title in
the US, Accolade made thirty-two recommendations for changes
to bring the product in line with other "state of the art" releases.
Unfortunately, due to contractual disputes, only ten of these chan
ges were made prior to Strike Ace's arrival on the shelves. One
might still argue that the product should not have been released
until Accolade was fully satisfied with it, but they are certainly
considering this one a "lesson learned."
Considered in the aggregate, Strike Aces is not a bad product;
it simply did not live up to its potential in execution. Some portions, like the aforementioned in-flight refueling sequences, are
quite good. As such, this product must be considered a "mixed
bag," certain to appeal to die-hard computer aviators but not destined for greatness in the eyes of the general gaming public.

L

Review

World War I?
Enjoy the Flap from Wings
by Allen L. Greenberg

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

C

aution: Don't seek to convince the youthful pilot
that just because his
mama put a quarter in the slot
and there happens to be several
wires supporting his aircraft and
his flight path consists of the
same pre-determined circle, that
he isn't flying a real airplane.
Similarly, a fighter enmeshed in
Cinemaware's Wings may not
wish to be told that his or her exercises may bear only a superficial resemblance to flying combat in the first World War. While
some serious pilots will dismiss
this program as merely an overly
streamlined flight simulator,
Wings is really a whopping good
arcade experience. The game is
further enhanced by the presence
of dramatic scenes between action sequences.

A View From Above
The Trenches
Taking place between 1916 and
1918, Wings unfolds as a personal narrative of that great war,
from the perspective of a young
American pilot. In somewhat wideeyed "Oh-gosh-oh-gee-whiz" terminology, the fighter recounts his
story, which is illustrated by both his own aerial adventures and
wartime newspaper headlines. In well-designed contrast to the
spirited arcade nature of the action sequences, these narrative
links appear to be historically accurate while also explaining the
significance of the individual missions.
Airplane control is performed entirely with the joystick. In the
Wings school of flight, as the package-notes indicate, there are
no complex keyboard commands to call on while flying. There

Wings
Amiga
$49.95
Cinemaware

are also no gauges to read, nor
even any displays to indicate
such critical information as distance above the ground. All this
data must be interpreted by the
player from Cinemaware's
trademark true-to-movies
graphics.
The majority of battles are
played from within the cockpit,
using the pilot's point of view.
This view is a bit narrow, however, and may cause some
frustration when enemy planes
dance effortlessly into a blind
spot. The player-pilot may switch
the display to either of the two
side windows or the rear window.
However, this still reveals only a
limited portion of the battle
space. Unlike many other combatflight simulators, an external view
of the flying action is not available.

What You See .. .
There are two other sequences,
however, for which the player
has only an external view of the
battle. A strafing sequence uses
a three-dimensional perspective
of roads lined with infantry, tents
and vehicles. The player flies
overhead, machine guns blazing. This is similar to the by-gone
(but very popular) arcade game from Synapse, Blue Max. The
resulting mayhem includes objects which explode and soldiers
who moan and roll over in pools of blood. There are also bombing assignments which are viewed from directly over the plane.
The landscape scrolls beneath while enemy fighters descend
from the opposite direction.

Review

A Flyboy's Life
Wings also includes some role-playing features. Each pilot
enters the game with a small number of ability-points. These are
for the player to distribute among the attributes of flying, shooting, mechanics and stamina. Players in the roles of pilots who
possess greater flying and shooting ratings will have an easier
time controlling their planes and bringing down the enemy. A low
rating in mechanics will cause the player's guns to jam more frequently during combat--an experience sure to draw exclamations
from players as least as loud as "the shot heard round the
world." Stamina reflects the pilot's ability to survive a forced landing, which is the only time in the game a player needs to worry
about landing his plane. As the pilot survives and succeeds in
bringing down more enemy planes, the ratings in each category
will rise an appropriate amount.
There are over 230 missions in the campaign game which is
Wings, the majority of which are of the dogfight/combat variety.
An important note is that these will probably not be carried out
by the same pilot. According to the excellent historical background which accompanies the program, pilots were often not expected to live more than a few weeks once they began their
duty. The player must replace fallen pilots with rookies who
must, again, build up their abilities. While pilots come and go, a
complete game of Wings begins and ends concurrent with the
war. Of course, no one likes to observe the passing of a favorite
character, and one need not do so as long as there are blank
disks available.

Mission: Possible
As players progress through the war, they can expect the missions to become increasingly more challenging. In the earliest
dogfights, the enemy is usually found at a delightfully lower altitude than the hero. The enemy will also often cooperate by
facing the opposite direction until the attack is upon him. Also,
as if by some special arrangement, the enemy has volunteered

Review

planes will begin to appear from the more dangerous positions
which are above and behind the pilot. During the strafing missions, targets will be more difficult to follow and the player will
find avoiding ground fire a more strenuous activity. There will
also be a number of Red Cross vehicles which must not be
harmed if the pilot is to receive full credit for his otherwise successful efforts.

"Switch on. Contact!"

to go venturing out in manageably small numbers. Also, the
American fighter has other members of his squadron alongside
to back him up. This may be frustrating for some players who
will lose credit for a kill because a digitized buddy manages to
get the final shot at an enemy plane which the player has just
finished pounding.
Soon, enemy planes will appear in greater numbers, forcing the
odds to creep slowly towards the other side. Similarly, enemy

Wings is supplied on two (Amiga) disks. Copy protection is
strictly by the manual, and a key word must be supplied whenever a new pilot is introduced to the squadron or at the beginning of a session when a game in progress is resumed. Only one
game in progress may be stored on a disk. However, by
manipulating disks or files, players will easily find ways to store
multiple games. The program may be installed on a hard drive
and this is strongly recommended—there is a lot of drive access
during play. Lucky owners of an Amiga with at least three
megabytes of RAM will be able to install the program in memory
and forget about that problem. Amiga owners must also remember to close all non-essential windows (as is the case with most
Cinemaware releases for that machine) or the program will crash
(thus depriving the pilot of his chance to do so).
It would probably be a mistake to judge Wings in the same
category as other, more serious combat/flight simulations such
as Lucasfilm's triumphant Their Finest Hour. Wings has a unique look and feel to it which makes it an exciting, novel and addicting offering from Cinemaware and well worth checking out.

Review

You'll See SPOT
Before You're Wise
Virgin Mastertronic's Abstract Strategy Game
by Wyatt Lee

magine a game where, after a
few preliminary moves, every
move can change the face of
TITLE:
the game board. Imagine a game where the
SYSTEMS:
player's strategy is echoed by a cute cartoon
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
choreography designed to rub salt in the open
DESIGNER:
wounds of one's opponents. Imagine a game
PUBLISHER:
with nine levels of sophisticated computer opponents, as well as an option for one to four
human competitors. Imagine a game where the basic "checkerboard" playing surface can be modified into more than 500 different configurations. This is what the player experiences in
SPOT: The Computer Game.

I

"Perplex'd in the extreme . . ."
(Othello, Act V, Scene 2)

In the game of Othello, players
place a two-toned tiddlywink so
that it forms a "bookend" with
SPOT: The Computer Game
another tiddlywink the same color. Then, all the
IBM, Nintendo
opposite-colored tiddlywinks which are in-between
1-4
$39.99
the "bookend" tiddlywinks must be turned over
Graeme Devine
so that they are "transformed" into the same
Virgin Mastertronic
Irvine, CA
color as the "bookend" tiddlywinks. Hence, entire
lines of tiddlywinks can be changed every move.
Sometimes, the game seemed more like a tedious time of turning tiddlywinks back and forth than figuring out one's strategy.
Also, you could only play against one opponent at a time. Computerizing Othello made the game much more accessible. One
no longer had to turn the "tiddlywinks" over, but play was still
limited to one opponent. SPOT takes the idea of transforming
"tiddlywinks" to a new plane by adding new moves, new opponents, new board configurations and an optional time limit for
moves.

SPOT: The Computer Game bears some resemblance to the
boardgame Othello. Those who have played the boardgame (or
experienced it as Renaissance or Reversi on the computer) may
well sympathize with the quotation from the game's namesake.

In SPOT, one places his or her "tiddlywink" adjacent to as
(Continued on page 112)

Survey

Re-Sounding
... Computers
(Continued from page 61)

Each board offers plenty of benefits for
the price but each also has enough
liabilities to suggest why one may want
to consider one of the other options. At
the very least, this author firmly believes
that anyone who does purchase a sound
board should obtain nothing less than an
AdLib board.
To date, AdLib has sold over 100,000
boards and employs the FM technology
that is the overwhelming standard used
today. The quality is such that the buyer
invariably asks himself why he hadn't
bought one sooner. Add to this the
AdLib's comparatively low price and you
have reason enough to buy one.
The Roland LAPC-1 provides, without
a doubt, the highest quality sound available on a PC today. Everyone who hears
it wants one, badly. It doesn't hurt that
the MIDI standard is so prevalent in the

music industry that you can expect it to
migrate to the gaming environment at
any time. Roland makes it very difficult
to look elsewhere, but a few shortcomings may make it a necessity. The LAPC1 supports only music or sound effects
based on music instruments. It also costs
more than one might wish to pay. For
these reasons, it is recommended only to
those who either want to play serious
music with their PCs, or for those people
who like to have the biggest and best of
everything (no matter what it costs).
The Creative Labs folks have worked
very hard to make the Sound Blaster a
standard. Currently, there
are over 70,000 buyers
and current trends indicate
that the Sound Blaster
could possibly surpass
AdLib in sales by
Christmas. While costing a
bit more than an AdLib
card, it also provides
more. When one takes
into account the free
game port, text-to-speech
capability, true digitized

sounds, MIDI compatibility, and more included software, Sound Blaster an excellent value.

The Best Of All Possible
Worlds . . .
What does all of this information mean
to the consumer? One can only be assured that as larger developers continue
to push multimedia technology forward,
superior PC sound support will become
even more commonplace than it is
today. If one hasn't heard what a PC can
truly sound like, now is the time to listen
and buy.

Scorpia's Column

Scorpion 's View
(Continued from page 66)

game in some instances) if he doesn't have the right item(s) with
him to solve a particular puzzle.

Worlds of Fears (Game Play)
All right, that takes care of the mechanics. Now let's talk about
the main event, the game itself. First, this is not a jaunt for beginners. Altered Destiny is definitely aimed at the mid-level and up
of adventuring. So, you can expect to put in a fair amount of
time on this one.
The plot is fairly straightforward: it's the old chestnut of saving
the universe. This time around, we have the twin brothers Jonquah and Helmar, as well as the Jewel of Light. Despite its
name, the Jewel is a corrupting influence and Helmar has succumbed to it (sounds vaguely reminiscent of the shards in Ultima V). His use of the Jewel will eventually destroy everything,
unless he is stopped in time.
Jonquah has been imprisoned by his brother, but has enough
power left to call for a hero. Who he actually gets is P.J. Barrett,
Yuppie middle-manager. There's no time to look for anyone else,
so it's up to P.J. to put an end to Helmar's nefarious doings.
As you might expect, the action does not take place on Earth,
but on another planet called Daltere. It's a typical Berlyn world:
weird. There's no other description for a place where information
falls from the skies in little pieces, trees grow with roots up instead of down, and islands float in the air, anchored by a complex vine system . . . and that's just the start.
Weird critters abound, too, and you can speak to most of them.
Well, some of them. Basically, there are three types of beings
here: the intelligent ones, like Lantra, who are helpful in one way
or another; non-intelligent hostile types, like the clamchops
(cross a clam with "Jaws" and that's what you get); and the nonintelligent "window-dressing" creatures, such as quirls and
fluboxes, who are around to emphasize this isn't home.
It's pretty obvious this isn't home when, after his initial chat
with Jonquah, P.J. finds himself on the floating island. Naturally,
the first thing P.J. does is walk around and talk to everyone he
can. Let me insert a warning here to "Save Often." It is, alas, all
too easy to die in this game. One wrong step and P.J. will find
himself falling into eternity or some equally final situation. It's
going to happen sooner or later (and possibly many times). So,
use that save game function.
Up here, P.J. will meet Alnar, Tentro, and Vindah. Actually, Vindah isn't on the main island, but a small one nearby. P.J. will
have to figure out a way to get over there, but it's really not
hard. Along the way, naturally, anything that's not nailed down
should be picked up for future use.
Once P.J. has spoken to the three beings on the island, it's
time to find transportation to the surface (think small). He arrives
at a crossroads and much of the game will be taken up with solving puzzles around this area. Four paths lead off to the north (a
nasty canyon), west (Weird Woods), south (Order of the Jewel),
and east (Forest of Dreams).
The Order of the Jewel is a good place to start. We'll hope P.J.
has brought his invitations (can't get in without 'em). This area is
home to Lantra (caretaker of the crystal garden) and Master
Towhee (caretaker of scrolls). Let me save you some time by
saying that you can't get past any of the locked doors, so leave
them be. Lantra and Towhee are all you need to worry about

here; both will provide important items, under suitable circumstances.
A stroll over to the Weird Woods shows this place is aptly
named, being filled with all manner of strange vegetation. If P.J.
looks up, he'll see there's another area above him, which he'll
have to reach somehow. Further along in the woods is the Pool
of Light, guarded by a mean critter called the aRRaRRa. P.J is
going to have to fight it, although right now is not the best time.
I had some trouble here, since I used keyboard input such as
"fight aRRaRRa" and "hit aRRaRRa with sword", none of which
worked. P.J. has to be maneuvered physically with arrow keys or
mouse to combat the creature. Keep that in mind for when he's
ready for the confrontation.
The Canyon of Fears is an exercise in aggravation. P.J. has to
walk through several screens of long, narrow pathways
suspended over the ground. One misstep (and they're easy to
make!) and it's time for a restore. Saving often - is an absolute
necessity here.
These pathways lead to the Yula graveyard, where an important
item must be obtained. P.J. can get it by doing the obvious
thing, but only when standing in exactly the right spot. Move
around and keep trying from different locations.
The Forest of Dreams is an odd place. In fact, it's really two
places. P.J. will have to figure out how to get from one to the
other. Just remember that both are real and he can die in either
of them, if he isn't careful. This is especially true when walking
past pits of acid.
Eventually, the time will come when P.J. is ready (we hope) to
take on Helmar. This requires travelling across the Howler Lake
(bring everything that hasn't been used yet). P.J. should not attempt the trip until he has solved all the puzzles to this point.
The island on which Helmar's castle sits is populated by bizarre
and hostile types of mutated plants. There are several at the
dock where P.J. lands, and he hasn't much time to figure out
what to do about them (saving upon arrival is a good idea). Fortunately, his inventory by now should be smaller, and trial and
error, if nothing else, will provide the solution.
A careful tour of the pathways will bring P.J. to the castle door.
Inside is a sort of elevator that will take him up (with a little effort) to the crystal maze. Walking around at random won't do
much good here, as P.J. will need a little divine assistance to find
his way through to Helmar.
The final confrontation goes pretty quickly, one way or another.
P.J. gets his choice of weapons and the correct one to pick is
rather obvious, if you think about what Helmar will be using.
After that, the rest is pretty much automatic and a bit flat.
There's no special graphic when P.J. defeats Helmar, and
Helmar's abrupt return to goodness (without the least bit of struggle) when Jonquah appears is a little too deus ex machina to
be satisfactory.

Proffered Destiny (Conclusions)
In spite of the problems mentioned above, this is still a game
worth playing, especially if you've had your fill of the easy adventures that glutted the market over the summer. The vision of a
bizarre and alien environment is well-realized, the puzzles (most
of them, anyway) are tough but fair, and there are some interesting touches of humor here and there throughout the game.
That's about it for this look into the crystal ball.

Review

Lands and Legends
TurboGrafx 16's Ys & II
by Roe R. Adams, Ill

While the storyline is completely
unchanged, Mr. Iwasaki and a
team of artists totally revamped
the graphics and added orchestral sound.

he

hottest advance in gaming this
year has been the debut of
programs on CD-ROM disks from
Japan. This technology promises to
open new vistas for the computer roleplaying game (CRPG) player, as programming space opens up to an incredible 54
megabytes with full audio/voice channeling. So far, only a couple of the many
CD-ROM games which are currently available in Japan have crossed the Pacific.
Most of those, however, were merely
straightforward ports. The latest CD-ROM
from NEC for their TurboGrafx-16 game
machine is Ys I & II. Ys is the first CDROM available here to actually show off
the new capabilities of the technology.

T

The Ys series (pronounced "EASE")
has been a big hit for five years in
Japan. The first game in the series, Ancient Ys Vanished, was released in 1985
in Japan on the NEC 9800 computer system. Ys IV will be released in about six
months. The capacity of NEC's CD-ROM
disk is so large that it contains both of
the first two scenarios uncut. For this effort, one of Japan's top new programmers, Hiromasa Iwasaki, did an amazing
job of plastic surgery on the scenarios.

Ys was the first Japanese game
system to emulate the famous
Sierra King's Quest graphics
look. In the last five years, however, graphic concepts have
evolved considerably. Drawing
heavily upon the Japanese style
of animation known as "anime,"
a new ten-minute background sequence has been added at the
beginning of the game. Spectacular scenes scroll by on the
screen to a lush background of
music, while a narrator (heard in real
voice, not digitized!) tells of the history of
Ys. This is a terrific opening to show
one's friends (or wife) why all that
money was spent to get the CD-ROM addon for the TurboGrafx. Also, at key junctures in the game, special new anime sequences highlight the action. The gaming
landscapes and buildings of Ys have really been brought to a vivid level and the
graphic pictures of people talking have
been considerably enhanced.
The story revolves around an ancient
tragedy. Seven hundred years ago, the
land of Ys was created by two beautiful
goddesses. For many generations, the
land prospered and a golden age existed.
Then, one day, six wise priests tried to
make a magical metal (called Cleria) out
of Light. Unfortunately, in the process of
making Cleria, part of the Light was
reflected. This reflection of Light created
an evil darkness named Darm who
rampaged through Ys, destroying all the
culture and the cities. After much havoc,
the six priests managed to use all the
power of their magic to escape from
Darm's reach. The solution was a trifle

Review

drastic, but then such is the stuff of
legends. They floated the land of Ys up
into the sky to contain Darm, while they
remained on the ground! The chronicles
of these events were written down by
each priest. Then, they hid these six
books away in secret places so that no
one would be tempted to duplicate the experiment.
700 years later, Adol, our hero, comes
across the water to the land of Esteria,
where he is hailed (much to his surprise)
by a seeress as the fulfillment of legend.
She is even waiting on the pier when the
boat lands. Now there is an accurate
foretelling! Adol's quest is to discover
what happen to the ancient vanished
land of Ys. Toward that end, he must
seek out and recover the six legendary
books of Ys.
The town, in which Adol begins his adventure, is full of trouble from kidnapped
relatives to a missing silver harmonica,
all which need various kinds of help. Solv
ing each of these mini-quests furthers
Adol along the path to the first book.
His initial obstacle is to become strong
enough to survive outside town. In the
beginning, Adol can only afford to buy is
a simple sword and basic armor. Even a
wooden shield is beyond his purse's
budget. Be sure to save the game frequently throughout the adventures, not
just in the beginning. It is very easy to
die in Ys, because the monsters actually
pursue the player, homing in on him and
attacking.
Besides the usual choices of swords,
armor and shields, Adol may also acquire four special rings: a power-ring, a
ring-mail, a timer-ring, and a heal-ring.
The timer ring slows down the monster
movements on the screen, which can be
critical to avoid encounters with powerful
roaming creatures. An ornate Mirror affords escapes from combat while a Wing
provides a handy teleport back to town.
Arms, weapons, and items are all
portrayed on the inventory screen by welldrawn icons. Highlighting the choice
equips or uses the selection.

Once Adol advances a few levels and
can afford better armor, he may safely
cross the bridge into the main part of the
game. Due east, there is another village
which will yield valuable clues, add yet
more quests, and point Adol up the hill
to an ancient temple. Statues of the two
ancient goddesses mark the way within
the temple. One statue will even teleport
the player into the labyrinth beneath the
building. Many of the initial quests will be
solved within the confines of the temple.
Wearing a special Mask is needed to find
a secret passage within the temple's
lowest level.
The next phase of Adol's adventure
leads him into a deep cavern complex,
where he is immediately attacked by
some things that look like rabid raspberries. Ghosts and dark knights also
wander here, so make sure that Adol is
ready for all this fun! A unique feature of
the caverns is the way light is handled in
the game. Instead of just illuminating
everything, the game only puts a globe
of light around Adol. Everything else is
murky darkness. This makes for
thrills-a-minute as walking around a bend in the
corridor usually puts Adol right into the
arms of a monster the player couldn't
see until then!
Brushing the cavern dust from his
armor, Adol now stares up at a very tall
tower. Here is where the rest of his adventures will occur until he finally defeats the
end guardian and retrieves the sixth
book. In fact, when any of the major guardian monsters are activated in the game,
a player will only be able to defeat it if
Adol's level is high enough and he has
the best weapon/armor available at the
time. No lucky shots or clever strategies
work in these situations. Getting wasted
by guardians becomes a very common affair if a player is good and starts romping through the scenario ahead of Adol's
development. The ending, though, is
another fine anime sequence that will
delight the player.
Ys II, The Flying Ancient Land of Ys,
begins with Adol arriving in the aerial
city, guided by the information in the six
books. His quest is to somehow defeat
Darm and return Ys back to the planet.
Along the way, he must rescue Lilia, who
is held captive by Darm.
The first segment on the surface ends
with Adol's defeating a giant demon. This
gains him entrance into the Ice Park.
Here, various items must be discovered
and then used in a certain position for
Adol to proceed. This is the first real adventure gaming aspect of the Ys series.

To exit from the Ice Park, Adol must
defeat an even bigger demon. Now he
enters the Burn Land, which is full of extremely horrible monsters. There, he
must find the legendary Duck Demons
(no doubt a Disney spinoff!) and rescue
a kidnapped boy named Tarf. Not too
surprisingly, another huge demon blocks
Adol's exit from this horrible land.
Ahead lies the Solomon Shrine where
Darm awaits. The Evil One has prepared
an especially nasty surprise for our hero.
Lilia is to be sacrificed upon the twelfth
stroke of the giant temple bell at the top
of the pyramid! As Adol fights his way upward through the maze levels, the player
periodically hears the bell deeply toll yet
another stroke. It is a very clever artifice
to engender suspense and heightens the
player's sense of urgency. Finishing off
Darm and landing Ys yields another fine
anime ending, even better then the closing sequence of Ys I.
All games have a down side, and Ys'
Achilles heel is its combat system. Here,
Ys really shows its age and its evolutionary arcade roots. To engage in combat,
all that has to happen is for Adol to literally run into a monster. As long as the two
figures are touching, there is combat
until one dies. This form of combat
might be humorously referred to as the
"bump-and-grind" school of fighting, but
alas, it is rather boring by today's standards.
The game play is the same for both
games, but Ys II has a much enriched
graphic look. Parts of the land look like
giant interconnected wooden puzzle
pieces viewed at a slight angle from "top
down." This creates a wonderful threedimensionality to the landscape. Again,
lush music orchestration accompanies
our hero throughout his trials, and
sweeps him toward victory. Ah, but is victory complete? Stay tuned for Ys III,
Wanders from Ys, for the answer to that
question.
NEC has not set a firm date yet for its
debut on CD-ROM in the US, but look
toward next summer for its release.

Nintendo Unleashes the
Final Fantasy (Part I)
by Roe R. Adams, Iii

title such as Final Fantasy had
best not be the label for a penultimate fantasy game, lest it be
scoffed at for pretentiousness. Rejoice,
then, for the happy news is that (at least
for the time and in the place where it
was created), Final Fantasy did, indeed,
deliver the goods and thus, in its day,
was aptly named. The bad news, however, is that its "day" was five years ago

A

and its birthplace Japan. While current
Japanese role-playing games have matured greatly since then, five years ago
they were merely imitative clones, lagging somewhat behind U.S. game
development levels. Therefore, if one can
accept that Final Fantasy for the Nintendo is a game in the tradition of Ultima
III, it will be much easier to relax and
enjoy it.

As with many role-playing games, one
must first generate a team which consists
of four members. Character class choices
include: Fighter, Black Belt, Thief, White
Mage, Black Mage, plus an unusual addition entitled Red Mage. Players must care
fully consider the subtle pros and cons of
each class carefully, for they have some
unusual twists. Naturally, characters
begin as entry level in their class and, at

Review

a special point in the game, each character gains maturity and is thus elevated to
a higher level within their class. To wit,
Fighters become Knights, Mages become
Wizards, Black Belts become Masters
and so on. Those with long memories
might recall the original Wizardry where
changing Thieves into Ninjas was quite a
breakthrough.
Ninjas are incredibly powerful, but
Thieves have only one real function in
the game—making it easier for the party
to run away from combat.
(There is nothing to steal in
Final Fantasy and Thieves
make very poor fighters). Unfortunately, to acquire a Ninja,
one must be willing to lug a
useless Thief around for half
the game!

pricey. While a resurrect spell is inexpensive when compared to other FRP
games, Final Fantasy presents the
"taxing" problem of charging for saving
the game at the Inn! (No gold, no hold).
Another indicator of the game's age can
be found in the Potion Shop. While a
team can carry up to 99 heal potions
(which are needed for long sessions), the
game simplemindedly requires that each
potion be purchased laboriously one at a
time. (This means going through the 3-

For the meticulous planners
out there who just can't make
up their minds whether to hire
a second White or Black Mage
for the party, the Red Mage
class might be considered.
These hybrid Mages learn a
few spells on each level from
both the White and the Black
spell list. Red Mages can also
wear heavier armor and wield
better weapons than normal
Mages (shades of an AD&D
multi-class character). The
problem is that with a maximum four-member group, what
team can afford a character
who is not some sort of
specialist?

Outside the castle is the town of Coneria wherein the usual (almost generic)
assortment of RPG shops are there to
help outfit one's team. One oddity is that
individual magic spells must be purchased (per use) and they are quite

After returning, the now joyful king commemorates the return of his daughter by
building a bridge linking his island to the
mainland, beginning the game in earnest.
A series of interlocking quests
enable the team to awaken the
spell-ensorcelled Elven Prince
who becomes a powerful ally.
To do this, one must first travel
across land to the town of
Pravoka and defeat a pirate
crew in order to gain control of
their ship. On a water world full
of islands, a ship is unimaginably useful. The party will have to
visit the witch Matoya and discover what she seeks, paying
close attention to a backwardtalking broom in Matoya's
Cave for the vital secret of how
to access a world map of the
outdoors. Further itinerary highlights include: the Dwarf Cave,
the eerie Northwest Castle (full
of Undead), the Marsh Cave,
and the Titan's tunnel. If the
party is strong enough, they
will reach the Seer Sarda's
cave, wherein lies the item
necessary to complete the
Witch's quest.
On these journeys, the player
learns that the four elementals
(Earth, Fire, Water, and Air)
are busy destroying the world.
One's party must, therefore,
track down each elemental
fiend in its lair and defeat it. An
important task is to find the hidden circle of Sages in the town
of Crescent Lake, for they offer
many clues and a special item.

[Editor's Note — Roe's recommended team structure for
maximum efficiency: Two
Fighters, one White Mage,
and one Black Mage.]
The story opens with one's
faithful party of adventurers in
the Castle Coneria, with the
king awaiting them on the
second floor. He identifies the
adventuring party as the much
touted (if novice) "Light Warriors," and asks their aid in rescuing his daughter, the Princess Sara.
She has been kidnapped by the evil Garland (a typical role-playing UBG--Ultimate Bad Guy) and held hostage in the
nearby Temple of Fiends.

anti-climax, is that upon freeing Sara, the
team is teleported back to the Castle.
After defeating a greater monster, the
party is whisked out of the dungeon and
back to the surface, thus eliminating the
excruciating treks of retracing one's path.
This helpful feature is used throughout
the game.

step purchase procedure 99 times at the
beginning of each foray! No new game
would needlessly bore a player so badly.)
Once outfitted, there are no story-enhancing (or distracting, depending on
one's point of view) side adventures, as
the team must proceed directly to the
Temple of Fiends to rescue the Princess
Sara, their first great test. Contrary to all
the dire warnings, a team of lower level
characters can easily defeat Garland.
One nice touch, in an attempt to alleviate

A recent game machine trend
is to include extensive hint
(well, solution, really) books with their
games. Nintendo has gone one very welcome step further, however. While this
reviewer normally feels that these books
are extremely detrimental to people learning how to play an RPG (because everything is laid out for them by the numbers), Final Fantasy offers an outstanding tutorial for new players. This tutorial
takes great pains to offer choices to the
player and explain why certain options
(Continued on page 100)

Review

Nintendo Unleashes
the Final Fantasy
(Part I)
(Continued from page 96)

will be better than others. Within the 80-page manual is a wealth
of playing style tips and gaming perspective that is rare, indeed.
Also included in the package are two large foldout sheets containing a world map with notations for various localities; a series of
maps to the major dungeons; useful weapon, armor, and spell
charts; and an incredible monster table. This monster chart gives
every stat on each monster, even going so far as to discuss its
weak points and immunities!
Nintendo has shown great restraint, however, in stopping the
walkthrough at the game's halfway point. At this juncture, the
player has defeated both the Earth and Fire Elementals and has
uncovered the airship which will take the team to the Northern
continent. The world map does contain location pointers for this
continent which, by being numbered, suggests an order of visiting. Yet the hint book pats the player on the back, says "nice job
so far," wishes him good luck, and then boots him out into the
game on his own. What a very nice touch! Final Fantasy is one
game that strives to educate players without totally insulting their
intelligence.
The final dungeon is several orders of magnitude more difficult
than the rest of the game. Finishing will be quite a challenge,
even to veteran players, so be prepared for many attempts. The
best approach is to explore small chunks at a time and use the
exit spell to escape, thus allowing the party to recharge and
heal. Even 99 Heal potions vaporize like water on a hot griddle in
the final dungeon. One feature that is rarely needed throughout
the rest of the game, but is extremely valuable for the end game,
are the portable SAVE GAME items. The player may purchase or
find Tents, Cabins, and Houses, all of which allow the player to
save the game in the wilderness (but not underground). The Tent
only saves the game status, while a Cabin will partially heal the
team, and Houses not only heal, but restore magical strength of
characters to their maximum. (The wild concept of an adventure
team carrying around inflatable houses does not seem to bother
the Japanese!)
As a special treat for the players, there is an Easter Egg (a hidden section) buried in Final Fantasy. To access a totally different
mini-game "on the side," press the A and B buttons together 55
(yes, fifty-five) times while the party is sailing the ship on the
water. Voila!
The Final Fantasy series is highly popular in Japan, as this
reviewer can personally attest to. In Tokyo, a shop exists solely
for Final Fantasy merchandising of T-shirts, mugs, posters, and
notebooks. They even had CD records of the game sound
tracks! The Japanese take their gaming seriously. In the U.S.,
only Disney characters rate their own exclusive shop.
Players who enjoyed Final Fantasy and wish for a sequel will
not have to wait long. Final Fantasy IV was released in Japan
this year. So, look for the second scenario of this series to debut
in the U.S. in about six months. Although it is somewhat dated,
put Final Fantasy high on your list of games to recommend to
people who have no idea what a CRPG is or how to play one.

Review

Small-Unit Action, Up Close and
Personal
A Review Of D.R.A.G.O.N. Force
by Jesse W. Cheng

SPI's Sniper or Avalon Hill's
Firepower, but without the tedious

HQ told us this mission would
be a routine sweep of another
South America cocaine cartel lab
in the bush. Sure, routine .. .
Until Private Burbick got cut
down by a burst of automatic
fire. Second Lieutenant Mergen
got us into some brush for cover.
As luck would have it, the cover
ran us right into a terrorist
sniper. Greaser's M60 machine
gun spat at the sniper and he
was history. Not, however,
before Mergen got his thick skull
dented. He's still conscious, but
pretty foggy right now.

paperwork.

Squads With
Character(s)
Each mission starts out with an
objective running the gamut of rescuing hostages and eliminating terrorists to raiding cocaine labs and
recovering captured teammates.
After a briefing, the player forms a
commando unit from a roster of 14
specialized elite soldiers. Selection
is limited to seven men per mission, so one must choose the
squad carefully for the task at
hand. A dossier is available on
each man, rating him for close
combat, demolition, sharpshooting,
anti-tank (the ability to fire a
bazooka or missile), machine gunnery, scouting (ability to spot hidden enemy units and hostages),
and medicine (healing other's
wounds). In addition to the specialty skills, men are rated on the
basis of six attributes: awareness,
intensity, guts, vitality, strength and
luck. Some of these attributes will
improve from mission to mission
as squad members become battlehardened. When playing, no character actually represents the player.

Seems the only problem we've
got left is the rumbling coming
towards us from the dirt road
out of the jungle. Maybe it's an
Abrams from heaven come to rescue us? Sure. Maybe the moon
will fall out of the sky.
"Heads!" hollered Piper. 'T-72
with support!"
Sergeant Johnston grabbed his
LAW rocket, steadied it on his
shoulder, grinned and fired. Hiss.
Boom. Scratch one red tank!
Before Johnston's grin could
turn into a satisfied smile,
though, another tank popped out
of nowhere. Then another, and
another. Routine mission, eh? I
think I'll save my last clip for the boys back
at HQ.

A Wargame In "Dragon's"
Clothing

Title:
Systems:
Price:
Designers:
Distributor:
Publisher:

D.R.A.G.O.N. Force
Amiga, IBM
$49.95
Roger Damon & Arlon Harris
Electronic Arts Distribution
Interstel
Webster, TX

D.R.A.G.O.N. Force (Drastic Response Assault
Ground Operations Network) is Interstel's latest strategy game
of contemporary commando combat. D.R.A.G.O.N. Force is a
solitaire game where the player assumes command of a squad
of men and moves them, one at a time, into combat to overcome computer-controlled terrorists in over a dozen missions.
While an initial glance might lead one to compare this game to
Omnitrend's Breach series (except for the time period), the play
is really quite different. Wargamers will want to take a careful
look at this game, as it plays similarly to such boardgames as

Open Arms

Once a commando team is chosen, the next
step is to equip it. The arsenal is quite impressive, listing each weapon's make, manufacturer,
description, ammunition loadout, range, hit
chance, and suppression effects. Smallarms range from assault
rifles (US M16A2, Soviet AK47s or the Belgium FN-FAL) to submachine guns (UZIs and German MP5s). Long-range sniper rifles,
LAWs, grenade launchers, heavy and light machine guns and
even crossbows are available (to name a few!).

Mission Maneuvering
The team then embarks on its mission, mindful of its objec-

Review

tives. The strategic map is displayed, showing the entire area of
the conflict. There is a nice zoom feature on the tactical display,
which is where most game play takes place.
In the tactical display, there is an information screen to the
right showing the selected soldier and his attributes, weapons carried, health, and moves remaining. Actions are entered via keyboard or mouse. While the graphics are better than average for
the IBM version (supporting VGA down to monochrome), the
Amiga version is really no better than the IBM's VGA version, but
the Amiga's sound is far superior, the IBM version using only the
computer's internal speaker for sound support.
The real strength of D.R.A.G.O.N. Force resides in its simultaneous movement and fire control. In contrast to Breach 2
where all movement is sequential, in D.R.A.G.O.N. Force all
movement and combat is simultaneous through preplotted trace
lines entered into the computer. In general, all instructions to the
troops are given though orders, which each order taking one impulse. One can give any combination of movement or fire orders
not to exceed five per turn (which is one minute of real time).
Movement is entered via an icon-driven base through the keyboard arrow keys or by a mouse. The mouse interface is a bit
cumbersome since one cannot directly click and drag each soldier to move, but must go through a rather tedious set of icons.
For example, to move a man one must first click on the soldier
in question to "select" him, then click on the "OK" button to confirm the selection, then select "MOVE TO" which will bring up a
cross-hair cursor, which must be centered on the destination
square and clicked.
Other movement options include moving each soldier one
square at a time, doubletime and crawl movement, stand or
duck, and wait (used by medics to stay with someone they are
healing). After all the men in the squad have had their orders
entered, the computer resolves all movement and fire, for both
sides, simultaneously. Each impulse is played out a step at a
time, so it is easy to watch the action develop. The computer
can be set to run indefinitely until you decide to stop the action
from the mouse or keyboard, or until someone fires.

The Whites Of Their Pixels
There are three types of fire missions in D.R.A.G.O.N. Force.
By "firing at will," the soldier uses a sort of opportunity fire,
choosing the most threatening enemy to shoot at (usually the

closest). The "fire at spot" order is not for shooting dogs, but
good for hitting suspected enemy positions or as overwatch fire
to cover one's troop movements. Finally, the old standby "fire at
unit" order means exactly what it says.
Gunfire is represented by dotted white lines emanating from
guns and white splashes when they hit something. Gunfire can
cause a man to be wounded, killed or suppressed (pinned). Because of the suppression possibility, the game can sometimes
bog down when everyone starts exchanging fire as men become
pinned. The game also gets tedious when one has to individually
move all their men to the "extraction zone" after a mission is accomplished.
After a mission is completed, the element of surprise is lost
when replayed, so the trick is to do it right the first time. It is disappointing that D.R.A.G.O.N. Force doesn't include a scenario
builder, as many tools seemed to be provided for just such a feature.

Hills And Valleys
Terrain plays an important role in the game. There are four
levels of terrain, with level one being "ground" level, up through
two hill levels to level four, the "tower" level. Terrain types include trees, hedges, walls, buildings, slopes, flats, grass, roads,
huts, etc. Although movement doesn't appear to be effected by
terrain, defensive cover and tracing line of sight is. Hiding behind
slopes, trees, walls, etc. will lessen the chance of being hit by
enemy fire or being seen by the enemy. Also, shooting down a
hill from a tower improves a unit's field of view considerably
(giving new meaning to the cliche "put a man in the church
tower").

Parting Shots And Future Missions
In summary, there is a nice flavor to the game, as one really
feels like he or she is in the middle of a firefight with all the
chaos and confusion. One will see certain commandos pressing
on under withering fire while others may hug the earth in panic.
Despite the game's weaknesses of not having a scenario builder
and mild interface problems, this game would be a worthy addition to any wargame aficionado's collection. Interstel plans a
release of a version 2.0 early in 1991 which will include a
scenario builder, AdLib support for the IBM and additional mission disks.

Convention Report

GEN CON '90
A Pilgrimage to MECCA
by Dale Roethig

E

very August the pilgrims come to
MECCA for GEN CON. This year,
11,500 gamers filled Milwaukee's
huge MECCA convention center, each
seeking their own paradise (or pair of
dice, as the case may be). Some ventured into the pen-and-paper role-playing
tournaments; others challenged the
strategy boardgames or marched their
miniatures across terrain tables. For
myself (and about 3,000 others), Nirvana
was found where nearly 100 Amiga, Atari
ST and C-64 computers filled the "Computer Concourse," where they were
joined by a dozen Sega Genesis and
eight NEC TurboGrafx games. Even the
esteemed CGW Editor, Johnny Wilson,
was impressed when he saw it.
While large-scale computer events have
been a feature of GEN CON for only the
past three years, they have grown in size
to become the second most popular
event (behind role-playing). The credit for
this growth in computer gaming must go
to the two local user groups, MACE (Milwaukee Area Commodore Enthusiasts)
and MilAtari (the Milwaukee Atari Users

Group) who organized and ran the computer games.

used at GEN CON were provided by the
user groups' members.)

Both user groups took different approaches to organizing and running their
computer events. While both had computer "open gaming," MilAtari ran only
one other event, but did so on a huge
scale. MACE, in contrast, ran a large
variety of events.

The most interesting and popular of the
MACE competitions on the Amiga were
the Falcon and Populous events, which
used null modems to link two Amigas for
head-to-head real-time gaming. This
provided devotees of these games the
chance to test their prowess against unpredictable flesh and blood opponents.
The Populous tournament proved so
popular that extra sessions had to be
added. The C-64's most popular events
were Computer Risk! and Tetris.

The single MilAtari event was Midi
Maze. Utilizing the best feature of the ST,
its Midi Port, some 15 Atari ST systems
were daisy-chained into a ring network
with each player controlling his own
"happy face." Four teams of differentcolored happy faces stalked and assassinated each other through the maze
until only one remained. With two Midi
Maze rings being run constantly, over
1500 players competed in what was perhaps the most popular single event at
GEN CON.
MACE offered over 130 different games
for open gaming and ran over thirteen
tournaments. This all required a great
deal of effort. (Most of the computers

LucasFilm's Their Finest Hour game
packed the room with pilots hurling their
Spitfires against Heinkel Ills and their
protective swarms of Me109s. A nice
touch was the issue of an aerial ace certificate for every pilot scoring five or
more personal kills and Battle of Britain
commemorative pins to the top two
pilots. I saw one pilot rack up an impressive 62 kills!
That's the word from GEN CON '90.
See you in '91.

Letters

feature that does not appear in the
game? Why is "Hunter" quoted in bright
yellow letters without using his Aussie accent and using words which do not appear in the game? Why does the upper
left screen shot refer to a "Cruise" position when the game's console refers to a
"Set" position?

Women's Glib
I wanted to thank you for the very complimentary sneak preview of Spellcasting
101 in the November issue. It was impressively thorough despite the very late date
on which you received the game.
On the issue of a Female Mode in lieu of
Nice Mode: that wouldn't be an equal trade,
by far. For one thing, Nice Mode is mostly
subtractive; it's usually a matter of making
something that happens in Naughty Mode
not happen in Nice Mode (and then smoothing the edges of the resulting "hole.") A
Female Mode, as in Leather Goddesses of
Phobos, would be mostly additive, requiring
the addition of lots of material at all the
points where gender is, uh, significant.
A larger consideration, and the main
reason why LGOP had a Female Mode and
S101 didn't, is graphics. A Female Mode
would have required a second version of
dozens of pictures, and graphics are much
more expensive to create and much larger
to store on disk than equivalent text descriptions.
Also, I'm not sure that a Female Mode
would have been more utilized than Nice
Mode, since the percentage of female
players still seems to be mired down
around the 10% to 20% range. (And yes,
before you get a chance to say it, I do
worry about how those female numbers will
ever increase as long as we keep catering
to the male segment of the audience . . .)
A more subtle argument against a Female
Mode was a complaint that I heard from
several women who played the Female
Mode of LGOP: that they were simply experiencing a male sex fantasy with the
genders reversed. Clearly, a Female Mode
which met this objection would require
much more significant changes to the
game. Furthermore, being a male, I'm not
sure what a female sexual fantasy involves,
and I'm pretty sure that even if I was sure, I
wouldn't do a very good job writing one.
Nevertheless, despite all of the above, I
very much wanted to include a Female
Mode, and only gave it up with the greatest
reluctance and sadness.
Thanks again for the nice write-up!
Steve Meretzky
Bedford, MA
The graphic storage question aside, it

certainly sounds to us like we need male
and female co-designers on games like
S101 in order to avoid patriarchal
patronization. Meanwhile, the 90%+ of
our readers who are male should enjoy
the libidinous latitude enjoyed by Ernie
Eaglebeak in S101.

Sting Commander
I have noticed many things on Origin's
Wing Commander's box that are not in the
game. The company advertises that "what
you see is what you get" and that "every
picture on this box was taken from the
game." This cannot be true. Here are some
of the many examples.
The lasers on the box are just that. Lasers
are not laser cannons as in the game.
They also look a heck of a lot different than
in the game. There is no such person as Lt.
Shadow as appears in the box in the upper
left. The color and ship design in the ejection sequence is also not present (notice no
wings).
There is also no PkL. Karshk (Kilrathi) in
the game. The ship in the weapons
diagram looks more like a Gratha than any
Terran ships. Is this guy flying a Kilrathi vessel with a Kilrathi wingman? The asteroids
also look quite a bit different. Of course, I
don't want to be that close to them
anyway. Again, though, on the bottom picture, the lasers look different. Many
weapons on the box are not in the game as
well. The Hornet picture (same one as Lt.
Shadow) has three missiles that are not in
the game. Two of them are called "FF
Pikes," while the other one is unknown. And
what are the yellow lines around the crosshairs? In the lower picture, none of the
weapons are recognizable and the ship has
a heck of a lot of them. What is a Phalanx,
anyway? Now, on to the front of the box.
When ships get that close, they get blotchy.
Also, there is no ship named Spiculus. The
crosshairs and lasers look different than
they do in the game. And get a load of the
speed, 2400 kps. It's not possible in the
game I bought.
We'd like to explore some of this
WYSIWYG confusion, as well. Why does
the Hornet in the upper left screen shot
have 82 rear shield points? Why are the
map and text reversed on the briefing
screen in the small screen shot on the
back of the box? Why does the console
in the bottom screen shot show a "Tape"

It seems obvious that the marketing
department jumped the gun by representing the game screens on the package
as the final version of the game. In attempting to be able to say, "Every image
on this box was taken from the game"
(and to be the first company to be able to
say this), the lead time on printing the
packaging made for a promotion presentation of the product. We do not believe
this is malicious misrepresentation or
even significant subterfuge, but Origin is
risking having more cynical customers
quip that "every image on the box was
taken from the game."

Schizophrenic Journey
What's with all the "continued on page ..
."? It makes reading your fine magazine a
real adventure.
Dave Rekaiske
San Diego, CA
Would you believe we're part of the
"Scavenger Hunt School of Magazine
Layout" and want to get you to thumb
back and forth across our advertisers'
full color pages so often that you are subliminally coerced into purchasing everything that's advertised? Would you
believe our issues are scientifically laid
out according to the RND function on an
old Apple II+? How about a Vic 20?
Actually, articles are often continued because of printing limitations with our
new and larger format. The web press
we are currently on does not allow every
page to be a full-color page. Hence, we
have to make good use of every color
page we can schedule. If an article is
started in two-color mode, it would be a
waste to finish it in four-color. Therefore,
we tend to bounce the overflow pages to
the back. In the same way, we sometimes have to scramble to find an overflow page for four-color articles, so the
finish of an article which begins in fourcolor may end up toward the back of the
magazine. In general, the "broken" articles reflect production constraints.
Another reason for breaking up articles
deals with the psychology of the
newsstand reader. It looks like the
magazine has more to offer to the potential buyer at a magazine rack if there are
eight to ten articles which begin in the
first half of the book than if there are
four to five complete articles in the first
half of the book. We try to pack a lot into
the first part of the book so people will
realize just how intense our magazine
really is.

Review

You'll See SPOT...
(Continued from page 88)
many of his or her opponent's (or opponents')
"tiddlywinks" as possible. One does not have to
"bookend" the opponent's "tiddlywinks" in order
to transform them. Merely placing the "tiddlywink" adjacent to other "tiddlywinks" changes the color of all those it touches. Of course,
the so-called "tiddlywinks" are merely colored
"spots" in Spot, but unlike Jeremiah's leopard,
these "spots" do change.

Send in the Clones (Game Play)
The mechanics of the game are fairly
straightforward. During the player turn, one
directs the famous Seven-Up Spot of television
commercial fame to "clone" himself or "skip" to
a square up to two squares away (i.e. leaving
an intervening empty square). One can "clone"
a colored spot by clicking on it with the cursor
(designed in the shape of SPOTs hand) and ordering SPOT into an adjacent square. In this
case, the original colored spot stays and a new
colored spot is created. As soon as one clicks
on the original square, SPOT pops up ready to party. As soon as
one chooses the destination square, SPOT dives, cartwheels,
moonwalks, polevaults or spins into the chosen square.
One can "skip" with SPOT by clicking on a colored spot, then
clicking on the desired square (located two squares away in any
direction). Skipping has the disadvantage that one loses the
square where the original colored spot was resting, but the advantage of allowing the player to cover more ground with the
move (as well as seeing fancier footwork from SPOT).
In addition to the standard moves, SPOT offers an element of
chance. There are secret squares located randomly on the
boards. If the player directs SPOT to land on one of these secret
squares, the bonus screen pops up and the playing field is temporarily replaced with a slot machine display. If one is able to
line up three 7-Up logos, cherries, SPOT characters, or Virgin
Mastertronic logos, he/she wins a special advantage. A player
may receive extra time (in a timed game), a free turn, a free
placement, or even the chance to swap colored spots with
another player.

GO for It (Strategy)
Many players feel like SPOT: The Computer Game also bears
a resemblance to the ancient Oriental game of
Go. The objectives of the games are the same,
territorial conquest, and the playing pieces are
similar, colored stones and circles. Similar to
Go, it is impossible for the player to protect all
of his or her pieces (spots), so one must think
ahead far enough that it is possible to gain
more squares via capturing one's opponent's
pieces than one will lose during the opponent's
turn. Also like Go, the player needs to make
sure that he/she is continually expanding the
friendly territory. If he/she is not careful, it is
possible to be squeezed in and have to forfeit a
move. Unlike Go, one can have up to three opponents trying to whittle away at one's territory.
Also, the shape of the game board can change
from game to game.

Initial Moves: Players need to build a power
base by "cloning" their spots from the beginning. The documentation suggests building two
by two squares and this is sound strategy. One
must watch out, however, as the opponents'
spots get within two squares. Should "cloning"
a spot leave a "gap" next to three colored spots
(in sort of an "L" shape), the opponent will usually "skip" into
that gap. Try to extend the squares in such a way that the gap
from an odd-numbered "clone" move is always more than two
squares from the nearest spot of an opponent. By the same
token, one should be alert for the first time the opponent leaves
a gap next to three of his/her spots. Such an oversight provides
the first legitimate opportunity to gain from a "skip" move.
Mid-Game: Players should always think through the next series
of moves which could feasibly be made by their opponents. In a
four-player game, there are three possible moves to be made
before the player has a chance to recover from any wrong
moves committed during his/her current turn. Players must
evaluate whether any potential move will still be a net gain after
those turns are completed. If so, the move is probably a sound
one. If not, the player needs to try another approach.
End Game: Players who are behind must be bold, using a
plethora of "skip" moves to keep the balance shifting between
one's opponents until he/she has a chance to make a decisive
move. Players who are ahead must keep expanding slowly, but
surely, using "clone" moves to build territories which cannot be taken away from
them.

On the Spot
SPOT: The Computer Game offers a
simple concept with cute graphics and
stimulating game play. It offers fast play,
multi-player interaction, a long shelf life and
much delight. Here is an anecdote which illustrates how exceptional SPOT: The Computer Game is. In ten years of covering computer games, only once has CGWs
editor-in-chief entered a hospitality suite and immediately seated himself at a computer console
to play a game. That game was SPOT: The
Computer Game

Strategy

Hammering
Herman
(Continued from page 72)

them. There will be many times in a
player's career that while busily filling a
target with lead "up its six" (from directly
behind), he forgets to check his speed
and whooshes right past the enemy.
This means slow down. Try to remember to reduce speed by hitting the minus
key just prior to letting loose with the bullets, then speed up with the plus key
when flying past a target. This tactic
works well and can make the difference
between a crippling and killing pass. This
tactic is also useful for staying behind
wounded Me109's that keep twisting out
of one's sights by turning.
Slowing down must be used cautiously,
though. It is tantamount to painting
"shoot me here" on the tail of one's
fighter. If there is a 109 closing from behind when you start flying straight for a
target, then slowing down will allow the
enemy to rip one's plane up so badly the
only word that comes to mind is "per-

Their Finest
Holiday
(Continued
from page 58)

what would cause this scene to be
forever memorable was the lady who
stood next to us on the bridge and told
us stories of her experiences as a girl
during the Blitz. The bombs, the sirens,
the devastating damage, the massive
evacuation of children (including herself)
to the country. Stories like hers and
those of dozens of others made the tour
more than a tour; it became living history.
Among the highlights of the tour were
the world-famous Farnborough Air Show,
the Duxford Airshow, the 50th Anniversary London Flypast; and the 50th Anniversary Fireworks exhibition already
mentioned.
The Farnborough show featured the
world's largest aircraft, the Soviet A-225
Mriya transport which amazed the spectators as it dominated the sky during its
flight. The An-225 has half again the
capacity of the US Air Force's C5A
Galaxy. Duxford featured a mock air battle between Spitfires, a Hurricane, and
the only presently airworthy Me-109. The
London Flypast featured 166 aircraft
flying in formation over Buckingham

forated." [Ed. — I can think of a few
others.]

Tip Six
Ride the rollercoaster when tailing reargunned planes. Understand that the
enemy rear gunner is watching and waiting for the chance to do what he does
best: fill chase planes full of lead. The
way to foil that rear gunner is to use the
rollercoaster tactic of approaching
straight on until he opens fire, then
diving. Once below his field of fire, the
rear-gunner ceases to shoot. At that
point, the player's nose should be raised
until the target plane is again in sight so
that another burst or two can be fired at
it. The trick is to dive down again before
the rear gunner gets another bead on the
player's fighter. Be aware that this tactic
is straight out of Bomber Killing 101. It's
effective, but time consuming, and often
costs the player a few bullet holes when
charging in for the kill to finish off a softened bomber.

Tip Seven
Never forget your goals and their
priority. In summary, they are:
Palace (the largest flypast over Buckingham in more than 35 years).
Biggin Hill. Middle Wallop. Thorpe Abbotts. Duxford. North Weald. Seething.
The English have such great place
names. They also have a good sense of

1. Stay alive.
2. Disrupt enemy bombing runs, thus
saving your ground facilities.
3. Shoot down enemy bombers.
4. Destroy German fighter support.
Of course, the challenging part of the
game is that these priorities are most
easily accomplished in reverse order!
Fighters are fun to play "tag" with and enjoyable to shoot down, but taking too
much time to do so allows the bombers
to drop their loads and start for home.
Once bombers are headed home, it's
easy to take the time to pick them off,
but to do so means missing an opportunity to disrupt the incoming bombers
who haven't dropped their payloads yet.
Even in the best of play, one will lose
airfields, planes and factories. Success is
measured by slowing these losses down.
Time will pass and September 17th will
arrive leaving the player in the midsts of
a mass of smoking ruins and, hopefully,
a still effective fighting force (and, thus, a
victorious conclusion).
Finally, stay alert, remember what was
learned in flight school, and beware of
the Hun in the sun. Good day. gentlemen.
humor about it. There is a town in the
East Anglian region of England called
"Bury St. Edmunds". When one of us
asked the coach driver "how long 'til we
get to Bury St. Edmunds?" he replied
"Why? Has he died?"

Game Hints

Scorpion s Tale
(Con tinued from 44)
their tans. So much for teamwork and
daring rescues.
With nothing better to do, Guy might as
well explore as much of the ship as he
can, from the crow's nest to the leaky
hold. At the very least, he'll find more inventory. Like a whole cupboard full of
cereal that looks suspiciously like Cap'n
Crunch (sorta reminds me of Cracker
Jacks ...). Just remember, if it ain't
nailed down, grab it! And I'll bet once
Guy has everything, he could really cook
up a storm in that galley (hohoho).
Hey! Look! That's Monkey Island™ off
the port bow! Wowee!! Well, someone
had to show a little enthusiasm. The
crew is as laid-back and blase as ever.
Even reaching the island can't shake
them out of their vacation mode. Ho hum
Of course, you understand the ship is
not docked (there isn't a dock, for one
thing). So Guy is gonna have to find a
way to get from here to there. It's not
hard. Think Italian.

Guy might be wondering about that little monkey. Let me tell you, that's one
hungry monkey and it's gonna take a lot
of bananas to make him happy. One
skimpy fruit off the beach just won't do
the job. You'll need, oh, maybe four or
five of them.
As Guy meanders about, he'll come
across various notes and memos that provide a fascinating insight into the social
life of the island. Letters from Herman to
the cannibals. Missives from the cannibals to LeChuck, and vice-versa. Eh?
Cannibals??? Oh, don't worry, they're
trying to cut back a bit on cholesterol
levels these days, so they're probably
harmless. Kinda.
It's not easy to make friends with cannibals, even health-conscious ones, but
I'm sure Guy can manage it (that's no
idol statement ... or is it?). Anyway,
once he has the key to the Monkey's
Head, he shouldn't go rushing right off.
Finding LeChuck takes more than just
desire. Those are nasty catacombs down

'Smatter of fact, they're at the bottom
of a crevice. Find some rope, Guy, and
you're all set. Meanwhile, keep walking
around. That pond at the end of the dry
riverbed looks interesting. Umm. Well,
that's not a sight you see every day (and
a good thing, too). Herman Toothrot, a
sometimes-informative castaway who
pops up now and then, will be happy to
explain why his friend is just, shall we
say?, hanging around doing nothing.
Come to think of it, just why is that
riverbed dry, anyhow?
Don't overlook the fort at the top of the
volcano. Some nice stuff up there is just
waiting for Guy's sticky fingers. Tower
Rock (at the river fork) is another good
tourist attraction. That primitive art looks
especially interesting. Bet you can do all
sorts of neat things with it. Of course,
you'd better save first or you just might
be sunk.

Anyway, what about the rest of the
ship? Not much to see, except for the
captain's cabin, and the captain is in. He
is also not deaf. That's the problem with
being invisible: it doesn't make you inaudible, too. So, how is Guy gonna snarf
that key on the wall, when he can't just
walk up to it? Good question. Wonder
what the key is made of? (No, doesn't
look like wood . . .)
Good work, Guy! With voodoo root in
hand, it's time for a quick (very quick!)
trip to the cannibals, and then back to
the ship. Ooops! Looks like the ship is
gone! Only one of the ghost crew is left.
Left behind, poor thing. And he so
wanted to be at the wedding.
Wedding?? Egads, while Guy was shlepping back and forth, LeChuck set sail for
Melee Island™ to marry his beloved! Oh
no! Quick, back home to the island! The
wedding has to be stopped!
Just in time, Guy makes it to the
church. But, just in time for what? Ah,
there's a surprise or two in store here!
Not to mention the Big Fight (every hero
has to have a Big Fight With The Main
Bad Guy At The End) between Guy and
LeChuck. Will Guy prevail? Will he be reunited with the Governor? Will he ever
drink root beer again? Play the game
and find out the answers to these and
other pressing questions!

At last, Guy has reached (almost, that
is) his destination. Naturally, there are a
few things to do here. Like finding the
way to the ghost ship. (Nope, no big
neon signs that say "This way to the
Ghost Ship"; sorry about that.)
Okay, first order of business is, as
usual, looking around. Don't worry, Guy
won't get lost in the jungle, so go ahead
and explore. There's a nifty rowboat (not
even leaky!) on the beach. With a pair of
oars, Guy could really get around.
Wonder where the oars might be?

creaking door (hmmm, sounds like a
great title for a horror story).

Okay, now let's go below and see
what's there. Ick! That red stuff gurgling
by ain't lava. If Guy can't figure out what
it is, maybe all those eyes, noses, hearts,
and what have you stuck in the walls
and floors will clue him in. Definitely, this
is not a nice place. Try not to look as
you walk by.

Whew! Well, maybe the Caribbean isn't
quite the place for your next vacation
after all ... at least, not if it's Melee Island™. In case you've been wondering,
throughout the game, that's how the
names are displayed, with that little ™
after them. We don't know if Lucasfilm
is poking fun at their tendency to
trademark everything (including names
from the Bible) or making absolutely certain of ancillary rights for future products,
so we'll just humor them, this issue.

Finally, the ghost ship! Of course, Guy
can't just go waltzing in there. At least,
not without a little protection. Heads up,
and all that.

Anyway, I see by the old invisible clock
on the wall™ it's that time again. If you
need help with an adventure game, you
can reach me in the following ways:

Well, looks like some of the crew is on
deck and carousing the night away.
Maybe they won't hear as Guy opens the
creaking door. Fat chance! That's one
mighty big creeeeak. Something will
have to be done about that. Especially
since the voodoo root is below in the
hold, in a crate nailed, chained, glued
and otherwise securely battened down . .
. and the tools are (of course) behind the

On Delphi, stop by the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie, visit the Games RoundTable
(type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed,
stamped envelope if you live in the
United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, New York, N.Y. 10028.

there, and Guy can't get ahead unless he
has a head, so he'd better get a head.

Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1990 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Foreign Correspondence

Over There
(Continued from page 20)

acter into precise positions to examine/pick-up objects. This has now
been corrected, with Operation Stealth
being more forgiving in that area. Available now on the Amiga and ST for
£24.99.
Dragonflight, from German software
house Thalion, takes a top-down view
for the surface landscape with a first-person perspective down in the dungeons.
Basically, the story involves finding out
what has happened to the dragons that
lived in the vale—have they vanished or
been killed?
You control four pre-rolled characters
during the quest. The principal elements
of the game system are standard in this
genre. Visit a variety of towns, buy
weapons and food, talk to people and
hang around taverns for information.
Thalion has developed a very efficient
menu system that cuts "mouse-wandering" down to a minimum. Interaction is
achieved by clicking on a "mouth" icon.

No parser or keyword system is
employed. NPC replies are quite wordy,
though.
Combat takes a novel perspective. Your
view shifts to a close up side-on viewpoint, complete with animated action, immediately after you despatch your orders. An overhead window gives you a
tactical view of the protagonists' positions. Magic is handled in a minimal
fashion, as each character must learn
spells, but only one spell at a time may
be held in memory. Available now on the
Amiga and ST for £24.99.
Distributed by German software house
Rainbow Arts, Conqueror is a 3-D tactical tank game that can be played on an
arcade, semi-arcade, and strategy level.
You have external control over one or
more tanks that run upon a 3-D, undulating landscape. Buildings, trees, hills and
roads provide some of the scenery. On
the top-level strategy area you "buy" your
tanks from a limited budget (you can
buy a mix of German, American or
British light, medium and heavy tanks).
Then you are given a primary and secondary objective. Artillery bombardment

and spotter planes are available here.
Control is fairly detailed as individual
tracks are separately controlled, as is the
turret and gun. Available now for the
Amiga and ST for £19.99.
Note: The above games, and any of
the other games mentioned in "Over
There" in past issues, can be obtained
from:
Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY.
Telephone: 01144-51-263-6306
SDC, 60 Boston Road, London,
England, W7 3TR. Telephone: 01144-1567-7621
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins Square, Burnt Mills, Basildon,
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ. Telephone:
01144-268-590-766
Please note that stated prices are recom
mended retail price only. Mail-order
prices will often be substantially cheaper.
All of the above telephone numbers
assume you can dial direct. If you
have any trouble, contact the international operator.

Review

When You're in Command, Command!
(Continued from page 41)
and serves as a good introductory scenario which will continue
to challenge experienced players long after the game is mastered.
The WWII scenario begins at a point in early 1942 and adds
armor, aircraft carriers and air units to the game. The reduced
American navy is based in Hawaii and off of north-eastern
Australia, the Japanese navy is at home and can strike in any
direction. The Germans and Russians are heavily engaged and
Britain is in a weakened state. The allies need time because, with
their larger economy, they can eventually prevail if they can conduct some early, skillful defense.
This is a similar situation to that offered in the 1986 "WW Ill"
scenario. Here, everything gets added to the game: oil, nukes,
satellites, killer satellites ("k-sats"), foreign aid and intelligence
scans. These latter two items are used during the "two-minute
drill" of cold-war diplomacy and maneuvering before either player
has the option to declare war (and, also, during any truce which
the players might agree to).
Peacetime, that lull before the shooting begins prior to the
WWIII and WWIV scenarios, is an interesting game of politics and
economics. Income is generated much faster during these
periods of non-combat, so the purchasing of new units becomes
much easier. Furthermore, units may be "teleported" to new (and
more threatening) locations at will during peacetime. The only
way to get an idea where the enemy is concentrating is to conduct an intelligence scan, which will show you the positions (although not the types) of enemy units across the board.
During peacetime and wartime, foreign aid can be used to
"buy" the allegiance of neutral countries. The going rate is $10 billion per city or base in the country. If the enemy invades a
neutral during a war, the other player can often buy their loyalty
wholesale on the foreign aid market. Buying loyalty during
peacetime is vital for giving the player a strategic area in which
to base troops for the forthcoming conflict. Areas around the Middle East and other oil-producing regions become foreign aid

"sink holes" in no time as both players often contest each other
around these important strategic locations.
The Russian player begins the WWIII scenario with a huge army
has which must strike hard and fast in order to secure a solid
enough economic base to achieve total victory. Thus, all of
Europe must be overrun, and the Middle East seized quickly,
with a minimum of casualties. This done, the fleet much be
launched across the Atlantic before the Americans can prepare a
proper defense. This usually means staging the Russian army in
through Cuba. For the Allies, tenacity is the key. The Suez and
Panama canals are the keys to operational flexibility and efficiently mobilizing the economy is a paramount concern. Keep a satellite over the North Atlantic to watch for that Russian fleet!
The WWIV scenario (circa 2023) again uses every option. In
this scenario, however, capitols and territories are assigned randomly (for the two "new" superpowers). Players begin dead even
in terms of resources and starting funds, each with no armies
and few allies, but plenty of money to purchase both. The fiveminute cold-war interlude becomes an exhilarating, frenzied race
to formulate a grand strategy and then conduct it from the
ground up. No doubt this one will become the hard-core player's
scenario of choice.
The final scenario has no year, being dated ???? It presupposes
the collapse of governments, so that the world is naught but citystates (and oil wells) ripe for the picking. Each player begins
with only his capital, $50 billion and the world to conquer. This
might be thought of as the Empire scenario. The enemy's capital
must be discovered and captured in order to win the game. This
scenario uses no nukes, satellites, k-sats, foreign aid or intelligence scans. It is just a good, old-fashioned, hammer and tongs
slug-out kind of strategy game.

Surveillance
The beauty of this game is its handling of limited intelligence.
Players simply do not know how the enemy is maneuvering behind the lines. Each unit has a "radar range", which is the distance at which it spots enemy units. Naturally, aircraft units and
carriers have the longest range and infantry the shortest. When
playing the WW 111 or IV scenarios, satellites can be launched
which park over a certain part of the globe and inform a player
of everything the
enemy has there, except
for submarines. During
peace-time, the only real
clue as to the position of
any enemy forces is
through the use of an intelligence scan. This,
though, pre-sents its own
drawbacks. The
satellites and killer-satellites is yet another element of conflict and subterfuge in Command
HQ.
Fortunately, the question of "what can the
enemy see of my forces?" is easily answered.
A simple keystroke
reveals the "common"
units visible to both

Review

sides. Thus, the screen shows all
enemy forces discovered, but only the
player's units which the enemy can
currently "see." It is hard not to gloat
after finding out that the enemy has
no clue about the huge invasion armada heading his way. Such is the nature of war.

the map to observe an operational
area of the strategic board, the zoom
window can be altered to one of three
different sizes, each centering on the
targeted area. "Macro" functions can
also be programmed for a player's
convenience. Usually, this entails
programming an instant zoom to a
hotspot with a single keystroke. As battle reports come in, there are several
ways for the player to instantly zoom
to the crisis spot, and the destinations
for one's troops and the paths they'll
take are quickly and easily accessed.

Combat Doctrine
Combat is by attrition and tends to
be protracted enough for players to
have a chance to react. Each unit has
a strength bar which runs along its bottom. As units suffer casualties, this bar
shortens. Units may be "repaired" at
friendly objectives, with ships limited
to finding repairs at dock spaces only.
Thus, over time, units will become
revived and able to fight another day.
This method of unit "replacements" is
infinitely cheaper than repurchasing
units as reinforcements. Salvaging the expensive units (carriers
and armor) is especially important for this reason.
When land and naval units engage another unit in battle, they
acquire a "facing." Units attacked from directions other than their
facing suffer additional damage from those attacks (thus, armor
overruns and infantry airdrops can become decisive). Furthermore, each unit "shoots" only once per turn, but can be attacked
by as many units as can be brought to bear against it. Thus,
flooding a defender with several attackers will keep an attacker's
casualties low.
Air units can deliver devastating air strikes, but also abstractly
fight each other (with the computer determining failed mission
and aircraft eliminated results). Airpower is vital to any operation's success due to its enormous sighting and combat ranges.
Ships have different "arm's lengths." Carriers can strike from a
good distance, while cruisers must have their icons touching the
enemy they wish to bombard. Submarines, on the other hand,
must have their icon overlap the enemy to be attacked. Thus, a
well-managed naval battle will go to a solid combined arms navy

Nuclear Viability
Nukes are a touchy point in this game. At the time of this writing, the penalties for the use of nukes has been greatly increased
over previous test versions [Ed.: Amen!]. The first player to use
a nuke is at a particular disadvantage. [Ed.: Not only politically,
but pragmatically correct!] On the upside, an entire mass of
enemy troops can be wiped out, with naught but a nuclear wasteland where they once stood. [Ed.: This is the upside?] On the
downside, allies and "their forces" will defect to the other player
or become neutral, while neutrals might throw in with the enemy!
One drawback in the game's artificial intelligence is that the computer player will never use nukes. Thus, the penalty is twice as
severe when playing against the computer as opposed to playing
against another human player. Two other limiting factors concerning nukes is that a player cannot use nukes if he has nuked his
opponent three times without retaliation and, if too many nukes
are used, a nuclear winter can be triggered.

Advanced Functions
Command HQ is an extraordinary pleasure to play because so
many user comfort features were built in. When one "zooms" in

The "gee whiz" features of Command HQ are threefold and quite
remarkable in a strategy game. One allows the player to switch sides at any
point in a game. Whether the computer is kicking one's booty and the
player wants to check out what's
going on on the other side, or when
conducting a 2-player game on a single computer, it's a remarkable function. Secondly, there is a feature which can instantly
turn any solo game into a two-player game. Call it the old "care
to join me?" feature.
Finally, each game, when concluded, is saved as a "film"
(which, in turn, can be stored in a file). Not only can this film be
reviewed (from either side's perspective, or only showing the
units common to both sides' observations) allowing one to study
strategies and discover why certain things did and didn't work
(and perhaps learn how one's opponent thinks), but there is also
an extra feature. While watching a film, at any point, it can be
turned back into a game! Thus, if a player wants to go back to a
certain point and "correct his mistakes," he can. It allows players
to explore all the options available at decisive points in the war.
This is an outstanding feature for students of Command HQ to
revel in, and one which sets this game above the pack and will
give it a long life in the computer strategy game market.

Intelligence Gaps
The computer "player" has certain inherent limits to its
capabilities as an opponent. Aside from the aforementioned fact
that it (rather sanely) never uses nukes, it is also loath to conduct "fleet tactics" when maneuvering its navy, opting instead to
send ships out singly or in pairs, rather than in large, protective
groupings. The computer is also limited in that it will not conduct
airdrop missions. Finally, the artificial intelligence does not discriminate against different objectives. It "sees" every oil well, city
and base as the same type of "target," and thus will not concentrate on, say, oil objectives, even though it is suffering a terrible shortfall in fuel.

Prognosis
If there could be "winners" in a global war, it would have to be
all the players of Command HQ. MicroProse and Ozark
Softscape have redefined how computer strategy/war games can
(and should) be played. The tense, real-time pressure of warfare
against another human player in a true test of strategy is the
most challenging and rewarding experience that enthusiasts of
this genre of game can hope to achieve. Despite the fact that a
computer opponent can never quite challenge a player as a live
opponent can, Command HQ offers the best of both worlds.
This is the game we've all been waiting for.

Sneak Preview

Secret Weapons
(Continued from page 17)

economy. The irony is that strategic
bombing's great contribution was that it
pulled the Luftwaffe up in 1944. With
long range escort fighters we were in a
position to destroy the Luftwaffe over Germany, which gave us the air superiority
that made Normandy possible.

CGW: Getting back to the dam-busting
raids. You had low-level torpedo attacks
in Battlehawks 1942. Will you include
the dam-busting raids in SWOTL?
Holland: Not as a specific mission in
which you fly against the dam and use
skip bombs to attack it. However, you
will be able to select the dams as
strategic high-level bombing targets.
CGW: Why are you excluding the dambusting raids?
It's a matter of scope. The game will
concentrate on American bombing campaign and will emphasis the American at-

titudes and decisions. To include the
British attacks on the dams would require the expansion of the game beyond
the present scope.
CGW: So the game is primarily from
the 8th Air Force perspective?
Murray: It is entirely from the 8th Air
Force perspective because Larry is not
even including B-24s in the game.

CGW: The dilemma in computer games
that try to recreate history is that the history of the battle is already known. From
a game design standpoint, history takes
away the fog of war. The task here is to
put the fog back into the battle.
Holland: I've been thinking about that
issue too. I have already been asking
Professor Murray how they figured out
how effective the bombing was. Of
course, the Allies had a great leg up on
the Germans because they had Ultra,
which was the best source of information
about how effective our bombing was.
But if you take away Ultra then the fog
of war really comes in. Additionally,
reconnaissance flights were subject to
variable weather. There could be a long

delay in finding out how effective a raid
was.
Murray: For example, in the Battle of
Berlin Harris [chief of Bomber Command] hit them at the end of November
'43 and because of the cloud cover they
didn't get their first pictures until
February '44! In terms of figuring out the
effectiveness of his attack, he had no
idea for almost three months.
Holland: So weather will play a part in
the campaign game. Certain targets are
unavailable because you cannot see
them. Or you hit them but may not get
the results of your attack because of
weather conditions.
CGW: So you plan to use the weather
and clouds as a very literal "fog of war"
element.
Holland: Yes.
CGW: Are you planning to use Ultra as
a variable level of information?
Holland: Yes. There was randomness
in the way Ultra worked. They did not get
100% de-encription. That gives us a little
latitude to play with the information we
give the player.

Reader Input Device

Conversions Received
Anarchy (Psygnosis) Amiga
Dark Heart of Uukrul (Broderbund) IBM
DragonStrike (SSI) Amiga
Ishido (Accolade) Amiga
King's Quest I: Enhanced Version (Sierra) IBM
Loom (LucasFilm) Amiga
Out Run (SEGA) Atari ST, IBM
Pipe Dream (LucasFilm) Apple
Pool of Radiance (SSI) Amiga
Puffy's Saga (UBI Soft) C&1
Rastan (Taito) IIGS
War Eagles (Cosmi) IBM

Taking a Peek

Taking a Peek
(Continued from page 10)

the player much to discover en route to
the legendary Cheyennes' gold mine.
This action adventure game does not
(yet, we're assured) support sound
boards for the IBM version. Amiga, Atari
ST, IBM, Macintosh ($39.99). Circle
Reader Service #5.
Spectrum Holobyte
2061 Challenger Drive
Alameda, CA 94501
STUNT DRIVER: If there's a feature
missing from this program, we sure can't
find it. A state-of-the-art automobile driving/race/stunt simulator, Stunt Driver
also throws in such features as custom
track design, multiple opponents,
modem head-to-head play, full VCR
replay options, multiple car types, handling variables and lots more. Higher
resolution graphics and sound are pretty
much for the faster machines only. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #6.

DESIGNERS'
NOTES
(Continued from page 50)
take place without a significant struggle with the cultists.
The Oracle expands on the story by
revealing some information about a
pureblood who might have some useful
information. He has been captured by
the "tuffs" of the mutant village of Okkarn. The goal of this mini-quest is to
free the pureblood, against the objections of the mutants holding him, in
order to learn that Lord Dominix has imprisoned Captain Equitus of Xantinium
in the town of Yvrium. Dominix's plan is
to convince Lady Cassia, Equitus'
mother, that the mutants have taken
and killed her son. If she were to
believe this, even the normally openminded Cassia might be convinced to
join Dominix's war against the mutants.
Returning to the Oracle for a final consultation, the player's character is encouraged to find and rescue Equitus because he should be able to help stop
the war. Those who play Dekker, the
human tuff or Jakka, a human-appearing mutant, can simply walk into Yv-

Walt Disney Computer Software, Inc.
500 S. Buena Vista Street
Burbank, CA 91521
DUCKTALES, THE QUEST FOR
GOLD: One thing Disney knows is how
to tell a tale. DuckTales has a nice
scavenger hunt action/exploration story
to help carry along the adequate
graphics in this adventure/arcade game.
Flying the airplane and exploring the
mountains, jungles and caves require considerably more dexterity than some
youngsters may possess, but the game is
recommended for ages eight and up.

rium. Of course, those who play Varigg,
the green mutant, need to wear a
slave's collar to enter the city. To get a
collar, though, one will have to ambush
a party of human slavers and take it by
force.
In Yvrium, the gossip is full of the exploits of Bessek, a renegade mutant
who attacked Lord Dominix and nearly
killed him. Bessek is being held until
the next running of the Mutant Games,
where he will be executed in gladiatorial
combat. Naturally, it becomes of
paramount importance to free Bessek,
a hero to the mutants. Then, the
liberated Bessek can direct the hero or
heroine to the Subs, a secret society of
mutant freedom fighters who live
beneath the streets of Zero Town. Upon
arrival, the leader of the Subs explains
that Captain Equitus is being held in the
tunnels beneath Dominix's palace. He
also reveals that the keys to Equitus'
cell should be in the possession of Captain Theodus, chief of Dominix's guard.
By posing as the servant who brings
Theodus his meals, it is easy to slip into
the Captain's quarters and find the
keys. Talking to the town historian, as
well as to its resident thief, uncovers the
secret that the dry well in the northwest
corner of town can be used to enter the
underground tunnel system. Those who

IBM ($44.95), Amiga, C-64 ($29.95).
Circle Reader Service #7
MICKEY'S CROSSWORD PUZZLE
MAKER: This is definitely the game one
would like to have their 1st through 4th
grader playing on the school Apple computer. The clues and words are right at
that level, and the kids can play solitaire,
against one of three computer characters
(from Goofy to Mickey) or play against
other kids by sharing the same computer. Creative kids (and parents/
teachers) can invent puzzles to reflect
this week's spelling words, and even
print them out! Apple II series ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #8.
enter the depths of the forgotten
catacombs must negotiate the dark and
dangerous remains of an ancient fallout
shelter. If one can avoid harm from the
variety of mutated giant rats, hideously
deformed humans and other beasts, it
is possible to locate Equitus' guarded
cell.
The freeing of Equitus brings about
the dramatic endgame sequences which
tell the conclusion to the story. In this
sequence, Equitus reveals the
treachery—and deception—of Dominix, a
mutant himself! Equitus is made the
new Lord by the people (mutants and
purebloods alike) so that he and the
Lady Cassia may usher in a new era of
peace and brotherhood. The player's
character is made the new Lord of the
mutants of the plains, as a reward for
valor and courage.

The Bottom Line
From the beginning, the player of Bad
Blood is made aware that his goal is to
help avert a civil war between the
pureblooded humans and their mutant
cousins. In the story's conclusion, that
war is averted by the unmasking of
Lord Dominix's dark secret about his
less-than-pure heritage. Thus, hypocrisy
in high places is uncovered and justice
is brought to light.

Editorial

Five-Star
Observations

"If restaurant critics can quantify a subjective experience such as dining into a
five-star rating system," runs the logic,
"why can't CGW offer a rating system
along with their reviews?" We hear from
readers and advertisers alike that we
should rate software on a standard scale.

league thinks it's a 57%. It is to be expected that the 94% might drop very
quickly into, at least, the 70% range.
"The rating would be blind," you say? An
"in-house" reviewer would still know from
the reactions of colleagues as they look
at the game how they are receiving it.

Frankly, the issue comes up for
editorial discussion from time to time
and has been rejected for several
reasons. First of all, we feel that the
ratings provided by our readers are a
standard. If we were to provide a
reviewer's rating along with each review,
we would be contaminating the readers'
ratings that we depend upon. Many
readers would tend to simply follow the
leader in rating the games, instead of offering their honest opinions.

Third, CGW readers tend to be voracious readers. Over and over again, we
are told that they read our magazine
from cover to cover. Numerical (or even
icon-based) ratings tend to discourage
reading. How many people would "waste"
their time reading a review of a one-star
game (or one that didn't manage to earn
a "passing grade" on a 100-point scale)?
Yet, one reviewer's 53% might be another
person's 93% and the latter might never
discover that game upon seeing that
53% rating.

Second, there is no real standard when
different criteria are involved. If the same
person were reviewing every piece of
software, the numerical rating would
mean something because the same
criteria would be utilized in the same
way. Since we use several different
reviewers, the ratings would be extremely uneven, according to their tastes.
Some have suggested that we could
ameliorate this unevenness by using
three ratings per review. Of course, our
readers' ratings offer a more consistent
means of providing a quantitative rating
by using considerably more than three
ratings per game. So, why change a successful formula?
Further, getting three ratings per review
would take more logistical effort should
the ones providing the ratings be "
out-of-house." However, should the magazine
use three "in-house" reviewers to provide
the ratings, there is considerable risk of
contamination. One reviewer might have
been set to give a program a 94% when
he discovers that his colleague thinks the
game deserves a 62% and another col-

Fourth, one push toward numerical
ratings comes from our advertisers.
Many of them have so much confidence
in their products that they wish for a
venue where they can "take on" their
competition head-to-head and show
everyone which product is best. Unfortunately, many of these marketing executives have not completely thought
through the notion. Whereas Siskel &
Ebert's "Thumbs Up" or "Thumbs Down"
in a movie review will be one of a multitude of evaluations for a film, there are
only a few magazines where readers can
gain impressions of a computer game.
Such a "quick and dirty" means of
"reviewing" a game could be devastating
to a good product or misleading with
regard to a bad product.
In the long run, we believe our readers
are better served with the ratings
provided by a larger sample and printed
in the center of our magazine. Except for
paiktographies (i.e. game-o-graphies)
where one reviewer compares all the
games in a given genre, those are the
only ratings you'll see in CGW.

