August 1991

Features
ROM(ing) the Halls of the Future

Six Flags at Half-Mast
10
16

"Party" Line for Fantasy Role-Players

67

An Axis Strategy Guide to SSI's Second Front / Tim Carter

Operating on Life

EA's Latest Flies in Review Formation / Russell Sipe

26

64

Exploring Konami's Theme Park Mystery / Allen Greenberg

Wehrmacht East!

PartI of Our Summer CES Report / Johnny Wilson

Chuck Yeager's Air Combat

Number 85

& Death II: The Brain

72

Reviewing Games Ain't Exactly Brain Surgery / Dr. J. Cheng

A Preview of the New On-Line AD&D Adventure / Alan Emrich

30

Lights Out in Space
Reflections on Star-King / Dave Arneson

38

Take Your Pick!
Reviewing UbiSoft's Pick 'N Pile / Allen Greenberg

Landing the Big Ones in

Harpoon

43

A Strategy Guide / Jim Lowerre

52

Accountants & Armor
An Initial Decree on SSI's Medieval Lords / Chuck Moss

You're Pulling My Legate!

58

The Satyricon of Strategies for Centurion / Alan Emrich

Going Down With the

Yamato

General Quarters' Banzai Reviewed / Lt. H.E. Dille

60

Departments
Taking A Peek
Scorpion's Tale (Space Quest IV)
The Rumor Bag
Game Ratings Chart (Top 100 Games Rated)
Hall of Fame
Scorpion's Mail
Scorpion's View (Wonderland)
Another Look at Reach for the Stars
Inside the Industry: Comdex
Over There (European Games Report)
Reader Input Device
Editorial

6
19
22
48
49
51
64
68
78
84
90
96

Taking a Peek

Access
Salt Lake City, UT
LINKS CHAMPIONSHIP COURSE: This expansion disk for Links: The Challenge of
Golf adds the Bay Hill Club & Lodge.
Enough water hazards to end California's
drought condition make this course tremendously challenging. Since Bay Hill has one
of the toughest finishing holes in golf, this
course will really be a "must play" for the
serious Links player. IBM ($24.95). Circle
Reader Service #1.
Accolade
San Jose, CA 95128
JACK NICKLAUS PRESENTS THE
MAJOR CHAMPIONSHIP COURSES OF
1991: Accolade is the entertainment
software publisher with the strongest record
in supplemental products, giving their driving games and golf games, in particular,
long shelf life and tremendous replay value.
This course disk, requiring Jack Nicklaus'
Greatest 18 Holes of Major Championship Golf, contains three new courses:

Hazeltine National Golf Club (U.S. Open
Championship), Royal Birkdale Golf Club
(British Open Championship) and Crooked
Stick Golf Club (PGA Championship). IBM
($21.95). Circle Reader Service #2.
Apogee Software Productions
4206 Mayflower
Garland, TX 75043
COMMANDER KEEN: What's part
shareware and part commercial software?
Why, Commander Keen, of course. This trilogy of highly "Nintendo-esque" arcade
games is a classic scroll-around-and-zap
game. The game has been translated into a
very smooth-performing IBM format and is
of true commercial quality. The first game
of the trilogy is available as shareware, the
other two may only be purchased by direct
order from Apogee. IBM ($30 for all three
volumes). Circle Reader Service #3.
Epyx, Inc.
Redwood City, CA
CALIFORNIA GAMES II: In Epyx's first
return to the floppy format in years, the
Atari Lynx developer picks up where it left
off. In California Games II, players are challenged with five radical events that are
"more Californian" than comparing tans
with George Hamilton. Three competitions
take players on or over the water as they

bodyboard, jet ski and hang glide (a real
cliff cruncher, that one). Then, snowboarding opens with the player's on-screen persona parachuting down to a virgin slope
and ends up as a wild downhill ride (complete with "snow bowl"). Finally, kneepads
are in order for the skateboarding challenge. This aqueduct arena brings all of
those arcade skateboarding games right to
your PC (using VGA graphics and AdLib
sound support). Epyx continues to be the
leader in multi-venue action games. IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #4.
Masque Publishing
Englewood, CO
MASQUE VIDEO POKER: Every once in a
while, a quality "gambling" game comes
along. This is one of them. Masque Video
Poker takes this popular casino
moneymaker and turns it into a classroom/laboratory for players. Including variations for different video poker systems
which are currently popular in Las Vegas
and Atlantic City, the game offers advice
and statistics enough to sharpen any
player's skills. It might even help them to
actually turn a profit at most video poker
machines. [Ed: Of course, past or simulated performance is no guarantee of future success.] IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service #5.

Taking a Peek

Merit Software

Dallas, TX
MEDIEVAL WARRIORS: Monty Python
used to say, "And now for something completely different." Then they'd produce
familiar elements assembled in an offbeat
way. So it is with Medieval Warriors. Two
armies, consisting of twelve identical (except in name) warriors, battle over four different terrain settings in a military strategy
game with a twist. While the nature of the
tactical combat gives the game an Ancient
Art of War feel, the capacity for modem
play sets the game apart from that
predecessor. A pseudo-hex-grid overlay
regulates the movement of the pieces,
which are all rated for strength, speed and
weapons ability. Amiga ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #6.
Micro League Sports

Newark, DE
MICRO LEAGUE PERSONAL PRO: At
last, something for the computer golfer that
will enhance his or her game on the course.
Personal Pro is just that, an interactive golf
instructor that can be programmed to fit an
individual's game. Every detail of every
major golf problem is analyzed in "clinic"
style, showing cause, effect and solutions.
With an easy "answer the question" interface, the game's database proceeds to
present different views and angles of ball
flight, stance and swing to help the nonpros among us "see what we're doing
wrong." Solutions are then presented in the
form of animations. What a clever piece of
software! [Ed: Of course, past and simulated performance is no guarantee of future success.] IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service #7.
Ocean Software, Ltd.

Manchester. UK
F29 RETALIATOR: A typical Europeanstyle flight simulator, this program simulates the Advanced Tactical Fighter
prototypes (which inspired competition between the Grumman and Lockheed coalitions within the U.S.) in that players can
choose to fly either the X-29 or YF-22. The
game is amazingly fast-scrolling and has an
abundance of available missions and equipment, along with a moving map navigation
aid and a Maverick TV camera function to
add to the experience. The ground terrain is
detailed in certain theaters, yet spartan in
others. With the exception of the artwork
for the YF-22 aircraft in the simulation still
being modeled after speculation, difficulty
in cycling through the weapons options, a
somewhat cumbersome user interface and
inability to install to the hard disk, F-29
Retaliator has plenty to offer even the
most discriminating simulation fan. Amiga
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #8.
Psygnosis

Brookline, MA
ARMOUR-GEDDON: There is nothing,
repeat nothing, small about this game.
Psygnosis' action games have always been
quality fare, but now they are publishing a
fascinating concept in vehicle "simulation".

Requiring some strategic planning in the
"building" and "research" of the helicopters,
fighters, bombers, hovercraft, heavy and
light tanks needed to sweep the area clean
of "an ultimate terrorist threat," the game
plays like several great sim/arcade games
rolled into one. The real-time element of
play is challenging enough, but add to that
a direct-connect capability for team or head
to-head play, and you've got a Psygnosis
"psygnature" product. The smooth scrolling
graphics presented with "camera angles"
and multi-perspective viewing make this a
cutting-edge technical game package.
Amiga ($49.99). Circle Reader Service #9.
TR Development, Inc.

wargame for the Amiga, Brigade Commander is a tactical modern battlefield
simulation with lots of extras. On a hexbased grid (at 500 meters to the hex) and
played in real time, this solitaire-only game
allows for stacking of ten units per hex and
gives animations and sounds for combat
and movement. The big plus is the terrain
and unit design features (akin to SSG's
Warplan and Warpaint systems). Included
in the package is a Desert Storm data disk,
with scenarios of "hypothetical" clashes in
the desert (the real ones were too onesided). All in all, the game is an interesting
study in modern tactical air-land warfare.
Amiga ($44.95). Circle Reader Service #10.

Madison, WI
BRIGADE COMMANDER: A wargamer's

(Continued on page 91)

Industry News

Waiting for the Low-End CD
The Sights and Sounds of the Consumer Electronics Show

S

ometimes, visiting Chicago seems
like one is standing in a perpetual
cab queue. This is especially true
during the Consumer Electronics Show.
Hotel space, restaurant reservations and
taxi service are always at a premium and
lengthy waits seem to be the order of the
day. It's usually worth it once one arrives at
the desired destination, however. There are
some great restaurants and some marvelous cultural opportunities to be experienced, whether one's forte is escargot
or eclairs, blues or Bach.
This year's Consumer Electronics Show
reminded us of waiting for a taxi. There are
plenty of exciting products ahead, but the
"great leap" advances in game design and
presentation seem to be in a marketing
limbo, somewhat analogous to a Moscow
food line, as many publishers build interim
products and hold their collective breath,
waiting for that elusive CD entertainment
platform that will capture the heart of
America's heartland and pump that lifegiving cashflow directly from consumer's
pocketbooks. To be sure, the state of the
art is advancing, but the evolution of the
technology is crawling at a slow pace compared to the leap expected when the CD
catalyst hits the market. Most of our

favorite publishers have CD projects.
Few are close to finishing them. The
market simply is not here, as of yet.

Laying Track on the
Entrepreneurial Frontier
Some companies are placing heavy
priorities on CD projects. They are parlaying expensive "research and development" into products for the small
market share that will adopt CD platforms in their earliest incarnations. This
approach seems guaranteed to give
these companies a presence in the new
media and to provide them with name
recognition as the market expands in
the future. ICOM, heretofore primarily a
developer for other software publishers
with their Deja Vu and Shadowgate
series of games, is now coming on
strong in CD entertainment. Not only
will they start shipping Sherlock Holmes, Consulting Detective as a fully interactive movie (on the Turbo-Grafx
16, this summer), but they plan an interactive cartoon based on their own fantasy world (Beyond Shadowgate); a
first-person poker simulation; a futuristic
arena game (Arena 3000), a cyborg
combat game (Cyborg 2127) and a
sophisticated Alter Ego-style arcade
game called Shapeshifter, as well.
They are not simply using traditional
resources, either. Michael Pole, producer of
the Saturday morning cartoon series The
Real Ghostbusters is "directing" Beyond
Shadowgate and Frank J. Biondi, chairman of Viacom Entertainment, serves on
the company's board. Since Viacom has a
heavy presence in the music video business, it seems reasonable to expect that at
least one CD product will be built around
music videos.
Psygnosis, the British publisher of graphically intense arcade-style and action/adventure games, has been relatively quiet in the
U.S. market until recently. With Lemmings,
its first MS-DOS title, the company has
made a bold foray into the American entertainment software market. They are not
only already making their mark on traditional forms of computerized entertainment
(Electronic Arts is publishing The Killing
Game Show, Shadow of the Beast and
Lemmings on the Sega Genesis; Data
East is publishing a Lemmings coin-op
game and SunSoft is placing the suicidal
little varmints on the Super NES), but are
also heavily committed to CD development.
The Lemmings title is slated to appear on
Commodore's CDTV later this year, and
Planetside, a futuristic flight combat game
featuring fractal-generated three-dimensional landscapes and great sound, should
appear on a Japanese platform, CDTV and
CD-I platforms.

Another presence which should be felt
prior to Christmas is NovaLogic. Up until
now, the company has been a developer
for other publishers. They developed
Wolfpack for Broderbund and are working
on The Rocketeer for Walt Disney
Software. They have also been working on
CD-I-based products for A.I.M. (American
Interactive Multimedia). As a result of their
work, they have put together some marvelous tools for three-dimensional modeling
of computer game "characters" and "objects." Data East will publish Ultrabots, a
science-fiction oriented strategy and combat game, and the as-yet-unnamed Battlefield 2000 (working title), a postholocaust simulation of artificial warfare
featuring modern tanks with realistic features and controls. Both games feature
beautifully rendered "vehicles" and
landscapes, with some polygon-filled objects to hide behind. Jim Sachs, Amiga artist extraordinaire, rendered the ghastly postholocaust landscapes in the science fiction
game and the "matte" paintings provide a
mood reminiscent of film designer Ridley
Scott's worlds (Alien and Blade Runner).
Another exciting result of the coming CD
era is that Claymation genius Will Vinton
has joined with computer game designer
Kellyn Beck (Defender of the Crown, Rocket Ranger and Centurion) to publish interactive entertainment products under the

Industry News

Cine-Play label. The initial release,
Detectron, features 3-D modeling and an
easy-to-use interface that seems sure to appear on multiple CD platforms in the near
future. It even features (surprise!) claymation mutants.
Not all companies who invested heavily in
CD-based entertainment have fared well.
Yet, some of their products are about to
come to market. Cinemaware's It Came
From The Desert is still expected to appear
"real soon now" on the NEC Turbo-Grafx
16. In addition, Spinnaker Software's
LaserLords is expected to debut on CD-I
before the end of the year, even though the
company is (at least temporarily) out of the
entertainment software business.

Standard Oscillating
Procedure
Being so close to a breakthrough in data
storage and innovative software presentation, one would think that all is well in the
entertainment software industry. Yet this is
not the feeling among computer game publishers. CDTV's slow start along with the
long-delayed debut of CD-I has created uncertainty. Combine this uncertainty with the
"standards" controversy and the road to CD
paradise seems fraught with thorns. Sony
is attempting to create their own proprietary standard for CD-ROM storage. Prior to
their proprietary standard, Nintendo was
planning for Sony CD-ROMs to be the
dominant player in the Super NES market.
Now, Nintendo is planning to switch horses in the middle of the stream and change
to the Philips' standard before too long. Our
sources indicate that they are asking their
developers to choose between standards.
Sega was also soliciting developer support for a CD platform at CES. Their CD
player, to be released in Japan during the
fall of this year and possibly to reach our
shores by the next fall, will allegedly have
its own 68000 processor, contain 64K of
ROM to handle eight channels of sound,
use 32-kHz sampling, feature 10-18 frames
of video per second (if accompanied by
sound), utilize 6.5 MB of storage on each
CD and allow up to 56 minutes of full-motion video to be stored on each disk. The
system will even feature surround sound
and some more advanced video features
for extended screen handling.

We also discovered that video-game
developers are not the only ones faced with
standards-based dilemmas. In addition to
Sony's proprietary standard, the Microsoft
CD-ROM-XA approach and the approved
technical specifications of the Philips' CD-I
project, NEC announced their New Interactive Display (NID) technology. Fortunately
for multi-media personal computer
developers, this technology is compatible
with the MPEG video standards and the
multi-media hardware. The technology allows for 100:1 video compression which, in
turn, allows 20,000 still pictures per compact disc or up to sixty minutes of full-motion video per disk. The company claims
that its "standard" will provide the highest

rate of compression with the clearest possible pictures. It doesn't feature resolution
as high as DVI, CD-I or IVD (it is 512 x 256
as opposed to 640 x 480 and up), but judging from the NEC demonstration at CES,
this claim is probably true.
Finally, not only computer developers, but
also gamers will have to make a major
sound card decision in the near future. It is
no longer satisfactory to talk about a card
being Ad Lib compatible. The new Gold
Card features true 16-bit technology and almost double the dynamic range of its
closest competitors. The difference between
the old board and the new board is
phenomenal, but (alas!) developers will be
required to provide yet another new driver
to get the most out of the board. Since
Yamaha plans to place their chip (the
heart of the card) on the motherboard of
twenty different PC manufacturers in the
near future, Ad Lib promises that the Gold
Card technology will not conflict with these
new machines' additional sound capabilities.

Life in the Third Dimension
Perhaps the most pervasive trend in entertainment software was the amount of threedimensional modeling to be seen in upcoming computer games. Cine-Play's
Detectron has digitized film and claymation
images and moves them across a scanned
backdrop. The story is built around a postholocaust Washington D. C. where people
are being kept in a human preserve something like the "Wild Animal Parks" that one
would see in the present-day United States.
The distinctive walks and movements of
some of the characters are very interesting.
An even more sophisticated technique of
digitizing film is being used in Walt Disney
Software's The Rocketeer, an action game
being developed by NovaLogic. In a technique reminiscent of Disney himself bringing
in film footage of actual animals in order
for his animators to get the moves right,
NovaLogic is capturing all the action
scenes on film (with real human beings);
digitizing the figures and manipulating them
on-screen. Those who enjoy the film will
enjoy this continuing adventure that picks
up after the plot line in the film and was approved by Rocketeer creator and comic artist Dave Stevens.

Data East unveiled two additional
products being developed by NovaLogic.
The most detailed is UltraBots, a robot
combat game with a fascinating story treatment and a strategy game to support the
action scenes. The company has used raytracing to develop three-dimensional
models of their distinctive robots and they
can manipulate them easily on-screen using
their custom tools. In the same way, they
have developed a near-future version of armored warfare. It is a three-dimensional
world with extremely dark perspectives and
fast-moving bit-mapped scaling. Both the
near-future battlefield simulation and UltraBots feature distinctive cockpits for each
vehicle and two separate view screens
which update the game environment from
two different perspectives.
Accolade's Les Manley — Lost in L.A. is
a graphic adventure which, on occasion,
uses three-dimensional digitized images
overlaid across digitized oil paintings. The
artwork provides a rich texture for this satirical approach to the stereotypical Southern
California lifestyle. The game is a pseudo-sequel to Search for the King with a new
"look and feel."

Regular CGW readers will remember
Sierra's Adventures of Willy Beamish
(designed and produced at their Dynamix

subsidiary) from the "Behind The Screens"
feature in the July issue (#84). Designer
Jeff Tunnell has created a light-hearted adventure that pushes the edge of the threedimensional envelope in its handling of char
acter animation and backgrounds featuring
a perception of depth.
Sierra opted for near realism in their approach to Police Quest 3: The Kindred. In
this product, as well as Conquests of the
Longbow: Legend of Robin Hood, the artists captured live actors on video and used
a rotoscoping technique to enhance the
scenes with sometimes colorful and sometimes starkly realistic portrayals of scenes
that look almost as if they have leaped
from the cinema screen itself.

As noted earlier in this article, Psygnosis'
Planetside features three-dimensional fractal landscapes at twenty frames per second
with no compression necessary. The player
flies a futuristic atmospheric fighter across
the barren wastes of a mountainous planet
in this air combat simulation.
In addition, Wing Commander's legacy
leads on. Interplay's Star Trek features
three-dimensional bit-mapped scaling ships
in the tactical space combat sequences.
Konami's Top Gun: Head-to-Head Dogfighting Simulation uses digitized images
from the motion picture combined with bitmapped scaling techniques designed to enhance the look of the planes and their
Team Suzuki game (originally released in
Europe by Gremlin) presents motorcycle
racing via the same basic bit-mapped scaling technique. In Aces (scheduled for
1992), Dynamix's latest foray into historical air combat, Damon Slye is expected to
unleash a faster version of their patented 3Space technology mixed with technology

Industry News

that uses more layered bit-maps to offer better definition of aircraft shapes, terrain, etc.
The game is based on air combat in the
Pacific, replete with both carrier-based and
land-based missions. Finally, Origin's
Strike Commander takes textured mapping, gouraud shading and disguised
polygons to new heights in order to create
a near-future world of air combat. With
regard to the latter, readers of the
Wingman pulp adventure series will feel
right at home in the world of Chris Robert's
post-modern milieu.

"Scan"tily Clad
In addition to the lavish oils of Les Manley — Lost In L.A. and the bright cartoon
color scheme of The Adventures of Willy
Beamish, there are plenty of products
which take advantage of new scanning technology. Naturally, Sierra and Lucasfilm
lead the way in this usage. Sierra's Dynamix subsidiary performed pioneering work
in this area with Rise of the Dragon and
they are following up on their success with
Heart of China, the same technology with
an entirely different feel. Sierra unveiled
the mother company's approach in King's
Quest V and they are continuing their efforts in numerous releases. Leisure Suit
Larry 5: Passionate Patti Does A Little Undercover Work (we know there wasn't an
LSL 4, but we don't want the Sequel Police

after us, either) uses 256 colors to unleash
the gaudiest pastel palette since they
started manufacturing lawn flamingos. As if
that weren't enough, the publisher has
upgraded Leisure Suit Larry in the Land
of the Lounge Lizards into a 256-color
"touch and grope" (no more typing!) version with a palette borrowed from Merv
Griffin's sport coat linings. A course of a different color is suggested by Mixed-Up
Fairy Tales and Conquests of the Longbow: Legend of Robin Hood (by Quest
for Glory's Lori Cole and Conquests of
Camelot's Christy Marx respectively). Both
products suggest their respective genres
with lavish use of natural colors in their 256color VGA landscapes and interiors.
Lucasfilm is now unveiling their approach with gouache watercolors scanned
into their three-dimensional graphic adventure engine. The Secret of Monkey Island
II: LeChuck's Revenge features not only an
extravagant use of 256 colors scanned
from gouache originals, but light sourcing
and shadowing, as well. The graphics of Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis are
not quite as impressive as those in
Monkey, but the presentation is significantly enhanced by the cinematography of Hal
Barwood in presenting different angles and
perspectives from which to view the action.
One of the most unique aspects of the
latest Indy is that players actually "earn"

the on-screen interface, one step at a time,
during one of the sequences.
With 3-D modeling, computer generated
images, scanned backgrounds, digitized images integrated into existing programs and
rotoscoping, computer art is developing a
full pastiche of techniques to enhance the
look, quality and credibility of the gaming
experience. The entire industry seems to be
in a "tooling up" mode that can only
benefit gamers in the long run.

Enter the Interface
Two major trends seemed evident with
regard to computer game interface design.
One trend tended toward simplifying the in(Continued on page 81)

Review

When do Seven Gs Only Cost

C

CHUCK YEAGER'S

huck Yeager's Air Combat (YAC) is Sierra Hotel. For the
uninitiated that means YAC is [Expletive deleted] Hot! For
the initiated that means that YAC is a state-of-the-art flight
simulator that convincingly covers three eras of air combat:
World War II, Korea, and Vietnam.

Although YAC can't pull your stomach down into your crotch
or cause your chest to involuntarily exhale with a grunt while
whipping around in seven-G turns the way real flying can, YAC
can do the rest. Pull six plus Gs in a sustained maneuver and
your vision will fade to a black screen. Pull sustained negative Gs
and your vision will begin to red out. More than once this
reviewer has had to back off the stick at the end of a high-G
maneuver to prevent a blackout. It can be frustrating watching
the enemy drift into view just as your screen begins to black out.
Worse is to see the enemy lining up for a shot when your screen
begins to go black. The G-loads may not hit your body when you
sit in your den in front of YAC, but the tension and excitement

by Russell
will. Anyone
who has
pulled significant Gs in
aerobatic or
combat
maneuvering
will recognize
the grunt and
groan points
in the cockpit
of YAC.
Chuck
Yeager's Air
Combat was
designed entirely in-house
at Electronic Arts. Designer Brent Iverson said, "this
simulation offers flexibility and the exciting progression
of air combat, starting with prop-driven aircraft in World
War II, leading to the jet-powered dominance of Korea,
and finally to the modern-day guided-missile airplanes
that fought in the grueling Vietnam War."
With YAC, Electronic Arts brings to market the third
(but perhaps not last) product done in connection with
Chuck Yeager. The first was Chuck Yeager's Advanced
Flight Trainer. It was originally released as Chuck
Yeager's Advanced Flight Simulator. That name was
changed to Chuck Yeager's Advanced Flight Trainer
when SubLogic complained that the term "flight
simulator" was their protected title. Although EA may
well have been able to refute that claim in court, they
decided a name change would be easier. If you have a
copy of game with the original title, hold on to it — it's a
collector's item!
The second product was Chuck Yeager's Advanced
Flight Trainer 2.0, an update of the original product
which added a number of features including air races
and formation flying. (This version was released on
Amiga and Atari ST formats earlier this year.)

Blasts in the Past
What separates YAC from other combat flight
simulators, beyond the obvious connection with General
Yeager, is that it covers more than three decades in the
evolution of air combat. With YAC you will be able to experience in one program what it has taken several to do
in the past. For example, you will have to learn significantly different tactics for each of the aircraft. Flying
the P-51, you learn not only how to deal with stalls, but
also how to handle the realistically simulated problem of
loss of lift due to excessive speed. In the F-86 you learn
the art of dogfighting in jet aircraft without the modern
tools of air combat: missiles. And, of course, in the F-4
you learn a new set of tactics as you use radar-guided
Sparrows and heat-seeking Sidewinders.

Review

$59.95? When It's...

AIR COMBAT
Sipe
While real pilots may find minor points to quibble about (as
they can do with any computer flight simulator/game), the flight
dynamics and weaponry for each plane is as historically correct
as one could reasonably expect in a game. Example: although
not entirely accurate, Iverson added a 2G lift factor to planes
flying beyond their flight envelopes. A real-life plane caught in a
unrecoverable power dive would augur in (reality is harsh). In
YAC, because of the 2G lift factor, there is a chance of recovering from the dive if you apply constant back pressure on the
stick and there is enough altitude to allow recovery.

An in-office play session with
TITLE:
Chuck Yeager's Air Combat
SYSTEMS:
IBM
a Vietnam combat pilot vet
COPY PROTECT: Documentation Look-Up
and computer gamer gave us
PRICE:
$59.95
Brent Iverson
DESIGNER:
some insights to the game.
Electronic Arts
PUBLISHER:
He told us that the the
San Mateo, CA
graphics were the best he has
seen yet and that the flight
models seemed very good. His only "that's not right" comment
was that in real combat aircraft you don't hear or feel anything
when you break the sound barrier. In YAC there is a small "explosion" and a shaking of the plane when you break the barrier.

The Planes!
The Planes!

YAC offers a number of selectable information windows which
can be displayed during flight. The Envelope Window (one of
General Yeager's unique contributions to the game) displays a
dynamic rendering of your current flight envelope. Start pulling
Gs and your flight envelope shrinks, increasing the chance of
stalls or thrust failures. Ease up on the stick and the plane becomes more manageable. The Envelope Window graphically displays the physics involved.

In missions
covering the
three eras you
will fly the North
American P-51,
Focke-Wulf FW190, North American F-86 Saber,
MiG 15 Fagot, F4D Phantom II,
and MiG-21 Fishbed. Each has its
own flight model
that accurately simulates real-life performance.
In addition to these six aircraft, eleven
others are modeled in the game, although you cannot choose to fly them (B17, B-29, B-52, F-105, Me-109, Me-110,
Me-262, Me-163, MiG-17, P-47, Yak-9).
Beautiful bit-mapped images of the
planes are available for viewing in the
test flight and tactics briefing area of the
game. The planes used in actual game
play are nicely rendered using polygonfill shapes.
A lot of things changed in the state of
air combat between World War II and Vietnam. Jet aircraft replaced props; on-board radar replaced radio
vectoring and mere visual sighting; and missiles replaced guns.
Well, they didn't completely replace guns, but that is a story for
another time. YAC is a wonderful way to experience this evolution in aircraft and air combat tactics.

Performance Specs
The program runs very smoothly on both 386s and 286s.
Watching the combat action is the closest thing we have seen in
a computer flight simulation to actual gun camera footage. It's
smooth! The dithered horizon looks great. Although there is a
slightly annoying jagged edge affect on the horizon when you
bank your aircraft, you quickly get used to it. After a couple of
play sessions you don't even notice it.

The Target Window does a good job of solving the inherent
problem of tunnel vision associated with computer flight
simulators. Once you select an enemy plane, the Target Window
tells you his direction and shows you a miniature display of his
aspect in relation to your plane. If he is at your six o'clock
aiming at you the window will display "6
o'clock" and the enemy plane will have
its nose pointed at you. Unfortunately,
none of the information windows can be
used in the campaign game. Thus you
lose the situational awareness created by
the Target Window when playing the campaign. Fortunately you can use
Target-to-Plane and Plane-to-Target views in the
campaign. They are also great aids in establishing situational awareness.
The Yeager Window displays the
General's now famous mug when he
wants to give advice such as "Bandit on
your six — break!" or "You're taking a
pounding!" or
"Raise your landing gear." OK, so
maybe the Yeager Window is
just for beginners.
The Map Window shows the
distance and
direction of other
aircraft, both
friend and foe.

(Continued on
page 22)

Game Hints

Warning: Although "The Scorpion's
Tale" is a warm and comfortable
tavern of the mind with a nice cozy
fire of vibrant images, our resident
storyteller conjures up illuminating
hints about games. If the gentle reader
eschews hints, let him beware!

However, Roger has no choice (this
part is all automatic), and out he strolls.
What's going on? Well, it's a blast from
the past, a moldy oldie... in fact, it's none
other than... Vohaul! Yep, he's back from
the almost-dead to plague our boy again.

J

ust step right in and cool off. Pretty
hot out there, now that the dog
days of August are with us. Fred,
however, is not with us this time. As
usual, he's off at the annual Grues Convention in the Dark Room at Colossal
Cave. This year, they're going to try and
get up an expedition to go on a quest for
the Globe of Eternal Darkness. Hey, I
know where you can find that... out in
space, which is pretty dark. Hmmm...
kind of makes that a "space quest,"
doesn't it? Yes, it's time once again for
another Space Quest. Time, in fact, is
what this one is all about. Our buddy
Roger Wilco, galactic hero extraordinaire
and occasional janitor, will be burning up
the time lines in this adventure.

Although it's more like the other way
around. Roger has been rather a plague
to Vohaul, who has decided to eliminate
him once and for all, before going on to
rule the universe. Take no chances,
that's Vohaul's new philosophy.

Scorpion's Tate

Twelve? The series is gonna go on that
long? Now, that's frightening!

You can expect some big changes on
this Space Quest. The interface has
been completely re-done, and is now
much like that in King's Quest V. It's all
point-and-click; no parser, no typing in
from the keyboard. The "walk" command from King's Quest V has also
been implemented (a good thing, too!).
You can move Roger around the screen
just by clicking where you want him to
go, and he'll walk there, avoiding
obstacles along the way. No more
tedious maneuvering (for the most part).

Never mind — Roger (and you) can
worry about that later. Right now, he has
to find a way out of this disaster area.
There isn't much to work with, and the
area is dangerous. A weirdo cyborg is
wandering around and, if he catches up
to Roger, it's all over. So when you see
him, just go somewhere else and keep
out of his way.
The most interesting thing is the building on the horizon (kind of reminded me
of Darth Vader's helmet in a way).
Naturally, our hero can't just walk up
and knock on the front door (he probably wouldn't want to, even if he could).
Getting in there requires a bit of work
(this is an adventure game, after all!).

The graphics have also been upscaled,
and are really pretty to look at. You'll
want VGA and a fast machine to get the
most out of the game. A sound card
wouldn't hurt, either. The game also
takes advantage of expanded memory if
you have it (it worked very well with
QEMM-386, my memory manager).
Definitely, this is a high-end game (but
you can send in your disks for exchange
if you need the 16-color version; however, Sierra still recommends 10 Mhz
speed or faster).
It's a good idea to save often while playing. There are many situations where a
wrong move can bring the game (and
Roger) to an untimely end. As a precaution, you should also keep a couple of
save positions from different areas, in
case you have to restore to pick up an
item you missed the first time through.
So what's Roger up to this time? Actually, not much. All that running around
space, saving the galaxy, rescuing
people and whatnot, has sort of tired him

However, before the Sequel Police can
fry Roger, two mysterious strangers (no,
not the Guys From Andromeda!) jump in
and whisk him away. They open up a rip
in time and shove him through it, and
Roger's newest adventure really
begins. lt's a nasty place he finds himself
in, though: Xenon, his home planet, but
in pretty poor condition. Looks like a war
had been fought here. Even worse, a
glance up at the menu bar shows Space
Quest XII: Vohaul's Revenge 2.

So Roger spends some time snooping
around the streets and grabbing almost
anything he can get his hot little hands
on (almost, mind you; we don't want him
to blow himself up). Then a little jaunt
below (watch out for the acid!) followed
by a short ride and — poof! Roger's in
the big building.

out. The only thing he wants right now is
a little vacation, where he can kick back,
relax, and maybe brag a little about his
accomplishments (okay, maybe brag a
lot). So Roger's being a good little boy for
a change, when a pair of Sequel Police
march into the bar and ask him to step
outside. Right there, you realize that his
vacation is going to be put on hold for
awhile... possibly a long while.

Not that he should stay long. After all,
the place is crawling with plenty of killer
Sequel Police. Fortunately, one of those
little time-hopper machines is sitting
there, just begging to be used. Before
pushing any buttons, however, Roger
should take careful note of the symbols
on the readout. Otherwise, it's going to
be real hard to get back here again later.
Now, what should he push? As a matter of fact, any sequence at all. It won't

Game Hints

work the first time. Too bad, Roger. But
don't let it get you down; anything you
try the second time will work. Before
long, our boy is on his way to Space
Quest X: Latex Babes of Estros! (Hmm,
are you sure you didn't end up in a
Leisure Suit Larry game by accident?)
It's yet another weird place (Roger has
a talent for ending up in them), full of
rocky pinnacles and hungry giant birds
("roc"-a-bye Roger...). No sooner has he
escaped from the nest, then he's captured by some rather (ahem) "healthylooking" women. It's worse than it
sounds, because one of them is very
upset with our hero. Apparently, in a
later Space Quest he sort of ran out on
her, and now she wants revenge!
Shortly, he finds himself strapped to a
chair in the lady's underwater den, facing
one of the most horrible, fiendish tortures
ever devised. But wait: a nasty, ugly,
ravenous sea slug pops up out of the
water! The women take off, leaving
Roger to an even worse fate!
Hurry, Roger! Get yourself free so you
can defeat the monster! (it's a good idea
to save the game as soon as possible

after being strapped in the chair, because
there isn't much time to get things done
in this sequence).

and a bun top on each patty as it comes
from the oven. He gets one buckazoid for
each correct burger he makes.

With the monster killed, the women
return and proclaim Roger their hero.
They're even willing to let bygones be
bygones, and forget about torturing him
to death (...generous of them). Now that
they've made up, it's time to celebrate by
going to... the mall!

It's easy at the start, as the burgers
come along slowly. However, after a few
they start coming faster and faster, to the
point where Roger just can't keep up
with them anymore. Too many rejects,
and Roger is a reject himself (although
he gets to keep the money he's already
made). Fortunately, if you'd rather not
go through this, you can "wimp out" by
asking for the money without doing the
burgers. You get some cash and a boot
out of the burger joint (trying it both
ways, I preferred getting the boot).

No sooner said than done. Off they fly
to the Galleria, where the women promptly forget about Roger as they rush off to
the sales. No matter, Roger always did
better on his own, anyway.
He has time for a leisurely exploration
of various shops and stores (just don't
go down the escalator because
you-know-who's waiting below). Money's a concern,
though. Roger doesn't have much in his
pockets, and many things are a bit out of
his price range. Maybe he could earn a
few buckazoids at Monolith Burger?
This is a kind of arcade sequence. All
Roger has to do is make up the burgers
by putting lettuce, pickle, mayo, mustard, ketchup (ick, what a combination!)

Roger also has a certain lady's ATM
card, but using it is a problem. After all,
he's not a lady. But I'm sure he can think
of a way around that (hey, Leisure Suit
Larry managed it!). Don't overlook the
bargain bin at the software store. Not
only are there some interesting spoofs of
games (check 'em all out), there's a very
necessary Space Quest IV Hint Book. (A
crazy parody of all hint books, but it
does contain some important info!)
Of course, there's also the obligatory
Radio Shock (a Dandy company) with all
sorts of electronic gadgets for sale. However, even if Roger has enough bucks,
he'll have to wait for a while before he
can find out what he needs from here.
Check out the arcade (possibly more
than once). Umm, wait, what's that coming into view there? Looks like a time
hopper. Looks like Sequel Police getting
out of the time hopper. Looks like time
for Roger to get out of here!
Now, if Roger could just figure a way to
elude the cops, he might be able to
make it back to the time machine and
head along for other places. Too bad he
can't fly... or can he?
When he does get to the time machine,
where does he go next? Hey, didn't he
read the Space Quest IV Hint Book? It
ain't there just for laughs. Ulence Flats,
of course. Does that name ring a bell?
Like, maybe, from Space Quest P (and
remember to note the symbols on the
readout before leaving!)
Sure enough, that's the place. Look!, it
has the same grubby old graphics as the
first game did! (Wow, deja vu! Not to
mention the fact that the graphics have
come a long way since then!). In the bar
is a trio of tough-looking customers, who
sneer at our hero before tossing him out.
Well, it's happened to him before (and
probably will again).
Roger can handle it, though. He takes

Game Hints

his own form of revenge on the louts and
sneaks back into the bar after they've left
(save before doing anything, in case you
run into them again before you leave).
Then a quick dash to the time machine
and it's off to Xenon again.

fect score, you can go ahead and finish
up the game right here. If you want all
those points, then you have to go back
to the mall and buy a computer plug
(after getting a look at one of those little
boxes on the walkways).

Fortunately, on this visit, none of the Sequel Police are around (they must all be
out looking for him). Now he can take a
look at the mysterious locked door. Too
bad he doesn't have the combination to
open it. He's not gonna find one, either.
Brute force (kind of) is the only thing
that will work. Did you bring anything out
of the sewers with you, hmmm?

Whichever route you take, make sure
to avoid the droid! Roger is dead meat if
a droid catches him wandering around.
We wouldn't want that to happen! So
keep a screen ahead of it as you go up
hill and down dale to see what's in this interesting place.

Next comes the lasers and control pad.
If Roger could just see how the lasers are
set (cough, hack, wheeze), he might be
able to do something about them. like
use the control pad to straighten them
out. Unfortunately, the only method I
could find here was trial and error; there
doesn't seem to be any place in the
game where the numbers are written.
Save before you start, and restore if you
don't get them right.
Now at this point, you have a choice. If
you don't care much about getting a per-

For instance, there's a computer room
with some familiar stuff on the screen. I
wonder what would happen if a few of
those icons were flushed from the system? (Although I don't recommend flushing Space Quest IV, unless you save the
game first!)
Then there's Roger, Jr. Yep, Roger has
(or will have) a son (this time travel business can be confusing). There's only one
problem... Vohaul's mind is in Junior's
body, and Junior's mind is on the diskette that Vohaul/Junior just tossed over
the side!

Uh oh! It's getting worse: Vohaul/Junior
is about to fight with Roger!! Will our
hero survive? Can he get his son back in
one piece? Will a few explanations be
made of everything that's been going on?
Gee, I sure hope so. It would be a real
bummer if Roger got this far only to
mess up at the big finale! (but hey, that's
what save games are for!)
Whew! Well, enough of time travelling
and zaniness for now. I see by the old invisible clock on the wall it's that (hehe)
time again. Meanwhile, if you need help
with an adventure game, you can reach
me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the Game SIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu).
On GEnie: Stop by the Games RoundTable (type: Scorpia to reach Games RT).
By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed,
stamped envelope if you live in the
United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338,
Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1991 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Industry News

The Rumor Bag

knew that Fort Worth
was primarily for good
ole boys, but I couldn't
resist meeting my source
at Juanita's Mexican Restaurant (owned by
novelist Dan Jenkins of
Semi-Tough fame). Unfortunately, Juanita's
was closed at that hour of the morning and
we ended up around the corner at a burger
bar that was half hamburger joint and half
honky-tonk. My source turned out to be the
classic Texan in the stereotypical ten-gallon
hat. The floor, carpeted with peanut shells,
shook with each step he took and the
sweet "yellow roses" in the lounge stopped
sipping their liquored lemonades long
enough to check out his Brahma bull-sized
shoulders as he strode by.

I

"Ya'll Houston?" he asked, turning the
chair around so he could sit on it as though
he were astride his saddle. I answered affirmatively. "Whut d'ya know about RAW?" he
challenged. I explained that the company
was formed in Britain and that they were
entering the United States market with roleplaying games, graphic adventures and wargames. I told him that the company has
contracted with Lyric Software (Worlds At
War and Under The Ice) to develop a
game based on the Guadalcanal Campaign
of World War II. He pulled a plug of Red

by Billy Ray Houston, Jr.
Man chaw out of his pocket and bit off a
mouthful. "So?" he grunted. I told him that
the game would be, essentially, two
products. One would handle the surface action and the other would be based on aerial
combat. He spit, mingling tobacco juice
with the peanut shells in a strange Escheresque pattern. "And?" he prompted. I told
him that the company is working on a
game called Fleet Commander and hinted
that some heavyweight inside sources were
going to provide the specifications for all
the ships.
He squinted at me with a classic Clint
Eastwood expression and demanded, "Thet
all?" I told them about their abstract
strategy game to be called, appropriately
enough, Warfare.
His ice-cold blue eyes chiseled grooves in
my bag. I was glad I wasn't in a Wild West
gunfight with him, so I spilled my latest
rumor. "I don't suppose you know Martin
Campion's Medieval Lords game from
SSI, the one with the great gameplay and
the Apple II-level graphics?" He nodded.
"Well, Martin's next project is an ancients

WHEN DO SEVEN GS COST...
(Continued from page 17)
Although it is not as complete as the VCR mode in Dynamix's
Red Baron (which stands head and shoulders above all other current VCR modes), YAC's VCR mode is a good one. The VCR
mode lets you replay the current flight in its entirety or any part
thereof. You can view the action from multiple viewpoints, and
save the encounter to disk. A "box" view (available only in VCR
replay) shows you a tactical display of the entire "battlefield" in
which each plane is
represented by a dot
moving in a threedimensional box.
There is a mission
creator that allows
you to mix planes
from differing eras a
la the movie Final
Countdown. After a
rough day at the office it can be perversely rewarding to
jump five or ten Me109s with your F-86
Sabre. Unfortunately
the mission creator
only allows you to
pick the enemy
planes, the skill level
of the Al opponents
and the basic situation (i.e. you jump

level wargame and he's
hired a real artist to make
it look great. It's even
gonna have real sound
support," I added hastily.

He added to the tobacco
juice pattern once more. "Guess they're
raht," he drawled, "ya'll do need some help
gettin' rumors. Ah jest got back from
Europe and some feller gave me this to
give to you." He reached into his pocket
and pulled out a French matchbook. He
flipped it across the table and dug into the
basket of peanuts on the table. I opened
the matchbook and read the following:
"Lucasfilm Games is believed to be working on a computer game based on a motion picture tie-in with Steve Spielberg. We
think it is to be called The Dig, and it might
very well be based on something to do with
Moses."
He grabbed a longneck beer from a tray
carried by a nearby waitress and proceeded
to pour it over my head. "Next tahme," he
threatened, "ya'll bettah have some substantive rumahs or ah'm gonna pour it in yore
lap." I tried to explain to him that I'd put all
the new games in the CES report, but he
simply spit on the peanut shells and told
me not to forget.
(To be continued)

them, they jump you, etc.). You cannot recreate historical air
engagements. You cannot have wingmen, you cannot dictate
where the aircraft start in relation to each other, and you cannot
have friendlies. If you select B-29s in your mission they will fire
on you even if you are in an F-86! It's you against the world.
Iverson says he wanted a more detailed mission creator but
time constraints prevented it. Before you begin to grumble, keep
in mind Lucasfilm Games' Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe.
That game has been delayed many times in order to add more
features. Nonetheless, the lack of a full-blown mission creator is
the biggest disappointment in YAC. If Chuck Yeager's Air Combat does well in the marketplace, you can bet there will be a
YAC 2.0, and Iverson says that a full-feature mission creator will
be a high priority for that product.

Debriefing
Chuck Yeager's Air Combat will be popular with both flight
sim veterans and newcomers. Flight sim vets will appreciate the
realistic feel and historical breadth while beginners will find the
General a good tutor as they learn to take it to the enemy.
Remember what the General says: "Combat remains the ultimate flying experience".

Russell Sipe is co-authoring Chuck Yeager's Air Combat
Handbook: strategies for victory in WWII, Korea, and Vietnam. The book will be the first release in the Computer
Gaming World Presents book line published in conjunction
with Prima Publishing. The book should be out in September.
In addition, Electronic Arts has produced a video called
Yeager on Air Combat. The suggested retail price is $16.95.
It should be available in July.

Sneak Preview

W

ile purists would argue that
computer role-playing games
(CRPGs) contain very little actual role-playing, games like Wizardry,
Might & Magic and SSI's AD&D line of
games have all been highly successful in
their own extremely popular niche. In
these games, and others of their genre,
players assemble a party of elite,
hand-picked (or specially created)
characters such that each character is a specialist in his/her field:
fighter, cleric, magic-user, thief,
bard, etc.

Party of Six? Right
This Way...
Thus, players would always be
in lock-step with the system of
"proper party management." The
three "front line" characters would
always be fighters, or some derivative thereof. As heroic peril fodder
(or, alternately, monster chow),
these would be the first to melee
and would, naturally, receive the most
damage in battle. Thus, one would expect them to have the most hit points
and not be particularly reliant on missile
weapons. In the rear would be the "wimpier" characters such as the thieves,
clerics and magic users, who would contribute to the battles and other activities
from their positions of relative safety.
The phrase "SSDD" quickly came to
mean, "Same Stuff, Different Dungeon."
Worst of all, there was no "role-playing". The single player at the keyboard
was responsible for the thoughts and
deeds of every character in the party so,
naturally, every character behaved exactly as would best benefit the party's
leadership. A few exceptions, such as
Wasteland, threw in a few new twists,
but characters generally never really
spoke to each other, never really needed
to trade a lot of items, never proffered
wisecracks on the march or yelled for
help in combat. CRPG characters had
thus achieved the ultimate in two-dimensionality.

Role-Playing Requires Multiple Humans
What if, though, a highly successful
CRPG system, like SSI's AD&D Gold
Box series could be put on a telecommunications network, like Quantum's
America On-Line? What if each person
could only control a single character in a
game? What if players could communicate via a "chat" feature during play?
What would happen? The answer: computer role-playing.

Minuet in (AD&)D Minor
America On-Line's Neverwinter Nights
by Alan Emrich

Sneak Preview

Discovering America (OnLine)
If none of this sounds particularly
original, it isn't. Other networks have
long had multi-human player adventure/role-playing games in their inventory. To the average "buys the box off
the software shelf" computer gamer,
news of these on-line role-playing games
evoked little interest and a reaction of
"so what?" Now that on-line role-playing
is expanding the AD&D Gold Box
universe, however, a keener interest can
be sensed from these "off the shelf" com
puter role-playing garners.
While several explorers "discovered"
America before Christopher Columbus
did in 1492, what made Chris so famous
is that his discovery "stuck" and the continents were placed on the map and
colonized by the "old world." Similarly,
Neverwinter Nights, the latest AD&D
Gold Box adventure in SSI's hit series of
DragonLance games, should put on-line
role-playing on the map for all computer
role-playing garners. What Dan Bunten
(Modem Wars, Command HQ) did to
sell modems to computer strategy

garners, Neverwinter Nights will do to
sell moderns to computer role-playing
garners.

There's Gold in That Thar
Box!
Many people have called an AD&D
license from TSR, Inc. "a license to print
money." True enough, but that's not the
only reason SSI's AD&D product line
comes in a gold box. The gold also
stands for quality. The on-line version is
almost identical to SSI's classic Gold Box
game system. Players who have
generated characters, created and
changed their icons, equipped, traded,
mapped or fought within the AD&D Gold
Box universe will not have to "unlearn" a
thing before beginning play.
For those who've never delved into this
system, perhaps a brief description is in
order. The Gold Box line is pretty standard fare as most computer role-playing
games go in many respects. Players
generate a party of characters from
fighters to magic users et. al., with each
character having a list of attributes (rated
on a 3-18 scale) such as intelligence and

dexterity. They proceed to equip these
characters with arms, armor and sundry
other items prior to sallying forth into the
towns, dungeons and wilderness confronting them. They slay monsters, accumulating gold and experience points and unraveling the game's greater puzzles in
the process.
Where the Gold Box series is substantially different from the other fare of this
genre is in its combat system. Each character sports its own combat icon, which
is tactically maneuvered in an arena representing the actual dimensions of the
party's present location. A character
takes up a single "square" of space,
while monsters take up one or more
squares (depending on their size). Knowing by sight the ranges for missiles and
blast radii for magic spells becomes a
useful skill for experienced players. Although a bit time-consuming, the Gold
Box combat system is one of its outstanding aspects and is something which this
reviewer found generated a lot of spectator interest in his home (particularly
with his 5-year old son on his lap saying
"Get those monsters, Daddy!").
(Continued on page 70)

Review

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
PRICE:
PLAYERS:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

S

Star-King
IBM
$39.95
1-7
Walker Vanning
Spacewar Simulation Company
1309 5th Avenue
San Rafael, CA 94901

Stars in My Pocket
Spacewar Simulations Company's Star-Kin
by Dave Arneson

tar-King is very similar to a
three-dimensional version of a large-scale Battleship.
Those who remember the classic Milton Bradley game in
which the player guesses the coordinates of the opponent's ships
in order to hit them (and eventually, sink them) will understand
the basics of Star-King. Of course, Star-King features a much
grander scale. The "strategic display" in games #1 and #2 shows
ten grids of 100 squares each, making for 1,000 playing cubes.
Each turn, the player is allowed to build ships and colonies, following this by moving ships around the playing grids. Game #3
has a 15x10x10 (1,500 cubes) grid with levels 5-9 containing
"dust," so that sighting is reduced to a single square. Game #4 is
a 30x10x1 0 (3,000-cube) torus (wheel), again with five levels of
dust (#5-9) to obscure one's "sight." The only other "terrain"
squares are black holes. Squares containing black holes can be
passed through, but may not be the ship's actual destination.
One intriguing aspect of this game is the multi-player capacity;
up to seven players can compete at a time. Another positive feature is that Star-King is quite short and can be finished in one to
two hours. Unfortunately, there are many faults in the game, as
well. These cause the game to compare poorly with earlier
games of the same type. The graphics are virtually non-existent,
playability is limited and there is very little tactical depth.
In terms of screen graphics, sounds and animation, what one
sees on the title page is what one gets. With a monochrome
monitor, it takes very little memory (85k) to copy the entire
game to a hard disk. This is quite a contrast to the huge games
so common today. Even so, the game includes the "fake worksheet" option for those who play at work and the "decoy display"
to fool one's less-than-honorable opponents who might stoop to
looking over one's shoulder during the course of a game.
The first design problem that one encounters is serious. It is impossible to exit from the game and there is no save game feature! The only way out is to reset the entire thing and start from
scratch. This is annoying at best.
The second major problem is the poor display of the tactical information. There are no intelligence screens regarding coordinate
positions of the player's ships or of his planets. What is displayed is a row of numbers with a statement listing the order that
the information is displayed. It should have been quite easy to
make a simple statement line with variable inclusions or, at least,
a column head format to make those displays easier for the
player to grasp. When added to the fact that the coordinate system does not lend itself to easy comprehension, the result is a
very confusing picture for the beginning player.
The reviewer could go on but, frankly, it is not worth the effort.
This game looks like a first effort at a computer game design. It
certainly has the look of public domain rather than professional
software written all over it.
This game could be fun once the player becomes familiar with
its information displays and coordinate movement system. This
would give the player a Risk!-type "beer and pretzels" game.
For the same enjoyment, and less effort, one could play
Avalon Hill's Galaxy on an old Apple II. By comparison, StarKing lacks the user-friendly features, entertaining sound effects,

crude animation (in the results phases) and a fairly exciting play
system for multi-player action that Galaxy had over ten years
ago. When one considers that Galaxy was even written for a
30K machine, that makes Star-King a solid miss in this market,
unless one simply must have a multi-player modem game with a
steep learning curve

OPINION

Scorpion's 'View
Magnetic Scrolls'
Wonderland

Scorpia is an experienced and
respected adventure game expert.
CGW is pleased to be able to provide
this forum for her distinctive and
often controversial perspective.

O

nce again, it is time to peer into
the magic crystal. It's amazing
what you can see inside a glass
ball (well, you can't, but 1 can!). For instance, shimmering into view right now
is... is... a bunch of rabbit tracks???
Wonderland, as you can probably tell
from the name, is based on Lewis
Carroll's Alice in Wonderland. There
haven't been many games with this
theme; the only other one I can recall
came out some years ago from
Wyndham Classics and was a fully
graphic version. Wonderland, however,
is text plus graphics, somewhat in the
style of Spellcasting 101, but with one
of the slickest interfaces I have seen in a
while.

It also has one of the most thorough installation routines of any game. You can
install to a hard drive, of course, but if
you happen not to have one or prefer
not to eat up space on your hard disk,
you can put the game on floppies, instead. You can use double density, high
density, 5.25, 3.5, or almost any combination of these (ie, part of the game on
5.25 and part on 3.5). The only thing
you can't do is install partly to hard drive
and partly to floppy.
The installation routine automatically
checks the speed of your machine; if it is
deemed too slow, the graphics will be disabled when you play (this can be overridden, but the instructions recommend
against override). Also examined is the
amount of free RAM you have (500K minimum is recommended); if RAM is too
low, you will be advised and the installation will not continue.
If you are using a hard drive, you can
have the graphics decompressed onto

the disk. This will speed up access time
during play and is worth doing if you
have the space. The install program will
look at that, too, and let you know
whether or not your drive has room for
the decompressed graphics.
Finally, it will ask if you want sound for
your music card (AdLib or Roland only —
however, SoundBlaster worked very well
when I specified AdLib). Note that if you
are using an actual AdLib card, you will
have to disable the drivers if you boot
with them because the game has its own
drivers.
Once you've done all that and the
game is installed, you're ready to play.
There are basically two ways of doing
this, using a mouse (or joystick) and
using the keyboard. Wonderland is very
mouse-oriented because of its heavy
reliance on its own custom windowing
system, but you can do the entire game
with a keyboard only if you have no
mouse or joystick.

OPINION
There are a number of different windows you can call up, and they make
play much easier, eliminating a lot of the
drudgery often associated with adventure
games. First is the map. You can call up
a map utility that fits into about the bottom third of the screen. It creates itself as
you go along. Since the Wonderland area
is somewhat larger than a third of the
screen, the map has scroll bars at the
side and bottom, so you can move the
display around to see more of it. Many
areas of the map are also labeled, which
can be quite helpful.
What makes this even neater is the
ability to "go to" pretty much any place
you've already visited. You can be standing at the White Rabbit's house, type in
"go to the Palace"... and off you go! No
need for laborious "s,s,w,sw,n" directions.
Better yet, you can click with the mouse
on almost any map location and go to it
that way.
I recommend using the map click, as
sometimes the "go to somewhere"
doesn't quite work the way it should.
One time, I typed in "Go to the
Duchess's House" and somehow ended

up at the palace instead. Then I tried "Go
to the Duchess" and that worked all too
well. The game marched me right to her
house, through the door and into the
kitchen, where I was beaned by the cook.
It was "painful!" It also put an end to the
game. So do be careful with those "go
to" commands.
Another handy window is the compass,
which sits in the lower right corner of the
screen. This shows you the ways you
can move (eight compass directions,
plus up and down), by darkening the appropriate arrows. Clicking on one of
them will move you in that direction.
A very helpful window is "Items in
Room" (there is also one for the inventory you carry, but it's not as useful as
this one). Every time you enter a location, any objects of possible interest are
displayed in a long window on the right
hand side, above the compass. Then you
need merely click on them to examine
them, search them, get them, etc.
This really saves fingerwork on the keyboard, as you don't have to go through
the "examine X," "examine Y," "examine
Z" routine all the time. You can still use

OPINION
ting all the other windows that were open
at that moment. You may want to turn
animation off to avoid this if you plan on
having several windows open throughout
the game.

the keyboard to look at things manually,
but why make extra work for yourself
when it's not necessary?
Further, if you have the graphics mode
on, you can move the cursor around the
picture itself, clicking on individual objects as you would in the "Items" window
and operating them in the same way. I
preferred using the "Items in Room"
myself, as there was no guesswork involved as to what might or might not be
important and I could be sure of not miss
ing something inadvertently.
Speaking of the graphics window, this
can be either half-size or "standard." I
recommend half, since (a) the graphics
look much better and (b) it doesn't block
out as much of the text. The picture window can be moved around, and I generally had it up in the top middle of the text
area, to keep as much of the text in sight
as possible.
The graphics are quite nice, and there
is one for virtually every location in the
adventure. They come in fairly quickly
(at least on a 386) as you move from
spot to spot, and add a nice touch to the
game.

Saving and restoring are simple matters, and as you can specify drives and
directories, the number of save positions
is limited only by the amount of space
available on your drive. This feature is
particularly good if more than one person is playing the game; each can have
his/her own separate directory.

On occasion, there are some animated
graphics (most are still pictures). These
take up a tremendous amount of RAM,
and you will have to close down most or
all of any other windows you have open
at the time. I had that problem when I arrived at the Duchess's house. The animation of the fish footman delivering the invitation to the frog footman required shut-

I don't anticipate getting many letters
for help with this one, as pretty much all
the answers to the puzzles are in the
game itself. Yes, following in the tradition
of the later Infocom games, Wonderland contains on-line hints/solutions to
the problems.
This has both good points and drawbacks. On the one hand, no matter what,
you're assured of being able to finish the
game. However difficult or involved the
puzzle, help is easily obtained. Further,
the clues are graduated, so you needn't
see the answer right off; you can build
up to it, reading as many hints as you

OPINION
need (they become progressively more
blatant until the solution is spelled out for
you). You also don't have to shell out
extra money to purchase a separate hint
book (a big plus for many people).
On the other hand, with the solutions
so easy to see, there is a great temptation to look after you've been stuck on a
puzzle for only a short time. Unlike the In
focom series, there is no way to "turn
off" the hint mode. You need a fair
amount of self-control to avoid clicking
on "Help" when you've hit a brick wall,
or you may find yourself finishing the
game all too quickly.
The parser is fairly sophisticated and
capable of handling complicated actions.
After all, there will be times when you
want to do more with objects than merely examine them or pick them up. This is
where keyboard input becomes superior
to mouse clicking and provides a natural
complement to the simpler actions.
Wonderland blends the two very well.
While the game is based on Alice In
Wonderland, it does not follow the actual plot of the book. Some individual sections (such as the Queen's croquet party

and the trial for the theft of the tarts) do
appear, but the story itself is unique to
the game. So reading the book won't be
of much help in playing. However, you
might want to read it before you play, to
put yourself in the proper mood.
Translating a flight of fancy into a computer game is a delicate business, especially when dealing with a children's story
(however much adults may also appreciate it!). Fortunately, the team at
Magnetic Scrolls has done a good job
here, managing to retain much of the atmosphere, style and sense of humor of
the original.
Since everything takes place in a
dream, Alice never dies. If something unpleasant happens (like being conked by
the cook), Alice merely wakes up prematurely and is taken home by her sister. At
that point, you can either quit or restore.
It there is one weak point, it is the
manual, which at first glance can be
rather overwhelming. This is due more to
the wide variety of options available than
anything else. The best way to handle
this is skim through it for the basics, then
refer back to the manual while you play

around with the different settings. I found
it to be much clearer that way, rather
than trying to absorb everything at once.
Considered purely as an adventure
game, the puzzles are easy to middling,
with a couple that are, perhaps, overdetailed (the teapot business and the
nest come to mind here). Considered as
an adaptation of Alice, it is a satisfying
romp through Wonderland, simple puzzles or no. It's also a good introduction
for those who have never read the book.
(It's not every day you get the chance to
play croquet with a flamingo mallet and
a hedgehog ball!)
Overall, this is a good game to choose,
especially if you're looking for something
to while away a few lazy summer afternoons, or want an adventure you can
play with the kids. It's worth getting for
the technical achievements alone (and
that's not something I say very often!).
Fortunately, the game has more than
bells and whistles and, very simply, it's
fun stuff to play.
And so the crystal clouds over for this
session.
Copyright 1991 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Review

T

he degree to which an arcade game intrudes on everyday

life may be helpful in judging just how enjoyable and how
habituating that game may be. Just ask a Tetris addict who
is unable to so much as drive by a billboard without attempting
to mentally rotate it and fit it in between two buildings. This
reviewer has recently redecorated his house with popsicle-stick
bridges, just in case any Lemmings are about who need some
help in getting from one piece of furniture to the next. Indeed,
what videophile can deny the sheer terror experienced during a
heavy rain storm, while listening to the imagined toe-tapping
rhythm of happy Space Invaders dancing on the roof? Now,
Pick 'n Pile, a recent arcade offering from UbiSoft, will shake
up the lives of players who frequently stack dishes or other breakable objects, and live in fear of hearing a nerve-shattering crash.
Just such a crash (not a software crash!) occurs in Pick 'n Pile
at the beginning of each round when a collection of colored
balls, blocks and a few other assorted items are released from
the top of the screen. The objects crash to the ground and collide with each other with such a great impact that many explode.
When the digitized dust has settled, the player must go to work
stacking and organizing the surviving pieces. Points are earned
for creating a column of spheres which are the same color.
When this happens the column disappears, other objects on the
screen get shifted around, more objects explode and the player
is treated to a few more crashes. The round is successfully completed when all of the colored orbs are gone within the time limit.
It is up to the player to develop strategies for gathering as
many like-colored balls as possible in one column. This is challenging in that it takes only two of them to make the column disappear. There are extra points to be earned for making tall
columns, as well as including certain other objects to be found
on the screen in these columns. These include bonus-point
blocks, score-multiplying blocks and time-limit extenders.
Advancing though the game's many levels, the player will have
to contend with the inclusion of less desirable objects on the
screen, like bonfires and "death-heads" that eat away the round's
time limit. With each succeeding level comes both a greater number and a greater variety of objects on the screen — as well as, of
course, more of those wonderfully nerve-grinding crashes.
Manipulation of the objects on screen may be done with keyboard, joystick or mouse. Of the three, most players will probably prefer the mouse. Those who choose the keyboard or joystick,
however, will be able to customize the performance of those
devices. Placing the cursor and clicking on two different objects
will cause those objects to trade places. Most objects can also be
moved by clicking on the object and an empty space. Certain objects can only be moved by trading places with another.
Graphically, Pick 'n Pile is quite colorful. However, there is very
little detail or shading to lift the objects from their two-dimensional background. Unfortunately, the game falls somewhat behind state of the art in this department.
The sounds produced by Pick 'n Pile show quite a bit of imagination. Game play is accompanied by the mechanical
tick-tick-ticking of an old wind-up clock which speeds up as the time limit
approaches. The many crashes resemble an equally old handcranked cash register which aches from overuse. The successful
completion of a round entitles the player to a brief excerpt from
Mozart's The Magic Flute as performed by an ice-cream truck.
The cataclysmic noise following an unsuccessful round, however,
is enough to send any collector of fine china shrieking in terror.
Pick 'n Pile will probably never reach the obsessive heights enjoyed by Tetris or Lemmings. However, it has an original flavor
and charm to it which should earn it a following. For those who
enjoy fast-moving, non-shoot-'em-up arcade exercises, Pick 'n
Pile is worth checking out.

Piling
It On
by Allen Greenberg

TITLE:
Pick 'N Pile
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, Atari, IBM
REVIEWED:
Amiga
COPY PROTECT: None
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER:
UBI Soft
c/o Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

Strategy

Harpoon: The Blue Side
or How to Make Sure the Pointy End Is Facing the Opponent
by James M. Lowerre

Using Basic Platform Information
n early 1990, this reviewer, searching
to broaden his wargaming horizons,
elected to investigate an area unfamiliar to him: modern naval conflict.
The February 1990 issue of Computer
Gaming World decided for him that the
game would be Harpoon, and soon
another Tandy was launched into ThreeSixty's electronic ocean.

I

While prowling the GIUK gap, elementary- to graduate-level lessons in modern
naval warfare began to evolve. After
digesting Battle Set 1, the other Battle
Sets and the Scenario Editor became
mandatory continuing education. Being
the result of a quest for knowledge of
modern naval matters, this article is
designed to assist simulation sailors in
getting their sea legs under them and to
reduce the price of admiralty as they pursue victory at sea.
Absorbing the tactics and techniques
concerning the successful employment
of modern naval sub, surface and air platforms along with all their associated
weapons is akin to eating an elephant
with a pen knife and a shrimp fork: One
has to take it one bite at a time. The discussion following is of tactics and techniques useful in the employment of the different types of platforms. Material previously covered by the esteemed M.
Evan Brooks in both the February and
April 1990 CGW issues will not be
repeated.

The first order of the day is to learn, or
at least have available, information on
the military attributes of the platforms on
both sides (or all sides in Battle Set 3).
A series of tables is useful for units
operating in each type of environment.
These tables include fixed-wing AEW (Airborne Early Warning); fighter; attack/strike; bomber; ASW (Anti-Submarine Warfare); EW (Electronic Warfare); helicopter (AEW/Search, ASW);
and surface vessels, including CV (carrier), BB (battleship), CG (guided missile
cruiser), DD (destroyer), FF (frigate), missile boats, commercial ships and submarines (attack and missile).
At the start of any scenario, use the platforms display option from the reports
menu to list all classes. Then, while viewing each individual platform, the following information should be recorded: type,
class, sensor ranges — air, surface and
sonar (with a T for towed if appropriate),
quantities and ranges of air, surface and
submarine weapons (including the ranges and quantities of secondary weapons
used for the platform's primary role),
maximum speed and range, as well as
nationality. Admittedly, this takes a little
time, but the value of the familiarity with
platform and weapon characteristics
provided will contribute significantly to future success. This is also the cheap
man's alternative to buying the board
game for the platform data tables alone.

A partial example of this do-it-yourself
platform data table from Battle Set 3 is
in Figure A.

How to Come Up with a
Plan
Pay careful attention to the mission and
the victory conditions given in the
scenario brief. The scenario victory conditions (frequently referred to as the
described end state by military officials)
are the military objectives. As soon as
the scenario comes up on the screen,
save it and then put it on pause at the
lowest group window magnification that
will allow viewing all friendly and known
enemy forces.
Click through all enemy bases and
known groups, noting the numbers and
types of enemy ships and planes
present. Look at the geography of the
region in relation to the relative positions
and distances of enemy and friendly forces. Examine the characteristics of friendly and known enemy platforms.
Use the available information on the
relative positions of enemy and friendly
forces to determine the strengths and
weaknesses of both sides. Obviously, the
ideal plan uses the player's strengths
against the enemy's weaknesses. Such
strengths may include taking immediate
advantage of the starting situation. In
such a case, the player should reload the
scenario after developing a plan to accomplish the objective(s). If the initial
plan doesn't work, one should come up

Strategy

with another one (nobody's counting!),
since the experience prepares one for
more complex scenarios.

EW aircraft with the type of attack/strike
aircraft they are to accompany (i.e., EA-6
and A-6B). An ESPP 'package' will require several different types of aircraft
but each type should be launched in its
own group(s). Mixing only places artificial restraints on the more capable
aircraft, may needlessly expose some
aircraft to enemy air defenses and
presents a larger than necessary sensor
image.

Collecting Tactical
Information
As each new enemy group is identified,
click to that group and use the unit window to identify the platform type and its
locations within the formation. Then
check the characteristics of any "new"
platforms. Use this information to decide
the direction to attack with friendly
aircraft and/or missiles. Maintain contact
with the new group until it can be
engaged. If contact is lost, one must expend resources to regain it (without forgetting that the enemy group is still out
there).
Although AEW aircraft are best suited
to finding and continuously monitoring
enemy groups, other aircraft can be used
for this task. Long-range fighters, loitering just out of air defense range at high
altitude with sensors on, are good for
maintaining contact with enemy surface
groups. If enemy fighters are not an immediate threat, ASW aircraft can perform
this function.
Players who do not have local air superiority around their surface groups will
soon discover that using their air search
radars is far superior to the alternative of
identifying approaching enemy air
groups by watching them attack one's
own ships. Thus, since most modern
strike aircraft cruise at speeds around 10
knots per minute and, at a Vlow altitude,
can approach to within 12nm (nautical
miles) of a surface target, smart commanders should set an interval of no
more than three minutes between inter
mittent searches. Once a commander's
ship has been spotted, however, it's time
to leave the radars on.
Another way to avoid surprise attack is
to routinely check enemy bases for
decreases in the number of aircraft listed.
The types and numbers that are missing
will very likely be headed directly toward
the player's fleet.
After striking enemy targets, click to
the target and get a full report to determine the amount and type of damage
done by the attack. Think of it as
Harpoon's version of "battle damage assessment."
Finally, use the range circles to determine maximum sensor and weapon ranges for enemy groups. The sheer number of circles can be confusing at first,
but the information they provide is vital
to all decisions.

Supersonic aircraft can counter enemy
air-to-air missiles fired at range by running out of range at max speed and high
altitude.

Preventing the Red "Fly
By" or "Fly By" the Reds
The computer can provide auto-formation air cover. This reviewer's advice —
just say "No!" Instead, the wise commander micromanages his/her air assets,
launching AEW and fighter patrols to the
exact positions desired and launching attack/strike missions to a specific patrol
location so that when they arrive on station, one can make the final decision on
when and how to attack the target. One
can even assign helicopters to cover
specific ASW zones by using the formation editor.
Use a simple sequence to attack surface targets (call it the "Eyeball 'em,
Swat 'em, Poke 'em and Pound 'em sequence," or "ESPP" for short). First, the
target needs to be identified and sensor

"In war everything is simple,
and everything is difficult."
— von Clausewitz
coverage achieved and maintained (AEW
task). Next, the local airspace over and
around the target (at least to the outer
limit of the enemy air defenses) must be
secured (fighters). Next, poke out the
enemy's eyes by attacking with anti-radar
missiles (attack/strike/bombers). This
prepares the target so one can bombard
it with relative impunity (attack/strike/bombers).
Remember Von Clausewitz: "In war
everything is simple, and everything is difficult." This is as true at sea as it ever
was on land. The effects of friction on
friendly operations, especially attempts
to synchronize multi-group attacks,
should never be discounted. This is the
bottom line for micromanaging air assets.
Don't mix aircraft types, with the exception of EW aircraft necessary to
penetrate enemy air defenses. Match the

Aircraft mission range is calculated
from the original launch point. When a
group reaches the bingo fuel point (the
point at which one has only enough fuel
to return to his base of origin) and a loca
tion closer to the group than the take-off
point is available, the group can exceed
its bingo fuel limit and still land safely at
the closer landing point. Unfortunately,
the player can't tell how much additional
range the new landing point adds to the
group's limit. One won't know what the
group has remaining until the group actually arrives at the landing field. At that
time, the remaining mission range will be
briefly displayed just before the group
completes landing.
AEW Aircraft — Airborne Early Warning
will not happen if the aircraft aren't
properly positioned. The requirement is
to know about the enemy threat in time
to neutralize it. Anything else is too late.
These aircraft should be the first to
launch at the beginning of any scenario.
Bomber Operations — See attack/strike
aircraft. Local air superiority is essential
for successful employment of bombers.
ASW Operations — ASW work is like
preventative medicine in which the ASW
aircraft are the doctors. It is always
desirable to sink or drive off a submarine
before it attacks a target. However, one
should not forget that Magnetic Anomaly
Detection (MAD) devices locate enemy
submarines only when at low altitude.
It is extremely useful to combine these
aircraft with otherwise defenseless convoys, as well as to patrol geographically
restricted areas. One can even protect unescorted convoys with land-based ASW
aircraft. Use the formation editor to join
the two groups. Assign the plane a multisector patrol around the surface group,
making the patrol ring coincide with the
maximum enemy torpedo range plus
and minus 2nm. Then, use the staff
reminder to split the aircraft out of the
protected group before it reaches bingo

Strategy

fuel (or watch the mission range circle
on a like aircraft launched at the same or
an earlier time as the one(s) joined with
the surface group).

The carrier group's second priority is to
air-deliver ESPP-type attacks against surface targets.
Battleship Group — The 32 Tomahawk
missiles of the battleship alone are good
for the destruction of one or two small
enemy bases. A battleship group without
adequate air cover is no fun. Without adequate air cover, the group is also more
vulnerable to submarine attack (helicopters are forced to operate close in).

ASW Techniques — In case of an undetected attack, one should triangulate
upon the direction from where the attack
came. Then one needs to fly to that
point as soon as possible. Performing an
outward spiral at low altitude, one should
cover the area the sub could have
moved in since the attack.
Prosecuting a sub contact — the flush
'em and rush 'em technique does just
that. Move immediately to the center of
the contact and drop one torpedo. Wait
for the sub to take evasive action. When
he does, move directly over him and
deliver a coup de grace in the form of a
final torpedo. Plan on using four torpedoes against any one sub contact to
allow for the sub commander's skill
and/or luck.
Helicopter Aircraft — AEW/Search
Helicopters Operations. Remember what
early warning means and patrol at
highest (medium) altitude. Don't put
these aircraft out front in a hostile air environment. Hold them as a separate
patrol above the center of the surface formation. In this position, the helicopter
doubles the effective range of the group's
surface radars. Use the surface group's
air defenses to protect the helicopter. At
the first sign of enemy fighters, the
helicopter should drop to Vlow altitude
and hover inside the friendly formation.

ASW Helicopter Operations
Use those with sonar for formation
ASW patrols. Assign no more than half
the sonar-equipped helicopters to ASW
patrols to ensure continuous coverage.
Hold non-sonar-equipped helicopters for
prosecuting contacts.
If operating in a hostile air environment,
the patrolling ASW helicopters should be
kept in the formation AAW ring or center. Above all, always assign four torpedoes to each sub contact.

Staying Afloat, So the
Other Guy Won't
Scenario start — Check out all formations and group courses. Adapt the formations to the threat and the group courses to the plan. A surface group's course
should generally zig-zag along a given
travel path.
Formation editor — Formation orientation remains constant. Readapt the formation to any major change in the group's

general direction of travel. Concentrate
ASW patrols along the group's general
line of advance. Air defense vessels
should be between the formation's "mission essential" vessels and air-to-surface
threat(s). Remember what Sun Tsu said:
"He who tries to defend everything, defends nothing." Concentrate on the threat.
Maneuver individual ships using the formation editor, especially when under attack. Assigning a unit a new location
causes the unit to go immediately to
max speed and head directly for the new
position. For example, part of a group's
reaction to a long-range missile attack
would be to go max speed on a course
directly away from the incoming missiles.
At the same time, the air defense vessels
would be repositioning in depth at the
rear of the formation.
Group speed will automatically drop to
half of the group's maximum when
making a formation change. This allows
vessels to quickly reposition, but can be
overridden when necessary. Use the unit
window to determine when the group is
in its new formation.
Carrier Groups — Many scenarios revolve around the ability of one side or
the other to defend a carrier group. In
such a case, the group's first and foremost priority is to protect the carrier. If
enemy air is a threat, then all air-to-aircapable aircraft should be given that mission. Check formation when an air threat
is identified. If the CAP (Combat Air
Patrol) fails, the threat can get within

12nm.
A need for speed coupled with an
enemy submarine threat presents the opportunity to split off a decoy group. A
decoy group consists of one of the
carrier's cruiser escorts and one or two
smaller escorts. The decoy group moves
at high speed along the carrier group's intended path; the carrier group follows.
One will be amazed at what pops up
along the way to attack the decoy group.

ASW Group — Check the unit sonar ranges and ASW weapons ranges in the unit
window before assigning positions in a
formation. Helicopters, not ships, prosecute submarine contacts. Set the group's
patrol course to zig-zag. Speed should be
low (less than 19 knots) to prevent interference with the group's passive sonars
and to limit the group's hydrophonic signature. One will find that the best sonar
range is achieved at creep speed.
Turn air search radars on and enemy
air (including long-range missile) attacks
should be detected in time to react.
Missile Boats — With air superiority, substitute these boats for aircraft in the
"pound 'em" phase of an ESPP attack.
The unit's very high speed makes them
nearly invulnerable to torpedo attack.
Unarmed Convoys — Astute players will
set their course to frequently zig-zag and
their speed to minimize the convoy's
hydrophonic signature (something less
than 19 knots, since different surface vessels have differing hydrophonic signatures, but most begin the noisy propeller
cavitation at speeds above 18 knots).
Use a special formation. Make a large
center circle (8 to 12nm in diameter).
Place the least valuable vessel at the forward edge of the circle. Place all other
vessels at the opposite side. Enemy submarines will hear the lead vessel and
(hopefully) be decoyed into solely attacking the sacrificial vessel.
Note the direction of incoming weapons
during the attack animation. Direct ASW
groups back down the attack track. Split
damaged vessels (speed impaired) away
from the convoy (they're noisier). If the
direction of attack is missed, the player
should set the convoy speed to zero.
Then the ASW groups can try to locate
the attacker. After 30 to 60 minutes of
ASW searches, one should resume creep
speed and set the convoy's course to
swing wide of the attack area by a distance in excess of the enemy's maximum detection range.

Strategy

Staying Alive "Down
Under" (Submarines)

missiles is important. Warning: Missile
firing immediately compromises one's
position to air search radars.

Submarines in general — At the start of
each scenario, do a "crazy Ivan"
maneuver. This is a 90-degree turn to
"look back into the baffles" of the
submarine's track. It is always surprising
to see what one finds upon looking.

If the player has been positively located, he has nothing to lose by immediately conducting an "all weapons" attack.
No sense taking all that perfectly good
ordnance to the bottom.

Even though some submarines can
"creep" at up to 19 knots (Sea Wolf), the
passive sonars are most effective at a
speed of about five knots. Avoid enemy
SOSUS sensors (like around the Kola
peninsula) by traveling at shallow depth
and creep speed.

The classic indicator of air attack is a
dropped torpedo picked up by your listening equipment. Turn to face directly into
the attack, go to creep speed and dive to
deep depth if one is not already there. If
one is already at deep depth, rise to intermediate depth until the torpedo passes,
then dive deep again, repeating as neces-

Contrary to M. Evan Brooks' assertion,
sub speed can be set to zero. Move the
set course point indicator to the zero
point and give a zero speed command,
then wait for a minute of game time.
Attack enemy surface groups with torpedoes. The torpedo is very destructive,
has a high probability of hitting and may
not immediately compromise the
attacker's location. Some torpedoes outrange shipboard anti-submarine weapons.
Know the characteristics of your torpedoes. Range and speed are the key,
especially since many targets can outrun
a torpedo fired at long range.
When engaging a target with torpedoes,
fire single torpedoes in two or three
separate attacks. Use at least two torpedoes against an identified target and at
least three against a contact. Make the attacks ten to fifteen seconds apart. Fire at
enemy subs from the target depth.
After firing torpedoes, turn 30 to 180
degrees away from the attack point,
get or stay beneath the thermocline
and cruise away for several minutes,
returning to creep speed before getting attacked by reacting enemy
ASW aircraft.
Try to attack all targets simultaneously at close range. If this is
not possible, one must get exact
location data and determine what
one is facing. This insures that one
is hitting the mission-essential targets. Don't diddle around for long in
the middle of an enemy formation
before attacking.
Individual submarines do not carry
enough missiles to be sure that a sufficient number will get through to a
defended target. If one desires to get
in close, do not get too close. Knowing the activation range for one's

an undetected torpedo going past one's
conning tower is a good indicator), it is
advisable to alter course into the direction of attack (or 180 degrees if you
didn't notice the direction of attack), go
to creep speed, and get on the other side
of the thermocline from where one was
at the time of attack. If there is no
enemy sub behind the player, then get
beneath the thermocline.
Ballistic Missile Submarines (Boomers)
— Creep deep. Be patient. Get within
range of all missiles. Operate individual
submarines. When firing with other submarines, time the firings to mass in time
and direction.
Attack Submarines — move slow, listen
hard, shoot quick.

"He who tries to defend
everything, defends nothing." Summary
— Sun Tzu
Harpoon is a fascinatingly detailed and
sary. Use the unit window to ensure
one's course remains facing directly into
the torpedoes attack.
If time between attacking torpedoes allows, set speed to zero at deep depth.
Use creep speed if attacked again.
This technique requires some practice
(i.e., save the game as soon as the attack is identified). Once the player has
mastered it, the attacking aircraft will run
out of torpedoes and one can slink off
into the sheltering depths.
If one is attacked without any warning
and survives (the sudden thrumming of

complex study of modern naval conflict,
as satisfying in breadth as it is in depth.
In each battle set, new considerations
relevant to modern naval conflict become comprehensible, even to us
neophytes. One can only look forward to
Battle Sets 4 and 5 (Persian Gulf/Indian
Ocean and Western Pacific).
Additionally, the Harpoon Battle Book
is scheduled for release in or before
June. This reference is supposed to include all the detailed weapons and platform data currently accounted for, but
not displayed in the game, as well as
detailed tactics for use with the different
platforms.

Computer Gaming World's
See Reader Input Device on page 90

The Categories
Strategy (ST): Games that
emphasize strategic planning
and problem-solving.
Simulation (SI): Games based
on first-person perspectives of
real-world environments.
Adventure (AD): Games that
allow you to take an alter ego
through a storyline or series of
events.
Role-Playing Adventure (RP):
Adventure games that are
based on character
development (usually
involving attributes).
Wargames (WG):
Simulations of historical or
futuristic warfare from a
command perspective.
Action/Arcade (AC):
Computer games that
emphasize hand-eye
coordination and reflexes.
Games are often listed in more
than one category. In this
case, the first listed category is
considered primary. In order
to be recognized as the "Top
Game" in a given category, a
game must be listed as being
primarily of that specific type.

Top 100 Games

THE HALL OF FAME
The Games in
CGW's Hall of
Fame Have Been
Highly Rated by
our Readers
over Time.
They are Worthy
of Play by All.

Game Hints

Scorpion's Mail-

here we are in the depths of
summer again. Fortunately, it's
pretty cool in the depths of the
mail room. It's also roomier. After a terrific struggle, I worked up the courage to
dump about three years' worth of letters.
There is, after all, only so much paper
one can stand the sight of before going
crazy (and you don't want to be around
Fred when he goes crazy)! At least I can
walk around now without knocking over
sacks of missives.
Before we get to the good stuff, once
again I have to say: if you live in the
United States, you must enclose a self-ad
dressed, stamped envelope if you want a
reply. Having mentioned that in a previous issue not too long ago, I thought
that would be enough, but... some people
still send in letters with no SASE (and
some of them say they read my columns
every month, so it's a mystery how they
manage to overlook this little item).
Also, please do not send money,
foreign stamps, or international reply
coupons. There is no charge for getting
help with games, and outgoing postage
to foreign countries is not excessive
(even with the new postal rates).
Okay, 'nuff said about that, let's move
on to the games!
Bane Of The Cosmic Forge: There
certainly have been a lot of letters showing up lately about this game! One problem that's keeping folks up late is what
to do after they've gotten past the skull
door. Well, that's where having a chat
with the giant snake in the mines is helpful. So is getting open the second grate
on the skull door level. Most important is
breaking open the crystal with the
wizard's face. Remember, there are (our
sides to this crystal and you have to find
all of them. If you haven't, more careful
exploration of the mines is in order, especially the dark areas.

Spellcasting 101: Quite a few people
are having difficulties in getting away
from the college. They just can't get their
hands on the fancy surfboard and,
without that surfboard, they're not going
anywhere any time soon. You'd be
amaized (hehe) at how easy the solution
really is. Too bad there isn't a sign somewhere that says "this way to the egress."
Wing Commander: A few issues back,
I mentioned that a number of people
who have played this game thought very
highly of the Kraft Thunderstick. Since
then, I have heard from an equally large
(and vocal!) contingent who swear by the
CH Flightstick, which they claim is as
good or better. Since, alas, Wing Commander isn't my type of game, I can't
render an opinion on which, if either, is
really the better joystick. However, since
both products have a large following, and
comments on them are favorable, I'm
just passing along some recommendations that came to me!
Secret Of Monkey Island: Some folks
are having a hard time getting a head in
this game. Not "ahead," mind you, but
"a head." A little problem in navigation,
so to speak. This is one of those
situations where you need to make a little
trade. After all, those cannibals aren't
especially bright, and they aren't likely to
be able to tell the difference between
"ahead" and "a head." Now, if you are
bright enough, you should be getting a
head in no time at all.
Death Knights Of Krynn: In an earlier
issue, I mentioned that my party had not
been able to get open a certain door in
Quazle. Since then, I have heard from
SSI that there is, indeed, a minor bug
here (yes, they are fixing it up) and that
the way to get the door open is to have a
thief (preferably a high-level one) pick
the lock. Bashing or Knock won't do the
job. So, if the door is giving you trouble,
try a thief. Or (if you don't have one)

you can leave it alone, since getting
through to the other side isn't necessary
in order to complete the game.
Eye Of The Beholder: Let's talk about
a key item here. You'll need three (count
'em, three) Dwarven keys to get from
level six (those wonderful Kenku) down
to level seven (those wonderful Drow).
Be careful how you use them, because
there are only so many in the game.
Also, you will need a Drow key to open
up the portal to Mr. Eyes. So, be certain
to hang on to one of those.
Hard Nova: There are some folks who
are having a hard time getting the
Bremer (no, not your guy; the ones in
the asteroid ship) to be cooperative.
Keep in mind how the Bremer navigate
in the first place. Maybe you've met
someone they'd like to meet. One man's
noise is another man's....
Pool Of Radiance: Just because someone tells you something, doesn't necessarily mean it's true. When you're on the
track of Mr. T, don't be misled. Anyone
can say he's Tyranthraxus; that doesn't
mean he actually is. Unless a few lightning bolts are winging your way, I'd be inclined to doubt the veracity of a selfproclaimed "Tyranthraxus." Things are
not always what they seem.
And that's about it for this look into the
mailbag. Until next time, if you need help
with an adventure game, you can reach
me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie:
Stop by the Games RoundTable (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). By US
Mail (enclose a self-addressed, stamped
envelope if you live in the United States):
Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie Station,
New York, NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1991 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

Review

Decrees From the Saddle
Medieval Lords: Soldier Kings of Europe

TITLE:
Medieval Lords : Soldier Kings of Europe
SYSTEM:
IBM
B OF PLAYERS: One to ten
PRICE:
$59.95
DESIGNER:
Martin Campion
PUBLISHER:
Strategic Simulations, Inc.
Sunnyvale, CA

S

by Chuck Moss

ome rulers in the Middle Ages were known as "The Great"
or "The Conqueror." Others are remembered as "The Fat,"
"The Unready" or "The Foolish." Players get their chance
to find out which designation would best fit their leadership styles
in Strategic Simulations, Inc.'s new strategy game, Medieval
Lords.

Billed as a historical simulation and written and designed by
Kansas history professor Martin Campion as a classroom instructional aid, Medieval Lords allows up to ten human and six computer players to chart the destiny of Europe. Medieval Lords permits a player to counsel the liege lords of a medieval European
state, in one of six scenarios, and manage the kingdom until
1530. The scenarios start at 100-year intervals and allow the
player to inject himself into a wide variety of historical situations.
Game length varies from 10 turns all the way up to a campaign
game from 1028 to 1530. Solitaire suitability is high, with three
levels of difficulty.

Having the Royal Ear
In Medieval Lords, the player is cast in the role of "advisor" to
a lord: a king, duke, Islamic caliph, or even the Holy Roman Emperor or the Pope. As "advisor," the player controls the foreign,
domestic and military policy of the state (referred to as "domain.") — everything except the lord's periodic spending binges.
Imagine an immortal time traveller sent back to influence history, and the situation gains focus. Players pick their lord at the
beginning of the game, but can transfer to another domain (only
upon the death of their lord) by incurring a victory point penalty.
Victory points are the heart of the game. Players keep a running total of points earned (for building up a domain, conquering
provinces, etc.) or lost (for lost wars and revolts). A successful
player will earn points for effective nation-building — not necessarily for conquest. The point of the game is to lift one's domain
out of the Dark Ages muck, not to conquer the map (although
conquest is the fun part). At the end of the game, points are
totalled up for all players, and a rating from "Slave" to "Prince" is
assigned the player.

Review

Medieval Management
Each game turn represents one year and is composed of "actions," chosen by the player. Each player has a limited number
of actions he can try (from three to six, as determined by the
player before the game begins). Successfully accomplishing
these things depends on the computer-generated qualities of his
lord. "Actions" include nation-building policies like supporting
towns, nobles and bureaucrats, building castles, making treaties
and subverting the enemy, or war actions like raising armies,
moving, fighting and putting down rebellions.
To build a realm strong enough to defend itself and expand requires solid carpentry. Supporting nobles will give a player a certain volatile military might, but supporting the towns will insure
more money. Players can run up debt, but this only leads to the
rise of "assemblies" (like Parliament) which hem in royal power
and increase the likelihood of revolts. Players definitely don't
want to encourage these bodies, no matter how much Winston
Churchill may praise them 900 years down the road.

Nobles Versus Middle Class
The historical monarchs who were successful during the actual
period simulated built bureaucratic structures and supported the
towns (the nascent middle class) against the nobles and used
the revenues to build their own standing armies. The dynamics
of Medieval Lords lead the player toward this strategy — but it's
best done with small, tight realms the size of Elizabethan
England or Spain.
The bigger the domain, the more tightly stretched a player's
resources are apt to be and the more vulnerable it will be to rebellions and outbreaks of heresy. Players who neglect their political
infrastructure will end up simply marching around putting out
fires. Then there is the Black Death and the Mongol hordes to be
dealt with, which is sure to tax one's ingenuity, if not one's
citizens, to the limit.

Fire the Royal Cartographer
Originally conceived for the Apple II, Medieval Lords is a
graphic throwback to the days of Colonial Conquest. The screen
boasts a flat political map with no terrain features, save water,
divided into scores of blocky-shaped provinces. The commands
are menu-driven with "actions" performed by choosing items
from the keyboard. The only graphic interaction is performed by
marching one's army — players are only allowed to build one —
across the map.
A typical game turn with one solitaire player and six computer
foes takes about ten minutes, but most of that is spent watching

Review

the machine play itself, displaying data on various events. A
player can limit the data displayed, which will speed up play immensely, making the 500+ turn campaign viable.

Hear, Ye! Hear, Ye!
This reviewer's verdict on Medieval Lords? Good news and
bad. The bad news first: Medieval Lords is graphically nowhere
in the league of products like Command H.Q., Populous, Railroad Tycoon or even Sword of Aragon. The interface is unduly
clunky, and much of the information, like victory chances, available to the player is severely and ahistorically limited.
Further, as a historical simulation, purists will object that reducing the complex web of medieval politics to a manageable set of
choices reduces the potential for gleaning a sophisticated understanding of the period. Instead of understanding that the game
randomizes the historical figures to insure replayability, they
would contend that the game severely slights major historical
characters, generating lords and killing them off before their actual "time," and preventing players from seeing how epochal
these figures were. (This reviewer was enraged by the
computer's constant random snuffing of Emperor Frederick II.)
Perhaps there should have been a pure historical scenario where
the historical figures could attain their full stature. It probably
wouldn't have been much of a "game," however, and the value
of this game is not in memorizing time lines, but in understanding the dynamics of the period. In the latter, the game succeeds dramatically.
Wargamers will be furious in that terrain factors are non-exis

tent. There appear to be no movement points, so an army can
march all over a player's realm. In 1350, this reviewer was able
to put down a rebellion in Gibraltar, squash heresy in Denmark,
and still march to conquer Constantinople. (Okay, so it was a
big empire.) No one could do this with an army today, let alone
in the 14th Century. Part of the problem here is that they are
seeing the game as a wargame rather than a strategy game. As
a strategy game, the decision-making process is more abstract
and does not require the micro-managing of detailed military
simulations.
Medieval Lords is, frankly, a challenging and intriguing game
in which historical buffs will be delighted to match wits with the
Pope and the Khans. What wargamer hasn't toyed with the idea
of taking command of Byzantium, the Holy Roman Empire or
Crusader Jerusalem and rewriting history? It gives one's romantic imagination free play. This game definitely opts for playability
over presentation and hence will probably be a jewel that will
only be discovered by discriminating strategy garners who do not
have to be "seduced" by marketing "chrome" into playing an excellent game.
The many computer characters make for challenging
diplomacy and, in a pinch, a player can flee a collapsing realm
and start anew. The economic, political and military simulation is
so simple that the learning curve is short, despite the poorly organized and verbose documentation. Play moves very fast. The
menu commands are simple and easy to use. Few can resist the
joy of seeing the map slowly turn to one's chosen color. In short,
Medieval Lords is an entertaining and challenging computer
game, despite — or, perhaps, because of — its limitations.

Strategy Hints
Primus: First-time players should select a small, compact
realm. Political, economic and social development should take
priority over any military buildup beyond bare defensive necessity. Support towns and bureaucrats until town loyalty is a minimum of "5" and bureaucratic strength is at least "3" in every
province. This is how the Dark Ages were really rolled back, folks.
Secundum: Take neighboring provinces one at a time, and
stop for at least two turns to "consolidate" them, particularly if
the new prize has a different religion than one's own. Anything
beyond that is stretching limited administrative resources beyond
their capability. Slow, steady, long-term nation-building is the key
to relighting the Dark Ages.

Strategy

WheniRo
Electronic Arts' Centurion: Defender of Rome
by Marcus Licentious Ridiculous, Pontifex Minimus

A

ll Gaul was divided into three parts

(unfortunately, this article is longer).
Fortunately, Centurion: Defender of
Rome is now available on three formats:
Amiga, IBM and Sega Genesis (and all
play identically).
Determined, we set out many leagues
toward its conquest and made history's
first long-distance collect Gaul. Yet while
that pompous Pompey pontificated and
that silly Caesar sallied, all Rome knew
that a rising young soldier could go far. A
Centurion: Defender of Rome could write
his own ticket to the Curia and occupy
front row seats at the Forum next to
Jackvs Nicholson.
Here, young soldier of Rome, in these Annals, lie some secrets to success. Whether
leading legions, forming fleets, chasing
chariots or taking tribute, know that all
must be done with the Emperorship in
mind. The Senate will not help, the people
will not help and the barbarians will certainly not help in the cause of supreme rulership. Only this tome will help the wary warrior. Go forward, therefore, and conquer!

Know Your Limits
Perhaps the most important element of the game is setting the
play difficulty levels. The degrees of challenge offered between
the Galley Slave and Emperor levels are enormous. In land battles (the most common cinematic event in the game), one can
quickly see this in the size of the Roman cohorts and the effectiveness of barbarian cavalry and elephants. Since the right level
for a player can only be found by cruel trial and error, exercise a
little patience and don't hesitate to individually adjust the chariot
racing, gladiatorial combat, land conflicts and sea battles.

A "Tribute" to Fund Raising
Every good politician knows the value of fund raising, but in
Rome one must have special "talents" for money management.
Basically, one must develop Ben Hur-like chariot racing skills and
keep betting the limit. With full coffers, one can keep the
strongest possible legions in the field and reduce taxes to
tolerable levels. Spending money on such wasteful exercises as
gladiatorial spectacles is a necessary evil in Centurion, and circuses can cost plenty of bread. (Mr. Peabody would say that this
is the origin of the phrase "bread and circuses.")
It kind of reminds one of that joke they tell in the baths about a
funny thing that happened on the way to the Forum. A guy says,
"Hey, buddy, how do I get to the Circus Maximus?" and the other

guy says, "Practice." So it is that one must become adroit at the
chariot races. Many times the stretcher bearers will have to haul
one away before the right combination is found and the "safe"
containing one's betting fortunes is "cracked." Allow this
safecracker to say that taking a light, fast chariot is usually the
way to go; once in the lead, there's no looking back. Corruption
and off-track bribery are optional and not recommended due to
their expense (which defeats the purpose of maximizing profits).
Take the "outside lane" around corners so that maximum speed
can be maintained for the ensuing straightaways, and "lean" into
corners once they are entered. Remember, the whip is used,
literally, for extra horsepower, but too much will cause one to
end up beating a dead horse before reaching the third porpoise.

The Best Offense is a Good Defense
On land, the battles can be tough. While the different formations and tactics presented offer combinations of cinematic grandeur to behold, they offer little in the way of assuring victory on
the battlefield. Often, every advantage possible is necessary to
carry the day. The best offense, therefore, is a good defense.
Never once has this "historian" chronicled a battle where the barbarians have failed to charge into an attack. At each battle, they
lunge headlong, in one fashion or another, at the player's
cohorts. This weakness in enemy tactics can be exploited....
Here, then, is the secret: stand fast. Units which are not moving
have a slight battle advantage over units which are, and as often
as not, that is the difference between victory and defeat. Truly,

Emperors Do
Conquers New Formats

there is no better tactic than beheading the enemy's commander,
but failing that, stand fast. Experimenting with different formations and tactics is amusing, and will even work on occasion, but
the safest plan is to balance the formation and hold on. When
the enemy approaches, reserves can be committed to pressed
sectors, for a line held is a battle won.

Fleet Fleets
There seems to be little profit in sea battles and, if they can be
avoided, they should be. The primary purpose of a fleet is to
grow large enough to ferry full strength legions to the islands of
the known world. Without transports, one cannot conquer Britain
or Sardinia. True arcade skills need to be developed for superior
ramming and corvus tactics to work, but with few fleet battle opportunities and the extreme importance of each, earning one's
water wings can be frustrating. Remember where galley slaves
come from, and take this challenge at its easiest level.

Go West, Young Legionnaire
With the Senate's imposed restrictions on the number of
legions which a player can command, making optimal use of
them, particularly early on, is important. To that end, it is general
ly a sound strategy to methodically conquer the board to the
west first (saving, perhaps, Britain until a fleet can be amassed).
With that conquered, the legions can move with measured tread
eastward until, at last, they face the "Parthian problem." While it
has been said that one man's Mede is another man's Persian, the
Parthians fight like the Detroit Pistons coached by Darth Vader.
Several legions will have to be squandered in futile "wave" assaults before these hated horsemen will bow to Rome.

Saving Money at the "Banks" of the Nile
Everyone, it seems, wants to conquer Cleopatra rather than
Egypt. While we've heard rumors of success, bedfellows make
strange politics and Cleo is not likely to do a horizontal surrender. In fact, most barbarian leaders one encounters will speak
little more than "Your mother wears combat sandals." With insults like that, one can quickly see how Rome was provoked into
building an empire based on barbarian diplomatic slights.
Legions speak louder than words, and words will often fail a
general. It is better to practice one's military arts, rather than
one's oratory skills.

Aesop or ASAP?
Before setting out, brave soldier, know that the sufferings of the
army are "legion" and the fortunes of Mars are fickle. There will
be nasties from Neptune, and beauties from Bacchus. There will
be Macedonian mishaps (also know as "Greek tragedy") and
good Sarmatians (not to be confused with Samaritans). One
might end up impaled on the scythes of Scythia or have a lot of
Gaul. In any case, the final word of council is: cheat the Fates
and save the game before every major action.

Review

O

n the 5th of April, 1945, Admiral Seiichi Ito of the
Imperial Japanese Navy received the most
"honorable" mission of his life. Okinawa was
under siege and the Japanese had steeled themselves to
fight to the last man, woman and child. They knew that
the loss of Okinawa would lead to a large-scale invasion
of mainland Japan and, were it not for the efforts of some
scientists, that was indeed the original plan. The
Japanese philosophy reacted naturally to this threat by
adopting unconventional tactics like Kamikaze attacks,
the Divine Wind, to stave off the inevitable for as long as
possible and provide an "honorable" death to its warriors.
Admiral Ito's mission, to sally forth with the super battleship Yamato and an escort screen in the face of unstoppable Allied naval might, reflected this fundamental
change in approach that was the swan song of the
Japanese Empire.
TITLE:
Banzai: Death Sortie of the Yamato
SYSTEMS:
Apple II, IBM
REVIEWED:
IBM
COPY PROTECT: Document check
# PLAYERS:
1-2
PRICE:
$35.00
DESIGNER:
Dr. Owen P. Hall, Jr.
PUBLISHER:
General Quarters Software
P.O. Box 1429
Torrance, CA 90505

The subtitle of Banzai is appropriate to both reality and
the simulation. The Yamato's only chance in the scenario
is to avoid detection completely and reach Okinawa. For
this, the Japanese player will receive 200 victory points
and be declared the winner, even if no Allied shipping has
been touched. This is contrary to the actual primary mission of inflicting as much damage as possible on the Allied invasion forces around Okinawa prior to either being
sunk or scuttled. After all, the original orders stated to
take on only enough fuel for a one-way trip.

Fateful Voyage
by H. E. Dille

Although these details may seem superfluous at
first glance, they are critical to evaluating play
balance. It is questionable if such an ill-fated mission as Admiral Ito's is even appropriate for any
kind of strategic or tactical wargame, except for the
purpose of providing historical continuity. Assuming that is the case, the result is fairly accurate: the
Yamato will be destroyed any time she is detected, either
by carrier-based air power or a superior surface action
group. Does this make for either challenging or interesting game play? This reviewer must answer that question
with a resounding "No!"

Having dispatched the subject matter for its relative lack
of merit, one must turn his attention to the manner in
which the subject matter was presented as well. This
reviewer had occasion to cover an earlier General
Quarters release, Miracle at Midway (CGW #66), some
two years ago. At the time, the product received a
favorable review because it offered challenging (if not
balanced) game play and adequate graphics. It was
viewed as an acceptable effort from a fledgling firm. Two
years later, one cannot help but feel that Banzai is the
same game with the same interface and the same
graphics, but extremely unbalanced play. Only the names
of the combatants have been changed to protect the guilty. Failing to progress in the dynamic environment of
computer programming and increasingly sophisticated
consumers can only be seen as regression, plain and
simple. One quickly realizes that the games are the work
of an enthusiast of naval history rather than a "computer
game designer." Hence, the games tend to have more
pedagogical value than play value, at times.
To those who have not encountered the General Quarters interface, the following paragraph is mandatory reading. First, one has the option of playing at the "strategic"
or "tactical" level, neither of which approximates reality to

Review

the degree that the name implies. The tactical level involves a
single surface action between the Yamato or Yaghai and
whichever American ships are selected. Players control the standard options of targeting, course/speed changes, whether to make
smoke or fire star shells (for illumination in night engagements).
However, all gunnery resolution is based upon a single salvo reference to the hidden straddle table, regardless of firing rates, spotting or reload times. As such, any engagement for the Yamato is
almost inevitably deadly against three or more enemy ships, due
to her inability to fire more than once a turn, regardless of the
number of batteries that can be brought to bear.
On the positive side, counter-flooding has been added as a
damage control measure to help maintain an even keel for improved gunnery, but the truth is that the addition does little to improve overall playability, even compared to prior releases.
Playing in the strategic mode, one controls all ship/submarine
movement and all aircraft search/attack from a single screen,
which represents the area from Taipei to the central Japanese
mainland. As the Japanese player, one has the option of launching air strikes from Kure or Taipei whenever American ships are
located during search, and may specify up to 25% of the attacking aircraft to be Kamikaze.
Air strikes are handled as an arcade sequence with rudimentary
up/down/left/right arrow control for targeting. Naturally, if left to
the computer, this function is both faster and more accurate. As
such, player interface in this part of the game is not recommended. Why then, one must ask, does this portion even exist?
Frankly, it is highly unlikely that many of the generated results

have any basis in reality. As an example, in one strategic playthrough, the Japanese admiral launched 100 bombers from
Taipei at a lone enemy battleship, the Colorado. During the attack, 68 bombers were lost and the ship only suffered moderate
damage. Granting even the difficulty of accurately bombing a
maneuvering surface contact with iron/gravity ordnance, these
results are off astronomically in the probability and statistics
world. As for the remainder of strategic play, submarine attacks
are handled exclusive of player intervention and surface engagements are handled as described in the tactical segment above.
The only major revision between this release and others is the addition of a function for which this reviewer must coin a new term:
semi-modem play. Basically, it is nothing more than a file transfer routine that allows players to upload and exchange alternating turns (not unlike the play-by-mail algorithm) via the modem.
Although it is a start, it will be considered somewhat inferior by
many of our readers who have become accustomed to simultaneous movement via modem.
Given these factors, one might ask what Banzai has to offer,
and to whom. Primarily, it should appeal to players who want a
quick game of hide and seek that doesn't require a lot of
forethought, planning or knowledge of naval tactics. If one is looking for a good theater-level campaign game of the Pacific or a
good tactical wargame of WWII naval combat, it is best to look
elsewhere. As such, Banzai can only be looked upon as a case
of a developer resting on his laurels. Since this particular designer has provided hours of enjoyment in the past, one can only
hope his next effort does not require such a Sisyphus-like effort
in terms of play balance.

Review

ot

every theme park turns out to be Disney World.
Without the benefits of bank-breaking special effects,
gut-emptying rides and the cartoon clout of
you-know-who with the big ears, what can an old-fashioned carnival hope to offer? Anyone for death and insanity?
Granted, those two features may not make for sound advertising, but they are exactly what Konami is promising in its
arcade adventure, Theme Park Mystery (TPM).

N

The theme park in question has become famous for its
one-way admission tickets and now no one will go near the
place. This questionable piece of real estate now belongs to
a new owner — the player — who has decided to enter the
park, pierce its mysteries and, generally, debug the place.
Within it, he'll come across the charming Yesterdayland,
the barbaric Dragonland, the surreal Dreamland and the dizzying Futureland.
The most interesting setting in Theme Park Mystery is
found in Yesterdayland, where the game begins. Here, the
player may visit any of three slot machines. The first of
these is a fortune-telling device, akin to the one which transformed a young boy into Tom Hanks in the movie Big. The
machine contains Zoltan, easily the most charismatic
presence in TPM. For a price, this turban-wrapped countenance will dispense cards containing vital information and
valuable magic. The second machine is a primitive pinball
game that allows the player to win the tokens which are
necessary to buy Zoltan's cards. The last of these booths is
a crane machine or "grabber," ancestor to those now found
in many convenience stores. The prizes within it are the
members of a toy-soldier marching band who endearingly
stick out their collective tongues at the player each time
the crane fails to capture one of their group.
Yesterdayland is remarkable because of its evocative
sounds and graphics. The pictures are highly detailed, and
each scene is framed by a console containing levers and
other paraphernalia belonging to an old-time slot machine.
Each time the player pulls a lever or pushes a button, there
is the realistic scraping of metal against metal which gives
the whole sequence a very authentic touch.
Unfortunately, beyond Yesterdayland lies a big disappointment, as the seductive magic of the carnival is suddenly
replaced with several unremarkable arcade sequences. In
Dragonland, the player explores a massive underground
passage in search of several elusive gremlins and other objects necessary to win the game. The challenge is to do this
while dodging the usual variety of creatures, warriors and
various anthropomorphic pieces of slime.
Dreamland is actually a large fantasy chessboard containing more gremlins, more useful objects and more creatures.
The goal here is to scoop up the gremlins, gather the useful objects and avoid the nasty creatures.
Futureland features a shoot-'em-up, white-knuckle roller
coaster ride in which the player must grab yet more gremlins, pick up even more useful objects and (need we say
it?) avoid some additional creatures.
Back in Yesterdayland, the player turns his gremlin collection over to Zoltan and employs the latter's useful objects
in order to return to one of the three arcade lands in search
of more of the same. Only by capturing all eight gremlins
and conveying them to Zoltan will the player be able to
solve the mystery suggested in the game's title.
TPM is played using both the joystick and the mouse. IBM

Konami's Theme
by Allen

Review

owners don't necessarily need both devices, though they
are recommended for use in tandem. The hero is made to
move and jump using the joystick, while the slot machines
and inventory are manipulated with the mouse. The best
way to do this is to hold the joystick in one hand and move
the mouse with the other. This may be awkward at first but
adjustment to it is easy and it shouldn't cause any
problems.
The Amiga disk is copy-protected, while the IBM version
requires either a hard disk or several blank floppy disks to
decompress to. Both versions require the player to type in
a code number in order to access the program. These numbers are printed on that well-known dark brown paper using
black ink. Those who object to this type of protection, or
simply wish to spare their eyes, should be aware.
Other flaws which mar TPM include the absence of a
game-save feature. Since the story of the park is episodic,
and particularly since the game requires quite a bit of
patience and luck at the slot machines, it really is asking
too much for the player to repeat these sequences every
time the program is run. The game also suffers from a skimpy manual which fails to explain the meaning of many of
the items the hero will encounter.

Park Mystery
Greenberg

Regardless of the fact that TPM is at least three-quarters
arcade action, the word "arcade" is conspicuously absent
from the game's package. Even the screen illustrations on
the box convey very little of the hack 'n' slash to be found
within. Anyone investing in this program is almost forced to
assume that they are bringing home a mystery adventure
or possibly a strategy game. For this, Konami deserves a
sharp slap on this wrist. Misleading information of this sort
can only serve to anger good customers. Hopefully,
Konami will get the message.
TPM has its good moments — specifically those spent in
Yesterdayland. The arcade sequences really don't do justice
to the game's premise and opening. TPM's most serious
problem is its inability to save a game in progress. The conclusion this reviewer must reach is that this one really isn't
a very exciting piece of entertainment. For now,
you-know-who with the mouse ears has nothing to worry about.

TITLE:
Theme Park Mystery
SYSTEMS:
Amiga, IBM
COPY PROTECT: Non-Repro Paper
PRICE:
549.95
DEVELOPERS:
MirrorSoft
PUBLISHER:
Konami
Buffalo Grove, IL

I

a

Strategy

Home Before the Snows Fall
Axis Strategy for SSI's Second Front
by Tim Carter

O

ne of the attractions of wargames
will always be the ability of
armchair generals and politicians
to recreate the great "what ifs" of history.
In SSI's epic Second Front, players are
given the opportunity to recreate the campaign in Russia (from 1941 to 1945) on
a strategic and operational scale. As the
German player, one is given command
of the full range of military resources
available to the OKW during this period.
Players must implement a comprehensive plan combining land, air and
economic campaigns in order to achieve
victory.
In order for the German player to win in
Second Front, he must emulate the historical reality by defeating the bulk of the
Soviet forces early on, while the Russian
army is still disorganized and before the
full weight of the Russian winter takes its
toll. If he fails, the Soviets will get continually stronger from the beginning of
1942 onward, while the Germans become weaker. If, then, the German is to
win, he must win early.

Strategic Planning
A quick glance at the geography of victory cities and the distribution of their
point values shows that there are two
principal avenues which an overall German strategy can take: north to Moscow,
Leningrad and Gorki or south to
Stalingrad and the Caucasus oilfields. In
1941, the easier of the two routes is to
the north (Moscow-Leningrad-Gorki). This
route has the advantages of being

shorter and more direct, and it affords
the Germans with flanks that will be
much easier to defend.

Quartermaster Preparations
For this concentrated northern effort to
work, the Germans must concentrate
their mobile units north of the Pripet Marshes on the first turn. This means the 3rd
and 14th Panzer corps should be transferred to the 3rd Panzer Army, while the
40th Panzers go to the 4th Panzer Army
(creating two giant mailed fists). An additional Panzer corps, the 16th, should be
created from the tank divisions in Africa,
the Panzer brigades from the Western
front and a couple of Italian mobile
divisions (putting these "malingering"
mobile formations to work on the Eastern Front). This new mobile corps should
also be attached to the 4th Panzer Army.
The African units can be replaced by the
22nd and 23rd tank divisions plus one or
two infantry divisions from OKW in order
to keep the Allies at bay.
The Panzer armies should also have
their air complements significantly
beefed up. This can be done by transferring Finnish air units, as well as groups
from the Western front and Africa. Some
consolidation of air units from other HQs
to the Panzers should also be considered
in order to optimize success in the main
push northward.
As a result of these shifts, eleven Panzer corps will be available on the northern and central fronts. The 48th Panzer
corps is left in the south to keep the

Southern front from stagnating and to ensure the fall of Kiev and Kharkov. Such a
concentration of strength will allow for a
hard-hitting, rapid advance in the north,
regardless of the Soviet strategy. With
vigilant effort in keeping the Panzers in
supply, the German advance should be
able to reach the outskirts of Moscow
and Leningrad in September.

Go East, Young
Oberleutnant
The lines of advance should evolve as
follows: the 4th Panzer Army should
move along an axis from Riga to Pskov
and then turn north to attack Leningrad;
the 3rd Panzer Army must set out on a
Vilna, Dagavpils and Velikiye Luki route;
and the 2nd Panzer Army must bludgeon
through Minsk, Mogilev, Vitebsk and
Smolensk, where the most Soviet resistance can be expected, as this route
directly threatens Moscow.

Join the Wehrmacht.
See Moscow.
The attack on Moscow should be
developed in two stages. The 3rd and 4th
Panzer Armies, by concentrating on
taking Kalinin and Leningrad respectively, will put the entire Soviet army between Leningrad and Moscow out of
supply. (At higher levels of Russian advantage, Soviet units will not be out of
supply until the weather turns to rain.)
This means that as long as the Germans
retain possession of these two objectives,
a Soviet counterattack from this area will

Strategy

Another Look
REACH FOR
THE STARS
7.45 R.I.D. RATING

S

ince its 3rd Edition appeared on
the Macintosh format back in
1986, this perennial favorite has
come out in virtually every format imaginable, including the C-64 and Apple
IIGS. When first released in 1983, it was
an instant hit, particularly with the Apple II
users who then dominated the computer
game market. Today, the 3rd Edition
Apple II version is still considered the best
many formats offered.
Though no longer on our Top 100 Rated
Games chart (by virtue of its somewhat
dated graphics), Reach for the Stars still
adorns many a hard disk since it is the
"classic" strategic space conquest game.
Conceptually related to the Avalon Hill
boardgame Stellar Conquest, Reach for
the Stars is a four-cornered struggle for
galactic dominance for one to four players
(at the same computer). Computer controlled players play at various skill levels, with
the "Enhanced Veterans" as deadly
menaces, indeed!
Simple production, movement and combat systems allow players to quickly get involved in empire building (and crushing)
with a totally menu-driven interface.
Various player options, including technology levels, random events, set-ups and
starmaps keep this game fresh and interesting every time it is rebooted.
Ship-to-ship combat is handled abstractly in "rounds," between which players can
opt to retreat. One goal being to have the
largest popu-lation, growth depends on
transporting people to "greener planets"
for victory points, or to more resource rich
baron planets for production points.
Players also receive victory points for winning space battles plus destroying or occupying enemy colonies.
Computer Gaming World Index:
Reach for the Stars was featured in issue

3.6. It was peeked in issues 5.4 and 51
(the latter being a peek of the 3rd Edition). There was another feature article in
issue 55, and a short mention in issue 81.

remain completely untenable, due to
supply constraints.
Once Kalinin falls, the Germans must
concentrate all available forces in the
Moscow area for the final push. Due to
the usually high concentration of Soviet
strength around the capital, it is generally
unwise to try to encircle the entire Soviet
force in this region (sort of like a snake
swallowing a buffalo). Instead, the forces
in and around Kalinin should generally
move east and south while the 2nd Panzer Army, reinforced with the strongest
units from the Leningrad area, should attack straight up from the center. This
maneuver will never win any points for
its subtlety, but it will get the job done in
the minimum amount of time (time
being the important element during this
stage of the plan). Creating a huge pocket and trying to reduce it before Russia's
"General Winter" assumes command
could leave the exposed Wehrmacht
prone to disaster.

Once Moscow falls, Gorki usually becomes a fairly easy target, provided there
are still a few blizzard-free weeks left.
This is particularly true against the computer opponent. When playing against a
human opponent, one should recognize
the possibility of taking Moscow, but ending up being forced to stop for the
winter. If this is the case, more attention
should be given to wiping out the Soviet
armies along the Kalinin rail/supply line.

Tank Tactics
German tactics must be developed with
the strategic plan in mind. There is no
point in achieving spectacular tactical
successes if they do not assist one in attaining the necessary goals (strategic objectives). The German advance should
operate as a two-stage process, with
some armored units striking deep into
enemy territory while others are held in
reserve (rested and supplied) to ensure
open lines of supply to the front. As the

advance progresses and more opposition
appears, the Panzer corps should be
used in a leapfrog style, with some units
resting while others forge ahead. This will
allow for a continuous advance which
does not overextend German mobile elements.
The German player can further
strengthen his main attacking units by
transferring numerous reserve infantry
divisions to the Panzer army HQs. This
will allow the computer-controlled local
commanders to reinforce front-line units
in key battles as necessary. Remember
to return these units to the HQs on the
next turn, however, since infantry units
left in fast-moving armored corps will suffer high readiness losses during movement, especially during bad weather.

Victory Through Airpower?
At the higher levels of difficulty, the German player will want to consider a
strategic bombing campaign. The Soviet
advantage in readiness at the "help" and
"max help" levels can be negated by
bombing oil facilities in the Caucasus
region. Groups of BR-20s and HE-111s
should hit Maikop, Tblisi and Baku as
soon as they are within striking range.
Combined with the loss of Moscow and
Leningrad, this bombing will reduce the
oil reserves of the Soviets to below 100,
leading to losses in readiness for all
units. During the rainy season the Germans can divert more forces to this task
as the amount of ground fighting will
probably be minimal at that time.

Conquering the Ukraine on
Rollerskates
The German attack in the south is
generally restrained by a lack of mobile
forces. This can be overcome by creating
several mobile corps manned by infantry
units. These units will not fight well after
moving long distances due to loss of
readiness, but they will greatly speed the
Axis advance in the face of light opposition or delaying tactics.
A determined and tactically competent
German assault along these lines will be
very difficult for the Soviets to oppose.
By concentrating forces and driving
straight for the victory cities, the Germans can force the Soviets to commit
the bulk of their forces to battle before
the weather and Russian reinforcements
negate the German's advantages in
speed and striking power. If the German
troops are not home before the first snow
falls, they should be well on their way
before the blizzards hit.

Sneak Preview

Minuet in (AD&)D...

takes away the single most dynamic element of actual "role-playing."

(Continued from page 28)

With Neverwinter Nights, this problem
is solved by allowing each player to run
a single character in the game, bearing
that person's sign-on name (look for this
author, for instance, as "GamingGuy").
Now, players are presented with real roleplaying game problems, such as finding
others to "party" with. No longer does
one person generate six perfectly
matched, equal level, A-Team characters.
Now, one must use whatever personnel
happen to be available on-line at that
given time. Sometimes, any warm body
will do. Many a first-level magic user has
built up experience points by following a
couple of high-level fighters into the
woods surrounding Neverwinter!

Cool, but Neverwinter
Neverwinter is a town in the northwestern region of the DragonLance
universe. The people residing in this
town, however, are not happy campers.
With decaying walls and a severely
depressed (literally, rotten) economy (although the inns and merchants which
players frequent seem to be doing quite
well) are driving Lord Nasher into
despair. What he needs, like the Marines,
is a few good adventurers to help clean
things up, right a few unrightable wrongs,
fight some unbeatable foes and generally
unravel the mysteries that plague the
once prosperous city of Neverwinter.
As befits an on-line role-playing game
best, the world of Neverwinter Nights is
not a finite one; whereas when one purchases a Gold Box game off the shelf,
one can rest assured that when the quest
is over, so is the replayability of the
game. In an on-line world, however, the
dungeoneers never sleep. Instead, they
keep adding on new grid squares for persistent (and wealthy) players to explore.
Fantastic tales of on-line role-players racking up multi-hundred dollar phone bills
playing these games for hours and days
and weeks upon end are true. Like
teenagers, ex-wives and the I.R.S., these
"money vampires" can suck one's wallet
dry, except in the case of an on-line roleplaying game, the phone company is always a willing accomplice.

On-Line Is Role-Playing!
Many things wrong with computer roleplaying are "righted" when playing online. For one thing, role-playing started as
a very social interactive pencil-and-paper
game for a group of people. Achieving
that while sitting alone at one's computer

Ye Bards and Raconteurs
The mechanics of inter-player communication are about the only thing an
experienced "Gold Boxer" needs to learn
to play Neverwinter Nights. Quite simply, one merely types what to say and hits
'Enter', then everyone within two spaces
will read it along the top three "lines" of
their Graphical User Interface. By hitting
an 'F' key, one can find out who the
other players in their area are or, with a
shift key added, can find out who's playing anywhere in Neverwinter Nights. If
they are not within two squares, messages can be sent to them (by
"telepathy") by simply typing the
addressee's name and a colon to
precede the message. Even color can be
added to one's words (literal color, that
is, like green, yellow and grey).
Authentic social interaction is the true
beauty, nay, the soul of role-playing. For
example: This reviewer joined a group
one evening and, during the lulls in conversations, kept the party members
amused with several one-liners. These
barbs garnered responses of "LOL"

(Laughing Out Loud) and "ROFL" (Rolling On Floor, Laughing) throughout the
night. When a new member joined our
party in the middle of an encounter with
some trolls by a major pontoon (dubbed
a "Troll Bridge"), she asked what character classes and levels we were. Another
party member chimed in that this reviewer was an "8th Level Jester." Folks,
moments like that... that's role-playing!

Personal Touches For Real
Persons
Players assume identities for their characters not only by their banter, however.
Where a player might "knock out" a
"quickie" when designing a distinctive
icon for their Gold Box characters, they
are not so hasty in Neverwinter Nights.
Now, a character's icon is the player's
showpiece. Like any other first impression situation, players will want to create
icons (through the handy game menus)
which truly resemble their characters (or
are so wild that others are impressed).
It's that personal, "self-portrait" touch
that helps this computer game transcend
the traditional limits of CRPGs by allowing the "sharing" of one's artistic efforts.
By far, the best aspects of on-line roleplaying lie in helping others. Most people
like to help out. When new players
jumped into Neverwinter Nights, this
reviewer was moved by the caring and
patience showed to them by all. Weak
characters were invited to join stronger
ones, even on adventures where their survival was problematic. Rich characters
were quick to give extra gold and gems
to new-found impoverished friends. After
each battle, the fighters who came up
with magic scrolls would willingly give
them to characters whose classes they
benefited. Weapons, armor and magic
items would find the best of homes, even
if with characters who were hitherto virtual "strangers."

Longing For Alwayssummer
Nights
Like any popular "chat" area of an online network or any solid computer roleplaying game, one can quickly become
addicted to it and return again and again.
With Neverwinter Nights possessing
both of these silicon-narcotic qualities, it
is easy to imagine many new enlistees
for America On-Line who will make this
game their "home" and the players therein into their new friends. If this writer
were back in school again, when he
longed for the summer and staying up
late every night, Neverwinter would have
been his Alwayssummer favorite.

Review

A Mind Is a Terrible Thing to Waste
by Dr. Jesse W. Cheng

hey

always say that the first day is the longest when
starting out on the neurosurgical wards. "Toolworks
General" is no different with that darn loudspeaker
paging system dragging me every which way and the Chief
of Neurosurgery, Dr. Skelton, giving me a little pep talk on
how only the best residents survive. Sure, surgery is the best,
but this sink-or-swim attitude has got to change.

T

For example, the first case was a 37-year-old white male
found semiconscious at home. There was no history available, other than the fact he was gorked out on arrival at the
hospital, but my physical exam showed he had a dilated left
pupil that was unresponsive to light.
"CAT scan stat," I yelled to the staff.
Sure enough, my suspicions were confirmed — a large subdural hematoma from trauma. We wheeled him down to the
OR for an emergency hematoma evacuation. I was feeling
rather proud of myself as we prepped and draped the patient.
I'll show Dr. Skelton that I'm real surgical material. I started
the incision across the scalp with efficiency, clamping off
bleeders as they popped up. I stripped away the scalp and
had just started my drilling into the skull when horror

gripped me. The internal bleeding was on the other side of
the skull. "Dr. Skelton would like to see you in his office" the
pager blared. I should have gone to law school.... [Excerpt
from a life in the day of a neurosurgery intern.]
The Software Toolworks company has now produced a sequel to their popular Life & Death game. This one is called
(guess what?) Life & Death II — The Brain. For those who have
played Life and Death, the "point, click and drag" interface
(which is extremely friendly to mouse users and somewhat
awkward for keyboard users) is the same. However, there are
major improvements in the way the product looks and sounds.
Life & Death II has moved beyond the CGA graphics and internal speaker sounds found in the earlier version and moved into
the realm of VGA graphics and support for AdLib and Sound
Blaster boards, as well as Realsound code for those who must
use the internal speaker. The graphics are not simply aesthetic,
however, since the extraordinary effort placed in facial features
and anatomical detail adds to the playability of the game. The
sound effects also add impressive additional credibility to the
game's fiction, from the sound of the drill cutting into bone to
the patient reacting to the prick of a needle during his or her
physical exams.

Review

The game itself features much more than its predecessor. The
database has been expanded from two operations and six diagnosable conditions to three operations and ten diagnosable conditions. In fact, the game is so much bigger and more comprehensive that it must perform surgery on the player's hard disk in
order to get the complete six megabytes of program on the disk.
Prospective surgeons must spend a mandatory ten minutes in
"prep" while the program is installing itself!

Med School Recap
For those unfamiliar with the series, players assume the role of
a surgery intern (in this case a neurosurgery intern) in a teaching
hospital. In the medical school lecture hall, Chief of Neurosurgery
Ryan T. Skelton welcomes the new residents to the neurosurgery
wing of Toolworks General and gives a brief orientation to the
floor. In a major improvement over the initial game, Life &
Death Ii allows players to attend med school "lectures" and learn
all about the details of diagnosis, treatment and surgical procedures before (s)he makes a mistake. The original featured
trial-and-error medical training. Ironically, the tutorial system ends up
providing so much information that it required this reviewer to
copy the entire contents of the surgical procedure lectures onto
ten pages of notebook paper. If only the program allowed us to
watch some demonstration surgeries like
one does in medical school, as opposed
to simply reading a text file.
The next step is to hit the floor and
make rounds in the hospital. The main
screen consists of the hospital layout
with all its rooms. Simply point and click
to enter a room. The rooms include the
OR, four patient rooms, one's own office,
Dr. Skelton's office, MRI scanner room,
CAT scanner room, medical lecture hall,
X-ray room, the cafeteria (a good place
to catch up on gossip) and, last but not
least, the morgue. Activities include
answering pages, obtaining consultations
from radiology, going back to medical
lectures or even getting a bite to eat out
of the cafeteria. There isn't a whole lot of choice of where to go
since the overhead paging system will dictate most of one's activity.

Signs and Symptoms
Examining and diagnosing a patient is only half the battle in
Life & Death II. Proper diagnosis not only scores points with Dr.
Skelton, but also determines whether the prescribed treatment/surgery will be effective or not. Players click on the
patient's chart in order to glean a thumbnail history of why the
patient was admitted to the service and view a check list of diagnostic radiological procedures one can order. Although it is possible to go right to the procedures, this is bad form. One should
first perform a physical exam. The physical exam graphics and
interface are well done. Clicking on the head, arms or legs opens
another screen with a close-up of the respective region. At the
bottom of the screen are all the essential tools a good neurosurgeon would presumably use during a physical exam (e.g. a reflex
hammer, small pin, penlight, etc.) Here is where the graphics
make a real difference in play value. Pupils react to the penlight
with constriction and dilation, eyes track a moving pen and realistic knee jerks occur with the strike of a hammer, etc. The sound
effects help add believability for the players, as well. Once the
physical exam is completed, radiological testing should be done

to confirm or refute one's provisional diagnosis. Fortunately, one
is not penalized for the cost of tests, so simulated surgeons
should emulate their realistic counterparts in ordering numerous
and frequent tests (perhaps a statement on the high cost of
medicine today). One is penalized for side effects from the tests,
however. Patients might be allergic to the contrast dye used to
perform a CAT scan or the magnetic field in the MRI scanner
might damage a patient's pacemaker. It pays to read the
patients' charts very carefully for clues in the history of these
problems.

Primum Non Nocere...
Neurosurgery separates the surgeons from the orderlies.
Whether one is called upon to perform a subdural hematoma
evacuation, brain tumor resection or aneurysm resection, there is
plenty of challenge. Prior to entry into the OR, one needs to
select two physicians to assist in the surgery by examining their
on-line dossiers. It can make the difference between life and
death (pun intended) who one selects to be on the team. For example, the selection of Dr. Kahn, the anesthesiologist, will help in
long procedures where patient's oxygenation status and vital
signs may vary. If it's a brain tumor resection, the lovely Dr.
Brandt would be an asset on the team since her specialty is
brain tumor removal. Beware the teaming up of Dr. Kahn and
Dr. Brandt since they have had a failed
relationship which may affect their job
performance if forced to work together
(not to mention their demeanor).
The challenge increases when one sets
the level of difficulty beyond novice to intermediate, advanced or nightmare level.
The latter two modes allow more complications of surgery to occur (like bleeding, cardiac arrhythmia, renal failure,
etc.) and provide less assistance from
the operating team.
The actual surgery is surprisingly realistic (despite the extensive disclaimer issued by the company that none of the
scenes are meant to be based on reality).
All the basic implements of a neurosurgery are present like the
Trephine bone drill, the bone saw, rainey clamps, retraction clips,
etc. The actual operations are quite detailed, from the removal of
the scalp and skull to the layers of the outer membrane covering
the brain. As if learning the actual procedure in performing the
operation weren't hard enough, one must have sure hands on
the scalpel (or the mouse moving the scalpel) and steady hands
on the drill to be successful. One problem with the game is that
for every case that goes to surgery there are five to seven cases
that don't require surgery. So one may have to go through seven
cases before getting to a surgical candidate. After talking with
Dr. Skelton at Toolworks General, there is a built-in fix to this.
One can actually convert a nonsurgical patient into a surgical
candidate by typing from the main hospital screen (after being
paged to see a patient) the following key stokes to get the
desired surgery case: CTRL-ALT ft (where # = 0 (aneurysm
repair), = 1 (brain tumor resection) and = 2 (subdural hematoma
resection).

Post-Operative Notes...
Life & Death II: The Brain is not simply humorous entertainment, but it has educational value as well. It will take players
some time to absorb the fundamentals of neurological conditions
and surgical techniques, but it is time well spent.

Industry News

Windows on the World of
Games and Game Hardware
A report

on Spring Comdex and Windows World
by Paul Nielsen

F

or several spring days, Atlanta's

Omni/World Congress Center was
transformed into "Windows World
Comdex Center." As usual, the Spring
Comdex was a display of new technology and new games.

CD-ROM
While there were no games
demonstrated that ran from a CD-ROM,
compact disk technology was displayed
throughout Windows World. Several
manufacturers were pushing for CD-ROM
access times to improve. Regular readers
of CGW will, of course, be expecting CDROMs to play an important part in
tomorrow's mega-games.

Hardware Headliners
On the hardware side, Intel announced
a new chip — the 486sx — and Roland,
Creative Labs and Adlib all showed
how to make a PC sound better. CDROMs were also prevalent at several
booths. Also, in a determined move
toward better graphics, at least two video
board makers displayed an improved
VGA using the Edsun chip. In the

software arena (developers take note),
Microsoft just made it easy to write Windows programs.

Visual BASIC
Programming for Windows has often
proven as difficult as looking out one's
bedroom windows with the storm shutters closed. Now, Microsoft is attempting to open those metaphorical shutters
with their Visual BASIC development system for Windows. In Visual BASIC (VB),
"event driven" meaning functions are applied to parts of the screen (icons, buttons, menus). The Windows' screens are
first designed by simply drawing them
using VB's graphic interface. Code is
then applied to the buttons to drive the
actual action. VB may be just what the
software industry has been needing to
write games for Windows.

The 486sx
While the 386sx has proven to be both
the gamer's and the gamer's
pocketbook's best friend, Intel is positioning the 486sx/20 to be next in the spotlight. While the 386sx suffers from

having only half the memory I/O of the
full 386dx, the 486sx is a full-fledged 486
sans math co-processor. It retains the
486's faster 386 instruction set, built-in
memory manager, 8K high-speed cache
memory and 32-bit I/O. The cost for the
chip is $527. This is, of course, less than
a full 486dx, yet the 20MHz version is expected to run about 10% faster than a
full 33MHz 386dx. Why is Intel pushing
the 486sx to replace the 386? Because
AMD has recently been granted the right
to produce and sell 386-compatible
CPUs. The CPU war is on and the buyer
is the winner.

SoundBlaster Pro
Creative Labs upped the ante of PC
sound at a crowded demonstration of the
SoundBlaster Pro. It's the next-generation sound card and it is loaded! The
operative word is "twice." It has twice the
sound channels (22) of the original
SoundBlaster with twice the quality of
sound in stereo, as well as stereo DACs
for digitized speech and sound effects.
Then, to support the great games that
will be requiring CD-ROM to hold all that

Industry News

sound and graphics, the SoundBlaster
Pro has a built-in CD-ROM interface. Technically, it supports the Microsoft Windows
Multimedia Extension Level 1. MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface) is also
built in and Creative Labs ships it with a
MIDI sequencer program to boot. It
begins shipping in quantity this summer
at a $299 price point.

to 749,504 colors, automatically smoothing out the graphics and anti-aliasing
lines. Several VGA cards are now becoming available that already include the
Edsun chip. Future software must include a driver to enable the graphic effects. Game developer kits are available
from Edsun Labs for $250.

The New Games
AdLib Gold
Not to be outdone by the SoundBlaster again, AdLib also debuted a new
sound card at Spring Comdex. The
AdLib Gold matches the SoundBlaster
Pro feature for feature, but improves the
DAC samplings from 8 bits to 12 bits for
cleaner sound. The Adlib Gold will also
be available this summer for about $300,
but consumers will have to add $100 for
the CD-ROM SCSI interface and some
will have to pay an additional $100 for a
Micro Channel bus version.

The Edsun Chip
Perhaps the most exciting breakthrough
in graphics is the Edsun chip. With the
Edsun chip, a VGA card can display up

Drawing the most onlookers was the
Gunship 2000 demo. As noted in
CGWs "Winter CES Report," the game
has been updated to include 256-color
VGA and explosive support for sound
cards. Overall, it's a much bigger game
than Gunship: the player now controls a
squad of choppers and the crew members gain skills as the team progresses.
Desert Storm and Central European
scenarios are included, as well as seven
different choppers, to keep it accurate to
the situation. The updated game also includes a campaign game and permits
the player to edit and design missions.
MicroProse is planning to ship Gunship
2000 by August.
Those who read Paul Rigby's "Over

There" column in CGW already know
that Corporation by Virgin
Mastertronic is a science fiction roleplaying game, exploring the halls of a cor
poration doing genetic research that's
gone bad. Of course, security is high and
the corporation's facility is patrolled by
several armed robots and trick
holograms. The player can choose from
several types of armor and more gadgets
than Mr. Bond has. Corporation's
screens looked good, but most of the action in the pre-beta game was in long
halls and empty rooms. The interface
sports a mouse area that controls turning, movement and speed — it seems
awkward at first, but eventually provides
more agility than most games.
Another game worthy of note is Conan.
Virgin Mastertronic announced the
product at Winter CES, but is now
demonstrating what the game is really
going to be. It combines a top view
similar to Ultima but shifts to a side view
during combat. Conan learns fancier
sword-play as the game progresses,
making it easier on the player to learn to
control Conan during the complex sword
battles.

Industry News

Waiting for the...CD
(Continued from page 14)
terface. This is represented by Detectron's
three-button interface, the large pop-up command buttons in Adventures of Willy
Beamish, the "power meter" in Accolade's
Mike Ditka Power Football, the addition of
an icon-based inventory in The Secret of
Monkey Island II, Interplay's Star Trek:
The 25th Anniversary game (in which the
starship's controls pop up in half-bright windows so that none of the bridge background and action is lost) and the Ultimate
simplified interface, Ultima VIPs two-button
interface. The latter uses the left mouse button as an analog to the player character's
feet and the right button as an analog to
his/her hands. If one wants to go somewhere, the cursor is placed on the location
and the left button is clicked. If one wants
to use something, the cursor is placed on
the object and the right button is pushed.
The entire command structure has been
reduced to these two commands.
The other trend toward simplifying the interface is to concur with the sentiments expressed in last issue's designer notes ("The
Graphics Are The Interface" — CGW #84, p.
64) and create images on the screen that
will make the interface transparent. In the article, the author suggested that each button

on a spaceship's console should be active.
In Data East's UltraBots and near-future
armored battle game, the consoles are active buttons. For example, if one wants to increase a tank's speed, the cursor is placed
on the throttle image and pushed so that it
looks like the throttle is being pushed for-

ward. Also, in Three-Sixty's MegaFortress
and Dynamix's A-10E upgrade, weapons
are loaded by literally placing the images or
designations of the weaponry to be loaded
on the photo or diagram of the plane itself.
Each one of these approaches is designed

to simultaneously make the interface more
intuitive and suspend the player's disbelief.

His Master's Voice
Another trend which underlines the need
for CD storage is the inclusion of digitized
voices in products. Naturally, CD products
such as NEC's J.B. Harold: Murder Club,
which features four hours of digitized voice,
and ICOM's Sherlock Holmes, Consulting
Detective use digitized voices to convey the
dialogue, but other products are dabbling in
speech, as well.
Spectrum Holobyte's Crisis in the Kremlin, a geopolitical game of economic,
diplomatic and political strategy designed in
conjunction with a developer who grew up
in the Soviet Union, enables players to
relive their simulated regimes via an onscreen TV monitor view with digitized
speech commentary. One can even save
this report as a VCR file. In addition, Falcon
3.0 uses digitized speech for some of the
threat warnings coming from "other" pilots
in one's squadron. Bethesda Softworks'
The Terminator uses digitized speech in
the opening credits and the victory screen.
Accolade's Mike Ditka Power Football
uses digitized speech (but not Mike's), as
well as 256-color VGA digitized images to
help convey the excitement and urgency of
a professional football team's sideline. Cine-

Industry News

players to challenge the computer or
another human player (via direct connect)
in a scavenger hunt for four pieces of an ultimate weapon. Players fly stealth bombers
and fighters, hovercraft and helicopters or
drive heavy and light tanks in this literal
"arms race." There are strategic elements
as well, but the big surprise is that Psygnosis plans to distribute a joystick with two
serial ports so controllers can be daisychained. In this way, one joystick could act
as the throttle of a helicopter while the
other controls the collective — adding considerably to an intense gaming experience.

Play's Detectron will use a mixture of digitized speech and text conversation balloons
to handle the conversations in its story.
Lord British shared with CGW that Ultima
VII will use digitized speech for a focused
dramatic effect. The Ultimate "bad guy"
will speak audibly in the game as though
speaking directly into the player's mind. He
said that the design team had learned just
how much memory it takes to have digitized speech throughout as they continued
to work on the Ultima VI CD versions.
With so much digitized sound in the offing, one can expect to see new and more
effective use of speech in the near future.

Re: Action
Action garners will see plenty of the traditional horizontal scrolling games in the next
six months. Whether it is the physical logic
puzzles of Disney's Hare Raising Havoc,
the traps to be set in the clever Home
Alone game from Capstone (the player
sets the traps in the first part of the game
and watches the bungling burglars get
theirs in the second part of the game), the
non-stop trouble-making of Bart Simpson in
Konami's The Simpsons arcade game
(based on the cartridge game), Psygnosis'
Barbarian II (not to be confused with
Palace Software's earlier effort of the
same name released by Epyx) or
Konami's Back to the Future III game,
there is plenty of action. Ocean even has a
charming little jumping/scrolling game
called Elf that looks like a beautifully
rendered Marto Brothers derivative in
which the characters have the ability to use
"spells." It is a very pretty game with 256color VGA graphics.
Add to these titles the Cinemaware-style
action of Konami's Riders of Rohan
(Tolkien with action sequences), U.S.
Gold's three-dimensional arcade stylings
for their first The Godfather action game
and Bethesda Softworks's The Terminator with its first-person immediacy and
the scope is enlarged even further.
Yet even with traditional action games,
the lines between action games and simulations are becoming more blurred all the
time. Psygnosis' Armour-Geddon has already been released on the Amiga and is
soon to be released on the IBM. This fastmoving polygon-filled technology enables

Ocean is releasing a polygon-filled action
game, as well. Their new Robocop 3 was
designed by the same developers who
created F-29 Retaliator. It is a first-person
point-of-view game that puts the player inside the "Robocop" of film fame. The company is working closely enough with the
film company that they update scenes in
the arcade sequences immediately after the
film footage is developed and placed "in
the can." U. S. Gold's Cybercon III places
the player inside an intelligent machine, as
well, and features a futuristic polygon-filled
environment that combines combat and
puzzles. In addition, Konami is featuring
three-dimensional graphics in their budgetpriced ($19.95) movie-based shoot'em-up,
Predator 2.
One of the most exciting action games
due out on a home entertainment machine
may be Escape From Cyber City on CD-I.
This is actually a revision of the award-winning Freedom Fighter coin-op game on
laserdisc. Arcade owners had trouble with
the original Japanimation-style
shoot-'em-up because of the track-jumping required of
laserdisc programs. The track-jumping
tended to throw the machines out of alignment and this, in turn, created extra maintenance charges. The CD-I game features a
system which requires no track-jumping, so
players will not have to worry about having
to repair their new CD-I machines.

On a Role
Role-playing continues to be one of the
healthiest genres in sales and the rest of
1991 looks like it will be consistent with
past history. New World Computing was
showing its graphically intense Might and
Magic III product (previewed in CGW #83)
and first science-fiction role-playing game,
Planet's Edge. Both games were described
in an earlier CES report, but should be shipping by the time this issue hits the
newsstands and mailboxes. Mindcraft was
showcasing The Magic Candle II (as
previewed in CGW #84) and it should be
shipping in the same window as the New
World products. Origin was demonstrating
its imminent Martian Dreams game
described in an earlier CES report and
preparing to raise the curtain on Ultima VII.
The latest Ultima deals with Ultimate evil
and is the beginning of a darker trilogy
than previous efforts. The latest product will
feature no tiled graphics, full-screen (
edge-to-edge) graphics and the simplified interface described earlier.

Some new players are entering the roleplaying arena. Live Studios is working on
Dream Web, a fascinating concept for adventuring in the subconscious. The Jungian
adventure will probably be released early in
1992. In the minds of most computer
garners, Koei Corporation is almost
synonymous with the strategy genre, even
though most of their products have had
strong role-playing elements. In Uncharted
Waters, a role-playing game a la the classic Seven Cities of Gold, players become
16th century explorers. Trading goods, gambling, upgrading equipment, exploring the
unknown reflected in the title and encountering new diplomatic situations are the major
role-playing activities in the game.
Konami is making a major entry into the
computer role-playing field. Most exciting to
"pen and paper" role-playing garners is
their release of the Champions role-playing
system in a series of computer games. The
event-driven superhero game features plenty of strategy and story for any fan of
comic art.
In addition, Konami's latest Teenage
Mutant Ninja Turtles game will be a fullfledged role-playing game, complete with inventories and attributes. Those who do not
like arcade-style combat will be somewhat
disappointed, however. The publisher even
plans to market a Mission: Impossible roleplaying game. Konami is also distributing
Spacewrecked, the so-called "Dungeon
Master in space" from Europe's Gremlin
Software. Originally released as BSS Jane
Seymour (and discussed by CGWs Paul
Rigby in Issue #77), the game is virtually
Alien meets Dungeon Master. Another
Konami CRPG for this year, Bloodwych, is
a dual-play dungeon romp from Europe.
Another European product that is making
its way over to U.S. shores is U.S. Gold's
Knights of the Crystallion (only available
on the Amiga). In addition to the standard
arcade action used to resolve combat in
European games, this one features memory
games, strategy games and economic
strategy to challenge the player on a mental, as well as reflex, level.
Interplay has been extremely aggressive
in producing products for this marketplace.
Star Trek: The 25th Anniversary not only
features 3-D ship-to-ship space combat, but
about thirty worlds to explore, with each
trip analogous to an episode of the
television show. Some aspects of the game
play seem more analogous to a Sierra
graphic adventure than a traditional Interplay product, but Mike Stackpole created
much of the story, so there will be plenty of
the classic Interplay flavor in the plotline.
Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers builds
on the success of their original Lord of the
Rings product. Interplay has paid considerable attention to both professional critics
and consumer feedback. So they are enhancing the new game with an improved interface, the addition of automapping and a
certain amount of creative risk. The latter is
the addition of cliffhangers, a dramatic tool
(Con tinued on page 88)

Foreign Correspondence

Over There
Aesthetic Evil?
by Paul Rigby

There are 12 mission types that may be
selected, from Aerial Interception and
Bomb Runs to Troop Drops, Test Flights
of experimental aircraft and Aerial Reconnaissance. The game is set in an entirely
fictitious scenario — the programming
team being conscious not to offend potential customers with any reference to the
recent Gulf conflict. Mission types are
open-ended with unlimited possibilities
and variations. Pilot records can be
saved to disk, but, due to the dynamic nature of the programming, rarely will a
pilot be able to fly the same mission
twice. Being set in the "real world," both
sides are constantly active. Thus, enemy
planes actually roll out of their hangars,
trundle across runways and take off.
Bombed buildings and airfields will
gradually be repaired and become fully
operational again. Ground-based forces
move across desert plains or green fields
and carriers and warships steam ever onward toward their destinations... time actually passes as the game progresses. PC
and ST versions will follow the Amiga
release later this year.

Falcon Meets CDTV

vailable

from July for Amigas (1
MB required) is Electronic Arts
UK's Birds of Prey. Coded by Argonaut (developers of Starglider and
Starglider 2) and originally code-named
"Hawk," this new flight simulation has
been under development for four years.

A

Winged Argonauts
Birds of Prey is being touted as "the
most realistic flight simulator published
on a home computer to date." The
player has forty (yes, forty) planes to
choose from, ranging from MiG-29s
through European SAABs and Tornados
and on to the latest designs from the
U.S. manufacturers, such as the Rockwell
B1 and the F-117A. Every plane has, apparently, been thoroughly researched to
represent flight dynamics, performance,
weaponry, radar systems and targets featured in the game in graphic detail as accurately as possible. Argonaut has taken
a different approach in the quest for
"realism." Instead of implementing strict
performance limits on each aircraft, the
program uses complex mathematics to
calculate the realistic maximum velocity
and aerodynamics, etc. In effect, the program simulates the atmosphere surrounding the aircraft and how it acts upon the
aerodynamic surfaces of each aircraft
rather than simulating the aircraft itself.

Falcon, most beloved of flight simulations, is to appear on the CDTV.
Developed by Rowan Software, the format of this (so far) six-month project will
be as follows: the original Falcon simulation will appear more or less as a training
scenario while the two mission disks will
form the actual competitive game. Three
games in one, no less! The graphics of
the three "modules" will remain the
same, although there will be some interesting improvements. For example,
during the development of Flight of the
Intruder, this correspondent was fortunate enough to hear and record a number of real-life recordings of the flight
tapes from a variety of missions and
aircraft during the Vietnam war.
Dramatic, and often tragic, these tapes
formed part of the research process for
Intruder. These same recordings, along
with more recent information, have been
used to produce the CD-quality radio
chatter (spoken by four or five actors)
heard whilst playing Falcon.

"Can the Chatter!"
Rowan boss Rod Hyde said, "This radio
chatter will be added to the basic 20 messages found in the computer game. It is
amazing how the radio chatter adds to
the atmosphere. There are about 50 different stories in all. It means that you will
have radio traffic about half the time. It
will be up to you to pick out those mes-

Foreign Correspondence

sages that are meaningful and those messages that are just chaff. We are still getting the CD cut for those sequences. However, for testing purposes we do have a
CD with messages from the film Top
Gun, although they are totally unrelated
to the game. You'll be flying along and
suddenly hear Tom Cruise ejecting, for
example."
At the beginning of the game is a special welcome/introduction briefing. "We
are getting together a number of video sequences, so you may see a Falcon fly-by
while you are being welcomed to the
base and being told what you are supposed to be doing. Many of the video sequences are sourced directly from Gilman Louie [Spectrum Holobyte boss].
So, you'll see a typical briefing room
(this will be artwork) with the backs of
people's heads as though you're one of
them. You will also see an video screen
with the film (digitized video) running
plus the audio associated with it."
Other video clips include introductions
to the F-16 in general, air-to-ground
weapons, air-to-air weapons, external
stores, enemy recognition, a briefing on

the overall training session, the Falcon itself and the two principal missions. There
are ten briefings in all, some of which
may include video stills. Rowan hope to
have a total of 40-50 minutes of audio on
the disk. Available on the CDTV mid1991.

Flight Sims Made Easy
From MicroProse
Air Duel is MicroProse UK's latest
release. It is a simple, action-packed
flight simulation based almost entirely on
a series of dogfights and conspicuously
lacking any complicated controls or
similar features associated with other
MicroProse efforts. Designed by Glynn
Williams, the chap behind the SF action
game Warhead, it has its roots in a
game called Fokker that Glynn began
working on a while back. That was a
WWI flight simulation based upon encounters between Sopwith Camels and
Fokker Triplanes over the trenches
during 1917. Air Duel is a greatly expanded version, retaining the wizard kites
but adding three other classic dogfights
from different time periods. For example,
there is a WWII air encounter over the

Pacific starring Wildcats and Zeros, a
present-day affair featuring the F-18 Hornet and the MIG-29 Fulcrum in a Gulf
War scenario and a futuristic combat sequence set in space(!). Available on all
16-bit formats during mid-1991.
Note: The above games, and any of
the other games mentioned in "Over
There" in past issues, can be obtained
from:
Computer Adventure World, 318 Kensington, Liverpool, England, L7 OEY.
Telephone: 01144-51-263-6306.
Miles Better Software, 219/221 Cannock Road, Chadsmoor, Cannock, Staffordshire, England, WS11 2DD.
Telephone: 01144-543-466-577/8/80
Fax: 01144-543-466-579.
Premier Mail Order, Trybridge Ltd., 8
Buckwins Square, Burnt Mills, Basildon,
Essex, England, SS13 1BJ. Telephone:
01144-268-590-766 Fax: 01144-268-590076.
All of the above telephone numbers assume you can dial direct. If you have any
trouble, contact the international
operator.

Industry News

Waiting for the...CD
(Continued from page 14)
used to improve the pacing of a storyline in
other media. Tolkien used cliffhangers
regularly in the trilogy, but this is somewhat
unusual for a role-playing game and we are
anxious to see how they accomplish it.
Latent computer role-playing designers
will be most excited about The Bard's Tale
Construction Set. This handy-dandy tool
kit will enable computer game designers to
create stories with the "look and feel" of the
successful CRPG series. Games created
with the tool kit may be played as standalones and the product comes with a minidungeon. Along with Electronic Arts' upcoming release of Bard's Tale IV, this
product should guarantee computer game
immortality for the series.
Immortality seems to be the order of the
day for Strategic Simulations, Inc.'s
"Gold Box" series of Advanced Dungeons
and Dragons products, as well. With
Gateway to the Savage Frontier, SSI
begins a new series with a brand new
design team. The story revolves around a
desert caravan and should feature monsters
unlike those in previous "Gold Box" efforts.
Immortality does not seem to be in order
for the Commodore 64, however. Gateway
to the Savage Frontier will be the last
"Gold Box" game on that platform.
Sir-Tech Software unveiled the latest offering in the Wizardry series, Crusaders of
the Dark Savant. This time the VGA
graphics use the full 256-color palette; the
game can be 100% mouse-driven and inventory handling has been cleaned up via automatic equipping and unequipping. Character creation has considerable depth with
plenty of options; players can choose from
42 different character portraits and the
magic system has been revamped to reflect
a more medieval understanding of "elemental" powers. Perhaps most unique is the
fact that the game can begin in any of four
locations. Depending on which of the three
endings a player reached in Bane of the
Cosmic Forge, the story will proceed from
that situation. There is a fourth beginning
for those who have not yet played Bane.
Players will also compete against computeroperated parties in trying to get the artifacts
needed to complete the quest, adding a
sense of urgency to the game's pacing.
Sequels are also on tap at Accolade. In
addition to the adventure sequel Les Manley — Lost in L. A., the publisher is releasing Elvira II: The Jaws of Cerberus. The
matinee mistress has been kidnapped, and
the player's character will have to explore
three different film sets (levels?) in order to
harvest enough clues to avoid an unhappy
Halloween for the lewd and lovely lady of
darkness. One interesting facet of the interface is particularly appropriate to the genre.
Whenever the player's character loses hit
points, the flesh begins to fall off the body
profile. Somehow, it just seems appropriate.

The creator of Traveller and Twilight
2000, Marc Miller, has worked considerably
more closely with the programmers at
Paragon Software on their latest role-playing games. MegaTraveller 2 allows players
to portray either human or Vargr characters
in a search for ancient artifacts. The character's race and world of origin will make a
definite difference in the type of physical
characteristics and/or skills he/she can
have. MegaTraveller 2 will feature so many
different worlds (117) and so many different encounters that it will be possible to
simply go back into the game and explore
after one has already reached one of
several levels of victory in the game. Combat is much improved.
Twilight 2000, the role-playing game set
in a near-future semi-World War III universe,
takes a very different tack. One creates a
character via an elegant and sophisticated
character generation routine, accepts an assignment and even participates in combat
between polygon-filled vehicles. Much of the
game looks like a simulation, but battles
are determined by the role-playing skills of
the character, not the reflexes of the player.

The Boys Are Back
(Wargames)
The good news for wargamers is that the
genre isn't "quite dead, yet." In fact, there
were so many wargame titles bandied
about the CES floor that it looks like
reports of the genre's death may have been
greatly exaggerated. A new Canadian company called Ninga is publishing a simple
wargame called Civil War. It looks like it
plays at about the difficulty level of Avalon
Hill's early boardgame Waterloo. Speaking
of Avalon Hill, their Third Reich game
looks very polished on the Atari ST. The Al
is designed to be very aggressive, however.
Another new player is Quantum Quality
Products with The Perfect General and
The Lost Admiral. The former features
abstract armored combat in a fast-moving
game from the designer of Empire and the
latter features Empire-style naval combat
with some new wrinkles. In fact, Ubisoft
has developed a game called Battle Isle
that allows two players to fight battles on
the same computer screen in a game that
looks like one of the scenarios in The Perfect General.
Broderbund is also publishing some wargames. The Winter CES report covered Ancient Art of War in the Skies. In addition,
Chris Crawford's Patton Strikes Back features fabulous map graphics and some of
the most entertaining historical anecdotes
ever when units reach certain destinations
on the map.
Koei Corporation was very quiet during
the past year, but the next six to eight
months will see several releases. In addition
to Uncharted Waters, the role-playing
game mentioned earlier, the company will
release Romance of the Three Kingdoms
II (complete with AdLib sound support,
mouse-driven interface, ability to charge,

capacity to overrun and incendiary attack),
L'Empereur (a Napoleonic campaign game
where players can attack by land or sea)
and Liberty or Death! (the Koei version of
the American Revolution). Early 1992 will
see the debut of a World War II game using
the Koei system.
Three-Sixty Pacific is working on several
new wargames. Patriot is a land-based
equivalent to Harpoon. Their design goal is
to place players in the role of "Commander
of Theater" and enable one to give orders
and examine every unit from corp to company without forcing the player to be
responsible for seeing that every attack is
prosecuted. Another "wargame" is Theater
of War, an abstract game of conflict which
may be more analogous to chess than traditional wargames with units, leaders and armament. The publisher is also working on a
World War II version of Harpoon with Jim
Dunnigan as consultant.
Finally, Strategic Simulations, Inc. has
always been synonymous with wargames.
The company has recently taken responsibility for distribution back from Electronic Arts Distribution and expects wargame sales to increase. This year will see
Western Front, Gary Grigsby's sequel to
the critically acclaimed Second Front and
next year's schedule may see an African
Front game. They also plan to publish Ed
Bever's No Greater Glory, an American
Civil War game (using an enhanced version
of his Revolution '76 design).

While You Wait (Conclusion)
Next issue, we'll comment on some of the
adventure, simulation and strategy games
that were announced at this year's CES.
Those who feel like they are still standing in
the cab queue can meditate for a moment
on this ironic anecdote. Two years ago at
Winter CES, one industry insider jokingly
observed that CGW had focused so narrowly on floppy disk-based entertainment that,
within two years, we would be able to cover
a CES show in an hour and a half. Now, it
is that industry insider who is trying to survive and CGW is still trying to cover the
huge world of entertainment software as we
wait for that low-cost, high-volume CD platform that will launch us into the next era of
computerized entertainment.

Reader Input Device

Conversions Received

Centurion: Defender of Rome (Electronic Arts)
Amiga
Battle Chess (Interplay) Macintosh
Bandit Kings of Ancient China (Koei) Amiga
The Secret of Monkey Island (Lucasfilm) Amiga
Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse) Macintosh
Lemmings (Psygnosis) IBM
Bane of the Cosmic Forge (Sir-Tech) Macintosh
Renegade Legion: Interceptor (SSI) Amiga

Taking a Peek

Taking a Peek
(Continued from page 8)
Ubi Soft
France
PRO TENNIS TOUR 2: While it still requires the same level of finely honed arcade reflexes (just to hit the ball back over
the net) as the original, much has been
added to this worthy sequel. Female opponents are included (and play differently
than their male counterparts), four-player
capability has been added, as have different
court surfaces. Player "characters" can be
created by selecting attributes which can be
improved through both training and playing
(creating something akin to a role-playing
campaign adventure in tennis). Even statistical analysis of gameplay is included! Pro
Tennis Tour 2 is a most ambitious package. [Ed: Of course, past and simulated
performance is no guarantee of future success.] Amiga ($49.95). Circle Service #11.
U.S. Gold
San Jose, CA
THE GOLD OF THE AZTECS: This game
features basic two-dimensional arcade
game action, but it excels at what it does. It
features more detailed animation, more action and more music. Also, as experienced
garners would expect, there are plenty of

fights, death and mayhem included as the
player searches for the famed tomb of Quetzalcoatl and the riches buried there. IBM,
Amiga ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #12.
ROTOX: A new angle on an old idea,
Rotox puts the player in the body of a
cyborg zapping everything that moves and
walking tightropes, all controlled from a topdown perspective. Ten "theme" levels of
destruction feature continually improving
weaponry and contain "keys" to further
levels. Players will do a lot of "falling" while
learning the "tight"ropes, too. IBM, Amiga
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #13.
VAXINE: An anti-viral Fantastic Voyage
gone arcade game, Vaxine courses the
player through the President's veins in an attempt to stop a terrible virus. Fast action
(and reflexes) are required to stop "enemy"
cells from multiplying by hitting them with
correspondingly colored bullets. The wrong
color only makes them multiply! Lots of arcade goodies for you
scroll-around-and-shoot-fans. IBM, Amiga ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #14.
WORLD CLASS SOCCER: Soccer lovers
will have much more to cheer about here in
the States. The gameplay blends strategic
placement of players across the field with a
requirement of optimal use of their individual tactical expertise. In World Class
Soccer, shipped in Europe under a different

title, anything from a single match to the
World Cup championship tournament itself
can be played. The game includes the 24
actual teams from the 1990 World Cup
series, and rates each of their 20 players.
Naturally, games are resolved via traditional
arcade-style action where "the man closest
to the ball" becomes the "active" player.
Game length can be customized by garners
to last anywhere from 45 seconds to over
two minutes. The documentation is a
treasure trove of soccer information, statistics and trivia. IBM, Amiga ($44.95). Circle
Reader Service #15.
Walt Disney Software
Burbank, CA
ARACHNOPHOBIA: This "horror"-filled action game provides a polished presentation
and "story"-driven wrap for what is basically
a straightforward, simple arcade game.
Arachnophobia is loosely based on the
Touchstone film of the same name. The
player is one of Delbert's exterminators
going from town to town, spraying spiders
in an attempt to eliminate the "queen"
spider in each town. The ultimate destination is South America where the player
engages in a "once and for all" arcade battle. The game supports Disney's Sound
Source and includes a charming 100+ page
novel based on the movie screenplay. IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #16.

G

Editorial

Toolkit for
Game Design

S

tate of the Magazine: Summer is
an exciting time in the computer
game industry and everyone in entertainment software publishing pulls out all
the stops to get those important fall
releases into the marketplace. This month,
we share our initial impressions of the Consumer Electronics Show and begin our
genre-by-genre synopsis of games which
should be on the shelves by Christmas. In
addition, we offer a sneak preview of the
latest Chuck Yeager product from
Electronic Arts, Yeager Air Combat. We
hope our readers finish this issue with the
feeling that there are hot games on their
way for every taste.
State of the Industry: Summer CES
brought to our minds one of the hardest lessons for some of us to learn. That lesson is
that using the right tool can improve the
job performance whereas using the wrong
tool can actually undermine the task at
hand. This editor managed to literally
destroy some of the nuts and bolts on his
childhood bicycle because he didn't realize
that using pliers instead of socket wrenches
actually ruined the nuts.
So it is with the computer game designer.
Tool capability is an integral part of the
design process. If designers have the
capacity to use scanned art, our games will
look prettier. If they have better audio sampling, they will sound more realistic. If object-oriented programming increases efficiency and enables the programmer to have
more freedom to concentrate on other
things, our games may get more sophisticated. If data storage becomes significantly
larger, so can the complexity of either the
games themselves and/or the audio-visual
presentation of the games.
For the last few years, some computer
game designers have said that CD-ROM will
cause a decline in computer game quality
due to slow access to data and increased
production costs to meet higher graphic
and audio expectations. Many have pointed
to the disastrous maintenance costs associated with coin-op laserdisc machines in
the arcades and move from that association
to suggest that CD-based games would
destroy the platforms themselves.
So, it was extremely encouraging to see
that the CD-I developers have used design
principles rather than simply relying upon
their technology to solve the track-jumping
problem which caused the laserdisc
machine problems. In Escape From CyberCity, the CD-I version of the old Freedom
Fighter coin-op game, the designers placed
video sequences together in a logical pat-

tern in order to avoid the necessity of trackjumping.
Such use of the bioprocessor in the
human cranium offers an encouraging sign.
Oh, designers may decry the weak game
play in the ABC's Wide World of Sports
golf game on CD-I compared to that in the
IBM versions of Links or Jack Nicklaus' Ultimate Golf, but some bright publisher will
figure out that broadcast-quality graphics
would sell even better with more challenging game play. In the meantime, the new
look brings potential new consumers into
the market.
The toolkit for CD-based computer entertainment has barely been tapped by the
design community. Now that the machines
themselves are finally reaching the market,
it is time to start putting the toolkit to work
in order to create more polished and challenging designs. One thing is certain, we
won't be able to civilize the new frontier of
CD-based entertainment by recycling old
design concepts. We will need to develop
the new tools and take new risks in order to
refine both tools and products.
Although this editor's pet technological
paradigm, "The Interactive Citizen Kane,"
would be prohibitively expensive (both in
licensing and production costs) to develop,
such a concept may illustrate the point.
Who knows if a design team will ever be
able to (or want to) take a classic film, create 3-D models of the characters and sets,
write branching storylines, develop artificial
personalities to interact with, integrate new
strategic game elements (e.g., Kane's
editorial decisions would impact his financial empire and personal decisions would
impact his personal lifestyle; the protagonist
would interview non-player characters in
order to try to solve the meaning of the
word, "Rosebud," or the player might compete against an artificially competitive Kane
for personal, financial and political
prominence) and expand the original score.
Such a design would require new techniques for unfolding narrative, depicting
gameplay feedback on-screen and presenting reward sequences. Yet new techniques
are necessary to exploit the new technology.
The next 18-24 months will be crucial in
learning to expand the toolkit for computer
entertainment products. Either some design
teams will learn to color outside the lines of
past game design or we expect that the CD
entertainment revolution will die faster than
Colecovision. CGW challenges cutting
edge designers to break the mold and
retool the industry. We might become the
"new Hollywood" after all.

