January 1989

Number 55

Features
Top Ad Contests & Awards

13

Win Cash and More

The Plane That "Wasn't" There

16
19
23

Visions of Aftermath: The Boomtown

56

Times of Lore

59

Scorpia Looks at Origin's Adventure Game

26

Activision's New Simulation / David Wilson

Coin-Op Conversions

53

Mindscape's Multi-player Strategy Game / Jasper Sylvester

PBI's Action-Adventure Reviewed / John Munn

Ocean Ranger

MSFL Pro League / Pro Football Simulator
Two Football Games Reviewed / Hornfischer and Lee

When Is A Zero Not A Zero? / Dave Arneson

"Alien Mind" for the IIGS

48

Scorpion's Tale Gives Game Hints

Microprose's F-19 Stealth Fighter / Russell Sipe

Zork Zero

Leisure Suit Larry II

Genghis Khan

69

Koei's Game of World Conquest / Johnny L. Wilson

28

Why They Are Not The Same / William Fisher

Fantastic Voyages III

32

Meet Real People at Origin and SSI

Battletech

36

Infocom's Graphic Adventure / Vince DeNardo

Reach for the Stars (Third Edition)
Strategy for SSG's Space Game / James Hornfischer

41

Departments
Taking a Peek
Letters
The Rumor Bag
Conversions Received
Reader Input Device
CGW Hall of Fame
Game Ratings

4
8
14
69
71
71
72

Taking A Peek

Accolade
550 S. Winchester Blvd.
Suite 200
San Jose, CA 95128
SERVE AND VOLLEY: The tactics of
tennis play come fully into play with this
incredibly detailed tennis simulation.
Players play each other, or the computer
and must come up with the right shot
for every situation. Forehand, backhand,
topspin lob, backhand smash, dropshots
and slices are all packed into this game
that can be played on grass, clay or asphalt courts. The only thing you have to
supply are the strawberries and cream.
IBM & Apple IIGS ($39.95), C-64
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #1.

TKO: One or two players slug it out in
the square circle for the title belt in this
boxing simulator. Players can customize
their own fighter or choose their ring opponents with a wide range of variables
to consider. Punching power, stamina,
tendency to cut, where to hit and for
how long all go into determining the
final winner. Split screens show your
punches hitting, bruising and cutting
your opponent. Unfortunately, they also
show you on the receiving end. This
game gives new meaning to the term,
"swelled head." C-64 ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #2.

for top score in this gambling game.
The computer scores each hand by rank
and suit and keeps totals for overall scoring. The novelty in the game comes
from enabling players to keep ordering
new hands until they decide to stay pat.
Improve your hand or bust and you're
out, so players must weigh the odds of
improving their hands with a new deal.
A good party game. Players can send
their top scores into Aussie Joker Poker
and be eligible for a $200,000 Jackpot
to be played next year in Las Vegas.
Amiga, Atari & Mac ($49.95), C-64
($29.95), Apple & IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #3.

Aussie Joker Software Int.
Mindscape
3444 Dundee Rd.
Northbrook, IL 60062

Broderbund Software
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903-2102

AUSSIE JOKER POKER: Up to 90
players can compete against each other

ARCADE GAME CONSTRUCTION
KIT: Players tired of playing the same
(Continued on page 6)

Taking A Peek

KIT: Players tired of playing the same
old arcade games can now customize
and make their own versions with this
complete construction set. Six games
come with the kit and when tired of
them players can create their own with
control over sound, animation, environment, enemies, characters, backgrounds
and levels up to 50 deep. One to four
can play. C-64 ($29.95). Circle Reader
Service #4.
OPERATION CLEANSTREETS:
Players accept the role of Cleanup Harry
in an action game that offers an assortment of street hoods, punks and
pushers to defeat. Five levels of increasing difficulty challenge the player's ability
to kick, punch and dodge an assortment of missiles. Wouldn't be easier to
arm yourself with a street sweeper? IBM
($34.95), Amiga & Atari ST ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #5.
SPACERACER: Three racetracks on
three different planets afford the player a
chance to give his race-cycle talents a
real workout in this high action, 3-D
race game. Players must avoid each
other, guard poles & mines while
moving at high speed around the
smooth scrolling track. Using your laser
cannon is tempting, but the resulting
loss in power puts the onus on skill and
cunning. One of those cannons would
come in handy on the freeway! IBM,
Amiga, Atari ST ($29.95). Circle Reader
Service #6.

Buena Vista Software
500 S. Buena Vista
Burbank, CA 91521
WHO FRAMED ROGER RABBIT:
Roger Rabbit needs help to find Marvin
the Gag King's will, and in this action
game players control Roger in three different sequences. Careening through
1940's Hollywood in Benny the Cab,
chasing penguins at the Ink and Paint
Club, and picking up gags to slow down
weasels at the Gag Factory will keep the
player's hand glued to the joystick. This
is a tense, fast moving game with great
sound and animation. Win one for Jessica! Amiga ($44.95), C-64 ($29.95).
Circle Reader Service #7.

sonal favorite), Dino Racing, & the Dino
Vault. Winners get to enter the Cave of
Fame which is probably located in Alta
Mira, Spain. C-64 ($29.95) Circle Reader
Service #8.

Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Drive
San Mateo, CA 94404

MARS SAGA: Survival on the Angry
Red Planet is the subject of this strategy,
adventure game designed by Westwood
Associates, creators of Battle Tech for Infocom. Characters choose from up to
21 different skills while exploring the
silent city of Proscenium. Combat is controlled by the player or the computer.
Automapping and Top Down View
graphics make this an easy game to get
into. By the way, does Mars still need
women? C-64 (34.95) Circle Reader Service #9.

CAVEMAN UGH-LYMPICS: Players
pick their favorite neanderthals and compete for the title of Mr. Ughlympia in this
hilarious action game. The events include the Mate Toss, Saber (Tooth)
Race, Fire Making, Clubbing (my per-

MODEM WARS: This eagerly awaited
game is now out and it was worth the
wait. Players can play this real-time wargame against the computer, but the real
strength of the game lies in its ability to
link opponents via modem in a tense,

fast paced game of skill and derring.
This game forces you to think on your
feet in a way reminiscent of speedchess. Seven different levels of play, different unit capabilities, (ground, air,
mobile), and limited intelligence combine with real-time decision making to
make this a real winner. See our review
next issue. Modem War is Hell! C-64
($34.95) Circle Reader Service #10.

Epyx
600 Galveston Dr.
Redwood City, CA 94063
BATTLESHIP: Milton Bradley's classic
board game is brought into the computer age with this state-of-the-art
graphic update by Epyx. Players compete against the computer or each other
in an attempt to discover and sink the
opponent's fleet before losing their own.
(Continued on page 64)

Letters

Gold Standard
Congratulations on your Golden Anniversary! [COW #50]
We look forward to your 100th!
Jackson Y. Dott
Microcomputer Games Division
The Avalon Hill Game Company
Ed: Thanks, Jack. Coming, as it does,
from one of the original computer
game manufacturers, your sentiments
are much appreciated. I wonder how
many of our readers know that Avalon
Hill/Monarch printed CGW's covers
during our first two years?

enhance existing skills if they are familiar
with or enjoy reading aloud in class or
leisurely perusing the publications available to them. Due to a high degree of interest in your fine publication, it is one
that would be extremely beneficial, even
vital, to our cause. We desperately need
your help by providing a subscription to
your excellent publication. Feel free to
bill us at your leisure. We won't be able
to pay for it, however, feel free to bill us.
We are prohibited by the size of our
budget. We don't have one. Keeping in
mind that some of our guys may become your neighbors too, we sincerely
trust that you will give us a hand, or in
this case, a subscription. After all, you're
not losing a subscription, you're gaining
a charitable gift deduction. Besides,
you'll be helping a lot of guys who will
need every edge they can get. Our sincere thanks in advance.
Ron Bruneau
Farm Camp Library
Hendry Correctional Institution
Immokalee, FL
Ed: Okay, we will start your subscription. Consider this response to be your
invoice for $5,000. Pay at your leisure.

Unwarranted Acclaim

Jailhouse Rock
Before you wad up this letter and
ricochet it off your desk with a bank shot
into your trash can, give us a minute.
We are literally between the proverbial
rock and hard place. As the educational
instructors here, it is our responsibility to
prepare our guys intellectually as much
as possible for their next step, which is
their release and return to being friends
and neighbors in the civilized world. This
institute is our last opportunity to
prepare them for this. All those who
have made it this far have had to work
very hard to achieve their pre-release
status. We strongly feel these guys to be
deserving of our every effort to help
those desiring literacy to achieve this admirable, and in this day and age, vital
goal.
Learning to read or furthering one's
remedial skills is difficult under any circumstances. It is especially so for incarcerated adults. Since it has been proven
that higher literacy rates proportionately
diminish recidivism, we shall continue
our endeavors in this direction. It has
been our experience that people will accomplish a higher degree of literacy and

In CGW's November '88 issue, Acclaim was incorrectly listed as an affiliated publisher of Mediagenic. Acclaim is no way affiliated with
Mediagenic or Activision except for
the fact that some of its key executives
were at one time employed by Activision.
Madeline Johnson
Acclaim Entertainment, Inc.
Ed: This was a masterful case of
jumping to a conclusion. Both Absolute
and Acclaim have executives who were
once Activision employees; both companies specialize in video games; and
both companies have a top executive
who has a first name beginning with
"G." Therefore, a malformed neuron
made the illogical connection that since
Absolute is an affiliated publisher working with Mediagenic, Acclaim must be
such an affiliated publisher. This note
should clear up the unintentional confusion. Mass firings at CGW are sure to
follow.

Command Reformer
I am writing in re-sponse to your
review of Carrier Command, in the October issue of the maga-zine. While I
agree with most of the reviewer's points,
his suggestions about attacking Defense
islands are ludicrous. The enemy command centers rebuild defense structures
so quickly that such an all-out assault
on an island would never work. Regardless, even if it were possible, this method
would take an incredibly long time.
There are
two quick
efficient
ways to attack a
defense island, both
of which involve minimal resources, and
take hardly
any time at
all. The key
involves attacking the
command
center,
which is the heart of island defense.

Tactic Number 1: When the ship first
comes in range of the target island,
equip a Manta aircraft with seven Assassin missiles. This aircraft should approach the enemy Command Center at
top speed, avoiding all other structures.
When in sight of the Command Center,
all missiles should be targeted and
launched at the center (usually six missiles are all it takes, but more certainly
won't hurt). Due to opposition, it might
take two such assaults, but once the
Command Center is destroyed, a Walrus
amphibious tank can easily approach
the island and drop a new command
center.
Tactic Number 2: Upon sighting the
enemy island, release four decoy drones
and approach at high speed. Using the
laser's telescopic viewport, find the shore
upon which the Command Center is located, and head toward the shore. Once
the ship is located close to the command center, switch the decoys to the
rear of the ship, and turn the ship away
from the island. From this position, the
drones will protect the ship from incoming missiles, and it is quite easy to
launch a few Cruise Missiles at the Command Center (Two will usually do it, but
it occasionally takes three). Once the
Command Center is destroyed, use a
(Continued on page 67)

Announcing....

Computer Gaming World's

Top Ad Awards

G

ood evening ladies and gentlemen. I

would like to welcome each of you
to our First Annual TOP AD Awards.
My, you are a handsome group tonight. I
haven't seen this many tuxedos since the
Penguin Wing was dedicated at Sea World!
And those beautiful dresses, all you ladies
look just stunning! OK, Vinnie, your dress
looks nice too!
We are gathered together this evening to
be informed and entertained by the best advertisements in the computer entertainment industry. Last September, CGW invited the members of the computer game
manufacturing community to advertise in
our January issue and
thereby be automatically entered into our First Annual TOP AD
contest. Up until now, there has not been a
forum for computer entertainment advertisers and their ad agencies to "strut their
stuff!" Over forty companies have
responded and are entered into the competition this year. They all hope to attract the
votes of our distinguished judge's panel.
Serving on our judge's panel are "the
beautiful people"; those people without
whom there would be no computer entertainment industry. We refer, of course, to
YOU, the computer game consumer! We
thank you for taking time to be here this
evening and helping select the 1989 TOP
AD award winners! And now, on with the
show!
Awards will be given to three winners in
two separate categories, for a total of six
awards. Category One is for advertisements
which are either full page or two-page
spread sized. Category Two is for advertisements which are less than a full page in
size. The top vote getter in each category
will be awarded CGW's TOP AD Platinum
Award.
The second place finisher will receive
CGW's TOP AD Gold Award and the third
place finisher will receive CGW's TOP AD
Silver Award.
As the judge of our contest you are
eligible to win $250.00 and a lifetime
subscription to CGW.
The Rules
1. Use the Ballot Section of this month Reader Input Device
card located opposite page 4 to cast your votes (or a facsimile
thereof).
2. In the "Full Page & Spreads" Category vote for three different
full page and/or two-page spread ads.
3. A two page spread ad would be an ad that appears on ajoin
ing and facing left and right hand pages and is one continuos ad
vertisment. A two-page spread ad counts as a single ad for voting
purposes.

3. Select a first place, a second place,
and a third place ad.
4. In the "Fractional Page Category vote
for three different ads. These are ads which
are less than full page sized.
5. On the ballot, list the company
names and page number of the ads you are voting for. For example: to place a first place vote for
Acme Company's 1/2 page ad on page 345 write "Acme pg.345" on the line for 1st place in the
fractional ad column.
6. The criteria for evaluation is very simple: consider the graphics, copy, and overall impact of
the ad.
7. The votes will be weighted, added, and then averaged.
8. The reader that comes closest to picking the final correct order of winners will win $250.00
cash and a lifetime subscription to Computer Gaming World!
9. Please answer the demographic questions (#1-3) found in our Reader Input Device (pg. 71).
The answers go on the same card that contains the TOP AD ballot. Please include your name and
address on your ballot.
10. Entries must be postmarked by February 15, 1989. No purchase is necessary. Winners will
be notified by mail.

Industry News

A

loooooh-ha!" shouted the sensuous Hawaiian siren at the front
of the bus, blowing a provocative
kiss to all of her lustful male "cousins"
visiting from the mainland. Those of us
who live in the islands get tired of all that
tourist drivel, but it pays the bills.
Tonight, my editors and I were headed
for one of the most famous luaus on
Oahu. "Cousin Becky" was our guide and
hostess. As she worked the crowd on the
bus up to a party level, I realized there
was no possible
way to simulate
this kind of party
on the computer.

nificantly more pleasant invasion. Not
only will the best titles from Japan and
Britain grace our shores, but French
designs are appearing in increasing frequency. CGW readers are already aware
of Ubisoft's Skate Wars, a cross between hockey and rollerball to be distributed in the U.S. by Epyx, and Trials
of Honor (Epyx's U.S. version of Iron
Lord), but another French company,
Cocktel Vision will market a game
based on an escape from slavery. The
Amiga/ST game will probably bear the

The
Rumor
Bag

Of course, I never
thought Aussie
Games could be
simulated either.
Who would ever
have thought that
"bellywhacking,"
beach football,
beer (lager?) bottle
shooting,
boomerang tossing, dry riverboat
racing ("You've got
by Prince Popu Komilooni
a hole in your keel,
mate!"), and marlin
fishing would appear in a game? Mindscape apparently
English title,
thought it was "fair dinkum," because the
Freedom. Also, the
program is due to be released in C-64
French publisher of
and IBM formats during the first quarter
Captain Blood (Infogrammes has two
of 1989. Mindscape is also distributing
new space games that are expected to
the products from Aussie Joker
find their way onto U.S. shelves. One
Software. The Australian company ungame is a new approach to flying saucers
veiled Aussie Joker Poker during
and the other is entitled, Purple Saturn
November's Comdex. The company
Day. The latter is a galactic Olympics.
from "down under" will also release AusFinally, we reached the luau site and
sie Joker Xword during Spring 1989.
the show began. Those hula dancers
The latter game is similar to Scrabble®,
sure knew how to wiggle their hips. One
but offers a construction kit for custom
wag in the audience tried to count the
"board" designs and a flexibility to the
number of revolutions per minute, but he
rules that Computer Scrabble® does not
got dizzy and fell under the table. Speakoffer.
ing of revolutions, though, Ed Bever has
In between Cousin Becky's description
developed an interesting new game for
of "Honi-honi" (one of our most intimate
Britannica Software. Entitled Revoluexpressions of friendship) and her tactful
tion '76, the game is about the American
description of "Poi" (one of our most tasRevolutionary War and involves
teless dishes), she pointed out Ferdinand
economic and political decision-making
and Imelda (sic) Marcos' residence. My
in addition to military strategy.
editor suggested that the former first
We had no sooner finished our revolulady's spending habits were as extionary observation than we noticed the
travagant as any world leader since the
hula dancers had drafted some poor, unCaesars. That reminded us about the
suspecting "macho men." The "volunproject Kellyn Beeck is working on. Tenteers" had no idea what was planned for
tatively titled, Caesar, the game by the
them backstage, but those of us in the
designer of Defender of the Crown and
know had a wink between ourselves.
Rocket Ranger is Electronic Arts' verThey came out bedecked in grass skirts
sion of a Ben Hur type epic.
and coconut shell brassieres. In fact, they
The bus sped by Pearl Harbor and the
were as silly as some of the lengths that
party mood sobered for a moment as we
Victorian writers used to go to in order to
thought of the carnage of decades ago.
avoid the bawdy sections in 1,001
In 1989, however, there should be a sigArabian Nights. In fact, networking gos-

sip from the mainland has it that Eric
Goldberg of boardgame design fame is
working on an Arabian Nights game. Not
surprisingly, the computer game will be
based on a previous boardgame design
by Goldberg. This adventure game will be
presented in the style of the Victorian
bawdlerizers (not Sir Richard Burton's
translation). Players must learn to think in
terms of Arabic culture to do well. In
other words, players may play female
characters, but their seduction skills will
be more important than more standard
skills. Few people realize that
the boardgame started as an
Apple II design, but became a
boardgame when the 8-bit
machine didn't have enough
memory. Now, the game will involve a three-to-four hours of
play. Some of the game's uniqueness hinges upon its
replayability, a feature often
lacking in adventure games.
Our thoughts returned to the
show as we watched the always impressive Samoan firedancers. One former hippie,
now turned yuppie, at the end
of our table suggested that this
was like watching an ancient
light show. That reminded us
that Joe Belkowski has
designed a game on the
Iranian Conflict. Light Division
is the current name of the
game and it was developed by Eric
Hyman, the top-notch programmer who
did the Kampfgruppe and Gettysburg
conversions for Strategic Simulations,
Inc. The duo sold the game to 3W Wargames, a board game publisher entering
the field. With 3W's limited distribution, I
sure hope they aren't having to sacrifice
all that virgin design work to the volcano
god.

The luau ended and we boarded our
bus for the trip back to Waikkiki. Naturally, the sensuous atmosphere at the luau
had all of our male cousins attempting to
give "Honi-honi" to Cousin Becky. One of
our editors suggested that our guide
might enjoy a simulation entitled, "Escape from Tourist X." Actually, he was
musing over the fact that Covox,
publisher of Escape from Planet X, was
involved in the production of the new
IBM (and compatibles) sound board for
Epyx. It is expected to sell at a price
point of $60-$70. One thing is for sure.
We didn't need a sound board for our
tour bus on the way home. Choruses of
(apologies to Don Ho) "Tiny Bladder" and
other lewd songs echoed across the
lanes of the only Interstate Highway in
the U.S. which does not actually connect
to another state.

he Plane that
"Wasn't" There

"When near, make it appear that you
are far away; when far away, that you
are near."
"At first be shy as a maiden. When the
enemy gives you an opening be swift as
a hare and he will be unable to
withstand you."
Sun Tzu The Art of War

Microprose's
"F-19 Stealth Fighter"
by Russell Sipe

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:

PUBLISHER:

F-19 Stealth Fighter
IBM with 384K
1
$69.95
Sid Meier,
Jim Synoski,
Andy Hollis, and
Arnold Hendrick
Microprose
Hunt Valley, MD

1207 hrs: Captain Dan "Dervish" Hockman eased the joystick back to the left.
His craft, "Sweet Nothings", rolled slowly out of the 30 degree bank and leveled
out barely 300 feet above the cold Baltic
Sea. He backed the throttle down a hair.
The engine's already subdued hum
dropped even further. The air speed indicator dropped to 170 knots as the stall
warning marker settled in at 160 knots.
Just 10 knots above stall speed the F-19
cruised sleek, low and invisible. Dervish
engaged the autopilot. "OK, baby, let's
cruise on into town" he whispered to his
beloved machine. Leg one of his mission
was complete. Now skimming above
the dark cold waters, he began his
gentle penetration towards his target
deep inside East Germany. Dan's F-19
began the leg which would take him
into a maelstrom of enemy fire. A
maelstrom IF they found him. He was
betting his life on the stealthy nature of
his craft. They would NOT find him ..
he hoped.
This program is hot! The gang at
Microprose has given us another gem
with F-19 Stealth Fighter. Not satisfied
with a simple conversion of their successful C-64 Project Stealth Fighter game to
the IBM, Sid Meier, Andy Hollis, and Jim
Synoski took the increased speed and
memory of the 16 bit MS-DOS environment and have expanded their F-19
simulation into not only a better
program, but a dramatic product guaranteed to grab you and immerse you into
the world of modern technological warfare. F-19 is the perfect marriage of
modern technology and game. How do
you realistically simulate high tech warfare with its highly integrated network of
tasks in such a way that the individual
can make a real difference in the outcome? Simple, simulate the only weapon
system where the "lone wolf" can still
make an impact: the F-19. Arnold
Hendrick puts it this way in the documentation:
Modem air attacks are usually a complex dance of many different machines,
each with a unique specialty and role —
the scouts, the electronic warfare escorts, the strike planes, the fighter cover,
and the AWACS airborne controllers. The
(Continued on page 39)

Review

When Is A
Zero Not A
Zero?
Infocom's "Zork Zero"
by Dave Arneson

M

ore than 90 years have passed since the great
wizard Megaboz cast the curse which destroyed
Lord Dimwit Flathead "The Excessive" along with
the ruling family, the Twelve Flatheads. Now, the curse
threatens to bring down the Great Underground Empire itself!

Wurb Flathead, the current occupant of the throne, has
sent a clarion call to the most remote corners of the Empire: half the riches of the kingdom to the person who can
allay the curse. From every province of Quendor,
courageous adventurers, scheming charlatans, and wildeyed crackpots have streamed into the Imperial Capitol of
Flatheadia.
In Zork Zero, the player's character is a peasant from One
Hut Village in Nowhere Province. He is special. In times
past, an ancestor, who happened to have been a servant in
the castle, observed Megaboz casting the curse. This ancestor "just happened" to obtain a scrap of wizardly parchment
from the mage's pocket during the creating of the curse.
Passed down through the generations, it conveniently contains the clue needed to end the curse.
lie forewarned, however, that upon your character's arrival
in Flatheadia, the other treasure hunters will have gone
home. Those in authority, as well as the population in
general, have departed for parts unknown. Now, the quest
begins. All have left and the player's character is practically
alone in the castle on CURSE DAY. (Insert evil sounding
music here).
Only King Wurb's court jester accompanies the character.
The jester is, unfortunately, as full of deadly tricks as he is of
riddles and games. Players should watch out for him as he
gives helpful nudges in the right direction and pops in and
out of the quest at his own whim.

Getting Zorked
So, you don't like text games and don't like puzzles? I don't
either. I like watching the critters bash each other. Puzzles I
can't figure out become humiliating when the "All too obvious" solution is revealed. Well, Zork Zero might just
change all that for you, just like it has for me.
This game is well thought out, thorough, and covers a
large area. Really large! It is not only fun to play, but is also
neither too difficult nor a piece of cake.
Zork Zero has no animation. The few pictures are all static
pictures. Hence, it is strictly a text game with only a few
graphics. The manual is very complete and does a good job
of presenting the vocabulary used in the game. This is impor-

tant because the game uses a large library of words. Even
better news, though, is that when a command is refused, the
program explains why it does not like the command. This
reduces guessing quite a bit.
In addition, the game comes complete with two "clues" and
a calendar. The first clue is a parchment piece which is
necessary for solving the last puzzle and the other is a
blueprint that is vital for the later stages of the game. The
calendar is a compendium of clues. The illustrations of the
twelve Flatheads contain, at least, one good hint on each
page and players will find themselves consulting it on several
occasions during the game.
The game program contains almost twenty screens of
hints. These are quite useful in keeping the game moving.
This is quite helpful when one considers that there are over
twenty items that must
be found and returned
to their proper places in
order to complete the
quest. For those that
have trouble, the game's
extensive on-line hints
will provide a list of the
items, including a designation indicating which
of the Twelve Flatheads
originally owned it and
where the item can now
be found in the game.
For example, a listing
might read, "Silk Tie (J.
Pierpont): in the nest in
the Aerie." The tie is the
same one being worn by
Pierpont in his picture
on the calendar for the
month of "Mage."
Points are scored in several ways. The
TITLE:
Zork Zero
list of points in the on-line hints section
SYSTEM:
Macintosh
comes in four parts. The hints tell
# PLAYERS:
1
PRICE:
$59.95
players what actions will increase their
DESIGNER:
Steve Meretzky
scores and the number of points to be
PUBLISHER:
Infocom, Inc.
Cambridge, MA
received. For example, a player can earn
twelve points for finding a Flathead item
and five more points when that item is placed in the right
place. Five points can be lost if the player puts the wrong
item in a given location.
As one would expect, problem solving also scores points.
For example, solving the "walnut riddle" nets twenty points
for a player while simply winning the game only nets thirty
points. There is certainly more to the game than simply "winning," since there are one thousand possible points to be
earned and one can win with less.
A turn plays quite easily! Players who are familiar with text
games will have no problems with Zork Zero. Even inexperienced players will be swept right into the flow of the
game via the opening sequence. One of the extremely nice
features of this text game is that players can have their computers print out a "script" of their adventure. This provides
not only a nice reference, but it can also be used to impress
friends or compare notes.

To Map or Not to Map
The mapping system in Zork Zero is easy to use and well illustrated. Each location has its own special icon to show

where characters have been and where they
can go. The map can be called up at any
time and may keep the player from getting
repeatedly lost. (Note: If the game is not
saved prior to calling up the map, any information currently on the screen can be lost.)

Hints or Hindrance?
For denser players, such as myself, there is
a useful system of hints. Because of the
hierarchical nature of the hint system, the
first hint does not automatically reveal all information. In fact, there may be as many as
a dozen hints for a given situation. Not that
I would ever need to use hints! ha! Since
the player only gets the information needed
to help him solve the puzzle, players can utilize some of the hints and still have the satisfaction of solving a puzzle themselves. It is
also possible for those players with absolutely no willpower to toggle off the game's hint
feature so that it is unavailable unless one
restarts or restores.

Itemized Deductions
(Strategy Notes)
Players should not be too quick to discard
items they find or too eager to utilize an
item's magic. The temptation, for example,
is to throw the "Lobster" away or not even
take it in the first place. Keep it! It's necessary! Again, the "Magic Wand" is found early
in the game, but needs to be used judiciously since it is needed to open areas of the
maze during the latter portions of the game.
There is much to do in the game and
there are, of course, a few red herrings.
Players should keep that final goal in mind
and success will follow. It is fun, however, to
do some silly things as well. Since the game
is both non-linear and has no time limit,
there is no reason not to save the game
and go nosing about having a good time.

the hints. On the "plus" side, the card game
is rather neat.
One recurring problem is that the hints
often make references to the rulebook when
they actually mean the calendar. Failure to
provide the correct response will result in
the game insulting the players and calling
them pirates.

Jester Closer Walk
(Problems)
The continuous presence of Pester, the
court jester, is a nuisance! He can be a helpful companion, but there are many times
when players will have the urge to "Dispense with his services." Players are urged
to restrain themselves because his presence
is ultimately useful to the quest and it is impossible to get rid of him permanently,
anyway. Admittedly, the puzzle where the
player's character is transformed into an alligator (and must eat a worm as the antidote) only costs time and does no harm to
the final quest, but really! This is a matter of
personal taste, but I must protest that the
court jester seems simply too much at times.
Of more significance is the fact that the
program only requires one megabyte of
memory on the Macintosh. However, players
who only have 1 MB of RAM in their computers need to realize that the game plays
much slower than on 2 MB machines.
Those who use the slower machines won't
have time to get a cup of coffee while waiting for a move to be processed, but there is
plenty of time to reflect.
Another nagging detail is that the game is
set up to use only a half-screen window with
no provision for anything else. This is odd,
since the manual refers to full-screen illustrations. All of mine came up on partial
screens. Hopefully, other versions will use
larger windows since a partial screen on the
average Macintosh is pretty small.

Puzzled Looks
Some of the puzzles are good. Some are
strange. Some are dumb!
In the strange category, one finds the
rebus puzzle. This shows six "flattened"
animals on it. It is one of the few pictures
encountered in the game. (Warning: Hint
to follow) Players solve it by figuring out
that pressing the button that makes strange
animal noises is the key to the puzzle. Until
the animals are removed, the puzzle cannot
be read.
Another weird puzzle is reading the writing
on the "magic" glove. (Hint follows:) We
found a way to "Read Glove on Glove," but
that seems extremely odd.
On the "dumb" side is the puzzle about the
stack of six disks. Some of it seems obvious,
but part of it will make players thankful for

What Do You Really Think?
Zork Zero is a very well documented and
user friendly game. Overall, it is a worthy addition to the Zork series and is, by far, the
best one to date. Players who like text
games will definitely love this game. Even
those who don't usually like text games or
are "not sure" about them will probably be
pleasantly surprised with Zork Zero.
Frankly, Zork Zero is probably the best text
adventure out there. It is a lot better than
many animated ones. Few animated games
have Zork Zero's size and depth.
"When is a zero not a zero?" asks the jester.
'When it is Zork Zero!" you answer.
"Right!" says the jester as he turns you into
a rutabaga.

Review

Something's
Alive In Here!
Trapped in an "Alien Mind"
by John Munn
"Jonesy . . . Jonesy?"
—Harry Dean Stanton
Alien
ive minutes ago, everything was fine. You were about
to begin a new stage in your bio-scientific career.
With the help of your friend and fellow bio-scientist,
Aaron Avery, you were about to cross the threshold of a
new era in anti-starvation studies.

F

But that was five minutes ago . . . Right now, you're fighting for your life. Alone and trapped in the very space station that you thought was going to help you save lives. In
this corner of space, the only person that can hear you
scream . . . is yourself.

NOBODY SAID THIS WAS
GOING TO BE A PICNIC
Most role-playing games start out slowly, giving you a
chance to increase your skills and become acquainted with
the mechanics of the new system. Alien Mind by P.B.I.
Software is such a game, that much is certain, but the difference is the feeling you get of an arcade game wrapped
around role playing.
The entire game takes place in the Zekford Space Station.
The first lesson is: shoot first and never ask questions. The
"Enemy" varies between an assortment of killer robots and
Bug-Eyed Monsters bent on destroying you. They are controlled by only one source . . . the Alien that has taken over the
ship. That's another new twist added to this game. This Alien
isn't a slobbering beast, dripping acid. It is a highly intelligent
creature that has taken the Zekford Space Station and made
it its own.
But . . . there's hope! Your friend, Aaron Avery, is still alive
and playing a game of deadly tag with the Alien. He makes
his way from computer system to computer system, establishing contact with you in brief, almost cryptic messages
that only you can understand. He is trying to meet you,
somewhere deep in the bowels of the space station. Every
time he seems to be giving you the last bit of information to
find his location, the Alien breaks in and Aaron has to send
you off to another computer console with a different
password.
Armed with only a needle gun and Aaron's leading messages, you must find Avery and assemble a weapon deadly
enough to destroy the creature that is intent on destroying
you.

HOW DO YOU WORK THIS THING?
Alien Mind can be played with joystick, keyboard or mouse.
The "0" Button, in the joystick mode, is used for jumping
and the "1" button is used for firing. Unfortunately, the jump
button is not always consistent in its response. Sometimes
the jump is immediate . . . in other instances the jump oc-

curs later than expected, causing the character to trip over
objects (i.e. Dead Bodies). This really becomes annoying
when you have four B.E.M.s bearing down on you with laser
turrets blazing.
The game owes quite a debt to Gauntlet, but it offers
more. Graphic depictions of carnage surround the image of
the player as he makes his way from room to room. The
basic premise of the game channels players into a search-and-find strategy that forces them to search the complex for
the next computer station where Aaron's message awaits.
When players find the correct station (usually shown as red
lettering on the blue screen of the computer), they are asked
to input the correct password. The passwords come from the
cryptic clue that Aaron gives you at the previous computer
station.

I STILL
HAVEN'T
FOUND
WHAT I'M
LOOKING
FOR..
When I first bought
my Apple IIGS, I was
almost certain that
there would be
hundreds of games
released with mind
blowing sound and
graphics. Believe me,
they are few and far
between. Alien Mind
has a driving musical
score in addition to
the dynamic sounds
of laser fire and air
locks opening and
closing. This, coupled with the relative
ease of the game controls, creates an
easily accessible and addictive computer game.

Alien Mind
CAME TITLE:
Apple !ICS
SYSTEMS:
# OF PLAYERS: 1
PRICE:
$42.95
Robin Kar
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:
P.B.I. Software
Triton Drive,
Foster City, CA 94404

The game, as with all P.B.I. Software,
is compatible with MIDI engineering.
With the MIDI hooked up and the
sound cranked high enough to annoy
the neighbor's dog, Alien Mind really kicks in.

One constant feature of the game which keeps the player
moving along is the never ending task of searching for the
next computer station. The passwords that Aaron has set up
are made for the purpose of confusing the Alien and, at the
beginning, are not difficult puzzles to solve. Thankfully, the
difficulty of trying to figure out the passwords gradually increases through the course of the game. Sometimes these
clues prove to be quite vague in their answers. One question that kept me going around in circles was "What was the
color of ancient Earth's seas?"
It may look like a simple question.
It is.
It's just the answer that proves to be difficult.
Alien Mind is an easily embraceable game designed with a
relatively simple blending of strategic role-playing with the
finger-itching excitement of an arcade game.

Review

The Captain Is
Courageous
Activision's "Ocean Ranger"
by David Wilson
Captain Ken "Grits" Anderson slid into the warm
water of the Caribbean Sea as the remains of the
U.S.S. Ocean Ranger shuddered violently and burst
into flames. The captain was expected to go down with his
ship, but nobody
said anything
about staying
under the water
with it. As he
watched his ship
bum, he suddenly realized that
the surface of the
water he was
swimming in
was coated with
inflammable

TITLE:
SYSTEM:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:

PUBLISHER:

Ocean Ranger
C-64/128
1
$34.95
Kevin Patrick,
Sherwood Patrick, and
Dick Smit
Activision
Menlo Park, CA

diesel fuel. If one
spark from the
burning foilborne ship
should touch the
puddle of fuel it
would ignite. He
swam desperately and was
relieved to see a
ship coming
toward him. He
called for help
and breathed a
sigh of relief as a
spotlight illuminated his position.
After all, it would be better to be a
prisoner of war than to be a dead
man. When the ship came
alongside him, however, an icy chill
clamped his neck in a vice as he
heard the enemy commander order
his men to, "Take no prisoners!"

Activision places players in the midst of several different
war zones with their new naval combat game, Ocean
Ranger. Players find themselves in command of missile foilborne frigates; heavy in firepower. These ships have the
capacity for carrying a 76mm cannon, Sea Sparrow (surfaceto-air) missiles, Harpoon (surface-to-surface) missiles, and
depth charges. These ships are also capable of jamming
enemy radar and firing chaff (aluminum and mylar strips
which confuse enemy targeting systems).
The manual is concise and follows the principle that a picture is worth a thousand words. In addition, the so-called
Captain's Manual for the U.S.S. Ocean Ranger also lists the

important countersigns (which is, of course, the copy protection, as well).
During set-up, the player assigns a captain to the ship via a
point and click method. At this time, players may select increasingly challenging duty stations from the Bering Sea (the
easiest) through Southeast Asia and Central America to the
Persian Gulf (the most difficult).
During the mission briefing sequence, players are given a
primary and a secondary objective. The mission briefing is
graphically appealing, using an interesting "slide show" feature that accomplishes a unique effect. Following the briefing, the captain will have to see to the ship's provisioning.
Depending on what kind of enemy he believes he will be
facing, the captain orders the appropriate weapons stores
and fuel.

Engineering Report (Game Mechanics)
Finally, the ship puts out to sea. The captain reports to the
bridge and the player refers to the handy keyboard overlay
which assists him in keeping track of commands. Players will
normally be working from the bridge view and must utilize
the two monitors depicted at the bottom of the screen for information. The monitors display seven different information
sources: sector chart, mast camera-view, target identification,
weapon status, verified "hits," mission status updates, and
radar screen.
As for controlling the ship's movement, cruising is easy.
One simply uses the joystick for both acceleration and steering. However, players may need to remember that running
their ship at full speed will rapidly burn up the fuel. The most
economical throttle setting is 28-34 knots. Should the player
run out of fuel, however, it is possible to open the auxiliary
fuel tank and receive an extra 1,000 gallons of fuel.
Once on the high seas, players will need to view the tactical
chart. This chart enables players to navigate to the mission
area. An accelerated time mode is available, but one should
keep an eye peeled on the heading. It is possible to run
aground in this game.

Ordnance Report (Combat Mechanics)
Before actually engaging the enemy, it is a good idea to
toggle the maintenance screen and get the men out of the
galley and assigned to the four general maintenance stations. In the midst of a battle, one cannot stop fighting long
enough to assign them. Note: the most important maintenance station is the computer. You can't hit 'em if you
can't "see" 'em and you need the computer to "see" them.
One should probably assign the maximum component of
three men to that station alone.

Finally, the moment arrives. An alarm sounds and the
"threatboard" goes crazy. It is time to engage the enemy.
The view from the bridge shows a Soviet MiG bearing
down on the ship. The captain selects surface-to-air missiles, waits for the Target Acquisition and Designation System (TADS) to lock on, and pushes the fire button. "Target
terminated, sir!"
Except for the fact that the enemy comes in waves, the
paragraph above could be an illustration of a typical battle
round. Fortunately for those playing the easier levels, only
one type of enemy at a time comes in those attack waves. In
this more difficult levels, the enemy comes faster and with a
combined arms approach. Players will quickly learn that they
(Continued on page 47)

Designer's Notes

Coin-Op
Conversions:
Why They Are Not The Same
by William C. Fisher
Bill Fisher is the President of Quicksilver Software, Inc., one of the busiest conversion houses in California. Data East's
Ikari Warriors and Lock On (both for
IBM) are two of the latest projects he
has worked on. In this article, he shares
with CGW readers why arcade games
are not as easy to convert from coin-op
to personal computer versions.

How do you squeeze an arcade video
game into a personal computer? To
answer that question, let's look at two of
this year's IBM conversions. Ikari Warriors is a vertical-scrolling jungle warfare
game. The arcade machine supports this
scrolling in specialized hardware, provides
ample sprite hardware to overlay moving
objects on this background, and also utilizes a multi-channel sound chip. Karnov,
another Data East product, is an even
more elaborate game, with intricate
gameplay and enormous amounts of
graphics.
In comparison, the typical IBM PC clone
is a rather slow machine. Most inexpensive clones (4.77 MHz or 8 MHz "XT"
compatibles) have little more power than
the original Apple II. Even in a more
powerful "AT" compatible, the video
adapter is highly inefficient. Writing for it
is like trying to suck a frozen malt
through a straw. It is almost not worth
the effort.
In order to succeed, a game must work
on as many machines as possible. It

Boy, Are Our Faces Red!
While we thought our Art Director,
VinceDeNardo was checking screen
shots for the Stealth Mission article in
the Dec. '88 issue, pgs. 14 &16, he instead was out participating in his
favorite pastime, flaunting authority.
Therefore, we apologize because a
photo of Microprose's Project Stealth
fighter appeared in the review of
Sublogic's Stealth Mission. Mass firings
will follow.

must be fast on any machine, run in as
little memory as possible, use minimal
disk space, be written in a hurry, and still
be fun. Obviously, some of these goals
conflict. It is our job, in conversion
houses, to make the right tradeoffs. A
game must work with every model of
clone PC, clone video card (in any of a
half dozen different modes), and clone
joystick adapter. One mistake can mean
a lot of phone support.

How Do You Make It Fast?
It is possible to write a conversion in a
low-level machine language, but that
usually takes too much programming
time. Most of the time, we use the C language, writing only the graphics code in
machine language because it must be so
fast. Clever use of big data tables can
speed a game up a lot, eating up
memory in the process. The data tables
are often worth the trouble, though. Our
goal is to push beyond current quality
levels and set new standards. We achieve
new highs by applying dozens of such optimization techniques in every product.
Ikari Warriors is a rare game, written by
a programmer who was skilled enough to
cram the entire game into low-level code
and still turn out a reliable product. The
result is very fast and smooth, but, internally, it is a maze. Speed is gained at the
expense of maintainability and portability
to other machines. Karnov is almost entirely written in C. It had to be. The code
for the game fills several IBM diskettes,

not even counting the graphics data. It
was also intended to be moved to the
Atari ST, an impossible task if it were written in IBM machine language. Graphics
are handled by a special machine language program which plays tricks on
some rather large tables.

How Do You Make It Small?
Machine language is optimal for this because it is usually smaller than C code,
but it does have the problems mentioned
earlier. One popular technique is to compress some data, but that makes the
game run slower. It is also possible to
break up the game and bring in only a
small piece at a time from the disk, too.
This is how Ikari Warriors does it. The arcade game never stops, but the IBM PC
version pauses at several points to load
data. It also compresses data very heavily,
but only decompresses when loading so
that the game is not affected when it is
being played. It also does tricks with the
memory in the video card to save space.
The result is a game than runs in only
256K on most machines, yet does a full
vertical scroll.

What Are Some
Other Problems?
One could also consider some other
typical problems involved in converting a
coin-op design to the PC environment.

Field

Trip

Fantastic Voyages III
The Whirlwind Tour Inside the
Entertainment Industry Continues

nearly every conversation? What designer
began his career under the pen name
(pixel name?) of Chuckles?
The answers are: Origin (New
Hampshire and Texas), Lord British
(Richard Garriott), Robert Garriott, Lord
British, and Chuck Bueche, respectively.
CEO Robert Garriott seems determined
to lead the company (primarily founded
to produce designs by Lord British and
former college roommate and Sierra colleague, Chuck Bueche) into a more aggressive publishing stance. Business
decisions for the company are made in
the staid New England environs of New
Hampshire, while Lord British has assembled a creative team in Austin. The
avowed goal of the company is to release
as many titles in the current year as in
the entire previous history of the company.
Richard (Lord British), in the meanwhile,
is not only hard at work on Ultima VI,
but is happily ensconced in Britannia
Manor, his custom built home outside of
Austin, Texas. As part of his Halloween
bash, Richard turned both his swimming
pool and spa into a creepy swamp and
hired actors and actresses to play assorted diabolical roles over the course of
the weekend. Not only is the house
replete with secret passageways, a cave,
and a wine cellar, but it offers an observatory, as well. It is comforting to know
Lord British actually has a "castle."

With the October issue the editorial
staff of CGW began a tour of many of
the software companies. The purpose
of these visits and reports is to share
the human story of the work environment and the people behind the
scenes that produce the games and
creativity tools we all enjoy. This
issue, the story continues...

Origin of Worlds
Which entertainment software company
has two separate headquarters in different parts of the country? What major
software designer spent over ten
thousand dollars of his own money in
order to invite a whole city to his Halloween party? Which President and CEO
of a software publisher has a former
astronaut for a father? Which software
designer uses the adverb, "ultimately," in

Dallas Snell is Executive Producer. In
this responsibility, he often shuttles back
and forth between the company's corporate and creative headquarters.
Previously, Dallas was with Polarware.
One of Dallas' significant contributions to
the company was the suggestion of
hiring a full-time artist. Denis Loubet was
hired shortly thereafter. He is a talented
artist who not only executes much of the
cover art for Origin products, but also did
the introductory graphics for Ultima V
and all the graphics for Times of Lore.
Some of the Origin executives and members of the programming team were skeptical about hiring a full-time artist, but Dallas lobbied for one. Now, almost all of the
designers/programmers want to use
Denis' talents. In fact, Denis is so overbooked that the company has hired two
more full-time artists and are now looking
for another. The commitment to graphics
excellence should lead to an across-theboard artistic standard for Origin's
products.
In addition to an emphasis on fine
graphics (always a delight in the Origin
products), the company is making a
serious effort in terms of sound. Ultima V
on the Apple II, for example, supported a
MIDI interface, as well as the venerable
Mockingboard. Now, the company has

just released Times of Lore with a
soundtrack by Martin Galway, a
prominent British computer musician
who happens to be the nephew of the
famous flutist, James Galway.
If Lord British is having any trouble adjusting to the difference between being
primarily a designer and being more of a
designer/creative director, it doesn't show
when he talks about the products under
development by other designers. The successful designer unabashedly praises the
interface in Chris Roberts' Times of Lore,
the conversational features of Todd
Porter's upcoming Knights of Legend,
and the treatment of non-player characters in Tangled Tales: The Misadventures
of a Wizard's Apprentice as being superior to those features in the Ultima series.
He positively glows when he discusses
the individualized portraits of villagers in
Moebius II, the 3-D graphics and frame
rate utilized in Space Rogue, and the
potential for multi-player competition in
T.A.N.C., a cybertank game where players
will design their own fighting vehicles.
Together, both wings of the company are
working to underscore their corporate
name with a well-deserved reputation for
offering new beginnings. As the
company's promotional slogan says,
"Others write software, we create worlds."

The Eye of the Dragon
Contrary to appearances, Strategic
Simulations, Inc. has not become a
one product line company. In fact, the
company plans to continue to release the
same number (or more) of wargame
releases each year as in the past. Nevertheless, there is certainly a lot of excitement in their Mountain View headquarters over the success of their Advanced Dungeons & Dragons"
products. In fact, the early reports on
Pool of Radiance seem to indicate that
President Joel Billings has rolled the dice
and won big in the licensing agreement
with TSR, Inc.
SSI has always offered a catalog full of
titles. Prior to the advent of the AD&D"
line, however, the company had not really experienced the kind of big volume
mega-hit associated with other
publishers. Now, the company has great
expectations in terms of expanded distribution, future products, and anticipated
profits. finlike some licenses, SSI hedged
their bet in the TSR deal. Instead of relying upon one product to make or break
the profit potential of the deal, SSI has a
multi-year pact to create as many
AD&D" and Dragonlance" products
during that period of time as they perceive to be profitable.
In spite of the expanded growth poten

tial, however, the company has not forgotten that it is their loyal customer base
that has gotten them where they are. Customer Support has long been a
watchword at SSI. In the early days, disk
drive misalignment would often cause the
company to run through as many as ten
different disk replacements in order to
solve a problem. Most of these problems
were associated with a copy protection
that the company has since abandoned,
but it shows the lengths the company
goes to in trying to keep its customers
satisfied.
Carole Johnson is the person in charge
of SSI's Customer Support Department.
Everything related to disk replacement,
technical support, or game availability is
eventually referred to customer support
personnel. SSI is rather interesting in the
way they staff this important department.
Everyone at SSI who works in this area,
also works somewhere else at SSI in
another category. The company encourages employees to play SSI games
and be familiar with them and, to no
one's great surprise, Pool of Radiance is
the most widely played game within the
company in SSI's history.
The "hot line" which handles both technical support and game hints has two different lines. One line is monitored 40
hours per week and the other supplements it with an additional 24 hours of
service. SSI fans who call the hot line will
most likely speak to Bonnie Brors, Kathy
Beccia, or Janet Jackson. Game hints
are an important part of the hot line's
function and developers are required to
provide the customer support personnel
with a hint sheet folder before the
product is even finalized. Hot line personnel add specific answers and notes as
they both play the games and receive
answers to particular questions and
problems.
We asked Carole Johnson what the
most humorous call she could remember
receiving was. She thought it was probably the time an irate father called up and a
little girl could be heard crying in the
background. It happened that the man's
two year old daughter had attempted to
flush a disk down the toilet. The man had
managed to unstop the plumbing, but
called at the height of his frustration to
ask SSI to replace the disk without his
having to mail the (yecch!) disk in. Carole
went against the company's strict replacement policy and sent a disk out immediately. "Please sir," she pleaded,
"spare the child. We'll send the disk!."
Since Carole also handles the
company's complaint department, we
asked what kinds of complaints SSI
receives. One of the most interesting to
us was the fact that many fundamentalist

"Christians" complained
because groups in
Roadwar 2000 encountered bands of
Satanists. Other complaints have centered
on more common differences of opinion
such as the company's
support or non-support
for various machines or
choice of subject matter
for games. Asked how
she handles these kinds
of complaints, Carole
responded, "A lot of
times, you have to do a
lot of listening and not a lot of talking."
That sounds like good advice in any job.

There is another element about SSI
that has always seemed impressive. The
packaging is almost always exceptional.
SSI doesn't have an in-house department
to design those boxes. Instead, the company retains the services of the Louis
Saekow Design studio. Louis has a
clientele that is almost exclusively "high
tech" corporations in the Silicon Valley
area and of that clientele, 30-35% of his

work is concentrated on
SSI products. Louis even
did work for CGW during
one of our early subscription campaigns.
One fact is certain. With
SSI's bold venture into the
world of licensing and their
affiliated label deal with
Electronic Arts, the company can no longer be reck
oned as a "Forgotten
Realm" of software publishers which
caters to a narrow interest group. SSI is

spreading its wings on a grand . . . er, ah
. . . "scale."

(me stood still as Jason waited
or the acid stench of melting
metal to reach his nostrils. His 25
ton Battlemech had taken three direct
hits from the
enemy's Jenner-class
medium
lasers. Their
concentrated
energy was
enough to
bum
through any
amount of
shielding,
even the
massive
amounts
Jason had
added on to
the mech's
chassis back
at the
Mechit Lube
in Starport.
The question
now was
whether he
would live
long enough
to return to
Starport and
repair the
metal
monster.

T

entries in Infocom's new series of graphic
adventures. This is not a typical Infocom
adventure game, though. It is a role-playing game set more in the style of the U/-

series of missions which acclimate you to
the mech environment.
The sound of the pursuing Jenner rose
in pitch as it drew closer to Jason's starboard. Fortunately, the
trees he was
brushing
aside and
knocking
over worked
better than
the blown
out
windscreen
wipers that
were dangling uselessly from the
wrecked
cockpit
frame. Unfortunately, the
view Jason
was now afforded was
of a second
approaching
Kuritan
Locust that
was training
both
machineguns
and its torsomounted
medium
laser at the
already exposed intercooler.

Mech Wrecks

"Moving
would
probably be
a good
idea", he
thought.
Kicking in
the jump
jets, he got
the mech
running
toward a patch of forest ahead on the
left. Just as he made the tree line, burning cinders hit the windscreen causing a
shower of sparks to momentarily
blanket the main viewport.
"Great!", he thought out loud, jumping
momentarily at the sound of his own
voice. "Now I'm running blind. All I need
now is to find out I'm up against more
than one of those Kuritan rattletraps."
Battletech from Infocom affords players
the opportunity to control the massive
megaton fighting machines of the future
in an adventure quest set on a distant
planet. Designed by Westwood Associates and based on the Battletech
world from FASA, both companies have
taken care to keep The Crescent Hawk's
Inception consistent with the characters
and universe of the novels and paper
and pen game. This is one of the first

Infocom's "Battletech"
by Vince DeNardo

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Battletech:
The Crescent Hawk's Inception
IBM (with CGA, EGA
MCGA, VGA or Tandy)
1
549.95
Westwood Associates
Infocom
Cambridge, MA

tima series, but using the basics of the
Battletech combat system.
The player starts off as Jason
Youngblood, son of the great Mech Warrior Jeremiah Youngblood, who has
mysteriously disappeared while on a mission of top secrecy. Jason is about to
begin his basic training which will ultimately qualify him to be a Mech Warrior
in his own rite, and the player takes up
the game as Jason starts school. Training in the compound takes the place of a

Punching
the fire button, Jason
poured all
the remaining
firepower he
could muster into the rapidly approaching mech. Once again his viewport was
covered with smoke and ash, but this
time it was from the Kuritan slagheap
that used to be in front of him.
"Gotcha, you wimpy, bucket of bolts!"
he shouted, as once again his Commando was rocked by a direct, rear hit from
the still pursuing Jenner. "Right", he
thought, "I almost forgot about that
one." Turning the Commando to the
right, the enemy Jenner loomed out of
the smoke and darkness and filled
Jason's viewscreen. Silence settled over
the newly formed clearing as the Commando and Jenner stood face to face.
Ancient gladiatorial combat was being
refought 3000 years later, with newer
and deadlier weapons. Times had
changed, but man had not. Jason
reached for the blood-red fire button as

the silky soft whisper of his damage con.
trol system announced the fact that excessive heat-buildup would prevent any
further functions . . . and his cockpit
door was ajar.
"Thank you, and have a nice millennia."
The sound of the computer faded away
as Jason frantically scanned his
readouts. Slowly, he raised his gaze to
meet that of the Kuritan pilot who was
now focusing his weaponry for the final
blast. It was then that Jason
Youngblood heard what he thought
were the last words he would ever hear.
Smiling, he realized what they meant.
Above the sound of static coming from
his audio receiver, he heard the words
in Kuritan, "Thank you, and have a nice
millennia."

Starport has a wonderful place where
you'll be spending a lot of time: it's called
the Arena, the training ground for mech
warriors. This time there is the added incentive of winning money. Of course,
should you lose . . . well, a hot-shot warrior like you won't get caught with your
viewscreens down, right?
Starport is also where you get the first
additions to your party. Up to six mem-

First, you learn how to get where you
want to go ASAP, then you graduate to
maneuverability and finally to the proper
operation of the metal monsters in combat against one, and then multiple opponents. In between missions, you have
the opportunity to acquire armor,
weapons, and a variety of combat and
mech-related skills. There is medical training available and a tech school is there to
help you brush up on Repair 101. All of
these skills are valuable as you'll be using
them as you explore the world of Pacifica.

After a while though, the compound
gets to be somewhat claustrophobic, and
you just itch to get out into the world
and try and find out what happened to
Dad. About this time, there is an enemy
invasion at the citadel that destroys all
the buildings and most of the people.
You're left with whatever weapons and
armor you have on your person and the
knowledge that you have to make it to
the Starport to find out if civilization still
exists. Fortunately, there's a map that
gives you the general direction and off
you go. I would strongly advise carrying
an "Inferno" with you for protection.
Designed to be used like a bazooka
against battlemechs, an "Inferno" makes
a dandy anti-personnel weapon and
comes with an inexhaustible supply of
ammo, definitely a plus!

Finally after much exploration and
many combats you'll get to where you
need to be for the final solution. If you've
got the right mix of party members and
skill levels you should be able to proceed
to the end-game. Upon successful completion of your mission you find out that
there will be a sequel and you'll be transferring characters and possessions into
the next game.
The story line is rigidly linear and characters have a number of places they need
to go to proceed to the next phase of the
game. The freedom in the game is
centered around the individual battles
and the tactics that each player will
develop. The battles are what BattleTech
is all about. In mech combat, players
have the options to walk, run and jump,
making it harder to be hit, and if close
enough to an enemy, they can physically
kick him, doing a variety of damage. The
informational readouts allow you to scan
an enemy for location and weaponry,
and allow you to scan your own
machine. This is a good idea because
heat buildup can cause your perfect fighting machine to "freeze up" at the most inopportune times. Discretion is still the better part of valor, even in the future, so
fleeing is an option, although "real men"
know it's only viable for wimps. Each
mech comes with a variety of weapons
and it's possible to upgrade them at different speed shops.

Maybe it wouldn't be such a bad day
after all.

Money is received in the form of an allowance, and it's possible to invest it wisely on the stock exchange and make a
handsome profit. You'll need the profits
because armor, weapons and skills don't
come cheaply. Once you learn a skill,
there are multiple levels of improvement,
so it pays to spend a lot of time between
mech training wandering around, and
building up capital. Picking the right
stock isn't very difficult and soon your
portfolio will be looking pretty good.

out of melting those rattletraps into molten slag, so my extra party members had
to keep buying new shoes every town or
so. Whatever turns you on.

The graphics are excellent. During combat, and also during parts of the story,
there are outtakes done in the style of
Japanimation (animated cartoon features
based on Japanese Comic Books). They
are outstanding, though they do slow
down the fighting.
bers can be in your party at any one time
and you'll need several of them to solve
problems in the end game. These party
members can also be trained in different
skills so you'll be sending guys to school
for refresher courses on a regular basis.
Beware, though, some of the agents you
recruit might be doubles, so keep an eye
on them closely at first. As you explore
more of Pacifica it's possible to pick up
mechs and once you get your first one,
you're well on your way to establishing
your reputation. You can have many
mechs in your party but it's also possible
to win with only one. The mechs only
have room for two passengers, so the
extra party members are forced to walk.
By having an extra pilot walking or copiloting, though, you increase your ability
to scavenge useable mechs you've
defeated in combat. I got more pleasure

According to Infocom, the game is
designed for the 13 to 19 year old market
and we agree. It could also be used to introduce younger kids into role-playing on
the computer. BattleTech is made to be
solved in about 35 hours, but it can easily be finished in around 20. It depends
on how much fighting you want to do.
The game is really a combat game with
some story lines wrapped around. It's a
good game, but definitely for beginning
to low intermediate players. It could be a
great bridge to bringing new players into
the computer field. I'd like to see the sequel add a great deal of complexity and
flesh out the many concepts touched
upon in this game. Infocom has a great
framework here. They should be able to
get a lot of mileage out of it in the future.

(Continued from page 16)

The Plane
That
'Wasn't"
There
F-19 is the exception; it flies alone, relying on stealth and subtlety instead of
brute force. Not since 1916 have fighter
pilots gone off alone to duel the enemy.
Now that bygone era of the lone wolf
hero is possible again, in a very
modern, high-tech environment.
- Rulebook page 174 .
F-19 Stealth Fighter is a simulation of
air combat in the Lockheed F-19 single
seat "Frisbee" Fighter. Sources who "can
neither confirm nor deny" their involvement with projects like the F-19 say that
the product "seems to be an accurate
portrayal" of certain current high-tech
combat environments. (Don't you just
love high-tech vague-speak?).
In F-19 you will fly missions in four different theaters of operation: Libya, Persian Gulf, North Cape, and Central
Europe. Libya tends to be the training
ground for the increasing difficult Gulf,
Cape, and European theaters. Some
amazing coincidences to history occurred
to me in Libyan and Persian Gulf missions. On one bombing run into Libya I
missed my assigned target and leveled a
small adjacent village. Memories of the
U.S. raid on Libya in 1986 came rushing
back to me.
In a Persian Gulf scenario I fired two AMRAAMS (air-to-air fire-and-forget missiles)
at an enemy An-72 air transport. The missiles lost their lock on the transport and
acquired a civilian Boeing 767 which was
subsequently destroyed! I felt genuine
shock! The game had so engaged me
that I felt like I was actually there and got
sweaty palms and a weak stomach from
having downed a civilian airliner.
One of the most exciting scenes in
Tom Clancy's novel "Red Storm Rising" is
the scenario where F-19's penetrate behind enemy lines in Western Europe and
take out five Russian Mainstay "AWAC"
radar planes, thus preparing the way for
one hundred low level attack fighters to
attack a variety of targets in Eastern
Europe. It's an exciting sequence in the
book. I've been waiting for that mission
to come up in F-19. It hasn't come up
yet, but I still have hope. Nevertheless,
there are a sizable number of primary

and secondary missions available in each
of the theaters. You select whether you
want an air-to-air mission or a strike mission against ground targets. The computer then assigns you specific targets.
You will learn how to bomb using freefall bombs (dive bombing and level bombing), retarded bombs (low-level bombing)
glide bombs (toss bombing) and conduct
air-to-air attacks using fire-and-forget
missiles such as the "Sidewinder" and
AMRAAMs, as well as air-to-ground missiles such as the Harpoon, HARM, and
Maverick missiles. You will learn how to
avoid missile attacks using not only
hardware such as chaff, flares, ECM, IR
Jamming, and decoys, but also by
maneuvering (you can "turn inside" a missile if you know what you are doing up
there).
Note that I say you "learn" to do these
things. The program is almost a trainer
for the real thing. To master this program
you are going to have to do your
homework. The documentation includes
tutorials on aerodynamics and flight principles, radar, stealth technology,
air-to-ground tactics, and air-to-air tactics.
Speaking of the documentation, I can
sum it up in one word: "Wow!" (you can
quote me on that). Weighing a full
pound, the perfect-bound 192-page glossy manual tells you everything you
wanted to know about stealth fighters,
but didn't know you could ask!
The graphics and animation are stunning, to say the least. Hendrick does an
excellent job of describing how graphics
in F-19 stand apart from other programs:
When you look at a flight simulator,
the first thing to check is the detail and
fidelity of the 3-D out-the-cockpit
graphics. Many "simulators" use arcadestyle sprite graphics. They move a picture of the object around the screen.
There are three (or four, or whatever)
sizes of each picture, to give the impression of depth; but it's still really a twodimensional cardboard cutout sliding
around he screen. In comparison, a true
simulator like F-19 Stealth Fighter has a
data record of each object's dimensions,
and then adjusts if for distance and viewing angle, as well as removing objects
hidden behind others.
- Rulebook page 174.
Microprose has coupled hot graphics
with new perspectives of the game action. In TactiVue both you and the
enemy are kept in sight on the screen
(i.e. your plane appears in the foreground
and the enemy in the background, or
vice-versa. This view gives you a solid
perspective on where you are in relationship to the enemy. A very nice touch.

SlotVue gives you an "in the slot" look
from behind and above your plane (helpful on landings).
For all its splendor, F-19 is not without
its rough edges. Arnold Hendrick did an
outstanding job with the documentation,
but in a number of locations where the
text refers to information elsewhere in the
manual we are told to turn to pages 00.
Page 00 is the location we writers refer to
when writing the original draft of a document and do not know just where "page
00" will be when typeset and laid-out.
When the manual was laid-out
Microprose obviously did not do a final
proof read and insert the appropriate
pages. However, the problem is minor
and with a little searching you will find
the information you need.
As mentioned above, on one mission I
accidently shot down a civilian Boeing
767. I was shocked when during the
debriefing following this mission, I not
only got a high score (because of accomplishing both my primary and secondary missions), but was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross and given a
promotion as well! The only negative impact for shooting down the civilian plane
was a small reduction of my score and a
single comment that a friendly nation
filed a strong protest against the U.S.'s action in destroying a civilian plane. When I
asked Sid Meier about this he said
(tongue firmly planted in his cheek) 'Well,
the 767 was on a training flight; no passengers were on board". Right, Sid! Give
us something better than that! OK, he
did. Meier said that they chose not to
make the penalty for downing a civilian
liner harsh because it would be discouraging to the new pilot to have his character
grounded in that fashion. To their credit,
Microprose has always been sensitive to
making their detailed games "friendly" to
the beginner. Microprose's successful
sales record and high game ratings by
our readers vindicates this philosophy.
On the question of downing civilian
aircraft, however, it just doesn't work.
Beyond the ethical question, we feel that
a strong negative reaction to shooting
down a civilian aircraft would make the
game more realistic. Accidently shooting
down a Boeing 767 should be a real concern to players of the game, just as it is
real pilots and sailors.
F-19 Stealth Fighter is a must buy for
every IBM computer wargamer. In our
November issue (CGW #53) we sang the
praises of another IBM flight combat
simulator, Battlehawks 1942 from Lucasfilm Games. We even said that Battlehawks would be a serious contender
for next year's CGW Action Game of the
Year Award. Battlehawks now has a very
worthy competitor for that award in F-19
Stealth Fighter. Stay tuned!

Strategy Tips

S

o, you've mastered the original
Reach for the Stars. You conquer
the galaxy at will, bust planets like
melons, and are convinced that the computer opponents don't know
their bits from their bytes.
Where to now?
That's a typical situation
with most games. Thanks to
SSG's continued interest in
their flagship product, Reach
for the Stars is an exception
to the rule. The third edition,
with its advanced rules and
lethal computer-played "enhanced veterans," will test the
mettle of the wiliest galactic
tyrants.
The introduction of navigational technology has essentially altered the scale of the
game, profoundly affecting
strategy. Under the advanced
rules, you may venture only
three hexes from a settled system. Appropriate investments in navigational
technology can extend the navigation
range to as many as five hexes.

Life isn't so simple under the advanced
rules. This is a result, perhaps, of the laziness and complaisance that accompanies
a high quality of life. Therefore, the per

Strategy for SSG's
"Reach for the Stars"
by James D. Hornfischer

With only a few of the 54 systems immediately reachable, the vastness of the
galaxy becomes truly palpable and the
game better lives up to its name. No
longer is it sufficient merely to dispatch
scouts throughout a fully charted
universe and pound whomever you find
first. Without scouts, you expand slowly,
groping blindly among the scattered systems. The urgency to explore and
colonize heightens wonderfully the sense
of frontiersmanship. First contact comes
as an exciting moment indeed.
Shrinking the size of explored space in
this manner places a premium on rapid
colonization. It is more plausible, of
course, that fledgling empires would
develop slowly rather than launch crossgalaxy raids on enemy colonies early in
the game, as is both possible and probable in the original release. Realism aside,
however, the implications for strategy are
profound, doubly so with the advanced
rules' higher resource point (RP) costs for
production and maintenance.

TITLE:
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNERS:
PUBLISHER:

Reach for the Stars (3rd Edition)
Amiga, Apple II, IIGS, G-64/128
IBM, Macintosh
1-4
$45.00
Roger Keating and Ian Trout
Strategic Studies Group
Walnut Greek, CA

The Economics of Conquest
In the basic game's Gross Planetary
Product (GPP) formula, population is an
RP-neutral variable. Although the formula
generated one RP per unit of population,
it cost one RP each turn to support those
folks, thus negating their contribution. A
planet's net RP value relied solely upon
industry and social level. Population was
useful only in supplying colonists and
generating victory points.

capital allocation of RPs is two for populations with social environments between
61 and 75; three for a planet with social
environment between 76 and 90; and
four for those with a social environment
above 90. Though the GPP formula
doesn't show it, the higher the social environment, the more draining a large
population will be on a planet's economy
(see Figure 1). Forget Gross Planetary
Product. While a high social environment

will improve your GPP, the bottom line requires net resource points.
Bear this in mind when colonizing your
first planet. It is important to pump up a
new world's social environment to a habitable 40 as
rapidly as possible. When you
surpass that, the population
begins to grow. Resist,
however, the temptation to
spoil your off-wonders or the
cost to sustain them will rise.
Raise the social environment
only when industrial capacity
is reached and further
development is impossible.
Since a new colony will not
be able to provide for itself initially, have the homeworlders
sacrifice for the pioneers
during the turn prior to
planetfall. Their savings will
go to the global RP fund and
earn 6.25 percent interest.
With 100 RPs in the bank, you can improve the social environment of the
colony by the maximum 25 points the
next turn and make successful colonization possible with as few transports as the
system allows—probably, a minimum of
15. Save a little more than that to build a
few units of industry. If this is not accomplished, the zero in the GPP formula
will keep that colony in the stone age.
Building industry is safe. High industry
levels have no detrimental effects.
Moreover, since industry level determines
a planet's starship construction capacity,
this variable will have a lot to say about
how well you match up against enemy
fleets. There is a "Catch-22," however.
Population size limits the rate of industrial
growth. Each turn, you can build no
more than one industry on a given
planet for every two population points.
Remember also that the GPP formula
multiplies industry by social environment.
Industrial productivity is, therefore, a function of social environment. Simple algebra will then demonstrate that a new
unit of industry will generate 5/8 RPs.
Highly developed social environments
make possible a phenomenon called
"planetary improvement." Planets with social environments of 80 or more will intermittently see their maximum industrial
capacities grow, offsetting in the long run
the higher population maintenance cost
an 80 social environment incurs. The social environment may rise to 90 before
that cost rises again, though, so 90 is the
practical maximum.
Planetary improvement also increases a
planet's population capacity. Considering
the fact that only one eighth of a planet's
population may be boarded onto
transports on a given turn, it is eventually

critical to have large populations. This is
true, high maintenance costs notwithstanding. Once the battle lines are
drawn, you will need lots of transports in
order to seize enemy planets and recapture those you lose.

Beating the

"Enhanced Veterans"
Victory points come four ways:
economic development, starship battles,
planetary conquest, and colony destruction. The advanced rules allow you to assign multipliers to whatever objectives
you wish to emphasize. Which category
you stress and how you exploit that

choice is the secret to beating the
vaunted enhanced veterans.

fleet to repel the aggressive computer op
ponents.

The safest strategy is to put a 100 percent (or 4) multiplier on development victory points. Those you can bank on
receiving every turn. By developing rapidly enough, you can usually defeat even
the most ruthless veteran opponent in
short games of 50 turns or less, no matter how many points they score by other
means. It is not a pretty victory. Cashing
in by bashing planets is certainly more viscerally satisfying. Nevertheless, a victory is
a victory and once your development
generates more RPs than you know what
to do with, you can go all out building a

Victory by any of the three modes of
combat requires investments in navigational technology (to venture forth from
the home planet and locate enemies),
warships, and ship technology (high-tech,
faster vessels strike faster and spend less
time cruising uselessly in hyperspace).
Still, it is risky to emphasize colony
destruction, for example, when it is possible to play a game without even finding
a colony to destroy. Under the advanced
rules, locating the enemy entails luck and
striking his planets when his main fleet is
(Continued on page 44)

Galactus
Revivus
out will entail more luck. If you seek to
engage the enemy in combat, minimize
the risk of wasting resources on a large
fleet by playing a long game.
Investments in navigational, ship, and

industrial technologies are best made
over the long haul. Should you suddenly
need a crash research and development
program, however, here is a good
strategy. During production, have your
wealthy planets save 100 RPs in the
global RP fund for each underdeveloped
colony you have. This allows the minor
settlements to spend RPs for your powerful planets, which are otherwise limited to
100 RPs or R&D expenditures per turn.
In the end sum, you will need a lot of
everything to beat the enhanced

The Hidden
Costs of Living
Gross Planetary Product
= P + 1/8 (I * S)
Net Planetary Product =
1/8 (I * S)
for S < 61
1/8 (I * S) - P
for S = 61 to 75
1/8 (I * S) - 2P
for S = 76 to 90
1/8 (I * S) - 3P
for S = 90
P = Population
l= Industry
S =Social Environment
High Social Environments are costly. Each increment of 15 alters the
Net Planetary Product formula as
shown. Large Populations and High
Social Environments become necessary in the long run, but for young
colonies, they are disastrous.
Note: Because of an anomaly in the
program, the GPP formula does not
calculate with 100 percent accuracy.

veterans—population from which to
recruit colonists and marines; industry to
build warships and transports; social environment to accelerate industrialization;
and navigational, industrial, and ship technologies to compete in the ceaseless
arms race. Priorities need to be set early,
though. They are: 1) Colonization, 2) Industrialization, 3) Exploration, and 4)
Militarization. The astute player will have
gathered by this point that it is not necessarily the flashy admiral who wins as often
as it is the scrupulous accountant. With
these general guidelines and a little luck,
you should be able to win your share of
games and appreciate the true challenge
the advanced rules offer.

OCEAN
RANGER
cannot sit and wait in awe and admiration while a missile
zooms in to destroy an enemy. Instead, they need to be tell
ing the TADS to find a new target, before the potential target finds them.
At times, the battle situation will become confusing. Targets will fill the threatboard and even the quickest and most
experienced player will become confused. That is a good
time to fire off some chaff. Chaff rockets will confuse enemy
missiles and give players a moment to make some quick tactical decisions.
Even the best captain, however, will likely find his ship
damaged in hostile waters at some time or other. The best
procedure under these conditions is to head out to open

sea. Then, should no immediate enemy be present in the
vicinity, come to a full stop and allow the maintenance crews
time to do their thing. Even if one must return to base, it is
wise to try and find a "safe" zone and attempt repairs so that
one might be prepared to encounter the enemy on the
return trip.

Promotion Eligibility List
(Role-playing Mechanics)
Completing missions is only a secondary goal of the game.
The real goal is for your captain to live through his terms of
service and reach retirement. This is not an easy task. The
captain can be killed in action, listed as missing in action, or
taken as a prisoner of war. Unlike many M.I.A.s, however,
the player's captain can be found if the player can successfully complete three CIA level missions in a row. Prisoners of
war are considered rescued if players can successfully complete three very difficult National Security Council missions in
a row.

After-Action Report (Recommendations)
While Ocean Ranger should by no means be considered a
"serious" wartime simulation, it can certainly be considered
"serious" fun. It is challenging, fast-paced, and graphically interesting. Every mission is full of different encounters and objectives with lots of "bang for the buck.". Ocean Ranger
should provide hours of exciting naval action for courageous
computer captains.

Game Hints

Warning: Although "The Scorpion's
Tale" is a warm and comfortable
tavern of the mind with a nice cozy
fire of vibrant images, our resident
storyteller conjures up illuminating
hints about games. If the gentle
reader eschews hints, let him beware!
It's midwinter again, that time of year
when all the good holidays are over
(sigh), and those long,
dark nights stretch out in
front of us. The sort of
time when some people
(not me, tho!) yearn for
warmer places and fairer
climes. So, have a seat by
the fire while Fred makes
you a strong one and we'll
see about getting you off
on a trip to sunshine and
summer fun.
Leisure Larry II, "Looking
For Love (In All The Wrong Places)", is
the sequel to "Land Of The Lounge
Lizards." However, unlike the previous
game, the emphasis here is more on low
comedy than sex. This time around, Larry
is really looking for true love rather than
a quickie or two.

Then again, people who are desperate
(like Larry), are sometimes tempted to,
shall we say, stretch things a bit. Maybe
more than a bit. Maybe even a lot. All it
takes is poor vision and less brains.
In no time at all, Larry finds himself on
that well-known TV program, The Dating
Connection (if you want to know how
this happens, you'll just have to play the

Scorpion's Tale

after you've finished with the Dating Connection, you're hustled onto the set of
the place you're supposed to be, the
Luck-0 Buck-0 lottery program. Again,
this is automatic. You get to watch as
Larry spins the big wheel. Will his luck
hold up?
Zowee!! Larry's just won the big one. I
mean really big. I mean like the hostess
sashays in and hands Larry a million-dollar bill. For starters. That's
right, starters. He's just won a
million dollars a month (or
was that a week?) for life.

Sierra's "Leisure
Suit Larry II"

Hey Larry, snap out of it.
You've got some shopping to
do before the cruise ship
leaves, and there isn't all that
much time. There are plenty
of stores around where you
can start spending your
money (and see how fast it
goes), so get on with it. Except maybe
the music store (when it finally opens).
Nothing to buy here, but you get something anyway. just talk to the pretty clerk
(so what if your Spanish is rusty...subtitles
have been provided).

Gee, too bad Larry didn't see those subtitles. He has no idea what he's lugging
around. Then again, maybe it's better for
his peace of mind that he doesn't know
the KGB and the agents of a mad scientist are both out to get him. However,
you know, so it's up to you to see that
poor dweeby Larry doesn't get into too
much trouble (hah!).

Larry II is a very linear game. You go
from one area (with a small set of locations) to another and each such passage
is permanent. Once you leave an area,
there is no way back. So, it's wise to have
a few save games for each area, just in
case you miss something.
The disks are not copy-protected and
can be loaded easily to the hard disk.
However, don't lose the manual. Inside,
on various pages, are pictures of women
and their phone numbers. Each time the
game is booted, one of these pictures is
displayed on the screen and you must
enter the correct phone number.
Those who have played Lounge Lizards
will remember Eve. Well, Larry and Eve
didn't quite hit it off after all. In fact, the
game begins with Larry broke and on the
street in front of Eve's house in Los Angeles. Right off, you get the feeling this
isn't one of Larry's better days. That's the
right feeling.
If you want to get off to a quick start,
read the mini-walkthru in the back of the
manual. This way, you (or Larry) will, at
least, have a dollar.
Not much, but enough to buy a
Buck-0 Buck-0 lottery ticket. This could be
Larry's big chance to gain fame and fortune, or, at least, some ready cash. Then
again, maybe not. You can just bet that
none of Larry's numbers will be the right
ones (but what can you expect from
someone ranked as a dweeb, jerk, lame- o,
and other wonderful things?).

Well, it's about time for Larry to board
ship (he does have his passport, I hope).
After the (somewhat overlong) pullout
from the pier, the view changes to show
the ship from the side, with (guess what)
stairs. Yep, you just can't get away from
climbing around.
game..grin), as the "token intellectual."
This part of the game is very much
automatic. You just sit through all of
what happens, except for a couple of
parts where Larry answers the questions
of Barbara Bimbo, the lovely
bachelorette. I advise saving the game
after the Dating Connection part is done,
because few (if any) in their right minds
would want to go through it a second
time (or even a first, but there's no way
around that).

Fortunately, getting up and down the
stairs is simple and straightforward, just a
little tedious. Take some time out to
move around and see what's where. Your
wonderful cabin, for instance. It would
make a terrific walk-in closet; amazing
how they managed to fit a bed in there.
Of course you'll want to see where that
other door leads . . . right into the next
cabin, which is much nicer than yours.
Also occupied by . . . Mrs. Bimbo. Arrgh!
It's Barbara's mother! N00000000!!!

What do you know . . . the lovely Barbara has chosen bachelor number two.
Two? Hey, that's you, Larry Laffer! Wow!
You've just won a month-long, all-expenses paid cruise with the lovely Barbara as
your companion! Gosh, could things finally be taking a turn for the better?
(Naaaahhh!)

Yes! But wait . . . there's more! Mrs.
Bimbo has her own little ways of (ahem)
having a good time, which include the
wearing of skimpy leather garments and
high heel boots (we won't even mention
the chains and other items tucked away
in the closet). Better be real careful
around this one, Larry.

Still, it seems that way, because shortly

After making a fast exit (escape?) from

the Bimbo cabin, you can go on to better places. The barber, for example.
Maybe he can do something for your
receding hairline. Then again, maybe
not. At least, you have a terrific mop-wig
for later on.
There's an onboard pool, too. Just the
place to get a little tan or take a quick
dip. Say Larry, that beautiful girl seems
real interested in you. Perhaps, a little too
interested. Isn't that just a trifle suspicious? Of course, Larry doesn't know
what we do, so a word to the wise, etc.
Overall, the ship is a small place, and
there is an item to be obtained from each
location, except the bridge and the
lifeboat. Of course, not everything is immediately evident.
Y'know, this cruise is turning out to be
less of a dream and more of a nightmare,
what with Mrs. Bimbo on the one hand
and nasty secret agents on the other.
This might be a good time to cut out for
parts unknown. Just pray that you didn't
overlook anything on the ship or back in
Los Angeles, because this next part is totally automatic.
In other words, if you have what you
need to survive, you'll survive automatically, although you do have to sit through a
long animated sequence. There is one exception to this. One item must be used
before you get too far away from the
ship. Having it in your possession isn't
good enough.
Anyway, in spite of everything, Larry
manages to live through days alone at
sea, finally washing up on a resort island.
From the beach, there are three directions to move. I do not recommend
going east at this time, although if you're
curious, you can always save the game
first and then, take a look. To the west is
a nude beach. Interesting place, although there really isn't much to be seen
(really).
Well, there is that girl on the rock, who
seems (suspiciously) interested in Larry.
Personally, I wouldn't go anywhere with
her if I were you (and thank heaven I'm
not!).
Now comes the nasty part. South of the
entry beach is the jungle. Once in there,
Larry goes on auto-pilot, wandering
around looking for a way out. Eventually,
he'll find one that leads to a restaurant.
When he's done with that, he goes back
to the jungle to wander again until he
finds the guest room, the barbershop,
and finally, once more to the beach.
The problem with this is that Larry has
to go through the jungle a total of eight
times (about seven too many). There is
no way to avoid this ridiculous tedium.

The first time is cute. After that, it becomes pointless.
However, there is something you need
from the jungle, so pay attention on the
first go-through. Movement keys won't
work, but you can type in commands
from the keyboard. Watch the screen
carefully, but if you should miss the item,
you have another seven chances to get it
. . . lucky you).
The restaurant is a semi-automatic sequence, where patience will pay off eventually. The guest room has a couple of
items you can pick up. You can, if you
wish, try to sample the charms of the
maid, but I'd save the game first. Larry
might have some qualms about the
resort barber. It's hard to trust someone
who puts detergent on your hair, but this
guy seems to know what he's doing. Zap!
Larry's hair suddenly grows down to his
shoulders and also turns blonde! We all
know blondes have more fun (suuuuure).
Once out of the jungle (for the first
time), Larry might want to check out the
nude beach again. Hmm . . . someone
left a bikini bottom here. Does Larry also
have a top? Yes? Good! No? Guess who's
gonna have to restore back to the ship?
And now, it's back into the bush for the
second tour of the island establishments.
Just back out of the restaurant; there's
nothing to do here the second time
around.
The guest room is another matter.
What does Larry do here? Do I really
need to tell you? C'mon, I know you took
a peek at the right hand beach. You have
to get past those agents, and sneaking
just won't cut it.
Of course, Larry may not exactly be
thrilled to make it past the KGB; not
when he sees the narrow, winding trail
across the cliffs. Careful, Larry, one slip
and it's a long way down.
Whew! You made it across and there,
by gosh, is the airport (I hope you're
suitably attired). Also there, by gosh, are
two KGBishna agents by the door. Peace
and love, guys. Hare hare and all that
jazz. The sixties live again (You remember
the sixties, don't you? That's a hint, folks).
Once inside the airport, Larry can buy a
ticket. Well, he could buy a ticket if the
line he gets on decides to move. Of
course, it only moves when he changes
lines (what else?). Since this is getting
you nowhere, a little exploration might be
helpful.
Naturally, there's a barber shop. Maybe
you can get a little trim here. By the way,
that barber looks a trifle familiar. Haven't
we seen her somewhere before? (Does
KQ4 ring any bells?).

However, none of this has helped so far
in getting a ticket (and I wouldn't try
boarding the plane without one). At least,
you can pass the time by snooping in
other people's luggage. It's amazing what
some folks take with them on a trip, isn't
it?
After Larry finally gets his ticket, he may
want to splurge a bit and purchase some
flight insurance (the insurance turns out
to be a parachute) and it would be wise
not to ignore the "blue pate" (that's pate,
not plate) special.
Finally, the boarding gate! After talking
to the clerk at the counter, Larry can get
on the plane. Naturally, he has no idea
where it's bound, but what does that mat
ter, as long as it's far away.
At least, he has a seat (A tiny one, but a
seat nonetheless. Take a moment to look
at it). Unfortunately, Larry's seat is right
next to that of the plane bore. This guy is
more than just boring, he's simply itching
to try hair transplanting on a real live vic .
.. ahem, customer.
Guess who he has in mind? Right! So
you'll have to do something about this
fairly soon. Changing seats won't work
(there aren't any empty ones), and the
second you stand up, the stewardesses
block the aisle with drink carts. If you find
yourself dying of brain damage a lot, you
probably missed something back at the
airport.
Once the bore is taken care of, it is a
good idea to depart. The emergency exit
is in the smoking section. You can't see
it, but some trial and error should locate
it for you. Of course, the door is locked,
but that should be no problem for Larry
unless he missed something else back at
the airport.
Once Larry reaches the ground, he's in
the jungle again. Fortunately, it's not the
same jungle. Unfortunately, he will have
to run an obstacle course before he can
get out. The first thing to do is look
around, and look at everything. I'm sure
you don't want to see poor Larry carried
off by killer bees. This is an easy one to
get past, actually. The next is a little nastier. Hard to see, but definitely present, is
a large and hungry snake waiting to drop
down on Larry. Position and timing will
rescue him, here.
Larry's not out of the jungle, yet, by any
means. Now, he has to get across the
quicksand patch. Since success calls for
exact maneuvering, you may want to put
the game speed down real low before
trying to cross. If you look carefully at the
screen, the path to follow should be apparent.
Only one more obstacle to go! Larry

could try wading through the water, but
that's not a terrific idea. Save the game
and try it once. Now that you know what
to avoid, the question is how. I'm sure
you already have at least a glimmering.
You have seen a lot of jungle movies on
the late show (right, Jane?).
Finally, on the beach past the jungle . .
. true love at last! The real thing! Larry's
found it at last!
Of course, there is this one little
problem. Larry won't be able to marry his
beloved until he performs a small, trivial
task. Nothing much, just penetrating an
impenetrable volcano and taking out that
evil mastermind, the infamous Dr. Nonookie. Hey, after all Larry's been through,
this should be a piece of cake (by the
way, a lot of what happens from the
beach onward is automatic again).

tle matter of a glacier. Now, it's just a tad
strange that this glacier is here, at pretty
much ground level, under the hot tropical sun. But, whether it defies the laws of
nature or not, you'll have to come up
with a way past it.
Finally, Larry is at the top of the volcano. How odd to find an elevator here.
Not surprisingly, there's no way to open
it. On the other hand, a deep crevice is
not too far away.

So here's Larry at the chasm. Of
course, it might be a good idea to slip
back to the village and poke around. You
never know what might be needed up
ahead (the woodcutter is not important).

This is where things get a little silly.
Larry should have three items with him.
All are needed. This is also where the parser goes a little wacko and you have to
use two items at once. That sounds cryptic, but when you're up there, it should
become fairly obvious. However, the parser will not understand what you want to
do when you try doing the obvious action. That's why I say you have to use
two items at once (although, in fact, only
one—the right one—is used). The other
problem is to find the one spot where the
command will, in fact, work.

After crossing the chasm (no turning
back now, except via restore), there's a lit-

After that, the rest is automatic. Larry
ends up in Dr. Nonookie's place,

removes him from the scene, calls in
help, etc. etc. etc. This is rather a letdown. You'd expect, at the very least, a
puzzle or two before Nonookie is
defeated, but the whole thing chugs
along with you as a mere spectator.
True, the sequences are funny and welldone, but some of the pleasure of the
game is lost for the sake of cute animations.
Well, it seems to be that time again.
Remember, if you need help with an adventure game, you can reach me in the
following ways:
On Delphi: stop by the GameSIG
(under the Groups and Clubs menu). On
GEnie: Visit the Games RoundTable (type
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). On The
Source: send SMail to ST1030. By US
Mail: (If you live in the United States, you
must include a self-addressed stamped
envelope to receive a reply!): Scorpia, PO
Box 338, Gracie Station, New York, NY
10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring!
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

Review

During the fall and early winter evenings, radio airwaves
are full of sports talk shows in which callers and hosts discuss the latest games, personnel changes, injuries, matchups, individual performances, and futures of their favorite
NFL teams. These armchair coaches and general managers
always seem to have the answers. The programs described
in this article give those fans and anyone else the opportunity to do more than talk about what they would do with
their favorite NFL teams.
MSFL
Pro League Football 2.0 (MSFL) is a nice compromise for those who want statistics and the ability
to watch a thrilling game, as well. It presents an attractive graphic display and can crunch statistics with the
best of them. Even more, however, MSFL is the first and
only system for creating and running entire leagues by using
any teams ever to play the professional game: past, present,
and future—even fictitious.
The gameplay for MSFL is truly revolutionary. Its intricate
Game Plan generator poses 104 questions about how the
player will coach his team in order to assist in creating the
game plan. Further, the Stats Keeper utility updates the
league, maintains standings, and tabulates offensive, defensive, and a host of miscellaneous statistics; the Record Book
documents 70 categories of team and individual bests; and
the Scouting Report evaluates teams position by position. In
addition, Modem Play allows players nationwide to compete
head to head. Actually, this feature enables two players to
run the same game on separate machines. By exchanging
Game Plans via modem (or even by U.S. Mail!), rival coaches
can obtain identical results using this feature. All they must
do is set their alarm clock desk accessories to the same date,
specify identical game parameters (weather, home/visiting
team, and starting quarterbacks), disable the Audible function, and agree on the coin toss.
The Audible function allows players to abandon the Game
Plan momentarily and call specific plays. Coaches must be
fast with a mouse to invoke this command in the allotted
time, however. Once mastered, calling audibles enhances
the thrill of the contest, allowing players to replace their
coach's headsets with a player's helmet when they find themselves in key situations.
The only drawback to this remarkable game system is the
fragile user interface. Woe be it to the league commissioner
with the unsteady grip on his mouse. If, with an honest slip
of the hand, he should select "Set League Format" instead
of "Sort League Standings," he risks erasing the entire
league rather than merely updating it. Note: The Command
"." function, which the documentation does not mention, will
let him exit the "Set League Format" function and save the
league. If the commissioner should be careless and the Stats
Keeper needs a file that does not yet exist, the application
sends up an error message and crashes, rather than politely
informing the player with a dialogue box. In fact, a single
typo while inputting team names into a league structure forces one to reboot and start from scratch. The program also
does not prevent players from Auto Updating the same
game into the league standings more than once. Doing so,
of course, ruins the standings and league statistics. A more
thorough idiot-proofing could have eliminated many such pitfalls.
The manual stresses the importance of backing up key
files. Heed it. Floppy users will note that this involves a lot of
disk swapping—seemingly an inordinate amount of work to
save the program from itself. Those who are serious about

Play Action
Option
Two Football Simulations
For Serious Fans
by James D. Hornfischer and Wyatt Lee
setting up a league are encouraged to purchase an external
disk or hard disk and back up the data regularly.
MSFL does not audit Game
Plans, though it does allow
players to change them after
creation. In short, MSFL is no
game to dive into with reckless
pointing and clicking. Players
cannot expect to learn it on
the job. Rather, the wise player
will sit down and read the
manual, twice. Then, one
should run through a few practice leagues before getting
friends involved.
In spite of the fragile interface, the news from Micro
Sports is exciting indeed. By
the time this review is printed,
the MSFL will be on-line, offering CompuServe subscribers
current NFL team files—updated weekly. Early reports on
that project are encouraging.
TITLE:

MSFL Pro League Football

SYSTEMS:
Macintosh, IBM
Once players look past the cos1-28
# PLAYERS:
metic flaws (the opening graphics fly
$49.95
PRICE:
by unreadably) and master the
DESIGNER:
David Holt
PUBLISHER:
Micro Sports, Inc.
quirky interface, MSFL has a magic
1410 Mountain Ash Drive
of its own. No current game on the
Hixson, TN 37343
market touches it in terms of statistical realism and the addictive, if minimalist, graphic display puts it in a class above the primarily
text-oriented stat games. Organizing and running a football
is hopelessly addictive. So much so that readers might well
want to go out and buy another computer just to get a
piece of the action.

—James D. Hornfischer

Pro Football Simulator (PFS) offers players a different approach to coaching and managing personnel than MSFL.
This text mode game does not rely upon creation of a game
plan like MSFL, but allows players to get "down and dirty" by
calling each and every play. Previous simulations have allowed individualized play selection, but there is more to PFS
than that. For each play, both players can select an offensive
or defensive set; authorize individual substitutions in order to
exploit potential mismatches; and call the specific play from

a very sophisticated playbook
(over 600 offensive plays and
over 125 defensive assignments).

goes to the play calling menu automatically after each play.
If a faster setting is selected, there is no way even a speed
reader can get the full description of the play before having
to call the next.

Some will be dismayed that
the game does not follow up
with a graphic resolution of
the play. Instead, the game
offers a play-by-play. A play
from a recent 1986 Tampa
Bay Buccaneers vs. 1986
Detroit Lions was reported as
follows:

For serious football fans with readily available human opponents, this is an extremely viable program. Players are in
complete control of their particular team's destiny and the
ability to make individual substitutions depending on the
play selection is marvelous. Further, it is obvious that the
designers of this program know their NFL football. The NFL
players perform in statistically accurate ways and the
playbooks utilize the offensive and defensive sets in proper
ways. In this regard, this game is superior to anything else
on the market.

The snap—it looks like
they're going to pass. No—
it's a draw. They give the
ball to James Wilder. He's
running back up the middle.
The play is going nowhere—
I don't understand that play
selection. The play gained -2
yards.
TITLE:
Pro Football Simulator
SYSTEMS:
IBM (with 256K and CGA(
# PLAYERS:
2
PRICE:
$39.95
DESIGNER:
David Moxley
PUBLISHER: Sports Simulation Software
2100 Tanglewilde, #165
Houston, TX 77063

AT owners (especially those with
286/386 processors) are advised
to set the game for the slowest
possible display speed because
the program clears the screen and

Overall, however, the game is not for everyone. Pro Football Simulator lacks the thrill of a graphic replay as in XOR's
NFL Challenge (which costs three times as much as PFS) or
XOR's Pro Challenge (which only costs slightly more). It
lacks the flexibility of Lance Haffner's Three-In-One Football, Avalon Hill's Super Bowl Sunday (or Mac Pro Football), SSI's Computer Quarterback, and the aforementioned
XOR games because it does not have a programmed computer opponent for solitaire play. Nevertheless, PFS offers a
intriguing opportunity for sophisticated pro football fans who
want an inexpensive option for face-to-face excitement.
—Wyatt Lee
CGW readers should look for a full review of
Cinemaware's TV Sports Football in the February issue.

Review

"Are you prepared for the coming ice age?" "Can you survive a
documentation comes in three parts: a user's guide, a fictitious
nuclear winter?" Every so often, there will be a news story on the
survivalist pamphlet, and a special civil defense manual describradio that will force me to flash back to my college days. The
ing a survival home within the game context. The temptation is
basement of the college I attended in the 1960s still contained
to boot the game and start exploring. Avoid the temptation by
Civil Defense stores from its inception as a fallout shelter in the
noting the instructions of p. 13 of the survivalist pamphlet, "You
1950s. Then, as now, the idea of hoarding provisions against a
should start by staying inside of some kind of shelter or other for
nuclear
as long as you
holocaust
^ can." Even if the
seemed need"nuclear winter"
lessly gruesome
option is not
and horribly pesselected, the first
simistic. like
few turns of the
many, I find
game represent
myself embarcold months.
rassingly uncomTherefore, any
fortable when
exploration
by Jasper Sylvester
thinking about
during these
that meagre pos• months will
sibility of survivprobably use up
ing World War III."
too much fuel.

Survival of the Fittest
Mindscape's "Visions of Aftermath"

Mindscape has released a multiplayer program that takes these
thoughts beyond mere speculation.
In Visions of Aftermath: The Boomtown, each player directs the survival
attempt of one character. Players are
challenged to strategically manage
their resources in order to "survive."
The simulation offers a blend of exploration (though not as much as in
a standard adventure game), skill
development (not combat-based as
in adventure games or combat
simulators); economic manipulation
(through exploitation of natural
resources, management of supply,
and barter), and diplomacy (through
interaction with other players and the
computer-led "hordes"). In addition,
Boomtown is flexible in terms of
determining victory conditions, difficulty levels, environmental conditions, hard or floppy disk set-up, and
number of players. Players who
dream of carving out their own empires against all odds should get a'
lot of satisfaction from this game.
The object of the game is to survive with the highest standard of
living, measured in terms of Agriculture, Architecture, Survival, and
Leadership. Scores are updated at
TITLE:
the end of each turn (a month in game time) and
provide a numerical ranking for each area. Three
SYSTEMS:
# PLAYERS:
of these categories begin at one hundred points
PRICE:
each and "Leadership" begins at twelve hundred
DESIGNER:
points. If one of the player's "Survival" ratings
PUBLISHER:
should drop to one point for more than a couple
of turns, that could signal the death of the character. In addition, each character is continuously
monitored for endurance, radiation level, and life spent. These
sliding scales limit what each character can potentially accomplish in a month.

Mr. Inside, Mr. Outside
No matter what victory conditions the players select, it is important to read the documentation in order to be successful. The

Since immediate exploration is not
productive, I recommend reading
books during the first two months
(and whenever the average temperature is near or below freezing). In
Boomtown, characters can only
learn skills by reading books. In
order for your character to have the
option of hunting game, he must
have read the classic Native
American work, Bow Hunting by
Charles "Flying Chicken" Feathers;
to be able to trap game, he must
read Kill Furry Things With Traps by
Daniel Boone; and to be equipped
to build a shelter, he should examine
1001 Bomb Shelters YOU Can
Build. There are 22 useful books
(see the annotated bibliography on
pages 39-41 of the pamphlet) and
several surprises that are not so useful (like A Boy and His Dog, On The
Beach, Game Rules According to
Hoyle, and The Phone Book) placed
at random locations throughout the
"world."

Visions of Aftermath
The Boomtown
IBM (with CGA or EGA)
1-16
$39.95
Sparky Starks
Mindscape, Inc.
Northbrook, IL

Other useful activities to be undertaken during those long months indoors include: repairing one's shelter
(increases "Architectural" rating;
making arrows (increases "Survival"
rating; making toys (creates
"goodies" to trade); and developing fine art
(creates "goodies" to trade). In order to have these
options, of course, one must have read the appropriate books.

After temperatures become more moderate or a
character's dwindling supply of provisions forces
him outside, players have a greater number of options (depending on what they have read). One approach is to
raid the nearest shelter for whatever is lacking in one's own shelter. Another approach is to locate the nearest water source (since
the pamphlet tells players that food grows best near water). Also,
those who have read Mud Fishing can increase their meat supply
by fishing. Those who have read Agricultural Science may elect
to plant fields. Naturally, each field planted increases one's
"Agricultural" score (10 point increments at Beginner level and incrementally more on higher levels). The index included with this

article should help players find hints on various activities within
the survivalist pamphlet, New World Vision. The discussion on
those pages should obliquely indicate what is needed to accomplish each task successfully.

Born To Be Rad
In the early stages (especially at Beginner and Standard levels),
the game may seem to lack intensity. Looks can be deceiving.
Once the turn begins, the players "Endurance" begins to be
used. If the sliding scale should reach the far right side (representing ultimate fatigue) before the character completes all that
he is doing or returns to his shelter (assuming he is outside), the
player receives a costly "Extreme Hardship" warning and a severe
penalty to the "Survival" score. When
travelling or working outside the shelter,
the player must monitor the "Rad" scale
(representing exposure to radiation), as
well. If the "Rad" scale reaches the severe
radiation stage at the right hand side of
the scale, the player is penalized for an "Extreme Hardship" and his character could
potentially die. For this reason, players are
advised to keep their characters close
enough to the shelter that they can be certain to regain its safety well before either
scale reaches its limit.
In a one player game, the simulation is
primarily a strategy game where one needs
to plan what he is going to accomplish
before the turn begins and must race
against the clock (in this case, the "Endurance" and "Rad" scales) to accomplish
the plan within the turn. This is just as true
in the multi-player version of the game,
but there are less overall resources available and more complications. Does one
raid his fellow player's shelter? Does one
harvest his opponent's fields? Does one
trade with a potential enemy? Does one
declare war on his competitor? Should one
destroy land around his shelter as a buffer
zone from the hordes? Should one deplete
the natural resources near a fellow player's
home shelter? What a sociological experiment this game can be! If it was not a
marketing kiss of death to do so, one
could even say the game was educational.
It is, but it is also the kind of challenge a
player can come back to again and again.

Light My Fire
Even though the subject matter being
simulated seems depressing and pessimistic, Visions of Aftermath: The Boomtown manages to create an
optimistic opportunity to rebuild a new world. The game is a
diverse and cerebral challenge. Gamers who are looking for
another Wasteland with its violent encounters and intriguing plot
line or those who lose patience with multi-player games where
the interface consists of one player in front of the keyboard while
the others leave the room will probably find that Boomtown
leaves them as cold as the nuclear winter simulated. Gamers who
want a game with realism, replayability, and challenges that grow
with their gaming experiences should find that Boomtown lights
their fire. Above all, Boomtown is a unique game that should
especially appeal to those who like economic simulations and
multi-player competitions.

Review

n olden days, the High King ruled from his throne in
I Eralan and the land was at peace. Then, barbarians
came from the south, bringing war and destruction with
them. Ten years the conflict raged and no side could best
the other. At last, the High King himself went into battle
and, after much fierce fighting, achieved a truce with the invaders. Sorely weakened by his efforts, the High King
returned to the land of his forbears, swearing to return in
twenty years. That time has passed and the High King has
not returned. The land has fallen into chaos as petty nobles
squabble among themselves and evil creatures stalk the
countryside. Only the return of the
High King can set things aright,
but none can say where he is.
Some brave soul will have to go
looking . . .
Times of Lore is basically a
beginner's computer role-playing
game. The game is very easy to
learn and play: character creation
is simple, monsters are few, conversations are menu-driven, and
actions are controlled from an
icon-based menu on the screen.
Unlike other CRPG's, experience
gained does not advance the
character in levels (there aren't
any). It is strictly used as an indication of how well you're doing.
The game opens with the story
of how the High King went off
twenty years ago, promising to return. As might be expected,
he hasn't come back and the land is falling into chaos. Your
character is an adventurer who sets out to discover what happened to the King for the purpose of bringing him back.
There are three characters to choose from: a knight in
armor; a valkyrie, less well-armored but fast; or a Barbarian,
practically naked but very strong. None of these have any
visible stats, so you simply pick whichever of the trio appeals
to you most. The only thing to keep an eye on is the candle
of life in the lower right-hand corner, which indicates how
healthy or injured the character is, and substitutes for the
more common hit points.
After this, the game actually begins, with your character
standing in the upstairs bedroom of the Froth and Slosh in
Eralan, the capital city. Movement can be done with the
keyboard, arrow keys (at least on the //e), or a joystick. When
using keys, the character moves continuously in the direction you choose (so the key does not need to be held down),
while the joystick requires you to hold the stick in that direction to keep the character moving. Keys are good for long
trips with few direction changes. The joystick is better when
moving around confined spaces or to avoid monsters.

Prior Engagement
Warning: This section provides specific hints about
the game from opening sequences to the conclusion.
Readers are advised to proceed with caution in order to
avoid unwanted hints or to skip to the final section of
the article.
Once your character is downstairs, it won't take long to obtain the first quest in the game from the Prior, who is running around on the ground floor. In fact, he's rather hard to
avoid (grin). Talking to the prior, or anyone else for that mat-

ter, is a simple operation. You face the person and click on
the mouth icon.
This initiates conversation, which is completely menudriven. There are two choices, "Start chitchat" and "Ask question". Chitchat is just a "gosh, you're looking well today"
opener, which may or may not elicit a meaningful response
from the person. The questions are all keywords. Simply
pick one from a list and ask
the person about it. Everyone
does not know about every-

by Scorpia

thing, so it sometimes helps to run down
the list to see what response you get.

TITLE:
SYSTEM;
# PLAYERS:
PRICE:
DESIGNER:
PUBLISHER:

Times of Lore
Apple II, C-64/128
1
$39,95
Chris Roberts
Origin
Londonderry, NH

Generally, utilizing the chitchat
response will add a word to the list. For
instance, someone might say, "I'm feeling well, thank you.
By the way, Ralf saw some strange lights last evening." This
would put "lights" in the question menu. Asking the person
about "lights" might bring more information, although in
most cases, you would have to find Ralf (or whoever) and
ask him.

Regarding the prior, he will ask you to retrieve the mystical
Foretelling Stones, which have been stolen by the orcs in
the Dark Forest. This is a good time to open the map that
comes with the game.
The Dark Forest is fairly close to the city, but the orcs are
tough customers and you may want to wait awhile instead of
just rushing off into the fray. For instance, you need an idea
of how your character does in battle. Since there is no
character advancement, it's a wise move to see if the one
you've chosen is one you can live with. If not, restart the
game and pick someone else.
Combat is simple. Face your opponent and hit either the
"A" key or the joystick button. Depending on what is being
fought, it will take anywhere from one to several blows to kill
it. Of course, the monster is fighting back, so watch the
candle to be sure you don't end up dead.
If things are getting tough, you can always run away (unless you're boxed in). In fact, many times you can choose
whether or not to start combat, since the monsters are very
easy to avoid. You can walk around them, behind them, or
even right in front, so long as you keep moving. No one else
in the game can walk as fast as your character. It is also possible, at times, to walk between two monsters and have them

hit each other instead of you (This is always fun, although a
little a dangerous if you don't time it right).

may want to get it before you begin questing in earnest,
which brings us back to the orcs in the forest.

When monsters are killed, they are immediately transformed into a little R.I.P. tombstone. From time to time, they
drop items during the transformation. These items are of
four types: scrolls with spells (two types), healing potions,
food, and money. You can only have one type of scroll and
one type of potion at a time. Don't be afraid to use these
items, as you can always get more by killing monsters, and
none of them are cursed.

As you can tell from the map, the forest is pretty extensive,
so it helps to have some information on their location, or
you could wander around for awhile without finding anything
(by the way, except for the orc encampment, every place you
need to visit in the game is clearly shown on the map).
Then, it's simply a matter of making your way to the camp,
bopping a few orcs, and picking up the stones.

Monsters, by the way, have their own little areas that they
patrol. If your candle is low and you don't have any healing
potions, just walk to a part of the screen where no monsters
are visible. You can usually stand there safely and wait while
you heal up (aside from a night at the inn or a potion, this is
the only way to regain your strength).
Food is important in the game. You'll starve to death
without it. Wherever you are, the price is always the same,
10 gold pieces for one ration. Your character can carry up to
nine rations at once; the game won't let you buy any more
than that. Check your food supply from time to time, to
make sure you don't run out. If you do, your candle will start
to go down from lack of food.
Nothing has been said so far about arms or armor. There
are no armories or weapons stores. In fact, there is no armor
to purchase anywhere; your character will go through the
game with whatever he or she begins with. As far as
weapons are concerned, the situation is pretty much the
same, with the exception of the magic axe. You'll have to
find the person who has it for sale (and have the money) in
order to obtain it. The axe is a very good weapon, and you

After you've returned the stones to the Prior, you'll get
some more quests, one at a time from different people,
which will eventually send you into the dungeons. There are
three places that can be considered dungeons: the ruins in
the desert, the crater hole, and the Temple of Angor.
The ruins you can enter any time, but you need special
items to get into the other two places. So, it's best to wait
until you're told to go to them. The ruins and the crater are
very similar, both in layout and what needs to be done inside
to get from one area to another. While monsters abound (as
you might expect), there are no traps to worry about.
However, you might want to keep an eye on the floor in the
ruins and crater.
The temple is the last and most difficult of the three. As
you walk along the corridors, skeletons pop up from the
floor. They are, it seems like, endless. This also makes them
difficult to avoid in the cramped hallways, so moving fast and
fighting only when necessary is your best bet here.
From time to time, you'll want to save the game. This can
only be done at one of the inns, by purchasing a night's
lodging. Staying overnight heals you up and stores the
game at that point. Saving, after completing a quest or
before heading off to one of the dungeons, is a must (particularly when you're going to the temple!).

Saving Grace
Note that saving the game also stores your list of key
words. If you stop playing without first having saved, you'll
lose any new words on the list, and will have to go back and
converse with some people again to get the words back on
the list.
The graphics are pretty, vaguely Ultima in style, and welldetailed for the most part. The villagers all look alike (little
red suits with red caps), but each type of monster has a distinctive icon. Outdoor terrain is varied, from deserts to
grasslands to mountains (impassable) to forest, making for a
pleasing variety.
As with the Ultimas, people tend to move around a lot,
especially in the day time, but each town has so few inhabitants that the people you need to talk to are generally
easy to track down. No one is hidden away behind secret
doors or in some hard-to-reach spot. The towns are all laid
out on the map, so you can see at a glance how many buildings each one has and where they are. Typically, any town
has an inn and several residences. In addition, Eralan and
Ganestor have castles. Since the only thing you need to buy
is food, there are no shops.
Overall, Times of Lore is a neat and simple game. It plays
fast, avoids the complexities of more sophisticated CRPG's,
tells a story, has nice graphics, and a decent (if a little
abrupt) ending.
Bottom line: A good introductory-level computer role-playing game.
Copyright 1989 by Scorpia, all rights reserved.

(Continued from page 28)

Coin-Op
Conversions

4. There are many brands of PC clones,
each with a slightly different design. How
many different brands must be checked?
At Quicksilver, we usually test on
several XT clones, a Compaq, three kinds
of AT clones, a PS/2, and a 386 machine
(along with anything else we can dig up).
Every machine in our office is different.

The Challenge Is Real
In summary, cramming a high-quality
game is rare. A game is like a fine watch.
It needs a precision craftsman to design
and assemble it. Once it is done,
however, it is an artwork worthy of longlasting use and enjoyment.

1. Not all machines run at the same
speed. How do you make the game work
well on all of them without being unplayable on either the slowest or fastest
models?
2. Each video adapter type is completely
different from the others. How do you
design one game and yet, make it work
on all systems? How do you waste a minimum of extra memory doing it? You may
need two copies of each graphic to look
good on all adapters, wasting disk space.
Further, how do you get an artist to draw
a jungle when all he has to work with are
black, white, pink, and blue?
3. IBM-type joysticks are analog. Each
one responds differently and even the
adapter boards can differ. The game
must self-adjust so it is playable.

Conversions
Received

Serve & Volley (Accolade)
Steel Thunder (Accolade)
Victory Road (Data East)
Zoom (Discovery Software)

This is a list of games which
have been recently converted
from another personal
computer system.

For the IBM:

For the Amiga:

Captain Blood (Mindscape)
Corruption (Rainbird)
Foundations Waste (Exocet)
4th & Inches Team Disk (Accolade)
Operation: Cleanstreets
(Broderbund)
Reach for the Stars: Third Edition (SSG)
For the Apple H:

Aussie Joker Poker (Joker Software)
For the Apple II (128K):

Ancient Art of War at Sea
(Broderbund)
Last Ninja (Activision)
Neuromancer (Interplay)
Rampage (Activision)
For the Apple II GS:

Bubble Ghost (Accolade)
Manhunter New York (Sierra)
Mini-Putt (Acco lade)
Serve & Volley (Accolade)
Warlock (Three-Sixty)

For the Atari ST:

Aussie Joker Poker (Joker Software)
Elite (Rainbird)
Karateka (Broderbund)
Operation: Cleanstreets
(Broderbund)
For the C-64 / 128:

Aussie Joker Poker (Joker Software)
Deathlord (EA)
Faery Tale Adventure
(MicroIllusions)
Heavy Metal (Acce s s)
Ikari Warriors (Data East)

Airborne Ranger (Microprose)
Apollo 18 (Accolade)
Aussie Joker Poker (Joker Software)
Captain Blood (Mindscape)
Club Backgammon
(California Dreams)
Firepower (MicroIllusions)
4th & Inches Team Disk (Accolade)
Heroes of the Lance (SSI)
High Seas (Garde)
Mini-Putt (Accolade)
Operation Cleanstreets
(Broderbund)
Paladin (Omnitrend)
Rack 'em (Accolade)
The Train (Accolade)
Under Fire (TAHGC)
Zoom (Discovery)
For the Mac:

Ancient Art of War at Sea
(Broderbund)
Arkanoid (Discovery Software)
Aussie Joker Poker (Joker Software)
Blue Powder Grey Smoke (Garde)
Mean 18 (Accolade)
Tetris (Spectrum Holobyte)

Taking A Peek

Hide your ships, search out the opposing fleet, and then blast it into submission. This sure beats the old paper and
pencil game! C-64, Atari ST, Amiga and
IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #11.
DIVE BOMBER: Flying from the Ark
Royal, the player's WWII torpedo bomber, "Avenger", must find the Bismark
and put her down. This flight simulator
has a pilot's screen, engineering, navigation and tail gunning views, and besides
finding & sinking the Bismark, the
players will be able to shoot down
enemy fighters, sink E-boats & U-boats,
and take out minefields. Nice graphics
enhance the play against either computer or live opponent. C-64, Apple II &
IBM ($39.95) Atari ST & Amiga
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #12.
THE LEGEND OF BLACKSILVER:
Players enter the world of Bantross in
this adventure quest game that features
monsters, traps, dungeons, towns,
labyrinths, arcade games and an assortment of puzzles. Character attributes
can be increased along with corresponding access to high level magical spells.
Attractive 3-D graphics enhance this
detailed adventure game. C-64 ($39.95)
Circle Reader Service #13.
SPACE STATION OBLIVION:
Here's a different twist, players are
miners sent to prevent a colossal gas explosion on a distant moon. Exploring
the alien surface in an excavation probe,
the player must chart sector geography,
avoid security traps, locate potential explosive pockets of gas and send for drilling rigs to vent them. The graphics enhance the feel of an "alien" environment
and the clock keeps ticking towards final
doom, so there's no "down-time" in this
one. Bring along a canary on this trip. C64 ($39.95), IBM, Amiga & Atari ST
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #14.
STREET SPORTS FOOTBALL:
Here's your chance to draw up a play on
the ground and then watch it go for six
points. Three-on-three football in the
streets is accurately reproduced in this
humorous version of sandlot ball.
Players choose from multi-skilled, neighborhood kids and send them out on a
variety of patterns. This is a great
change of pace for football freaks. Buttonhook at the red Chevy, or Fat Kid go
long! C-64, Apple II & IBM ($19.95).
Circle Reader Service #15.

Ocean Isle Software
697 Copa d'Oro
Marathon, FLA 33050
NEUROBICS: This is a different type
of brainteaser for the computer.
Designed to improve the user's mental

capabilities, this six pack of puzzles tests
the player's abilities of memory and
logic. Pour liquid between a variety of different size containers to finish with the
desired amount, remember hidden numbers and match them a la Concentration, and spot the counterfeiter passing
money in a bank are some of the puzzles which come with up to 25 levels of
play. An interesting change of pace in
the gaming field. IBM ($59.95). Circle
Reader Service #16.

Origin
136 Harvey Road
Londonderry, NH 03053
TIMES OF LORE: Fantasy Role-Playing combines with arcade combat and
excellent graphics and sound in this
hybrid adventure game. Players interact
with characters, explore buildings and
fight increasingly difficult monsters
before completing their final quest. A

good game for novice FRP'ers. C64,(joystick required), Apple II ($39.95)
Circle Reader Service #17.

Psygnosis Ltd.
1st Floor,
Port of Liverpool Building
Pier Head, Liverpool
MENACE: Fast arcade action powers
players through the planet Draconia in
an attempt to destroy it, along with the
usual assortment of monsters. Somehow your superiors decided that one
ship alone could do the job and, of
course, it's you. Smooth scrolling
graphics keep players on their toes in a
seemingly impossible mission. This is a
typical, Psygnosis high-quality release.
Amiga ($29.95). Circle Reader Service
#18.
(Continued on page 66)

Taking A Peek

Infocom
125 CambridgePark Dr.
Cambridge, MA 02140
QUARTERSTAFF: An update of the
original, without the bugs, this is a
graphic adventure game that really feels
right. Top-down view maps, multiple
party members, digitized sound & easy
interface make this a fun and interesting
FRP game for Mac users. Windows can
be customized for size and location. Can
be played monochrome or color. This
looks like a winner. Mac with 1 MB
($49.95) Circle Reader Service #19.

CRL
Scorpion
19 Harbor Drive
Lake Hopatcong, NJ 07849
JACK THE RIPPER: Players find
themselves on the trail of Saucy Jack in
this stylishly written, graphic adventure
game. Real-time prevents the player
from quaffing a brew or two at the local
pub because the environment changes
as the city awakens to find what horrors
have been left from the previous night.
You must be careful where you go and
what you handle, as everyone is a
suspect. C-64 ($29.95). Circle Reader
Service # 20.

The Software Toolworks
One Toolworks Plaza
13557 Ventura Blvd.
Sherman Oaks, CA 91423
LIFE & DEATH: Every month something really unusual comes across our
desks and this month's winner is Life &
Death. Players sit in on medical lectures,
make rounds, examine patients, order
testing, and even get to cut a few in this
seemingly realistic simulation of a day at
the hospital. Closer to St. Elsewhere
than General Hospital, players get to ultimately perform major surgery with
hand-picked assistants. A tremendous
amount of detail is in this package, right
down to trying to stop a fibrillating heart
in the middle of appendix surgery. Be
sure your malpractice premiums are
paid up before going to OR. I forced
them to keep an extra shift on at the
morgue when I was the attending
physician. IBM & Mac ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #21.

Strategic Studies Group
1747 Orleans Ct.
Walnut Creek, CA 94598
DECISIVE BATTLES OF THE
AMERICAN CIVIL WAR, VOL. III:

WILDERNESS TO NASHVILLE: The
incredibly versatile SSG game system
moves forward once again as the
American Civil War draws to a close. Enhanced entrenchments, increased sighting values and cohesion stiffening for
unshattered brigades are some of the
changes updating the system to its logical development. Apple II & C-64
($40.00). Circle Reader Service #22.

Team Software
P.O. Box 7332
Washington, DC 20044
A DAY AT THE RACES: Horse racing
fans will really like this racing simulator.
Buy and sell horses at auction, choose
jockeys, select the type and length of
race, track conditions, check the betting
sheets, place any type of bet or amount

and then watch 'em run. There's lots of
fun in this addicting simulation. The
only things missing are the Marx
Brothers. Circle Reader Service #23.

Three-Sixty
2105 S. Bascom Ave.
Suite 290
Campbell, CA 95008
THUD RIDGE: American aces face a
variety of missions over Vietnam in this
flight simulator. Players attack Mig
bases, SAM sites, thermal plants, shipping, bridges, barracks and enemy HQ's
while trying to avoid Mig 21's and flak.
Missions are rated for difficulty and rank.
Above all, keep the Grey Ghost off your
tail! Joystick optional. IBM ($39.95).
Circle Reader Service #24.

(Continued from page 8)

tank to drop a new Command Center.
Thus, taking over the island.
Both these tactics are nearly foolproof
(I have used them almost exclusively, to
great success) and leave all the other
structures of the island intact, to be
used once the island is taken over.
Douglas Seacat
Denver, CO
Ed: Thanks for your suggestions. We
always welcome strategic and tactical
hints.

Amygdala The Beautiful
Some of your readers may be interested in knowing about the existence of
Amygdala, a newsletter devoted to fractals and the Mandelbrot set.
Amygdala features an extensive fractal
bibliography, fractal pictures, fractal fiction, reviews of programs for generating
fractals on computers, elementary and
advanced articles about the mathematical background underlying fractals (including tutorials), subscriber participation in the form of articles, stories, etc.,
as well as notices and reviews of commercial software and other products.
A subscription consists of ten issues

(currently #11-20), appearing at four to
six week intervals, of which #11 and
#12 have appeared so far. The price is
$25. A color slide supplement consisting
of 24 slides (of which eight have appeared so far) is available for $20.

lated subjects. A sample issue may be
obtained for $2.50.
Amygdala
Box 219
San Cristobal, NM 87564
(505) 758-7461

Also available are back issues #1-10
($25 for the set), the first 25 slides ($20),
and selected books on fractals and re-

Ed: Hopefully, we won't have to draw
them a picture. We haven't gone
through your tutorials as of yet.

Review

C

onquerors need to be calculating, charismatic, and
cunning, as well as courageous. This is as true for
modern politicians, managers, military officers, and
business competitors as it was for the rulers and kings of the
past. In fact, there is probably no more pleasant and effective way to learn those lessons than in the historical simulations from Koei Corporation. Victorious players in these
complex competitions must learn to blend economic
management, diplomatic manipulation, and strategic
maneuvering into a rare mix of personal effectiveness.
Even more than its predecessors, Genghis Khan is a fascinating tutor that pulls players into a colorful past with challenging problems. It is two games in one. In the solitaire
game, "Mongol Conquest," a player may become Temujin,
the Bordighin tribesman who united the Mongols as Genghis
Khan. In the "World Conquest" game, up to four players may
assume the roles of Richard I (England), Alexious III (Byzantine Empire), Temujin (Mongol Empire), and/or Minamoto
Yoritomo (Japan). The game covers the great sweeping cultural and political changes of the late 12th and early 13th
centuries: the Crusades, the Shogunate, the decline of the
Holy Roman Empire, the Magna Carta, and more!
The game's mechanics are similar to Koei's Romance of
the Three Kingdoms and Nobunaga's Ambition. It is still
menu-driven (with an enlarged menu) and utilizes "game
years" made up of seasonal turns, but there are some significant (and welcome) differences. Now, nearly every major
command costs attribute points (according to the chart on
page 43 of the manual); mutual non-aggression pacts are
rigidly enforced by the computer for a period of game years;
economic growth is a function of population distribution;
wars can last up to 60 days rather than 30; a rendezvous
command has direct bearing on the ruler's potential heirs;
there are three different merchants (so there are three potential markets for buying and selling) as well as a new market
mechanism; the training command allows players to train soldiers, non-soldiers, governor candidates (underlings), and
one's player character; and combat now uses zones of control, long range attacks (with archer units), and man-to-man
combat (leader vs. leader). In addition, the graphic presentation is even more exceptional than the resplendent graphics
of the earlier games because the colors are brighter and the
caricatures more crisply rendered. Also, the programmed opponents are, if anything, more bloodthirsty, competent, and
opportunistic than the computer opponents in the previous
games. Further, the manual offers the usual Koei thoroughness of organization, attention to historical detail, and attractive production values.

A Lean and Hungry Look
Like Shakespeare's capsule description of Cassius' ambition in Julius Caesar, all of the computer opponents are extremely ambitious. The program exploits the fact that the
best time to attack someone is immediately after they have
attacked someone else. If Richard I attacks Phillip II (France),
not only does England have less soldiers in it than prior to
the attack, but France will have less soldiers in it whether it
successfully defends itself or merely whittles down Richard's
forces before the battle is over. Richard must make certain
that England either has diplomatic security through a non-aggression pact with the Holy Roman Empire or a large defensive force and that the force sent to conquer France will
have enough strength to successfully occupy it (and stave
off potential attacks from the Holy Roman Empire or Moorish
Spain) after the battle is over.
It is usually a good idea to reign in one's ambition during

Mongol Hordes
and Holy Romans
Koei's "Genghis Khan"
by Johnny L. Wilson
the earlier portions of the game and observe how the computer opponents treat one another. After one gains sufficient
respect for the way they gobble up each other's kingdoms
immediately after a "successful" military expedition
that may have left the
home guard light or a
natural
plague/catastrophe, one
will be better prepared to
weigh the risks of a given
assault. Even more than
Nobunaga's Ambition, the
game does not reward
those who are impetuous.

Economic Slurpee
Genghis Khan also uses
a fascinating economic
mechanism. Koei games
have always forced the
player to choose from
military or domestic spending, but this game forces
players to distribute the
work force, as well. It is
too bad that leaders of the past
TITLE:
Genghis Khan
SYSTEM:
IBM (with 384K, EGA,
and present do not have the opand two floppy disk drives
portunity to use the kind of
or one floppy drive and
flexibility in reality that the game
one hard disk)
1 -4
# PLAYERS:
system allows. Since food producPRICE:
$59.95
tion is only calculated in the fall
Koei Corporation
PUBLISHER:
Torrance, CA
turn, players with secure
diplomatic boundaries can simply
order the bulk of the population into food production during
the summer turn and reap the same harvest as though they
had been working in the fields all year. This, in turn, allows
the rest of the population to be divided into town builders
and castle builders during the other seasons in order to build
up the economic strength (i.e. tax base) and defense
strength (i.e. castle rating) of the country. If a player is sufficiently secure through diplomatic means, he doesn't even
have to garrison soldiers during the period of economic
growth.
In spite of this anomaly, the game teaches a valid
economic lesson. Defense spending is primarily no-growth
spending. Money spent on defense does not fuel the
economy to the same degree as other funding. Koei's home
country of Japan has learned this lesson well and the game
reflects it. When countries in Genghis Khan have a standing
army too large for their economy, the amount of gold in the
treasury will drop during the taxation round (Spring) instead
of increasing. One must pay for his soldiers' upkeep.

Hide and Go Seek
There is also more tactical strategy in the combat portion
of the game. Players may choose a one-on-one combat,
long range attack, or, since the victory conditions allow the
defense to win if the attacking side reaches the maximum
number of days allowed for the battle, a version of "hide and
go seek." The computer only seems to hold back from attacking when its total force outnumbers its opponents forces. This means that it will attack a larger force with a
smaller force if it has a larger force somewhere else on the
board. Many times, it is possible to retreat one's command
unit and use the other units (and their zones of control) as a
blocking screen in a gambit which forces the attacking units
to travel through rough terrain (forest or mountain hexes).
Since attrition can take its toll on armies passing through
rough terrain, an astute commander can actually reduce and
eliminate units by forcing them to go through rough territory
in order to attack them. This takes patience, but works more
effectively than combat in the long run because the defending units do not travel through rough hexes and suffer the
same attrition. This means that there is not as much risk of
losing the defending units in this way as in closing for battle.
Defenders with potential attackers on several sides of their
countries should keep the "hide and seek" gambit in mind to
preserve defenders for future battles.
One-to-one combat can also bail out the outnumbered
defender. The program recognizes that it is often hard for a
commander to refuse honorable combat in front of his own

troops. Therefore, should the opposing commander refuse,
his Leadership and Military abilities will be reduced by half. If
the player should have a high enough leadership, military,
and physical ability level to defeat the opposing leader, he
will either immediately take the opponent as prisoner or
receive 20% of the enemy soldiers to bolster his own army.
This option can really bail one's fat out of the fire, but it is
risky enough that one must pick his spots.
Long range combat expands the horizons of the battle sequences by allowing players to concentrate on whittling
down one particular enemy unit (usually the command unit)
without having to close on that unit and risk losing one's
own strength points. The power of this type of attack is
mitigated, however, by the fact that there is a limited number
of long range attacks available during a given battle and the
damage inflicted is usually limited.

Khan Summation
It is possible to quibble with the game's structure. One
could suggest that the menu/sub-menu/sub-menu interface
for giving orders causes unnecessary keystrokes. It is possible to argue that the angle of the world map in the world
conquest scenario is somewhat disorienting from a western
perspective. Still, the fact remains that Genghis Khan is the
toughest, most satisfying, and richest historical simulation,
yet!. If there are any better historical simulations anywhere
that touch base with the forces of human society more
thoroughly, this writer is unaware of them.

Hall of Fame / R.I.D.

Be it known to all gentle persons that the above named games have been well
spoken of by our readers over a goodly period of time. Therefore they have been
enshrined in the CGW Hall of Fame as
games of renown and worthy of play by all

Game Ratings Chart

"Dungeon Master" has advanced to the highest possible level
on the Adventure side, narrowly averting a historic happening.
By edging "Wasteland" by .02 points, FTL denied the folks at
Interplay the chance of having the number one rated game on
both the Strategy and Adventure sides. Meanwhile, a host of
new action/adventure titles grace the top ten and threaten to

challenge the longstanding titles at the top.
The early returns on "Battlechess" and "Typhoon of Steel"
threaten to topple CGW's Strategy Game of the Year, "Empire"
from its high throne. It will be interesting to see how the competition continues in the massive face lift the R.I.D. ratings are
undergoing. Who will emerge on top in three issues?

