Number 35

March 1987

FEATURES
The State of the Industry

6

Entertainment Software Report

Gunship

11
M. Evan Brooks

Wargame Review

Gemstone Healer
Scorpion's Tale Gives Playing Hints

Fifty Mission Crush
A 50 Mission Recall

Space M+A+X

16
Scorpia
20
Leroy W. Newby
22
Johnny L. Wilson

A Review

Star Trek: The Promethean Prophecy
Adventure Game Review

Starflight
Science Fiction Game Review

Designer Profile
Interview with Doug Crockford

26
Scorpia
34
Mark Bausman
40
Frank Boosman

Blue Powder, Grey Smoke

46

Civil War Game Reviewed

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek

8

Screen Photos and Brief Comments

Sports Scoreboard
World Games, Championship Baseball, and more!

14
Rick Teverbaugh

Micro-Reviews

52

Patton vs Rommel, Strategic Conquest Plus

Reader Input Device

63

Game Ratings

64

From the Editor .. .
Beginning with this issue CGW will dedicate part of each
issue to a particular theme. In this issue we take a look at
"Computers In Flight" with articles on game subjects ranging
from B-17 bombers in WWII to interstellar adventuring
across the universe. As an extension of the Computers In
Flight theme, look for a special article on the history of
SubLogic's Flight Simulator that will appear in our April issue.
Themes to be covered in future issues include: Baseball
Fever! (April); World War II Games (May); Fantasy/

Adventure Gaming (Jun/Jul); Game Design (Aug/Sept):
Computer Game Hardware (also Aug/Sept); Wargaming
(Oct); Educational Games (also Oct); Christmas Buying
Guide (Nov); Football (Dec). As is obvious from this issue,
the theme material will only comprise a portion of the coverage each time. Game reviews remain our number one priority.
How are we doing? As always, we like to hear from you,
our readers. Let us know what you like and/or don't like
about CGW coverage. Fill out the Reader Input Device found
in this issue and use 'Comments' section to send us a 'letter to
the editor'.
Russell Sipe

C.E.S. REPORT:

ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE:
CONSOLIDATION OR
INTIMIDATION?
Would you take a commuter flight if the terminal wasn't even open by 10 minutes before departure time? How would you feel if you did get on
that little prop plane (flying from Orange County
to LAX) and discovered it was a training flight?
Then at LAX how would you feel if hundreds of
gallons of jet fuel from the plane you were supposed to fly on spilled all over the tarmac and had
to be cleaned up by the Fire Department? What if
they couldn't even announce the delay because the
P.A. in the terminal was malfunctioning? Well, I
suppose you have to be willing to buck the odds in
order to go to Las Vegas, even if you're only going
for the Winter Consumer Electronics Show. Anyway, we made it!
If you've ever heard the W. C. Field's routine
where his character claims to have slashed his way
through "...a wall of living flesh," you can remove
the violence from that imagery and have a picture
of the Winter Consumer Electronics Show. It is a
physically exhausting and mentally stimulating experience of sensory overload as one strives to trek
through the future of "living better electronically."
Here are some of the kaleidoscopic impressions of
the home computer industry as observed through
the eyes of CGW's editorial staff.
ANOTHER FINE MSBoth Atari and Commodore have blinked in the
battle for market share with "Big Blue" by introducing MS-DOS machines. Atari calls their machine
the Atari PC and it is intended to be fully compatible with the IBM PC, but priced more aggressively. One configuration will retail at $499 and
comes with monitor and one disk drive. The other
configuration is more impressive in that it will retail for $699 and includes an EGA adapter and
monitor. Atari expects to be marketing a full line
of PC compatibles in 1987, including an AT workalike using a 286 processor and one using the new
386.
Commodore introduced two different IBM-PC
compatibles. Called the PC10-1 and PC10-2, both
machines use the Intel 8088 microprocessor and
feature as standard equipment: an RS-232 serial
port, Centronics parallel port, ATI Graphics Solutions Adapter (monochrome and color display card
compatible with IBM, CGA, MDA, Hercules and

Planatronics video modes), and five full-sized expansion slots. The PC10-1 has 512K RAM and
PC10-2 has 640K RAM.
BORN AGAIN SOFTWARE
The hardware market isn't the only environment
where consolidation seems to be taking place. In the
software market, the emphasis for 1987 seems to be
on consolidating the market share on existing products rather than focused on developmental innovation. This has shown itself in two different developments: 1) the rise of budget software and 2) escalation of projects for the conversion of existing
products.
ELECTRONIC ARTS' Bing Gordon believes that
EA's release of Software Classics was the first
salvo in this budget-priced "Disk War." Citing figures which reflect that between June, 1985 and
June, 1986 the $10-$20 price range was only about
2% of the total market share. Software Classics
moved this "low-end" share to 5%. He believes that
the addition of the Amazing software line (imports
aimed at the teen male market) will strengthen their
position. "EA has always stood for simple, hot and
deep. This line," says Gordon, "should be thought
of as simple, hot and cheap." Dan Dare: Pilot of the
Future, an interactive comic book, is the first release in this series which Gordon describes as having a "mission" in the industry. That "mission" is to
get non-gamers into the ranks of game consumers
by giving them inexpensive software with positive
value. He believes that the high-priced arcade
games of the past left a bad taste in many people's
mouths and hopes that this value-oriented software
will change things.
The show was full of representative booths for
this budget-priced software. ACCOLADE introduced its Avantage line in 1986 and feels that the
company is in a class by itself. Peter Doctorow explains that their titles are not simply reissues of
older titles. Desert Fox, a military simulation, and
Power, a space-action game, are original designs for
Accolade which were not quite ready for prime
time Accolade distribution. Spy vs. Spy is a re-release of the Atari 8 bit hit, but is a flippy which
has an Apple version of Spy Part II which has

never been released before.
ACTIVISION has been releasing its Electric
Dreams imports throughout 1986 (The Rocky Horror
Show, Spindizzy, Zoids and Titanic: The Recovery
Mission), and has also started re-releasing some of
its arcade/action titles (from the 2600 series) as its
budget-minded Solid Gold line. This line will retail
at under $15 and the first release is Pitfall!/Demon
Attack, a flippy which includes both games for the
price of half the original retail value of one of the
games.
MINDSCAPE entered the "Disk War" with its
new Thunder Mountain division. This division offers a mixed bag of imports (Rambo), re-releases of
former best-sellers (Voodoo Island), inexpensive
educational titles (Spelling with the Tink Tonks,
Pyramid Puzzler), and low-end productivity tools

(Picture Writer, Songwriter).
STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS is cutting back the
main product line and blowing out some terrific
game inventory via their SSI Classics promotion

(Cartels and Cutthroats, Computer Bismarck, Cytron
Masters, Eagles, Fighter Command, Galactic Gladiators, Geopolitique 1990, and Warp Factor).
Low-end publishing is also supported by some
relatively new players. INTERNATIONAL COMPUTER DISC was incorporated in order to export
software from the U.S.A. to Europe. With the interest in imported software (primarily because of
the lower development costs in Europe), the company decided to use its European contacts to reverse some of the flow. In particular, they are importing RED RAT and DOMARK (Trivial Pursuit)
software from the United Kingdom and re-releasing some of the SCOTT ADAM'S adventures in the
U.S. and Europe. ICD is also the U.S. Distributor
for STARSOFT, the company founded by Scott
Adam's former lead designer, Hal McCrey. McCrey's intriguing Pirates of the Barbary Coast (for
the ST computer) is an excellent value at $14.99.
MAIN ST. PUBLISHING offers classic titles
under $10 (many at $6.95 and lower). Remember
Muse Software's Castle Wolfenstein, Robotwar, and
Titan Empire? How about Origin System's Caverns
of Callisto or CE Software's Sword Thrust series?
Those are just some of the titles which Main St. is

making available at bargain prices. The low-end
competition should benefit the consumer by increasing the value offered per game at both ends of
the spectrum. If Bing Gordon's "rule of thumb" for
game value ($1 of value for every hour played, 40
bucks for 40 or more hours) is correct, the observant consumer should find 1987 to be a great year
for purchasing classic titles at outstanding value.
The other way that software is being "born
again" to new life is through conversion. Conversion is a major emphasis in the computer entertainment industry. (Ed. - Note that CGW is publishing a new column on "Conversions Received"
for this very reason.) STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS, Inc. has allotted a major portion of its
publishing program to translating products into
other formats. The first half of 1987 will see 10
different products converted over to IBM. Joel
Billings of SSI thinks that it's possible for IBM to
pass Apple in computer game market share during
1987. Nearing release are the following conversions:
Shard of Spring and Rings of Zilfin (IBM), War in
the South Pacific and Wargame Construction Set
(C64), Phantasie (Atari 8 bit), Phantasie II (ST) and
Computer Ambush (MAC). At least 19 other conversions are in the works at SSI.
ACCOLADE has tended to be very expeditious
in converting their first-line titles from one format
to another. In 1986, Mean 18 was converted from
IBM to the Amiga and Atari 520 ST; Psi-5 Trading
Co. from C-64 and Apple to IBM; and the fastselling Hardball to Macintosh. This trend is expected to continue in 1987 with Hardball converted
to ST and IBM and Mean 18 to the IIGS.
ACTIVISION has already converted GBA Championship Basketball: Two-on-Two from its original
C64/128 roots to Amiga, Atari ST, Apple II and
IBM. Watch for numerous Apple IIGS products to
be released by Activision in the coming year.
ELECTRONIC ARTS is rapidly introducing
conversions for its regular line and affiliated labels.
Ultima IV is now available for the IBM; Computer
Scrabble is currently available for IBM and
C64/128, but will soon be available on Apple II and
Macintosh; and Autoduel, the Apple and C64/128
car battle game, is due to be converted to Amiga,
Atari 800, Atari ST, and Macintosh. EA not only
released a beautifully enhanced Amiga version of
The Bard's Tale, but they are soon to release a
look-alike that is just as stunning for the JIGS.
MINDSCAPE was prompt in translating its socially significant Balance of Power game to IBM
and Amiga in 1986. An Atari 520 ST version is

Continued on pg. 59

Accolade
20813 Stevens Creek
Cupertino, CA 95014
(408) 446-5757
KILLED UNTIL DEAD: This animated adventure is a fast-paced, joystick-driven, tribute to Agatha
Christie mysteries. You play the part
of "Hercule Holmes" (or was it "Sam
Marple"?) and have 24 minutes of actual playing time to solve each of 21
cases (with titles like "The Case of the
Mutilated Moose," "Mars Needs
Women" and "Beaujalois or Bust") divided between four difficulty levels.
Apple, C-64/128 ($34.95). Circle
Reader Service # 1.
Activision, Inc.
2350 Bayshore Parkway
Mountain View, CA 94039
ALIENS: Six different game segments
attempt to emulate the fast and furious action of the hit motion picture in
this arcade game. Players attempt to
navigate a fierce windstorm and drop
the ship down the "pipe"; hold off at-

tackers while attempting to torch
through an "Operations Room" door;
rescue Newt via the air duct maze
(evasion is better than shooting here);
rescue Newt (what again?) from the
nest in the Atmosphere processor;
rescue troops from the Atmosphere
processor; and capture the Alien
Queen in order to flush her out the
airlock. This game is about as close to
the movie's plot as can be expected..
C-64/128 ($34.95). Circle Reader Service Card #2.
CHAMPIONSHIP BASEBALL: A
combination action/strategy game,
this new release from the Gamestar division offers the chance to draft players, form a 24-team league with fourdivisions, play against human or computer, and keep track of league standings. Like other Gamestar offerings,
this is an action game, not a statistics
based simulation. Apple II, C-64/128,
IBM ($39.95). Circle Reader Service
#3.
TITANIC: THE RECOVERY MISSION: This timely import is a fanciful

extrapolation from last year's celebrated exploration of the R.M.S. Titanic. Instead of simply exploring the
hulk using the submersible, Alvin, as
in actuality, the player attempts to
"Raise The Titanic" with more of a
Clive Cussler flare. This strategy game
takes into consideration that bane of
many archaeological and salvage expeditions, funding and image. It is a
joystick-driven adventure and features
several colorful screens for each activity required by the scenario. C-64/128
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #4.
Cheapware
4038 N. Ninth St.
St. Louis, MO 63147-3441
(800) 642-6524
ARCADE POKER: You'll think you're
looking at one of the ubiquitous poker
machines in a Las Vegas (or Atlantic
City) casino when you boot up this
program. The program uses Vegasstyle payoffs (Jacks or better equals
even money and progressively upward), but records your winnings in
points instead of funds. IBM ($30.00).
Circle Reader Service #5.

Datasoft
19808 Nordhoff Place
Chatsworth, CA 91311
(818) 886-5922
221B BAKER STREET: Based on the
popular boardgame by Jay Moriarty,
this Sherlock Holmes game allows 1-4
players to attempt to beat the clock
and each other in solving 30 different
mysteries (and there are 30 more on a
separate case disk, available separately). The game encodes clues so
that only the detectives who actually
find the information can make use of
it. The game includes animated characters and voice synthesis. Apple, C64/128 ($29.95, extra case disk $14.95). Circle Reader Service #6.
Electronic Arts
1820 Gateway Dr.
San Mateo, CA 94404
(415)571-7171
THE BARD'S TALE II: THE DESTINY KNIGHT: The map of the
wilderness may include cities which
sound more like the missionary journeys of St. Paul (Ephesus, Corinth,
Thessalonica, etc.) than the Scottish
roots of the original Bard's Tale (Skara
Brae), but this is the same system that
thrilled adventurers before and then
some. Since the party will have en-

counters in the wilderness, ranged
combat is now possible. It is also possible to transfer parties assembled in
Bard's Tale, Ultima III, or Wizardry
onto the character disk for use in this
adventure. Adventurers may explore
cities, castles, forests, taverns, and
casinos in this story line. C-64/128
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #7.
MAKE YOUR OWN MURDER
PARTY: Here is a program to take you
step-by-step through hosting your
own murder party. It's better than
boxed games in the store, too. In these
two adventures ("The Big Kill" and
"Empire"), the identities of the murderers change from game to game. You
can print out new invitations, clue
books, note sheets and verdict sheets
for each party, as well. Apple, IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service Card
#8.
Firebird Licencees, Inc.
74 North Central Avenue
Ramsey, NJ 07446
(201) 920-7527
MRCA MACH 2 COMBAT FLIGHT
SIMULATOR: An F-15 flight simulator for those with Atari 8-bit machines, MRCA offers three-dimensional

Continued on pg. 57

Gunship is MicroProse's latest release in the
wargamer/cross-over market. Unlike the typical
wargame design which appeals to a small esoteric
crowd with sales for a mega-hit numbering slightly
over 10,000 units, MicroProse has established a
niche of computer conflict simulations which appeal to a broad-based market, e.g. F-15 Strike Eagle, Silent Service, and now Gunship. Long
promised and eagerly awaited by the anxious public, Gunship lives up to its billing. From discussions
with the design staff at MicroProse, it would appear that several livelihoods depended on the timely
(?) release and salability of Gunship. These individuals can relax; based upon current sales and
projection data, Gunship will go platinum (i.e.
250,000 unit sales) as have F-15 and Silent Service
heretofore.
From the keyboard overlay to the documentation
and on to the program itself, all is of the high caliber one has come to expect from MicroProse. The
documentation is excellent; the tutorials explain
succinctly and completely how to fly the craft and
how to engage the enemy with the various weapons
systems.
Many reviewers have complained about MicroProse's protection schemes wherein the player has
to type in a certain code. Gunship continues this
tradition, but with a trace of brilliance which obviates the aggravation. Upon initially booting the
program, the player will be presented with a one
vehicle identification quiz. The documentation
shows the various illustrations and explains what

the particular vehicle is used for; a quick scan
should reveal the proper vehicle. If an incorrect
response is made, then the player can only fly in a
training mode (in CONUS), with SGT Kilroy (as in

Name:
Players:
System:

GUNSHIP
Solitaire
C-64/128, Amiga
Atari ST, Apple, IBM
$39.95
Price
Designers: Arnold Hendrick
Andy Hollis
Publisher: MicroProse
Hunt Valley, MD

"...was here").
This reviewer liked the protection scheme.
Having listened to vehicle recognition classes in the
United States Army for almost two decades and
having in fact given several such classes, this reviewer has to admit that he never really bothered to
learn the actual vehicle recognitions. Gunship compels one to learn, and does it painlessly!
After getting past vehicle recognition (and this
has a game benefit in that the user familiarizes
himself with particular enemy weapons systems and
their weaknesses), one makes a choice of pilot by
the name roster. Initially, most of the MicroProse
design staff is present together with their ranks and
decorations. However, since they are all KIA or
MIA, the user cannot access them and must begin
his flight career as a sergeant. Input is via joystick
and keyboard, and is very simple to accomplish,
especially with the cardboard overlay to remind one
of what each keystroke can do.

Next, one decides on a duty assignment. Flight
training in CONUS (continental United States) is
highly recommended until one is familiar with the
mechanics of flight and combat (enemy "hits" do no
damage, a la Lazer Tag). After initial confidence is
gained, one may join the 1st Cav in Southeast Asia.
Once the pilot has gained combat experience and
the campaign ribbon, harder missions may then be
made with the 82nd Airborne in Central America
(Ollie North, where are you now that we need
you?), the 101st Air Assault in the Middle East,
and finally with the 3rd Armored Division in
Western Europe.
Each successive area bears more danger. Troops
are better trained and have better equipment, including the infamous Soviet Hind helicopter. Of
course, one may also choose the degree of duty
hazard -- regular, volunteer and hazardous volunteer missions (the last for the truly suicidal lifer).
Finally, one may choose reality levels -- flight

performance, landing, weather, and enemy quality
(ranging from first to third line troops). Most of
this reviewer's missions were made against first line
troops, with a mission difficulty being rated as
"Ultimate".
Next, the briefing. The screen gives the pilot
both a primary and secondary mission together with
a password. One must look up the countersign in
order to land back at a friendly base (another form
of disk protection), but the most interesting aspect
of this is that the briefing page looks "official" in
every sense of the word. One may access a terrain
map and an intelligence report for additional information, and then decide whether to go on the
mission or report to "Sick Call". If the pilot does go
on sick call, a service reprimand (Article 15?) will
appear on his record, and future promotions will be
much harder to obtain.
Next, one chooses the particular armament for
the mission, given weight standards and ultimate
targets. Armament selection is made via joystick/mouse, and is quick and painless. Finally, the
mission begins! Turning on the port and starboard
engines, one next engages the rotor and finally
raises the collective. As lift is gradually achieved,
the pitch (angle of the blades) is adjusted in order
to develop speed. Adjustment of pitch and the collective determine speed in a synchronous relationship; but determining the proper ratio requires
practice and confidence. All too often, the novice
pilot will be "chasing the needle". Despite the

reader's possible confusion in visualizing this process, be assured that the above flight guidance becomes second nature in the game itself and requires
little conscious thought or effort.
Flight characteristics are much easier in this
simulation than in actual helicopter operations.
Gunship is not a "flight simulator" per se; its mechanics mirror that of reality, but are eased so that
even the non-aviator can quickly grasp the beauty
of flight. Two caveats are necessary: first, the
Apache Gunship is an excellent craft, but does
have a delayed response to control inputs; and second, weather is less harmful than actual flight conditions (i.e. low flying will generate some turbulence, but nothing like real thermals which can toss
a craft several hundred feet).
Getting there, however, is only half the fun;
there are "bad guys" waiting to blow the Apache
Gunship out of the sky. The real challenge is in
accomplishing both missions, devastating the enemy
and returning safely to base. This reviewer recommends maximum use of Hellfire missiles. These
missiles are effective against vehicles and bunkers
at a distance of up to 6000 meters (usually, maximum engagement range will be 2.5 km). It is truly
enjoyable to render millions of dollars worth of
Warsaw Pact armor into junkyard scrap at no risk.
But into each life, some rain must fall, and one's
Gunship is not immortal. Soviet Hinds are dangerous adversaries, but one's Sidewinder missiles
should negate their threat (just make sure to see
them before they see you!). The worst threat is
anti-aircraft guns and infantry (soft targets); your
FFAR (folding fin aerial rockets) and cannon fire
can destroy these threats, but at ranges of 1000 and
700 meters respectively. At those close distances,
the Threat can also get you -- and often will!
Discussions with combat-experienced Huey and
Cobra pilots revealed that this is in fact correct.
Soft targets do present the greater threat, and there
is no obvious solution. Evasive flying and quick
response is the best technique.
In terms of flight, NOE (nap-of-earth) flight is
recommended. While your visibility is limited, the
Threat also cannot see you as readily. Generally,
70/70 is a good yardstick (70 knots speed at 70 feet
of altitude). Many Threat targets are not revealed
until one stumbles over them. Therefore, the following tactic may be used -- upon beginning a
mission, simply climb to c. 1000 feet. This will reveal most enemy positions, and as soon as they are
revealed and begin firing, dive QUICKLY to a

NOE position. Your map access will still have these
positions marked, and a route may then be selected
to minimize enemy opportunities. Otherwise, one
may accomplish a mission only to stumble onto a
single target and engage it; suddenly, infantry and
anti-aircraft guns will reveal their positions by
firing at one's now revealed and somewhat helpless
craft.
Although the Apache is post-Vietnam, the SE
Asian scenario has been included because of customer demand. Vietnam was the war associated
with the helicopter, and furthermore, it is ideal as a
basic scenario since the enemy anti-air threat is
limited. There is no air threat and vehicular response is limited at best; also weapons systems are
generally not the newest.

In terms of aerial performance, the simulation
has shortchanged the maximum altitude of the
Apache. However, this is not a flaw; the higher one
flies, the more he reveals himself to potential enemy positions. Therefore, for the most part, height
is fatal. Also, ground graphics deteriorate as altitude increases.
Finally, the real Apache Gunship can "loop". The
simulation cannot. Aside from "Blue Thunder",
looping is an extremely difficult maneuver which
should be rarely used in combat situations (the craft
is virtually defenseless at the top of the loop).
Thus, its absence will prove no real loss.
As for NOE flight, Gunship uses 3-D graphics,
which are similar to those used in F-15 (albeit improved). The designers explained that these are
similar to vector graphics, but are filled in. The net
result is that one can see the terrain easily, but actual close flight becomes a matter of experience.
Unlike actual visual acuity, depth perception of
distance can be difficult; the usual tendency is to

avoid hilltops by more clearance than is actually
necessary. This reviewer sees this as an 8-bit limitation; presumably, the 16-bit machines allow better resolution. At any rate, one can adjust to the
terrain with experience. Similar problems occur in
landing at friendly bases. There is nothing more
aggravating than to have completed both primary
and secondary missions, be entering a final approach to a base, have a Hind on one's tail, and
land one-tenth of a kilometer short (and realize
that the damage incurred has now prevented any
lift-offs). As the designers have stated, one must
almost pass the base before going into a
hover/descent. Actual ground location and visual
perspective differ slightly, and only flight experience will teach one the proper techniques.
Upon returning from a successful flight, one
will be rewarded with either a promotion and/or a
medal. The game actually simulates an award ceremony; presentation of the Silver Star is made by the
Chief of Staff of the Army. Unfortunately, the
Distinguished Service Cross is simply handed over.

The designers have assured this reviewer that a
special presentation of the Medal of Honor is portrayed. Since this reviewer's 200 hours of flight
time have not yet yielded that particular decoration,
it must be presumed that the President makes the
presentation (the designers refuse to confirm or
deny this).
On top of medal presentations, campaign ribbons
and air medals are given the player. Slightly reminiscent of SSI's 50 Mission Crush, MicroProse's implementation of the actual ribbons and medals are
an appreciated, albeit cosmetic addition to the
gaming environment.
In conclusion, this reviewer heartily recommends
Gunship. From a historical perspective, one must
remember that gunships are only effective in areas
where one has local air superiority. Even the
Apache is no match for modern fixed-wing fighter
aircraft. The game's flaw (ground terrain visibility)
is more than offset by the sheer pleasure in flying
against and defeating the Threat. A five-star rating
(my highest) is well-deserved.

SPORTS SCOREBOARD

World Gaines
Championship Baseball
Equestrian Showjumper
Beach Blanket Volleyball

Rick Teverbaugh

WORLD GAMES
Although tightrope walking isn't one
of the events in World Games, that is just
what Epyx needs to do in order to avoid
repetition in this well-reviewed and enjoyable series. With the competition taking
place all over the world instead of in one
place like a traditional Olympics, World
Games breaks away from the traditional
Olympic events. Included this time are
such events as cliff diving, bullriding, log
rolling, sabre toss and barrel jumping,
along with the better-known weightlifting,
slalom skiing and sumo wrestling.
There is more attention to detail and
more variety to the challenge of World
Games than in Summer Games I and II or
Winter Games. Weightlifting, which takes
place in Russia, features a burly competitor who even gives a few audible deep
breaths before attempting the next weight.
There are two types of lifts, 'snatch' and
'clean and jerk'. Both require strength, coordination and timing. The computer version does away with the strength requirement.
Though weightlifting is my favorite
event, I have several others of nearly equal
enjoyment. Cliff diving is surprisingly
stimulating. You need to time the jump so
that the tide is up when you hit the water,
you must keep your back arched long
enough to carry beyond the jagged cliff
and you must make a quick turn once you
hit the water to keep the diver from having a terrific headache. Another favorite is
bull riding. It is necessary to remember
which joystick position will be successful
for each possible move by the bull so that
you can stay on long enough to garner a
good score.
World Games, unfortunately, has a
couple of clinkers. The first is the slalom
skiing. Not a novice at sports simulations,
I haven't yet completed the course in 14
tries. It is too difficult to make sharp turns
and keep forward momentum, but the
gates are spaced too close together to get
to them without sharp turns. I don't think
Epyx play-tested this event enough with
outside gamers. The second disappointment is log rolling. Against a human foe it
isn't too bad because neither player knows

what they are doing and it is enjoyable to
plunk your foe in the water. Against the
computer opponent, however, it is suicide.
The rule book, normally quite informative,
is of no help to plot a strategy or to even
know what a particular move of the joystick will accomplish.
Even with those complaints, World
Games is still a must for the avid sports
gamer. I plan an all-day session soon with
all the events in the four games. I'll report
my progress if I survive. World Games is
available for Commodore owners with conversions to follow for other machines.
CHAMPIONSHIP BASEBALL
If you are familiar with Gamestar's
Star League Baseball,then you'll understand the basics of Championship Baseball, also by Gamestar. If you've seen the
league-play concept of GBA Championship Basketball (Gamestar), then you
know the concept behind Championship
Baseball.
What Gamestar has done is rework
Star League and answer some of the more
common complaints. In Star League, hitting was far too difficult because there was
only the side perspective. There was no
way to tell whether a pitch was inside or
outside. Now there is a split-screen; one
the traditional side approach of the original and the other a behind the plate perspective. Hitting is still no picnic, but it
can be done. The field is drawn a bit better and it is slightly easier to get an outfielder to flag down a fly ball. Still, to beat
the computer, you'll need a sound defense.
The game has the option of creating
your own team, saving it to disk and then
running it through a season. If the team is
good enough, you can make the playoffs
and go for the title. This is a concept that
worked well with GBA Basketball and
does the same here. It would have been
nice if the program kept stats for the individual players, but that wasn't expected
since GBA didn't perform that feat either.
All the action is joystick controlled.
Some sequels aren't really worth making another purchase. Championship
Baseball is the exception.

ON _THE BEACH & HORSING AROUND
Artworx has come out with a series of
inexpensive sportsgames. I'll briefly cover
two, Beach Blanket Volleyball and Equestrian Showjumper, and save Thai Boxing,
for a later column. Equestrian is my favorite. There are 12 different courses for
you to try. You can change the name of
your horse and the country you represent.
You can also design your own steeplechase
course, but you'll have to erase one of
those already on the disk to do so. There is
no option for saving a course to a blank
disk.
The horse can move at three speeds,
trot, canter and gallop, all controlled by
flicking the joystick in the direction necessary. The joystick button controls the
jump of the horse. In the lower right-hand
corner is the layout of the course and arrows indicating the correct order and direction. Take a fence out of order or knock
too many of them down and you'll be disqualified. Top scores are saved.
Beach Blanket Volleyball is a threeman volleyball game that can be played
against a human or computer foe. You
control only the hitting for the player
nearest the ball. The computer controls all
the movement. There are nine different
skill levels of the computer opponent to
sharpen your skills. Setting up a spike is
the most difficult. The length of time you
hold down the fire button before the shot
controls the strength and the set must
come down very near the net to get an opportunity for a kill.
Graphics on both games aren't spectacular, at least on the Commodore versions I tested. But they do a good enough
job to make playing the game smooth and
simple.
That's it for this time. So until next
time, be a good sport!

Scorpion's Tale

Name:
System:
Price:
Designers:

Gemstone Healer
Apple, C-64
$29.95
Peter Lount
Trouba Gossen
Kevin Pickell
Publisher: Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

Step right in! I see you made it back
safe and sound from your ghost-hunting in
Cornwall, although you do look a trifle
dusty from all that nosing around in secret
passages. Must make for a dry throat, too.
So just sit right there by the fire, and Fred
will mix up a little something for you.
Then we can talk about nosing around in
monster-ridden caves.
It's rare for me to play an arcade-type
game, although I do have a few. When
Gemstone Warrior came out, I rather
enjoyed it. Once you had the maze figured
out, the game was a quick play with a
definite end, and you didn't need the
reflexes of a fighter pilot to get through it.
So, when I heard that a sequel was in the
works, I looked forward to getting it.
Healer takes up where Warrior left off.
In Warrior, you entered a maze of caverns
to find the five pieces of a magical
Gemstone that had been stolen by evil
demons. Once you got out with all five
pieces, the game ended. However, that was
not the end of the story.
Apparently, the magical forces within
the Gemstone were unbalanced by the
rough handling of the demons. Now, you
have to take the Gemstone to the Center,
where it was originally created, and find
the tools you need to restore the
Gemstone's balance and harmony.
Graphics are the same as in Warrior,
simple but nice, and smoothly-scrolling.
Monsters are also much the same, with the
addition of some extra demons, who show
up fairly early, but are easily dispatched
with a well-placed fireball or two (or a
special, demon-slaying sword you can find,
but fireballs are safer, you can use those
from a distance).
Healer also allows you to generate

random mazes. You must create a maze
(on a separate disk, or the back of the
original game disk) before you can play
the game. You type in a series of letters
(which can be words or just a bunch of
miscellaneous letters), and this is used by
the program to make the cavern complex.
The same letters, of course, will always
make the same maze. The creation process
takes awhile, so be prepared for a wait
while the program is working on it. After
that, you're ready to go.
The first step is to map out the entire
complex of caverns. There are no trick
doors as in Warrior, but this time around,
some doors are hidden, and you can find
them only by using a magical dagger, or if
you have none, trying various parts of the
walls. Once the map is completed, you can
start playing the game in earnest,
collecting the tools and healing the
Gemstone.
There are 27 tools in all to find. Two
of them, a hammer and chisel, are used to
split the Stone into five pieces again, as
each piece must be healed separately on
one of the six altars scattered at random
throughout the Center. The remaining 25
tools are used in the actual healing
process, five tools per side of the
Gemstone.
Naturally, monsters will be getting in
your way as you attempt to complete your
task. To get them out of your way, you
have a crossbow, a sword, fireballs, and a
variety of magical items to use against
your foes and heal yourself of damage.
These objects are found in chests, coffins,
and on the bodies of the monsters that you
kill as you go through the caves. Chests
and coffins also hold the various healing
tools.

Since each piece of the Gemstone
requires a specific set of tools to restore its
balance, you can't just use any old
grouping. So, what you also need to find
are the scrolls that tell you which set of
tools repairs each piece. The tools are
grouped into five sets, representing the
aspects of direction, shape, energy,
elements, and man. One tool from each set
is needed for each piece of the Stone, and
each tool will be used only once.
One aspect of the game that eases your
burdens, at least to a small degree, is the
fact that a correct grouping of tools will
heal any piece. So you don't have to work
on the pieces in any particular order, you
simply need the right set of tools (but
remember, each set of tools works only
once).
You might be tempted to use trial and
error, but I wouldn't advise it, at least not
until you've found two or three of the
scrolls that tell you the specific tool
groupings. Consider only the first piece. It
might take any one of five tools from the
first group, any of five from the second,
and so on. Think about that for a moment,
and you'll see there are a LOT of possible
combinations. Far too many to stand there
and keep trying while monsters are on
your back. And until you have the right
five on the stone, you won't know if you're
choosing the proper tools or not.
Further, each maze has its own unique
sets of tools. When you first create the
maze, the program will choose random sets
of tool groupings. Thus, combinations that
worked in one maze will probably not work
in another. Of course, as long as you stay
with the same maze, the same sets of tools
will work, so you only need to find the
scrolls for that particular maze once.
Unfortunately, as I played the game, I

found that the scrolls were a long time in
showing up. Their appearance is
randomized (although they always come
up in the same order; it's a question of
WHEN), and it might take many
traversings of the caves before you have
read the ones that carry the specific
groupings. This could easily become tedious. Having experienced this myself, I
can assure you that it IS tedious.
However, there is a bright spot in the
fog! As a result of a three-way phone
conversation with CGW, Paradigm
Creators (Peter Lount, Trouba Gossen),
and myself on the line, changes will be
made in the program. Basically, the scrolls
will appear at a faster rate in the game.
You might be able to get them all (a total
of 21) in one pass through the caverns, or
soon after that. It won't be necessary to
make a lot of extra trips looking for monsters to kill in the hopes of finding scrolls.
Whew! Gold stars to Paradigm and SSI for
their quick work in making the changes.
The fix should appear in Gemstone
Healer version 1.3, which may be out by
the time you read this, or shortly

afterward. [Ed. Note: According to SSI,
owners of earlier versions of Gemstone
Healer can return their disks for a free
upgrade to version 1.3]
Finally, when you're tip-toeing
through those caverns, be careful; there's a
trap or two waiting for you, so read those
scrolls attentively!
APOLOGIES: My sincere apologies to
the reader in Kansas who wrote to me
around the beginning of the year with a
question on Leather Goddesses.
Unfortunately, I lost the letter in the
street (first time this has ever happened),
and didn't realize it until late in the
evening. By then, there wasn't much I
could do about it. So, I'm sticking this in
here to let you know you weren't ignored,
I just had no way of replying.
ALTERNATE REALITY UPDATE:
For those of you with the Atari ST
version, please note that not all of the
material in my previous article (Nov. '86)
applies to you. Datasoft has expanded the
game in some respects to take advantage
of the additional memory on the ST, and
thus not everything is the same as in the

Apple version. For example, in the ST
game, you can get a job, and therefore you
don't have to mug innocent citizens (such
as commoners) for money. Also, clothing is
much more important in the ST version
(dress warmly!). So go carefully, there
could be (probably are) other surprises in
store for you.
Well, I see by the invisible clock on the
wall it's that time again. If you have a
game question, you can reach me in the
following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under
the Groups and Clubs menu). On GEnie:
Stop by the Games RoundTable (type:
Scorpia to reach the Games RT). On the
Source: Send SMAIL to St1030.
By US Mail (and I promise to be real
careful with those letters!): Scorpia P.O.
Box 338 Gracie Station New York, NY
10028.
Please remember to enclose a selfaddressed, stamped envelope with your
questions. Until next time, happy
adventuring!
Copyright 1987 by Scorpia, all rights
reserved.

four anti-aircraft guns at Mostar!). That was a
patsy, but later on, when they made us fly over
Mostar on the way to other Balkan targets and we
kept losing planes to those four guns, we had more
respect for Mostar.

As at Mostar, I encountered no fighters and
light flak. "This will be easy!" I thought. I hit my
target and earned 1,150 points. If one survives 50
missions and earns 50,000 points, he becomes a
Brigadier General and SSI sends him a certificate.
My second mission to Abbeville Air Base was
more like the real thing. I encountered flak at the
target, knocking out the top turret guns and the
right waist gun. This was later to hamper me with
fighter attacks over the channel. I thought we were
fairly safe and flying through relatively friendly
territory when a fighter attacked from the right
side. Since I had three inoperative guns on that
side, I lost a lot of sweat, but we got home safely.

50 MISSION CRUSH:
A 50 MISSION RECALL
by Leroy W. (Ted) Newby
[Ed. Note: Mr. Newby was a B-24 bombardier in
the 460th Bomb Group of the Fifteenth Air Force.
He was shot down on his fiftieth mission. He is the
author of Target Ploesti: View from a Bombsight, a
Military Book Club selection and is acting as consultant and technical advisor on John "50 Mission
Crush" Gray's new game for SSI entitled, "B-24".J

I was anxious to play 50 Mission Crush as I had
never played a computer game before and was a bit
skeptical with regard to a mere game capturing the
real spirit of aerial combat. As I discovered the
rules and options offered in various stages of the
game, I began to appreciate what goes into creating
a computer simulation. It was all there: bomb load,
ammo load, gas load, route out, fighter escort, flak
at the target, cloud coverage, bombing accuracy,
battle damage, fuel and ammo conservation, route
back, more fighter encounters and finally, "enough
fuel to make it across the pond?" I was confronted
with decisions, decisions!
My first mission was a "milk run" to Cherbourg
Air Base.
Forty-two years earlier, my first mission was a
"milk run" to Mostar, Yugoslavia (They only had

On a 15th AF mission to Bologna, we survived
the target flak. As we let down to lower altitude to
return home, however, we encountered surprise flak
as we passed over the front lines of the ground
forces. A lucky shot caught a plane off to our left
in its No. 3 engine and set it on fire. One of the
waist gunners saw the flames and bailed out of the
window. A few seconds later, the fire went out and
the plane went on its merry way home. We thought
we could see the guy in the chute shaking his fist at
the departing bomber.

My third mission sent me to bomb the air base
at St. Omer on the coast. I wasn't into worrying
about gas on these first three short missions, but I
began to care about cloud cover, as indicated on
the monitor, at each move. Clouds under my plane
meant no flak -- that move, anyway. I also learned
about fighter attacks. Now, I had to decide between
letting the fighter come in (and hope he wouldn't
hit me in a vital spot) and firing at him (which
wasted ammo while he was still out of range). Here
came the sweat! Should I shoot or hold my fire?
Back in summer of '44, when we were penetrating
deep into the Balkans, our gunners tended to fire a
lot (none of that "waiting for the whites of their
eyes" propwash for those guys!). It wasn't easy
holding fire with three ME 109's on a pursuit curve
with you in their sights. Fortunately, our gunners
shot a few down and none of them ever did any real
damage to our lovely Hangar Queen (although they
certainly damaged some of our sister planes).

Mission four was to an industrial plant in
Antwerp. We soon moved into Zone "C," which

meant heavy enemy aircraft and minimum fighter
escort. When No. 3 engine was hit and we had to
feather it, I empathized. I knew how few B-24's
ever made it home on three engines. Of course, we
were flying Fortresses (B-17's) in the game, so it
was a needless sweat. "Forts" did much better on
three engines.
Since we still had bombs aboard, we were penalized 1.5 drag points and started to fall out of
formation. I had to decide either to drop my bombs
at once and remain in the protection of the formation (losing those bombing points which reflected
my efficiency) or opt for a solo mission (gaining
points, but becoming a straggler - easy prey for the
fighters).
I was once a straggler, coming home from
Ploesti. Our No. 3 engine was windmilling because
we were hit by flak on the bomb run and the oil
pressure had dropped before we could feather it.
Windmilling drag reduces a bomber's speed by 12
MPH. Two other engines had their superchargers
shot out, so when we dived out of the formation and
leveled off at 13,000 feet, we couldn't maintain altitude. We headed home alone, ducking in and out of
clouds to escape enemy fighters--losing altitude all
the while.
Mission five was to the railroad center at
Amiens. I was pleased that our gunners became
more experienced as we flew more missions and
that this was reflected in better marksmanship. Our
ammo could be expected to last longer as they improved. We experienced flak damage to our fuel
tank, then took a hit in another fuel tank during a
fighter attack.
This evoked memories of a long mission to
Nimes, France (in support of the coming southern
invasion). Our pilots were of two opposing opinions
on when to empty the "Tokyo Tanks," the two 200
gallon wing tip tanks that carried extra fuel on long
missions. One school held that one should not empty
the Tokyo's until after leaving the target. The point
being that empty tanks were full of fumes and
could be exploded if a red hot piece of flak entered
the tank. A full tank of gasoline would quench a
piece of hot flak. The opposing view says to empty
the tanks prior to entering the target zone, because
you may suffer flak damage to the fuel transfer
system and never gain access to the reserve fuel. It's
a long way home if you're denied 400 gallons of
gas. It was one of those free time arguments that no
one wins. Everyone does it "his way." If one's argument proves wrong in execution, he joins the

"Caterpillar Club," takes a swim in the ocean, becomes a P.O.W., or dies. Some may make it home.
Nimes was a nine and one-half hour trip (my
longest in combat) and our pilot was on the side of
the "transfer after the target" people. After leaving
the target, we found we could not transfer the reserve fuel to our main tanks. Our experienced Flight
Engineer tried every trick he knew, short of wing
walking, but it was all to no avail. Our pilot resorted to the only thing he could do with over 400
miles of ocean to fly over before reaching friendly
soil--he leaned out the gas-to-air mixture on all
four engines. This accomplished two things, conserving gas and burning hotter. Burning hotter increased power. That was the good news! The bad
news was that he had the temperature gauges for all
four engines reading above the red line. How far
can the needle go above the red line? How long can
the engine last when running above the red-lined
temperature? If you can answer the question, "How
far is up?", you can answer those questions.
The Amiens mission brought back memories of
that frightful trip home, how we'd wondered when
we'd blow up. We made it back to Italy and ran out
of gas on the perimeter taxi strip.
Sweating out fuel problems in 50 Mission Crush
is one of the many authentic elements in the game.
Forty years after the Nimes mission, I learned
why we didn't land at Corsica, halfway home. My
pilot for that flight had been the previous day's
Squadron Operations Officer who had chewed out
several pilots for landing at Corsica for frivolous
reasons such as the large busted Red Cross girl stationed at the air base. He couldn't bring himself to
land there the day after his speech.
Mission six was my deepest penetration so far-Emden, a 1,140 mile round trip to bomb a factory.
It was in Zone "D," which meant it was beyond
fighter escort range and was protected by heavy
flak batteries. I elected to fly north from our base
in Thurleigh, England so as to stay out of enemy
fighter territory for as long as possible. When I got
north of Emden, I turned south to the target. I ran
into a hornets' nest of fighters and was expending
ammo at a frightening rate in trying to survive long
enough for the bomb run. Between the fighter attacks and the target flak, my plane took a beating.
Two hits to the fuel tanks, a windmilling engine
and a damaged landing gear. The route back was a
constant air battle and the rapidly diminishing fuel
supply forced me to fly directly home and hope my
Continued on pg. 54

M+A+X-IMUM CONCENTRATION:
MODELING THE FUTURE
USING SPACE M+A+X
by Johnny L. Wilson

TITLE:

Space M+A+X:
Space Station Construction Simulator
SYSTEM:
IBM
PRICE:
$49.95 Protected/$59.95 Copyable
DESIGNER:
T. L. Keller
PUBLISHER: Final Frontier Software
18307 Burbank Blvd. #108
Tarzana, CA 91356
(800) 854-0561 Ext. 816
Circle Reader Number 99

Noted science fiction and computer writer, Jerry
Pournelle, recently participated in a symposium on
"The Military in Space" (Universe '87, Los Angeles,
January 4, 1987). One of the important points
which he made was that the United States space
program, if you can call the doldrums NASA has
been in for the last ten years a program, hasn't really given capitalism a chance. He pointed out that
an appliance manufacturer in China was preparing
to launch satellites at an extremely cost-effective
price tag. Further, note that the European Common
Market has its Arianne space station program nearing completion. Isn't it ironic that the heart of the
free market in the western world hasn't allowed
private enterprise to lead out in space exploration?
Will the moon ever be colonized and/or mined if it
isn't profitable? Since most moon colonization projects are predicated on having a functional space
station, the margin of profitability needs to begin
at this early stage. That's one reason why Space
M+A+X (hereinafter, MAX) is such an interesting
simulation. It not only takes profitability into consideration, but makes the economic factors one of
the key motivations of the game (successful construction, meeting deadlines, and preservation of
human life being the others). The acronym, MAX,
stands for Materials processing, Astrophysics and
eXperimental space station.
Tom Keller, the designer, worked for three and
one-half years as a Systems Analyst in Resources
Planning and Support Systems for Jet Propulsion
Laboratories unmanned projects. His experience has
allowed him to design an extremely intricate model
in which logistics and economic parameters play a
significant role. The program consists of three disks
and a 137 page full color Operator's Manual. The
manual is a bound paperback volume with numerous color drawings and photographs. It is a beautiful book of superior quality, complete with detailed
data necessary for game play and NASA approved

diagrams and cut-away art. It also includes some
important screen shots and black and white photographs. Game play consists of five levels of difficulty in which the player acts as civilian director
of space station project (M+A+X). The program
graphics are all constructed using Graphics Magician by Penguin Software. Launches and landings
tend to be somewhat mundane (at least, after the
first sequence), But the models on the assembly
screens where the player will actually construct the
space station are extremely detailed.
IT'S A MOD, MOD WORLD
The object of the game is to construct a minimally configured and operational modular space
station (with five different laboratory modules)
within the time and budget constraints. Depending
on level of difficulty (MAX has five), the project
may be plagued by accidents (fire, radiation, loss of
cabin pressure, explosion, illness, manufacturer's
production problems and strikes. Not only does the
player want to get the astrophysical, experimental,
and materials processing (for biological, electronics
and metals-glasses-plastics respectively) laboratories
operational, but points (in the form of salary
bonuses) are paid for placement of the labs close to
the center of the mass of the total station and positioning of habitational modules out of the traffic
flow. Between all of these considerations, MAX is a
challenging and fascinating simulation.
Though it is very playable as a game, I prefer to
call it a simulation because of the detailed modeling. Indeed, constraints of realism caused Keller a
significant problem in game design. It seems that
Keller had simulated explosions long before Challenger. In fact, he had designed the graphics explosions prior to Challenger and wondered whether it
was in good taste to keep that feature. Realism
seemed to dictate the possibility, but it might
cheapen the actual loss of life. In the end, Keller
left the sequence in as a caveat to those who take
short cuts with human lives at stake. Indeed, after
the Rogers Commission report on the Challenger
disaster was released, he even figured in the cold
weather launch problem as being a potential cause
of explosion and followed suit with the commission
in making Edwards Air Force Base the preferred
landing site. The simulation requires four orbiters
and the demise of Challenger presented another
problem. There were now only three orbiters
available. Fortunately for the U.S. space program,
President Reagan ordered the construction of a new
orbiter. For purposes of the simulation, Keller

named this fourth orbiter after Captain Cook's Endeavour. In actuality, Keller even sent a letter to
the President which suggested this name for the
new orbiter.
I mention the capitalism aspect of the project
because MAX even lines out the prospective companies which might participate in such a project.
The following companies (and products) might be
involved: Battelle Columbus Laboratories (collagen
fiber), McDonnell Douglas Astronautics
(interferon), Johnson and Johnson (urokinase),
Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing (HgCdTe and
GaAs crystals), TRW (optical fiber), Union Carbide
and Grumman Aerospace (ultra-pure alloys), and
General Electric and Particle Technology (latex
beads). This aspect is also important because the
player judges his/her success in terms of base
salary earned, completion bonus ( upon successful
completion of the project), savings bonus (a percentage of net savings over projected costs), and
profit sharing (fixed percentage of the profits).
Hence, the simulation can be replayed over and
over again at the same level by trying to achieve a
higher and higher total of earnings.
UP, UP AND AWEIGHT
The game is played by means of two menus,
Mission Control Center (MCC) and Orbital Operations (00), and a graphics screen for actual assembly of the station. The menus allow the player to
access reports or move to specialized activities
(load, launch, assemble, or deorbit) by means of the
function keys. The MCC menu is the first one
which the player must use. As project director, the
player is given a look at the cost profile, revenue
profile, and up-dated financial reports through this
menu. Just as importantly, this is where orbiters or
HLLVs (Heavy Lift Launch Vehicles) are loaded
prior to launch. One must examine costs carefully
at this point, but the immediate problem deals with
weight. In order to be efficient, one must launch
the maximum weight (or close to it) with every
launch. Each HLLV can be loaded with up to
150,000 pounds and the maximum orbiter payload
is 65,000 pounds. The documentation suggests a series of three orbiter launches in order to get the
station operational as quickly as possible (p. 21).
This approach has two distinct disadvantages. First,
the weights of 46,100, 64,200, and 51,300 respectively are not the most efficient possible. Second,
the use of three different orbiters to accomplish
what one HLLV could do isn't cost efficient because...

THE ORBITER COST HERTZ!
Orbiters are leased from NASA on a daily basis
($14,000 per day). That's not the only cost because
the flight crew receive a per diem salary (a total of
$3,600). Since you have to leave at least one orbiter
in orbit for habitation space and use of the orbiter's
remote manipulator arm or RMA (until the station's
RMA is operational), the three orbiter approach
means that you either have to leave two of them in
orbit, paying exorbitant leasing fees and salaries for
nothing, or immediately deorbit them with no payload. Deorbiting costs money and to have to deorbit
without recouping anything for the trip is extremely frustrating. Further, orbiters must undergo
maintenance upon landing. Since there are only
four shuttles, this might mean that the project
could be unable to launch for many days if anything happens to the fourth shuttle (even on the
easiest level, one can be forced to make emergency
landings). Therefore, it makes the most sense to use

the HLLVs for your first launches and get as much
of the material available for assembly as possible
before ever launching an orbiter. A preferred series
of launches might be:
First Launch
Biological Module
Metals-Glass-Plastics Module
Solar Array
Heat Radiator
(149,300 pounds out of a possible 150,000)
Second Launch
Astrophysics Laboratory
Command Module
Electronics Laboratory
Thruster
Remote Manipulator Arm.
(139,900 pounds)

At this point in time, an orbiter (followed
swiftly by another) may be launched with assemblers (and/or operating crew), an adapter unit, logistics module and habitation unit and the basic
core of the station can be assembled and activated
without incurring excessive orbiter costs. Further,
the scrap from the HLLVs is worth 20% of the initial cost. That means the orbiters can be loaded to
the payload limit with scrap and start the profit
cycle.
Once the modules and assemblers are in space,
the assembly process can begin. The Orbital Operations menu is used to select the part or module for
assembly and the orientation of the new part to the
assembled portion of the station. The graphics for
the entire station must fit on the assembly screen.
The player constructs the station by moving the
parts/modules into position by means of joystick or
keyboard. Each new section must be lined up
properly with regard to the assembled section and
Continued on pg. 62

Space, the final frontier... These are the lost
voyages of the Starship Enterprise... On the
viewscreen, the stars dance in their eternal patterns,
tiny glimmers in an endless void... All is quiet out
here, on the edge of the Galactic Rift... And then...
Sulu, at the helm, blinks at the screen. Surely he
just saw something there? No, only star-flecked
space...but...yes! The deflector shields just snapped
on! Moments later, the Enterprise is buffeted by
blasts from an unseen enemy. Blow after damaging
blow strikes the ship, as the crew strives
desperately to get a fix on their opponent. At last,
Mr. Spock pins him down, and the photon
torpedoes, under the sure hand of Sulu, do their
job.
Now the damage reports start rolling in. Heavy
damage on all decks, some of which have been
evacuated due to life support failure. Fortunately
casualties among the crew are light; no fatalities.
Mr. Scott and the repair crews will have their
hands full, but most of the damage can be fixed.
However....
There is one problem Scotty can't fix. Phaser
coolants have seeped into the ship's food supply,
contaminating the entire batch. There is nothing to
eat.
Too far away to be helped by Star Fleet
Command, there is only one hope: beam a small
party down to the surface of the only habitable
planet in the vicinity, to search for a food supply.
Quickly, Kirk, Spock, McCoy, and Lieutenant
Dimas, xenoethnologist, make their way to the
transporter room. In a short while, they will
materialize on the surface of Prometheus Four,
where a strange alien culture waits for an ancient
prophecy to be fulfilled....
Thus begins Star Trek: The Promethean
Prophecy, second in the Star Trek series from
Simon and Schuster. This time around, however,
things are different. No fancy screens with pop-up
windows, this one is all-text. Gone are the weird
function keys and limited vocabulary. In their
place, a capable parser, and crew members you can
really talk to. Even better, the bugs are gone!
Of course, with the Enterprise in her current sad
state, you won't be able to go very many places on
the ship. Indeed, the turbo-lift can only take you to
three places: the bridge, deck 5, and deck 7.
But then the real story is on the planet's surface.
The mystery surrounding the Prometheans must be
solved before Kirk can solve his own problem of
the imminent starvation of his crew. It won't be

STAR TREK
The Promethean Prophecy
by Scorpia
Name:

Star Trek:
The Promethean Prophecy
System:
IBM, Apple, C-64
Designer:
TRANS Fiction Systems
$39.95
Price:
Publisher: Simon & Shuster
New York, NY

easy; not all the aliens here are helpful. Some are
downright hostile. A few may provide cryptic
answers to the riddle. Most will scurry away. No,
getting food is not going to be an easy job at all...
In fact, it's a job that calls for patience,
ingenuity, and some detective work as you try to
piece together the truth about the Prometheans. Just
who are these Prometheans, a declining race sitting
in the middle of a desert? Why are the caste lines
so rigidly enforced? What is the mysterious
Afflictor up to? And what about the prophecy, that
some speak of in guarded tones? Is the arrival of
the starship party really the fulfilling of it? Puzzles,
indeed!
But as a starship captain (this is the real thing
now, not a test), you should be equal to the task.
And you have help, from the comments and reports
of your landing party members, who do a little
more than just follow you around like shadows.
Their input and insights into the alien culture will
give you some valuable hints.
There are not very many locations to visit on the
planet; some people might even be able to get
around without a map (although having one is
certainly a good idea). On the other hand, entering
a few of these places is by no means easy. The
central compound, for instance, has several gates,
most of them closely guarded by an armor-clad
Defender. Kirk and his crew will have some
difficulties in getting past the Defenders peacefully
(no, violence is not called for here...of course, you
can always try it (evil grin), but you'd better save
the game first!).
Another problem is the sandstorms. Every so

often, a sroc (as they're called) comes along,
presenting hazards of its own. Fortunately, the
Prometheans will allow you into the compound
during the storm (where you had better be when it
happens, or this will be a short adventure).
Unfortunately, as soon as it's over, out you go
again. So you can't count on learning much that
way.
Perhaps the best place to start is the Trader
compound. You can pick up some rather interesting
items here, if you do your trading properly (of
course, you DO have to get in first, but Weelomin
can help, in return for the right object). One thing
to keep in mind is that nothing gets traded away
forever. Anything you give away can be retrieved,
eventually, by more trading. This is important, as
most of the items you come across (or trade for)
have more than one use in the game.
Of course, figuring out what to do with a forked
thing or a harrik brush may not be all that easy. A
little experimentation is certainly called for,
although nothing is actually dangerous. Just a bit
strange and obscure, like the Prometheans
themselves.
Which is not to say there are no dangers at all
here. Aside from the sandstorms, you'll come across
a few other perils, so make sure you keep your
phaser handy, you will be needing it in a couple of
places. I'd suggest hanging on to the phaser until
near the end of the game. By then you should have
a pretty good idea of what to do with it.
In the meantime, your explorations of the area
continue. One gate you find unguarded; this leads
to the compound of the bizarre Delighters, odd

beings living in an egg-like "house", continually
circling around a shaft of sunlight. Mumbling to
themselves and apparently oblivious to everything
around them, they seem to have no purpose in life
beyond their incomprehensible movements. Then
again, as with many other things on Prometheus
Four, all may not be quite as it seems. Perhaps
Gaidren, the only Delighter who appears to have
retained his intelligence, can help. If his memory is
properly stimulated.
The compound of the Sustainers, who do general
handiwork and provide the food for the entire
society, is another interesting place to visit. In this
case, however, a guard is at the gate, and he won't
let you by. You may want to take a good look at
the carts used by the Sustainers in their daily tasks;
it might give you some helpful ideas.
Oddly, the compound of the Defenders
themselves is now abandoned, and no one will
prevent you from entering. Then again, it may not
be all that easy (pesky sandstorms!), but keep
trying, and you'll get in eventually. There are a
couple of places that you really have to visit. One
is right there, and you should pay close attention to
the table (ask Dimas about it). The other place may
be something of a problem. That dark expanse
looks ominous, and it sure is: quicksand, wouldn't
you know it? Not something you want to merrily
tromp through, as your chances of making it to the
other side are just about nil.
Fortunately, everything you need to get past it is
close to hand. And when you do get to the other
side, remember the table. Also, let us not forget the
mysterious cave near the point where the landing
party first beamed down. Tricorder readings should
provide some valuable information and then, it's up
to you to figure out what to do about it. Finally,
the Blue Gate, entrance to the compound of the
Chanters. By the time you're ready for this, it
should be pretty obvious to you what all your
activities have been leading up to, and getting
inside should present few difficulties. If Kirk is
lacking a certain item, you may need to make a
visit to the Traders again.
Once inside, you have reached the endgame. The
moment is now. A prophecy waits for its
fulfillment and the destiny of a world is in your
hands. All you need to do is play it the right way...
Overall, the Promethean Prophecy is light years
better than the previous game, in both design and
execution. While the alien culture may seem very
strange at first, it is well-thought-out and has a
Continued on pg. 30

Continued from pg. 27
logical basis that eventually comes to light as you
continue to explore the planet and piece together
the various clues. Careful attention to the text is
necessary or you might miss something important.
Handling of crewmembers in the landing party is
also executed well. Asked appropriate questions,
they respond intelligently and they will also report
their own observations to you from time to time,
even without having to be asked. Just like real
people, isn't it (grin)?
Aliens react in pretty much the same manner,
although of course, they are aliens. You are not
restricted to a few stock phrases when talking to
them, although best results are usually obtained
when asking questions about specific things.
Several neat little touches can be found
throughout. One of my favorites is the occasional
reports you get from the Enterprise while on
planet. Every so often your communicator beeps,
signalling a message from the ship. It's not only

very reminiscent of the TV show and a nice
addition to the game, as well.
The manual that comes with the game is a joy to
behold. It is clear, concise, informative, funny, and
tells you everything you need to know to get
started with the adventure, even if you know
nothing about Star Trek. Read it before you begin,
you'll be glad you did. The game comes on one
double-sided disk. Saving is done to a separate
disk, and supports either one or two drives. Up to
7 positions can be saved on one disk, and saving
and restoring is quite fast. Currently, Promethean
Prophecy is available for Apple, C-64, and IBM,
with a Macintosh version in the works. However,
Simon and Schuster has no immediate plans for any
Atari versions, either 8-bit or 16-bit. Considering
the number of Ataris out there, it's a little strange
that they should be overlooked. So, all you Atari
owners, send a letter to S&S telling them you want
the game for YOUR machine! If they hear from
enough of you, they just might decide to get out a
version for your computer.
Bottom line: Highly recommended!
Copyright 1987 by Scorpia, all rights reserved..

ESCAPE FROM PLANET ARTH: A Review of
Starflight
by Mark Bausman
The date is 30-10-4619 and you are in your
quarters aboard Starport Central, Arth Orbit Station. A courier from Interstel Corp. has just delivered the package containing: a transcript from last
week's Operation Starflight briefing, a technical
reference manual, operations disk, galaxy map, and
launch code wheel. You read the briefing and discover that your own home planet, Arth, was actually colonized by a group called Noah 2. This group
came from the planet Earth. Earth, you discover,
was the seat of a vast Empire which collapsed during an interstellar war with the "Uhlek",
"Gazurtoid", and "Phlegmak" races. The Noah 2
group launched just before the downfall and contained representatives from the Human, Elowan,
Thrynn, and Velox races. These now comprise the
inhabitants of Arth. You discover that Interstel
Corp. is going to supply you with a starship, 12,000
monetary units, and 20 meters of endurium fuel to
use to explore the galaxy and determine the secret
of Arth's founding (you also have to find a planet
to evacuate Arth's residents to before the game gets
very far along).
Since there are 270 star systems and each one
may have zero to eight planets, this will not be an
overnight job. Slowly you rise from the chair, don
your spacesuit, slip the Starflight disk into drive
"A" and power-up your IBM computer. You've entered the Starflight simulacrum. Beginning in the
Operations Section of Starport Central, you will
obtain information necessary for your explorations.
Be sure to jot down some of this information for
future reference. Later in the game, you will use
this section to find out if planets you have recommended for colonization have been accepted. Recommending an acceptable world earns a big reward,
but bad recommendations incur a penalty.
After finishing at Operations Section, you must
spend your 12,000 MU's to equip your ship, hire
your crew and train them. At the Ship Configuration section, you will purchase cargo pods, engines,
shielding, armor, missiles, and lasers. You start with
enough funds to purchase minimal equipment and
will be able to upgrade through five progressive
classes of superior technology, as you earn profits.
It is best to hold off on purchasing lasers, missiles,
shielding, and armor until the ship is ready to begin exploration away from the home star system.
(Note: Don't go out of your home system until the

ship and crew are ready. In-system trips are not too
dangerous, but deep space travel without a welltrained crew and well-armed starship usually means
you get to start a new game upon your first alien
contact.)
Having outfitted the ship, you access the Personnel section and select your crew. This is a very
important part of Starflight and will require some
tough decision-making. You choose from the four
known races (Human, Velox, Thrynn, Elowan) or
the biosynthetic Androids. Each race and the Androids are rated for their skills in Science, Navigation, Engineering, Communications, and Medicine.
They are also rated for their ability to survive
(Durability) and their ability to learn.
Since operation of your starship requires a captain, science officer, navigator, engineer, communications specialist, and doctor, you must hire and
train enough crewmembers for one or more
crewmembers to fill one or more positions. Generally, it is better to have one or two well-trained
crewmen than three or four with average training.
It is possible, however, to operate your ship with
just one person, if you train them properly. Remember that crew may be assigned and reassigned
at will, so you will not be forced to stick with the
initial assignments throughout the game.
After completing the preliminaries, it's launch
time. After launch, the Starport Central Screen is
replaced by the main game screen and the real adventure begins.
While traveling in-system you will have a map
of the system on screen as well as a view of space
around you. You can use the system map to guide
your ship to any of the planets and then use the
space view to position yourself in orbit around the

desired planet. The Science officer may be called
upon to scan the planet and report on its condition.
Information gained from the scan tells you the
planets temperature, gravity, atmosphere, water,
Bio-density, and minerals. This is important data
because planets with favorable conditions may
spawn life, be the home of ancient civilizations, or
be recommendable as colony worlds. The scan will
also tell you the percent of mineral composition and

the probable type of minerals. Mining minerals,
storing them in your cargo pods, and later, offering
them for sale at Starport is your main method of
earning monetary units.
Since your ship is constantly burning the most
expensive mineral possible (Endurium), you must
earn money to replenish the lost fuel. Planets favorable to life conditions are the most rewarding to
find because they usually have minerals which may

be mined and have life forms to capture and take
back to Starport for sale. On most of these planets
you will also find ruins of the ancient civilizations
which once populated them. You might even find
remnants of a colony from the Noah 2 group. These
ancients usually left stockpiles of Endurium just
waiting to be picked-up and used. Of course, if
your Science Officer is not well-trained, his interpretation of the scan may be incorrect and you will
act on invalid information, wasting valuable time
and fuel.
If you decide to land on the planet's surface,
you select a landing spot and order the ship to land.
As you descend, the planet grows larger in the
main view screen and topographical details begin to
resolve themselves with elevations shown in color
variations. (T.C. Lee did the landing and take-off
sequences with different fractal graphics for each
planet. They are certainly some of the most extraordinary ever designed for an adventure game on
the IBM).

Shortly, you ship fins down and the terrain exploration vehicle automatically launches. All of
your crew is in the vehicle and you use it to explore the surface, capture life forms, and mine the
mineral deposits. Planet exploration is very time
consuming because the terrain vehicle has a limited
range and the the ship must re-orbit before moving
to some other part of the planet. Planetary storms
are common, even on planets with mild weather.
This is significant because it is in storms that
crewmembers may be hurt or killed and the navigator may lose his position with regard to the ship's
location. The latter occurrence makes it extremely
difficult to return to your ship before fuel runs out
in the terrain vehicle. There is no automobile club
on a planet's surface and being out of fuel means
walking back to the ship. This means: at best, a lost
vehicle, and at worst, the death of the entire crew.
The less-trained a navigator is, the higher the possibility that he will lose position in a planetary
storm. [Ed. Note: The problem of losing the ship
can be avoided in a relatively simple way. Since the
ship itself doesn't move in the storm, all the player
needs to do is scribble some simple directional
notes on some scrap paper while the ATV is outbound, stop all ATV movement until the storm
stops - so you know what direction you're heading
for certain, and are able to retrace your steps.] You
may launch and re-land the ship in another position
on the planet as often as you feel there is something left to explore.
At any time during interstellar travel, you may
be intercepted by an unidentified object and experience a close encounter of the infinite kind. Your
science officer can scan the object and determine
its nature and attack capability. If the object is an
alien vessel, and it isn't always, you may decide to
open communications, run for your life, or raise
Continued on pg. 38

Continued from pg. 36
screens and open fire. Talking with aliens can give
you many clues to the locations of the most interesting planets or send you off on wild goose chases
which result in nothing. The Starflight authors
have developed an interesting form of Artificial
Intelligence for these aliens that allows them to
"size-up" the situation and make decisions based on
what they see. On my first exploration into Velox
space, I could not find the approach that would get
those arrogant fools to talk to me. Every encounter
resulted in a short communication and then a battle
which gained a little endurium and no information.
Finally, I met a ship and opened fire without trying
to establish communications. I knew that three laser
blasts would destroy the ship so I fired twice and
then opened communications to the stricken vessel.
The Velox Captain was more than helpful, as he
begged me not to destroy his ship. As Captain, you
must experiment with various approaches to the
aliens and determine what works best most of the

time. You may go into an encounter with screens
up and a hostile posture or you may decide to assume a friendly posture with screens down. Only
experience will give you a handle on alien encounters and even then the same aliens will not always
act the same way. But then, getting there is half the
fun.
[Ed. Note: If you find yourself reduced to such
drastic actions in alien encounters, you might want
to look at the Cheat Sheet which is printed upside
down at the end of this review. Our inside source
has provided us with significant insights on intercultural relations.'
NOTES ON PLAY
By exploring your own system and the nearest
star, you can obtain enough money from mining to
equip the ship with a level 3 screen and level 5 armor. You also need to train a human in navigation
and hire and train a Thrynn in communication.

Continued on pg. 51

DESIGNER PROFILE:

by Frank Boosman
Doug Crockford got his start at designing computer games with Galahad and the Holy Grail, a
graphic adventure he wrote back in the heyday of
the Atari 800. After stints with Atari and National
Semiconductor, he joined Lucasfilm's Game Design
Group, where he is working on the joint venture
between Apple, Lucasfilm, and National Geographic to explore educational uses of CD-ROM
technology.
I interviewed Doug at Lucasfilm's headquarters
in Marin County, almost an hour north of San
Francisco. Lucasfilm is almost hidden in the forest;
it's difficult to find it even if you know what
you're looking for. It's a very peaceful, tranquil
place to work, with the latest in computer technology mixed in with stables and Victorian houses. It's
said the deer come down the hills to the buildings,
and why not? Above all, Lucasfilm seems friendly.
CGW: How did you get your start doing computer games?
Doug: I started in college. I went to San Francisco State, majored in radio and television, and
graduated in 1975. While doing that, I took a couple of classes in Fortran, had a real good time with
those, and then got into time-sharing. I worked my
way through college in the school behavioral social
sciences time-share laboratory, so that gave me a
real different type of background than you might
pick up in the school of Engineering or the school
of Mathematics or wherever else the computer stuff
was going on. I bought an Atari computer in 1980
and I had in mind to do a whole bunch of stuff
with it. I was going to start with a word processing
program. I found the machine was just too small
and I just couldn't do a good job with that. I was
going to write a programming language in 6502 and
it didn't lend itself to that, and I said, "What does
the machine do a real good job with?" and I
thought, "It does a really good job of doing video
games," so I did a game I called Knightsoil and
when I was finished I sent it to APX and they said,
"We really like it: it won the quarterly prize, and
we're changing the name because we can't call it
Knightsoil."
CGW: Knightsoil?
Doug: It's a pun. If you take off the "K" it's an
archaic term for excrement. Someone there was
literary enough to figure it out. So they wanted to
change the name to Lancelot and the Holy Grail,

and I said, "That's OK, but Lancelot never found
the Holy Grail." So, it became Galahad and the
Holy Grail. It was okay; it was a pretty good first
attempt and it sold pretty well for APX and almost
went mainline at Atari, but the whole thing fell
apart before it could happen. But, the good thing
for me out of that was that I got a job at Atari research.
CGW: That was Chris Crawford that hired you,
right?
Doug: Chris Crawford hired me on the strength
of that first game. It turned out that Chris and I
didn't get along real well, so I migrated to different
parts of the laboratory and worked on different
things. I was helping to design a new home computer there. I was working on the development effort to make graphics chips for it. I was working
on the programming language environment that I
bought the Atari to do in the first place, but now I
could do it right in the context of the new machine. My goal was to make a machine which could
do video games and be simple enough hat kids
could write their own games. I got fan mail from
"Galahad" players saying, "That was great. What do
I have to do in order to write a program like that?
What books do I have to read and what classes can
I take?" The answer was, "There are no books that
you can read and there are no classes that you can
take; it's just real hard." So I started to develop an
operating environment. There was talk in the lab of
something called "Kit" where you allow people to
make their own applications and most of the applications that people make are the same, but they
would be constrained by what the "kit" does, so if
people want to make spreadsheets, they get a
spreadsheet kit; people want to make environments,
they get an environment kit. I also have this powerful language called "Ply"...
CGW: P-L-Y?
Doug: P-L-Y. P for programming, L for Ian-

gauge and Y because we like you. Then we designed a computer called the "Gump"...
CGW: Gump?
Doug: Gump, G-U-M-P, the graphics and music
'puter, that was going to have a chip called the
"Rainbow," a graphics chip that I was working to
develop, and a marvelous music chip called the
"Amy" that you might have heard about with a
processor in memory and all that kind of stuff, but
the lab got closed before we got to finish that.
CGW: Wasn't Alan Kay involved in that stuff?
Doug: Yeah, he founded that laboratory.
CGW: There were some other interesting projects out of that laboratory. There were things that
they were working on that never saw the light of
day. What were some of the things that you were
doing there, besides what you talked about?
Doug: Other people there were doing stuff on
intelligent animation...
CGW: Intelligent animation?
Doug: Where the computer would actually know
a great deal about the structure of the things being
animated, whether it was based on constraints systems or behavior modeling or whatever.
CGW: So you mean you could say, "Tell Goofy
to walk from here to here" and it would automatically animate that sequence?
Doug: Stuff like that. But that was more longrange kind of stuff that they were working on. It's
unlikely that you could just tell Goofy that and really get what you want. They were working on the
things that would ultimately lead to that. There was
a media room project in which there would be a
room with projectors on all four walls in which you
were supposed to be in a simulated place that was
indistinguishable from reality. There had been some
video game research, but that got discontinued
pretty early on. Then there was the electronic encyclopedia project.
CGW: What was that?
Doug: Essentially you have a huge data base in
your computer and you could look it up and interact with the articles, either by running simulations
or animations inside of articles, or by calling constraints of cross references. And stuff like that is
actually starting to happen.
CGW: CD-ROM and CDI now.
Doug: At the time it looked so... far out. But
that's actually one of the most practical things that
they worked on.

CGW: So, you were at Atari, you migrated out
of the game design group, and migrated into other
interesting projects. Then what happened?
Doug: Then Warner sold Atari and I left. I
worked briefly at National Semiconductor. I
thought there was a chance there that I could take
the computer ideas that I was working on and actually get them implemented. It turned out that that
wasn't the place to do that and so I ended up here.
CGW: How did you feel that National Semiconductor was going to help you with that?
Doug: I was talking to a consumer marketing
group there. They don't sell their semiconductors to
consumers, they sell them to a manufacturer who
then sells them to consumers. So, they were looking
at things like automotive, microwave ovens, things
like that; places where they could put their semiconductors. They were also looking at information
systems, home computers, things like that. Part of
what I would be doing would be sketching up possible home computers, presenting those ideas to
manufacturers who would then go and make them.
Part of that business turned out to be real weak
because nobody is selling home computers anymore.
And we could talk about why that's happening...
but after a month or two I realized that my dreams
were not going to come true at National Semiconductor, so I came here.
CGW: So you came here to Lucasfilm when,
what year?
Doug: Let's see, I got here in November of 1984.
So, I've been here for almost 2 years.
CGW: When you came aboard here, what did
you expect, and has that turned out to be the case?
Doug: I expected that we would be mostly doing
home video games. For me, that hasn't been true.
I've done almost no home video games here. I did
do a design for a game that didn't get implemented
because I found some more interesting things to
work on. I am much closer to doing the really wild,
great stuff here than anywhere else I can imagine.
CGW: Really?
Doug: Part of it is hype. Lots of people want to
work with Lucasfilm, not because we've demonstrated that we can do anything yet, but because we
have this reputation and we have this glamour.
We're doing some really interesting stuff with other
corporations: new hardware developments, some of
which you've heard about, some of which you
haven't. They need help in figuring out what to do
with it and they will often come to us and be very

interested, so I get to work on that stuff. It's mutually rewarding.
CGW: In other words, you expected to work
mostly on video games, but you've worked on a
much more eclectic group of projects. Are you
happy with the way it has turned out?
Doug: Oh, yeah. It's wonderful. I can't imagine
doing anything more interesting than this. And I
can't imagine a better place to be doing it in.
CGW: So, maybe that's why everybody wants to
work at Lucasfilm?
Doug: True. And a lot of that hype is true,
which is a good thing. This is a very nice place to
work. We've got very good people.
CGW: Do you keep up with the games market
much? Do you play computer games?
Doug: I'll play one occasionally, but I don't do
much of it.
CGW: Have you seen any computer games that
you really liked lately?
Doug: No. I'm pretty disappointed by the whole
thing. To me the collapse of the video game thing
and the home computer thing all point at a set of
serious problems. And I don't usually see things
that seem to at least recognize these problems and
overcome them.
CGW: What are those problems?
Doug: Like with home computersthe big problem was that they didn't do anything useful. And
for a long time it didn't matter; people were so
swept away with the technological capabilities and
possibilities. They had grown up with them in TV
and movies and they thought, "Wow, if I can just
get a computer, my own computer, I can go against
the establishment, I can get control of my life,
could be in power, could have all this stuff working for me. Just wait." Well, then it happenedthe
machines came out and people were baffled by
them. The machines were pretty stupid, they were
much too hard to use. They were all cryptic and
once you did all that stuff and were able to do
things, things you did turned out weren't very interesting or helpful. The grand vision just never
came true. You know the stuff we heard about, the
Dynabook that first was talked about in the early
seventies, wow, imagine when that gets
outamazing. And it didn't happen. Hardly any of
that turned out to be true. The biggest thing that
happened was that we got desktop metaphors on the
Macintosh. That's not that useful.

CGW: You don't think so?
Doug: Not nearly enough. It doesn't come nearly
close enough to delivering on the promise. It
doesn't empower you, it doesn't help you get control of your life. So, my opinion is that home computers are never going to get big, or won't get big
again, until someone figures out what they are good
for. It hasn't been done yet.
CGW: In designing software, where do you want
to take people?
Doug: I want to make them feel things. I want to
give them things that they can take away and use.
In video games there's a lot of skill-building, especially in the skill-and-action games where you're
doing a lot of things, knocking things down, and so
forth. But the things you learn don't do you any
good in the real world. You can be failing in life,
play a tremendous video game, and still be failing
1
in life. So what I'd like to do is give you something
you can take with you and not just give you trivia.
There's some deep psychological thing that I think
we can get at that will do nice things for people.
CGW: Are there messages inside you that you
want to get out through game-like experiences?
Doug: No. I'm not looking at it as propaganda,
but more as helping people to find emotional material that's in themselves and finding a way to
connect to it.
CGW: You think you can do that?
Doug: Yeah, I think I can.
CGW: When?
Doug: I don't know. The biggest obstacle is getting a delivery medium. I need something that has
enough resolution and enough graphic presentation
power to deliver the things I want to deliver. And I
need it to be cheap and I need it to be now. And I
don't have it yet. I've seen some stuff that's coming
real close.
CGW: CDI?
Doug: CDI doesn't come close, but we're going
to get into CDI. It could do well. So we're going to
get into CDI, most likely, even though it's not the
medium that I'd like.
CGW: Why is it not the medium you'd like?
Doug: I have problems with the CD itself. I need
a lot more storage and a lot more bandwidth. If you
think of it in video termsyou know what a "jiffy"
is, right? That's a sixtieth of a second. We want our
graphic programs to be running at that speed.
That's the best you can do with television.
Continued on pg. 44

.

Continued from pg. 42

CGW: You can do about three frames per second
with CDI, right?
Doug: Yeah. The CD itself can deliver about
2.5K per jiffy. And so you try to imagine, "What
kind of an experience can I deliver in a sixtieth of
a second with 2.5K?" And that's not much. So I'm
bandwidth-limited. There's only so much information that you can deliver. And then if you look at
random-access, CDI does even worse.
CGW: It's slow. Why do you need so much
bandwidth?
Doug: I need the bandwidth because of Mom.
CGW: Mom?
Doug: Mom. M-O-M. In order for it to be successful, Mom has to buy it. You can't have Skip
and Dad doing this in the basement. The whole
family's going to have to buy into this or there
won't be enough to make critical mass. If Mom gets
suspicious of this the same way she did of the VCS,
it won't fly. And Mom didn't do real well with
video games because all she ever saw were these
little jagged things. If it doesn't look as good as
what she watches on television, and if she has to
look at it on a television set, there's going to be
some psychological barrier. She's not even going to
be aware of it, but there's going to be something
that's going to keep her from connecting with
whatever it is you're trying to give her. So I need
something which is going to be video-like.
CGW: So Mom is the crucial person?
Doug: I like to design my stuff for Mom.
CGW: Did Galahad and the Holy Grail appeal to
Mom?
Doug: No.
CGW: Who bought it?
Doug: Teenagers. Dads. There were some Dads
who worked at Atari who became major fans; I almost destroyed some marriages with it. The thing
was nice in that it never demanded that you play
the game. You could make up your own game, invent your own rules, and go off to some other part
of the kingdom to do your own stuff. There's a
holy hand grenade of Antioch in it. And that was
intended to kill a rabbit.
CGW: Of course!
Doug: But you didn't have to do that. You could
just go around and blow up the landscape. And so
people do that. They blow up the landscape, they
blow up themselves, and they go and get it again,

because when you die, everything's resurrected.
They could go and see how many rooms they could
blow up. And I never really intended that, but if
you can do it, why not?
CGW: If you weren't at Lucasfilmif you were
an independentwhich computer would you be designing software for, and what kind of software do
you think you would be designing?
Doug: Realistically, I think the only choice right
now is the Commodore 64.
CGW: Because of the size of the market?
Doug: Yes. If 1 could be designing for the machine 1 liked, it would probably be the Atari 800 or
the Amiga.
CGW: What kind of software do you think you
would be doing?
Doug: The world could still use a really good
music program.
CGW: What about Deluxe Music Construction
Set from Electronic Arts?
Doug: The music program that I would like to
see hasn't been written yet. if you have music in
your head but do not have the formal training to
translate it into real sound, the computer should be
able to help you do so. This seems to me to be one
of the useful tasks that a personal computer can do.
CGW: Any other programs you would like to
do?
Doug: There are still some video games I would
like to write. One problem is that the market for
those games probably doesn't even exist anymore.
The people I would have sold it to aren't buying
anymore. So I would probably have a very tough
time writing video games.
CGW: If you couldn't do what you're doing here
at Lucasfilm, what would you like to do?
Doug: I don't even think about it anymore. Perhaps I should protect myself, but I'm having such a
good time here...
CGW: What happens if your group is sold off?
George Lucas has already sold Pixar and DroidWorks.
Doug: They sold off things that were not production-oriented. Anything that was making
movies, they kept. Anything that was developing
technology, they spun off. We're sort of in the
middle, but as long as we can keep track of what
we're doing, and make sure that we're doing production and not technology, and as long as we can
be profitable, then we have a home here.

I

TITLE:
Blue Powder, Grey Smoke
SYSTEM:
Apple II, (soon C-64)
# PLAYERS: 1-2
PRICE:
$49.95
DESIGNER:
Ralph Bosson
PUBLISHER: Garde' Games of Distinction
8 Bishop Lane
Madison, CT 06443
(203) 245-9089

Normally, one gives the benefit of the doubt to
any new company which enters the wargaming or
computer wargaming field. After all, there just isn't
much money for a struggling new business. One
simply doesn't expect the first effort of a publisher
to match the "cutting edge" market level. In the
case of Garde' games, however, the first release can
stand on its own. This is because it is based on the
efforts of a top-flight designer. The game is BLUE
POWDER, GREY SMOKE, and the designer is
Ralph Bosson. Bosson's first game, UNDER FIRE!
was quite a hit for The Avalon Hill Game Company.
BLUE POWDER, GREY SMOKE (BPGS) is a
game which covers operational and tactical engagements during the Civil War. It includes nine scenarios drawn from three of the most famous Civil
War battles: Antietam; Gettysburg; and Chickamauga. The game includes a 48 page rules booklet
and the game diskette. The rules booklet contains
the rules, a tutorial to follow along through the introductory scenario, and the scenario descriptions.
One point does need to be cleared up, however.
Just exactly what "kind" of game is this? The text
on the box implies that BPGS has role-playing elements and that you can choose to command anything from a single company to the entire Army Of
The Potomac. Well... actually, it has no more roleplaying elements than any other wargame, as far as
I can see. When you play a scenario, you are taking
the place of a particular army officer in history.
You try to do better than he did historically. In
BPGS you do give your units their orders using realistic Civil War military lingo, but that alone can
not qualify it as a role-playing game in the classically accepted sense. There is no character generation, no continuation of a character from one scenario to another, and no real impact of your
"character" on the game other than the fact that you
are in the position of "the man at the top".
The second point I mentioned, that of being able
to take control at any of several different command
levels, leads to a discussion of one of the oddest
features of the game. I will defer this discussion

until we have looked at the game as a whole. Suffice it to say that you can assume any of several
different command levels, but that these are specific to each scenario. The scenarios span a broad
range, from a tactical engagement where each unit
represents 50 to 200 men (and you play a company
commander) to operational battles where each unit
represents an entire division (and you command
several Corps).
THE SYSTEM
BPGS recreates Civil War battles in a "real time"
environment. There are no "turns" per se; the battle
progresses and men move and fight on the screen as
a "clock" in the menu area keeps track of the time.
The player can request an interrupt at any time and
this freezes the action. One is then free to issue
new movement and fire orders, check the status of
friendly units, or whatever. Then, a simple press of
the "fire" button on your joystick (Apple owners
can also use the "Escape" key) and the action starts
again.
The primary task for the player in BPGS is to
give movement and combat orders to his units. In
setting up the orders system, Ralph Bosson has
created the strongest part of his design. The lower
third of the monitor screen is used for a series of
windows which contain both menus and information displays. After stopping the game action, all
player inputs are menu driven, and the entire game
can actually be played by toggling the joystick to

by Jay C. Selover

select an option and pressing the "fire" button.
Movement, facing, and posture orders are all
given to units by a similar procedure. Units can be
individually selected and then ordered to move to a
location by either a computer-chosen or playerspecified path. If you just want your men to move
from one point to another by the most efficient
route (as when reinforcements arrive and are
headed towards the battle area), let the computer
choose the path and take care of getting them
there. If, however, a unit needs to follow a specific
path (you want the men to slip around behind the
enemy and attack them from the rear), then you
can give orders to the unit which will specify the
exact route to be taken. The movement orders are
the same as would really have been used; examples
are "Column right march" and "About face, double
quick march." Most of the orders (which are actually constructed by stringing together separate
words which are on the Orders Menu) will be easy
to grasp, but it will take some time to get used to
the "oblique" commands. The game uses a square
grid. Therefore, a unit can have any one of eight
facings. "Oblique" commands turn a full turn into a
45 degree turn. Thus, a north-facing unit which
executes a "Right oblique face" will then face
northeast. What can make it confusing is that units
can march on the oblique without changing facing.
In addition to simple movement orders, players
can specify both the formation and posture of their
men. Units can be in column, in line, or in skirmish order. Units can also be split in half for pur-

poses of formation (they must always remain together for movement). Units can also be ordered to
"deny the flank." This means to bend back about
one third of the line at an angle to keep from being
attacked in the flank. The combination of splitting
a unit and the "deny" orders even allows an isolated
unit to form a "box" for maximum defense. In this
case, the unit is split and the two halves face opposite directions with both halves denying one
flank. Therefore, there is very little the enemy can
find in the way of exposed flank or rear. For posture orders, each unit can be ordered to stand,
kneel, or lie prone. These have appropriate effects
on movement capabilities and defense against enemy fire, as well as affecting the ability of the unit
to spot enemy units.
Combat orders can also be controlled either by
the computer or specified by the player. Each unit
can be ordered to "fire at will", in which case the
computer will decide which enemy unit poses the
greatest threat and select it as the target. Or, the
player can specify a target for each unit. In this
mode, the player also has control over several firing
techniques which were actually employed in the
Civil War. Units can either "volley fire" (all men
shoot at once and then reload) or fire by rank or
by file (part of the unit fires and then the rest of
the men fire while the others are reloading or as
soon as the others have finished reloading).
One of my quibbles with the documentation for
the game is that there is little in the descriptions of
some of these specialized orders to indicate how
significantly they can affect a battle. The ability to
split a unit in half plus the ability of each half of
the unit to execute a different special combat order
allows you to execute as many as four separate fire
attacks by one unit against one enemy unit in a
minute of play. Each of these separate attacks is
weaker than the volley fire of the unit as a whole,
but an enemy unit with reduced morale has a
chance to break and rout whenever fired on. Thus,
the same number of casualties could give you a
much better result by careful management of your
formations and combat orders.
The basic units in BPGS are made up of either
infantry, sharpshooters, cavalry, and artillery. Infantry make up most of the units, and they are, of
course, the good old foot soldier. Sharpshooter units
are very rare and are basically the same as infantry,
but with more effective firepower because of the
better rifles and improved training they received.
Cavalry can be either mounted or dismounted, with

appropriate effects on movement and combat. Cavalry can fight while mounted, either at normal
ranges (though pistols can be wildly inaccurate
fired from horseback), or in close combat in cavalry charges (sabers drawn!). Artillery can be limbered and unlimbered with, of course, only unlimbered artillery able to fire.

CHROME
Maybe it's not accurate to call the peripherals
"chrome," but by now, we have come to expect
certain things of a good combat simulation. Quite a
few weapon types are represented in the game. Artillery batteries will contain the historical types of
cannons which really made up each battery,
whether Napoleons, Howitzers, or Parrot Rifles.
Not all of the exact types are represented, but there
is enough differentiation to give a fairly accurate
accounting (five types of artillery and four types of
rifles and carbines).
Morale, fatigue, and command control are
tracked for each unit. Although morale and fatigue
are affected by the progress of the battle, I was a
bit disappointed to see that the command level of
each unit is apparently preset and fixed in each
scenario as a function of the quality of that unit's
leader. There are no higher level headquarters units
in the game.
As is appropriate in a Civil War game, morale is
the great destroyer of units. As a unit takes casualties or remains in prolonged battle, the morale of
the unit begins to suffer. If it gets too low, the unit
routs and heads for home. The player loses control
of the unit as it runs headlong towards the rear.
One can only wait and hope that the unit's commander will rally his troops at a later point (it
seems to take anywhere from half an hour to several hours in game time) and return them to your
control.

SCENARIOS: A MATTER OF SCALE
In discussing the scenarios that are presented in
the game, I can no longer avoid discussing the one
oddity of BPGS that I mentioned earlier. This is a
problem with the varying scales of the scenarios
and the units of maneuver. As mentioned before,
the scenarios cover situations that range from
brigade-level actions up to full size battles. How
can one game cover such a wide range? This game

accomplishes this by changing the scale of the map
and the unit of maneuver. In a tactical engagement
scenario, one finds the units represent companies
(50-200 men) and each map position represents
about 50 yards. In the large scenarios, the units on
the map each represent divisions (2000-6000 men)
and the map positions are each approximately 500
yards across. What this seems to teach the player is
that a brigade commander in the Civil War would
do pretty much the same thing as a Corps commander, but with smaller units. This may be true in
general terms of ordering subordinate units to go to
certain locations in order to fight, but the orders
system in the game seems more appropriate for the
lower level commanders. Whole divisions were seldom treated as a single unit of maneuver in the
Civil War.
Even more peculiar is the lack of consistency in
the units of maneuver within the scenarios. Each
scenario includes between five and thirty units per
side. Most units in each scenario represent the same
sized unit, but there are exceptions in most scenarios. For instance, in the scenario covering the first
day at Gettysburg, the Union I Corps is represented
by brigade-sized units while the units representing
Howard's XI Corps are each divisions; Wadsworth's
division (I Corps, 3600 men) has two units on the
map (one for each brigade, about
1800 men each), while Schurz's division (XI
Corps, 3900 men) is represented by a single unit.
Granted that the men in XI Corps were probably
only about half as effective as those in I Corps, and
that a single brigade from Howard's Corps probably
could not have done anything worthwhile, one must
still argue that if one allows independent maneuver
by brigades in one unit, we should be allowed to do
it in other units as well.
An even stranger representation is the selection
of Confederate units in that same scenario. The
historical units were Heth's and Pender's divisions
(in A.P. Hill's Corps) attacking down the Chambersburg Pike, followed later that morning by
Early's and Rhode's divisions (Longstreet's Corps)
from the north. In the scenario, each Confederate
division is represented by two units. These apparently each represent two or three brigades apiece. A
"half division" simply was not a unit of maneuver
in the Civil War. Either each division should be
forced to remain together as one unit on the map,

Continued on pg. 56

Continued from pg. 38
With this configuration, you have a ship that can
explore a little further out and escape if communications with aliens seem to be falling apart. Your
next upgrade should concentrate on the training of
crew so that you have highly skilled and non-android crew at all positions, except engineer and
doctor. You will be ready for deep-space exploration when: all crew are trained to the max; your
engines are at level 3; your shields at level 4; armor
at level five; and laser cannon at level 2. When you
add an offensive capability to your ship, you gain
the advantage of being able to destroy alien vessels
and then pick-up any endurium they may have had
with them, but remember, they shoot back and a
well trained Engineer can be worth his weight in
gold when repairing damaged systems in space.
With all ship's systems at level 4 except armor
which should be at level 5, about 20 cargo pods,
and a highly trained five person crew, you can explore about 95% of the galaxy with very few trips
back to Starport Central for repair and replacement.
[Ed. Note: Imagine a spacefarer with Humphrey
Bogart's voice, "Don't get cocky, kid, because there
are still some places you can't go and live to tell
about until all systems are maxed. Even then, you
may need to get the first shot while the alien's
screens are still down in order to survive."]
In short, Starflight has to be the best science
fiction game available on computer. Warm approval
is certainly due Rod McConnell for his creative
initiative and over-all direction, Joe Ybarra for
taking the risk to produce more than either a
"shoot-em-up" game or a sci-fi "D & D;" Greg
Johnson for his work as lead designer and primary
character creator (Guide Of Development?); Alec
Kercso for a dynamite programming achievement;
T. C. Lee for the aforementioned graphic sequences; and Bob Gonsalves for the sound sophistication. Some will talk about Sundog and others
will speak in hushed tones about Universe I, but
Starflight will hold a special niche for a long time
and give many months of pleasure before the final
exploration occurs.
By the way, If you play the game from hard
disk, I recommend that you set up a couple of subdirectories to hold various stages of the game. Use
the save game option and then copy all files in the
main play directory to one of the sub-directories. If
your ship gets destroyed or all the crew dies the

game starts over from the beginning. If you have
saved the files then you can restart by copying the
sub-directory back to the main directory and you
can pick-up the game from your last saved position. Happy exploring.

MICRO-REVIEWS

PATTON VS. ROMMEL
TITLE:
PATTON vs ROMMEL
SYSTEM:
Macintosh
DESIGNER:
Chris Crawford
PUBLISHER: Electronic Arts
San Mateo, CA

BACKGROUND
They were the two greatest tank commanders of the second world war. The
American was George "Blood & Guts"
Patton and the German was Erwin Rommel, the "Desert Fox." Brilliant, combative
and fiercely competitive, they were, ironically, never to face each other in battle.
Until now, that is! Now, Electronic Arts
and Chris Crawford have teamed up to finally bring these two legendary figures
from World War II together. This is the
contest they were meant to fight more
than forty years ago, PATTON VS.
ROMMEL (PVR), the Battle of Normandy.
PVR is set in post D-Day Normandy.
By late July of 1944, the "victorious" allied
invasion of Hitler's Fortress Europe was
looking altogether too much like the failed
Anzio landing in Italy, the previous year.
Instead of a swift advance from the beachhead, the British and Americans were
bogged down for nearly two months by
interminable hedgerows infested with a
seemingly endless supply of veteran German soldiers. Making matters worse, these
battle hardened veterans were commanded
by one of the ablest German generals ever
to carry a Field Marshal's baton, Erwin
Rommel. Something had to be done to get
the stalled Western Front moving. That
something was Operation Cobra, a massive
allied aerial bombardment followed by a
breakout led by the American armored
and infantry units in the Normandy
pocket. To lead the attack Gen. Bradley
would finally choose the most combative
soldier to wear an American uniform since
Robert E. Lee, George Patton. This clash
of intellect and spirit was not to be. A
week before Cobra began, Erwin Rommel
was severely wounded by an allied fighter
bomber and out of the war for good. Chris
Crawford's PVR brings them together at
last!
PVR comes in the now standard EA
"Slip Cover" style packaging. The cover
art is pure EA, depicting Patton and
Rommel glowering face to face with a map
of Normandy in the background! (Patton
& Rommel Go One on One?) Inside you'll
find a program disk and a game manual
that's both readable AND informative, including historical background, "Quick
Start" rules for those too impatient to read
the manual before booting the game disk,
separate sections for each level of the
game, Beginner, Intermediate and Advanced and finally a short biography of
both George Patton and Erwin Rommel.

GAME SYSTEM
In PVR Crawford's gaming system
brings a host of game options and some of
his own innovation to strategy gaming in
general and the Apple Macintosh in particular. The game proceeds in "turns" of 24
hours with simultaneous allied and german
combat and movement. In addition only
those enemy units within "sight" of a
friendly unit are visible on screen. Having
Panzer Lehr disappear into the Boccage
can give even the boldest gamer pause!
The scale is divisional, with off-screen
tactical air support available to the allied
player only. (Allied air supremacy on the
Western Front was nearly absolute by this
time. A popular saying making the rounds
of the Wehrmact went, "Wo ist der Luftwaffe"?) Air support is "attached" to one
of a maximum of two divisions for any single 24 hour period. In addition, Generals
Patton and Rommel will accompany one of
their units, lending considerable command
benefits to that unit, as well as the ability
to "intervene" during a game turn. This
allows players to change orders for any
friendly units nearby, if need be..
PVR includes three levels of play, Beginner, Intermediate and Expert. In the
Beginning Level, for those new to war
gaming, both game play and on-screen
commands are simplified. In the Intermediate Level however, you not only direct
where a unit is supposed to go but how it's
supposed to get there and just how it will
execute combat. Six new Attack and Defense Modes are available to execute more
sophisticated movement and combat commands. In addition units may even wait
for a specified time and change their facing
to maximize fire power. Finally the Expert
Level is really a game "editor", allowing
the gamer to change any of the game's
parameters from unit combat capability,
speed, breaking point etc. While this isn't
a game design kit (you couldn't create a
Bastogne Scenario for example) you could
change a few parameters and turn a war
weary Wehrmact unit into a crack SS Division for example.
GAME PLAY
Game play in PVR may be either two
player or solitaire, with both veteran and
novice gamers finding a challenging computer opponent. But Crawford has gone
one giant step further and in PVR has created a solitaire opponent which is much
more than a mirror image of Chris Crawford, the designer. What you, as the
gamer, really want as you play the game is
the opportunity to actually face Patton or
Rommel in combat and test yourself
against "their" tactics. Well, Crawford's
done just that. The computer Patton or
Rommel uses the same type of offensive
and defensive tactics that both generals
used historically during their campaigns!
PVR uses the hi-resolution Macintosh
display to full advantage, as well. The

screen displays a detailed, and we do mean
detailed, map of the Normandy peninsula
with terrain, rivers, towns and the all important road network displayed in striking
detail. Units may be identified using either
infantry or armored icons or, instead, may
display their relative strength or combat
capability. The effect is rather like unfolding a topographical map over the hood
of your jeep or Volkswagen behind the
lines! Using the familiar Macintosh Interface a series of game options in pull down
windows are available from a menu bar at
the top of the screen including executing
the next turn and loading and saving
games in progress. Arranged along the left
side of the display are a series of command
icons. "Cracked", or demoralized units are
even depicted with , you guessed it,
"cracked" icons! I just wish I could say as
much for the sound effects. One of the
combat sounds has more in common with a
bronx cheer then the roar of battle and
mercifully the sound can be turned off.
(The Mac REALLY does have a four voice
audio system, honest!)
Audio aside, the net effect of all this
ingenuity on the Mac is a VERY playable
game. PVR plays quickly with minutes,
rather then hours, between turns. Indeed
players are tempted in PVR to play "just
one more turn". And if you think the
Macintosh made spreadsheets and word
processors simple to use wait till you see
what it, and Crawford, have done for computer gaming! PVR employs a gaming
system designed to simulate battlefield
command as well as combat. Battlefield
commanders, after all, give units an
"objective", leaving to their subordinates
the details of just how those "objectives"
will be taken. "Orders" in PVR are issued
in much the same way. The unit to be
moved is selected with a click of the
mouse, a statistics window opens on screen
showing the infantry or armored units
available strength in men and tanks and
the unit's "relative" strength in the game.
In addition, weather permitting, air support may be assigned to the unit, if available for the next day's operations. Movement in PVR couldn't be easier. Simply
point to where you want the unit to go
with your mouse and "click". Multiple orders can be issued to a unit in this way
and the sequence of orders is even
"remembered" from turn to turn! This aspect of the system goes a long way to create both a more "playable" game and more
sophisticated simulation.
But Crawford isn't done just yet. One,
often valid criticism of computer vs. board
gaming is the lack of social interaction
when playing a solitaire computer game.
Even in two player games it's one thing to
have your opponent point out that your
"lightning" advance seems to be held up in
a traffic jam on the road to Caen but one
can't help wondering what Patton or
Rommel would have advised you to do. In
PVR there is a game option that brings
the General and the Field Marshal ON-

SCREEN at the conclusion of each game
turn in order to offer a few choice comments concerning your handling of the
operation! Veteran garners will enjoy the
interaction and newcomers will find the
advice goes a long way to making an
evening with PVR enjoyable rather then
needlessly frustrating.
This reviewer can think of no other
computer game, on any computer, that
he'd choose to introduce the joys of war
gaming to a friend than PVR. It's not a
"monster" game or an exhaustive "study"
of the Normandy military campaign. It's
what we used to affectionately call in
board gaming a 'beer and pretzel' game.
Simple to learn and play and great good
fun!
William H. Harrington

STRATEGIC CONQUEST PLUS
TITLE:
Strategic Conquest Plus
SYSTEM:
Macintosh
DESIGNER:
Peter Merrill
PUBLISHER: PBI Software
1111 Triton Dr.
Foster City, CA 94404
(415) 349-8765

Strategic Conquest Plus (SC+), from
PBI Software Inc., is a Macintosh game
with a difference. Actually, it's quite different. This latest version of Peter Merrill's game may be played either single or
multiplayer and includes some new and
rather unique features and enhancements
over the original. These include improved
graphics, automated moves, automatic
game saves, digitized sound and even support of the AppleTalk Network! My favorite improvement is what I consider the
most insidious copy protection scheme yet,
but more about that later. SC+ comes
packaged in a conventional slip cover, but
the cover art depicts a graphic display of
the globe that has absolutely nothing to
do with the game. What ever worlds you
conquer in SC+, it definitely won't be this
one. The documentation, though not as
"slick" as some, is well written, readable
and includes numerous screen printouts to
illustrate game commands and play. Two
game disks are included, a "Program" disk
and a "Sound" disk.
What SC+ is not is a literal simulation
of any historical or contemporary conflict.
SC+, in fact, creates an imaginary randomly generated world (or worlds, actually
up to two billion of them, if you like!)
Think of SC+ as "Risk" with a college education. Each "World" includes continents,
cities and oceans on a 90 by 70 grid. You'll
begin the game on your "own" continent
with one city. You may choose to play
with another human or against a computer
opponent with 15 difficulty levels ranging
from push-over to unbeatable. The first
order of business is to explore your continent and "discover" each of it's cities.
Cities in SC+ can belong to you, be independent or belong to the "other" side.
That's right, you have a rival somewhere
else on this imaginary world! Sooner or
later, human or computer, you're going
run into this rival conqueror and have to
deal with them. For now, however, you'll
have to establish your own empire.

GAME SYSTEM
In establishing your empire, SC+ provides you with "pieces" or weapon types.
Each "piece" may represent an Army, a
Fighter Jet, a Bomber, a Troop Transport,
an Aircraft Carrier, a Destroyer, a Submarine or a Battleship. Each of these
weapon types has its own particular combat strength, capabilities, movement and
"Cost". In SC+, conquered cities are used
to produce armies and weapons. The cost
represents the actual number of days required for a city to produce the selected
weapon. The only exceptions to this rule
are Bombers. In SC+, these pieces are "one
way only" weapons and have more in
common with cruise missiles than conventional bombers. Bombers, however, are the
most destructive pieces in the game, hence
both their cost and destructive power increases throughout the game.
Having explored and conquered your
home continent, the rest of the world lies
before you! Players can use either ships or
fighter planes to explore new continents.
To conquer these new continents and their
cities, however, you'll have to build troop
transports to ferry your armies across the
oceans! Then, to protect your expeditionary forces, you'll need to provide naval
and air support for the invasions.
The graphic displays in SC+ show only
a small portion of the world at any one
time. Players may, of course, scroll the
display within the map window. In this
display, unexplored areas are blacked out
and only revealed as your pieces move
through, or over, the unexplored territory.
Players can also choose to see a full screen
overview of the entire world, as currently
explored.
The SC+ game system makes full use
of the Macintosh interface including menu
bar, pull down windows, dialogue boxes
and, of course, that boon to computer
gaming, the mouse. Sound is where the
latest version of SC+ really shines. Not
only does SC+ have a full range of sound
effects to accompany combat, but the
game actually talks! Players can elect to
have the combat summaries and messages
delivered in digitized speech.
GAME PLAY
Pieces may be moved manually, one
location on the world grid at a time, or

simply by clicking the mouse on the destination and allowing the SC+ piece to move
to the target. While the object of the game
is to control as many cities as possible,
you'll have to defeat your opponent in
combat in order to accomplish this. Combat in SC+ is simplicity itself. Your piece
either destroys your opponent, is itself destroyed or "draws." Incidentally, nothing
in the game will prevent you from attempting the ludicrous, such as attacking
an enemy battleship with the troops on
your transport. The game will warn you,
however, that the probable outcome will
be your troops leaping into the ocean and
drowning! Nice touch there.
Game play in SC+ moves relatively
quickly during the early stages of the
game, but as the players acquire more
"pieces" and more of the world is explored,
game turns can become quite long. Even
though groups of pieces or "stacks" can be
moved as a single unit, this can become
lugubrious. Fortunately, Peter Merrill has
thoughtfully provided an autoplay option
which allows the game to take over your
moves until you wish to continue!
Perhaps the most innovative feature of
SC+ is the Network Option. Two players
on a Macintosh Network or with two Macs
sharing a printer cable can play the game
remotely. There's even a host of password
protection options to keep everyone honest. Further, just to keep the network
players from getting lonely in their cubicles, there's even an option to send messages back and forth during the game.
This sort of thing at the office could really
have potential! I've saved the best for last,
however. For those of the skull and crossbones persuasion (you know who you are
out there!), PBI let's you copy SC+ to
your heart's content. Unfortunately for
you, however, the pirated version is permanently set at the highest difficulty level,
15. Who says game designers don't have a
sense of humor?
SUMMARY
Strategic Conquest Plus is one of those
rare games that the author seems committed to improving. With a host of innovative new features and the ability to
withstand a billion or so replays, SC+ is
certainly worth taking a look at. Just keep
the sound down if the boss is around.
William H. Harrington

50 Mission Crush
Continued from pg. 21
gunners would fend off the fighters. Now, I was
getting into the game.
That's the way it was sometimes, like when we
were limping home from Ploesti with the windmilling No. 3 engine. We threw out everything not
nailed down, including the bombsight, as we tried to
stem the continuing loss of altitude. We finally leveled out at about 4,000 feet, flying about 2 MPH
above stalling speed. We still had a 6,000 foot
mountain to cross. Our navigator managed to guide
us through a river valley where we looked up at
trees on either side of us. As we broke out over the
Adriatic, gas was pouring out of the windmilling
engine so we knew we couldn't make Italy. We decided to try for the Island of Vis (off the Yugoslavian coast) and its short 3,500 foot runway.
With our low gas situation and our propeller ripping off from the engine on the land approach, we
thought things were tough. The pilots knew it was
worse than tough. They saw an open cockpit biplane starting down the runway from our end toward the middle, leaving us only about 1,500 feet of
runway--and a cliff at the end of the runway. As
our pilot dropped the B-24 in front of the bi-plane,
the men in the waist held out parachutes, strapped to
gunmounts, and pulled the rip cords. Between the
two brake chutes and the four adrenalin spiked legs
of the pilots, the plane screeched to a halt--the nose
section sticking out over the cliff's edge about a foot
or two. That was close!
Lucky seven! When I drew Bremen, a 1,310 mile
round trip, I knew "milk runs" were a thing of the
past. The game was really going to test me, this
time. I took the northern route again to conserve
gas and ran into the usual heavy fighter action
while still over the channel. I got a little trigger
happy and expended more ammo than I should
have. We suffered considerable flak damage: the
wing and stabilizer were badly chewed up, the fuel
tanks took two hits and two guns were immobilized.
I faced three possibilities--all bad: 1) not enough
fuel to make it across the channel (I could bail out
now and come back to fight again); 2) not enough
ammo to defend ourselves; or 3) a plane about to

fall apart from structural damage.
My thoughts went back to my fiftieth combat
mission with the 460th Bomb Group (based in Italy).
Due to some engine checks, we were 45 minutes late
taking off and had to try to join our formation over
the Tyrrhenian Sea en route for an attack on the
marshalling yards at Arles, France (in preparation
for the forthcoming southern invasion). As we approached the formation, sliding in to fill the open
spot in #7 position of the #6 box (affectionately
known as "Purple Heart Corner"), we noticed bullets
coming through our plane. They were coming from
the plane in the #5 position--evidence of a runaway
gun during test firing. Our right wing caught fire in
the wheel well. I salvoed the bombs and the pilot
dropped the landing gear in hopes the inrushing air
might put out the fire. Wrong! He shut off both
starboard engines and feathered the propellers. He
was determined to make shore so that we wouldn't
have to bail out in the ocean.
Finally, the wing blew up and I managed to open
the bomb bay doors and get out. The pilot, co-pilot
and radioman were pinned against their seats by the
centrifugal force of the flat spin and could not escape. I will never forget watching that stricken
bomber spiraling in and the undulating sound of its
two out-of-sync port engines, as I hung in the comparative safety of my parachute. About one quarter
of a mile away, the right wing was flopping around.
A round oil slick in the center of the bay formed
by the mouth of the Tiber river marked the grave of
the three trapped men. The circle of oil kept growing as I neared the bay. Suddenly, it was everywhere
as I splashed down about thirty feet from where the
plane's radio antenna was sticking out of the water.
As I saw my world crumbling around me on my
seventh mission, I was striving for some way to
prevent what I knew would soon happen. Fighters
kept coming at us. We would drive one away and
another would take its place. Doom was inevitable.
Suddenly, the monitor began screaming, "Bail
Out! Bail Out!" My palms were sweating. "Could I
get the bomb bay doors open in time?" I wondered.
The screen began listing: "Danny's parachute
opened," "Sid's parachute opened," and "Holt's
parachute opened." In my mind's ear, I could hear
the throbbing of the out-of-sync engines below me.
Then the shocker flashed upon the screen: "Capt.
Leroy Newby Killed In Action." It was more than a
game at that point. I was reading my own obituary!
The fact that I had earned 8,350 points and had
been promoted to Captain didn't seem to matter. 

BLUE POWDER, GREY SMOKE
Continued from pg. 48
It is true that I have picked out some obvious
cases and that some of the scenarios do maintain
consistency in unit size (for instance, the scenario
covering Dunker Church and the Cornfield at
Antietam has every unit as a brigade of infantry of
one artillery battery). Still, one wonders about some
of the choices. I cannot tell if there was a limitation on the number of units which could be programmed for each side or if it was felt that units
which pretty much stayed together in the historical
battle could be lumped together as one unit for the
purpose of the game. I also must admit that once
you get into playing the game, it doesn't matter too
much what type of organization each unit represents. You will be thinking about the units in terms
of how many men each contains and their morale,
rather than what parent organization they belong to.
This is, I guess, where we get to the realization
that BPGS is ultimately a "player's game". It plays
smoothly and lets you move and fight with your
units with a minimum of hassle. It seems to contain
accurate combat algorithm's (this is another case
where we have to take the designer's word for it
that he really HAS factored all of those modifiers
into the combat system). It does tend to reward
proper and careful use of your forces and the outcome of each game will depend on the player's tactics. I fear, though, that the true Civil War buff
will have trouble looking past the unit representations in several cases. If you can just accept that
during Pickett's Charge, Rhodes' first brigade can
move independently while the second and third
brigades must move together...
SCENARIOS: GETTING DOWN TO CASES
Antietam is represented by three scenarios. The
first covers the fighting for Dunker Church, where
the Union I Corps got so badly chewed up in the
Cornfield (and Mansfield's XII Corps didn't fare
too much better). The second covers the fighting
which occurred later in the morning and continued
past noon around the Sunken Road. The third represents the battle for Burnside's Bridge (actually it
starts after the crossing and deals mostly with
Burnside's delayed pursuit which was stopped by
the timely arrival of Hill's division). One other
point worth mentioning is that all of the scenarios
have only the units that were involved in the actual
fighting. In the Burnside's Bridge scenario, the two
forces fight it out southeast of Sharpsburg while
the rest of the strategic map is bare. Since the sce-

troduction to the game. In this action, Buford's
cavalry attempt to delay or stop Heth's division
early on July 1. The next scenario covers most of
the first day, as the Union forces were pushed back
through town. The third scenario is a very tactical
look at Devil's Den, with it's own special tactical
map of the area. Finally, we have a scenario for
Pickett's Charge on July 3. Chickamauga is represented by two scenarios. The first occurred the day
before the main battle started, as two Union cavalry brigades attempt to hold the bridges over
Chickamauga creek against superior Confederate
forces, and the last scenario takes place after the
bulk of the Union army is retreating back towards
Chattanooga with Thomas's 14th Corps attempting
to buy time for the rest of the Federals against
Longstreet's Corps.
FINAL THOUGHTS
I like playing BPGS. One big reason, that I
haven't mentioned so far, involves the hypothetical
options. Each scenario allows you to recreate either
the historical situation or a hypothetical one. If you
go hypothetical, the computer will choose one of
several different alternate possibilities for each side.
It may mean that your reinforcements will arrive
earlier (or later!) than they historically did; extra
units may be added to either side; or the starting
morale or fatigue values for your units may be
changed. Of course, your opponent gets some sort
of change also. To add to the realism (and playability) neither player is informed by the computer
as to what it has done to the scenario. You might
wait and wait for reinforcements that never arrive
or you might find enemy units where none were
expected. Any number of surprises are possible and
must be guarded against. This really is a clever way
to introduce "fog of war".
Anyway, I like playing BPGS. Some might insist
that I should be a bit more of a purist and demand
that the units I'm moving around on the screen really represent realistic maneuver elements of the
Civil War. Others might want me to demand better
command control rules and superior headquarters
units. I could wish I'd bought IBM at $15, too.
Nevertheless, if the Civil War is a passion for you,
you'll just have to swallow hard and accept a few
things. If, on the other hand, you would like to see
just how easy it is for a crack division of 6000 men
to turn into a frightened mob running back to
Washington, give this one a look.

PEEK (cont.)
graphics and an opportunity for the
player to test his pilot skills in dogfights, crosswinds, and blind landings.
The crosswind and turbulence mode
will give you deja vu from the film,
"Top Gun." Atari 800 with 48K
($24.95). Circle Reader Service #9.
MichTron
576 S. Telegraph
Pontiac, MI 48053
TIME BANDIT: If you've successfully
run "The Gauntlet" in the arcade,
you'll enjoy playing this arcade lookalike. The game has a fantasy adventure ("Castle Greymoon"), wild west
adventure ("Ghost Town"), and space
adventure ("Excalibur") all rolled into
one. Two player mode is available.
Atari ST ($39.95). Circle Reader Service #11.
Mindscape, Inc.
3444 Dundee Road
Northbrook, IL 60062
FIST - THE LEGEND CONTINUES:
Kung Fu aficionados should like this
hybrid arcade/adventure game. The
game has more than 100 screens complete with puzzles, traps, and the requisite Ninja assassins, Shoguns, mercenaries, and angry peasants. A plague
of "Grasshoppers" upon the foul villains. C-64/128 ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #13.
INDIANA JONES IN REVENGE OF
THE ANCIENTS: A text adventure in
the familiar Angelsoft format, this scenario takes place in Mexico's famous
Tepotzteco Pyramid. As "Indy," the
player must fight off the venomous
snakes, banditos, and vampire bats in
order to stop the Nazis from acquiring
the Mazatec Power Key. Apple, IBM,

Macintosh ($39.95). Circle Reader Service # 14.
PARALLAX: Five different planet
sectors (read difficulty levels) await
the player as he pilots his IBIS ship on
a mission to save the earth. Players
must discover how to access the computers, subdue scientists, destroy
robots, and eliminate aliens within a
limited amount of time. C-64/128
($29.95). Circle Reader Service #15.
S.D.I.: The President would be proud
of you. As Sloan McCormick, you
strive to immobilize the KGB-led revolutionaries who are attempting to
initiate the big one, World War III.
Since you and the Soviet commander
are "lovers," you can work out of either
the Soviet or American space stations
in order to fly your spaceship and blast
the KGB ships out of the sky. There is
also the opportunity to rescue the
lovely Soviet heroine, if the fanatics
try to take over the Soviet space station. Think of an arcade game with
excellent graphics and a plot line to
boot. Atari ST ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service # 16.
UCHI MATA: This martial arts simulation is a smoothly animated arcade
game which is to judo what previous
attempts have been to karate and
kung fu. C-64 ($29.95). Circle Reader
Service #17.
Polymath Systems
P.O. Box 795
Berkeley, CA 94701
(415) 492-0875
HALLUCINATIONS: I don't know if
these guys "...had too much LDS in the
sixties" or have pointed ears, but their
screen pattern generator for the IBM is
certainly a "trip" (or should I say
"trek"?) It's not a game, but it is entertainment. IBM ($25.00). Circle
Reader Service #18.

Sierra On-line
Coarsegold, CA 93614
(209) 683-6858
KING'S QUEST III - TO HEIR IS
HUMAN: This is the third in the popular 3D animated adventure series
authored by Sierra co-founder Roberta
Williams. It requires 256K, doublesided disk drive, and either a CGA or
EGA card. This means that the
graphics are even more colorful and
well-defined than before. The predecessors have been "tweaked up" to
256K and EGA supportive, as well.
Amiga, Atari ST, IBM ($49.95). Circle
Reader Service #19.
SPACE QUEST - THE SARIEN ENCOUNTER: Like the fantasy quests,
this is a tongue-in-cheek adventure
with the kind of 3D animation you've
come to expect from the makers of
King's Quest and Black Cauldron.
Here's your chance to visit Droids R
Us, the galaxy's finest Oasis Bar, and
"Honest" Tiny's Used Spaceship Lot.
The game comes complete with guest
appearance by the Blues Brothers.
Don't let those sorry Sariens get that
Star Generator! Amiga, Atari ST, IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #20.
WRATH OF DENETHENOR: Apple
II and C-64 owners should be excited
about this "hack and slash" fantasy
adventure. Characters are not limited
to character class, so the same character can explore numerous possibili-

ties in the same game. The story line
itself is the age-old "sell your soul to
the devil," but the execution is anything but mundane. The background is
Nordic in culture and offers an intriguing setting for the adventurer to
interact with. Apple, C-64/128
($24.95). Circle Reader Service #21.
Spinnaker Software
One Kendall Square
Cambridge, MA 02139
(800) 826-0707
ACE - AIR COMBAT EMULATOR:
A fictitious enemy is invading the U.S.
and it's up to the player to stop them
with his fictitious aircraft. This is a
fast-moving arcade game, originally
marketed by UXB in the United Kingdom and now, imported for the "shoot'em-up" crowd in the U.S. C-64/128
($19.95). Circle Reader Service #22.
KUNG-FU - THE WAY OF THE
EXPLODING FIST: Originally billed
as the only karate game with one or
two player action, this is no longer the
case, but the game does feature highquality graphics and 15 different
moves to be made via the joystick. C64/128 ($29.95). Circle Reader Service
# 23.
MAJOR LEAGUE MANAGER: If you
remember Pro Manager in its Avalon
Hill configuration, you have an idea of
how this simulation looks. This is superior to that version, however, since it
offers the opportunity to create your
own teams and leagues, as well as
trade players from team to team. In
this version, players are not dependent
upon someone else's stat disks, but can
key in players by hand. IBM. Circle
Reader Service #24.
STRIKE FORCE: COBRA: This one is
somewhat unique in that it is an arcade game with 3D graphics and independent control of eight different
commandos. Commandos are armed
with digital lock breakers and electromagnetic flux grenades in order to retaliate against rather than negotiate
with international terrorists. This is a
good way to construct your own
counter-jihad and protest the evening
news. C-64/128 ($29.95). Circle
Reader Service #25.
Z-PILOT: When you put on the cybernetic helmet (a cross between
Eastwood's Firefox and the fighters on
Battlestar Galactica), you're ready to
take on aliens like Pac-Man took on
dots. C-64/128. Circle Reader Service
#26.

CES REPORT (cont.)
Continued from pg. 7
now available and an Apple II version is on its way
(in much simpler form, of course). In addition,
Crossword Magic will soon have a Macintosh incarnation and Uninvited will find new exposure as an
Amiga product. Arcade titles like Bop n' Wrestle
and Infiltrator are now horizontally available and
Trailblazer is an Atari 800/C-64 flippy. In addition, High Roller and Trailblazer should be available for the ST by the end of the first quarter.
Mindscape's MASTER DESIGNER SOFTWARE
affiliate will be converting Defender of the Crown
to the C-64 in 1987 and King of Chicago from
Macintosh to Amiga.
FIREBIRD is translating its adventure programs
across all formats as soon as possible and is even
translating Starglider for the IBM. SIERRA ONLINE has been "tweaking up" many of their C-64
programs (Mickey's Space Adventure, Donald Duck's
Playground, etc.) for the Amiga (through their new
distribution agreement with EA). They also believe
in the Macintosh and expect to convert King's
Quest I-III and Space Quest to that format in 1987.

Look for all of the major companies to horizontally
cover the available machines in 1987.

INSECURITY CLEARANCE
Industrial espionage has always been a problem
in the computer industry. Unfortunately for the
consumer, it is becoming increasingly difficult to
find out what new releases are planned because of
escalating paranoia among game publishers. Some of
the concern is well-founded. For example, MICROPROSE is extremely concerned with the number of Silent Service and Gunship look-alikes. They
feel that they do an adequate amount of research
and system definition to create a superior product,
but that this often requires a greater amount of
time to produce than some of the low-cost replicas
of their programs. They are concerned that a person who wants a combat helicopter simulator will
buy the first one on the market, even if it is inferior, and will not want to spend the money to
purchase a quality simulator like Gunship. Judging
from the market response to Gunship, even with all
of the imitators, their fears are unfounded. Indeed,

imitators are the sincerest form of flattery and even
imitative predecessors may only whet the appetite
for quality programming.
Nevertheless, Microprose is rumored to be
working on Destroyer Escort, the surface naval
counterpart to Silent Service. There is even industry
gossip to the effect that one could interface two
computers (by either modem or direct connect) and
have one player act as the submarine commander
using Silent Service and the other player act as the
destroyer captain using Destroyer Escort. Microprose neither confirms nor denies these rumors.
Further, the Microprose booth offered a "teaser"
of a film clip about a pirate/buccaneer type simulation, but refused to answer questions regarding
the existence of such a game. The big news from
Microprose, however, was the announcement of
their licensed product, Red Storm Rising. The
company is excited about working with Tom
Clancy and Larry Bond (co-authors of the bestselling book) on the project because they feel that
Clancy's exceptional ability to come up with hard
data and Microprose's design systems will insure a
winner.
ELECTRONIC ARTS has always been aggressive
in new releases and 1987 will be no exception.
Wargamers will be intrigued by the C64/128 (and
soon, Apple II) game, PHM Pegasus. The game allows the player to command a Patrol Hydrofoil
Missilecraft on 8 different missions of progressive
difficulty. The designer, Noah Falstein, is a naval
miniatures buff who always wanted to do a program which would put the player inside the ship.
Players can fire guns, Exocet missiles, and aluminum chaff in both real time and compressed time
modes. EA leads the market in supporting the
Amiga and this is reflected in their releases for this
machine. Return to Atlantis is a sophisticated
graphics adventure with over 40,000 words of text.
It involves 14 scenarios of progressive difficulty
and presents 5 different interactive characters.
Similar to the aliens in Starflight, the characters
have simulated AI and can engage in 100 different
conversations. Characters also keep a memory of
previous conversations. Return should ship in April
and is the culmination of a project begun around
Thanksgiving, 1984.
Interesting enough, one of the most significant
releases by EA is Earl Weaver Baseball (be sure to
see our interview with Weaver in the April
"Baseball Fever" issue) for the Amiga. This program
is potentially the finest baseball simulation on the
market. It can be played as a strictly statistical

game or a combination arcade-statistical game. Eddie Dombrower, a mathematically minded programmer, and Weaver ('nuff said) have combined
their talents to create a marvelous product which
uses algorithms based on physics, as well as statistics, to simulate baseball action. In their own press
release, EA calls this program the "Lead-off hitter
for new Sports Legends line," but company
spokespersons were extremely close to the vest with
regard to future titles in the series.
MINDSCAPE is solidly behind the MASTER
DESIGNER SOFTWARE products. Good things are
on the way from this duo. Sinbad and the Falcon
Throne is a visually striking tribute to the sword
and sorcery genre. I think Ray Harryhausen, the
great special effects who animated the Sinbad
movies would be proud of this effort. "This game is
like a special effects extravaganza," said John Cutter of Cinemaware. At first glance, the game looks
like something less graphically and a lot more in
playability when comparing it with Defender of the
Crown.

Firebird has an exciting line-up for this year.
The Universal Military Simulator will be available
for several machines at once. This program is a
tribute to the classic Avalon Hill boardgames of the
past (Tactics II and the original Gettysburg) in that
it seeks playability above all. Played on three-dimensional battlefields, this product reminds one of
fighting a miniatures battle. It plays much, much
faster than any miniatures rules, however. The program is intelligent, as well, since it uses the classical military theory of the age simulated in commanding its forces.
FIREBIRD may have the most balanced line of
new releases in 1987. In addition to the wargame,
they are releasing an arcade game, Tracker, which
uses artificial intelligence to get tougher as you
play against it, and two new graphic adventure
games. The Golden Path looks like a better than
average set of puzzles and difficult situations based
on oriental philosophy and religion, but Guild of
Thieves may be the most aesthetically remarkable
product of the year. The art work and sound is
comparable to Defender of the Crown and the
gameplay itself may surpass it (We haven't played
it, just looked at it).
SIERRA ON-LINE has just released Wrath of
Denethenor, a new graphics adventure which breaks
ground in two different ways. First, the author refused to allow it to be copy-protected. Second, the
author insisted on a low price ($24.95 for C-64 and
$19.95 for Apple  both are two disk sides). Here
is a chance for pirates who claim that the software
companies' greed is their justification for pirating
to put up or shut up. If Denethenor is pirated, it
certainly puts the lie to that argument. Sierra also
plans to release a very serious adventure game designed by a retired police officer (Police Quest). It
will have a mature orientation and not be designed
as a game for children. Asked if the game will have
a rating or warning, John Williams responded that
it would have some kind of warning, but would not
succumb to any rating system. "This industry has a
problem." the publisher of the old Softporn adventure commented, "Anything not rated G is rated X."
He went on to suggest that there must be room for
software which can be designed for purchasers beyond adolescence. Another potentially controversial
release will be the humorous (read risque) Leisure
Suit Larry and the Lounge Lizards.
ACCOLADE has just released Killed Until Dead,
a menu-driven graphic adventure game built
around several tongue-in-cheek murder mysteries.

It is a timed game and essentially maps the adventure as you play by keeping notes on all your phone
calls, wire-taps, and surveillance. Soon to be released is Accolade's Comics (for C-64/128 and Apple II). This is an interactive comic book with 150
animated frames and 220 still frames to each of two
stories. In addition to these, there are four simple
arcade games integrated into each story line which
must be mastered before the game can be won.
This release may be the first of a possible series of
Accolade's Comics.
HOLD THE PHONE!
One of the interesting technological developments involves modem and/or direct connect play.
More and more games are being developed which
allow for it. Strategic Conquest Plus (from PBI
Software) allows for play over an Appletalk Network, Flight Simulator II allows for either modem
or direct connect, and Sierra On-line will soon release a Helicopter Simulator with this function.
Major League Manager (a "tweaked up" Pro Manager) was being distributed privately with a
play-by-modem option, but MLM's new publisher,
Spinnaker, decided to market it without that
feature. It will be interesting to note whether this
becomes an important feature in the software of
the future. One would have to be able to pay longdistance phone bills of prodigious size; have a
friend with the same computer, hours of availability, and area code; and/or have a second phone line
in order to keep from having one's phone regularly
busy. Perhaps, however, it will eventually be possible to play Operation Market Garden (read as your
own favorite two player game) by modem with
each player making their moves, sending a text file
by modem to their opponent, and relaxing until
their opponent sends them the next text file move
by modem in return. It is hard to conceive of tying
up the phone lines long enough to play a sophisticated two player game with both players at the
computer simultaneously. Of course, technology is
available if we decide to make use of it.
PLEASE REMAIN IN YOUR SEATS!
Our flight home was as peaceful and calm as a
Flight Simulator II scenario. When we were reminded to keep our seats until the plane came to a
full and complete stop, we realized that technology
never comes to a complete stop. Computer owners
always have to keep their seat belts buckled for the
next take-off. We at CGW will try to help you file
your flight plans!

Continued from pg. 24
placed exactly one pixel away from the previous
modules. This simulates an airlock seal between the
modules.
TRAFFIC JAMS AND MASS APPEAL
When the player indicates that the module is in
position, the time for completion flashes on the
screen one simulated day at a time. Then, the computer cycles through a "test" routine and informs
the player of whether the assembly passed the test
or not. Then, it reports on a scale of 1-10 (Poor Excellent) on how well the station is functioning in
terms of safety/health, altitude/inclination, integration, center of mass, traffic, power/heat, consumables, sequence/damage, and an overall rating.
These ratings are graphed and displayed on the 00
screen. This is the primary source of feedback on
space station efficiency, even as the financial reports on the MCC screen are the basic sources of
feedback on project finances. Of these ratings, integration is the only factor that will cause instant
rejection of the assembly and force reassembly of
the station. This is because loss of integration
causes an atmospheric leak which is extremely dangerous. Center of mass is integral to operational
status because the Materials Processing Modules
must be placed as close to the center of the mass of
the space station in order to negate the gravitational
forces as much as possible and allow zero-g production. Since the modules are leased to the private
corporations (mentioned above) for such production
and you cannot gain any revenue if they cannot use
those laboratories, this is vital. Traffic is important
because your crew could go crazy if their habitation areas are exposed to heavy traffic. This rating
measures how ergonomic your complex is. Altitude
needs to be monitored because of the inevitable
orbital decay in a low Earth orbit (LEO) and inclination must be watched because the 28.5 degree
inclination allows a springboard effect which lets
the orbiters carry more payload to the station and
this is a good position to accomplish astrophysical
work. When the thrusters are in place, occasional
adjustments may be required to keep these factors
in line.
Once the processing laboratories are functional,
construction may continue with the orbiters shuttling new parts into orbit and returning finished
products to the Earth. (Note: In order to offload

processed products and return them to Earth, there
must be a functioning logistics module hooked into
the station. After offloading, the logistics module
will disappear from the graphics screen and a new
one must be interfaced with the station.)
The financial reports become much more interesting when the revenue begins to accrue. This is
also the point where the battle of the project calendar is coming to its climax. Every possible day
saved at this point means big money. That means
that each assembly sequence is watched with baited
breath.
CLI-M+A+X! AND ANTICLI-M+A+X!:
Should you go beyond the time allowance or
more than 10% above the budget, the project will
be terminated in a short terse memo to the player
as project director and informing you as to why the
project has been concluded. Should you be successful, you will receive a congratulatory message
and a recapitulation which reveals all of your
earnings and bonuses, as well as your previous high
earnings.
MAX is a remarkable and fascinating simulation.
It should be played by everyone who is even remotely interested in space exploration and/or hard
science fiction. It should be savored by those of us
who enjoy economic simulations. It should be a required learning activity for every U.S. Congressperson who sits on an appropriations committee authorized to oversee space expenditures and
procedures (whether military or civilian). It should
be used as an educational tool for any person interested in improving their management skills. Finally, it is deserving of greater recognition than
even this review can give it.

READER INPUT DEVICE

RID #35 (Use Card at pg. 5)
On this page, a number of games
and articles are listed for evaluation
When evaluating a game, consider
such things as PRESENTATION
(graphics, sound, packaging, and
documentation); GAME DESIGN
(design, playability, and level of
interest); and LIFE (does the game
wear well?).
For each game or article which
you have played or read, place a 1
(terrible) through 9 (outstanding)
next to the appropriate number.

Games

GAME RATINGS

With the recent moving of CGW's offices and the inclusion of
the 1986-1987 Index in CGW #34, the compilation of Game
Ratings has been somewhat sidetracked. Now we are getting back
on track. The ratings below include the results of RID #32. There
was no RID #33. Data from RID #34 was still being compiled at
press time.
As predicted in CGW #32, Chessmaster's very high rating in
RID #32 slipped when a larger number of responses came in.
However, Chessmaster continues to rate very highly, topped only
by the extremely popular Kampfgruppe, which again takes the top
spot on the Strategy Game side. Battlefront jumps into the
Strategy Top Ten with its initial 7.44 rating (good for 5th place).
The big losers were Silent Service, which dropped all the way from

3rd to 25th, and Star Fleet I which dropped from 10th to 30th.
Battle for Antietam continues strong but we are looking forward
to seeing the rating of companion game Gettysburg:The Turning
Point which should do well when its initial rating appears in CGW
#36.
Ultima IV continues its domination of the Adventure/Action
Game side. Ultima III and Wizard's Crown swapped 4th and 5th
spots from our previous ratings. Phantasie II moved up from 14th
to 8th. Leather Goddesses of Phobos joins the Adventure/Action
Top Ten with its initial 7.30 rating (good for 10th place).
Omnitrend's Universe (6.73) was moved from the Strategy to the
Adventure Game side.

