Nov-Dec 1985

Vol. 5 No. 5
FEATURES
Future Games
Where is Computer Gaming Going?

The Bard's Tale
Electronic Arts' New Adventure Game

CGW GAME OF THE YEAR

13
William H. Harrington
27
Scorpia
32

The Winner's Are Revealed!

Microprose's Command Series
Crusade in Europe and Decision in the Desert

The Electronic Gridiron

34
M. Evan Brooks
41

Computer Football 1985

Ultima III
The Macintosh Version

Golan Front
Simulation Canada's Latest

47
Patricia Fitzgibbons
48
William H. Harrington

DEPARTMENTS
Taking A Peek

6

Screen Photos and Brief Comments

Scorpion's Tale
Wishbringer Tips

Telegaming
How to Telegame

Commodore Key
Information for Commodore Gamers

Atari Playfield
The ST Outlook

The Learning Game
Games That Teach Programming

Micro-Reviews

11
Scorpia
18
Patricia Fitzgibbons
21
Roy Wagner
24
David Stone
54
Bob Proctor
57

Colonial Conquest
Star Fleet One
Star Crystal
Speculator
Incunabula

Reader Input Device

61

Game Ratings

64

100 Games Rated

CBS Software
One Fawcett Place
Greenwich, CT 06836
203-622-2500
DREAM HOUSE: A chance for the you
to become an architect and interior designer without leaving the keyboard. The
user can build a Victorian, Georgian,
Colonial or cottage, manipulate the floor
plans (bird's eye and cut-away) and
decorate the various rooms. Includes
animation and sound effects. A welldone product, despite being aimed at a
limited audience. C-64, Apple. $39.95.
Reader Service #3
THE SEA VOYAGERS: A learning program devoted to the Age of Exploration.
Covers 30 famous sea voyagers, from
Covilha of Portugal (1486) to Captain
Cook (1776). Graphics display a map of
the world with a dotted line showing the
particular voyage being discussed.
Rather shallow in historical depth but is
a good introduction for junior high history students. C-64, Apple, IBM. $39.95.
Reader Service #4
QUINK: Game of knowledge and association for one or two players. Each Quink
challenge presents a screen of eight randomly-generated places, names or objects and a common bond or association
the entries may share. 150 subjects from

Grammy Winners to Wines of the
World. Five levels of play with color
graphics and musical cues. C-64, Apple
& IBM. $34.95.
Reader Service #5
Avalon Hill
4517 Harford Road
Baltimore, MD 21214
1-800-638-9292
UNDER FIRE: Tactical World War II
combat from 1939 to 1945. U.S., German
and Soviet armies, tanks like the Sherman and Panther, halftracks, artillery,
anti-tank guns, etc. Infantry units including paratroopers, engineers and
mountain troops. Extended capability
disks (to be published) will expand the
roster and add armies of other nations.
Three different map scales - situation
map, strategic map and tactical map.
Mapmaker disk allows creation of scenarios. Solitaire or two player. Keyboard
or joystick (required on II+). Apple family. $59.95.
Reader Service #6
Activision
2350 Bayshore Frontage Rd.
Mountain View, CA 94043
COUNTDOWN TO SHUTDOWN: Arcade game where your objective is to

find and stabilize the core of a nuclear
reactor. You choose Mechanized
Rangers, each with different skills and
attributes, to 'send down the shaft'. The
plant is defended by droids that you
must destroy or avoid. Eight levels with
hundreds of rooms per level. C-64 &
Apple.
Reader Service #7
Artworx
150 North Main Street
Fairport, NY 14450
800-828-6573
INTERNATIONAL HOCKEY: A sequel
to Slapshot Hockey. Additional features
include speech synthesis and two player
action. One player mode offer three levels of difficulty. Overly aggressive play
will lead to a bench-clearing brawl!
Penalty shots are also included. C-64 &
C-128. $24.95
Reader Service #8
Commodore Business Machines
1200 Wilson Drive
West Chester, PA 19380
QUESTPROBE (Featuring The Hulk): A
text and graphics adventure game by
Scott Adams, the father of adventure
gaming. In this one you control Bruce

Banner, aka The Hulk, with the assignment of unlocking the riddle of the Chief
Examiner, the overseer of the Questprobe series (12 in all, each adventure
complete an d separate). The parser is
not very sophisticated by current standards but the game should appeal to
pre-teens. C-64 & C plus/4.
Reader Service #10
Data East
470 Gianni Street
Santa Clara, CA 95054
800-538-5129
KARATE CHAMP: This is the home
version of the hit arcade game. Player
can choose from thirty possible moves,
modeled on real-life karate action. This
is an exact translation of the arcade
game. One or two player option. A similar game, Kung Fu Master will soon be
available. C-64, C-128 & Apple II series.
$29.95.
Reader Service #11
Epyx
1043 Kiel Court
Sunnyvale, CA
WINTER GAMES: A continuation of
the successful Olympic series by Epyx
(Summer Games & SG II). This one includes six winter events - bobsled, ski
jump, figure skating, free-style skating,
hot dog aerials and the biathlon. Opening, closing and awards ceremonies. One
to eight players. C-64 & C-128.
Reader Service #15

TEMPLE OF APSHAI TRILOGY: By
computer game standards this one is
from the Stone Age (my own copy is for
a TRS-80 Model I). The games have
been 'modernized' with new graphics,
enhanced sounds and faster play, but
they still won't be confused with newer
graphic adventure games. One player.
C-64/128, Atari, Apple & IBM. $29.95
Reader Service #12
OIL BARONS: A hybrid simulation,
computer graphics plus a cardboard
game board. You are a wildcatter (one to
eight players) in a contest to see which
can player can amass the most wealth.
Considering the 64K limitations, the
game is a rather good oil exploration
simulation. Requires careful planning
and strategy. C-64.
Reader Service #13
Cosmi
415 N. Figueroa
Wilmington, CA 90744
213-835-9687
SUPER HUEY: A 'Flight Simulator' for
helicopter fans. Teaches how to fly rotary wing aircraft and then becomes a
game, with four separate missions - Solo
Flight, Rescue, Explore and Combat.
The craft is modeled on the Bell UH-1
but has been highly modified, a la "Air
Wolf". The game also has many of the
features of Skyfox - electronic instrument console, on-board computer and a
hi-res landscape.
C-64. $19.95.
Reader Service #14

First Star Software
18 East 41st Street
New York, NY 10017
212-532-4666
SPY VS SPY (THE ISLAND CAPER):
Volume two in Mad magazine's ongoing
comic adventure series. This one features
full scrolling screens, animation, shark
attacks, coconut bombs, etc. The primary change is "Simulvision", windowing
that allows both players to be active at
the same time. Solitaire play also supported. C-64/128. Reader Service #16
STAR RANK BOXING: A combination
of arcade and strategic play. Create your
own boxer with a choice of styles, looks
and images. Then go into training with
light bag, heavy bag and roadwork. Play
solitaire against one of 19 different computer opponents or send (via disk) a created boxer to a friend to fight. The
boxing action is pure arcade, with no
option for computer vs computer, as allowed in Championship Boxing by
Sierra. C-64.
Reader Service #17

Macrocom
PO Box 70012
Marietta, GA 30007
800-MAC-8086
ICON: An advanced video
game/adventure loosely based on
Richard Wagner's Ring of the
Niebelungs. Elements of the (our operas
are incorporated into the plot. Explore
mazes, solve puzzles and engage in
interactive combat situations. Advanced
technical features that permit standard
PC color graphics adapters to display far
more than four colors. The game can
display as many as 60 independently
moving, multi-colored, animated figures
on the screen at one time - while
scrolling the map background. IBM.
Reader Service #18
Sierra On-Line, Inc.
Coarsegold, CA 93614
209-683-6858
STUNT FLYER: An aerobatics flight
simulator based on the premier stunt
plane - the Pitts Special bi-plane. A
very sophisticated package that gives a
good basic course in flying, along with
the fun of learning aerobatic maneuvers.
Among these are: Slow Roll, Inside Loop,
The Hammerhead The Spin,
Immelmann, etc. (21 in all). The
attention to detail indicates the care
that went into this program. C-64/128.
$24.95
Reader Service #19

Springboard Software
7807 Creekridge Circle
Minneapolis, MN 55435
800-328-1223
THE NEWSROOM: A program for
creating surprisingly stylish publications.
A good introduction to journalism for
novices. You can write, edit, illustrate
and add a personal touch to each
publication. Useful for neighborhood
newspapers, newsletters, brochures,
flyers, etc. A lot of fun for
frustrated/would-be Woodward &
Bernstein types. Optional disks are
available containing additional artwork,
called Clip Art Collection. Apple, C-64
& IBM.
Reader Service #20
Synapse
17 Paul Drive
San Rafael, CA 94903
415-479-1170
WIZARD OF WALL STREET: Realtime stock market simulation. Scrolling
news headlines, tickertape and three skill
levels. Players can buy and sell 12 to 24
stocks and options in six different industries. Sell short and buy on margin.
Adjustable game speed. IBM.
Reader Service #21
LODE RUNNER'S RESCUE: A sequel
to the popular Lode Runner series. 46
levels, 3-D action and sound effects.
Includes a game editor to create your
own mazes and challenges. Atari, C-64.
Reader Service #22

Strategic Simulations, Inc.
883 Stierlin Road
Bldg. A-200
Mountain View, CA 94043
415-964-1353
PANZER GRENADIER: Solitaire WW
II game depicting platoon/company level
warfare between Germans and Russians
on the Eastern Front. Five scenarios
with 1-2 hours per scenario. Three
difficulty levels Each tank unit consists
of 3-5 tanks (Panzer, Tiger, etc) and
each infantry company has 100-150 men.
Easily the least attractive box art of any
SSI game. Atari. $39.95.
Reader Service #23
subLOGIC Corp
713 Edgebrook Drive
Champaign, IL 61820
800-637-4983
JET: A high-performance jet flight
simulator. Jet simulates the land-based
F-16 Fighting Falcon and the carrierbased F-18 Hornet. Free-flight noncombat mode plus a variety of land/sea
strike or dogfight options. Aircraft is
equipped with a "Heads Up Display".
Compatible with all subLOGIC Scenery
Disks. Around here the most play
involved the F-18 and its aircraft
carrier. Flight Simulator I & II set the
standard for this type of program,
subLOGIC has now brought the concept
into the JET age. IBM. $49.95
Reader Service #24

CGW WILL BE PUBLISHED NINE TIMES
PER YEAR BEGINNING IN JANUARY '86!

pretty nice, and even offers you a gift. I'd
accept it, if I were you.
When you leave, you find that
somehow things have changed a bit.
There's a lot of fog around, but that
shouldn't bother you, after all, you made a
map of the way up, right? (Well, I hope so,
anyway!) Then again, maybe you'd prefer
to stay in the fog, since there's that
vulture sitting on a branch at the bottom
of the hill. Lucky for you, you don't have
to worry about that (but it sure is creepy).
You realize things have changed a
LOT when you try to cross the bridge and
find a nasty creature there demanding
payment first (sounds like a troll bridge to
me!). Anyway, you do need to get over to
the other side, so you better give him
something.

WISHBRINGER

As told by Scorpia

WARNING! Scorpion's Tale contains
hints on solving computer adventure
games. If you do not want help, do not
read on.
Ah, it's that time of year again. Cold
winds outside, a roaring fire inside. Just
the right atmosphere for getting cozy with
a good adventure game. So, draw your
chair a little closer to the fireplace, while
Fred pours your favorite drink. Now, all
you need is that adventure, so just... make
a wish.
So, here you are, a grubby little postal
clerk, staring at the sky and wishing for
better things. Considering that you work
for a twit like Mr. Crisp, I don't blame
you. However, if you don't get back inside
and pick up that strange letter, nothing
much will be happening, so you better hop
to it!
On the other hand, you have some
time to deliver that mysterious missive, so
use it to good advantage. Explore the
town and its environs carefully. Look
everywhere, making your own map if need
be (even though a nice one comes with the
game). Things are going to change pretty
soon, and you don't want to miss
anything!
Of course, you can't go very far until
you get past that rotten little dog (I
cheerfully admit I tried kicking it, but that
didn't work...sigh). So, while you think of
something to do, why not take a stroll
through that delightful cemetery; it might
even prove helpful!
Once past the dog, you shouldn't have
any problems for awhile (at least not until
you come out of the Magick Shoppe). Just
keep in mind that postal carriers also pick
up mail as well as deliver it, and you
should be ok. When you finally do get to
the Shoppe, you'll meet a pretty weird old
lady, but don't let that scare you. She's

So now you can enter Witchville. Huh?
WITCHVILLE??? Hmmm, maybe that
nice old lady wasn't so nice, after all! Look
what she's gotten you into here. You
better check this out, cause things aren't
the way you remember them from before!
There certainly wasn't a piranha in the
town fountain last time you looked. And
there sure weren't any boots patrolling
around to pick up curfew violators, either.
Not to mention, the tiny poodle has
somehow grown into a full-fledged
hellhound! And what's that sinister castle
doing there where the post office used to
be?
Never fear, you can get through it, and
without using any wishes. In fact, you can
only get a perfect score by NOT using any
wishes to get past obstacles. So, what can

you do? Well, it would be wise to avoid
the patrols for now, while you go around
the town and see how much has been
changed. Don't forget the areas outside of
town too, such as the lake, among others.
You will find a creature in need of help.
What a platypus is doing in this place, I
won't even attempt to speculate on, but it
would be nice to get it out of the hole. It
can't jump, but it can climb, if only it had
something solid to grip.
Now, what are you going to do with
that whistle? Well, what is usually done
with them? Aha! That should help you a
lot on your quest (the things you have to
do to rescue a cat...). And after that would
be a good time to visit the town jail. You
can let yourself be picked up by the boot
patrol, or walk in the door. Either way,
you will soon find yourself in a cozy (?)
cell.
Actually, the accommodations are not all
that thrilling, and you really don't want to
stay here too long. Take a good look
around at everything, and don't be afraid
to exert a little force if need be. And make
sure you don't leave empty-handed. Then
it's off to the Grue lair (and if you don't
know where that is, you haven't been
looking very hard!).
Ever wonder what Grues keep in their
refrigerators? Why not open it and find
out? Hmmm. Well, perhaps you should do
something about baby Grue first, 'cause
Momma Grue is NOT someone you want
to meet! If you could just figure out some
way of keeping the baby from being
bothered by the light, you'd be ok. Well,
you can't cover the light, so...

Continued on pg. 53

by
William H. Harrington

years ago the software industry was
heavily influenced by arcade games. The
appeal was in speed, flashy graphics and
sound -- that was the first "boom"
product. "Then", Richard says "they
began to demand more!".
This second "boom", as Garriott refers
to it, was fueled by the first games to
use the unique capabilities of computers:
adventures (interactive games).
"Adventures introduced compelling dialog
and in-depth plots", notes Garriott.

H

History may recall that modern computer gaming
began in 2001. The movie, mind you, not the
year! It all began innocently enough when HAL, the
schizophrenic computer, casually asked astronaut
Dave Bowman, "How about a nice game of chess?"
If the author of 2001, Arthur Clark, didn't foresee
the personal computer, he certainly imagined the
personal computer game.
We've come a long, long way since HAL and
2001. The personal computer has been transformed
by a legion of dedicated garners and talented programmers into, among other things, the "ultimate"
game machine. With the beginning of the personal
computer revolution in the mid 70's, dedicated programmers began to explore the possibilities of electronic games on the first generation of personal
computers and created the likes of "Star Trek" and
"Hunt the Wompus" on early 8-bit home-brew systems. With the appearance of such popular and affordable home systems as the Apple II, C-64 and
Atari computers, computer gaming became a sizable
segment of the software industry.
As we begin to exhaust the capabilities of the
older 8-bit computers, a new generation of personal
computers is bursting upon the scene. Three new so
called 32-bit computer systems best exemplify the
new technology. Apple's innovative Macintosh,
Atari's new ST or "Jackintosh", and Commodore's
much touted Amiga are each poised to turn the
personal computer into something approaching the
ultimate game machine.
But what is next? After all the perilous dungeons we've explored, hair-raising adventures we've
shared and endless lost weekends enthralled in
"monster" strategy games, where do our computers
take us next? We can't buy them yet, not for any
price, these computer games of the future that fire
the imagination and stagger our senses. For now
they exist only in the minds of their creators. Come
join us as we explore this exciting new world with
some of the "stars" of computer gaming.
Richard Garriott (aka Lord British), originator
of the acclaimed Ultima series of fantasy role
playing games, sees the development of an ongoing
evolution, driven not by hardware or software professionals, but by the consumers. Three or four

The next trend in computer gaming, according
to Garriott, will be the design of games which
synthesize the "compelling" aspect of good adventure games with greater realism through the use of
extensive graphics and in-depth content. Garriott
maintains, "all of the user's senses will be involved,
the player will be lost in the game."
For the creator of Ultima, tomorrow's 32-bit
computers offer one overriding advantage: more
memory. But they also offer some mixed blessings.
"Memory size offers new vistas. With a Macintosh
for instance, speech could become part of the interface", muses Garriott. But advanced ultra hi-res
graphics are another matter. Dealing with a hi-res
graphic screen is a problem. As the speed of interaction on the screen is increased, the enhancement
can be 'lost' in the hi-res clutter created by too
much color and action on the screen. "16 bits are
adequate", he maintains.
Another growing trend, in Garriott's view, is the
necessity of team programming. As the computer
hardware becomes more complex, and gamers demand ever more elaborate games, the resulting programs become increasing intricate and time consuming. Adds Garriott "the lone programmer is becoming a vanishing species." He ought to know. By
his own admission Ultima III required a year of
almost constant labor to create. The shortly to be
released Ultima IV has taken over two years to develop! But then, even Michelangelo had help with
the Sistine Chapel!
Like Garriott, Chris Crawford (Eastern Front,
Legionnaire) feels that a case could be made for
text adventures as the "next big thing" in computer
games. However Crawford objects to the term interactive fiction. "Rubbish", he maintains; "a player
participates in a text adventure not one whit more
than in a regular novel." The problem as Crawford
sees it is in the ability of the players to exercise
their own free will. Presenting a player with several
choices, "all but one of them wrong", doesn't allow
the player to participate in the solution. You
"discover" it by trial and error. The computer
doesn't truly interact with the gamer according to
Crawford.
In the future Crawford sees "interaction" as
playing a key role in computer games. "The essence

of any good computer game lies in the interaction
between the player and the computer. In a true interaction, the reactions get all mixed together and a
completely new term enters the equation: anticipation. Each actor acknowledges the other's existence
as a sentient being by anticipating that actor's reaction to his own behavior. This process of anticipation and counter-anticipation can iterate endlessly, creating situations of profound depth and
subtlety."

Crawford sees the future of computer games in

interaction through anticipation. A future he does
not think will happen soon. "Three years ago the
games industry had enough money to experiment
liberally and it blew the opportunity in its mad
rush for the next Pac-Man. Nowadays", he continues, "with companies struggling to survive, the
money isn't there for bold experiments and innovative games." Crawford even admits to backing off
from his more ambitious game designs in favor of
`mere mortal games' to make a living.
Just to complete his iconoclastic view of the industry Crawford feels that graphics, sound, color
and animation have ". . . no important role in the
future of computer games." For Crawford the "gee
whiz" aspects of computer games, as he calls them,
have few charms. He leaves us rather with one final thought: people, not things. Computer games
have always concentrated on things. You shoot
things, chase things, avoid things, capture things,
but never encounter any real people. The games of
the future " . . . will necessarily shift their emphasis away from things and towards people."
Since the dawn of digital computing in the
1940's computer scientists dreamed of computers
that could play chess. During the 60's and early 70's
the mainframe fraternity, using millions of dollars
of exotic hardware and countless thousands of
hours stolen from more mundane tasks, took up the
quest. But it took a young couple from San Diego,
Kathy and Dan Spracklin, to take computer chess
from the laboratory to chess lovers everywhere.

Their creation, Sargon, was not the first chess program on a microcomputer, but it was the first to
play a good game of chess in a reasonable time.
That was enough!
"There is only one problem with Sargon", Kathy
Spracklin muses; "it plays better chess than most of
the people who play it". While a small segment of
the chess community urges ever more challenging
versions of Sargon, the Spracklins look instead to
"service the average user". "What we want to offer
are more features", she continues, "extended libraries, onscreen chess clocks, that sort of thing".
For the Spracklin's chess is a full time job: working
for Fidelity (the manufacturers of dedicated chess
games) and updating Sargon for Hayden Software.
It isn't that the Spracklins wouldn't mind doing
something else, but Sargon is never finished.
Looking back from when Sargon was first published in 1978, Kathy Spracklin saw the arcade
style game with its emphasis on hand-eye coordination and fast reflexes "peek and die". In her own
words, "There has been a gradual change to games
requiring mental input such as word games and interactive fiction." In the future Kathy sees computer games that use the unique capabilities of the
computer to enhance a child's education with games
that are "goal oriented", games that teach reasoning
as well as entertaining the player.
As for the impact of the next generation of
personal computers, Kathy cautions "there must be
enough machines in the market for software developers to support." The Spracklins' found that creating the Macintosh version of Sargon III opened
up some new opportunities. "The mouse on the
Macintosh and its pull-down windows enabled us to
add many more features to the program without
increasing its complexity." She looks forward to
extensive use of window technology in adventure
type games. With multiple windows on the screen
there are things you can now do that you just
couldn't do before, such as completely integrating
text and graphics without resorting to split screens.
For the game industry to capitalize on the new
technology she warns there must be a major marketing effort to reintroduce the consumer to computer gaming after the "arcade game collapse", as
she calls it. "People just went from games to
spreadsheets; but they can come back just as
quickly" she maintains. And just what is her favorite game (excepting Sargon)? Frogger she confessed.
Mark Cantor and Jay Fenton of Micromind have
quickly gained a reputation for innovation and
imagination on the Macintosh including such programs as MusicWorks and VideoWorks, proving that
the Mac can play something else besides JAZZ.
Full screen cellular animation is possible with
the new technology, Cantor feels, opening the door
to graphic effects that rival the very best that the
Disney Studios produced during the "golden age" of
animation in the 1930's and 1940's and at a fraction
of the time and cost. Imagine for a moment the
equivalent of "Fantasia" coming soon to a computer
near you!

Some people hold that interactive video is the
future of computer gaming. These colorful, iridescent and nearly indestructible disks have already
brought reliable audio-video storage to the mass
consumer electronics market. Instead of conventional magnetic "heads" that travel over the surface
of a floppy or hard disk, video disk drives would
use low power lasers and polarized light to "read"
the surface of a laser disk. Their potential for the
personal computer is truly staggering. A single 5"
laser disk can easily store over 500 megabytes of
data! Yet, surprisingly, interactive video has few
charms for Cantor. "The problem with interactive
video, in arcade games like Dragon's Lair, is that
they're just too slow accessing the disk; the action
and reaction must be immediate or the game
doesn't work!" These computer controlled video
disks, or CD ROMS as they are sometimes called,
may have a different role in Marc's view of future
computer gaming. "They potentially can store
enough data to create true, interactive comic
books", Cantor muses, and goes on to see both
Apple's Macintosh and Commodore's advanced
Amiga computer as capturing a significant share of
the future entertainment market.
Roe Adams, a columnist with with Computer
Gaming World has worked as a game reviewer,
writer, and columnist in almost every facet of the
computer entertainment industry. And as one of the
industry's most noted game designers and consultants, he has worked on more than a few of your
favorite games. He has strong opinions. "Right now
there exists a 12-inch abyss between the keyboard
and the monitor. The games player feels no relationship between himself and what occurs on the
screen. In the future, computer game designers will
have to bridge that abyss. The effect will be to
create a realistic 'you are there' feeling in the software. The player will be totally swept up in living
the adventure." Such a fantasy "world" would have a
depth and an immediacy that might rival reality.
Perhaps future garners, Walter Mitty like, might
come to live for their "games" and escape from the
work-a-day world in a computer generated fantasy.
The computer hardware that will most influence
the immediate future of computer games is the
plasma display. This is state of the art, and still
very pricey technology, which uses several layers of
ionized gas trapped between layers of glass. An
electric current then travels along an almost microscopic grid of fine wires producing a pixel, or dot,
composed of glowing gas, at any location on the
screen. The result is ultra sharp resolution thin
screen displays with vivid color. Plasma displays are
rumored to be the color display system that Apple
may eventually incorporate in the Macintosh. While
Adams sees considerable potential for laser disk
technology and personal computers, he predicts that
the price will have to be "about $99.00" before they
can become a viable mass market medium.
DR. CHANDRA, WILL I DREAM?
The computer games of the future, it seems, are
as much art as science. And like art they seemingly

have more to do with the imagination and creativity of the artist then the medium, the electronic
canvas, they come to life upon. Future computers
may give the programmer greater freedom and
range, but the real limits may lie with the author,
not the machine. Still we can imagine what they
might be like, these future games.
We are already seeing the beginning of the future in adventure gaming. Games of interactive
fiction will be written by not one inspired programmer but by the collective efforts of teams of
writers, designers and programmers. Mixing text,
ultra high resolution graphics and multiple windows, these games would communicate with sophisticated, full sentence parsers and employ a full
range of appropriate sound effects. With smooth,
flicker free animation and three dimensional perspectives the gamer would be drawn into his or her
own very "personal" adventure.
Strategy or war games might simulate a battle or
campaign on several levels. Perhaps the gamer
wishes at first to conduct the game on a strategic
level, ordering vast armies or fleets across continents and seas. Then at the stroke of a key or a
spoken word, the General becomes a Private in a
squad, taking some small part in the larger battle.
Instead of clumsy hexagonal grids borrowed from
conventional board games, ultra high resolution
color displays with multiple windows provide
panoramic views from any perspective that can
quickly zoom in or out. Again, orders and commands are through natural language. Real-time action-packed graphics are simulated with true full
screen cellular animation that rivals the best efforts
of the wizards of Lucas Films. Characters speak
and gesture to you, on the other side of the screen.
Instead of the crude audio output of today's games
hi-fidelity digital sound brings another dimension
to the gaming experience, from the rattle of musketry at Waterloo to the roar of Rommel's panzers
at El Alamein.
Or perhaps there will be games that we can't
imagine, new games that defy conventional labels,
games that will go on to explore new dimensions in
computer entertainment.
One thing is certain, the future of computer
gaming is more than the evolution of computer
hardware and software. The human dimension of
gaming will surely change as well. Games are as old
as man and his need to learn and relate to his world
or to escape from it. Yet as our games become
more sophisticated the computer becomes more than
a passive entertainment instrument such as the television or radio. Rather the computer becomes an
imagination machine that creates and shares a fantasy world that we truly live in and experience. A
world unique to each player, both man and machine. Imagine that!

.

TELE-GAMING
HOW TO TELEGAME

Patricia Fitzgibbons
During the past two years, I've received many letters from CGW readers
who've requested basic information about
telegaming. For the rest of you who
haven't written to me -- and are still
wondering what the heck online gaming is
all about -- here is a list of readers' ten
most commonly asked questions, and my
answers.

1) WHAT IS TELEGAMING?
"Telegaming" is an activity in which
you use your computer, modem, and telephone to connect with another computer
and play games online. The remote
("host") system can be a huge mainframe
or a small personal computer; in either
case, you are allowed to access game programs that reside on that system.

2) WHY SHOULD I TRY
TELEGAMING?
Since you are reading this magazine,
you already have a special interest in computers and games. Telegaming is simply
another aspect of that exciting combination, another step toward the high-tech
entertainment frontier. And it's a great
way to meet new friends while you're
having a lot of fun.
3) HOW DO I GET STARTED?
You need a computer or terminal, a
modem, a private telephone line, and
telecommunications software. Most computer manufacturers recommend modems
for your machine. Ask for information on
popular brands and price ranges at computer stores or user group meetings, and
check computer magazines for reviews of
terminal software to accompany your
hardware configuration.

4) WHICH SYSTEMS OFFER
ONLINE GAMES?
Here are the names, addresses, and
telephone numbers of seven telecommunications services that offer online games.
Write or call for more information.
COMPUSERVE, 5000 Arlington
Centre Blvd., Columbus, OH 43220,800848-8199 or 614-457-8650.
THE SOURCE, 1616 Anderson Rd.,
McLean, VA 22102,800-336-3366 or 703821-6666.
PLATO, Control Data Publishing Co.,
P.O. Box 261127, San Diego, CA 92126,
800-233-3784 or 800-233-3785.
DELPHI, 3 Blackstone St., Cambridge,
MA 02139,800-544-4005 or 617-4913393.

Continued on pg. 52

To Access credit, I highly recommend their fast
load cartridge Mach 5 as well as Epyx's Fast Load.
Both work well and offer several additional features. Early releases of the latter had various problems that have now been corrected. If you think
yours may have a problem, call Epyx first before
returning it.
GET YOUR ENGINES RUNNING

THE COMMODORE KEY

Roy Wagner

THE BRITISH ARE COMING
In Great Britain, as well as most of Europe, the
C64 is a very popular for both business and gam-

ing. This is due to it's low cost and extensive capabilities. Most game software is released on cassette.
This does limit such games because they must be
loaded entirely into computer memory. Loading
however is NOT slow and can even be as "fast" as
the 1541 since nearly all cassette software uses fast
loading code. They fully load C64 memory in 2
minutes.
Cassette and some disk software from England
are being introduced into the US market at about
$10 by several distributors. Typically each is worth
the price and matches or surpasses the quality of
some software from major US companies at 2 to 3
times the price.
The games offer arcade like challenges at several
levels of difficulty. The graphics are fast and well
done. Themes are similar to several classic US favorites (Jumpman, Ft. Apocalypse), yet different
enough to still be fun. These are games you play
persistently for several days and then go on to
something new.
I looked at Henry's House from English Software
(my favorite with 8 rooms to get through), Choc A
Bloc Charlie from Lothlorien, Killer Watt and
Loco(motive ed.) from Alligata, and 1985 - The
Day After from Mastertronic. The latter is one of
several on disk from this company for $9.95 in a
nice vinyl folder.
BEACH-HEAD TOO MUCH
The latest release from Access is a sequel to

Beach-Head, the game that put you alone against a
formidable fortress. The only good thing I can say
about this one is that it has a one or two player
option. The game is excessively violent with the
only thing missing being the blood and guts. It
gives us the screams, moans and cries for the
medics. Even the quality graphics of previous titles
from Access are missing. I hope this one dies
quickly on the shelf.
Reader Service #34

Available for the auto racing circuit are some
new titles. On-Track from Gamestar is off the
track as to what makes a good race car game. This
style of game was left behind years ago. Hot Wheels
from Epyx isn't so hot. It is geared for the younger
crowd of about seven. Racing Destruction Set from
Electronic Arts crosses my finish line every time. It
offers an extremely comprehensive game package:
nine vehicles (Baja bug, Can-Am and Indy racer,
stock car, dirt and street bike, pickup, jeep, lunar
rover) each with customizing options and 50 popular tracks (with jumps and pavement types) and the
option to create your own. For added excitement
you can change gravity and place land mines or oil
slicks. You get great graphics and plenty of action.
Other contenders that entered the race long ago
are Pit Stop from Epyx and Pole Position from
Atari. The former is the pits because that is where
the race is won or lost. The latter is good with arcade like racing fun without much variety.
NEXT ISSUE we'll review the NEW Amiga
computer from Commodore and games for it.

Just as the STs were being delivered to computer
stores, Commodore announced that it was ready to
go into production on the Amiga -- its 16/32 bit
personal computer. The media hype for the machine was extraordinary. From all accounts, it appears to be an ST with an extra voice, sprite
graphics, slightly slower speed, and almost twice
the price.

Atari Playfield
ST OUTLOOK
David Stone
In the last issue of this column I chided Atari
for slow delivery of production models of the
520ST -- Atari's 16/32 bit, 512K personal computer. Since then, things have picked up. With over
500 retail outlets now selling the 520STs, the machines are getting into the hands of users. And, if
the electronic bulletin boards are any indication,
new owners seem to be genuinely excited about the
ST and awed by its power and speed.

The 520ST and Amiga appear to have been built
with two different design philosophies. Ironically,
the ST's design philosophy seems similar to the
original Apple II in that it optimizes the power of
the machine's central processor and input/output
operations. According to Atari, the ST's floppy disk
(one of the most important I/O operations) is faster
than the IBM PC/AT harddisk! The ST has been
designed to allow, even encourage, development of
third party expansion peripherals. The input/output
ports exist for easy add-on of super high speed devices such as co-processors, harddisk drives, or you
name it. Amiga, again ironically, seems to have
more in common with the design philosophy of the
Atari 800 -- built in bells and whistles, slower input/output, and somewhat less conducive to expansion.
In line with a design philosophy of providing
the flexibility to grow and adapt as technology
changes, word is already out that Atari plans the
release of a true 32-bit bit add-on co-processor
that will plug right into the 520 ST. Atari claims
that this new processor will speed up the computations to one "megaflop" -- that's one million floatContinued on pg. 50

THE BARD'S TALE
Name:
Type:
System:

The Bard's Tale
Adventure
Apple (initially)
C-64 (November)
#Players: One
$44.95
Price:
Author:
Interplay Productions
Publisher: Electronic Arts
2755 Campus Dr.
San Mateo, CA 94403

by Scorpia

Skara Brae. Once a pleasant and bustling town,
now the desolate haunt of terrible monsters. By day
and by night, bloodthirsty creatures roam the
streets, or lurk within empty buildings, ready to
pounce on the helpless or the unwary. Few people
live here now. Indeed, most of the inhabitants have
fled; only the temple priests, a few tavern-keepers,
the Review Board, Garth the armorer, and Roscoe
the Mage, remain. And high up in his tower,
Mangar, the wizard, directs the onslaught of evil
that has brought Skara Brae almost to ruin.
No red-blooded adventurer could resist this
challenge! So you stand in the Adventurer's
Guildhall, looking over prospective companions.
Around you crowd humans, elves, dwarves,
gnomes, hobbits, half-elves and half-orcs. They are
fighters, paladins, bards, rogues, hunters, monks,
magicians, and conjurers. All are eager to join you
in your quest, but you must choose your band
carefully. It will take the right combination of

fighting ability and magic to see you through to the
end (of Mangar, we hope!).
Thus begins The Bard's Tale, Electronic Arts'
latest entry in the computer RPG field. And a very
good entry it is. There is enough in the way of
monsters, dungeons, tricks, traps, puzzles, and
mysterious magical goodies to keep you busy for
quite some time! And for you cartographers out
there, be prepared to do A LOT of mapping. The
game has (not counting the town itself) five different dungeons with a total of 16 levels. Stock up
on graph paper now...you'll be needing it (a supply
of erasers will also come in handy).
Your first task is to create a strong enough
group to survive the rigors of Skara Brae. As noted
above, you have a wide variety of races and
professions from which to choose. You might want
to create several groups, testing them out until you
have the right "mix" of characters. Of course, there
is no one "perfect" group; all you want to do is find
the one that works for you.

The characters come with money, but no equipment, so you'll have to take them along to Garth's
(fortunately nearby) to buy a few things. Keep in
mind that this game runs in real time, so it might
be DARK when you leave the Guild. Nighttime is
no time for you to be out there wandering around
naked and unarmed. Especially since Garth is
closed at night. If the sky is black when you leave
the Guild, turn right around and go back in... fast!
Then wait awhile, and check again. Keep doing
that until it's daylight again. You'll live longer that
way.
Once you've got the group equipped as well as
possible, it's time to take a stroll around town.

Encounters will be fairly frequent, since monsters
are roaming the streets. You can also find a few by
kicking in the doorways of nearby houses.
Sometimes they're empty, and sometimes, they
aren't. Beginner parties might want to run if the
monsters look too strong ("You face 6 Mad Dogs
and 8 Berserkers"). Eventually, of course, your
party will be strong enough so that encounters in
the town itself are a piece of cake. When you reach
that point, it's time to go underground and visit the
delightful sewers, all three levels of them. These
are the easiest dungeons in the game (just keep in
mind that the lower you go, the tougher it gets!).
When you've finished with the sewers, it's time
for the catacombs, and three more levels of fun and
frolic for your stalwart group. All sorts of nasty
undead things wander around down there, so be
prepared and be careful. There's nothing like going
through a door and finding yourself up against 66
Wights, or 99 skeletons (oops!).
Having survived that, you're probably about
ready to tackle Harkyn's castle. Getting in is not all
that easy; the grey dragon in front of the door may
have something to do with it. Fortunately, there is

a temple nearby where you can heal up any members of the party who got fried during the combat.
Then it's up into the castle, to investigate the contents... living and not living.
Whew! It's getting tougher all the time, and you
aren't finished yet. Now Kylearan's Tower awaits.
It has only one level, but it's VERY tricky... and
very nasty. Do your mapping here with the utmost
of care. Use spells frequently to check on your position; you may not be where you think you are.
And now, at last, you are finally ready to take
on the big boy himself. Of course, you'll have to
find a way past the gates first. And then fight your
way through five (count 'em, five!) levels of ingenious nastiness to reach Mangar for that final encounter. May the gods be with you at that ultimate
moment!
Let's step back a bit now, and look at the actual
game mechanics. The screen is divided into three
squares or windows. The bottom half displays your
party and their current stats. The upper left window shows a graphic representation of where you
are or what you're fighting, and the upper right
window is the combat screen. There is a gap between the upper two windows; here will appear little symbols that show you certain spells are in effect.
Movement is accomplished with the I-J-L keys,
and K is used for kicking in doors. Viewing is
three-dimensional; you see things as though you
were really standing there, looking down a street or
dungeon corridor. The graphics are very good, and
disk access, for a game of this type, is at a minimum. There is even some minor animation in the
monster pictures: heads turn, eyes move, hands
open and close, dragons spit out fireballs.
Response time is FAST, both in moving and in
combat. Results come as quickly as you can press
the keys, and combat resolution is just as swift.
You can also slow down or speed up the combat
results, which is helpful when zapping a large
group of monsters (like those 66 Wights).
The magic system is interesting; there are four
classes of magic-users, but at the start, you can
have only two, Magician and Conjurer. When these
have gone up high enough in level, they can then
switch class to Sorcerer and Wizard. It is possible
(in fact, highly desirable) to have characters that
know all the spells of all four classes. This is important for two reasons. One, you will need spells
from all four categories to get through the game.
Two, each time a magic-user goes up a level, he
gets more hit points and more spell points. This includes starting over again in a new magic class. So,
over time, magic users get to be pretty potent
characters.
However, don't let that fool you. Some of those
monsters are pretty potent, too. Red dragons, for
instance, can fry you for 100+ hit points a shot,
and it won't take many of those to wipe out even a
very advanced party. No matter how good you are,
you aren't immortal.
For you Wizardry and Ultima players, there is a
little bonus: you can transfer your favorite charac-

ters over to the game from a Wizardry or Ultima
character backup disk. The utility simply copies
them over, leaving the characters on the original
disk. I tried this with some characters from Knight
of Diamonds, and it worked nicely. Of course,
some of the magic items will be changed as the
transfer is made; don't expect the characters to be
decked out in KOD armor. Also, bishops and
priests will become magicians, and mages will become conjurors. However, characters DO retain
their stats, including hit points and levels of experience.
There are some other nice features to the game.
No matter what happens to your characters: poisoned, paralyzed, petrified, insane, withered, level
drained, or even dead, they can be made well again
at a temple... for a stiff price, naturally. And
Roscoe is available to re-energize magic-users, for
a sufficiently outrageous sum. Finally, if worst
comes to worst, and your group is all destroyed, or
about to be, you can simply turn off the computer.
As long as your group has been saved at least once
at the Guild, they will still be there. So you can try
again, although anything you found on that last expedition will not be with you.
One drawback to the game is the fact that you
can't save it anywhere but in the Adventurer's
Guild. Which means that you'll need to set aside
some time when you want to play, because wherever you are, you have to get back to the Guild

when you want to stop, or else lose everything
you've done that time out. There is, however, a
pause feature that will let you suspend play for
short interruptions (such as answering the call of
nature).
The Bard's Tale comes with three disks: Main
Boot, Character, and Dungeon. Use the utilities
program to make a couple of copies of the character disk. Use one copy to play the game, and the
other as a backup in case of disk crash or other
unpleasant things ("Rover, no, that's NOT a frisbee!
Arggh!!"). A manual and command card are also
included, and they contain enough information to
get you off to a reasonably good start in the game.
Make sure you read both of them carefully before
you begin.
Also, while the game supports two drives for
making a backup of the character disk, you can
only use one drive when transferring or copying
characters. If you are saving or transferring several
characters, the disk swaps soon become tedious.
However, since this review is based on an early,
pre-production version of the game, this might
have been changed, and the final version MAY
support two drives for transfers/copies (but I can't
guarantee that).
PLAYING TIPS
Now, it just wouldn't be right if, after telling

you about all the danger, I just left you hanging.
So, here are some tips in the game to help you
along and keep you alive. First, don't mess with
those statues for awhile. Go up several levels, and
then tackle them, leaving the golems and grey
dragon for last, as they are the toughest. Magic
points regenerate slowly during the day when
you're in town (but not in dungeons!), so you can
step inside a tavern and just wait there, doing
nothing, letting the time pass and your spell points
will come back (there are never any encounters in
taverns or temples or Garth's or the Review Board,
where you go to advance a level).
Absolutely, and without question, map EVERY
single space in every dungeon. It may be tedious,
but otherwise you are sure to miss something important, and you may not be able to finish the
game. Also make note of the information you pick
up from the bartender (after tipping him, of
course), and you might want to keep track of
which taverns are where; you never know what
someone might ask you. And when you have a
Sorceror of high enough level, make sure he calls in
"Big Red", the illusionary red dragon. Sometimes
the enemy may see through the illusion, but when
they don't, Red can fry them in their tracks or
claw them to shreds REAL quick! Just watch out
he doesn't turn on the party...
Finally, one more thing about statues. They
eventually come back again after you've killed

them. However, they will stay "dead" for the duration of your current expedition, no matter how long
that is; only after you've returned to the Guild and
left the game are they restored. This is especially
helpful when you're messing around in, say
Harkyn's castle. You can leave, get your spell
points regenerated at Roscoe's (open 24 hours a
day), your party healed up at a temple (also open
24 hours), and then go back for more. Oh, and it's
a good idea to cast any long-lasting spells just before you enter Roscoe's, so you can have more spell
points left for the dungeons (and pssst! this isn't
called the BARD'S Tale for nothing!).
I'll let you discover the properties of the various
magical items yourself. There are some pretty nifty
things waiting for you out there, and best of all,
there are no cursed objects!
The Bard's Tale is available for the _
Apple II and IIe, and versions for
the C-64 and Amiga are in the
works. At this time, there is
no word yet on versions for
the Atari or Atari ST series,
or the IBM PC (so write to
EA and let 'em know you
want it for YOUR machine!).
Bottom line:
Not to be missed!
Copyright (c) 1985 by Scorpia,
all rights reserved.

GAME
OF THE

YEAR

The ballots are in, the votes
are counted. Here are the
winners in the first annual

CGW Game of the Year

Awards.
From SSI we have the

Kampfgruppe was an
immediate hit in the CGW
offices and our mail has
consistently indicated very
strong positive reactions by
readers. It received the
highest RID rating ever
recorded for a wargame. In
the contest, Kampfgruppe
won by a fairly substantial
margin over its closest nonwargame competitor - Ultima
III.
We spoke with SSI
President, Joel Billings, to get
his views on Kampfgruppe's
success. "We were not
surprised at the popularity. We felt at the time that
it would be the best-selling wargame ever done by
SSI", said Billings. His reasoning is that Kampfgruppe gives the feeling of miniatures for fans of
that genre, while giving tactical garners the most
realistic computer simulation to date. The scale is
popular (tactical), the setting is popular (WWII Europe), the designer is popular (Gary Grigsby)
and SSI knows how to package and market
wargames. Joel also emphasized the random

Wargame of the Year
Lord British
-Kampfgrue.
(Origin Systems) brings home
a winner in Ultima III, the
Adventure choice. Seven
Cities of Gold (Electronic
Arts) is discovered winning
the Strategy game category.
F-15 Strike Eagle strafes the
competition to achieve
Action Game of the Year for
MicroProse Software.
And now for a blast of
trumpets and a rolling of
drums for the CGW GAME
OF Tiff YEAR - 1985.
Kampfgruppe by SSI! The
voting was never very close
and Kampfgruppe led "
wire-to-wire".
Congratulations to all the
designers and publishers of
this year's winners.

scenario generator, which
makes for endless variety in
fighting WWII land battles.
Boardgame players have
long enjoyed complex tactical
games. PanzerBlitz, by
Avalon Hill, is probably the
best-selling wargame of all
time. The only real drawback
to boardgames of this nature
is the inherent complexity of
items such as "line-of-sight"
targeting and "opportunity
firing". The computer is ideal
for handling the "bookkeeping" chores and allowing
the gamer to concentrate on
strategy. A fairly easy guess
would be that we will soon
see a large number of tactical
games utilizing the general
game mechanics pioneered by

Kampfgruppe.
SSI stated that Kampfgruppe
sales have reached the 8,000
unit mark, with an eventual
mark of 25,000 expected. This is compared to the
I00,000+ figures for the other winners in the
contest. Despite the significantly smaller ownership
of Kampfgruppe, it was able to easily win game of
the year honors.
The staff at CGW feel that Kampfgruppe represents the finest wargame currently available and
that it will be looked back upon as a true landmark
effort in computer wargaming.

The hands down winner of the CGW Adventure
game of the year was Ultima III, a worthy successor to Ultimas I and II. This fantasy role playing
game was designed by Lord British (aka Richard
Garriott) whose Ultima trilogy has remained on the
best seller lists for the past several years.
Ultima III is much larger scope than either of the
previous Ultimas and has set a standard of excellence which as of yet has not been surpassed. Ultima
III was the first to introduce multiple characters
that could explore a complete fantasy world with
amazing freedom of movement.
Although Ultima III has been out well over a
year, we feel that it is still the best game of its
kind. And we anxiously await the upcoming Ultima
III sequel, Ultima IV.

Our strategy game award winner has turned one
particular city to thoughts of gold as Seven Cities
of Gold (SC) has passed I00,000 units sales for
Electronic Arts of Menlo Park, CA.
It is little wonder that SC has proven to be so
popular. The incredible mapping procedure used in
SC permits 2,800 different screens to exist on the
map disk. Placed on a wall they would map a I0x20
foot map! In addition, the random continent
generator makes this a game of endless variety.
Attention to detail is another hallmark of quality.
The designers spent many hours researching the
period of Spanish exploration and the game reflects
their efforts. It is a game, but the all-important
"feel" of authenticity is readily apparent.
Seven Cities is a strategy game, it is not a
wargame. Our readers have stated that it is the best
strategy game of I985. We wholeheartedly agree.

The winner of the action game category is F-15

Strike Eagle by MicroProse Software. Again, the
voting results are corroborated by sales figures:
I00,000 units since the game was introduced in
September 1984!
The reasons for F -15's success are not hard to
find. It is an extremely authentic representation of
a modern combat aircraft. It retains much of the
excitement of an arcade game, with arcade
graphics, and yet it can also be enjoyed by a player
looking for an accurate simulation. It is perhaps the
prototype game for the arcade/simulation marriage.

Microprose's
COMMAND
SERIES
by M. Evan Brooks
iCTsoMmcrapndhSe'ltfT
ing to the computer simulation hobbyist. Crusade
In Europe (CIE ) may well have been the hit of
ORIGINS (the National Wargaming Convention)
and is firmly entrenched in the software best seller
lists. Decision in the Desert (DITD) is rapidly
joining its predecessor. CIE covers the war on the
Western Front during World War II, from the invasion of D-Day onwards to the collapse of the Third
Reich. Design notes for this simulation have previously appeared in this magazine (cf. Jun-Jul 85);
these comments apply equally to DITD. This review
will encompass both simulations - their strengths,
weaknesses, strategic/tactical considerations and
overall conclusions. Be advised that although there
are faults, these games are heartily recommended;
at least one (if not both) belong on every
wargamer's shelf.

Using Microprose's Nato Commander as a starting point, the designers (Sid Meier and Ed Bever)
have greatly increased the options in order to
achieve a user-friendly product. Upon opening the
package the first thing to strike the user will be the
professionalism of the documentation. Over fifty
pages long in each game, it states succinctly how to
play, and then details "How to Play Well". This latter instruction delineates basic strategic and tactical
options in the first scenario of the appropriate
product; for a novice (or even the more experienced gamer), the aid may well prove invaluable. It
is a virtual stepping-through of the scenario, giving
detailed analysis while leaving choice of the different strategic options to the player's expertise.
This type of tutorial is needed in most wargames,
and sadly lacking heretofore. Maps and historical
analyses further elucidate the goal of the simulation; in addition, illustrations of militaria are interspersed throughout the booklet (e.g. shoulder
patches of various units, insignia, combat badges,
etc.). The single most impressive aspect of the documentation is the bibliography -- both general
reading and technical references are present in
profusion. It is gratifying to see a computer game
designer finally giving credit to boardgame antecedents; numerous references are made to
Strategy & Tactics' classic board wargames.

Name:

Command Series (Crusade in
Europe & Decision in the
Desert
Type:
Wargames
Systems:
C-64 and Atari
# Players: 1-2
Authors:
Sid Meier, Ed Bever
Publisher: Microprose Software
Hunt Valley, MD

Both CIE and DITD utilize a removable center
insert which offers a strategic map (CIE) and a
portrayal of a desert engagement on a small-tactical
scale (DITD). This reviewer considered the map to
be a much more useful centerpiece; however, one
will discover that there were subtle reasons for
DITD's insert (cf. Strategy and Tactics, infra.).
Both products also illustrate a terrain key. Taken
from a monitor, it is fuzzy and not as professional
as the rest of the package; an artistic touch-up
would be beneficial. Despite this, the terrain on the
display is clear enough that the player will not get
confused.
Although not stated, the Command Series is
rated as intermediate in complexity - easy enough
for the beginner to grasp, but still challenging
enough for the aficionado.

BEGINNING
The opening sequences of the Command Series
are the best since Summer Games. As the spotlight
pans a packed auditorium with a huge American
(CIE)/British (DITD) flag in the background, the
general marches out from the left to the center
stage podium. As the strains of "Theme from
Patton" (CIE)/"Tipperary" (DITD) begin, the
General's speech scrolls up across the screen. Upon
pressing the Start button, the player will be asked
for the Code Word. Give the wrong code and the
computer will reply "You are an enemy spy!"; the
correct response will be answered by "Hello
General". The correct codes are scattered throughout the rules book. Then the options begin. Five
major operations are available in CIE (Normandy,
Race for the Rhine, Market Garden, Bulge and the
Campaign Scenario) with most operations offering
numerous sub-variations. Altogether, I4 variants
exist. DITD has five battles (Sidi Barrani, Crusader,
Gazala, First Alamein and Alam Halfa). With subvariations there are II variants with DITD. Upon
deciding the scenario further options exist: speed
slow-medium-fast, one or two player (or the computer playing itself), which side will you play (you
can even switch sides during the game), full or
limited intelligence, icons or military symbology.

THE MAP
The maps are readily recognizable as France,
southern Britain (totally out of play) and portions
of Germany with six-mile hex movement (CIE).
DITD portrays the Western Desert, with three-mile

hex movement. Terrain and geographic features, as
well as military symbology, will be quite familiar to
wargamers; the road network is well done. The
overall effect of the terrain resembles a truly natural representation rather than a strategic or tactical
playing field.

REAL-TIME PLAY
The Command Series runs in real-time.
Microprose is proud of its real-time simulation
concept. Time flows inexorably, and each unit is
sequenced roughly every eight hours (CIE)/four
hours (DITD). If the player finds time moving too
fast he may slow the speed down or even freeze the
action (this still permits one to issue orders and
scroll throughout the map). Once every day supplies
are distributed; during this period (midnight)
nothing may be done. The main advantage to realtime is that a game may be saved at any time; but
be sure to have a formatted disk available (the program will not allow you to pause and prepare one).
Given the scale of the games, this reviewer felt
that the real-time worked best in DITD; actions at
the regimental level were accessed in fifteenminute increments, with little "wasted" time. CIE
reflects divisional level activity, accessed in halfhour increments. While this worked well in the
smaller scenarios, in the longer scenarios it sometimes seemed to drag. Overall, the real-time concept is more beneficial to a tactical-level game.

PLAY: AN INTRODUCTION
Either joystick or keyboard-driven, the mechanics of the Command Series are simple to master. It must be noted that this reviewer played the
game on an Atari 800; because of memory limitations a playback of two weeks movement ("instant
replays") is unavailable. It is available on both the
Atari 800XL and the Commodore 64. The
Commodore has an additional feature -- divisional
commanders will be characterized by effectiveness/personality (e.g. "forceful and dynamic","not
the best general on the field").
Basic mechanics have been covered in Dr.
Bever's earlier article (CGW 5.3). This reviewer will
delineate basic tactics and strategic options. The
scenarios covered are the "Campaign Scenario"
(CIE) and "Gazala" (DITD). In prefacing the
Campaign Scenario, it must be noted that this is not
the scenario the designers would have chosen for
review. Its sheer length and volume stretch the
ability of the computer to its limit (and sometimes
beyond!). However, most experienced wargamers
approach a new product by trying the simplest scenario, learning the mechanics and then jumping to
the "monster" scenario. In CIE, the whole may well
be less than the sum of its parts. Each individual
scenario is a "close-run thing", with victory hanging
in the balance until the end. In the European
Campaign Scenario, victory against the computer
opponent may be one-sided - but the scenario is
reminiscent of the "Dancing Bear". The miracle is
that it dances at all, not that it can't dance well.

PLAY: CRUSADE IN EUROPE (CAMPAIGN)
Playing against the computer Nazi, one will be
hard pressed to break out during the first two
weeks of June I944. However, at Omaha Beach,
when the 7I6th Static Division is forced back, the
computer will usually leave a 30 mile gap in the
lines. Pouring through the gap, the Americans
should be able to encircle eight divisions around
Avranches while the British encircle seven divisions
around Caen to the Seine River delta. Despite a
huge gap in the Allied lines, no Germans are
available for exploitation. In fact, lack of supplies
and continued attacks will annihilate the Germans
within 7-I0 days. After the elimination of I5
German divisions (c. 250,000 men), the Allies race
everywhere; opposition is isolated and ineffectual.
While the coastal ports do have garrisons, their lack
of mobility dooms them to eventual extermination.
In this game, Paris fell by 20 July, and by 20
August, the Allies had secured everything. But the
game does not end! One still has to wait until I
November. The lack of an automatic victory condition in the Campaign Scenario is sorely missed.
Casualties were as follows: Allies -- 240,300 troops
and 2,112 tanks; Germans -- 773,300 troops and
2,706 tanks. The Germans retained control of 257
towns, while losing I,643 towns to the Allies. One
final tactical hint for the Allies: beware of supply.
In the Campaign Scenario on the first run-through,
everything was captured and the German army annihilated no later than I September; the bulk of the
American army had been sent to the Ruhr valley,
whereupon they eventually surrendered due to lack
of supplies -- despite the fact that the nearest potential German unit must have been a scout troop
of Hitler Jugend marching through the Black
Forest. The correct response is to do the minimum
necessary to accomplish the task. Once the British
have secured the coastal ports, put them into
Reserve mode; similarly, use only a few American
divisions for the long thrust. German strength is
weak enough that the economy of force applies.
If the Allies had such an easy time of it, surely
the real challenge must be the German opponent.
Well, not necessarily true. Playing against a computer Eisenhower, this reviewer managed to prevent
the Allies from penetrating as far as St. Lo. A line
stretching laterally from St. Lo was buttressed by a
second line I2 miles to the rear (i.e. two movement
spaces); this second line had a six mile lateral separation between each unit, i.e. this permitted the
front line units to retreat when necessary, not cause
traffic jams and allow the reinforcing units clear
access to the FEBA (forward edge of the battle
area). Please note that it is difficult to withdraw
DLIC (detachments left in contact); it can be done,
but it will take longer than one may expect. At any
rate, the Allies were held, and this reviewer went
on the offensive against the British. By 11 August,
Sword Beach fell; Juno fell five days later. Gold
fell on 7 September; Omaha, I4 September; and
Utah on 9 October. By game's end, the Allies were
compressed into a 200 square mile area around
Cherbourg. Casualties were as follows: Allies --

674,I00 troops and 6,846 tanks; Germans
172,100 troops and 526 tanks. The Allies captured
42 towns, while the Germans retained control of
I,735 towns/cities.
In fairness to the designers, it must be admitted
that the Campaign Scenario taxes the computer to
its limits. The smaller scenarios are closely-fought
and tense to the last minute.

PLAY - DECISION IN THE DESERT (GAZALA)
"Gazala, Rommel's Finest Hour" simulates the
battles occurring in the Western Desert between 27
May and 20 June I942. As the Axis, the player
must crush the British, by gaining at least 200 victory points. An automatic victory may be achieved
by the capture of Tobruk, Gazala and the three
South African boxes. (cf. map inset)
Ignoring the northern sector, the Afrika Korps
will assault Bir Hacheim. (I) Historically, this position (held by elements of the Free French) was a
difficult objective. In game turns, it falls relatively
quickly. However, unless the player is careful, the
entire Afrika Korps will soon expire in the desert
due to lack of supplies. A forceful exploitation into
the British rear will be met by a counter-thrust that
will devastate the Axis.
What is the solution? If you cannot supply
through the desert, then you must utilize the road
network. The main road to the bulk of the Afrika
Korps passes through British minefields (actually
minefields plus platoon minus ambush elements).
Therefore, after seizing Bir Hacheim and moving to
threaten the 150th Bde box, the Afrika Korps must
wait while the Italian army forces a channel
through the minefields. The critical period arises
now; while the Italians are clearing the minefields,
the British will attack the isolated Afrika Corps.
Judicious tactical employment, trading space for
time and concentration of forces should defeat the

play. Also, the longer scenarios require more time
to allocate supplies. In CIE's Campaign Scenario
allocation requires c. one minute. Out of a playing
time of 14 hours, three hours involve watching the
computer deliver supplies (shorter scenarios require
as little as 8 seconds).
Given the nature of the Desert Campaign, logistics were the prime mover. Logistics drove operations; insufficient logistics doomed the best operational plans to failure. Each scenario utilizes the
supply rules in a different method; it is left to the
player to determine the optimal use of supplies.
While this can be learned, it is unrealistic to expect
a Commander to be ignorant of the capabilities of
his supply trains. But remember - familiarity does
breed victory!
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE

British in detail. When the minefields are cleared,
the Afrika Corps is resupplied. (2) With the Afrika
Korps ready to resume the offensive, elements will
engage the British boxes from the rear.
Simultaneously, splinter elements will race to El
Adem and Sidi Rezegh. (3) Finally, a small force
(c. 2 regiments) will penetrate the northern road,
seize Gazala and drive on Tobruk. (4) Elements
from Sidi Rezegh should drive north to Tobruk in a
final pincer movement.
The most important consideration in Gazala
(indeed all DITD scenarios) is the low density of
units and the low manpower availability. Loss of a
single regiment may prove disastrous; on the other
hand, seeing numerous enemy units should not be
overly disheartening. They may well be small recon
forces of 1,000 men or less - no match for your
hearty veterans of the Desert Campaign.
Losses in this scenario were as follows: British 63,800 troops and 604 tanks; German - 10,500
troops and 56 tanks. The Germans achieved a total
victory when Tobruk fell in mid-June.
SUPPLY
Supply is perhaps the weakest element of the
Command Series. This "weakness" was in large part
a conscious effort of the designers; they wished the
player to act as the strategic/tactical field commander - without having to delineate supplies to each
individual unit. One can sympathize with the designers on their abhorrence of detailed supply rules;
playing G4/S4 (logistics) is not an exercise in
playability and entertainment.
In effect, the supply rules are left for the player
to learn. The documentation is complete, but implementation is a matter of educated guesswork.
During the midnight allocation phase truck icons
speed throughout the map, bringing supplies to all
possible units. Given the speed at which the icons
travel, it is difficult to determine which units are
unsupplied until one can access them during regular

It should be noted that both games were played
at the fair level; this default condition is historical
parameters. However, given the nature of conflict
simulations, as the designers have pointed out in
private conversations, this default condition in effect penalizes the computer. Since the player learns
each time he plays the game, his play will naturally
improve; but the computer does not "learn" - it
plays each game as if it were its initial effort.
Therefore, to make play more exciting, consider the
following alternatives:
(1) Play with Full Intelligence. After the first
play, you will have a general idea of the location of
enemy reserves. This is an unfair advantage, since
the computer will not "remember" where your reserves are. By utilizing full intelligence for both
sides this advantage for the player is negated.
(2) Play with a Handicap. Usually, handicaps involve mere alterations of strength. However, in the
Command Series, the handicap adds to the effectiveness/morale of the computer's forces. This permits the computer to choose riskier strategies;
where the computer would have normally refrained
from an attack or a certain approach, it will now
seize the initiative and continue longer than at the
"fair" parameter. Also, this is the only way in
which the player will be able to achieve the rank of
"Supreme Commander".
Finally, some points about the other aspects of
Artificial Intelligence.
Overrun units may reconstitute themselves as
cadre units. However, while this may be realistic if
they appear behind their own lines, in the
Command Series they appear in the area of destruction -- even if that area is now 100 miles behind enemy lines. Thus, as the Allies, this reviewer
was approaching Paris when a German unit popped
up near Cherbourg ("Hey, G-2, I thought you said
we destroyed that unit three weeks ago!"). As the
Germans, this reviewer was not surprised to see
Allied units popping up behind the German lines.
But these units, without supply and with low efficiency (c. 30%) are targets of opportunity without
risk. In effect, this aspect of artificial intelligence,
while admittedly artificial, does compel the player
to both seize and occupy key terrain.

If one is playing the Campaign Scenario (CIE) as
the Germans and you manage to contain the beachhead, reinforcements appear around Avranches and
Rennes late in the game. This reviewer was completely surprised by what seemed to be a major invasion. Was it a paradrop a la Market Garden?
Well, no, since there were Tactical Fighter Wings,
Headquarter Units and an Armored Division. Ah, it
must be the troops from Anvil/Dragoon (the historical landings in southern France). Well, not exactly. In fact, this added invasion force is merely
units appearing which draw supplies from the
Normandy beachheads; the computer expects the
Allies to have cleared most of this portion of
France by the time of appearance. Therefore, these
units appear historically -- notwithstanding the fact
that the lines have not expanded sufficiently to allow the reinforcements. Consequently, these units
appear out of supply and easy targets for German
counter-attacks. The designers feel that if the
Normandy Beachhead had been contained, then an
invasion of Rennes/Brittany would have been a
viable alternative.
STRATEGY AND TACTICS

CIE offers both strategic and tactical decisionmaking. With the different scenarios, the player has
a plethora of strategic choices. Tactically, one must
remember to withdraw ineffective units in order to
allow them recuperative time. Given the scale, one
can make numerous errors and still win decisively.
DITD is much less forgiving, given the smaller
scale and limited personnel/materiel. In CIE, units
should be withdrawn when they are 70% effective;
in DITD, one will be compelled to fill the line with
units at 60% effectiveness. Be aware that these
units are capable of sudden burn-out!
Also, when isolating a position, it may sometimes be beneficial to utilize siege warfare; a few
days without supplies may weaken the enemy sufficiently to permit conquest with minimum use of
force.
In terms of a learning experience, if the player
is stymied, allow the
computer to play
itself. Watch
carefully;
although the
computer's tactics
may be below
optimum, its overall
strategy is generally

best. Take lessons and apply your learning. CIE's
scenarios offer a multitude of approaches. Proper
strategy and tactical employment will achieve victory.
On the other hand, DITD is a learning experience par excellence. The scenarios, seemingly unrelated, build upon one's experience in order to
teach valid lessons about Desert Warfare. Read the
historical documentation and scenario information
carefully. Those subtle, devious designers at
MicroProse... remember the earlier mention of the
center insert? It portrays a tactical engagement at a
lower scale than the game. Is this mere window
dressing? NO! In fact, it is a disguised hint to the
player. Desert warfare was characterized by the
following: German panzer formations would entice
British armor to pursue. When the British took the
bait, the Germans would withdraw. The British
formations would plunge into the range of the
dreaded 88's (flak guns which proved deadly
against armor). But British firepower would still
lack range!
After a few scenarios, the player should learn
that optimal tactics for the German are a strategic
offensive coupled with the tactical defensive, i.e.
place the panzers in a location where they pose a
threat to the British, but allow the British to attack.
This maneuver should permit concentration of force
against isolated British formations and eventually
destroy British power. The concept of strategic offensive/tactical defensive is taken straight from
Napoleon vice Liddell Hart/Hans Guderian. The
player's initial concept of penetrating the lines and
fanning out in all directions will prove tragically
misdirected; in effect, the game rewards the player
for learning the proper lessons of Desert Warfare.
Kudos to the designers for effectively teaching this
lesson! As the British, do not engage piece-meal;
concentration is the key to victory.
CIE is more forgiving than DITD. Its scale is
more ambitious, as are its scenarios; however, in
this reviewer's opinion, DITD teaches a more effective lesson in warfare.
DITD is tighter and more balanced. Does this
mean it is a better game? Not really. One must
consider where one's interests lie. Personally, operational simulations seem more readily adaptable to
real-time play, but the purchaser will have to decide for himself.

CONCLUSIONS
Both products are recommended. CIE offers five
scenarios in one package, a bargain. While DITD
lacks a campaign scenario, the scale offers a reasonable explanation. We can eagerly look forward to
the next Command Series game, Conflict in
Vietman. In 1969 who would have ever thought we
would be looking forward to conflict in Viet Nam!

M. Evan Brooks is an attorney with the Federal
Government. He is also a Major in the Army
Reserves, having completed Command General Staff
College and the Army War College.

THE ELECTRONIC GRIDIRON
Computer
Football 1985

minute quarters. The offensive play selection is a
bit limited, but after the play is chosen you can
pick one of three formations. If it's a run you can
select the running back and if it's a pass you can
pick the quarterback and the receiver.

In the past few months a bumper crop of
computer football games have appeared. Rick
Teverbaugh covers some of these games in his
Sports Scoreboard column. Lew Fisher and Erich
Faust share an interesting
statistical analysis of
Lance Haffner's 3-1
Football. Finally, CGW
assistant editor, Bill Oxner,
tells us about the new
game that has the CGW
offices staying open late at
night, NFL Challenge. So
here's the kickoff.. .

Rick Teverbaugh's

SPORTS SCOREBOARD
Now that we are firmly entrenched in the football season, and of course we know that's where
championships are won, in the trenches, this would
be a good time to look at what grid games are currently available for us blue chip coaches.
The rookie in the lineup that's causing the
biggest stir is NFL Challenge from XOR
Corporation.
The program is so extensive that it takes up
nearly all of the 256K available on the IBM. That
makes it nearly impossible to convert into format
for the Apple II+ or IIe or Commodore 64. There is
a MacIntosh version in the works and some serious
consideration is being given for a IIc version.
The magic of this program is the visual display
of the game once both offense and defense has
selected the plays. If you've ever seen John
Madden's CBS Chalkboard come to life on television, that's exactly what you get with NFL

Challenge.
The play unfolds on a grid display of Xs and
Os. Then to repeat the influence television has obviously had on this game design, there's a slow motion replay of the play.
There's another newcomer to the computer football scene and that's Super Bowl Sunday from
Avalon Hill. There are 20 Super Bowl teams included from the initial champion Green Bay
Packers all the way up to last season's 49ers and
Dolphins.
Many options are available to you in playing the
game. They begin with the choice for 5, 10 or 15

Defense is even more enjoyable. First there are
only three basic defenses (pass, run or normal), but
then you can blitz one or more linebackers, key on
a particular running back, bring in an extra lineman or a fifth defensive back and finally double
cover a receiver.
After all that there's a graphic presentation of
the play, followed by a scoreboard that shows the
exact yardage gained and the down and other pertinent information. The game really has everything it
should, like penalties, fumbles and injuries.
Right now it is available to Commodore owners,
but as successful as it should be, there are probably
more versions to follow and perhaps more teams.
Before taking a quick look at are veterans of the
computer football lineup, let me express disappointment that Epyx's World's Greatest Football
Game wasn't available to cover here. We'll try for
the next issue. A quick peek at the game at CES
showed a lot of promise, much more than the baseball equivalent.
Probably the king of our returning letter-winners is SSI's Computer Quarterback. I've probably
logged more quarters with this game than all the
others combined. The game is a solid test, whether
playing against the computer or another human opponent.
The variety of plays included, along with the
ability to use real teams makes it an enduring classic. The graphics are extremely mediocre and it
wouldn't surprise me if SSI booted the game up in
a new, more pleasant, 64K or 128K version in the
future.
Avalon Hill's Computer Football Strategy is still
around, though I'm not sure why. The game feels
more like a guessing game than a real football
challenge. Try to sell me on the realism of a football game where the same offensive play selection
and the same defense always yields the same results. Go on and try.
Then there's Lance Haffner's 3-in-1 Football,
which is totally text but still enjoyable to play and
realistic to boot. Right now there are over 500
teams available from the college, NFL and USFL
ranks and more are on the way.
Previously the only system Haffner's game was
available for was the Apple. Now the IBM version
is out and by the time the ink is dry of this copy
of CGW, a version should be out for the
Commodore 64. The 1985 football season will be
available Dec. 23 and will include some 167 college
teams, 28 NFL, 14 USFL plus some more great
college teams out of the past.
For those of you bent on frustration, there's
Gamestar's On-Field Football, which is very nearly
as bad as their On-Court Tennis is good. There's

some just
hand-to-eye coordination necessary just to complete one pass or gain a yard, yet
the computer almost never makes a mistake.
Finally there's Touchdown Football from Imagic.
It is a game with excellent graphics, in fact on a
color monitor it looks like the Miami Dolphins are
taking on the Pittsburgh Steelers. Play selection
isn't that difficult and the computer opponent is
tough but honest.
That about wraps up this issue's edition, but
next time around I hope to get Epyx' football game
as well as their Winter Games and maybe one or
two others.

3 in 1 Football
A Statistical Comparison
by Lew Fisher and Erich Faust
3 IN 1 FOOTBALL (Apple, C-64, IBM); Lance Haffner Games
P.O. Box 100594 Nashville, TN 37210

We own or have played most of the board and
computer football games available today. Out of all
of them, 3 in 1 Football (3FB) is by far our favorite. This is for several reasons. First, it is a statistically based game using all the key offensive
players of each team. Second, literally hundreds of
past and present professional and college teams are
included. This allows for an almost unlimited number of match-ups and interesting replays. Third,
although a text game, it is exciting and a real
"white knuckler". It has a range of fifteen offensive
plays (including scouting reports) and six defensive
alignments.
3FB is simple to play and each game can be
played in less than half an hour. After each game a
multitude of team and individual stats can be displayed on the screen or transferred to a printer.
We took our two favorite NFL teams; the Miami
Dolphins and the San Francisco 49ers. We then replayed each team's full 1984 season and compared
it to the actual season to test 3FB's accuracy.
Frankly, we feel the results of 3FB are truly
amazing. Admittedly, there are some discrepancies
- such as the 49ers losing three games, and the fact
that the 49er defense (which allowed the fewest
points in the NFL) plays weaker than the Dolphins
(which allowed 71 more points than the 49ers in the
real season). Other major differences include a
lower average yards per catch for most of both
team's receivers, and Miami's Pete Johnson only
scoring two TD's rushing (Shula used him to ram
the ball in 12 times). It should be noted that while
each player picks each play, the computer chooses
who will throw, run or receive the ball. This is
based on the number of times each player appeared
during the actual season.
Some of the statistical differences for the
Dolphins are due to the fact that Lew (as Shula)
stayed mostly with shorter, surer passes rather than
going deep often. Still, there probably should have
been more long receptions to Clayton, Duper and
Solomon.
Erich, on the other hand, stuck more to the ac-

tual game plan of the real 49ers. Differences between their two performances are more apt to be
due to statistical range than any flaws in the program.
Montana and Marino were close to their '84
performance. as was the running of Tyler and
Nathan. True, Tyler did get a lot more TD's, but
Erich ran a lot more inside the 20. Wersching and
Von Schaman were so close to their actual FG
percentages you would swear they really were
kicking the ball! Also, McLemore proved just as
dangerous in his punt returns as he was in real life.
As previously stated, the pass receivers were somewhat off in the per yards caught category, but accurate as to who received and the number of passes
each player caught. Both teams threw a little more
during the computer played season; therefore, receivers caught a few more. Except for Clayton, TD
receptions for receivers were very reflective.
You can draw your own conclusions from our
statistics; however, 3FB seems to be extremely accurate.
Besides the way each team was individually handled, some of the differences in performance were
probably due to statistical range. If each real team
were to again replay their '84 season they might
win or lose another game or two - due to differences in luck, weather and many other factors.
Similarly, individual performances would not be
exactly the same. This should be heavily considered
in any comparison, especially in a simulation where
random number generation partially determines the

outcome of each play.
Additionally, even if we wanted to, we could
never hope to recreate the '84 season - exactly play
for play. This most certainly affected statistical results.
Considering all the above, we haven't played a
game (including APBA, Strat-o-Matic or SSI's
Computer Quarterback) that can compare to 3FB in
realism, excitement and ease of play.

[Ed. Note: In terms of comparisons with other
football games, it would have been interesting if the
authors had had an opportunity to see the new NFL
Challenge from XOR. Unfortunately their article
was written before the game was available.]

NFL Challenge
by Bill Oxner
NFL CHALLENGE (IBM); XOR Corporation Minnetonka, MN
1-800-NFL-CHAL Reader Service #46

NFL Challenge (NFLC) is the finest computer
sports game I've ever seen. It is a high-tech, stateof-the-art simulation that is truly remarkable in
recreating the "feel" of a professional football game.
Please note that this reviewer is primarily a baseball
fan. NFLC knocked my jockstrap off.
Let's get the wailing and gnashing of teeth out
of the way. This game is expensive. $99.95 (IBM

256K). It is also worth it. You begin to get that
impression when you see the packaging. It is the
equal of any $500 software package and will look
quite at home on a Computerland business software
shelf. Solid, thorough documentation. Laminated
cardboard player aids that are quite complex but
realistic. Before you ever place the disk in the
drive you know that this product is likely to be a
winner.
The game comes on two disks, one for play and
one for team data. The team data is from the 1984
NFL season. These data files can be loaded into any
word processor and updated or new players added.
Players are rated from 0-100 in each of several
categories of offensive abilities (speed, blocking,
running, receiving and passing), defensive skills
(speed, rushing and passing defense) and specialty
types (kicking and punting). There are 49 players
per team.
The offensive options consist of 49 distinct
plays, broken into six categories (short yardage, IFormation, Double wing, HB split to weakside,
shotgun and special plays). The defense can counter
with 26 different plays, four categories (short
yardage, 3-4 Line, 4-3 Line and long yardage).

The above items are all nice but don't really
distinguish NFLC from the pack. It jukes the
defenders and goes all the way in its use of the
"electronic chalkboard". This is an X's and O's

picture of each play. Example: Offense calls a
halfback counter to the weakside, defense calls for
a free safety blitz. Each team (consisting of moving
X's and O's) comes to the line of scrimmage with
the proper alignments. The ball is snapped and 22
"players" do what they are supposed to do.
Offensive linemen block to the strongside as the
halfback takes the handoff and starts in that
direction. Defensive linemen react and the free
safety comes flying in on the blitz. Suddenly the

halfback counters to the weakside and gains nine
yards before being brought down by the outside
linebacker. If you like, you can view the "instant
replay"! The same devotion to detail is apparent on
all the various plays. Receivers run the correct
routes and defenders play zone or man-to-man, as
you wish. Now you know why this one takes 256K
to run.
Statistics are equally dazzling, at least team
statistics. Individual stats are not yet available and
this is a weakness in such a fine product. One other

minor irritation is the lack of names - only
uniform numbers (real-life) are used. You will have
to get a football guide (1984) that lists names and
numbers if you want to get the full enjoyment out
of the simulation. One minor bug has been noted after punts the game clock continues to run (on
change of possession). Not a biggie, given the
ambitious scope of the game.
If there was such a thing as a "CGW Seal of
Approval" this game would get it. It will be used in
an office league that will be in full-swing as you
read this review. With a wall full of games to
choose from, NFLC is the one we selected for our
football league replay. Visicalc is the program that
sold Apple computers, NFLC may be the one that
sells IBM PC's to sports gamers.

The Macintosh Version
by Patricia Fitzgibbons

Name:
Type:
System:
Format:
#Players:
Author:
Price:
Publisher:

Ultima III
Role-Playing Adventure
Many
Disk
One
Lord British (Richard Garriott)
$59.95
Origin Systems, Inc.
340 Harvey Road
Manchester, NH 03103

Have you ever seen a dragon smile? No? Well, perhaps "smile"

is the wrong word; "smirk" is really more accurate. For it is indeed
a smirk -- that lip curling, ear-to-ear, somewhat idiotic subgenus
of smiles -- which wreathes the snout of an extremely self-satisfied
dragon on the title screen of Ultima III. And why is this particular
basilisk so pleased with himself? Why else? He has just incinerated
a quartet of erstwhile heroes. But allow a hypertrophied lizard his
moment of triumph: Lord British -- and you -- will have the last
laugh.
Published by His Lordship's own company, Origin Systems,
Exodus: Ultima III is the latest game in the ambitious series to be
converted to the Macintosh. Exodus is a logical extension of the
two earlier chapters of the Ultima saga, and the goal is, once
again, to vanquish a powerful evildoer; however, this game is much
more vast in concept and execution. Virtually every level of every
dungeon, every shop in every town, and every twisting, frustrating
maze must be explored. There is plenty to do in Ultima III, and
there are few shortcuts to victory.
Unlike Ultima I and II's solitary adventurers, Exodus lets you
create a party of up to four characters. Each party member may
be assigned a different profession (such as fighter, thief, or wizard).
Multi-classed professions (including paladins, illusionists, and
druids) may also be incorporated into the group, but only "pure"
spellcasters can reach the maximum ability levels needed to
complete the quest. The most balanced team would consist of a
dwarf fighter, an elf thief, a fuzzy wizard, and a hobbit cleric.
The task of coordinating each character's development and
possessions (including food, gold, weapons, and armor) can be
complicated. Because each of the four is vitally important to
winning the game, one or two "super characters" must not develop
at the expense of their weaker comrades. This is an interesting
strategic issue which couldn't arise in the earlier Ultima games.
Most of the game's activities take place in the plains,
woodlands, towns, or dungeons of the continent of Sosaria.
There's no space travel in this Ultima, but the party will take
several side trips to a mysterious "Forgotten Land." While they
explore Sosaria, looking for fights and clues to various puzzles, the
entire party is represented by a single icon. However, in the
combat sequences each character or monster appears and acts
individually. Because combat occurs in real-time, you must decide
very quickly what each party member will do: fire an arrow, hurl
an dagger, or cast a spell. Speed and quick thinking mean success
in these hazardous encounters. Tip: Seeing that it is so difficult for
a beginning party to survive, you might want to create several
"sacrificial" characters whose sole purpose in life is to transfer their
food, gold, weapons, and armor to your "real" party members. This
technique gives your team a leg up at the start of the game.
The Ultima III package contains an abundance of excellent
documentation: a colorful cloth map of Sosaria; two elaborately
illustrated spell booklets; a detailed "Book of Play"; and a handy
player reference card. Ignore Lord British's frequent misuse of
"thee, thy, and thou," and just have fun reading the history of foul
Exodus. The only serious error in documentation exists on the first

page of the instruction booklet; players are told that they "...must
follow the arcane rituals described on the back page of the player
reference card," to learn how to clone a player diskette. No such
instructions exist and, unfortunately, the master diskette must be
used for play.
The game's graphics (credited to Marsha Meuse) are
outstanding: not only can a fighter icon be easily distinguished
from a ranger or thief, but you can see the buttons on a jester's
jacket... and even a dragon's smile. The gargoyles and griffins are
truly fearsome, as would be the poisonous bradle but for its
twinkling, Kewpie doll eyes. The lack of color on the Mac is no real
drawback; much is done with patterns and shading.
Forget the game's sound effects: they're awful. Toggle off the
volume for a much more enjoyable playing session.
The Macintosh user interface has not been adequately
exploited in Ultima III. Use of the mouse should be fun, but in this
game it's aggravating (eventually, I abandoned the mouse in favor
of the slightly less klutzy keyboard commands). One irritating
example is all the moving and clicking that is required -- between
three widely-spaced spots on the screen -- to view a character's
status; it would have been much easier to click twice on the character's name. And why wasn't the "drag and click" capability used
to allow diagonal movement by the party? Programmer James Van
Artsdalen told me that the diagonal movement option was
discussed at Origin Systems, but was rejected as "upsetting the
balance of the game." Still, it seems unfair that monsters can
crisscross the screen and your party can't.
There is a tremendous amount of disk access, especially with a
128K Mac (I also tested the game on a 512K Mac) Van Artsdalen
responded to this criticism by saying that "...the game does swap
out some code during play, and doesn't keep the maps around
because of the lack of extra space, but then Ultima III is a big
game." Indeed it is, but more could have been done to speed up
play.
A few strange bugs surfaced during my many gaming sessions,
but perhaps these were unique to my review copy. The several
program crashes I experienced (always at the "Journey Onward"
point) are being investigated by the publisher. Note: Use the Mac's
desk accessories during the game at your own risk.
Even though the Mac conversion is far from ideal, Ultima III is
a very enjoyable game, and well worth its hefty price.
(c) Patricia Fitzgibbons, 1985. All rights reserved

by William H. Harrington

Name:
Golan Front
Type:
Wargame
System:
Apple, C-64
#Players:
1-2
Price:
$60.00
Designer:
W.J. Nichols
Publisher: Simulations Canada
P.O. Box 452
Bridgewater, Nova Scotia
Canada B4V 2X6

[Ed. Note: Simulations Canada's newest
computer wargame continues Sim Can's standard
pattern of combining a text only program with a
traditional board game map and counters. While this
approach may have contributed to lower RID ratings
on Sim Can's earlier games, there are a growing
number of computer game grognards who think Sim
Can's approach is on target. William Harrington is
one of those grognards. Here is his review of Golan
Front.]
While Israel slept on the eve of Yom Kippur,
the Jewish Day of Atonement, October 6, 1973, the
armed forces of Egypt, Syria, Iraq, and Jordan secretly massed on Israel's frontiers. At 1400 hours
they attacked. In the south, on the Sinai Front, the
Egyptian Army stormed the Bar Lev line and
swarmed across the Suez Canal. But nowhere was
Israel in more mortal danger than the Golan Front.
Here in this barren moonscape less than 32 miles
separated the hard pressed Israeli front lines from
the Mediterranean Sea and certain defeat. Heavily
outnumbered, two under-strength Israeli brigades
fought off five Arab League divisions while thousands of sophisticated Soviet Surface to Air Missiles
(SAM's) and hundreds of MIG fighters provided
cover for the advancing Arab Army. GOLAN
FRONT (GF), from Simulations Canada, is a sophisticated yet surprisingly playable simulation that
recreates this desperate and fateful battle that Israel
fought among the empty wastes of the Golan.
As with all of Sim Can's computer war games
GF is text only, no hi-res color graphics here.
Instead you'll find on opening the game box two
folding maps of the Golan Front including roads,
towns, terrain and forward observation posts. And

to record the shifting fortunes of war on the battle
map are several dozen conventional die-cut cardboard counters, blue for Israeli units, red for Arab
forces. The game may be either two player, or
solitaire. The computer can play either side. And
make no mistake, the computer opponent is one
very tough customer! What GF and similar games
from Sim Can lack in memory intensive graphics
they more than make up for in considerable depth
and uncanny realism. The feeling is definitely "You
are there" as you assume the role of either Arab or
Israeli Army Commander on the Golan Front.
GE uses a variation of the same gaming system
first introduced by Sim Can for Fall Gelb, their
simulation of the WW II Battle of France. In place
of the standard hex grid to record movement and
resolve combat, the battlefield is divided into irregular areas, some named for nearby towns or terrain
features, others simply given a numeric designation.
Individual units are "ordered" to each location, just
as a theater commander would order to a location.
The tactical options available to each unit include
assault, advance, defend, delay and withdraw.
Individual unit commanders may even unilaterally
issue new orders to their units to respond to
changing battlefield conditions, with sometimes
disastrous results! Should morale or exhaustion
reach a critical point players may even lose complete control of the battered, exhausted units in
their command.
Sim Can's GF is a first class study of the problems of command and control on the modern battlefield as well as contemporary strategy and tactics.
Few games simulate so well the confusion, ineptitude and mishap that dog even the great battlefield
commanders. And that's not even taking into account the vagaries of supply, international political
intrigues, the competing demands of the Sinai Front
and the differing capabilities of the units under
your command. Indeed, so detailed is GF that each
unit commander that took part in the battle, Israeli
or Arab, is individually rated for combat experience and initiative.

GF begins with an appropriate quote from
Henry Kissinger and the ominous date, 6 October.
Players may select a wide variety of menu options
including detailed reports on every aspect of the
battle from current intelligence estimates (not always accurate), available aircraft for the next days
air superiority and ground support missions, reports
from the Sinai Front, morale estimates and available reinforcements arriving during the next game
turn. The mechanics of the game are surprisingly
simple. You could learn to play GF in 15 minutes,
playing it well is another matter! Game turns are
divided into AM & PM phases with air strikes limited to daytime operations only. In your role of
commander you'll have to determine supply priorities for each of the units under your command,
numbers of aircraft allocated to air superiority,
ground support and hair-raising anti-aircraft strikes
against your opponent's SAM sites. Each unit is, in
turn, assigned an objective posture and obeys its
last order until changed or until the unit commander exercises a command decision and countermands the order. Oh yes! Be prepared for more
than a little confusion.
What GF does best is not only succeed as a sophisticated simulation of one of the few "modern"
battles using the new technology; it also succeeds as
a role playing game as well. The perspective of the
game, the front commander, is so accurately portrayed that the actual feel of commanding a modern
combined arms force in the electronic battlefield is
almost uncanny. During the first crucial hours and
days of the game/battle you'll feel all of the frustration and exhilaration as the Arab and Israeli
commanders struggle to retain control of the battle
rather than becoming swept up in the mounting
tide of events. Few other games so accurately
recreate this "feel" of actual combat command. In
addition, GF's game mechanics don't get in the way
of the game's flow. What does happen is the ability
to lose yourself so completely in the game that for
a few hours you are in a command bunker amid
the babble of voices, confusion of battle and the
almost unendurable waiting as men and machines
battle for these barren hills on the road to
Jerusalem or Damascus.
One very nice touch is the presence, very much
felt, of the Sinai Front. This feature neatly resolves
a problem with many board and computer simulations - sometimes called the "Edge of the World"
phenomenon. Battles don't exist in a vacuum but
are dependent on and influenced by the fortunes of
events many miles away. The frustration you'll feel,
as your desperate requests for air cover and reinforcements are refused, is as much a part of the
game as the clash of arms on the field. The game
detail is extensive and the fragmentary and often
contradictory reports received before each game
turn only serve to heighten the sense of imperfect
command that any field commander knows only too
well. GF provides a fascinating study of a small,
highly trained and motivated force facing a vastly
larger but qualitatively inferior force. Either side
faces unique problems and opportunities. Both
share some of the most difficult terrain in the
world and events far beyond their control. GF is a
first rate military simulation.
Reader Service #52

PLAYFIELD (cont.)
ing-point operations per second!
So, does incredible computing speed mean anything to computer game playing? The answer is a
definite "Yes." The kind of speed that the ST currently offers can greatly improve arcade games, adventures, and strategy games.
In arcade games, scrolls can be smoother and
character animation can be more colorful and more
intricate without slowing down play action.
In adventure games, feedback could be lightning
fast, the player could use the screen to draw and
save a map, and the range of interactions allowed
between the player and the program could be
greatly expanded. Even in familiar adventures that
do not exploit the features of the ST, such as
Wishbringer from Infocom, responses to input are
almost instantaneous.
Strategy games programmed for a super high
speed computer like the ST could be made more
human-like in their strategy formulations and responses to human opponents. Before now, programmers were forced to avoid overly complex algorithms and lengthy decision tables because the
computer would take so long to process them that
play would grind to a virtual halt. Now its up to
the programmers to really push the 16/32 bit processors to their limits. When they do, the players
will be the winners.
For Atari 520ST owners there is good news and
bad news about software. The good news is that
many major companies such as Broderbund,

Sublogic, Penguin, Infocom, Activision, Micropro,
and SSI (plus dozens of minor companies) have acquired one or more ST development packages from
Atari. Of course, only time will tell whether or not
the programs that these companies produce will exploit the speed of the ST. Initial products (some
already being delivered) include Flight Simulator
from Sublogic, the entire set of Infocom adventures,
Gato from Spectrum Holobyte, a version of Bruce
Webster's Sundog from FTL, a word processor from
Haba, and GEMWrite, GEMDraw, and GEMPaint
from Digital Research.
The bad news for the 520ST owners is that
Electronic Arts (producers of CGW top-rated Atari
games M.U.L.E. and Seven Cities of Gold) seems to
be putting all of its eggs in the Amiga basket.
Perhaps E.A. will see the wisdom of also supporting
the ST before too many of those eggs break.
Fortunately, in the world of computer gaming,
most software companies choose to support machines based on market size. My bet is that after
consumers have had a chance to compare the ST
and the Amiga, they will choose the machine that
delivers the most performance for the money and
the software companies will follow.

[Ed. Note: This is Dave Stone's final installment
of The Atari Playfield. We want to extend our
thanks to Dave for covering the turbulent Atari field
for the past year and a half. He is pursuing other
interests but will continue to be a contributor to
CGW.
Gregg Williams of Byte magazine will take over
duties as our Atari columnist with the Jan-Feb '86
issue.]

TELEGAME (cont.)
PLAYNET, P.O. Box 587,
Wynantskill, NY 12198, 800-PLAYNET.
GAMES COMPUTERS PLAY, 112
East Market St., York, PA 17401, 717848-2660.
GAMEMASTER, 1723 Howard St:,
Suite 106, Evanston, IL 60202, 312-3289009.
There are also hundreds of private
bulletin board systems (BBSs) all over the
country. Many BBSs allow you to download game programs or participate in
play-by-mail games via message boards or
electronic mail. To find out the modem
numbers of BBSs in your area, ask members of your local user group or check the
"P.A.M.S." BBS list that is available on
CompuServe's GameSIG, The Source's
Member Publishing, and the People's
Message System BBS (619-561-7277).
Also, check past CGW "Telegaming"
columns for listings of modem numbers of
many popular BBSs.
5) DO I NEED SPECIAL
EQUIPMENT?
Generally, no. However, there are some
exceptions: several of CompuServe's games
require VIDTEX software if you want to
receive graphics; Plato is accessible only
by special plasma terminals or
HOMELINK software; Delphi offers several
games that can be played only if you have
a VT52 or VT100 terminal; PlayNet requires that you use a Commodore-64 computer; and Games Computers Play is only
for Atari computers.
6) DO I HAVE TO KNOW HOW TO
PLAY ANY COMPUTER GAMES?
Not really. If you happen to be a whiz
on your PC version of Adventure,
Blackjack, Hangman, or Chess, your expertise will carry over to online play.
However, the most exciting telegames are
unique, and you'll have to start out as a
novice and practice them online just like
everyone else.
7) WHAT TYPES OF GAMES ARE
AVAILABLE ONLINE?
Most systems offer single-player games
(you versus a computer) such as Star
Trek, Backgammon, Trivia, and
Adventure. Some also provide multiplayer games (you versus others) such as
CompuServe's MegaWars, Island of
Kesmai, and You Guessed It!; Plato's
Empire; and GameMaster's Empyrean

Challenge. Very few companies offer "real"
graphics; Plato and PlayNet are two that
do. CompuServe and Delphi have established online special interest groups for
gamers; The Source offers a Post Games
bulletin board.
8) HOW MUCH DOES
TELEGAMING COST?
If you're not careful, online fees can
really add up. Depending on your budget
and gaming preferences, you can spend as
little or as much money as you desire. Here
is a list of system charges: the first amount
is the regular cost for a subscription; the
second is the hourly charge for nonprime
time access (evenings, weekends, and holidays) using a 300 baud modem.
COMPUSERVE -- $29.95/$6
THE SOURCE -- $49.95/$8.40
PLATO -- $50/$5
DELPHI -- $49.95/$6
PLAYNET $39.95/$2
GAMES COMPUTERS PLAY -$30/$6
GAMEMASTER $15/$3
Most BBSs are free (excluding longdistance telephone costs), but more and
more SysOps (systems operators) are
charging nominal membership fees of $10
to $30 a year.
Investigate ads for discounted signup
packs, especially those that include several
free online hours; sometimes you can find a
real bargain. But be aware of additional
online costs: telecommunications surcharges for using Tymnet, Telenet, Uninet,
DataPac, even AT&T; prime time
(daytime) and/or 1200 baud access fees;
monthly minimums (whether you dial in or
not); and connect minimums per call.
9) WHAT ARE THE BEST AND
WORST ONLINE GAMES?
That, of course, is largely a matter of
personal taste. Many garners feel that fastpaced, exciting, multi-player games of
warfare and conquest -- such as
CompuServe's MegaWars or Plato's
Empire -- are tops. However, others prefer
leisurely-paced, single-player puzzlers like
Adventure, Chess, or Trivia.
Games Computers Play offer three hires graphics games (Bio-War CyberTank
and Lords of Space). The graphics look
nice but as GCP is an Atari only network,
I have not had , the opportunity to play the
games.
Most folks seem to agree that rudimentary public domain games don't belong

on a fee-based service -- unless the programs are available for downloading to
your own computer. Naturally, any game
that is bug-ridden should be exterminated.
10) WHAT TYPES OF GAMES WILL
WE SEE IN THE FUTURE?
How would you like to join a few
spacestation crew members for a quick
round of Galactic Diplomacy? Or, maybe
you'd enjoy tackling a treasure-filled dungeon with party members from Zurich,
Rangoon, Nairobi, and Bogota
(simultaneous translation optional).
Multi-player games are hot now, but
they'll really sizzle in coming years. We'll
soon be playing games online -- simultaneously, in real time -- with thousands of
users from all over the world. When computer telecommunications technology lives
up to its promises, online gaming is going
to be irresistible.
Adventure, fantasy, space, and war
will continue to be especially popular
gaming topics; graphics capabilities will
greatly expand; data lines will improve;
costs will decrease; and the quality of online entertainment will become crucial to
the success of consumer telecommunications services. The future of telegaming is
very bright, and CGW will continue to
cover all major developments for you.
Until next time, feel free to contact me on
CompuServe at 76703,657, on The Source
at BCE124, on Delphi at
PFITZGIBBONS, or via U.S. Mail to:
Patricia Fitzgibbons
195 Claremont Avenue #115
Long Beach, CA 90803
Copyright (c) 1985, Patricia
Fitzgibbons. All rights reserved.

SCORPIA (cont.)
And then there's that piranha. Nasty
little thing, isn't it? Maybe you have
something it would prefer to nibble on,
besides your precious fingers. Remember,
it's a fish.
You certainly have been doing a lot of
running around here. Why not relax and
enjoy a good movie? It may seem a little
strange that Miss Voss is selling the
tickets, but go ahead and buy one.
Hmmm. Seems that it's a 3-D feature, and
the ticket-taker is all out of those funny
glasses (and isn't it strange that the place
is open at night when there's a curfew
on?). Oh well, go on in anyway. Don't
forget to look around while you're there.
Hey, so far, so good! How about a little
trip to the arcade now? There's one
machine in particular you should check
out. It looks like a pretty strange game,
but go ahead and play it anyway. Keep an
eye on your map while you do that. And,
by golly, here you are at the castle. Now, if
you could just get that drawbridge down.
It's all in how you say it.
Then again, maybe you're wishing
right now you hadn't entered the place,
since it seems you just walked into a trap.
Mr. Crisp is even nastier than you ever
imagined. There you are, chained to the
wall, and there is the platypus, stuck
inside an insidious machine and about to
be ground into mush. Don't panic (err,
sorry, wrong game!). Remember, you are
still a mail carrier. Think about it.
Gee, Crisp sure took off in a hurry,
didn't he? Of course, you're still chained
to the wall, but you can do something
about that. Stretch a little. Ahhhh, that's
better! Don't forget to free the platypus,
too! And by the way, while it's not really
cricket, you might want to read someone
else's mail. Under the circumstances, it's
forgiven.
Now it's time to explore around a bit.
How about that fuzzy room? Fuzzy..does
that remind you if anything? When you
can see clearly again, check out everything
in the room. Pay special attention to the
levers. You still have to find the way out,
though. I hope you're an art lover.
You're almost finished now. A quick
trip to Voss's cottage (the hellhound
should be no problem), a thorough
examination of everything, and then it's
off to the library. Those display cases look
interesting. There seems to be a cat statue
in one of them. Too bad you can't get the
case open. Well, sometimes it DOES pay
to be violent!
So here's the statue. Odd, there seems
to be a small piece missing. Just a tiny
piece, about the size of....well, I think you
can guess what it is, and what you have to
do. And I hope you make the right
choice..good luck!
Looks like that's it for this issue.
Remember if you have a game question,
you can reach me at:
Scorpia
P.O. Box 338
Gracie Station
New York, NY 10028
Please enclose a self-addressed,
stamped envelope with your questions. See
you next time!
Copyright (c) 1985 by Scorpia

the learni g
game
Games That Teach Programming
BOB PROCTOR
This issue, The Learning Game takes a look at a special category of games: those that teach concepts useful in computer programming.
In CGW issue 5.2, Gregg Williams reviewed one of the best of
these, Chipwits. In Chipwits, you program a robot by placing tiles
in a tray. Each tile represents one "statement" and each points to
the next tile so it's easy to follow the flow. You can make your
robot search for objects, navigate around obstacles and through
doorways, and perform point-scoring chores like eating pies and
zapping electro-crabs. The object is to make a robot that will become the point-scoring champion in one of the eight Chipwits
"mazes".
Chipwits provides a very close analogy to programming in a
procedural language like Basic or Pascal. To create even the simplest robot, you must use conditional branching and recursion. To
create a real champion, you'll have to use subroutines and stack
operations as well.
While those of us who already know how to program get very
excited about Chipwits (Gregg even wished it was MORE complex), I have yet to find a child under the age of 12 who wasn't
intimidated by the complexity. If we want to teach the logic of

programming to a younger group -- who are certainly capable of
learning it -- we need to separate the concepts and teach them
one at a time.
THE INCREMENTAL APPROACH
One company in particular is putting out products that teach
programming concepts one at a time. Sunburst Communications
has an extensive line of educational software on traditional school
subjects: math, grammar, science, logic, and now programming.
Every Sunburst program is rock solid as far as teaching goes;
they're all designed by people who know their education. Some of
the titles are too dry and, well, boring to hold a child's interest by
themselves. They require a parent or teacher to stimulate interest
and provide motivation. But then, Sunburst's games are aimed at
the classroom environment, they come with a Teacher's Guide and
a backup diskette. They're also a bit on the steep side -- $59 each
-- compared to most educational software.
Here's a summary of the Sunburst games for would-be programmers. Reader Service #60
The Pond (Apple, Atari, C64, IBM)
This classic has been around almost two years now. An absorbing game that will hold the interest of most 7 to 9-year olds
for hours. It teaches pattern recognition and how to build a repeating sequence of commands.
The Factory (Apple, Atari, C64, IBM)
Another great game for a slightly older age group (say 9 to
14). Here the solution is a "program" that's longer and more complex than for The Pond. Some deductive reasoning is needed.
For Your Next Adventure (Apple)
A game that teaches the concept of iteration. It uses the FORNEXT command from the Basic language as a vehicle, but the
focus is really on the concept. You don't have to type in the whole
command with perfect syntax, just the numbers that control the
"loop".
Blazing The Basic Trail (Apple)
This one is less successful. The intent is to teach the logic of
conditional and unconditional branching. You and your opponent
(which can be the computer) use IF...THEN and GOTO statements to build a Basic-like program. The object is to pay attention so that you can run the program when it becomes advantageous to do so. It's a classic case of a competent and clever program that never gets a chance to teach because kids just haven't
the patience to figure out what's going on.
Learning Through Logo (Apple)
The Logo language, with interactive "turtle" graphics, is an
open-ended game (perhaps "pastime" is a better word) all by itself. Here's a program that provides more focus; it's a series of obstacle courses for the turtle. There are mazes to run and dots to
connect. It is fun for children as young as 6 or 7.
Exploring Logo (Apple, 064)
Don't get this one confused with the one above. This is a collection of resources to help teach the Logo language to a group. It
includes 22 laminated activity cards, a disk of examples, and a
teacher's guide, but it is not a game.
NEW PRODUCTS
The most interesting new program of late is The Body In
Focus from CBS. It was created by the Neosoft group that also did
Sea Voyagers and Dinosaur Dig. This game has the same format, a
chance to explore and learn in smorgasbord style by picking menu
items that seem interesting, then (if you want) testing yourself by
taking a 20 question, multiple choice test. Or you can take the test
first and then go look for the answers you didn't know. What
makes the program so good is the wonderful use of color and
animation to explain bodily processes. For Apple, C64 and IBM.
Scholastic Inc. has released two titles of a new series to teach
reading skills. Each package contains two short adventure games
that are clever and don't require much in the way of typing skills.
Scholastic recommends Tales Of Discovery for ages 8 and up but it
would be better to say for children who read at a third grade level
or better. The two stories here deal with dinosaurs and (believe it
or not!) software piracy. Tales Of Adventure is about the same
level; Scholastic says nine and up but I think this must be due to
content than reading level. These two stories, getting lost in the
woods and being shrunken to mouse size in your own house, place
the adventurer in more danger and may seem scarier. Both
programs make excellent use of graphics and get rave reviews from
the intended age group.
That's all the room we have for now, keep learning!

COLONIAL CONQUEST
Name:
Colonial Conquest
Type:
Strategy
System:
Atari, C-64
# Players: 1-6
Price:
$39.95
Designer:
Dan Cermak
Publisher: Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

Colonial Conquest (CC) brings back
the period of conquest which swept the
world, leaving few areas of the globe not
controlled directly or indirectly by the
major powers of the 19th Century. And, as
one of the major powers (England, France,
Germany, Russia, the United States, or
Japan) it will be your duty to "civilize" as
many of these backward (read as pre-industrial) countries as possible, while using
your military force and diplomatic guile to
limit your opponents from doing the same.
Divided into eight regions, the world contains over 120 territories for you to uplift
(read as grab) with an income bonus
should you control an entire Region.
CC should not, however, be thought of
as a difficult game. Its origins, according
to its designer Dan Cermak, has its roots
in the popular board game Risk.
Dissatisfied with the simplicity of Risk,
Dan designed a board game of his own
which changed over the years, adding this
and deleting that, until he had the opportunity to incorporate much of it into
this, his first computer game design.
Each of the major countries in CC
have certain strengths and weaknesses
making each of them, when the geographical factors are considered, different and
challenging to play. England, for example,
has the highest quality armies and fleets
available.
Its fleets are, as would be expected,
inexpensive but its armies are twice as expensive as all except Germany's. Russia,
on the other hand, has inexpensive armies
of low quality and expensive fleets of
equally poor quality. Thus, while England
uses sea power to expand its empire,
Russia must use large numbers of land
troops to conquer adjacent territories.
The game is played in yearly cycles
consisting of building phases at the beginning of the year which are followed by four
quarterly turns of movement and combat.
The building phases include an Army
Build Phase, during which you build
armies in your production centers; a Navy
Build Phase in which your navies are built
at coastal production centers; a

Fortification Phase which allows you to
fortify strategic territories and thereby
double their defense; an Economic Aid
Phase during which you may give money
to human players for whatever reason, to
computer players as a bribe to go to peace
with you, and to minor countries to stiffen
a key minor in the path of one of your opponents; an Espionage Phase which allows
you to spy the approximate value and
number (but not quality) of the defending
troops of minor countries and more expensively major countries; and finally the
Subversion Phase, during which you may
use the information gained the previous
phase to "buy off' the defending armies of
a minor country. If you have a great
amount of money, or the minor country is
poorly defended, this can result in a coup,
which will give you control of the country
with a minimum garrison.
The four movement phases each contain an Army Movement Phase, a Navy
Movement Phase for each of the players.
During the Army Movement Phase a
player may order his armies to any adjacent territory. If not controlled by him or
if another player moves to the same territory on his turn, this will lead to combat
in the Combat Phase. It is in the Naval
Movement phase which navies may be ordered to transport armies in the territory
that they occupy for an invasion of another territory or the reinforcement of a
territory of that players. Naval sorties may
also be ordered which send ships from one
of your territories to fight the ships in another territory and then return to its point
of departure.
After all of the players' armies and
fleets have been given orders, then a combined Combat Phase takes place. In nine
rounds of land and naval combat the attacking forces will assault the defending
forces, each round causing some casualties
on both sides. When one side reaches its
breaking point, it will retreat to an adjacent territory if it is a land unit and another port containing territory in the region in the case of defending ships. If such
is not available, all will be destroyed. It is
in the area of a unit's breaking point that
the units quality rating plays an important
role. An English unit might, for example,
be able to take 50% losses before breaking
whereas a similar Russian unit might take
only 12% before the retreat would begin.
This rule holds for both armies and navies.
CC has one of the widest selections of
difficulty and goal levels seen in a fixed
scenario game (one in which you are not
allowed to design your own scenarios, as
you can for example in Mech Brigade).
Each of its computer controlled players
may have its relative strength set on a ten
point scale giving a vast number of permutations. The victory point level required
to win can also be varied between a low of
only 500 points to an unlimited game. This
allows the tailoring of any level of play required, from a solitaire game of a novice to
the play of up to six cut throat experts.
These factors, along with the three basic
scenarios to which they would be applied,

provide one of this games most selling
qualities.
There are some features or strategies
not covered in any detail in the otherwise
comprehensive documentation which
should be pointed out. The first is the extreme vulnerability of a player who controls only one territory in a given region. If
such territories show a naval presence,
then it is ripe for a sortie. Should you sortie against such a territory and force a retreat, then all of the defending (expensive)
fleets will be destroyed, leaving the land
forces stranded. You should also leave the
territory from which you send a major
sortie or invasion well defended. Should
such a territory fall, returning sorties and
any failed invasions will be destroyed.
Also, pay close attention to the terrain
value of a proposed target, as good defensive terrain can more than make up for
numbers. Of course, all of these rules apply
just as strongly to the person on the receiving side. Expand in a region so that
more than one territory is held, watch for
a weakly held territory from which sorties
are staged, and plan your defense keeping
the territories terrain in mind.
Colonial Conquest is not a serious recreation of the colonial era. What it is, is a
challenging and enjoyable multi-player or
solitaire game. While containing the flavor
of the period, it plays easily and gives ample opportunity for the Diplomat or the
General in you to stab your opponents,
conquer territories, and build an Empire
on which the sun never sets.
Stewart McKames

STAR FLEET ONE
Name:
Star Fleet One
Spacewar
Type:
System:
IBM
# Players: One
Price:
$49.95
Designer:
Trevor Sorensen
Publisher: Cygnus Software
Webster, TX

You begin Star Fleet One (SF1) as a
cadet trainee in command of United
Galactic Alliance Ship "Republic", an
Invincible class Heavy Cruiser based on
Cygni Epsilon Three. From there, you are
dispatched deep into the galaxy on missions against the Krellan and Zaldron
fleets. On each mission you are given a
certain number to days to destroy a specified number of Krellans with a small number of starbases for support.

As a trainee, your early mission parameters will be rather easy to attain and
you have a lot of starbases for support. As
you complete missions and advance in
rank, the parameters become more difficult.
Your ship has some 13 critical systems
and 500 crew including space marines, security, and operations personnel. Two hits
at close range will generally penetrate a
shield and then you must scramble to reallocate your shield power or turn your
ship so that a different shield faces the
enemy.
Although SF1 has its roots in the old
Star Trek computer games of a few years
back, the people at Cygnus have added
many features which make this a remarkable game in its own right.
For example, you can disable a ship
rather than destroy it. If you successfully
tow it back to back (using your tractor
beam) your mission efficiency increases.
You may also move close to a disabled
enemy and use your transporter to transport space marines into the other ship. A
boarding battle will ensue (with some nice
sound effects) and you may or may not
capture the enemy ship. If you capture the
ship then his energy and any prisoners will
be transferred to your ship. Taking prisoners back to a starbase really increases
your efficiency. Of course, towing Krellan
ships and transporting Krellan prisoners
has some hazards of its own. The Krellans
may beam a spy aboard your ship or a
prisoner might escape. In either case, they
run amuck and cause damage until your
security crew can capture or kill them.
You can use torpedoes as if they were
mines. Laying a few torpedoes in various
sectors is a very good tactic to use when
Zaldron hunting as the mines are undetectable by Zaldrons or Krellans and the
enemy may easily blunder into them.
Unexploded mines may be retrieved and
used again. By dropping 10 mines in the
same sector as the starbase, then docking,
then leaving and retrieving those 10 mines,
it is possible to have 30 torpedoes instead
of the usual 20.
The Star Fleet Command format gives
you a larger task than just seeing how
many Krellans you can kill in a given
number of days. The new features, including mine laying, transporters, tractor
beams, and ship-to-ship fighting add a
needed dimension to the basic phaser-torpedo battle sequence and gives the player
something else to consider when thinking
about the final efficiency rating.
The game is well implemented on the
IBM-PC and takes advantage of the function keys to initiate game orders. There
are some very good character graphic sequences at the beginning of the game and
sound is used effectively at various places.
The two manuals which come with the
game are very well organized. I especially
liked the "Training Manual".
As stated above, Star Fleet One is a
truly remarkable update of the classic Star
Trek game
Mark Bausman

STAR CRYSTAL
Star Crystal
Adventure
Apple II Series
Diskette
1
Jim Long, Terry Gray,
and Jeff Billings
$39.95
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: Ba'rac Limited
P.O. Box 21830
Shreveport, LA 71120-1830

NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS:
AUTHOR:

Jake Sligot kicked the useless lantern
away and listened as it crashed down the
staircase in the dark. He winced as the
sharp talon of a tiazar scratched his face
and wished he could see the fowl so he
could make certain of the next day's
breakfast. "Three blasted lights!" he expectorated from his dry mouth as visions
of expletive deleteds danced in his head.
"What does this planet do, devour light?"
The ex-scout attempted to inch his way
carefully down the stairs, but the spiraling
stairway was to be his descent into eternity. What a glorious feast for the Tilok
Lizards had Jake Sligot turned out to be.
Star Crystal (SC) is a text adventure
game based on the famous Traveller series
of role-playing games, aids and supplements. The fiction behind SC is placed
carefully and consistently with previously
published material in the Traveller universe. This adventure, the first in a series,
takes place on the planet, Mertactor, in
District 268, Subsector N of the Spinward
Marches Sector. SC contains many advantages for the Traveller RPG player
who has no local gamemaster and desires
to play within the system. First, the
common vocabulary between the RPG and
SC enables the experienced role player to
identify and categorize animal and human
encounters with little difficulty. Those
unfamiliar with typical Traveller descriptions of "gatherers," "killers," and
"scavengers" may need to borrow the basic
rules to brush up. Second, the combat
system is based upon Snapshot rules
(another Traveller rule set) and is easily
understood by the veteran spacer within
the common universe. Third, the series
promises interaction with character generation rules from the RPG series, since a
Citizens of the Imperium character generation utility will soon be available. When
the utility is available, the player will no
longer be limited to an ex-scout character,
as he is thus far. The skills allotted to the
ex-scout character are already written in
basic Traveller terminology. Fourth, when
SC is completed, the map of the temple,
shelter, cavern and planet provides a useful setting for creating one's own adven-

PLEASE
TAKE TIME
TO FILL OUT
READER INPUT
DEVICE

tures for the role-playing game. Hints for
"Campaign Interfacing" are included in the
documentation and even the basic Library
Data (included in the documentation) is
familiar to the experienced role-player.
The information is given to the player
via a divided screen. The upper portion of
the screen describes the general location,
while the lower portion of the screen accepts the player's input and describes the
immediate environment within the location. This divided screen assists in mapping the adventure, since one is never in
doubt as to general location, but still has
room to maneuver within the location.
Acceptance of commands to go directly to
objects within the location speeds exploration considerably.

Yet, for all it has going for it, SC is
susceptible to many of the typical flaws of
text adventure games. Do spelling errors
annoy you? You'll love fighting giant
"tras" instead of "rats." At least, I assume
that's an error, since rats are described in
the SC's documentation, but only "tras"
show up. Do you hate detailed descriptions
with key words which the parser doesn't
know? SC has them. Try to get a drink
at the sink in the shelter. Examine the
sink. You are told that it has a faucet.
Try to turn on the faucet, however, and
the parser doesn't know what a "faucet" is.
Try to "Turn on sink" and it wants to
know how to do that. If you enjoy wasting time on a ridiculous parser, you'll love
SC. Further, as noted within the fiction,
one of the main obstacles in the game
seems to be finding light when your cold

light lanterns, filled in the description's
own words with three days' worth of
chemical, malfunction within 24 hours.
There is no logic to the malfunction. It is
simply a "deus ex machina" to foil the exploration or destroy a character. I prefer
more logical obstacles in my adventuring.
Last, but certainly not the least annoying
is the program's tendency to forget things.
Disappearing canteens, keys and artifacts
abound. No, they are not to be found by
backtracking in case one has violated the
weight and displacement formulae.
Another criticism involves the system
of encounters. Even though the computer
divides the screen into a general description and specific description, it is possible
to be in hand-to-hand proximity with an
animal or human before having a chance

to ready one's weapon. This may not be
too unreasonable in narrow corridors, but
certainly seems unreasonable within an
exterior clearing or courtyard.
SC is enjoyable when one is simply exploring the well-designed locations and
examining the objects within each location. It isn't fun when one is trying to
play "Stump the Parser" or "What's My
Light?" But in all fairness to SC, many
adventure games have evidenced this same
problem. The scenario is well-conceived
and the scientific thesis held by the deceased offers stimulation for its own campaign. SC bodes well for future interactive
Traveller adventures, but the initial offering could have used more playtesting and
a more user-friendly game system.
Johnny L. Wilson

SPECULATOR
NAME:
Speculator
TYPE:
Strategy
SYSTEM:
IBM PC
PRICE:
$69.95
#PLAYERS:
1-6
PUBLISHER: OCO Software
P.O. Box 1067
Belvedere, CA 94920
(415) 435-5031 (in Cal)
(800) 446-3400

"At 6:49 A.M. CST, Hong Kong Gold
reports are that gold is weaker against the
U.S. Dollar." You hurriedly phone your
broker and put in an order to sell gold
"short" (that is, sell gold that you don't
have at present on the assumption that
you can purchase it at a lower price before
you have to "deliver"). In SPECULATOR,
you get a chance to interpret news reports
and estimate their effect on market conditions. Unlike many simulations which reflect price changes over weekly or monthly
periods, SPECULATOR practically puts
you in the pit. It simulates "real time"
trading with a scale of 1 minute of playing
time equal to 6 minutes of "real time." The
graphics even allow you the privilege of
watching your broker answer the phone
and view the floor broker moving to the
appropriate post to execute your order on
the floor of the exchange.
The realism used in this simulation is
remarkable. One is able to buy at the
current market value; buy below the market value using an MIT. (Market if
Touched - becomes an active market order
when a certain price is reached) order; sell
at a pre-arranged MIT. order; sell at a
given price OB (Or Better - will sell at a
given price or higher price); sell short; use
a spread order (simultaneous selling and
buying of related contracts which are related to one another); using GTC (Good
til Canceled - order remains with the spe-

cialist on the floor of the exchange until a
certain price or contingency is reached),
OCO (One Cancels Other - an offsetting
mechanism where if one part of the order
is filled, the other part is canceled) orders;
and having the flexibility to execute orders
at the immediate beginning of the trading
session (On Open) or at the end of the
session (On Close). The effect of all these
options (though they are not all immediately available to the first level or "novice"
player and must be earned as a performance bonus as the player improves to
"Speculator" and "Floor Trader") is to give
the player a more intimate understanding
of the mechanics of futures markets. It also
seems to allow the player feel more "in
charge" of the situation because he is able
to communicate EXACT conditions for investment.
It's also a multi-player simulation and
one of the few "realistic" simulations based
on actual market conditions to allow this.
TYCOON reflects actual market conditions and an excellent degree of realism,
but only 1 investor can compete within the
same market environment. In SPECULATOR, up to 6 players can compete at the
same time. This feature also presents a
problem, however. It is very difficult for
more than 1 player to use the keyboard at
the same time. When the market is about
to open, there is only 1 minute to enter
"On Open" orders whether there is 1
player or 6. Further, since the market
keeps on moving, even when 1 player is in
transaction mode, there is an inherent advantage in entering one's orders first. The
scaled "real time" is a vital ingredient to
the feeling of being there within the simulation, but either there needs to be some
other way of providing input from the
players than from the keyboard or there
ought to be a feature which allows the
"freezing" of the "real time" until all players may enter their orders.
Another important factor is the data
disk. Because the events, contingencies,
and price fluctuations are geared to an
actual 45 day profile of market conditions
on three different exchanges (Chicago
Board of Trade, Chicago Mercantile Exchange and New York Commodity Exchange), there is a significant correlation
between what May orange juice does the
first time you play the game and what
May orange juice does every other time
you play the game. In order to circumvent
this tendency toward sameness, O.C.O.
Software plans to market several different
data disks to reflect different market histories. These will be a welcome addition to
the game, since it will keep the game fresh
and playable.
In spite of the fact that SPECULATOR allows the investor to play much
closer to the market than its closest competitor, TYCOON (that is, the investor is
able to act upon the news before the market as a whole acts upon or discounts it),
the basic "futures" strategies described in
CGW 4.3 will work. It is harder to be a
fundamentalist in SPECULATOR, however, since one only has a 30 day history
chart to work from where TYCOON offered annual histories of each commodity

Continued on pg. 63

RID #23 (use card at page 5)
On this page a number of games are
listed for evaluation. When evaluating a
game consider such things as PRESENTATION (graphics, sound, packaging,
documentation); GAME DESIGN (design,
playability, interesting?); LIFE (does the
game wear well?)
For each game you rate place a 1
(terrible) through 9 (outstanding) next to
the appropriate number. Leave blank any
game which you have not played enough
to have formed an opinion.
In addition to games, we have listed a
few items about the magazine itself that
we would like you to rate on the same
scale.

SPECULATOR (cont.)
in graph form. It is easier to be a technician in SPECULATOR, however, since one
may place a buy-sell order immediately
after news which will affect the basic supply and demand for the commodity hits
the ticker. For example, you read that
meteorologists predict a severe winter on
the east coast (not an actual event). This
indicates that there could be a freeze in
Florida which would reduce the supply of
orange juice. Reduced supply means increased demand which means higher futures prices. Therefore, you want to buy
orange juice futures before anyone else
can. In TYCOON, there is a definite advantage to following the news, but the
price fluctuation has already begun by the
time the player reads about it. In SPECULATOR, the player has to move in a hurry
before he loses out on the advantage which
the news gives him/her.
SPECULATOR is the first investment
program I've seen which eclipses the fine
line of Blue Chip Software investment
simulations in tutorial value. The two
books of documentation which are packaged with the program (the Game Manual
- which explains everything from booting
the program to how to place an order and
the Market Reference Guide - which explains everything from the size of a contract to factors that influence prices) are
understandable and make a valuable resource for perusing the financial pages
and/or publications distributed by brokerage houses. Between the two booklets, almost any conceivable order is defined from
both the perspective of real trading and
playing the game.
SPECULATOR compares favorably
with any other investment simulation on
the market to date. It is competitively
priced for the basic game and should be an
especially worthwhile investment with the
addition of new data disks. I look forward
to the projected release of a stock market
simulation in the near future.
Johnny L. Wilson

INCUNABULA
Incunabula
Name:
Strategy
Type:
IBM-pc
Format:
1-6
#Players:
Steve Estvanik
Author:
Publisher: Avalon Hill Game Co.
Baltimore, MD

Incunabula, Avalon Hill's multi-player
game of the rise of ancient civilizations,
asks only that you lead your small tribe
along the road of increasing size and social
complexity to eventual Imperial Dominion.

The kind people of Avalon Hill have,
however, recognized that some tribes are a
bit more chaotic than others; they are
better destroyers than builders. For those
of you who, quite unlike me, fit this barbaric mold, Incunabula is a game of ancient "de-civilization", in which you raise
your small tribe slowly into a vast Horde,
demanding tribute from proud nations or
destroying them at your whim.
In design and play, Incunabula is very
much like Avalon Hill's board game,
Civilization, in that your tribe progresses
by stages determined by your trade and
the number of cities you possess. Why
Avalon Hill didn't just call this game
"Computer Civilization" is a question open
to speculation.
Trade, without question, is the most
important aspect of the game, as successful
trading is crucial to your gaining those
skills necessary to any would-be empire.
As a result of trading, your group may acquire such diverse skills (or Arcana, as the
game refers to them) as metal working,
navigation, music and philosophy. The selection of skills is not, though, a
straightforward action.
The skills required may vary from
player to player depending upon his
BASIS OF LAW (BOL). There are four
possible BOLs, ranging from a strict
Theocracy to the highly chaotic Khanate.
The former requires a long list of skills
culminating with theology and philosophy
while the latter requires and indeed allows
no skills beyond the inherent ones of rape,
pillage and burn.

Within their limitations and requirements, the four BOLs add one of the
needed opportunities for variation in the
game. Additionally, the computer run
players vary in their personalities or
"humors". These humors, which can be
human or randomly assigned, as can the
BOLs, direct the behavior of the computer
players and can be used to predict their
probable value in an alliance or danger as
a neighbor. The humors vary from the win
oriented "Choleric" types to the
"Sanguine" types, who seek balance but
also want to keep the game interesting in
unpredictable ways.
The inclusion of different personalities
and the different BOLs, when added to the
different places you might randomly start
on the map give the game its only sources
of variation other than those due to human interaction which would not exist in
solitaire games. The game has no option
for map variation which would have
greatly added to its projected lifespan. It
also has no option to vary the difficulty
level other than the option to increase the
probability of natural disasters from likely
to inevitable. This lack of variance suggests that the probable solitaire life of the
game could be rather limited.
Incunabula is an interesting and enjoyable multi-player game. The combination of combat, goods trading, and diplomacy will give a wide variety of garners
something worth a closer look.
Stewart MacKames

The RID for this issue reflects a trend, on
the wargame front, towards sophisticated tactical
simulations. Kampfgruppe, the CGW Game of the
Year, maintains the number one spot, closely
followed by its modern equivalent - Mech Brigade
Ancient Art of War, another tactical level game
continues to rate highly with our readers. On the

adventure/action side of the ledger we find
Wizardry I retaining the coveted top spot. We're
beginning to think this one will never give any
other adventure game a chance at numero uno.
However, stay tuned for Ultima IV, we have a
sneaking suspicion that Lord British just may do
the trick.

