"Special Sports Games section COMPUTER GAMING WORLD The Premier Computer Game Magazine June 1993 Number 107 100 GAMES RATED CONFIG FILES TO SOLVE LEGAMERS MEMORY PROBLEMS ODUCTIONS EMPIRE DELUXE SHOW TO:WIN AT 3 TAXI CGW Warner eW=Malas $3.95 USA $4.95 Canadian 06 NEW YORK XXX 666 29074121589 "


"Snear of Destiny Hollenstein 3D Graphic Adventure w II III IIII gali HEALTH AMMOTT FLOOR 8 SCORE LIVES 4400 3 HEALTH AMMO 36% 23 FLOOR 5 SCORE LIUES 2900 3 FLOOR 9 SCORE 2800 LIVES 3 HEALTH AMMO 80% 939   Spear of Destiny brings virtual reality to the PC, hurling you into an intense battle between good and evil in which only you can save the world! A breathtaking musical soundtrack sets the mood, while amazing first person\" visual perspective and spectacular digital stereo sound effects give an experience like no other game you've ever played! Peatures! spectacular VGA virtual reality system #breathtaking musical soundtrack for Adlib, Sound Blaster x digitized stereo sound effects for Sound Blaster, Sound Source over 20 complete floors to cover 4 levels of play difficulty special extra challenges for advanced game players saves multiple games in process What the Reviewers Say! the player is 'there' like no game I've ever played...\" \"the sound and the visual action, is frighteningly realistic... I can't remember a game making such effective use of perspective and sound and thereby evoking such intense physiological responses from its players.\" Game by id Software. Published by FormGen Corporation, Box 279, North Andover, MA, USA, 01845-0279 (800) 263-2390 (416)857-4141 Fax: (416)857-4531 Circle Reader Service #53 "


"Clue Book Now Available A Fantasy Role-Playing Simulation by D.W. Bradley _WIZARDRYI CRUSADERS of the DARK SAVANT 1992 Role-Playing Game | PCGames magazine 1992 Role-Playing Game of the Year Strategy Plus magazine 1992 Role-Playing Game of the Year CompuServe 1992 Excellency in Software PC Entertainment magazine PENYE SPUSHES 2.2959LE LOR DAS HILO ROSE CANOALS PROCED Welcome to the sequel to Bane of the Cosmic Forge and the only game that could possibly follow its lead. 'It's everything Bane was...and more. 256 Colors Outdoor Campaigns Full Musical Score & Sound Effects  Auto Mapping True Point & Click Mouse Interface Unprecedented depth of story SIR-TECH Ogdensburg Business Center, Suite 2E, Ogdensburg, New York 13669 To order or for a dealer nearest you call 1-800-447-1230 Circle Reader Service #92 "


"FEATURES COMPUTER GAMING WORLD 8 Hell Cab: Paying the Devil his Fare Due Johnny \"The Exorcist\" Wilson goes along for the ride in Warner New Media's Mac CD-ROM adventure Playing the Game Where it Lies: Greens Dave Pyron looks for handicaps in the MicroProse fairway favorite Och! Scottish Text Games? Aye, Wizard Games has a loch on three sporting titles: Greyhound. Goal and One Nil se Tony La Russa 2 Earns Some \"A's\" Wallace Poulter provides the play-by-play i Konami's Wilson Pro Staff Golf Wallace \"Putter\" Poulter gossips in the clubhouse Chalk Talk for Front Page Sports Football Jarrod Kimberlain gives us more X's and O's than his wife ever sees in his love letters XXX 666 Hell Cab pg. 8 Hockey League Simulator II Franchise building in Bethesda's NHL Simulator by Johnny L. Wilson INCE m Read All About it with CC Hockey Joe \"Stick Man\" Sherfy puts it all in print about this action-packed, text-based hockey game ert a The Magic of B-Ball The text-based game faces a full court of press Stor Destrover fleet orbiting a. X-Wing pg. 76 Slaying the Knight Fantastique Interplay's BattleChess 4000 rockets onto the scene but Jay Kee won't hold his review in check sok Tracking Down the Koshan Conspiracy Cyberpunk Jeff James reviews this role playing game set in Ubisoft's dark future Alone in the Dark: An Illuminating Review Charles Ardai sells his soul to H.P. Lovecraft to review this I-Motion creation Fangs A Lot for the Veil of Darkness Chuck Miller raises the stakes and draws blood in his review of this SSI vampire fest Daughter of Serpents pg. 82 Space Flight Takes X-Wing Rebel Hero \"Ranger\" Chris Lombardi straps in for a \"force\"ful look at LucasArts space combat simulator Courting the Daughter of Serpents Our true Victorian, Robin Matthews, reviews Millenium's horror game Tech Support: The Good, The Bad & The Ugly Computer gaming curmudgeon M. Evan Brooks writes a review while on hold Space Quest V pg. 112 "


"TM { Tools The Creepers are on the move It's the annual trek to the Butterfly Bowls. But, with over 70 levels of factories, caverns, and forests to cross and with the worst sense of direction in the entire animal kingdom, getting them all there is going to take some doing! Tool BRE 8P 3800E Energy 3600 Tool Creepers Features:  Over 70 puzzle levels.  256 colors (PC).  Crazy Creeper animations.  Difficulty rating from easy to brutal.  Full soundcard support with 16 funky soundtracks. The Creeper-cam with multiple playfield views. SEOA Enero The mean green creeping machine Look for Creepers crawling in your favorite software store, or call: (800) 438-7794 S: Psygnosis 29 Saint Mary's Court, Brookline, MA 02146 (617) 731-3563 Circle Reader Service #78 "


"100 COMPUTER GAMING WORLD A Gamer's Guide to Memory Management Mike \"Moondawg\" Weksler playes a keyboard concerto in DOS 106 Cashing in on Our Casino Comparison Will Capstone's Trump Castle III take the pot? Or will Konami Beat the House? 112 Space Quest V: The Next Mutation Charles Ardai becomes Roger Wilco in Sierra's latest cosmic comic epic 116 Just Dial Terminator 2029 Through the eyes of a cyborg courtesy of Gordon Goble COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD 126 Publisher Russell Sipe Editor Johnny Wilson On-Line Editor Alan Emrich Managing Editor Ken Brown Assistant Editor Chris Lombardi Art Director Susan Zurawik Graphic Artist Jack Rodrigues Marketing Manager Diane Miller M.I.S. Manager Gene Allen Assistant M.I.S. Manager Mike Weksler Ad Manager Jim Messing Circulation Kathy Garcia Contributing Editor (Adventure Games) Scorpia Contributing Editor (Wargames) Evan Brooks Ad Director Jay Eisenberg Good Impressions of Caesar By the Imperial Building Inspector himself, Allen \"Hippodrome\" Greenberg 128 Hats off to Spaceward, Ho! Martin \"Martian\" Cirulis heads for a New World in search of that big roundup in the sky 132 A Rustler's Guide to Spaceward, Ho! What it takes to steal (and steel) stars in this freewheeling galactic grabber by Roger \"StarTzu\" White 134 Jim Dunnigan's Victory at Sea A \"Behind the Screens\" look at Three Sixty's upcoming World War II epic by Alan Emrich 136 Pre-20th Century Wargame Survey M. Evan Brooks' annotated listing of wargames 144 Building upon an Empire New World Computing's Empire Deluxe makes some classic changes and dresses for the 90s by H. E. Dille 148 Mega lo Mania From the stone age to the nuclear age in Ubisoft's wacky conquest game by John \"Brass Age\" Brassil Computer Gaming World (ISSN 0744-6667) is published monthly by Golden Empire Publications, Inc. 130 Chaparral Ct. Suite 260. Anaheim Hills, CA 92808. Second-class Postage paid at Edanger. KY 41011 and additional mailing offices. Permit #672-910. Contents are copyrighted by Golden Empire Publications. 1993. Postmaster: Send address changes to Computer Gaming World. P.O. Box 601, Mt. Morris, IL 61054-8052 The subscription rate for twelve issues (one year) is $28.00. Canadian and foreign surface subscriptions add ST100, Foreign air subscriptions are $78,00 per year. All payments must be in U.S. dollars, made by check drawn upon n U.S. bank, Visa, MasterCard, or money order. Psalms 9:1-2 CompuServe (76703.622) America On-Line: CGW Prodigy: EXPT40B GEnic: CGW Subscription Dept. 1 (800) 827-4450 Telephone: (714) 283-3000 Fax: (714) 283-3444 Foreign Subscribers: (815) 734-1113 For advertising information only, call: JE Publishers' Representative Company 3415 S. Sepulveda Blvd., Suite 520 Los Angeles, CA 90034 (310) 572-7272 For newsstand circulation, call: kemco Publishers Services (603) 924-0224 Printed in the U.S.A. DEPARTMENTS 52 Scorpion's Mail 120 Company Report: 54 The Rumor Bag Legend Entertainment (Non Video Meo) 124 Computer Wargaming 68 Scorpion's View: World Editorial Alone in the Dark 150 Taking a Peek 84 The Best of the Rest 155 Conversions Received/ (Shareware) Ad Index 88 Over There: European 157 CGW Hall of Fame Software Report 158 CGW Poll: Top 100 Games 96 Industry News: SPA Report 160 What's Hot? 110 Letters from Paradise 161 The Patch File 162 Editorial (On Reviews) "


"Bad Day in Bagdad! 1000000 You've been cast out of the palace as a beggar. The princess has turned against you. The palace guards want your head on a skewer. And you haven't even had breakfast yet. This is not good. It gets worse. One minute you're fleeing for your very life across roof tops. The next, you find yourself washed up on a desert island...or amidst ancient ruins, face to face with a disembodied head (and boy is it hungry!). This is really not good. You stumble upon quicksand, serpents, spikes, magic spells, a skeleton with a sick sense of humor, and then...well...things get just a mite tricky. Introducing Prince of Persia 2: The Shadow & the Flame'. Some call it a dozen Arabian Nights movies rolled into one. Actually, it's your worst Arabian nightmare. So get some sleep. Once this Beaderhund swashbuckler begins, you may never sleep again. PULSE-QUICKENING ACTION RICH MOVIE-LIKE STORY AND SOUNDTRACK INCREDIBLY REALISTIC ANIMATION A CINEMATIC ACTION GAME BY JORDAN MECHNER SUGGESTED RETAIL PRICE: $69.95 (MS-DOS VERSION). SEE YOUR LOCAL DEALER OR CALL 1-800-521-6263 AND REFER TO CODE 262 TO ORDER AT A 25% SAVINGS. REQUIRES 10 MIZ 286 OR FASTER MACHINE. HARD DRIVE AND VGA REQUIRED. 01993 Brader und Software, Inc. Prince of Persia is a registered trademark and The Shadow & the Flame is a trademark of Brodertund Software. All rights reserved. Circle Reader Service #37 "


"TIME TAKE PROD NO. SCENE DATES DIRECTOR PRODUCED BY Go 10 X New York Warner New Media's Hell-Cab CASIO Sneak Previews are not designed to be reviews. They are feature articles based on \"works in progress\" that CGW's editors have deemed worthy of early coverage. These articles are not intended to provide the final word on a product, since we expect to publish appropriate review coverage when the game is finished. by Jolinny L. Wilson LVUS SOKA WA BUVO yo to hell. Go directly to hell. Do not pass Times Square. Do not collect $200. Oops, wrong game. In fact, very much wrong. The concept behind Pepe Moreno's Hell Cab is to stay out of hell. No, the idea of the game is not for us \"left coasters\" to claim chat New York is equivalent to hell. Yet, those of us who have had the \"Our of Towners\" experience have often wondered if we hadn't managed to hire a taxi driven by a denizen of said theological locale of eternal punishment. In fact, the latter is probably not only the inspiration for Hell Cab, but it is where the game begins. The player, from a first-person perspective, arrives at John F. Kennedy International Airport in order to transfer to a connecting flight and discovers that said flight has been delayed. Along comes a \"friendly\" cabbie who promises a deluxe tour of New York in order to help our hero/heroine pass the time. Yes, this cab ride does pass the time: the Jurassic Age. Rome in 59 B.C. and France in 1917, as well as modern day New York. Of course, the character who has this. www. LEASE SIT BACK IN CASE OF SHORT STOP TOR YOUR OWN SARITY serves as the player's inventory and that the cursor changes shape to indicate different options. Anything interactive is indicated by a hand and extended index finger (an extremely valuable resource, at times). At other times, the cursor is the familiar black arrow. If the character is streetwise to the entrepreneurial wiles of urban cab drivers, he/she is bound to need some money. Where would someone find money in an airport? An ATM machine, of course. The ATM machine is immediately accessible to the player. If one just stepped off a plane has no way of knowing doesn't immediately remove the debit card from the \"I Love NY\"inventory bag, pop-up What the character does know is that taking instructions tell the player what to do. Once that taxi ride is not likely to be as boring as the machine is activated, one enters the charstaying around the airport boarding lounge. acter's name and a three-digit numerical passWhat the player knows is that the game is word/account number. funneling his/her character toward that taxi At this point, the ATM is useful for several cab. The appearance of the cab driver in a reasons. First, such ATMs (scattered about digitized sequence sets up the first interaction. NYC and the past) are the player's only source Gamers with CD-ROM experience will noof cash. Second, all instructions for the game tice that the graphics window has been reare available from these machines. Third, they duced from full-screen in order to provide a provide mini-documentaries (in QuickTime) faster frame rate, but will immediately be on the three historical eras to be visited in the aware of the fact that this is not full-motion course of the game. video. Moreno and crew removed some of the There is one other interesting feature prevideo frames in order to have the game play sent in the ATM locations. There are broreasonably well off the CD. They kept all of chures in a rack, presumably built into the the video, in case they were to publish the ATM machine. If one clicks on these brosame product on a machine that supports full motion video (e.g. 3DO or the new CD-I TITLE: Hell Cab SYSTEMS: Macintosh w/ CD-ROM with FMV cartridge). IBM (MPC Standard) to follow PRICE: $99.95 Adventure gamers will quickly tumble to PROTECTION: None DESIGNER: the fact that the \"I Love NY» shopping bag Pepe Moreno PUBLISHER: Warner New Media on the bottom left-hand side of the screen NY Page 8 Computer Gaming World "


" IL chures, they provide a commercial for some parks outside the Emof the game projects which Moreno and his pire State Building. As crew would like to publish (including an inalways, when dealing teractive tour of Fritz Lang's Metropolis). The with fictional New idea for «virtual tours\" has been around for a York cab drivers or the long time (just ask Chris Weaver of Bethesda devil himself, the charSoftworks), bur Moreno has utilized the techacter is expected to pay nology to offer something more than a simple more than his/her tour. \"fare» share. No matter what one does, there is no way to get out of the HEILIGAB jam, but to sign Raoul's contract. Naturally, Raoul's contract is a fascinating descendent of every infernal contract since classic 60s TV emcee introducing QuickStephen Vincent Benet's \"Devil and Daniel Time videos with soundtracks of real underWebster,\" Broadway's Damn Yankees or The ground bands like New York's \"Black Rain.\" BAXT 666 Charlie Daniels Band's \"Devil Went Down Also, though it wasn't yet implemented in the To Georgia.\" It essentially puts the playerversion we played, gamers who want to expecharacter's soul \"in escrow\" and the devil rience a quick end to the experience can even Driving Ambition wants to close the deal ASAP. Fortunately, for jump off the fabled ESB. the player's character (as well as the protagoArmed with cold hard currency, the characnists in the popular works cited earlier), there A Plan for All Seasons ter exits the airport and watches with trepida is an exit (sorry, Jean-Paul). Of course, it tion as Raoul the friendly cabbic crashes into would ruin several hours of play to give that Eventually, however, the gamer will tire of the back of another car with appropriate away here. this \"busy bath\" (neat things to do with no sound effects) and backs up to allow admisexplicit reason for doing them) style of explosion to the player's character. Moreno calls Where is King Kong? ration. To be sure, the ESB may well be one this a fully interactive taxi cab and it is lovof the richest \"busy bath\" environments we've Once one makes that little deal with the ingly depicted (he is an admitted automotive explored, but Hell Cab would only be a «Me, devil (or, in this case, apprentice temptor aficionado). As one explores the taxi cab enToo!\" product if this was all of the game. So, Raoul), the Empire State Building is open for vironment, the detailing is incredible. Neverone moves back to the cab and, almost before a visit. Indeed, one can explore the entire theless, it is not yet fully interactive. One one realizes what is going on, moves back in edifice without any time constraints or worry cannot, for instance, enter the passenger door time. about losing the game (or one's soul). Whenor open the hood and trunk, though one can ever there is something that one can do, the The cabbie takes the player to ancient Rome accomplish most of these things at a later cursor changes into the pointing hand. and before one's character can say, \"Nos point in the game. Whenever one double-clicks, either a magnimoriruri te salutamus\" (\"We who are about to and fied pop-up image of a small detail appears in to die, salute you.\"), Emperor Nero requires enjoy Jeff Essex parodies of radio stations, or the graphics window, a QuickTime movie one to fight a gladiator or face the gauntlet. read typical legal notifications such as one runs or an animation takes place. If one ins or an animation takes place. If one clicks Both sequences give us the feeling of playing on a plaque, a photo-realistic plaque pops up. an enhanced version of a Cinemaware game. If one clicks on a curtained window, a movie The graphics are rich and the sound efplays. fects/musical score are superb. Yet, much of These movies tend to underscore the variety the game play is a cross between arcade seof interests to be found among the creators of quences and timing puzzles. Indeed, it is Hell Cab. One film has a brief demonstration ironic that we should be reminded of Deof \"morphing\" (that graphics technique seen fender of the Crown and Sinbad and the Throne in Terminator 2 where of the Falcon, since the former publisher comsomething becomes fluid and metamorphosizes into somewould expect in an NYC taxi cab. Of course, thing else), while the most important feature in the cab (besides another features a parRaoul) is the meter. Not only does this meter ody of the closing credmeasure cab fare, but it also measures one's its of a television show soul and game lives. After all, if it hasn't been and features a hilarious immediately obvious from the 666 on the voiceover. By far the license plate and the way Raoul drives, this most interesting tidgame is about learning not to traffic (ahem) bit, however, is the with the devil. \"Dead Sullivan Show.\" Raoul drives the character downtown and This little vignette features a parody of the June 1993 Page 9 "


"NY pany was originally formed to create products for multimedia, specifically CD-I. Unlike the Cinemaware releases of old, old however, Hell Cab features the ability to save and store several game positions. Also unlike the old games, these arcade sequences seem pretty tough. In addition to fighting the gladiator, one must shoot a German soldier, down a WWI era plane and use a machine gun in a high-res shooting gallery sequence. Go to hell. Go directly to hell. Do not pass Times Square. Do not collect $200. Some gamers will not like having arcade sequences where they must click on the mouse button at just the right time or \"die,\" but the amazing effect of the way death is handled in Hell Cab is that each death gers funnier. The player rides the elevator to hell while lively, happy clevator music belies the actual failure within the game context. The incredibly inappropriate music gets cumulatively funnier the more one enters the elevator to hell. Like the rest of Jeff Essex' musical score, cach geographical area has its own musical score that seamlessly sets the tone for experience. Some musical themes are reminiscent of familiar tunes from film past, but they are all original pieces which are designed to elicit a particular emotion or atmosphere. Hell is more than just the place where losers go, however. The good news is that this is where the Digital Justice if the demand for such a prodplayer's character gets uct was demonstrated. \"dis\" ed in a humorous fashion by St. Peter's Certainly, the first impression one gleans opposite number and from Hell Cab is that one has entered the that this is where one light-and-shadow world of a graphic novel. can find, not Hell's The colors blanket the screen with vibrant Kirchen, but Hell's hues, magnificently accented by bold shadGarage. The latter is ows. Moreno knows his craft and his vision where the truly interactive cab may be found has been both well-implemented and duly and explored. supplemented by his creative team. Phil Simon, as associate producer, helped refine It's a Jungle Out There! Moreno's concept. Programmers Mark CasFortunately, the entire gaming experience is tle and Julian Urbach integrated software from Macromind and Electric Image with h their own custom C extensions in order to explore and find light sourced locations ons one bring the environments to life. Finally, Jim features a map that is almost illegible until one Ludky handled much of the actual animation figures out how to illuminate it), negotiate igures out how to illuminate it), negotiate and, as mentioned earlier, Jim Essex provided mazes in the jungle, read materials like diaries the music. that provide story continuity and make tactical de cisions based on one's soul meter (said decisions might be as simple as whether to kill someone or not). According to Moreno, part of the design philosophy is to give the gamer several opportunities to do something good in order to Now Departing, Gate 777 \"buy back» (redeem?) soul points. So, one needs to pay attention to even those interruprions that seem meaningless and irritating. In short, Hell Cab is a work of art. It is a showcase product for graphics, technology Cinematic Journey and sound. The value for gamers hinges on whether they want to explore a fascinating If the gamer is successful, the game features world inside the computer while facing occathree alternate endings. Each of these endings sional gaming challenges or interact on a is incredibly cinematic and humorous. This deeper level of strategy and communication. shouldn't be surprising, though, considering the fact that Pepe Moreno is a book and The response to that choice will determine comics illustrator with a desire to make interwhether Hell Cab flies (as it does after a active movies. His Batman: Digital Justice was successful game) or sinks slowly in an elevator a bestselling graphic novel last year and was as it plays a mocking medley of elevator muwholly rendered on the Macintosh. Indeed, sic. In many ways, it's the most beautiful Pepe still has all of the rendered objects and game I've seen. The question is, will it play on could easily create an interactive Batman: Broadway? Cow Page 10 Computer Gaming World "


"If you've ever said, «Give me the chance, and I'll create the greatest fantasy game of all.» OFICIAL Advanced Dungeon pragons COMPUTER PRODUCT UNLIMITED ADVENTURES FANTASY CONSTRUCTION KIL (66))) STOP FANTASIZING AND DO IT! This is your chance to break the chains and create your own AD&D adventure scenarios in the incredible FORGOTTEN REALMS world. Your tools: More than 200 classic art images from AD&D Gold Box games of the past. Digitized illustrations from the pen-and-paper AD&D game. And original art drawn especially for your creation. Your only limitation is the size of your hard drive. You'll build maps with the easy-to-use grid screen and link them with teleporters, doorways and stairwells. You'll choose from the massive bank of 112 monsters and multiple non-player characters. You'll design the dungeons of your dreams and test them as you go with a point-andclick interface that makes errors gone forever — at the touch of a button! The 3-D views are drawn directly from popular SSI titles. The strategic overhead-view phased combat scenarios feature easy-to-use commands. And you can back it all up for later play on your or a friend's machine Test your mettle by playing the precreated scenario \"The Heirs to Skull Crag\", with its four huge areas, a killer plot and four separate quests to solve. If you choose, you can even modify this ready-to-go adventure. To make a long story short, if you've discovered just about every other AD&D adventure limits your imagination, you'll find UNLIMITED ADVENTURES, in a word, fantastic! BUILD THE BEST DUNGEON AND WIN A TRIP TO THE ULTIMATE FANTASY SHOW! Detalls Inside Fi bor. TIL UTILTOTES TILLS HALL AND ODSTRUCTIONAL QUSTRUCTIONS  OPEH SECRET Tilst VOOR SECRET OPETT HILL: . OPEN FACINO HRLE OPEN DUESENT HALLE HD 20 HT 200 ,  IBM (286 or greater) MACINTOSH TO ORDER: Visit your retailer or call 1-800-245-4525 (in USA & Canada) with VISA/MC.  LOCKED WIZAR LOCKED K096 OO71 KIT TEST FDVERT ERITI FREE MOULIENT EDEREB KESZ . SELECT LEFT PLEICE RIGHT UNDG SEL PAGE COHORT CUENT NORSTENS ENCOUNTEREU NUMOURS TYPE CNOMOUS SPIDER REU OREGON ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, AD&D. FORGOTTEN REALMS and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by and used under license from TSR, Inc.  TSR. Inc.  Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved. TITOLLERY BEHOLDER PINES LEHUETUTCH RCNAMEUMPORTEMEDIER TOK PREV NEXT CRDICELE 22 SCREENS SHOWN IBM 256-COLOR VGA "


"COMPUTER GAMES ARE ABOUT TO MAKE THEIR BIGGEST LEAP EVER. "


"THE MAN WHO REWROTE THE LAWS OF GRAVITY IS ABOUT TO FLY INTO THE FACE OF CONVENTIONAL PC TECHNOLOGY. INTRODUCING MICHAEL JORDAN IN FLIGHT.\" USING OUR BREAKTHROUGH TECHNOLOGY VIDEO-SIM WE'VE DIGITIZED EXCLUSIVE FOOTAGE OF MICHAEL JORDAN AND CREATED THE MOST FLUID, REALISTIC ANIMATION EVER SEEN ON A PC SPORTS TITLE. MICHAEL SMILES AFTER HE MAKES A SHOT, PULLS ON HIS SHORTS WHEN HE GETS TIRED, AND EVEN TALKS TO YOU WHEN HE FEELS LIKE IT (DIGITIZED, OF COURSE). WHAT'S MORE, HE'S GIVEN US HIS STRATEGIES, PLAYS, AND MOVES (WELL, MOST OF THEM). Available for 386 and 486 IBM and compatibles for $59.95, Visit your local retailer or to order call 1-800-245-4525 anytime, Michael Jordan In Fight and EA SPORTS are trademarks of Electronic Arts. 13M is a registered trademark of International Business Machinos. Corp. YOU CAN EVEN MAKE YOUR OWN HIGHLIGHT FILMS WITH THE VIDEO EDIT LAB. WE'RE TALKIN' 100% MICHAEL JORDAN. NO ADDITIVES. NO PRESERVATIVES. CHECK IT OUT. IT'S THE FIRST COMPUTER GAME PLAYED ENTIRELY ABOVE THE RIM. CHAEL AN ESPORTS. ELECTRONIC ARTS IF IT'S IN THE GAME, IT'S IN THE GAME. Circle Reader Service #48 "


"Deulem Through Rough And Over Water Golf With David Leadbetter's Greens by Dave Pyron The sun beamed brightly on the 18th green at Ballybrook Country Club. Sweat glistened on my brow, and not entirely from the heat of the day. Wilbur Gooch had just holed out with a bogey. My turn. The ball was six feet away from the cup, right in the throw-up zone. Can it and I win. Miss it-and... ideal for the golfer looking for the right kind of match. A few clicks to set up the persona and voila! an ideal opponent is nodding at you with a naive grin. (Lessee now, if I can get Wilbur to give me two strokes a side for five bucks four ways...) would rival the best of the golf simulations, and to a large degree, it does. A clever introductory screen acquaints the gamer to David Leadbetter, the world-renowned golf pro and mentor to some of the P.G.A. Tour's finer players. David Leadbetter will appear frequently during play on all of the six championship courses included with the game. Throughout game play, he helps the player at appropriate times, providing clues on how to swing better, how to play a certain lie, and dispensing useful facts about each hole. (Attention Serious Golfers! These tips are helpful not only within the Greens game, but also on your own home course). Overheard In The Caddy Shack... With its foremost feature of \"on-thecourse\" instruction, David Leadbetter's Greens could end up tops in the Tour. The scuttlebutt in the gaming world was that Greens Fore-ward To The Fairway Okay...enough of the clubhouse charter and member gossip. Let's hit the course. As with a number of computer golf games, hitting the ball is accomplished via a \"swingometer,\" a dial that represents the backswing, swing and \"snap\" of a stroke. Tap a key to start the backswing, tap a second time to start the downswing, and once more as the \"swingometer\" dial reaches the release or \"snap\" point. A few minutes on the practice range will do wonders. Clubhouse Chit-Chat DAVID LEADBETTER'S GREENS The instructional 3-D Golf Simulation each with its own special interior decor. There are 12 items always present in the clubhouses, each representing a \"click on\" option for the player. In addition to the expected options of typical golf games, (begin play, statistics, driving range, game type, etc.) Greens offers three unique selections. First, Greens supports modem play, an excellent feature for playing golf with your buddies on a rainy day. The modem is easy to set up and within a few minutes the player can be immersed in a one-on-one matchup against a twice-removed cousin. For those who can't do without TV, a detailed, well-crafted, VCR replay option is provided. It records every single shot played, allowing the user to edit any shots from any round played, replay highlights of tournaments, and set up a limited database of various shots as specified by the player. Truly superb! Last, and most intriguing, Greens allows the player to create the \"persona\" of one's opponents, assigning them various levels of skill in their drives, long game, short game and putting, as well as determining their power, straregy and level of aggression. This feature is BRAUCHEDULE Greens offers a variety of ways to line up a shot. The player may aim using an overhead map of the hole, or one can jump to the view screen where he or she can align their persona in the direction of aim. A unique and interesting feature is the preview shot, an option which can also help the player's aim. The preview will show the ball's expected flight path from a tracking camera perspective, as if the shot was struck perfectly. Really neat! After the ball is hit, seven different camera angles provide for a myriad of ways to see the shot. Tracking, panning, and reverse angles are all available, each with excellent shot Covcrage. TITLE: David Leadbetter's Greens SYSTEM: IBM (2MB RAM required) GRAPHICS: VGA/MCGA PRICE: $59.95 PROTECTION: None DESIGNERS: Lee Hodgson, Mark Davies & Marcus Goody PUBLISHER: MicroProse Hunt Valley, MD (410)771-0440 Page 14 Computer Gaming World "


"i eview Player This is iudt EFET Leaving the hi-tech cameras behind, let's get back to the basic golfer's reality\" that is the heart of Greens. Reality in the form of duck hooks, banana slices, ball-eating rough and tentacled trees. Wherever the player hits it, that's where it's played; Greens pulls no punches. The ball may end up in a divot, on a cart path, heavy rough, or even plugged hard in a bunker, but timely advice from Leadbetter and the aid of a remarkable shot set-up screen can help the player adjust the stance and club selection for each situation. This even wind can affect the accuracy of the putt. As stated earlier, David Leadbetter watches over the player like a guardian angel. When the inevitable shanked shot occurs, D.L. will appear with all kinds of advice on how to rectify the problem. He also pops up with helpful purting advice, giving the player the green speed and suggesting how strong the putt should be. Player 1 Hole 3: 0(3) To Flap: 184 yds Club: 3 Iron Aim: 195 yds Birdies And Bogies Greens will be appreciated by the avid golfer as well as the non-golfer who just enjoys a fun and challenging game. Realistic game play along with the ability to play against a computer opponent or a far away friend adds to the strength of this game. Other interesting 8 features are the statistical analyses that one may review on each golfer, and the variety of game types offered including matchplay, medalplay, skins and tournament play. The negative aspects to the game are few, but need mentioning. Players may not take a practice swing while playing-often a helpful convenience when facing a tough lie. Another flaw is the inability to pick up before holing out, forcing the player to finish what may be a tedious hole. The most serious blemish within the game is the skimpy and inadequate sound accompaniment. It would have been Daver2012nter m in nice if Microprose had included better sound support in the Greens game. David Leadbetter's Greens is an ideal golf game for those who like realism, fast screen refreshes, and a variety of game types. While Greens does not use digitized graphics and sound, it has a number of unique and intriguing features that make this game above par for the course and a serious contender for a top spot on the golf simulation Tour. proves extremely useful for difficult shots, allowing the player to hit with better timing and consistency. After the ball makes the green, the player can call up a grid pattern and/or rotate the point of view to see the surface and slope from a variety of angles. Green speed, slope, and Now, Back To The 18th Hole... ...Leadbetter finished giving me his pointers. I settled into my stance and stroked the putt towards the hole. It rolled smoothly, curling slightly to the left. Wilbur looked on, his grin somehow less naive. Clunk. \"Thank you, Mr. Gooch. \"And thank you, Mr. Leadbetter! cow PARALLEL GAME PORT. YOUR NOTEBOOK. TE Portable computers are great except when it comes to playing simulation and action games. That's because they don't come equipped with a gameport. The Parallel Game Port\" (PGP) fixes that problem and lets you connect a joystick, yoke, weapon systems controller or pedals to any portable or desktop MS-DOS computer. And even if your computer already has a game port, the PGP's software features make it an indispensable accessory for any serious gamer. Use it to customize key joystick switches and eliminate inconsistencies between games. Even eliminate the computer speed dependencies of some game ports. PGP's Standard mode is fully compatible with all game software. And an Enhanced mode adds sensitivity and response for most simulation games. Look for the Parallel Game Port in the software section of your computer store. Or call (714) 833-3355 and say: \"Stick it to me!\" TURN YOUR NOTEBOOK COMPUTER INTO A FLYING MACHINE  Connect your joystick to any IBM-compatible computer  Program your joystick switches for specific games GENOVATION GENOVATION Circle Reader Service #57 June 1993 Page 15 "


"LANDS : LORE THE THRONE OF CHAOS The Dark Army encroaches. King Richard falls. And Scotia beckons you, laughing... In her mad quest for power, Scotia has ravaged the kingdom. She seeks the throne, yet it eludes her. She's getting desperate. She's getting mean. Stor Doom Lightning Vortex BADES EN MAR AO CAN YOU STOP HER? DO YOU DARE? "


"FEATURING Compass and Automapper Included Adventure through ancient keeps and living forests. Unearth hidden ruins and haunted caves. a Make Friends and Influence People Cooperate with the helpful, sidestep the treacherous and destroy the dangerous. ia Quick and Easy Combat and Spell Casting, da Indulge in a Land of Sensory Delights Over 20 megabytes of compressed art and special effects. Actually hear the clash of steel! Feel the blows of terrors who slip beneath your guard! LANDS OF LORE THE THRONE OF CHAOS AN INSPIRED FANTASY RPG EXPERIENCE FROM THE DEVELOPMENT TEAM THAT CREATED EYE OF THE BEHOLDERI AND II. Westwood Distributed Exclusively by Available for your IBM PC. Eye of the Beholder I and II are trademarks of TSR, Inc. GAMES The Eye of the Beholder games, TSR, Inc. and SSI are not connected or related in any way to the Lands of Lore game, Virgin Games, Inc. or Westwood Studios, Inc. Lands of Lore is a trademark of Westwood Studios, Inc.  1993 Westwood Studios, Inc) All rights reserved. Virgin is a registered trademark of Virgin Enterprises, Ltd. Circle Reader Service #99 "


"THE VERY BEST IN: : STRATEGIC STARSHIP COMBAT Impressions are delighted to announce an Omnitrend production Rules of Engagement 2! The original became an instant success one of the top 6 games of 1991\" (Newsweek). \"involving, well-planned, entertaining, highest levels of intelligence and excitement\" (Computer Game Review). Now, the sequel surpasses even the original's excellence! Rules of Engagement 2 is a real-time, strategic space combat game. The player commands a fleet of starships engaging enemy ships in campaigns composed of multiple combat missions. The attention to realism and detail (Omnitrend's hallmark) and the sheer size of the game are phenomenal, and are made accessible by the unique easy to use control system. Rules of Engagement 2 is the latest Interlocking Game System moduleand can link with Breach 2 or Breach 3 (coming this fall). Exciting animated sequences featuring 3D rendered spaceships relate the storyline at strategic points within campaigns. Players can create their own tree-structured campaigns with the world's first campaign-builder and can even include their own PC Animate Plus animation files! CORCU E LEC 100 TACFR AKU accusTION DOCCESS -------les INGALING MEMY 14. Titus he Hill vvs SIAT ELUT NAVHUP LE th T Rules of Engagement 2 features an a still from an animated squence outstanding interface. Game screens consist of four QuadPanels, color coded to distinguish different control systems. The central control bar coordinates all activity between panels. Users can select which of the 28 QuadPanels appear on the main screen and can even save several configurations for use in different situations. 20900 LTE MOTO NIN sample configuration of QuadPanels SVE MIX Deres BE R EITSCH OFVOF SERVICE RECORDS HAMET LOISIR DE LEUR F PSYCHOLOGICAL PROFILE Rules of Engagement 2 offers a significant advance in artificial intelligence within computer gaming. Each starship captain has a substantial dossier complete with many personality traits which affect how he, she or it reacts to orders and situations which arise, B07 CCP O NETTBAL TENORES A NOITEESSE 2 ANIS HIST O MULILIERE I De COLE DIMRITS LAST 3 MONESTY SPACECRAFT RESIGN Nettt a starship captain's dossier \"HIVA Cele Rules of Engagement 2 offers immense replay value, allowing the player to design and construct both friendly and hostile spacecraft and their captains, specify the physical and mental capabilities of the enemy forces -and design solar systems in which the battles will take place! MET outfitting a ship in dry dock Committed to Excellence in Strategy Entertainment Impressions Software, Inc. 7 Melrose Drive, Farmington, CT 06032 Circle Reader Service #64 "


"RULES OF ENGAGEZAENT ENKOMNITREND TIE Impressions INTERLOCKING GAME SYSTEM "


"Corner Those Puppies! One Nil, Greyhound, and Goal from Wizard Games by Wallace Poulter 2 SIZE: The Purculator 1 yuar O Muntis 401 PREFERS Standard  The Percolator 2 Tanparis rello from Harringay, where you'll find One Nil picks a team. In my case, I choose my old Greyhound racing at its finest. The hometown of Hartlepool. True to form, the Laction is just underway... Stay in Bed \"Advanced management for Football Adteam is comprised of a motley crew and is leads as they start the second lap. Skin Cream dicts,\" says the opening screen of One Niland, either too old, too young, useless or a combiand Nerher Wallop are challenging on the other than confusing the American audience, e, nation thereof. Just as in American football, outside as they go into the turn. Tucked in it is completely accurate. The initial choice defense is the basis of a strong team. Therenicely behind the three leaders are Wellingneeds to be made between a Scottish dara base fore, the first priority is to acquire some additon. Double Chin and Screw Loose. And and an English data base. Those who have a tional players. down the back straight they go, Nether Walscreaming need to manage the Raith Rovers can of course pick the Scottish version. The Enter the \"Transfer marker\" where players lop just in front, Stay in Bed falling back can are Transfer listed for a certain fee. Again, slightly, and Wellington moves up to chalrest of us pick the English version. unlike US sports, soccer players are sold\" for lenge the leaders. The final corner...for HarThe overall objective in One Nil is to mana fee rather than traded for another player. tlepool. Jones with the inswinging corner burage a soccer team through league and cup There is Moverly picks it out of the air with ease. play. Unlike US sports where there is a league the Transfer list, E.Bergsson, a Center back reak. Moverly throws the season and then an elimination tournament for the Icelandic team of Vikingur is listed at ball out to Smith the Left Back. Smith moves noves the playoffs), soccer splits these into two 200,000. A bid of 270,000 secures the servforward confidently and passes to Honour on distinctive parts. The League Championship \"P ices of Bergsson, and the Hartlepool defensive the left side of midfield, Honour looks goes to the team with the best record (points) unit begins to take shape. Continual up and spots Saville racing into the HELP 12-DOCSE -RONK FA-ROCE 15-INFO (GAVET 19-soles 15-MUNITY trips will need to be taken to the Penalty Area. A sweet pass finds Saville GREVIOUNDS Mam 1 bawy Raceti o uina: P O post 2013 Transfer Market to upgrade the team in flight and his snap shot is pushed El Bading as needed. Of course, one has limited away by the Reading \"keeper, Francis. CRODE 2 C200 LAPS:2 funds and must sell players to raise 10/3 First Look additional capital. Buying younger players for a low price and then selling No, you're not mistaken. A greythem after a few years of improvement hound race did just dissolve into a socis a tried and true method. cer game. Welcome to the wonderful Building a team is only half the story world of Wizard Games. Civilization, 1441 though. Next comes the individual Links, Railroad Tycoon, World Circuit games. Here team confidence, fitness, and One Nil are this reviewer's five cnergy and hardness come into play favorite games. The first four you have MIU Baburamio. c ond-RACH E ATH along with team and player tactics. probably heard of but the fifth, One Nil, There are eight different team tactics is almost certainly a mystery. Quite simIn the doghouse again with Wizard Game's Greyhound that can be set. Each one is important ply it is the biggest time waster\" I have in and of itself, and is a toggle. For come across since Civilization, and I mean at the end of the season. Cup competition is example, Passing Preference may be long that as the most sincere compliment. Many a usually a single elimination tournament. Of passes or short passes, Aggression may mean time I have made the mistake of starting a course the great feat is to do \"the double\" avoiding injury or going in hard. Setting a game at 9:00 PM, only to look at the clock at which is to win the League Championship team to go in hard for example will lead to 2:00 AM and wonder where the time had and the Cup in the same year. To accomplish more ball winning and more scoring opporgone. One Nil is the first of a number of this, the gamer must make numerous decitunities, but will guarantee that one's players excellent games from a small outfit in Scorsions. The term \"manage\" in the game conland called Wizard Games. We'll take a look text is very much the equivalent of being both will be injured more often and a good set of at One Nil, Goaland Greyhound. What is even a general manager and a coach in US Sports. reserves will be needed. more amazing is that these are text-based Gamers are responsible for overall team tacOnce a game is ready to be played there are games with ASCII character graphics. Don't tics, individual player tactics, trades (known a number of choices. Tom Fitzgerald who be fooled into thinking that somehow a textas transfers) and keeping track of the financial runs Wizard Games in the US likes to watch based product is old fashioned. Great games matters of the club. cach and every game as it is shown via ASCII are great games. First and foremost, the would-be manager graphics. The ASCII graphics give a good Slag 1. Bed The Clazier Oplun Bad Loser Stignata Double Chiu Kingtor Seruu LE Imperial Pool Summary 15/1 HEALTH od 3 No urutrant 1 Litlul EV 140H 1/8/H/HE 11/2 / S ha entrant 6 Body Organ Reason: Meet to y: 35 Page 20 Computer Gaming World "


"EN TINO ORLDS WAR Win AUTODEL I JUggerhout RK Speed Land Sponti Fire Power TE EEEEEEEEE NU DOOD DOEDD Torget: Prior: Rador: Transport: CUTLO COST: Lau17 Mines 13 Power las U STATS: in SerVICES In ProDUCTION Kris : Loses: Command your entire planet's military resources in an effort to conquer a hostile neighbouring planet. You control a state of the art workstation from which advanced software tools enable you to design new craft, research new technologies, build new installations & craft, set up highly sophisticated missions and watch the progress of this strategic interplanetary conflict.  BES, DUILD DESIGN ORDER SYSTEM EPID Design your own spacecraft (or tanks, submarines, jet....)! Send out units on missions to explore the unknown enemy planet and wipe out its military capability! Battles take place in space & on surface of both planets Random planet generator for great replay value Designed as a 2 player game! Impressions Committed to customer satisfaction in strategy entertainment! Circle Reader Service #65 "


"De...) ONE FRIENDLY ... Contary Varadi.collects high ball for Szuco 23462 RC MILAN----NIL the Percolator 2 The lascist 103 3 Sreedy Gonzalez Listeria SIS takiwa kaka representation of the game and a running might try to take Sri Lanka to a successful run. different race distances per meet. These are commentary is provided. I, on the other Each of the major world regions (Europe, Sprint (1 lap), Standard (2 laps) and Distance hand, am interested more in the building of Americas, Africa, Asia) are represented, al(3 laps). Each of the greyhounds has a prethe team—the actual match play is secondary. though using four groups requires some geoferred distance, and it is usually best to stick The latest versions of One Nil have an autographical juggling. Australia and New to the preferences. The lads of Wizard Games matic option for playing the game in a few Zealand end up in the Asian group for examdid their bomework and have added numerseconds (depending on machine speed). ple and no consideration is given to political ous options, including betting, sales and vets! There is, of course, a list of additional fea situations, such as the fact that Israel is always As with most Wizard Game products. we soccer fanaries would like to see put in a European group in World Cup qualimoney is an important component of the Provision for \"own goals,\" more advantage lying due to the unwillingness of its neighbors game. Dogs may be bought or sold, money game. Doos may be given to a team when the opposing team has to play them. made or lost on betting, and prize money and Once a team is selected, a quick vet bills allocated. Building up a stable takes PECSI MUNKAS--knockud on by Sarosi \"newspaper\" section announces the some skill. A significant number of stats are appointment. Newspapers appear also provided keeping the kennel owner up to throughout the game to chart one's date on the race for the championship. These progress. Three other teams will be include: races participated, wins, strikes (races selected to join the group of the divided by wins), money, best lap and points. team that is selected. In England's When the kennel owner starts out, the fastest case, Sweden, Northern Ireland dogs in their stable will run a lap in about 19 and Luxembourg. A pretty easy ride seconds. By the time a dog is up to Grade 1, and England is duly installed as the 17 seconds is the standard. favorite. After pushing this around for some time, I \"Friendlies are played to prepare found that the best betting strategy was to the teams for qualifying matches load up on low odds, especially when a good against the previously mentioned An international match in One Nil three teams. I'his is the opportunity to try out tactics. For example, the a man sent off, and, most importantly, computer has selected a 4-4-2 formation for leagues other than England or Scotland. As a England. I prefer a 5-3-2 which means dropfollower of Borussia Moenchengladbach (geping one of the Midfield players and substisundheit!), I would love to play the German tuting another defender. B Squads can be league, or follow AC Milan in the Italian, or selected and \"up and coming youngsters Real Madrid in the Spanish. In addition, it given the chance to try out for the team. More would be nice to be able to play non-league importantly the same tactics will not work sides so that one could try and gain promo against every team, so a coach must be flexible tion to the league and then be successful in in team formations and selections. The puppies approach the corner in Greyhound the league itself. Such a situation has hapWith the World Cup arriving on US shores pened in English Football with Wimbledon. in 1994, Goal is not only an enjoyable and dog drops down a grade, but still outclasses Back in the early '70s they were a non-league challenging product, it can also educate fans the lower grade. Kennel names and greyside. The mighty Leeds Utd got a huge scare on the strengths and weaknesses of the World hound names can be edited and much hilarity one year in the Football Association Cup when this bunch of part time amateurs held can be had from the animal names. Soccer teams. them to a draw in one match and only a lucky Greyhound Conclusion deflection (off an Eddie Gray shot, if I remember correctly) beat them in the replay So, there I am at 3:00 AM, letting out a Wizard Games are shareware. The games comparable to the Miami Hurricanes holding whoop because Screw Loose came through on can be downloaded from any major BBS such the Dallas Cowboys to a draw. This served as the inside to nip Wellington and Double the spring board for Wimbledon to successChin in the latest race—yet another example missing from the game is the save option and fully gain promotion to the league itself and of how these games from Wizard Games can that is provided automatically by registering now play in Britain's highest league, the Pregrab one's attention. As mentioned earlier, the product. As mentioned at the beginning. mier League. Wizard Games are rexr-based management One Nil is one of my five favorite titles. It games that use ASCII characters to represent provides a strategic and tactical look at the Goal the action. It is totally irrational to get worked world's most popular sport in a symmetry up over six blocks racing around a track, but rarely found in a game product. Goal offers a Goal is the second of Wizard's games. It is trust me, it happens. more tactical look at the international game, the game of International Soccer Team manEach player starts with a stable of ten dogs and Greyhound is an incredibly enjoyable agement,\" which basically means the World (to be technically correct, dogs and bitches) product. As in racing, these are products Cup. In many ways, this game is the tactical and the goal is to win the championship at the where the underdog can surprise. portion of One Nil expanded to its logical end of the season. To do this, one's dogs must Again, Wizard Games' products are shareconclusion. Instead of worrying about transmove up from their initial grade ten rating ware and are available on most of the major fer and stadium improvements, all the gamer and through the different classes to grade one. networks. If you do not have access to a has to worry about is coaching the best side In fact, having the kennel spread over the network, you can contact: they can put together. different grades gives the player more chances Wizard Games of Scotland, Ltd. Any one of 128 teams can be chosen to to race as there are only so many open slots in PO Box 498 coach. Picking a major team such as England races each time. Wilmington, MA 01887 is relatively easy, bur for a real challenge one E ach class also will stage only one of three (508) 658-2209 The Percolator CGW Page 22 Computer Gaming World "


"Wolfenstein 30 Hottest Shareware Game \"...more like an interactive movie than an arcade game.\" Shareware Update \"Almost single-handedly justifying the existence of shareware... Video Games & Computer Entertainment \"The first game technologically capable of...immersing the player in a threatening environment.\" Computer Gaming World Imprisoned in a Nazi Portress, In an act of desperation you overpower your cell guard. Standing over his fallen body, you frantically grab for his MAMELUM gun. Deep in the belly of a Nazi dungeon, you must escape-or die trying. 967 19 *3003 967 19 300 3 LO SC LES 9 Experience a 256-color, smooth scrolling virtual reality Hear professionally composed music with an AdLiby, Sound Blastert, or compatible Four levels of game play make it enjoyable for the novice to the experienced player Battle with knives, pistols, and machine guns Easy to start playing, and instantly absorbing 197 53 1515600 Call Toll Free 1-800-GAME123 For the cost of shipping and handling, only $4.00, you'll receive Episode One, Escape from Wolfenstein. Or download Episode One and pay no shipping and handling. Call the Software Creations BBS and check out our FREE Apogee file section. BBS Phone Lines are:  (508) 365-2359:2400 BAUD  (508) 368-7036:2400-9600  (508) 368-4137:2400-14.4K Episodes two through six are sold separately and can be purchased by calling Apogee's toll-free number, shown above. APOGEE P.O. Box 476389 Garland, TX 75047 SOFTWARE Not Recommended for Younger Viewers Due to Realistic Depictions of Violence Wolfenstein 3-D requires an IBM or 100% compatible computer with 640K RAM, a VGA graphics card, and a hard disk drive. Extended memory (XMS), expanded memory (EMS), joystick, and mouse are optional. IBM is a registered trademark of International Business Machines, Inc. Sound Blaster is a registered trademark of Creative Labs, Inc. Adlib is a registered trademark of Adlib, Inc. Circle Reader Service #33 "


"Editors' Choice COMPUTER GAMING WORLD E Batter Spes 8 Strategic Simulations Puls Tony La Russa Baseball 2 == in the Big Leagues by Wallace Poulter positioning changes and substirutions. (This time, we might be able to take our Bill Buckner in the bottom of the 9th of the '86 World Series.) Graphically, Tony La Russa Baseball II breaks very little new ground. The standard of displaying runners on first and third via windows in the respective top right and top left has served many games well. The catcher's position is taken by a scoreboard of balls and strikes, inning, out and overall score information. To the left and right of this scoreboard are graphic representations of the batter and pitcher (ye olde baseball card approach as in \"Most baseball games pretend they're in the majors. This one really puls you there, Tony Lu Russa h Spring, when a young man's fancy keyboard control, I found TLII's controls to turns to spring training! The endless be incredibly logical and easy to use. So much debates to determine who was the so that I now prefer the keyboard controlsgreatest hitter of all time (Ted Williams), the certainly a first for me. Fielding, throwing greatest first baseman of all time (Jimmie and base running can be set to automatic, Foxx), or the worst team of all time (Clevewhich can be particularly useful when one is land Spiders) are renewed with all the passion first learning the product. The designated of a bunny with the vernal itch. I mean, who hitter (hiss!), injuries, errors, one pitch mode, cares about how bad the Colorado Rockies sound effects and more can all be toggled will be when you can debate much more according to the gamer's wishes. meaningful matters. For example, my asserOnce in the game, the interface and its ease tion that the Pirates of '27 are the second best of use make the gamer's decisions simple and team of all time. They just had the misfortune effective. As the pitcher, one must choose to be around the season of the best, the '27 from a standard package of fastball, curve, Yankees. change up or slider (there are supposed to be specialty pitches, but they don't show up very Scouting The Field often). Different defenses can be set and stratProbably the most crowded field in sport egy is not optional. Even with the ability of a simulations is the sport of baseball. Tony La Sandy Koufax, one cannot simply blow fastRussa Baseball II has stiff competition from ball after fastball by a batter. Instead, one can the likes of Hardball III and Pro League Baseset them up with the fastball and then, throw ball. Getting into a game is as easy and quick a low change up and see if they bite. Conas clicking on play ball, selecting an All-Time versely, one can throw sliders and curves and team, clicking on an opponent, and signaling then whiff them with a fastball. The pitch play ball. This game has League Championselection and location takes only two inputs ship caliber stamped on it from the first pitch. to give 36 different combinations, more than to give 30 di enough to keep the hitters off balance. The choices are numerous. For each game, sertings can be tweaked based on one's skill De skill Similarly, the offensive choices are normal, level and/or interest. Keyboard. joystick and power, contact and bunt. Various special mouse are supported and, while not a fan of plays such as the hit-and-run can be called. Again, strategy plays the part. I found using power hitting with less than two strikes to be effective, but went to a contact stance when in the hole.\" Multiple options are also available during the game play. Line score, box score, a rather nifty replay option and slow motion are just some of the items available. Each team, as one would expect, can activate a Pinch Runner or Hitter, send the Pitching Coach to the mound to check on the pitcher, start relievers warming up in the 'pen, and make defensive Tony LaRussa, BASEBALLT Anche SPEL TITLE: Tony La Russa Baseball 2 SYSTEM: IBM (386/25 recommended, 2MB RAM required) GRAPHICS: VGA PRICE: $59.95 PROTECTION: Documentation Look-Up DESIGNERS: Mark Buchignani, Don Daglow, Tony La Russa, Hudson Piehl PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations, Inc. Sunnyvale, CA (408) 737-6800 Page 24 Computer Gaming World "


"TARE MANI som er Unit 3 unit 4 Ne 092 Homire 51CD SAUD empire sur URETRH 2 empre THE LONG AWAITED SEQUEL 25 battle areas individually coded to very fine detail. TO THE AWARD WINNING u View the battlefield from four & PACIFIC different perspectives using a 3D mix of bitmap and vector graphics. ISLANDS Take, command of 4 tank units, simultaneously controlling 16 different 1995... The Iraqi Republican vehicles through the unique split screen control system. Guard have overrun the oilfields. Call upon the latest military technology of Northern Kuwait. War in the including; laser-range finders, Infra-red imaging, TOW, HEAT and SABOT missiles! Gulf follows the fortunes of a Liberate Kuwaiti villages, capture 2431 crack unit of M1 tanks as the oilwells and disrupt desert supply lines.  Lay minefields and order up artillery action unfolds. barrages. REALISTIC... GRIPPING... NO ANIME THE ULTIMATE BATTLEFIELD SIMULATION Circle Reader Service #80 AVAILABLE FOR IBM PC & AMIGA Empire Software is distributed by ReadySoft Inc. 30 Wertheim Court, Unit 2. Richmond Hill Ontario, Canada L4B 1B9 Tel: (416) 731 4175 LC 03355 este es Unic 4 R empire "


"pewiewu BOSTON 8 Hardball III). The animation of the However, any frustration is well pitcher is the larger of the two, with worth the price one must pay to get the animated movements based on into the league simulator. League the motions of Dave Stewart of the play is at the heart of the product, Toronto Blue Jays. (Sounds Multiple teams are available and strange, doesn't it?) The special case feature an incredible array of talanimations on an event such as a cnt. My frustration is due to the headfirst slide into home to beat the NORMAL FASTBALL fact that the American League All tag are rather nice. All in all the POWER CURVE Stars follow tradition and consider graphics are what I would describe CONTACT CHANGEUP Lou Gehrig the best first baseman. BUNT SOREWBALL as \"clean.\" SIGNS DEFENSE Obviously, this reviewer considers Not surprisingly, in a game with this a major design error on the Tony La Russa's name on it, the part of Don Daglow and crew at managerial aspects of baseball are StormFront Studios (mostly kidexplored in depth. The manual conATLANTA ding, folks!). In fact, one could BOSTON tains a number of useful overall generate a whole bunch of argubaseball hints from LaRussa himself BALL O STRIKE O ments based on the All Star deciand while not earth shattering they JENSEN 286 OUT 2 INNING 1 sions. The previously mentioned SPAHN 2.10 do provide insight for the average Foxx versus Gehrig, the glaring New Season\" and decide the schedules, numfan. One of the major enhancements with omission of Shoeless Joe Jackson and Ty in ber of games, season start date, playoff and Tony La Russa Baseball II is the Manager Cobb (while it would be hard to break a he Manager World Series lengths. Now, one clicks on profile. This allows each and every team to starting outfield of Ruth, Williams and Man\"New Season\" to start the first season of the have different strategies for lineup, pitching, tle, the fact that they don't even make the league. batting, defense and base running. While it bench is alarming!), Joe Torre as a backup would have been nice to have some defaults So far, this is all covered in the manual, catcher to Gabby Hartnert rather than for each of the current Major League manag though not particularly well. To play the Mickey Cochrane or Yogi Berra, and more. ers or recent Major League Managers (ie. games of a favorite team, a person can activate In fact, the lineups look a little weird because Roger Craig would sacrifice bunt every \"Team Schedule\" under the season menu bar they are based on the current league the user blessed time!), the opportunity to set these or do this individually on each date. TLRBII is playing rather than some mythical Allvalues ourselves is great for running leagues uses what they call \"Featured\" and \"Stand Time, All Star team based on the real life amongst friends. While I know it is going to ard games. The Standard games are the ard\" games. The Standard games are the ones teams the players played for. Meanwhile, this extremes, I would like to see the inevitable the gamer wants the computer to play, while reviewer is off to check the Baseball EncycloTony La Russa III have the additional feature Featured games are the ones the user wishes pedia to see why Joe Jackson is on the Cleveof third base coaches who might have differto play. However, at no point does the manland roster (which, along with Nap Lajoie, ent running philosophies than their manager. ual explain how to play a Featured game! This Tris Speaker, Al Rosen and Joe Sewell, might Of course, then one would have to be able to requires choosing \"Play Standard Games\" unjust be the best lineup in the entire game). fire those coaches. der the Season menu bar. This automatically plays the games of the other teams in the Final Score A League of My Own league through a date selected by the gamer. It is rather interesting that when Tony La Then, a window option asks if one wishes to Tony La Russa Baseball Il really shines in play the Featured game as a Standard Game. Russa Baseball Il is broken down into its comleague play. Yet, ironically, it is also where Next, the hard drive rattles away as the former ponent parts, it seems less impressive than it the manual is the most unclear. To set up a games are played. Finally, a window appears actually is. One can become annoyed at bugs league one selects, not surprisingly, \"Serup which asks the user if they now wish to play which add extra errors and RBIs to the statisLeagues\" from the \"Utilities\" menu bar opthe Featured Game. On answering to the tics, and one can complain that the action tion. Once within the new screen, the gamer affirmative, the user finally gets into the ball game (particularly with its new mouse supas commissioner must select \"New League\" game. As a whole, the manual is somewhat port) is not as clean as it should be. Yet, I must and type in the new league name and abbrelacking in that it is a step by step listing of hasten to add that this is quite simply the best viation. Next, it is necessary to choose the each menu choice in the product rather than baseball game on the market. It is definitely number of leagues (such as American & Naa manual designed to be user friendly and one of those cases where the whole is better tional) within the overall League (yes, I know helpful. It looks like the manual was written than the sum of its parts. As far as I'm conthat sounds confusing) and the number of by someone already familiar with the product cerned, the design is not only fundamentally divisions per league. Teams can be duplicated and reflects that knowledge rather than being sound but it is the outright winner of the from any other source league available. Now written for a new user. current world series of baseball simulations. under the Season menu bar, activate \"Start CGW T BALLSEASON SEASON MANAGER LOS ANGELES UTILITIES VS. MANAGER UTILITIES TEAM COLORS/CHICAGO A CALIFORNIA PLAYER   YEAR TAGETXP SALARY BITIPO51 POS2 MORALE L'SHIP 142 BB 53 GANDER 2 532 PULL T450 OPP FIELD 200 Sa SPEED 10 POWER BUNT HER CLUTCH STALAK DAY NITO TRIPLE FLYBALL 960 PULLS 450 OPR FIELD .200 SACO PURRENT CHOICESO PINCHABO CHEA G ERATIVE PITCHER TRAV KOUFAX SANDY 2.04112 CHANCE, DEAN R 1.65 10 BATTIHO ORDER BIS ADOT P 15ATTING ORDER TO AVOIP SS WILLS, MAURY S-2996 LF JOHNSON, ALEX R 3291291 2R ROBINSON, JACKIE R 342101B THOMPSON, JASONL2889 CF SHIDER, DUKE 341 11 30 DECENCES, DOUO R301 10 C CAMPANELLA ROY R -312 11 28 GRICH, BOBBY TR294 10 18 HODGES, GIL R304 115SFREGOSLJIM LF WHEAT, ZACKL 375 10 CF BETEQUEZ, JUANR 3363 36 CEY, RON R2811F BONDS, BOEBY RE MARSHALL, MIKER .293 10 C BOONE, BOB R2957 P KOVFRX, SANDY R172 1P CHANCE, DEANR .0721 PAR I TIES AVO MAR COLOR TOTIUS LIVSR HOMERSO SLUG 201302304 318 320 310 ACCENT COLOR DONE SOHNSON 100 ULUUT MALLITAMA HALLESON152 Page 26 Computer Gaming World "


"THE FUTURE OF ADVENTURE GAMING BEGINS WHEN THE PHANTOM RETURNS! MicroProse pushes adventure gaming to its limits with the most significant innovations in graphics and animation to date! tht is the world premiere of the endary 1881 score DON JUAN TRIUMPHANT Tragedy awaits you and the audience inside the famed Paris Opera House! Explore the opera's labyrinth of catacombs! Confront the Phantom faceto-face! or Hasit CMRM Search for clues along the catwalks, through the wings, and into the many backstage rooms of the opera house! Try Rex Nebular And The Cosmic Gender BenderTM for more mind-blowing adventures! To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY. (Mon Fri., 8:30 am-5:00 pm EST.) Or fill out this coupon and mail it to: MicroProse Software, Inc. 180 Lakefront Drive . Dept. D-10. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 Name Address State Zip_ City RETURN A OE THE PHANTOM MICROPROSE NTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE  1993 MicroProse Software. Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED Circle Reader Service #72 "


"Dewlewu That's the Man who Shot my Par!\" by Wallace Poulter enth hole at the legendary Konami Hills done. In fact, the screen redraw is quick enough course. The 305 yard, par 4 hole starts to allow what Konami calls the \"Gallery Refrom an elevated tee with a shot over a view Cam.\" Near the end of the gamer's shot, picturesque lake. A narrow fairway greets the the perspective will switch to the landing site. player with two bunkers to the right and two This is nice, very smooth and possible because bunkers to the left just waiting for the under hit of the quick redraw. or wayward drive. The small green is protected The Main Menu is self-explanatory, allowing by a wrap-around bunker on the right, and a small \"pot\" bunker on the left. An accurate one to select their on-screen player and the player has a great birdie opportunity, but traps game type that they wish to play. Wilson Proawait on what at first glance appears to be an Staff Golf comes with a default player, but easy hole. The Wol sizes up the hole and decreating a custom player is painless and offers cides, not surprisingly, on a driver. Aim will be a number of options. These include: Sex, Style to the right side of the landing area, trying to stay away from all the (putter, average, aimer), Level (professional, bunkers. A nice solid drive goes 229 yards down the middle of the amateur, beginner), Handicap (hearing impaired, visual impaired, fairway. Seventy-six yards to the hole and a litching Wedge comes politically correct well, it seemed too obvious to pass up) and Player Colors Chair/skin, shirt, sweater, pants/shorts). The five basic options out of the bag. However, The Wol is tentative and hits his second shot short of the green by some 14 yards. Again the Pitching Wedge for provide for a multitude of different golfers. Meanwhile the basic game the third shot and a nice chip (if I do say so myself) to within five feet options include individual competition and team competition. of the hole. Finally a tough downhill putt fading to the right which Once the selections are made, it's on to the course. It is \"the\" course just trickles in. Off to the 11th hole where a blind too. While the 18 holes are different and challenging, drive over a hill greets players on the 455 yard par 4 Konami should look long and hard about doing add hole. Wilson on disks with additional courses. Visually, the 3-D One of the more interesting products at Winter graphics are quite stunning, and while nothing comCES was shown by Konami. This was a golf game pares with Links 386 Pro, the graphics in Wilson that looked quite beautiful, had almost instantaneProStaff Golf are of exceptional quality and clarity. ous screen redraw, and a logical interface. Konami Trees look like trees, bunkers look like bunkers, and Feutuning Fast-Action was making a point that this was specifically targeted GOLF SW someone took the time to shade around the bunkers at the 286 or lower end 386 user in order to avoid so that the normal \"rough\" associated with bunkers the inevitable comparison with Links 386 Pro), but is there also. The background of hills and mountains this game appears enjoyable for any computer user also adds to the overall aesthetics. regardless of machine speed. One of the more accurate positionings of a product can be found in the Addressing the Ball manual introduction. «Some software offers highresolution graphics with enough derail to be able to A very nicely designed interface adds to the prodsee a boat sailing in a harbor a half-mile away. ucr. The overlaying windows can be turned on or off Unfortunately, they take about as long to play on the but are not intrusive. The information bar shows computer as a real game of golf takes on a Saturday KONAMI Navn standard information such as current player, shots ar a public links. Then again, you can get a fast game taken, distance hit on the last shot, etc. The overhead that offers as much visual excitement as a bologna view allows one to size up the hole and the on-screen Wilson ProStail Golf sandwich. ... Of course, someday someone might SYSTEM: IBM (286/124 required) player's position at all times. This perspective is GRAPHICS: create a game that gives good graphics with a variety particularly useful when picking a bailout spot when PLAYERS: of side games, lightning-quick screen redraws, mulPRICE: one is not confident enough to be able to hit a drive PROTECTION: tiple player options, and the usual options of skill into the preferred landing site from a particular lie. DESIGNERS: Novotrade International level setting, handicapping, save game features, in PUBLISHER: The club selection window obviously shows the club Buffalo Grove, NY stant replay of your shots, putting and ball control currently in use and the distance, but one can also (708) 215-5111 adjustments.\" Which is exactly what Konami has click on it to activate the putting grid and see some Prostati Screen Re-Draw ProStaff TITLE: VGA 1-10 $39.95 None Konami Page 28 Computer Gaming World "


"Take Command of Task Force 1942 TM Lead The World's Most Colossal Battleships Through The Greatest Battles Of World War II. The Pacific Solomons 1942. Over 250 destroyers, battleships, cruisers, carriers, and transports are poised for grueling head-to-head confrontations and awaiting your command. This is the setting for Task Force 1942...the ultimate simulation of surface naval action in the South Pacific! Experience the intense pressures that the admirals and subordinate commanders faced during the actual Solomons Campaign of 1942. No detail has been spared! You'll experience the intensity of realistic torpedo wakes, riveting night combat, and harsh weather conditions! All brought to life by the most advanced 3-D graphics in any naval action simulation!  Command U.S. or Japanese forces! Find out if the 64,000-ton Yamato Class Battleship is a match for the mighty lowa Class Battleship! Take control of Gun Director View or Torpedo Mount View for more effective ship-to-ship combat! Or anticipate your enemy's next move from the bridge! . Command hundreds of destroyers, cruisers, and battleships...all faithfully reproduced! Lead your task force to victory in single engagements or comprehensive campaigns...or end up at the bottom of Iron Bottom Sound like Admirals Callaghan and Scott! Absolute historical accuracy thanks to technical guidance from Vice Admiral William Mack, a veteran Gunnery Officer aboard the John D. Ford in the actual Solomons Campaign! \"If you are looking for a gritty, challenging simulation of ship-to-ship ocean surface combat in World War II. Task Force 1942 has the goods.\" \"Launching torpedos is a blast, and so is this game.\" Video Games & Computer Entertainment \"Night battles are quite spectacular with all the flares, salvos, and ships on fire... a fireworks show!\" Strategy Plus ES ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE  1993 MicroProse Software, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. For a FREE INTERACTIVE DEMO DISK of the incredible TASK FORCE send this coupon to: MicroProse Software, 180 Lakefront Drive, Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245. Please include $3.99 for postage and handling To get our free catalog, call 1-800-879-PLAY today! (Mon-Fri8:30 am 5:00 pm EST) Name: Address: City: State: _ Zip: _ AAL TASK FORCE Actual Screen Shots Shown. SURFACE HAVAL ACTION IN THE SOUTH PACIFIC circle Reader Service #70 "


"pretty extreme grades on some greens. The stance window allows the player to intentionally hook or slice by adjusting the footing, and the wind gauge shows the strength of the breeze on a 1-9 scale along with the direction. All pretty standard, but very well thought-out so that one can keep the windows active while playing the game and not feel like a portion of the screen is lost. The heart of the game is the power meter and aiming spot. An additional window appears as a golf ball surrounded by a circular power meter. Click once to acrivate the power meter, click a second time to pick the relative strength of the stroke, and then the play gets more interesting. A red aiming spot appears on the golf ball and begins moving around the golf ball. The gamer has to click once more when the red aiming spot is in the center of the golf ball to hit a normal shot. Any deviation will generate a hook or slice. Of course, one can also get under the ball for additional back spin on a shot. This is challenging without being frustrating and allows many different kinds of shots to be made. I found it useful to hit off center depending on the strength of the wind and the landing area. Wilson ProStaff Golf also includes a number of side games such as Best Ball, Straight Scramble, Carryover Skins and Bingo-Bango-Bongo, which sounds something like Dick Vitale would say during March Madness. In fact, BBB is rather good, teaching accuracy and consistency. Three points are awarded each hole, the first to the first player on the green, the second to the player who is closest to the hole when all the balls are on the green and the third to the person who holes out first. Simple, yet I found that my normal hack and slash to get the ball somewhere near the green, chip close and make a putt (see description of play above), didn't work playing BBB. bove), alan work plyng DDD. Returning to an earlier point. This game cries out for more additional courses or, better yet, a course designer of some kind. A sparse looking 36 page manual actually covers everything quite nicely, and the interface is so logical I didn't need the manual to play the game. Holing Out Returning to the manual, we find on page 4 that Wilson ProStaff Golf was designed with fun in mind. I couldn't agree more. It is a highly enjoyable, moderately challenging product that is user-friendly, has multiple options, and firs the niche it aimed for perfectly. Wilson ProStaff Golf should join Links 386 Pro and Jack Nicklaus Signature Edition in the library of every computer golfer. Cow OUT TIME DAYS Out Time Days is a Play-By-Mail game of life on a strange world. Emphasizing role playing and inter-player communication. OTD is a game for those who like to join with other players around the world in figuring out puzzles, creating working economies, exploring large sections of worlds. undertaking or tracking criminal activities, or fielding capable armies. The worlds explored are living, vibrant locales that will change through your character's actions. With the ability to journey in many eras (you'll start in a medieval-like location), you'll enjoy adapting to new sets of abilities and restaints or you can focus on a single place and become well established. OTD is a combination Science Fiction-Fantasy game. It is 99% computer moderated to ensure fairness, and 1% GM moderated to allow for creativity. A maximum of 1 turn per week is allowed. Cost per turn is $5.00. The game is open-ended with each new character playing a vital role. A special start. up is available if you mention this ad. Receive a rule book. startup turn and 5 turns for just $5.00 ($20,00 outside U.S. and Canada), a $35.00 value! Dependable, weekly, error-free turns since 1984 H To sign up or for more information write to: Twin Engine Gaming, 3254 Maple Leaf Ct., San Jose, CA 95121 Wanna try a tactical space game and pay only $20 for the entire game? Then ask for information on Space Combat. Circle Reader Service #96 Page 30 Computer Gaming World "


"If you don't have F-15 Strike Eagle III, you're still playing games! So real, you'll think you're back in Baghdad! \"Versatile, violent, and victorious. Those are the kinds of adjectives that should accompany this cutting edge flight simulator.\" Computer Gaming World 1 expected this game to knock me through the back wall. I wasn't disappointed.\" Computer Game Review 1-F PDF U2ZSBS USC0335 -> -----Sist \"Being one of the highest time pilots in the Strike Eagle. with about 1200 F-15E hours and some 115 plus sorties in the Persian Gulf theater. I can honestly say that your Strike Eagle III simulator is the closest example of combat flying I've seen! Outstanding.\" A Letter from a Desert Storm F-15E Pilot Actual cockpit shown. F-15 Strike Eagle III is the most accurate and realistic combat flying simulator on the market today. And no wonder! Just look at all the startling features the third edition of MicroProse's landmark jet fighter has in store for you!  Experience all the real avionics of the F-15E from its seven actual CRTs to the sniff modes of the super sophisticated AN/APG-70 radar system! (No-sweat easy modes for first time pilots...until you can handle the real stuff!) Fly the most realistic fighter flight model available in any PC fighter simulation! Designed, tested, and certified by Lt. Col. George Wargo, USAF Retired, formerly a TAC Stan Eval puke with over 3000 hours in fighters and 1500 in F-15's! Surround yourself in a revolutionary new 3-D graphics system that provides you with a digitized map of downtown Baghdad complete with every bridge, the TV famous Air Ministry building and the \"Baby Milk\" factory! Cheat death in three explosive Actual F-15 Strike Eagle III scenarios cockpit screen shot shown. including Desert Storm, Korea, and Central America!  Go 1 vs. I with head-toSTRIKE ENGE head modem combat mode or put your \"Wizzo\" in the back seat via modem and fly like the real F-15E with a two-man crew! Patrol in two-fighter formation with your favorite wingman in an F-15 Strike MICROPROSE Eagle right next to you via modem! Erica De Plet y l ghar Returns New Ar Como ALLION \"Nuclear power facility destroyed! Iraqi Air Ministry next targetll\" MICROPROSE 1 ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE SERIOUSLY FUN SOFTWARE For a FREE INTERACTIVE DEMO DISK of the incredible F-15 Strike Eagle till send this coupon 180 lakefront Denver, Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 Please include $3.99 for postage and handling, To get out free catalog, call 1 800 829 PLAY |Mon Fri 8.30am 5:00 pm ESTI Name: Address: City: ___State: Zip: _ _AAK 1993 MicroProse Software. Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. \"Scratch 3 more SAMs north of the 38th parallel!!\" ---Circle Reader Service #71 "


"Play Hard. Pla Quarterdeck O rg C RE226 INCREDIBLE SPECIAL OFFER QEMM-3868 3 HOT GAMES OVER 5220 OF SOFTWARE WHOLM Retrdes Now, buy something you really need and get some games you really want. Quarterdeck's QEMM-386\" gives you the highest performance memory management money can buy. It's the leading utility in the industry. It can help you get Get 3 free games your work done faster when you buy the special by allowing you to use QEMM-386 Game Bundle productivity-enhancing TSRs and network —while supplies last utilities you'd otherwise have to do without What are you going to do with all the time you save? Play! Look for this Special Package at your favorite software store! even fly for the other side. Magnificent 240-page manual is complete with photos and war maps. On the Gridiron Get into the action with this amazingly realistic simulation. Its 3-D look puts you in the middle of the action in the most complete football gaming package ever. Play quarterback arcadeIn the Sky Step back into history and experience the emotion of airborne combat with the men and machines of the Pacific Theater of World War II. Attack carriers, air bases and fight the finest pilots Aces of the Pacific FREE Front Page Sports: Football FREE \" : 500 soor loer 400 MPH209 the enemy can throw against you. Super-realistic simulation uuw against you. Super-realistic simulation includes 30 accurately recreated WWII fighters and bombers; legendary enemy (and friendAces of the Pacific ly) aces to battle, and all the \"The benchmark of the 90s heart-pounding excitement of for flight simulators.» carrier landings. Choose from -Simulation Magazine an array of missions or enlist for the entire war. You can style or be the coach and play a strategy game against an opponent or against the computer. View instant replays from a floating camera you position. Front CS F ront Page Sports: Football Page: Football is \"... remains unchallenged as the most designed to complete football game ever... for appeal to players gridiron fans of all interest levels...\" at any level. You -Electronic Games get a full 47-man roster including injured reserve, up to 28 teams and 1,400 players per league, 200+ stock plays, 300+ stat categories and your choice of exhibition or a full season of play. "


"Safe. Save Big. Qarisdeck NTTEST Derulow Topic. Aceste indliche Menory Ultima II Labyrinth FREE State Retail Value n-012345678 Bubo Xocy w li Sest meil  Extended 2006 Manifest memory analyzer FREE Mappable Ramable 4 = Page Tres High RAM Mapped ROM Excluded Wideo ster RAM 1ROM Split TOM 195 196 In Coupon Discounts Enclosed 3.00 400 5000 6.60 7nec Babe 9690 Anoe ww ww www 3n60 UHRHR W ww Choo Pn00    2.60 ZEE ENTRERT TABORTIS Press F3 for list tole ni Hely 12-Trist You are in the Ethye VOLO You guess that its currently down. MEYOU CRAC01 THE PC/COMPUTING MAWEEK PC 200 ANALYST'S CHOICE INFO WORLD PRODUCT OF THE 100 YEAR MAGAZINE BEST PC PRODUCTS EDITORS CHOICE CATEOORI WINNER 9 BEST BUY THEB:37 VordPerfect Work Safe QEMM-386 is the number one memory management program Your son distorte and you tsel_ught headed. D O in the world. Not only does it make games run better, it helps you when you get back to Through the Labyrinth work-reducing the chance Send in your registration card and get this special free bonus! of crashing while making Ultima Underworld II incorporates the latest advancements in room for both your favorite sound, 3D graphics and animaTSRs or network utilities Ultima Underworld Il: tion. You play Avatar, trapped and memory hungry prowith the other leaders of grams like WordPerfect or Labyrinth of Worlds u Britannia by the Guardian in a MS Windows. Whether you Registration Bonus Game black rock gem. You will have to have one megabyte or eight, QEMM-386 can find more find your way out against seemingly overwhelming odds. But BYTE memory for your programs. you must-or your entire country will die! Play Safe Suggested U.S. What You Can Expect Circle Reader Service #79 QEMM-386 version 6 gives your OUT OF Retail Price: $99.95 MEMORY games all the conventional memoWOORTVIJO Product Qty Product Each Totals (default) ry available on your PC. AutomaTOEMM-386 Game Pack Payment method Shipping & Handling $10 (Canada & USA only) tically. No wonder QEMM-386 is specified Visa MasterCard Expires Calif. Residents add 8.25% by more game publishers than all other Card # Card # TIT DOS DOS3or DOSS memory managers put together. Name Address LOTUS Kraiders Canice 1991 1992 AWARDS OF E EXCELLENCE POURNELLE'S READERS TUSER'S CHOICE CHOICE AWARD TO AWARD Maximum Conventional Memory Gain Yes! Diy Product $99.95 alone with OEMM6 Total Please allow 3 weeks for delivery For fastest service call (800) 351-3222 ext. 1D1 State_ City City — — Quarterdeck Office Systems 150 Pico Boulevard, Santa Monica, CA 90405 (310) 392-9851 Fax (310) 314-4219 Quarterdeck International Ltd., B.I.M. House, Crofton Terrace, Dun Laoghaire Co. Dublin, Ireland Tel.(353) (1) 284-1444 Fax: (353) (1) 284-4380 Quarterdeck All games are complete, fully-functional versions. However, because of shipping considerations, individual game boxes are not included.  Quarterdeck Office Systems. All trademarks are property of their respective owners. "


"clase Blitzed-Out of Their Minds I SIIII Building a Play in Front Page Sports Football by Jarrod Kiriberlin sent different position groupings. Red circles represent the Defensive Backs, red triangles denote Linebackers, and red squares, the Defensive Line. Each play is divided into two parts. Movement before the snap and the actions the player takes after the snap. Initially the play on the screen is before the snap. If the user clicks on \"After the Snap,\" the graphics used by Front Page Sports Football to show player efense builds Championships, or so The relcasc last year of Front Page Sports popular gridiron wisdom tells us. It Football from Dynamix was an important is ironic that the San Francisco 49ers step forward in the cvolution of foorball are lauded for their offense. Most of the games. The Play Editor it offers is the most previous Champions have been known for sophisticated yet on the marker and allows the their defense. From the Steel Curtain and manipulation of all 22 players on the field. the Doomsday Defense to the Monster of The following will show how to build a the Midway and the Purple People Eaters, defensive play for the San Francisco exhibidefense has been singled out as the prereqtion playbook. An important note is that I uisite for a successful team. During the 80s will refer to the players based on how they the Forty Niners were known for the Bill appear on the screen, which for the defense is Walsh system that methodically broke the opposite of real life. Hence, the Left Cordown opponent's defensive plans. Joenerback is the Cornerback on the left side of Montana, Roger Craig, Jerry Rice, Dwight the screen. For the sake of simplicity I have Clark and Ronnie Lott are probably the chosen to modify one of the existing plays. most well known of the Forty Niners from While all former direction is removed, startthe 80s, with of course only Ronnie Lott on ing a formation from scratch delves into varithe defensive side of the ball. Yet, football ous formation rules that can drive a user to experts will tell you that it is the Forty Niners defensive play, dismissed by some (such as the Giants) as finesse, which carAt the main menu, select Exhibition Play. ried the Forty Niners to greatness. MoreMake sure that the home league is the Dyover, examining the times that the Forty namix Football League. Click on the box Niners failed to win, usually a problem with labeled Home Team and select the San Franthe defense could be shown. The mistake in cisco team. Finally, click on the Play Editor letting Ronnie Lott depart without having button. This will place you in the Play Editor either an experienced Safety or leader on (a good diagram of this can be seen on page page the defense has kept the Forty Niners out of 63 of the Front Page Sports Foorball manual). the Super Bowl these past couple of years. Click on the load button. This will activate a a window with the choices, stock formations, stock plays or exhibition. Click on the stock play formation. Another window, this time with three choices, offense, defense or special teams is displayed. Click on the defense button and the stock plays to reveal the Defense Window (offering 10 different options such as Blitzs, Runzone or in this case, Passshrt). Within the Passshrt option are a further 12 plays. The one we are interested in is the first one, 3-4manun.ply. Clicking on this will display the defensive play in the upper half of the Defensive formation prior to the snap. Play Editor Screen. Different symbols repreOffensive pass patterns. assignments are displayed. The orange boxes are zones and the yellow boxes are logic boxes. \"Theen These yellow logic boxes can be crucial in designing a play as a player will arrive at a logic box and then perform the scripted instructions within that box. It is possible for a player to be given multiple logic boxes that will guide his movements and reactions to the situations relevant to the play at hand. However for the purpose here we are going to delete the current instructions from each player and work from this formation. Therefore, click on the left most Defensive Back. The lower quarter of the screen will display the instructions that are contained in the first logic box, which is the players starting Page 34 Computer Gaming World "


"The Book Store CGW Presents. CLOIAL CONOUEST NEW RELEASE TATTORISTA wa Global Conquest, The Official Strategy Guide by Computer Gaming World On-Line Editor Alan Emrich is only $24.95 plus $1.81 tax and $3.50 shipping and handling. Special features: floppy disc with updated (2.0) game version and a new map maker; and full-color player's aid card. A complete tutorial with five programmed scenarios. Strategy tips, detailed, tables, and analyses of actual program formulae. A complete modem-gaming reference. LIVILIZATION OLIWIONARIO Sid Meiers Civilization, Or Rome on 640k a Day by Johnny L. Wilson and Alan Emrich Prima $18.95 If you're serious about playing Civilization, this is the book you need. Jerry Pournelle, BYTE Magazine Includes 100 charts covering technological advancements, 24 original tables and 22 specific formulae showing how the game works, as well as 17 ways to cheat and more than 20 ways to win. CHUCK TEAQUERO AIR COMBAT Chuck Yeagers Air Combat Handbook by Russell Sipe and Mike Weksler $18.95 U.S. $25.95 Can Winning Strategies to all the missions. Campaign games for every player-flyable aircraft (P-51, FW-190, F-86, MiG-15, Phantom II, MIG-21). Valuable performance charts for each aircraft. Extensive information from the designers of YAC. Exclusive interview with Chuck Yeager. THE SIMEARTH BIBLE The SimEarth Bible by Johnny L. Wilson Osborne-McGraw Hill $14.95 I salute Johnny Wilson for giving us a new kind of book about the earth and the terrestrial planets. James Lovelock The SimEarth Bible is a winning strategy guide to SimEarth, as well as a fact-filled guide to Earth sciences and theories of the balance of life on the planet. T ORTICLAL GOIDE YO COU The Official Guide To Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon by Russell Sipe COMPUTE Books $12.95 U.S. $16.50 The best book on Railroad Tycoon. If you love Railroad Tycoon get Russell Sipe's book Jerry Pournelle, BYTE Magazine Here are just a few of the things you'll learn: get the answers to puzzling economic forces in the game: learn to defeat each of the tycoons; manupulate the stock market to your advantage; and learn optimal building and survey techniques. The SimCity Planning Commission Handbook by Johnny L. Wilson Osborne McGraw-Hill $14.95 Each time we read this book we learned something, because it explains the theory behind the game and doesn't just list one-two-three bints Use order form bound into this magazine to order books. "


"back. Press the following buttons. More, Pass stripe (ie 10 yards). This zone will cover the defense, Man to man, Bump man at line and intended route of the Tight End, the primary finally, press Done twice. Do exactly the same receiver. The left OLB should be set to a Fake with the right Cornerback. The Safety that Blitz, while the Safery who was moved to you did not move, the right Safery, should be behind the right OLB should be set up to a assigned to the buttons, \"Key on\" and \"ReReal Blitz. Finally, issue a \"Move to\" comceiver.\" Lastly, for now, set each of the three mand to the right OLB and end the move at defensive linemen (red squares) to pass rush. the Quarterback's logic box destination (beAt this point, we should take a look at the tween the two running Backs.) opposing offense. Load, Stock Plays, Offense, A quick analysis of the situation shows a Pass, Middle, Medium and Temiddle.ply. mismatch on the right side of the Offensive This will select the appropriate play. The Line with four defenders attacking three offensive routes are shown in the illustration. blockers, while two additional players (the TE Defensive coverage for the same pass play. The order in which the Quarterback will and right RB are designated to go into passing check the receivers is color coded: white, yelpatterns.) To see what happens in reality, go point. Click on the line, which in this case says low, orange, grey and black. Blue is not into the practice mode and watch a number \"1. Pass defense man to man shade coverchecked. Then, we set up the assignments for of replays of the play. Most of the time the age underneath\" and delete the information. the Linebackers and the Safety we first offense will get a first down with a completion Then click on the done button. Do this for moved. Set up the right Inside Linebacker to the WR on the right side. Even though this each and every defensive player. (ILB) to a Real Blitz. The instructions to the left ILB are a little intricate. Click on the Now, we will start to move the formation \"Move to\" button and you will see cross hairs around. Take the Left Safety, the second red and an orange line from the left ILB to those circle from the left and move this player dicross hairs. Right click on the upper left correctly above the right Outside Linebacker ner of the Nose Tackle Red Square. The (OLB). To do this, you must first activate the instruction script you will see says \"1. Move \"Before the Snap\" button and click and drag the left safery to the new position. The intent to Logic Box #2.\" FAST douw. OFFENSE is to create a local superiority for the defense Left click on that new logic box and select when they are attacking the right side of the pass defense, zone. This will allow you to Offensive Line. designate the zone area (box) for the player. Your boundaries are the OLBs on both the Next, we will set up some elementary defenleft and right, just behind (ie above) the desive assignments. Reactivate the \"After the Less than optimal result for the defense. Snap\" button and click on the left cornerfensive line and the top of the dark green field ACCESS Soft A COURSE FOR YC LINKS LINKS NKS LINKS PINUTURST Tarde  HYAT NORTH BARTON QUEK ZACOLO ACCESS Troon Firestone Akron, Ohio Pinehurst Pinehurst, NC Scottsdale, AZ ACCO Barton Creek Austin, Texas Dorado Beach Puerto Rico Bayhill Oralndo, F. "


"OFFENSES 113 Darnell Richards is sacked by DEFERE'S N TRO for a loss o yards. Hit TAB for replay The optimal result for the defense. Wide receiver earning his first down. open enough to allow an easy completion. If the defenders are to get to the QB, they must have more time. First things first. We move the Right Safery closer to the line of scrimmage (remember of course that you need to activate Before the Snap to be able to readjust the formation) and change the player instructions from Key On Receiver to Pass Defense, Zone. Draw a box of similar dimensions to the Linebacker zone you drew earlier, with this box extending from the Safety himself to the right sideline. This time when you look at the practice, you will find that the right WR is covered and usually, the QB will look for the TE over the middle. This allows the receiver to be covered more effectively and forces the QB to hold the ball longer. The QB still won't be sacked because he has time to throw to the TE over the middle or scramble himself. At this point you have created a base from which to work. Save the play off and name it. In studying the situation, the left RB is staying in the back field to block, while the right RB is blocking and releasing into a passing pattern. If at all possible it would be good to get the attention of the left RB. To do this, we take the left OLB and instruct the player to move down around the left DE into the backfield. This is set up as a \"Move to\" instruction rather than a blitz. If you try this, and it is useful just to see the way the offensive line reacts, you will find that the left DE moves out to meet the challenge. Nothing much is accomplished. So switch the left OLX inside and place him directly between the Center and the left DE, slightly off the line of scrimmage in front of the left ILB. Set the player up to blitz and go into the practice mode. Ironically, this blitz from the other side is the key to opening up the right side of the Offensive Line. Now, unable to concentrare the blocking schemes on just the right side, enough of a lane is opened up for the blitz of the Safety to be successful as much as 40% of the time. You will have to tinker with this to get the placement of the left OLB and the right OLB just right. You will find that the critical player on the offensive line is the offensive lineman directly to the right of the Center. His attention must be diverted enough, if only for a fraction of a second, to allow the Safety to get by on the blitz. It is a testament to the strength of the Play Editor that the movement of one player can open up just enough of a gap for another. Experiment with changing the scripts assigned to each player. Find out what happens when you assign further strategies. Delay blitzes, fake movements and then fall off into a zone, play strict zone instead of man to man on the outside. This play is designed for a specific situation, to defend against a team that throws to a TE out of a pro set backfield. Try this defense against a flea flicker or a long pass to see if it will be useful in different situations. You just might get a new appreciation for the strategies used in professional football, cow a re brings you UR EVERY MOOD! LJKS COURSES If you feel like playing 18 holes on Hawaii's Mauna Kea course on Monday and the desert splendor of Arizona's Troon North that night and Akron, Ohio's Firestone course on Tuesday morning, save your airfare and just pull out your LINKS Championship Courses! ACCESS Software has faithfully reproduced every detail of some of the world's finest golf courses so you can play them on your computer anytime of the day or night! LINKS fall LINKS MAUNA KCA All LINKS Championship Courses are completely compatible with our original LINKS-The Challenge of Golf, the new LINKS 386 Pro, and the new Microsoft Golf for Windows! ile Reader Service #31 FOUNTIFUL GOLF Coat Championship COURSE & Meer Mauna Kea Hawaii ...and more coming every six weeks! ACCESS Bountiful Bountiful. UT SOFTWARE INCORPORATED 4910 W. Amelia Earhart Dr., SLC, UT 84116 (8071859-2200. (8002800-4880, FAX (8012596-9128 "


"\"There must be not a balance of power, but a community of power; not organized rivalries, but an organized common peace.\" Woodrow Wilson ASHESE "


"In a modern world, what happens when empires fall... Inspired by Caniol. merytorozross the comanie Room on you. Herbarice join your 104 you will del abiedt golesta nd. a palecle of food and Darso says that commande pod was in the Coun 6 hours ago but he left fortsatwortes expected back in 2 hours.com this town 4 hours ago ber o r Ant expected Back in Arours. the tumultuous events in Eastern Europe, Mike Singleton and 2000 COORDOO You must choose your own diplomatic strategy when dealing with people. his team have created Ashes of Empire, their biggest game to date. Ashes is a complex fusion of adventure and strategy which places demands on all your powers of diplomacy and intelligence. As you enter | ) the heartland of your one-time great Flying one of many vehicles, you attack a ground target. adversary, you must find a strategy to bring order to chaos, while at the same time avoiding the initiation of a nuclear conflict with an embittered and desperate people, mistrustful of your intentions Each town holds the potential of new allies and resources to acquire. in this New World Order. Free instructional videotape v Keyboard function overlay Over 6,000 unique characters The harsh reality of an empire torn apart. Full free movement in a 3-D environment Di 2.8 million sq. miles and 9.000 locations. Circle Reader Service-455 GAMETEK Distributed by Gametek, Inc. Packaging D 1993 Cametek. Inc., Gametek is a trademark of IJE. Inc. $2999 DE 191st Street, North Miami Beach, Florida 33180. Ashes of Empire is a trademark of Mirage Technologies multi-media Ltd. Licensed by mirage Technologies multimedia Ltd. O 1993 midnight Technologies Ltd. All rights reserved. "


"Deview THE SECRETS OF RUNNING AN NHL FRANCHISE Bethesda's Hockey League Simulator II by Johnny L. Wilson A Games C Divisional rence TOP 2 Teams El TOP 5  TOH Teams ENTRU Series Length Best of 3 Best of 5 Best of ? Set udget Editro Team Edit arm Team Horaf Player's Set ptions Ma a Schedule Load/ ave Team Load Save GH Team Then Disney CEO Michael Eisner Create League Setup Menu started, I dropped a veteran goalie onto my officially announced that Anafarm team and brought up a promising Schedule Menu heim's new NHL expansion team M Playoffs rookie goalie who lasted the season. would be called \"The Mighty Ducks,\" he LED Outside Divisional brought with him a bit of show-biz knowThe trades were not as easy to pull off as 16. Total they were in the original HLS. Of course, the how and media manipulation that the NHL F Make a Schedule original HLS didn't have any kind of algohas desperately needed over the last decade Manual Automatic rithm to bargain with the human GM. The or so. It is no longer enough to own a human GM could make trades to his/her professional hockey franchise; it is now necheart's content. HLS2 factors in a perceived essary to market it. Bethesda Softworks' pdate Player's value for each player (loosely represented by original Hockey League Simulator reflected Optional Set Up the order in which the rosters for each team this to a minor extent. The simulation kept Protect Pla ers? Do Haver Draft track of attendance figures for the teams and are displayed on the computer screen). I let would-be general managers know how they were performing in found two ways to influence trades in the human GM's favor. One way is to find two expendable players relation to the projected budget. Yet, it neither had an algorithm for (preferably listed back-to-back) on the roster and offer them for one refer determining how attendance related to performance on the ice, nor desired player that is only listed a line or two higher than the offered did it do a good job of simulating the negotiations, trades and showmanship necessary to put a quality team on the ice. players. If the computer GM does not accept the trade immediately, one can sweeten the deal with $10,000-$25,000 in cash. Another way Hockey League Simulator II (HLS2) does a respectable job of redressis to offer a large cash supplement in order to seduce the computer ing the latter inadequacy, but deleted the former from the simulation entirely rather than addressing those concerns. The net result is that GM into trading for a disparity in talent. HLS2 does a respectable job in handling trades, salary negotiations for In order to create the economic model for HLS2, the design team coaches, and the megastrategy of coaching (setting lines and handling had experienced NHL executives rate the NHL cities for their potenpersonnel), and is extremely flexible in allowing gamers to replay entire tial income. The projected income is based on how certain franchises seasons in a single sitting or to weave games played in Wayne Gretzky have performed monetarily over a course of years, in bad seasons as Hockey III into custom leagues. It has a fantastically versatile structure well as good. Although the actual amounts shown on the screen are for creating custom leagues and allowing gamers to test out possible greatly reduced from the amounts one mighr see in a \"real\" transacresults of their trades in fantasy or rotisserie leagues. It features a tion, they do a good job of impacting the bottom line of each franchise multitude of print options which can greatly simaccording to the NHL analysis. The limited funds plify the lives of computer hockey league commisavailable to most franchises explains why using sioners and statistics-hungry hockey fans. Most immoney to leverage a trade can cause a computer GM portantly, one can easily switch back and forth to trade more quickly. between viewing the final scores of games played and In addition, I found the use of the farm roster to watching a period-by-period recap of scoring. This be more solidly implemented in HLS2. One can get allows one to speed up play when desired and watch a display as to the talent available on the farm and the season unfold leisurely when that is preferred. can easily move personnel back and forth as required. This played a vital role for me. Whenever How I Won The Stanley Cup injuries occurred, I would tend to bring up \"roleAs the only human general manager, I am able to players\" from the farm system in order to shore up win the Stanley Cup (or, at least, reach the confera given line. For example, a farm player rated high ence finals) almost every time I replay a season. I in checking might be brought up to fill a Penalty have won the Stanley Cup with a superior team, the Killing Line, even though that player's overall statisMontreal Canadiens, and with a team of less stature, tics were weak. I once brought up an unknown to The Toronto Maple Leafs. I was unable to duplicate play on the Power Play because he had a high rating the feat with the Quebec Nordiques. Indeed, my for his shooting accuracy, and I had lost my #1 trades managed to decimate that team rather than center. galvanize it toward victory. With the Canadiens, I Perhaps the most significant change in HLS2, won by stocking the team with proven stars from however, is the addition of the coaching factor. Now, SYSTEM: IBM with 640K other franchises and dumping the large-salary play GRAPHICS: human GMs go after the coaches they want and PRICE: ers in whom I personally had no confidence. With PROTECTION: Documentation Look-Up negotiate with a computer \"agent.\" The negotiations the Maple Leafs, I made strategic trades among the DESIGNERS: S. McKisic and Nick A. Volkov aren't very deep, but it adds an element of suspended journeymen in the middle of the line-up in order to Bethesda Softworks disbelief that was not there before. The fictitious Rockville, MD strengthen specific positions. Then, once the season coaches are rared according to their previous performances (Unknown, Veteran, Renowned, etc.) LE TITLE: Hockey League Simulator II VGA $44.95 PUBLISHER: (301)926-8300 Page 40 Computer Gaming World "


"Play the best and we'll send you $8.00 (See details below.) FRONT PAGE SPORTS STARE SUN VOM TREVE JOHN FOOT MIKE I Football TOMLA No matter what computer football game you've played (or even if you haven't played any), you'll find nothing compares to the total pro-football experience of Front Page Sports Football. From drafting teams to forming leagues to designing plays and running the action, only Front Page Sports\" Football has it all. And now you can get $8.00 just for treating yourself to the best. Here's how: 1. Buy a copy of Front Page Sports\" Football from your local retailer. 2. Fill out the coupon below and send it and your original purchase receipt to us. 3. We'll send you a check for $8.00. 4. Enjoy the best computer football season you've ever had. PlayMaker w\" U YOU WANT MOILLA MAYOU'LL HAVE DESCARON ON LA VERSION DYDPTK MIDES  E B \"...the best animation I've seen in a football game... The action is fluid and easy to control... There is no better football game on the market!\" -Computer Game Review \"In play creation and editing, Front Page Sports Football can't be touched...the game that brings everything to the field...\" -PC Games Magazine \"...one of the most visually stunning and realistic simulations of the sport... It is a rare example of a football game that will appeal to everyone, from the casual arcade player to the die-hard rotisserie league fanatic.\" -Video Games & Computer Entertainment Yes! Send me a check for $8.00. Here's my coupon and my original sales receipt for Front Page Sports Football. Name Address _State Daytime Phone Terms & Conditions: 1.) This offer is valid only for Front Page Sports Football games purchased berween Feb. 15, 1993, and June 30, 1993. 2.) This offer not valid with any other coupons or promotions. 3.) One rebate per household. 4.) This offer expires July 10, 1993. 5). Mail this coupon and your original Front Page Sports Football sales receipt as proof of purchase to: Football Rebate Offer, Sierra On-Line, P.O. Box 485, Coarsegold, CA 93614. Offer #368 Excellence in Sports Simulation. City Zip Dynamix PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY Circle Reader Service #103 "


"DPUPM. Team.Capitals Players Name A Tim Bergland Edit Pro Team Team Strength: 1652 HINTERESTINATSKAPCS a Michal Pivonka Mike Ridley Dave Tippelt Randy burridge John Druce Dimitri Khrislich Todd Krygier Nick Kypreos Peter Bondra 2 Dino Ciccarelli 23 Paul MacDermid VB Alan May Kelly Miller Shawn Chambers Kevin Hatcher P USD inning D in U CENTRO irroiron OTONG m to a - arsings nnsru  arms HEDDEUD. robornomerinin LISTINGUE in Garmin minina and, if the gamer selects the \"Coaches AFrunning in the red. This takes some of the joy fect Play\" option, they can have a tremenout of reaching the exalted levels of the Standous affect. By firing the Maple Leafs' ley Cup finals. Veteran coach early in the season and hirThe second negative should be classified as ing a Renowned coach (and bringing up a a \"body check.\" It physically knocks one off farm goalie), I managed to raise the team the \"puck of enjoyment\" and diminishes the from Maple \"Loafs\" to a team worthy of game. The separation of the Print Utility the national emblem. No other personnel from HLS2 limits the joy of a season replay. changes, save for substitutions for injuries The design team insists that they could not and goalie rest, were required. have handled all the statistics that they do if Speaking of goalie rest, I found that my salvain Cote the print utility was integrated into the simuteam performed well using a 2:1 formula. La farrate lation. So, unless one is merely interested in My starting center would play two games printing the statistics game by game, it is and then, unless one were facing an intradivisional rival in a key game, necessary to save the entire league, exit HLS2, and enter the print the back-up goalie would have a shot. The design team assures me that utility. Then, one loads the league, prints the desired statistics, and it is possible to play up to 10 games in a row or more before there is exits the print utility. Then, it is possible to re-enter HLS2 and a degradation in the starting goalie's play. continue the replay. Worse yet, one must re-enter the copy protection in order to re-enter HLS2. In many ways, it seems like the player is Checks... being penalized for the \"sins\" of the programmers. Since they bound themselves to the 640K RAM barrier and didn't want to deal with There are two negatives that I experienced in HLS2. The first memory management, gamers are forced to dance around two pronegative could be classified as a poke check. It causes one to lose grams instead of one. control of the «puck of suspended disbelief\" for a moment, but doesn't impact the overall enjoyment of the game. The economic model, as explained above, abstracts the income potential of each NHL city on ...and Balances the basis of past performance and does not allow the gamer to reap Hockey League Simulator I/has moved from the status of game utility the benefits of increased attendance due to winning streaks, trading to that of entertainment producr with the addition of the trading for personalities or superstars, and reaching the playoffs. Indeed, algorithm, new versatility in creating leagues, flexibility in handling though the economic model can impact a team negatively (i.c. during the farm system, coach influence calculations, streak variables and the season, a team which runs out of money\" has a degradation of more. Though Hockey League Simulator // will appeal more to the performance), there is no extra income to be gained from reaching the Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 fan who wishes to integrate the full-blown playoffs. Indeed, though this factor does not affect play during the simulation with league play, it is in itself a noteworthy simulation for playoffs, anyone who checks their finances will find that they are statistics buffs. Now, if I could only figure out a way to get the Nordiques into the Stanley Cup finals! CGW We've Outdone Our Only Competition... Ourselves. Mark II WCSM THE MARK II WCS *User Programmable Functions *Allows Joystick Programmability ThrustMaster Get Real HOTAST Thrustmaster Inc. 10150 SW Nimbus Ave. Suite E-7 Tigard OR 97223 PHONE(503)639-3200 FAX(503)620-8094 Circle Reader Service #93 "


"eam, Hats Mean hals ont To Clean... savo present saperne Cuncoveteglsts cares SPACE SPACE QUEST V QUEST Well-oiled adversaries are out to waste our favorite cosmic custodian. ze The Next Mutation To Nei RTR hy Meet bodacious babes in the far reaches of space. Actual web SIERRA Take on interstellar pukoids and nasty phlegm throwers (yeccch)! He's a legend that's sweeping the galaxy... Roger Wilco, the universe's favorite janitor, has taken the helm of his own starship. And that's the good news! Join Roger and an intergalactic gaggle of misfit shipmates in the most hilarious adventure on this (or any other) planet. Find out why Game Players magazine calls the Space Quest series \"a prime example of why Sierra is at the top of the computer gaming world.\" Pick it up at your local software dealer, or call: 1(800) 326-6654 He's out to clean up the universe, and it ain't a pretty job! SIERRA Circle Reader Service #85 "


"KANSSAVAMAK 10. Deunew A selfs Waalre Jolasak ini okjolas sh Jatiwoolkir Teolar \"oias! todosijwej .. .dijwoodloian talk, K. J ufijwood: jwoe kdfois Ucejdorliwnelfiel kjal).jr uits with sjdfois/ \"Vol frir el 14 aljdfox 44 un ijt ligu... Melkjdou id's Captiivkuithalkidiplasi Wal! in 1jdoy Hockey in ASCII CC Challengeséup Hockey N700 porginos afijwoeir Stiw profil eksdofin Ef Lelkaju by Joe Sherfy elkeja The crisp hiss of blades on the ice combines with the bass percussion of bodies colliding with the boards to form a hony of hockey sounds. The action flows from end to end, bright colored sweat ers swirling and colliding like paint thrown onto an icy canvas. Such is the visual thrill of hockey. Punctuate it with the dramatic freeze frames of a sniper winding up to shoot from the point, a defenseman sacrificing his body to block a shot in front of the goal, or a goalie snagging a hard shot with his glove hand and one has a sense of the drama of hockey. For years, the NHL has tried to figure out how to convey the sport on television, without success. The challenge for computer game designers, is how to imbue the majesty and excitement of this action-packed sport onto a monitor smaller than a television screen. One approach is to stick to the statistical performances of the stars and teams within the sport. By eliminating the sights and sounds, text-based hockey simulations like Lance Haffner's Hat Trick Hockey, TRUE Sports, Inc.'s TRUE Hockey and CC Challenge Cup Hockey (CCH) from CC Software Corporation try to focus on the coaching experience rather than the viewing/playing experience. For hockey purists, they offer an interesting perspective. CCH is a text-based simulation of NHLstyle of hockey. The gamer is put in the shoes of both the front office manager and the coach on the sidelines. The player makes all the coaching moves, but it's up to Gretzky, Lemieux or Messier to make the manager look good by executing those plans. After booting, the program gives one a wealth of options. In addition to letting one play a game, one can review statistics, set up a league, schedule league games, and access and edit player data. For those living in Tampa Bay, Anaheim or Ottawa, expansion that!) As the coach, the gamer begins by teams can be created in order to let fans of the choosing the starting offensive line, defensenewest franchises join in the fun. men and goalie. Once the team is sent out, Next, one chooses the competing teams the player will be presented with a screen (naturally, each team can be controlled by the which shows a small rink and displays the player or the computer) and reviews the perplayers that are currently on the ice, the score, sonnel in order to set up the offensive and shots on goal and time remaining in the defensive lines for the game. Individually, period. As play begins, the player will be gamers can check the roster and see the presented with a text description of the game strengths and weaknesses of each hockey as it happens on the screen. The text reads just player. In addition to providing statistics such like a radio or television broadcast, right as goals, assists, penalty minutes, shots on goal down to the crunching body checks, the and shooting percentage, each player has a obligatory exchanges of fisticuffs, and the rating for defense, passing, hitting, turnover removal of injured players from the ice. The (as a percentage), power plays and faceoffs. speed of the text can be varied to suit just about anyone, and the program has a very When it is time to set the lines, each team unique (although somewhat limited) fcature can have six offensive lines (including the of allowing one to edit center-, left and right-winger) and six dcfensive lines (left and right deAs play unfolds, each line fensemen). Generally, the six will fatigue and the gameroffensive lines will include as-coach will have to decide 12 players playing on four when to send in a fresh line. CC \"CHALLENGE CUP HOCKEY different lines, plus one line This option is available each specifically sct for power time there is a stoppage in plays and one for shortplay, as well as when one has handed situations. On the control of the puck and elects to change lines on the defense, one will have three fly.\" The text will prompt normal, one power play and one shorthanded line. Fortuthe player with the option to nately, cach team has pre-set change the lineup when one lines so that this part can be has the puck and one's playskipped if desired. This is ers are coming to the end of probably a good idea until their allotted time. Generone has some experience ally, each line can spend up with a team. to two minutes on the ice before the players become Once everything is set, it is TITLE: CC Challenge Cup Hockey tired and their play begins to SYSTEM: IBM time for the gamer to see if PRICE: bel $49.95 suffer. It is imperative that he/she can get a given team PROTECTION: None one make his or her substituto play up to its potential. (If DESIGNER: Carl Charroux PUBLISHER: CC Software Corp. tions at the right time so that playing with San Jose, of PO Box 112 the team is not facing a fresh course, one hopes to get the E. Freetown, Ma. 02717 (508) 998-2434 unit when it is tired. One team to play better than also has the option to change Page 44 Computer Gaming World "


"ACES OF THE PACIFIC WAS ONLY THE BEGINNING... A-CE-SOVER EUROPE VGNCOLOR MACINTOSH VGA/COLOR MACINTOSH ollowing the award winning Red Baron and Aces of the Pacific, the best-selling Great War Planes series continues with Damon Slye's most intense and historically detailed simulation yet, Aces over Europe. From the beaches of Normandy to the war-torn ruins of Berlin, you'll fly with the U.S. Army Air Force, the R.A.F. and the German Luftwaffe. Patrol the front lines, target supply depots and come face-to-face against moving ground targets and fortified artillery bunkers. It's an all new battle covering land, air and sea. Strap into the aircraft that made history, and take to the skies with the valiant mert who will be forever remembered as the aces over Europe. SIMULATION ACES EUROPE OVER * Experience the aces of the European Theater including: Johnny Johnson, Adolf Galland, Francis Gabreski and Hub Zemke. * Over 20 meticulously modeled aircraft including the Messerschmitt 262, the Supermarine Spitfire, the Arado-234, the P-51 Mustang and the P-47 Thunderbolt. * Fly in historical campaigns such as the invasion of Normandy, D-Day and the Battle of the Bulge between June of 1944 through May 7, 1945. * All new up-close and personal air-to-ground scenarios: target VI rocket sites and radar installations, make bombing runs near the front lines, take-out enemy bridges and strafe armored vehicles and trains. * The sharpest and smoothest 3-D graphics to date using Gouraud shading, Si texture mapping and a new Tall Res graphics mode. * A richly detailed 240 page manual with an historic overview, color aircraft plares, photos, maps, combat tactics and pilot profiles. Dyname Visit your local software retailer or call (800) 326-6654 to order. TM and are trademarks of, or licensed to Dynamix, Inc. 1993 Dynamix, Inc. A106 Circle Reader Service #86 "


"Tornato Mateus FORWARDS POS 1. DEFENSE Illett SUBS LlegeHoweville Militant u C.faderen Clark-LU LD CHILD Foligno AU Krushelegeki 10 HETKELD Ex loc PARA SAO? Brott-LU Sacco 14 Zezel3D 1 MattreisBarMellTrade Maquin Osborn-LU COALIES SandoMove Plate DDisplay Plyn, C Contiowe. goalies during the game or to pull the goalie when the team is behind and needs another skater. One can also rearrange the lines any time during the game. In addition to the personnel decisions to be made during the game, one can also alter the team's style of play. The default setting is for \"normal\" play (a balance between offensive and defensive considerations), but one can also opt for either an \"offensive,\" \"defensive,\" or physical\" style. Obviously, the latter allows the team to pick up more loose pucks at the expense of an increase in penalty minutes. In addition to the standard game, the program comes with a myriad of features. One can set up leagues and schedule the games to be played manually or by the computer. The program is not as sophisticated as some of the recent entries in the sports simulation market, but the computer can finish a game in about four minutes. The program keeps track of all of the statistics and has more than one might find in USA Today. One can review statistics gencrated from the league play or from the actual NHL season. Team stats include home, away and overtime records, power play and shorthanded goals, offensive and defensive shots on goal, and penalty minutes, just to name a few. Individual stats include all the normal ones one might expect. One can even print out stats for one's own league leaders. Finally, the program will let gamers trade, create new players, or send players packing for the minors. cult time figuring out how the program determined who deserved an assist on a goal. Quite often, an assist was credited to a player who wasn't even involved in the play. Finally, the program could provide greater flexibility in setting lines when a player is in the penalty box. This is the one time when the program does not give the player total control over serting the lines. In summary, while CC Challenge Cup Hockey is a definite contender, it is probably best suited for those NHL fans who have enough imagination to enjoy a fine book and are often disappointed when the book is transferred to the silver screen. It may not offer the symphony, the masterpiece or drama associated with the spectacle of hockey, but it offers the coach's perspective in a way few programs do. (As this article went to press a new version of CC Hockey was released with some notable changes. Whereas the original game offered commentary on the game in 15 second action intervals, the new version breaks these down to six second intervals so that the action is more fluid. In addition, a save game option has been added, and programmable computer coaches are now a possibility. For more information on the update, the designer can be reached at the phone number above. cow Box Score With all of the great things the program can do, there is still room for improvement. First, the actual text description, while easy to read, could be better. Quite often, one loses track of exactly where the action is taking place on the ice. One second the opponent is in his end of the rink and the next thing one knows his center is sailing a slapshot into the net. The text could be greatly improved by letting the player know each time the puck has crossed a blue line or center ice. Unfortunately, the text editing feature cannot be used to remedy this problem. Secondly, this reviewer has a diffi4-0 Sports Boxing A-Train 18.95 26.95 Not Just Another Roll Of The Dice SIDELINE SOFTWARE D dance by ORDERS 1-800-888-92731 Your European PC Connection NEW TITLES A 16.95 16.95 16.95 14.95 18.95 14.95 18.95 16.95 16.95 18.95 14.95 16.95 18.95 14.95 16.95 16.95 16.95 18.95 18.95 26.95 19.95 HYPER BACKGAMMON HYPER-BACKGAMMONM is an exciting, new, fast-paced, CD-ROM game. But, unlike any other games on the market, HYPER-BACKGAMMON\" was programmed to calculate over 32 million different playing scenarios and is accurate to +1%. So be forewarned, your opponent is a formidable expert! TYPE A 320 Airbus Flight Sim Amberstar RPG Battle Toads Arcade Daemonsgate RPG History Line 1914-1918 Strategy Sim Hunter, Supremacy, Corporation ALL THREE for only Ishar: Legend of the Fortress RPG Reach for the Skies Right Sim. Robocop 3 Arcade Adventure Sabre Team Arcade Strategy Shadow Worlds RPGStrategy Sleepwalker Arcade Strategy Space Crusade RPG Strategy Street Fighter 2 Arcade Tornado Flight Simulator Flight Sim. Transarctica Strategy Sim. World Wrestle Federation 2 Simulation WWF, T2, The Simpsons ALL THREE for only Zool Arcade A Icon PG-5 G3OGDCE Arkanoid 2 Armor Alley Austerlitz Backgammon PC Bard's Tale 3 BAT Battlechess Baltletech 2 Bloodwych Centurion Colorado Collussus Bridge 4 Conan the Cimmaron Conflict: Europe Defender of the Crown Deluxe Strip Poker Die Hard 2 Drakkhan Elvira 2 EPIC F16 Falcon Fire Team 2200 Flight of the Intruder Floor 13 Fool's Errand Greg Norman Golf Heart of China Hero's Quest Hills Street Blues Hoverforce Imperium Jack Nicholas Greatest 18 Killing Cloud King of Chicago Mig 29 Fulcrum Monty Python Panza Kick Boxing Paperboy  Pit Fighter RBI Baseball 2 Realms Rocket Ranger Sinds of Fire Sargon 5 Shadowlands Shanghai 2 Sherman M-4 Sleeping Gods Lie Spell Casting 101 Spol Star Saga Two Stunt Car Racer Super Oll Road Super Space Invaders Three Stooges T.V. Sports Baseball T.V. Sports Basketball T.V. Sports Boxing T.V. Sports Football Trump Casino 2 Winter Super Sports 92 18.95 18.95 16.95 18.95 18.95 18.95 18.95 14.95 18.95 16.95 16.95 14.95 18.95 16.95 18.95 16.95 18.95 14.95 HYPER-BACKGAMMON\" uses fewer playing pieces than original backgammon, which makes the game faster, more exciting, and much more fun. You can easily master the basic offensive and defensive strategies, and soon you'll be testing your gambling instincts with the doubling cube! So, don't be surprised if you find it impossible to stop playing. But remember, in the lightning-fast world of HYPER-BACKGAMMON\", your fortunes may rise or fall with just one roll of the dice! EUROMAGS 18.95 Get the latest news on the best PC titles from Europe! These high gloss, full color magazines also feature a demo-packed playable cover disk with each issue! PC Format, PC Review, PC Zone, or PC Plus only $10 each. Available at your local CD-ROM dealer or call 1-310-659-6707. SHIPPING (UPS Ground) For up to 3 pieces, by payment: Mastercard & Visa $5.00.C.O.D. (Cash Only) $10.00 Next day & second day air available! Call for prices on special shipping. Shipping times not guaranteed. Price & Availability subject to change! No refunds or exchanges. Defective products exchanged with same item. Products warrantied through Sideline. 13.95 18.95 18.95 18.95 14.95 16.95 18.95 16.95 14.95 16.95 16.95 16.95 RM System Requirements: IC or S/? compatible com puter, CD-ROM drive that supports the ISO-9660 standard, with interface card, cable, and software, minimum 640K of RAM with 400K available. DOS 3.1 or later. VGA card and VGA color monitor. 16.95 FAX ORDERS CALL (305) 491-6134 Need Info? Call (305) 491-9519 Dealer Inquiries Invited! 840 N.W.57th Court, Ft. Lauderdale, FL 33309 21.95 14.95 18.95 14.95 18.95 16.95 HYPER BACKGAMMON 1991 ARCTO. INCAll rights reserved. Detributed by ROMTIME, a vam of ARCTG, INC TYPER-BACKGAMMON ROMTIME trademarks ARCTO, INC. All other trademarks are the property of tlucir tec Circle Reader Service #83 Circle Reader Service #84 "


"LEGENDS 04 FANTASY LITERATURE PRAISE A LEGENDARY NEW GAME ROGER ZELAZNY Author of The Prince of Chaos ANDRE NORTON Author of Witchuorld RAYMOND E.FEIST Author of The King's Buccaneet \"A rousing and engaging game where the wellhoned edge cuts wellBetrayal at Krondor.\" \"The idea of combining your game with a book seems to me to he enriching and I most heartily endorse it.\" \"I feel great pride and satisfaction that this beautiful piece of computer fiction was based upon my work.\" RAYMOND E. FRIST RIFTWAR LEGACY 0:0 XPERIENCE the cinematic intensity of Betrayal at Krondor, a revolutionary fantasy role-playing game based on the New York Times best-selling Riftwar Legacy books by Raymond E. Feist. Betrayal at Krondor launches all-new legends of Midkemia, a breathtaking mystical land. Elegant story-telling and revolutionary 3Space visuals immerse you in the most realistic, detailed fantasy ever created. ENDURE savage enemy combat. Opponents not only act but think using revolutionary artificial intelligence. SEE the wonders of Midkemia for the first time as over 2,500 frames of rotoscoped animation, exquisite hand-painted backgrounds and Dynamix's 3 Space technology combine to create a \"virtual\" fantasy. WIELD more than sixty unusual spells that unleash superhuman magical powers. g Betrayals 1. Rromdor Dynamix I do not know what first born In s mind, but the SHORE   IE CIn Lo  us though they can be TIELTS   ,  .  crush the hopPIRSCIU Dynam. Visit your local software retailer or call (800) 326-6654 to order. Circle Reader Service #87 "


"DBI Bill Hard Driving The Lane by Johnny L. Wilson the top of a list down instead of from the bottom up, this was unsettling to me, and I used the abbreviations. Unfortunately, this means extra keystrokes. If phrases like \"in the paint,\" \"nothing but net,\" and \"kisses the backboard\" stir one's blood, it is easy to identify with the enthusiasm of Bob Chaikin. His creation, B-Ball: Pro Basketball for the Computer (B-Ball), is an ideal game for those who can: remember Jerry West's half-court prayer at the buzzer in a post-season shoot-out with the Knicks of 20 years ago, chuckle over Darryl Dawkins backboard smashing spree of a little over a decade ago, or resonate with the sight of Clyde Drexler powering to the basker during today's battles of the NBA giants. B-Ball is a statistics-based, all-text basketball game that reflects Chaikin's fanatic devotion to basketball and accurate statistical replays. He had attempted to sell his statistical analyses of match-ups, performance characteristics, and statistical summaries to NBA franchises. His lack of success, to date, has allowed gamers to grab the game on the rebound. The game comes in two flavors, a single game version and a deluxe version. The latter is three games in one, since it not only features the single game version (the meat of the product from a gamer's standpoint), but a full season capacity (with a very friendly utility for drafting custom teams), and an NBA prediction utility. ball). One sets a line-up, selects from a menu of defensive options and establishes the defensive match-ups. An additional wrinkle is the capacity for setting the computer team's substitution pattern to follow a four-minute or six-minute rotation. Since B-Ball, like Haffner's classic text games before it, gives plenty of weight to the fatigue factor, this is an important option for those who like to play play games against artificial coaches. the flow of play is similar to the Haffner products in that the screen prints the line-up for the offense at the top of the screen, and the player-as-coach gets to determine where the plaver-as-ra the ball will be passed and when a player will Playmaking From this point on, the advantage has to go to B-Ball. Since real NBA coaches do not actually get to tell their players who to pass to at what moment, Chaikin has introduced a couple of new pages to the stat-game playbook. Those who want to call a game following a realistic mode of play can opt for an automatic passing option. With this choice in place, the program will determine the most realistic flow of the game according to the personnel in place and the defensive matchups. abbreviation for the position of the receiving player (eg. PG for point guard) or, as in Haffner, the number which corresponds to the position. If one opts to use the numbers, the older product makes more sense. Haffner numbers from the first player listed on the screen to the player listed at the bottom of the screen. Chaikin numbers the positions in a reverse order. Since I am used to reading from TITLE: B-Ball: Pro Basketball for the Computer SYSTEM: IBM PLAYERS: 0-2 PRICE: $29.95 (single game version) $95.00 (full version) PROTECTION: None DESIGNER: Bob Chaikin PUBLISHER: BOBBALL Inc. 1523 Felton Road South Euclid, OH 44121 (216) 291-9243 For control freaks\" like myself there is yet another design element. When an offensive team controls the ball in B-Ball, the line-up lists a PF (possession factor) for all players (which changes according to their playmaking possibilities) and gives a temporary PF in the play-by-play text for the player who is currently controlling the ball. The PF is a number from 0-3 that determines the oncourt player's level of control of offensive factors. The lower the PF, the easier it is for the on-court player to get the ball to the teammate he desires to shoot. So, Louie Dampier of the old Kentucky Colonels (ABA) might bring the ball down the court with a Game Plan In play, the single game version is much like Lance Haffner's basketball games (Basketball: The Pro Game and Final Four College BasketPage 48 Computer Gaming World "


"QUEST WITH REAL PEOPLE IN REAL TIME IN AN EPIC THAT'S AS REAL AS A FANTASY CAN GET! Eurogorurev KING HHRK Hetraiti Historen INVENTORY ITENS sarske UTA Loop Louieli Luaranna Histress MoonDang Nickadenus Pain Pure uince Sir Barthil sir arady 44 Welcome to the furion Tavern CLOSE Flatiron The Noctu Malo Human  16  n enos POSTS SORT SHOH SORT OPTIONS PLACES + Basilisk casts Blast on t'ia cavsing 200 Baskisks attack MAD causing 519 damage! anticore casts Lightning on AD Susing 65 mage! anticore attacks no causing 152 You see Orange Loc PICK (ou see Green Lockpick rou seer Refresh Scroll (ou see! Sovereign Scroll rou see: Rune Prism Choose Your Action Create your face and personality, modifying your skills, attributes, and character class. Then head out... ...And meet adventurers from all over the country. Form parties and battle monsters with might and magic, Save your stats and inventory at the end of each session. Your character grows every time you play. all itching to take on the dangers that wait in the dark corners of these dungeons. Host a Fantasy Role-Playing Convention in your computer. Welcome to the dungeons of Shadow of Yserbius, the new multiplayer fantasy role-playing epic on The Sierra Network: Join real people in real time as you search for the secrets of a 39 kingdom, buried by an ancient curse. Everyone you meet, friend or foe, could be a real-live person. High-Risk Quest, No-Risk Offer If you're 18 or older and have a PC and a modem, you can try Shadow of Yserbius FREE! Access to TSN is a local phone call from most of the continental U.S. Call today for a free trial membership kit and get started on the greatest adventure of all. At 57 an hour, Shadow of Yserbius | lets you play with adventurers from all over, all night, every night! Try it FREE! Call: 1-800-SIERRA-1 The Sierra Network An Epic Too Big for One Player. Meet thousands of other adventurers and form parties of up to four. Team up with a Wizard from Wisconsin, a Knight from New Jersey, or a Cleric from Colorado. Talk to Elves, Trolls, Orcs, Dwarfs, Gnomes, and even a few humans from all over America, Oller # 268 with a wides of up And all weekend, too!) PART OF THE SIERRA FAMILY e les entradeso por ceringen aning proteins Price based on baste 30 hour evening and weekend package of $12.95 + S4 monthly access to Medievaland. e Reader Service H18 "


"Deview PF of 2. If Artis Gilmore at center and Maurice Lucas at strong forward are rated at PF 1 and PF 2 respectively, that means that it is significantly harder for Dampier to get the ball to Gilmore in the paint. However, it would be logical for a PF 2 point guard to pass the ball to the PF 2 strong forward. In our example, Dampier passes to Lucas and Lucas elects not to go for the shot. However, the text rates Lucas at a PF of o, indicaring that he has excellent playmaking position. Since everyone else on the team is going to have a PF of 0 or higher, this means that Lucas would have no trouble passing the ball to anyone. The alert gamer notes that Gilmore and Dampier both have PFs of 0 at the moment. As the \"hands-on\" player coach, he can clect to have Lucas pass to Gilmore for what would presumably be a quick two points or pass it out to Dampier to try for either two or three. If the gamer elects to have Dampier try for three, he/she simply adds an \"x\" to the command for Lucas to pass to Dampier. In this case, I would type gx. Someone using the number commands would type x. nouncer cliches in B-Ball. Players ger «nothing but net\" and \"swish\" when they play the string music of putting the ball straight in. One player \"elbows his way to the rebound\" and another \"pulls down the defensive rebound.\" Fouling players \"grab» and «trip\" and defending players \"reject\" and \"goaltend.\" Some teams \"slow it down as they bring the ball up the court and others \"fast is the ball up the court and others fast break,\" depending on the personnel in play. Sometimes the team is called by its nickname, others by the city where they are located. Also, since the game is strictly ASCII, statistics and box scores are easy to print. One can print the screen (using the Print Screen kcy) or one can wait until the entire game is resolved and use the built-in print utility. In the latter case, even the single game version allows one to save the results to disk. I like this versatility. throughout, I left players in the entire game (except in the case of one injury) and there was no degradation of performance at the half. Indeed, the fatigue factor did not come into play until late in the fourth quarter. I would like to see enough impact in the first half that one would be forced to substitute realistically. Another factor which may be a disappointment to some gamers is the inability to design and save set plays. Though the manual passing option allows one to have more control than a real coach, many NBA fans would probably like the opportunity to save a playbook in advance and be able to interrupt the automatic passing game by calling those ser plays at various times. No texr game has yet allowed this, however, so one cannot give too much weight to this consideration at the moment. Nevertheless, one would have to give the overall nod to B-Ball. With its capacity to predict NBA games, resolve entire seasons in 30 minutes to an hour, and its robust playmaking model, it is a statistics buff's dream. Plus, Chaikin offers a tremendous library of season disks to choose from. If one is more interested in performance results than graphic on-screen portrayals of action, B-Ball has to be a contender. CGW Net Result Play-By-Play The text descriptions in B-Ball also seem more robust than those in the older games. There seems to be a wider variety of anIndeed, the only area where I might fault the program is in the way it numbers the positions from bottom to top (for passing) and the way it handles fatigue. The fatiguc factor was well-handled in the Haffner games. It is present in B-Ball. I deliberately played two equivalent teams and managed both in order to rest out the fatigue model. Whereas Haffner's games forced one to substiture COMPUTER SPORTS GAMES IBM APPLE IL C-64 \"The Informative PBM Magazine\" Do your know what PBM (Play-By-Mail) gaming is? If you don't, we can help you explore the world of PBM gaming. Paper Mayhem has been leading the way for over 9 years by informing people about PBM gaming. Articles, reviews, biographies and more fill each issue. Not to mention the ratings of PBM games and companies that our readers participate in. Paper Mayhem has been improving with the ever expanding hobby of PBM gaming since 1983. Each bimonthly issue brings you the latest on PBM news. So why delay and miss out on all the fun? Read Paper Mayhem and take advantage of PBM gaming. Send subscriptions to: PAPER MAYHEM Dept CG 1518 Adams Street Ottawa, IL 61350-4770 US Subscriptions: Single issue $5.00 1 year $24.00 2 year $42.00 THE MOST REALISTIC STRATEGY/SIMULATION COMPUTER GAMES ON THE MARKET TODAY! FULL COUNT BASEBALL You manage all 26 most recent teams and 52 great past teams  45 man roster Stats compiler. Complete boxscore to screen/printer. Input your own teams, draft or trade players. Wind/Weather Option. You choose starting line-up, batting order, bunt for a hit, steal, DH option and much, much more! BASKETBALL THE PRO GAME You're the coach and you choose line-ups, shot selection, style of play and much more. Stats compiler . Full team and individual player stats kept for up to an 82 game schedule. All players rated by actual statistics and tendencies 27 current teams and over 190 great teams from the past included! ORDER TODAY! Mail check or money order for $39.95 each for Apple II and C-64 or $19.95 for IBM. You may call in and order with VISA or Master Card. Please add $3.00 for shipping and handling. For more information, call or write for a free brochure. LANCE HAFFNER GAMES FOREIGN SUBSCRIPTIONS: 1 year Canada $31.00; 1 year to Europe $51.00: 1 year to Australia $57.00. All Subscriptions to PAPER MAYHEM are to be paid in US funds and drawn from US banks. Foreign subscriptions are asked to use Intemational Money Order in US funds. P.O. BOX 100594. NASHVILLE, TN 37224 615/366-8088 1-800-477-7032 Circle Reader Service #77 Circle Reader Service #63 Page 50 Computer Gaming World "


"PICK-UP THE PHONE AND PICK TWO GAMES FREE! AP Sierra Discovery Series PRE-MEADING SKILLS ALPHABSA A-C-LS CHPIC SPACE QUEST V (We Talk! UBE FRONT PAGE SP The Next Vina Het V AV. CONEJOSONROW SIERRA 1-800-877-1995 ROBERTA WILLIAMS SIERRA Choose any Two Sierra Games when you switch to Sprint directory assistance, customer service, even instant credit for wrong numbers. And we do it 24 hours a day! Sprint long-distance service just became more valuable up to $159.95 more! Now, when you switch your home long-distance service to Sprint, you can select any Sierra game, free! And after enjoying six months of highquality long-distance, you'll receive a second Sierra game or one month of free long-distance service. * Only Sprint can offer you a nationwide 100% digital, fiber optic network that provides the long-distance quality and reliability you need. Experience for yourself Sprint's \"fiber optic\" clarity that makes both your longdistance calls and PC data transmissions crystal clear and error free. But unsurpassed call and data clarity is just one of the many benefits you will enjoy as a Sprint customer... calls each month to whomever they talk to the most, including international calls-even if the called person is with a competitive long-distance carrier. The Most will also provide automatic 20 percent discounts on all calls to Sprint's millions of customers, anytime and anywhere. When the most frequently called, number in a given month is a Sprint customer, Sprint will combine both discounts for an effective overall savings of 36 percent on calls to that number.** No Risk Guarantee Your satisfaction is guaranteed: we'll pick up the cost of switching your long distance to Sprint, and will even pay to switch you back if you are not completely satisfied. (Some restrictions apply.) So why not sign up for Sprint and receive the clarity, savings and service you want while getting two Sierra games you enjoy? Save on Long Distance When You're away from home too! Sprint's FONCARDS travel card lets you continue to take advantage of clear calling and savings even when you're away from home. Plus the FONCARD is free, with cards available to every member of your family. Sprint SERRA \"The Most\" A Unique Calling Plan Sprint offers an unprecedented longdistance calling plan called \"The Mostam\" available now for all customers. The Most will save Sprint customers 20 percent on already low rates on their The Service You Deserve At Sprint, we make no compromises when it comes to dependable, personal service we do it all; operator services, Circle Reader Service #89 * Offer valid only in the U.S. and for new Sprint customers. Not valid for FONCARD only orders. Certain restrictions apply. Free month is up to $25 usage on 4th month invoice. To qualify for a second game or free month of long-distance the customer must bill $20 per month in 3 of the first 6 months. ** THE MOST discounts apply to intra-state calls only where authorized. "


"Scorpion's Mail Daughter of Serpents Veil of Darkness Forge of Virtue Ultima VII Crusaders Of The Dark Savant Indiana Jones/Atlantis Spellcasting 301 Eric The Unready Ultima Underworld II rell, here we are with summer just and everyone has the same problem; namely, that, a new method for taking it on the lam around the corner (it's the one there finding the real amulet in the Test of Truth. has to be found. There are a couple of times on your left). But if summer is here. That's not surprising, as it's a tricky matter. when an item comes in handy, but most exits can autumn be far behind? Let's hope not, Look for a secret door near to where you enter rely on spells. So, be familiar with your spellbecause the mail room isn't air-conditioned the test, and that will put you on the road to book, and remember that there's one spell that Can't even bring in a wheelie unit with all what you're after. can modify other spells to have different efthese mail sacks around. At least we did manUltima VII: Some players manage to get fects. Don't be afraid to experiment! age to neaten up the piles since your last visit. into the secret caves behind Buccaneer's Den Eric The Unready: The hardest part of this Before we get to the good stuff, a word or early in the game (far sooner than they're game is to keep from laughing so hard and get supposed to), and wonder why they can't find on with playing it. Still, there are a couple of month for letters. Next issue, I will go into Hook. Well, you're never going to find him places where what to do isn't exactly obvious. more detail on that, but it is enough to say for there, no matter when in the game you visit the bar with Bruce the Waiter, for instance. now that somehow I managed to mix up some those caves. You only catch up to him and the Patience is a virtue here, but that by itself isn't unanswered mail with older, answered letters rest of the merry crew (Elizabeth, Abraham, enough. As anyone who lives in New York and (ahem) threw them out. Really sorry and the gargoyle) at the very end. I also knows, any waiter or waitress under the age of about that, folks. Neatening the piles does wouldn't advise running off to the final dun90 is an aspiring actor or actress. Keep that in have its dangers. geon right away if you've gotten into the caves mind and read a book while you wait (heh). So, if you wrote to me in February and early; you're likely to come to an unpleasant Ultima Underworld II: The Void is the last didn't get a reply, that's probably the reason end without the right items in your inventory of the eight worlds and, in some ways, the (that or you didn't include a SASE; some Crusaders Of The Dark Savant: Getting most difficult. Some people aren't sure of people still don't put them in, however many into Murkatos's Outer Sanctum at the Orc what's going on in this weird place, or what into Murkatos's Ourer Sanctum at the Orc what's going on in thi times I mention it). The year did not get off castle is giving some players a hard time. Well, exactly has to be done. It's a confusing area, to a promising start. Anyway, enough about that blood stain in the corridor is there for a to be sure. The main thing here is to follow that for now; let's get to the main event. reason. Then, if you polish up your thinking the various colored paths one at a time Daughter of Serpents: The hint here is to and reflect on the situation, you just might through the moongates until you reach the watch out for this product. It isn't so much a find the door open to you. And getting into pyramid of blocks. Then, you get to play game as a computerized novelette. While the that room is quite important, so don't skip it. Q-bert and change the pyramid to the same story is interesting, and there are minor variIndiana Jones/Atlantis: Those taking the color as the path that led you here. Be sure to end at the top, because a moongate will show about 20 minutes or so. While playing it, I trouble persuading Mr. Trottier to hand over up there when the whole pyramia nas to be someone s idea for a his stone, particularly when Sophia is doing changed. The pyramid has to be done four Call of Cthulhu scenario that they thought her mumbo-jumbo spirit acr. Everything goes times, once for each path that leads you there. would make a neat-o computer game. Well, fine until she has to guess how many fingers Well, that's about it for this look into the maybe it would, but not in this implementahe's holding up behind his back. Well folks, mailbag. In the meantime, if you need help tion. Caveat emptor! that's the nasty parc: there isn't any way of with an adventure game, you can reach me in Veil of Darkness: Veil is still pretty new as knowing, you just have to guess and hope the following ways: I write this. It's a fairly simple and fun game, you're right. Even more irritating, the number e right. Even more irritating, the number On Delphi: stop by the GameSIG, under which gave me no problems until the confronis picked randomly cach time Sophia guesses; picked randomly each time Sophia guesses; the Groups and Clubs menu. tation with the vampire at the end. Then I had it isn't always the same. So unless you want to a lot of trouble, until I found out about somekeep on saving and restoring until you get On Genie: visit the Games Round Table thing I had missed in the swamps; namely a lucky, it's better to let Indy do this one. (type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT). sinkhole. Even when I knew it was there, it vas there, it Spellcasting 301: Breaking jail is fun stuff. By US Mail (enclose a self-addressed. was very difficult to make out. So, if you're right? No? Well, get used to it, because Ernie stamped envelope if you live in the United playing this one, watch for that sinkhole; you will find himself behind bars several times a States or possessions): Scorpia, PO Box 338, can't win the game without going down there. few players have learned this already). What Gracie Station, New York, NY 10028. Forge of Virtue: Many letters on this one, ever way he uses can only be used once; after Until next time, happy adventuring! CGW Page 52 Computer Gaming World "


"Twice The Mind-Munching Madness With Two Interactive Imps. \"... you will want to snatch this one up. Its intelligent design and cute good looks will hook you right from the start.» -Game Players Magazine «... a delightful mix of adventure and puzzle gaming that will leave your gray matter positively fried.» Video Games and Computer Entertainment FEATURES FROM THE CREATORS OF GOBLIIINS Teamwork. It sounds like a great idea, but when you put these two whimsical imps together the results are more hilarious than productive. You will take control of Winkle and Fingus who are on a mission to rescue the King's son from the clutches of evil. They must work together as they take on a whole smorgasbord of twisted traps, maniacal monsters and perplexing puzzles. It won't be easy, and don't let their size fool you. These are two imps with a serious attitude. Simultaneous multi-character mouse control.  Highly animated characters with hilarious and often unpredictable personalities. Humorous sound effects and lively background music. Seven brain-busting episodes each with up to five interconnected scenes. ... as puzzling as a Rubik's Cube with a bad attitude.\" -The Newark Advocate TM GOBL: NS 2 V You control two new hilarious imps... ..As you unravel brain-bending puzzles... ...and face off with really weird folks. PICK IT UP AT YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE DEALER, OR CALL 1-800-326-6654 7am-7pm (PST) Monday-Friday / Outside U.S. Call 209-683-4468 8am-5pm (PST) Monday-Friday COKTEL VISION Circle Reader Service #90 Part of the Sierra Family "


"The Rumor Bag But, I Don't Want to be on T.V.! CGW's Bag-Guy Seduced by The «Dark» Side of The Farce by Mike Rooney Kronkite It was not the type of scene I was expecting, not only trying to fix Darklands completely ordered the cameraman to zoom in. \"Hey, I The entire crew of that prime time news with their version 7 update, but that they were didn't even get to mention Dynamix' submashow was crowding into my office. I heard working on a hot, new cyberpunk game called rine simulation, tentatively called Sea Wolves, some technician complaining about needing Blood Net as well. or even their Japanimation-style robot comtime to white balance the shot and the host Before he could ask another question, I bat game. They both have terrific graphics.\" starred rattling off questions at hyperspeed as attempted to change the subject. \"If you want He zeroed in on his agenda. \"Ever notice I sunk into my chair with a dejected slump. something that's really news,\" I said, \"you that all these companies that had worker reSomeone had told this crew of investigative ought to ask about the upcoming game from ductions have the word 'Dark' in, at least, one journalists about a conspiracy in the enterPapyrus Software.\" title? In fact, the same thing happened to a tainment software industry and that I was a \"Who?\" he asked, as I knew he would pen-and-paper game company with a game conspiracy buff. So, they invaded my basecalled Dark Conspiracy. Maybe there is somement office in the massive Golden Empire \"The developers who designed and programmed Indianapolis 500: The Simulation Publications building to get my thoughts on thing about that word? Maybe there is a 'dark the matter. conspiracy?\" for Electronic Arts. They are planning to release an open-axle racing game which reI tried to change the thrust. I told him that \"Could I deny that Strategic Simulations, tains some of the feel of Indy, but offers much LucasArts was finally going to publish that Inc. had laid off almost 20% of the company, improved graphics and a whole list of features Sam & Max: Freelance Police game I had largely over delays in their Dark Sun prodthat weren't even considered during its proalways wanted to see, the one based on Steve uct?» I told them that delay had hurt a lot of duction.\" Purcell's short-lived Comico comic book. people, but I was more excited about Gary He seemed placated for a moment, but \"You know,\" I reminded him,\"the characters Grigsby's War in Russia. The monster game seemed unsatisfied when I told him that the satirized in the costume shop for LeChuck's will do for the CGW Hall of Fame game War game hadn't been named, pending the signRevenge?\" He didn't. in Russia) what Gary Grigsby's Pacific Wardid ing of a license with a major racing team. The I informed him that Mallard Software was to the old 8-bit War in the Pacific gamereporter opened his mouth to ask another going to release an enhanced version of Wesbring it into the '90s (and MS-DOS world) question, but I interrupted to throw him offson's Lunar Commander. He didn't bite. I and provide the kind of accessible and custobalance. told him that they had an air traffic controller mizable challenge one finds in PW. \"Did I tell you that Virgin Games is dissimulation called \"Tower\" on the books that The television interviewer wouldn't let up. cussing scenarios for Dune IR. How about the would connect lots of flight simulation fanar\"How about MicroProse? Didn't they let fact that they're planning a Sega Genesis verics. I told him that they were going to publish 10% of their employees go? Might that not sion of Dune IR.\" When that stopped him for voice command modules for F-117A Stealth have something to do with their Darklands a moment, I followed up with some more Fighter, Comanche: Maximum Overkill and product?\" I told him that the company was news from Virgin. \"They're also planning to Flight Simulator 4, bundled with a headser. publish a CD-ROM version of a game called He wouldn't take the hint. Curse of Enchantia.\" I was losing him. He How could I get rid of this guy and get back COMPUTER WARGAMES glanced back at his notes and I blurted out to work before my editor killed me? I faked Historically Accurate...Easy To Use \"They're doing Caesar's Palace for Windows!\" it. It was just like an NBC newscast. «Ever For IBMT PC and Compatibles The latter might have been good news for hear of I-Motion's Alone in the Dark?\" I gamers, but it didn't seem to do much for the asked. His eyes widened. «They did it. They BIG THREE la GRANDE (V 2.01) ARMEE broadcast news personality joined in league with H.P. Lovecraft's Og. WWII Strategy Game Napoleon's Campaigns \"Then, tell me about Sierra and Dynamix. Suggoth demon and caused the other compaSeven Scenarios, Map Seven Scenarios, Map Didn't they reduce their work force by 10%\" nies to have to lay off employees.\" World-Renown 11 New Release Hard Drive Required || Challenging, Intense he queried. «Why?\" he asked with great gravity. European Theatre Austerlitz to Waterloo \"Sure,\" I responded, but there is still going «Why?\" I answered, «so that they could be $25 Each. Send check or money order to: to be good stuff coming out. I started listing alone in the dark.\" I didn't tell him that there SDJ Enterprises, Inc. titles, \"There's Freddie Pharkus, Frontier was no conspiracy. It would have ruined the Department C (14)966-5602 Pharmacist.\" He already knew. \"There's Quest episode to mention that CyberDreams' Dark 1551 Fawn Valley Dr. Evenings Only for Glory IV: Shadows of Darkness.\" I struck a Seed won an SPA award. And, of course, I St. Louis, MO 63131 Specify 3.5\" or 5.25\" disk nerve. He wrote everishly on his notepad and wanted to be on television. CGW Circle Reader Service #101 Page 54 Computer Gaming World "


"Full Aloxing w al character El Camisa From the Creator of Leisure Suit Larry Frontier Pharmacist FREDDY PHARKAS Trontier Pharmacist SIERRA SIERRA We're Looking For People Who Like To Draw. They call him Freddy Pharkas, Frontier Pharmacist. He was born to be a gunslinger. But when he met his match, he gave it all up for a life in pharmacology. Now his arch enemy is back. And Freddy learns life's hardest lesson, you can't hide behind a pharmacy counter. Al Lowe, the creator of Leisure Suit Larry has gleefully pillaged the plots of every old Hollywood Western and stolen er, created the legend of Freddy Pharkas, a stirring Western sage of cowboys and Indians, banditos and mysterious strangers, women of ill repute and the men who repute them. With his faithful Indian sidekick, Srini Bagdnish, Freddy's aiming for clean up Coarsegold once and for all. And woe to any cliché that stands in his way. Play the only computer game that hands you a loaded six-gun and doesn't teach you how to use it. Freddy Pharkas, Frontier Pharmacist. And see if you're as good with a gun as you are with a mouse. SIERRA See your local retailer or call 1-800-326-6654. Circle Reader Service #91 "


"Deuneun 4001: Chess Odyssey Interplay Takes to Space in Battle Chess 4000 by Jay Kee hypnotized, tricked and hugged to death. This is cartoon violence, mostly harmless and very funny; the characters deliver punch lines, facial expressions and sound effects with an uncanny sense of timing. BATTLE CHESS AURIE Human hess isn't supposed to be fun. It's tough In this version of the grand old classic, a to learn, impossible to master. It's nameless Grand Master (the player) has been deep, mysterious, intriguing and chaltransported through time to the year 4000 lenging—anything but fun. and deposited on a space station in earth Fun is for kids. Fun is for carnivals, video orbit. Within the station is an arena housing games and vacations. Chess is for serious a huge, translucent chessboard. On the board study, intense concentration, deep thinking. is the strangest collection of characters ever It conjures up images of silent clubs decorated assembled. Gone are the standard inanimate in leather and wood; of opponents hunched medieval icons. In their place is a cast of over their boards, faces etched in frowns of characters right out of a Buck Rogers novel. intellectual effort. Why, the very thought of each outfitted in a strange and unique mansomeone laughing out loud boggles the mind. ner, equipped with strange and unique weapOf course, that's exactly what happens ons, and harboring a strange and unique sense of humor. when one plays Battle Chess 4000, a new and delightfully irreverent installment in InterInstead of pawns, there are cute alien play's Battle Chess series. One laughs...a lot. worms; bishops have been replaced by mad scientists with infectious giggles and bizarre wands; 300:04:1 knights have become spaceship captains and rooks have been transformed into huge robots that could best be described as a cross between a Transformer and a Battle Mech. The humanoid King and Queen are almost ordinary by comparison, but their repertoire of weapons and skills are anything but ordinary. In this game, there's none of that pawn-takes-pawn stuff. Pieces aren't just captured—they're tickled, vacuumed, blasted, melted, om TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: PLAYERS: PROTECTION: PRODUCERS: PUBLISHER: Battle Chess 4000 IBM $59.95 1 or 2 (Head-to-head and modem play) Documentation Look-up Brian Fargo, Scott Bieser Interplay Productions Irvine, CA (714) 553-6678 Page 56 Computer Gaming World "


"Chat Hub 3:25 8 X X 7112 X cunction    a efo formance on a slower machine is likely going to be less than optimal. BC4000 supports all the standard options: mouse control, take-back moves, time clocks, autoplay, swap sides, print moves and so on, but it includes some not-so-standard variations that make it fun to play. There's one that lets players rewind a game to the beginning, fast forward it to the last move played, or replay it from any position. There's another that gives players the opportunity to grade themselves on the Elo scale (named after professor Arpad Elo, who designed it) by testing them on 24 chess positions. Also, if playing against the computer isn't enough of a challenge, another option lets players use a modem to play against another person over the phone line. No, But Seriously... While Battle Chess 4000 is unquestionably a comical and thoroughly entertaining game, it does have a serious side. Hidden just below the surface is a surprisingly sophisticated chess program with all the features any serious player could hope for. Under normal circumstances, most people would consider watching a game of chess to be roughly equivalent to watching paint dry. I have several chess sets, a dedicated chess computer, one or two computer chess games, and have played at both the club and tournament levels. Not once have family or friends shown an inclination to sit down and watch. With Battle Chess 4000, however, the first game out of the box drew a crowd. And the crowd loved it. This is a dangerous game; it should have a funny, it's distracting. Players will spend library of over 300.000 moves. Openings are more time laughing at the antics of the chardetermined by three user-definable parameacters on the board than concentrating on ters: Random, Strength and Popularity. The position or tactics. It's also very slow. It takes first introduces a randomizing element; the time for these characters to move from place second derermines how strong or weak the to place and even more time to knock one opening will be, and the third determines another off. how common or uncommon it will be. PlayFortunately, the designers were thoughtful ers can set these to whatever configuration enough to include a 2-D option with conven and degree they wish, thereby controlling the tional chess pieces displayed on a conven aggressiveness and unpredictability of the tional board. Without it, patience would soon game. With the Learning option, BC4000 wear thin, and chances of winning at any level can record and store any particularly strong would be greatly diminished. opening variations. These moves are then written to a supplementary file and subLooking Good sequently included as part of the program's opening book. This gives the program a nearVisually, the SVGA version of Battle Chess human capacity for adapting to the skills of 4000 is a treat. Words like \"stunning\" and the player, a feature that can really make life \"awesome\" are used so often as to become interesting. trite. Sometimes, however, those words are Equally interesting is the unorthodox not only justified, they're an understatement. method of setting skill levels. Program Battle Chess 4000 is one of those cases. The strenoth is not simply determined by a pr SVGA graphics are razor sharp and crystal scale, but divided into Weak and Strong cateclear, and the animated movements are gories and controlled by independent varismooth and natural, and are enhanced by ables. Selecting Weak opposition brings up a bles. Selecting Weak opposition brings up digitized sound effects that pack the punch of a movie soundtrack. There is, however, a catch. The SVGA version is a memory hog, requiring a minimum of 600K conventional memory, at least 1 megabyte of expanded (EMS) memory and a fat 14-plus megabytes of disk space. It also needs a fast computer-a 386SX/16 MHz or better. Running on a 386/33 system under DOS 5.0, with 4 megabytes of RAM, and Qualitas' 386-Max memory manager, the program was clean and well-mannered, with       few interruptions from disk-accesses. Permenu of 10 levels, ranging from beginner to intermediate. Choosing Strong brings up an advanced level with five time-control options, each with its own unique degree of difficult. Of the five, Tournament is the strongest and most aggressive level. In this setting, the program actually manages time according to the difficulty of the position, spending less time in obvious situations and saving it for complex positions and endgame play. An extension of this capability, and one of the factors that makes Battle Chess 4000 a formidable opponent, is the Thinking option. When this is turned on, the program uses the time a player spends thinking to predict the next move and plan an appropriate response, in much the same way a human player operates. When it guesses right, the response is made immediately and time is saved for future use. The result is a faster-running program, with the percentage of correct guesses producing an equivalent increase in speed. According to Interplay, BC4000 will guess right 30% of the time, which translates into a 30% increase in speed. Another factor that significantly improves Baule Chess 4000's speed and performance is its use of a hash table. Basically, hash tables (or transposition tables, as they're often called) permit a program to score information about a position and then compare that to other positions during a game. Whenever an identical position is reached, the information from the hash table is used to generate a move, climinating the need to search the position all over again. As a game progresses and the number of identical positions increases, the gain in speed and performance is substantial; the endgame, a classic weakness in chess programs, is improved dramatically. All of this adds up to a killer program, one that easily justifies Interplay's claim of an Elo rating of 2000—a Candidate Master class, under the USCF system. Battle Chess 4000 has transformed chess from a stuffy, intellectual exercise into a game that is fun to play. It combines great comedy, superb graphics, and a serious chess game without compromising anything along the way. It can be played for laughs or played for real. It can satisfy the kid or the Grand Master in all of us. Cow 000 07:21 * WHITE bogenoemd. June 1993 Page 57 "


"pevneu the VvbenDXU7:13 Conspiracy The Kshan, Conspirogdom Ubista 21st Century Los Angeles seen in Blade Runner, and the seamy, hard-edged world of George Alec Effinger's Budaycen. Roma Il is composed of six sectors, each sector being a gameworld in miniature. The soaring towers of the business sector can only be reached by flying taxi, while the northern market section offers gamers a chance to buy a variety of goods. In the tourist sector, a video arcade offers three video games-much like the games Breakout, Chinese Checkers, and a bizarre water, pipes and buckets game—which the player can use to increase funds. Having a healthy supply of monetary units on hand is essential to success, so players would be well advised to spend a substantial amount of time visiting the arcade and bartering with NPCs to raise the required funds. THE s a literary genre, cyberpunk has emerged as an exciting subculture in the realm of traditional science fiction, The works of William Gibson (Neuromancer), Walter Jon Williams (Hard Wired), Bruce Sterling (Mirror Shades), George Alec Effinger (When Gravity Fails) and many other talenred writers have helped make cyberpunk one of the fastest growing segments in popular fiction. Even film has joined the cyberpunk bandwagon: Ridley Scott's cult classic Blade Runner, adapted from Philip K. Dick's novel Do androids dream of electric sheep, castBA72 is five times larger than the original and Harrison Ford as a troubled android killer in I found no evidence to dispute this claim. futuristic Los Angeles. Stephen King's recent BAT2 begins with the player either selectLawnmower Man film visually demonstrated ing a pre-generated agent or creating a new the concept of cyberspace in a convincing one from scratch. After a brief training period fashion. to increase attributes, the player's agent is sent In the software industry, the increasing into the fray. The goal of the agent is depopularity of cyberpunk has not gone unnoscribed in a 14-page scenario booklet. In esticed. Infocom's Circuit's Edge brought sence, the player's agent has been sent to George Alec Effinger's seamy and exotic Roma II, a city on the planet Shedishan where Budayeen to computer gamers a few years a large corporation, Koshan Inc., is attemptago. Interplay's Neuromancer adapted Wiling to control the production of Echiatone liam Gibson's novel of the same name, while 21, a valuable mineral. The player must Dynamix's Rise of the Dragon took visual and thwart the schemes of Koshan Corp. and stylistic cues from Blade Runner. Almost unassume control of the Echiatone 21 supply. noticed in the growing software cyberpunk After arriving in Roma Il and meeting the market, Ubisoft's BT (Bureau of Astral BAT contact, the player begins the game Troubleshooters) was a quirky and intriguing proper. BA72 is roughly divided into three product released in 1990, which was unfortubroad gaming segments. In the first, the nately hobbled by a variety of minor design player must obtain, by any means necessary, the deeds which grant ownership of Bedhin foibles and defects. 6, the natural satellite of Shedishan that conLearning from the shortcomings of their tains the majority of Echiatone 21 deposits. first foray into the U.S. computer gaming After that goal is accomplished, the player will market, Ubisoft has now released BAT 11: have the opportunity to fight in gladiatorial The Koshan Conspiracy (BAT2). Although games, journey into space, and undertake a BAT2 shares many design elements with its variety of other actions in the last two segpredecessor, it is clearly a superior product. ments. Instead of the relatively constrictive gaming When In Roma... environs of BAT, BAT2 gives gamers a huge, multi-faceted game world in which the player Gamers will spend most of their playing must find the people, items and information time in the city of Roma II-a grimy, polluneeded to succeed. The designers claim that tion-choked metropolis which resembles the KOSHAN CONSPIRACY A Thrilling Role Playing Adventure AUBISOFT Litertainment Software TITLE: SYSTEMS: REVIEWED ON: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: The Koshan Conspiracy Amiga, IBM IBM $49.95 Documentation Lookup Computer's Dream Ubisoft Sausalito, CA (415) 332-8749 Page 58 Computer Gaming World "


"Stop playing with yourself Trv interactive on-line games with a money back guarantee. With interactive games, you're not playing with yourself or against a computer .. you're head to head with a living, thinking human being who's playing for keeps. And NVN brings you the best interactive value, with the most popular on-line games at lower rates. Travel to the Island of Kesmai\" in a role-playing, multi-player game that will stretch the limits of your imagination ... create your own character in the fantasy world of Aradath and fight off magical spells and fierce martial arts warriors ... or manipulate space and time in your quest to conquer a planet in Galaxy II, the ultimate test of your strategic and logistic skills :** So quit playing with yourself. How to register Membership is just $5.95 a To register on-line, set your comm software to 1200,2400 or month*; AND YOU HAVE A 9600 bps, N-8-1, and full duplex. Dial 1-800-336-9092. When MONEY-BACK GUARANTEE. connected enter CG93RR and press <RETURN>. Then enter Plus, our premium on-line name, address and Visa, MasterCard, Discover Card or American Express number. Your Starter Kit will be mailed charges are only $6/hr nonright away. prime time, and $9/hr during For more information, call 1-800-336-9096. prime time! | Risk-free. Satisfaction guaranteed. NATIONAL VIDEOTEX Membership fee refunds are limited to $6.96 and do not apply to connect changes for remium services or connect and surcharges for remium Mus services Mditional charges due to itse s s of Premium Services offer applies to first time Members One per Membership per household Subscription fee is $5,36 per month. Prices and service content are subject to change National Videotex is a service mark of Natural Videotex Network, Corp. All others are for identification purposes only and belong to their respective companies of organizations Indicates Premium Service Circle Reader Service #97 "


"Deview BOB THI TIALIZATION or CHAT SOM TOU IN THE CITY, THERE ARE THE MAIN CORPORATE OFFICES OF THE LEADING ROMAN COMPANIES. ASHANTO NORTHL SECTOR SPORTAS All of the game elements are wrapped up in a unique, mouse-controlled interface. Everything is viewed from a first-person perspective, with the gamer seeing things with the agent's eye. As the mouse-pointer moves around the screen, its shape changes to reflect possible game actions. For example, moving the pointer to the edge of the screen changes it to an arrow, allowing the player can move in that direction. Moving the pointer over non-player characters (NPCs) turns it into a set of moving lips, making conversation possible. Using this \"multi-mode» point-andclick system, players can use services and vehicles, and purchase supplies and weapons. Conversing with NPCs is straightforward; after clicking on an NPC, a window opens displaying all of the NPCs which can be spoken to, while a scrollable list of topics fills the bottom center of the window. Other options allow players to fight with, steal from, and hire NPCs. Clicking on a topic will elicit a response from the NPC; if the NPC has a comment on the topic, a scrics of dialogue balloons will impart information to the player. Words highlighted in red can be clicked upon for further information, allowing players to direct the flow of any conversation. New terms learned from NPCs are stuck into the topic list. While this system seems very workable at first, it quickly becomes cumbersome as more topics are added. Since topics aren't listed alphabetically, players can spend an inordinate amount of time scanning through the topic list. As in most role-playing games, conversation sometimes degenerates into outright conflict. BAT2 offers two combat options: strategic and action. In strategic mode (essential if the player has managed to hire a mob of hirelings) the player may place characters in a tactical fashion. The action option resembles a shooting game like Operation Wolf, with the player moving an on-screen crosshair to target and fire at running, diving and jumping opponents. craft similar to the flying squad cars seen in the film Blade Runner, used to reach the lofty skyscraper runways in the business sector of Roma II. The \"katatruck\" vehicle is functionally identical to the mosquito, although it is used solely by the player to perform a little breaking and entering. In later segments of the game, the player gets some time behind the controls of a small spacecraft and an asteroid-tunneling machine. Even at the highest detail settings, all of the simulators are visually rather plain; gamers the effective portrayal of a grimy, overpopuseeking to zoom around the world of BAT2 lated city of the future. The graphics even with Falcon 3.0-style realism will be sorely change to reflect day and night cycles; a disappointed. The mosquito taxi and the grimy, vermin-infested alleyway during the \"mosca\" via-express vehicle can be automated day becomes a corridor girded by coruscating by hiring a chauffeur to drive the vehicle neon burst of light at night. about. Whichever vehicle the player chooses, one will see ray-traced animations of the veBionic Buddies hicle landing, lifting off, or otherwise changing location. W hile real-world computer users fumble with palmtop PCs, battery-hungry laptops, Ghosts In The Machine and other nascent attempts at portable comAlthough a vast improvement over the puting, the player's agent in BAT2 has the original BAT in both size and scope, BAT2 ultimate in totable processing power: the still has its own share of problems. Aside from Bidirectional Organic Bioputer (or BOB, for the cumbersome text handling and bareshort). This wonder of futuristic technology bones simulators, a few other defects should is embedded in the left arm of the player's serve to irritate gamers. While most adventure agent, serving the role of fully programmable computer with a variety of functions. In adgames today allow lengthy save game descripdition to keeping tabs on the physical welltions, BAT2 restricts players to a meager eight being of an agent, BOB offers five cybernetic letters for their save-game mnemonic. Furimplants which can grant an agent a variety ther, spelling and grammatical errors are far of special abilities. The ATS34 implant keeps too common in the game documentation; the agent awake for long periods, Morpho L7 even the scrolling text introduction contains can alter the agent's physical appearance, an embarrassing number of spelling errors. In terms of gameplay, some players may dislike while other implants allow the agent to heal wounds, activate night vision, and even genthe wide open, \"anything goes\" approach that erate a tingling \"Spiderman sense\" which Ubisoft has used in BAT2. Although this alerts the player to danger. Perhaps most powreviewer found wandering around the streets crful of BOB's features is the programming of Roma Il to be enjoyable, some gamers may module. Using a variety of icons, the player prefer the «step A, step B, step C» approach can create a variety of mini-programs to autoused in other adventure games. mare certain functions. Players can create proRUUS grams to translate languages, track the agent's physical condition, set alarms, tell time, and CCNTIFICATION 1859542 HERAN NENASIS perform other responsibilities. Once created, up to five programs can run at the same time. Amiga owners familiar with Commodore's Amiga Vision multimedia authoring system will recognize the iconic flowchart approach used in BOB's programming module. Although not essential for completing the game, the BOB adds another intriguing layer of gameplay for players to explore. Cyberpunk Sims In the final analysis, those aforementioned problems prove to be more irritating than In addition to the adventuring and converinfuriating. BAT2 is an enormous game, ofsarion elements, players will need to masterfering a richly textured, futuristic gameworld the controls of several flight simulators in that gamers can find themselves easily drawn order to complete the game. One of these is into. Whether one is a cyberpunk fan or an needed to use the via-express, a mass-transit adventure gamer looking for something new system which links the six sectors of Roma II. and unique, BAT2 is a gaming experience well To navigate the via, players must travel about worth the monerary credirs. cw in the mosca,\" a rocket-powered land vehicle. Another craft is the mosquito,\" a hoverWARRIOR BUSINERO URUSHWU01 AME FHEORE CG9Gogga LEGGGGGGGG All of these segments are accompanied by excellent sound effects: the noisy chatter of bar patrons, the mured whoosh of a hovercar on a empty street, and the whistling wind at the roof of a city skyscraper. The graphics are equally impressive: what the artwork lacks in aesthetic appeal is more than compensated by Page 60 Computer Gaming World "


"GearUp! JAPAN TAHFEL CANYON HAWATI GOD 21 LOL You push the threr Torward for Maximum Power and Or boldly go where few have gone before: pioncering the Sthe runway begins to race be beneath you: Suddenly, you're in moon's surface/with Lunar Command. Whether you prefer Sirborhok That's the sensation you ll get when you GEAR M e tion, adventure or the intellectual challenge of building UP with flight simulation programs from Mallarul Software, a civilization Mallard products offer you unmatched realMallard offers the most complete line of scenery, Wism in Simulations sound, graphics and aircraft upgrades and flight adventures. So if you're a Flight Simulator) pilor looking for a found anywhere to give you an incredibly realistic A little more wild in your blue yonder then Mallard Soft Microsoft Flight Simulatore flying experience. ware has the gear to put the world and even the moon at Take the chair of the Air Traffic Controller and.com your fingertips. mand the skies from an entirely different perspective. M llard To find out more, just call Copyright  1993 Mallard Softuwe. All product ricres and trademarks are the property of their respective owners, Circle Reader Service #68 "


"DURI) A Frogment Of The Diary | Of Lt. Col. Lemuel Cork, 58          9   :: Translated by Charles Ardai Despite a warning within the box that the results of my actions would prove inexpressibly horrific, I found I was unable to prevent by pinching my forearm violently. I approached the window with some trepidation, afraid of what I might find when I opened it. upon my completing the task, the front of the cube came alive with color and motion. Figures in miniature moved across the glass. There were words upon the glass as well. disequilibrium it was that I uncurtained my windows to discover that self-same leathern box about which I have dreamt lo, these 15 nights. I drew it in and cut the twine that bound it. With shaking hands I unwrapped its contents and removed them to a corner of my bedchamber. The cube and board were as they had been in my dream. The smaller box was one I had never seen before. It bore the legend, Alone In The Dark, and the image on the front was of a broad-shouldered gentleman, Fricus, March 13 Last night I again had the vision, as indeed I have had now for a fortnight consecutively. I set it down in these pages less for posterity than for my own sanity. I awakened or I fancied that I awakened, for in reality I knew full well that I was dreaming-to a tapping on the pane of my window. Drawing the curtain, I saw upon the ledge a leathern box, as wide as it was long and twice as high, bound twice around with twine. I threw open the window and brought the box within. It contained, I lost no time in discovering, three items—as, indeed, each night it has. There was a case, the size and shape of a gramophone's, but where the horn might be there was instead a large cube, one wall of which was glass. It resembled nothing so much as a glass-fronted diorama but for the fact that the glass was opaque so that one could not see within. Second, there was a flat, rectangular board with buttons arranged in rows upon it, cach labeled with a numeral or a letter of the alphabet. It was clearly a device of kabbalistic kabbalistic purpose. Finally there was a smaller box, with a garish image upon it-each night this image has been different which box contained a flat square of some stiff material. Within the box there were printed instructions for inserting the square into a slot below the glass-fronted cube and for activating the nefarious device. Yet, aside from wonderment at the sorcery I had worked and a gnawing fear that by doing so I was weaving the black web around me, no terror was forthcoming. To be sure, the tiny men who moved upon the glass committed grave atrocities upon one another-at my direction, I am afraid, for it was I who directed their actions by depressing the keys on the board and yet, their acts struck me less as horrific than quaint, for the images were so crude and tiny than no amount of violence done by them or to them could raise my gorge or make me wish to shield my eyes. Last night, the vision ended as it always ends: I reached behind the cube and deactivared it. The images vanished. I was left in marvel and bewilderment. A Virtual Adventure Fame Inspired by the Hork of HP Lovecrafi AR TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: SOUND: Soturday, March 14 My God! It has begun again, but this time it is no vision! I awakened this morning to the familiar tapping at my window; but this was waking in fact, not in a dream, as I swiftly ascertained PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNER: PUBLISHER: Alone in the Dark IBM (386 Recommended) VGA or MCGA Sound Blaster, Covox Sound Master 2+, Adlib, Disney $59.99 Symbol Look Up Frederick Raynal 1-Motion 1333 Ocean Avenue, Suite ... Santa Monica, CA 90401 (310) 576-1885 With specific reference to I-Motion's Alone In The Dark Page 62 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Call 800—753—4263 Shipping to US PRAK HI APO & FPO $4 per order. Alr Mall to Canada S6 per order. Handling $1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order: PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea. add'l: AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea, add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Alr Mail $19 1st Item + $6 ea, add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st Item + $6 ea, add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM HARDWARE IBM CD ROM IBM ADVENTURE 22 $79 WARS HACE COUSAT SUOLA101 S19 (Tortlar Iuftillis \"XWING' presents the epic space battles of Star Wars with advanced graphics, sound, and space combat technology. Pilot X-wing, Y-wing, & A-wing fighters against TIE fighters, Star Destroyers, and finally the Death Star. Features instant replay, over 50 missions, a companion book, & digitized movie sound effects. $40 Spirit of Excaliber $32 Star Child S32 Star Trek 25 Anniversary $46 Stellar 7 WIN $42 Talking Classic Tales S60 Team Yankee 2 $29 Ultima Bundle S59 Velveteen Rabbit Childrens $58 Where in the World Deluxe $66 White Horse Child S32 Wing Commander 1 Deluxe $48 Wing Commander/Ultima 6 $57 Wing Commandr/Ultima UW $59 Wolf Pack $39 Wrath of the Demon $29   Acoustic Research P22 Acoustic Research P42 $159 Acoustic Research P570 $319 Acoustic Research P622 $239 AdLib Sound Card $39 Adlib Gold Sound Card $159 Advncd Gravis Ultrasound $139 Champ Joystick Flight Stick Joystick $36 Labtec 105 Powered Speakr $24 Maxx Control Yoke $59 Maxx Rudder Pedals FLT $39 Media Concept $79 PC Symphony $37 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 $179 Quickshot 123 Joystick $12 Sony SRS7 Speakers $15 Sony SRS9 Speakers $20 Sound Blaster 16 $239 Sound Blaster Deluxe $89 Sound Blastr MM Upgrd Kit $499 Sound Blaster PRO Basic $139 Sound Blaster Pro Deluxe $130 Sound Blaster Sound Card $79 Sound Galaxy BX2 Sound Galaxy NX Pro $125 Sound Galaxy NX Pro 16 S169 Sound Machine $99 Thrustmaster FCS $67 Thrustmaster FCS Pro Thrustmaster Rudder CS Thrustmaster Weapons CS Thunder Board $36 IBM ADVENTURE 2323 AMELLO -0. $74 IBM CD ROM In 'BATTLES OF DESTINY' you must seek out and destroy up to 3 opponents in order to conquer the world. Features modem play, air, ground and naval combat, challenging artificial intelligence, 22 different units to construct, more than 20 worlds to conquer, campaign style play, and a complete player history. $36 $39 $28 $32 $39 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes $44 Lost Treasures of Infocom $42 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 $29 Lost Tribe $29 Lost in LA Martian Memorandum Max Pac Mean Streets Metal Mutant Moebius Murder Club Murder by the Dozen $15 Nebulas $27 Out of this World Pepper's Adventure in Time $29 Plan 9 from Outer Space $31 Police Quest 1 VGA $24 Police Quest 2 $15 Police Quest 3 VGA Power Hits: Movies Prince of Persia Putt Putt Joins Parade Return of the Phantom $42 Return to Zork $38 Rex Nebular Cos Gen Ben $39 Rex Nebular Master Edition $52 Riftwar Legacy VGA $39 Ringworld $36 Rise of the Dragon VGA $34 Risky Woods $24 Robocop 3 $32 Rocketeer $32 Rome: Pathway to Power $38 SDI $7 Screen Antics WIN $24 Search for the King $24 Secret Monkey Island 2 $38 Secret Monkey Island VGA $23 Sex Olympics $19 Sex Vixens from Space $12 Shadowgate WIN $34 Shogun $12 Sierra Adventure Bundle 1 $39 Space Quest 1 VGA $16 Space Quest 4 VGA $36 Space Quest 5 VGA $39 Space Quest Bundle Spellcasting 101 $19 Spellcasting 201 $36 Spellcasting 301 Spring Brk $34 Star Trek 25th Aniv $36 Star Trek 5 $12 Star Trek: Next Generation $46 Stellar 7 $21 Teenage Mutnt Ninja Turtles $25 Terminator 2029 The Prophecy $36 Time Quest The Train Transylvania 3 Trolls Uninvited Uninvited WIN $34 Universe 1 $34 Universe 2 Universe 3 Walker War in Middle Earth $12 Warriors of Legend $19 Weird Dreams S9 Where in America's Past $37 Where in Europe CSD $29 Where in Time CSD $32 Where in USA CSD Deluxe Where in USA CSD $29 Where in USA CSD Deluxe $49 Where in World CSD $32 Where in World CSD Deluxe $52 Wonderland $16 Zak McKracken w H Book $18 Zeliards $15 JUN CGW 1 Elf $36 Advent Willie Beamish S24 Advent Willie Beamish 2 $39 Alone in the Dark $36 Altered Destiny $34 Amazon $36 Attack Pack $42 Blue Force: Next of Kin $45 Cadaver $27 Castle Wolfstn-Spear Dstny S37 Coaster $32 Codename Iceman $15 Colonel's Bequest $15 Conquests Robin Hood VGA $36 Covert Action S12 Crime Does Not Pay $19 Cruise for a Corpse $32 Cyber Race S42 Dark Half $12 Dark Side $28 Day of the Tentacle Deja Vu 1&2 WIN Demon's Gate Dog Eat Dog $32 Dominus Don't Go Alone $4 Dragon's Sphere $42 Earthrise $9 $24 Epic $32 Eric the Unready $38 Flashback $33 Free DC $9 Future Wars Gambit Gateway $32 HUMANS $21 Heart of China VGA $19 Heaven and Earth S32 Hired Guns $32 Hook $32 Inca $42 Indy Jones 4 Fate Atlantis $36 Indy Jones Grfx Adv VGA $27 Jack the Ripper $38 KGB $17 King's Quest 5 VGA $36 King's Quest 6 VGA $45 King's Ransom $38 Kronolog: Nazi Paradox $42 L.A. Law $34 Land of Lore $36 Laura Bow 2 VGA & EGA Leather Goddesses $12 Leather Goddesses 2 $42 Legend of Faerghail $34 Legend of Kyrandia $35 Leisure Suit Larry 1 VGA $15 Leisure Suit Larry 2 $15 Leisure Suit Larry 5 VGA $34 Leisure Suit Larry Bundle 1 $39 Loom $19 Lords of the Rising Sun $9 $38 SOUD MAGNE 12 Roads to Gettsyburg WIN $48 7th Guest $56 Advent Willie Beamish Adventures of Brad Stallion $39 Aesop's Multimedia Fables $30 Annabel's Drm Ancient Egypt $52 Battle Chess WIN & DOS $46 Buzz Aldrin Race Space $59 Campaign $35 Capstone Game Collection $45 Chessmaster 3000 $46 Conan $21 Conquests Robin Hood WIN $42 Curse of Enchantia $26 Cyber Space $38 Don Quixote $32 Dune $35 EcoQuest Search for Cetus $42 El Grito Del Jaguar WIN $46 Fascination WIN $39 Fatty's Bears Birthday Surpr $38 Guy Spy $29 Indy Jones Fate Altantis $52 Interactive Storytime Vol 1 $30 Jack and the Beanstalk Jones In The Fast Lane WIN $42 Jungle Book Win $34 King's Quest 5 WIN $42 Laura Bow 2 Legend of Kyrandia Library of Art: Renaissance $60 Loom $48 Lost Treasures of Infocom $46 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 946 Mantis Experimental Fighter $45 Multi Media: Vivaldi WIN $34 Omar Sharif Bridge $46 Putt Pult Joins the Parade $42 Secret Monkey Island $39 Secret Weap Luftwaffe $48 Sherlock Holmes Contg Det1 $44 Sherlock Holmes Contg Det2 $44 Shuttle $24 Space Quest 4 WIN $42 ACOMPLETE FC SOUND XIT $42 SOUND CARD $34 'SOUND MACHINE' brings together 2 of the most popular computer add-ons in one inexpensive package. Features a genuine sound blaster chipset, digitized voice input/output, full duplex MIDI interface, built in 4W amp, volume control, a pair of 3\" magnetically sheilded speakers, and a Quickshot joystick. $99 JOT STICK $34 $34 $49 $32 SPEAKER STIEN S36 $45 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs S6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Olfer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS $34 "


"Deview lantern held aloft, on the point of entering a issuing forth from the machine, as though it fog-shrouded mansion. In the clouds above knew the discomfort it had caused me. the mansion one could just discern the ghoulDoes it know, too, I wondered, that I am ish face of an undead soul. tantalized and fascinated, that I could no The square within the box had the familiar, more resist the urge to return to the simulahandwritten note attached, warning me of the tion than I could resist the urge to breathe? horror that awaited me if I inserted it into the Does it know how it has captured my imagicube. Yet my curiosity was more powerful nation? than my anxiety and it won the contest for Immediately after I had finished my morncontrol of my will. ing ablutions, I sat before the cube and called Would that it had not! Would that I had up the simulation. Before it would let me never laid eyes upon the devilment that soon was able to maneuver my doppleganger with begin, it had me look up two symbols printed followed! great agility and ease. on a page in a book that had come in the box. I inserted the square; I activated the ma Then--my hand trembles most violently as Why it did this I have no clue, unless it was chine. Immediately I knew that this sorcery, I write of it—while I searched the house attic, in a deliberate attempt to delay my satisfacthis dumbshow upon the glass, was of a difa brutish hound leapt through the window tion. Yet, I did as I was asked. ferent type entirely from what I had seen and bounded directly at my throat! I had no \"Then, the mansion appeared before me. I before. All the rest had been merely prepara weapon on my person and lost much blood noticed what I had not before, that before tion for this. For now, on the glass, I beheld in the first instants of the attack. Rallying my entering the mansion I had the choice of not tiny sketchwork figures but a man, a fully forces, I drew back my fists and rained blows whether to direct a female or a male simulaarticulated simulacrum of myself. walking upon the beast's flank. It shrank back at last, crum. I chose the male, of course, but could through the corridors of a mansion, climbing collapsed on the floor and, in a clap of thunnot help thinking that this was a most constairs, opening cabinets and trunks and drawder, exploded into clouds of violet smoke. genial feature. ers. True, the image was somewhat stylized, I thought to rest and recover my strength, I was in the attic again and the scene began but the motion was indisputably that of a but it was not to be. A green-fleshed figure to play out as before. Forewarned as I was, man. sprang up from the floor below, through a however, I took precautions against the atThe image. roo. filled the entire screen. No trapdoor hitherto undetected, and swung at tacks that would come: I pushed a heavy one-inch. flat man was this, like the hierome from behind. In my weakened state, I wardrobe in front of the window and a trunk glyphs drawn on the walls of a Pharaoh's could not stand against him. I had barely time over the trapdoor. When the monsters came, tomb. This was a real figure, whom I saw from to swivel to face him before I collapsed, issued they could not break through. I was able to cible angle a different angle in each a horrible death-cry, and saw myself dragged proceed through the attic unmolested. room-nay, several angles in each room, dcby the feet to the horrible beast's crypt. pending on where I stood. At times, I viewed As I scan my words above, I see that I have the man from an overhead perspective. At adopted the habit of referring to my stylized other times, I gazed upon him as though I simulacrum in the first person. It is a habit were looking up from the floor and at still easy to fall into. I find myself identifying with other times, as though I saw him through one the poor, beleaguered figure. He died despite of the house's windows. my best efforts, at the hands and jaws of the I cannot begin to express fully the terror fearful servants of evil. I must, I now realize, that gripped my heart as I directed the figure revisit the mansion tomorrow. This is so dethrough the house. I could hear the man's spite the palpable sense of foreboding that has every footstep, whether on carpeted floor, on descended upon me. gravel, or on wooden stair. In the distance None of the other simulations I had expeAh but there is so much more to the house without I could hear the howls of damned rienced previously, in my dreams, had this than that one room! In all there are three other beasts: and from within the house came suseffect. None of the others could stir the heart floors, with monsters of unspeakable descrippicious creaking and slamming of doors. in my breast, bring me to shortness of breath, tion on each: ghouls, zombies, winged deThe man walked at my command, and this make me lean forward in my seat until my mons, ghosts, hellhounds like the first I had was only the start, not the limit, of his abili face was barely a foot from the glass. None 1 the glass. None seen, even a suit of armor that came to life as ties. When I directed him to do so, he raised before had made me care about the characters I neared it. Some of these I fought, others I his hands, kicked out with his leg, ran, whose lives I directed. None had made me avoided. I found weapons and tools to aid me jumped, or threw one of the objects on his jump in fright at the slightest sound. Nor had as I proceeded, though it was not always person. I tested all of these abilities one by any so fully realized an environment: though obvious how the tools were to be used. I died one, learning them on my own since the it only existed on the glass, I feel that I have many times before seeing all the rooms-ininstructions contained in the box were most been inside a real house. \" deed, even now I cannot be sure that I have inadequate. Yet learn them I did; and soon I I am afraid to sleep tonight, for I fear what seen every room. dreams may come. I also fear that I might Fortunately, I discovered a technique for awake to find this wondrous Alone In The preserving a moment in time, saving it so that Dark gone in the morning. I might return to it in the event that I die, rather than starting all over from the beginning. The simulation permits me to save four Sundore, March 15 such frozen moments, and it helpfully proIt was not gone. The cube, with its darkened vides a picture of each next to the label I have glass, seemed to glare at me as I stepped from given it so that I might remember where in my bed. I detected a radiant malevolence the house I was at the time that I saved it. This technique, of \"saving\" before I enter a potenPage 64 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802-767-3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US.PRAK, HI APO & FPO $4 per order. Alr Mall to Canada $6 per order. Handling $1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 por order; PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea. add', AK $19 1st item + $2 ea. add. Handling 51 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mail $19 1st item + $6 en. add'l Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st Item + $6 on. add. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM ARCADE IBM EDUCATIONAL IBM ROLE PLAYING $19 'INCA' is an epic adventure that catapults you through space and time. You are the champion of the lost Inca empire, rocketing across galaxies, battling space age Conquistadors, and unraveling intricate and ancient mysteries. Features motion picture quality video, a stereo soundtrack & challenging puzzles. S42 $19      wo VGA $24 $6 $32 Bop de Weeth Cric ! Airborne Ranger S9 Aliens Ate My Babysitter $32 Amazing Spiderman Arachnaphobia $28 Artura $4 Back to the Future 3 $15 Bargon Attack VGA $24 Bart Simpson's House Weird $31 Batman Caped Crusader $28 Batman the Movie $24 Battle Storm $32 Bill & Ted's Excellent Adv $19 Blockout $28 Brain Blaster Cadaver Cogito Windows Combat Classics Continuum Creepers D Generation Day of the Viper Double Dragon 3 Dr Doom's Revenge $9 Dragon's Lair $22 Dragon's Lair 2 Time Warp $34 Dragon's Lair 3 $34 Dragon's L Esc Singe's Cast $34 Dragons Breath Galactic Conqueror Galactic Empire Gauntlet 2 Ghost & Goblins Gobliiins VGA Gremlins 2 Guy Spy Hard Drivin' 2 Heavy Metal Hyperspeed Killing Cloud Knight Force Laffer Utilities Laser Squad Ms Pacman Mystical Ninja Gaiden 2 Ninja Rabbits Nova 9 Obliterator Out Run $28 Pac Man Pick'n Pile $6 Pit Fighter S22 Power Drome $9 Power Hits: Battletech $32 Power Hits: Sci Fi $19 Predator 2 Punisher $9 Quix $25 Rampage Rotox $20 S.C. Out $38 Sierra Arcade Bundle 1 $24 Simpsons:The Arcade Game $31 Space Ace $32 Space Ace 2 $34 Space Wars $37 Swamp Gas Windows Take-A-Break Crsswrd WIN $29 Take-A-Break Pinball WIN $29 Take-A-Break Pool WIN $29 Taking of Beverly Hills $19 Teenage MNT Manhin Miss Teenage MNT Adventure $32 Teenage MNT Arcade S24 Terminator $34 Tetris Classic WIN $26 The Light Corridor $29 The Tinies $29 Tristan Pinball $30 X-Men 2 Xenocide S6 is. $21            'CONQUERED KINGDOMS' allows you to invade castles and fly over mountains as you battle for control of the world. Features nine scenarios, a random map generator, human and fantasy combat troops, 21 levels of difficulty, modem play, several full campaign conquests, and complete game scoring history. $36 Ace Detective $30 Ace Inquirer $40 Ace Reporter $36 Ace Reporter Deluxe $48 Auto Map $64 AutoWorks $49 BodyWorks $49 Boom Box $29 Castle of Dr Brain VGA $29 Cleo is a Dragon $30 Clock Works Comic Book Maker $32 Cuckoo Zoo $32 Eagle Eye Mysteries $32 EcoQuest 2 Lost Sort Rain $34 EcoQuest VGA $32 Evelyn Wood Dynmic Readr $24 Fatty Bear's Birthday Surpr $32 Fay's Word Rally $32 Incredible Machine VGA $29 Island Of Dr Brain VGA $29 Island Of Dr. Brain VGA $29 Jones Fast Lane Kidworks $30 Kidwriter Gold $32 Land of The Unicorn $39 Mario Teaches Typing $24 Marvin the Moose Vol 1 $30 Marvin the Moose Vol 2 $30 Mavis Beacon Teach Typing $26 Milliken Storyteller Vol 1 $30 Milliken Storyteller Vol 2 $30 Mixed Up Faery Tale VGA $29 Mixed-Up Mother Goose $29 Mozart's Magical Music Mch $18 Munchers Bundle Never Ending Story 2 Crayn $9 Orbits: Voyage Solar Systm $39 Peanuts $9 Phonics Plus $25 Picture Perfect $32 Print Shop Deluxe $39 Print Shop Deluxe Bus Grph $29 Print Shop Deluxe Bus Grph $24 Putt Putts Fun Pak S22 Quarky Quaysoo's Turbo Sci $29 Read 'n Roll $36 Read 'n Roll Data Disk $12 Read & Rhyme Reader Rabbit 1: Early Read $37 Reader Rabbit 2 $37 Reader Rabbit's Letters $37 Robot Writer Plus $30 Rodney's Funscreen $32 Scooter's Magic Castle $32 Secert Isalnd Dr. Quandry $38 Snapdragon $29 Speedreader WIN $30 Speedreader WIN DD A $12 Speedreader WIN DDB $12 Speedreader WIN DD C Spell it Plus $31 Spell-a-Saurus $27 Spelling $31 Spelling Wiz $22 Stickybear Opposites $23 Stickybear Reading $24 Stickybear Reading Comp $30 Stickybear Reading Tutor $31 Stickybear Shapes $29 Stickybear Spellgrabber $32 Stickybear Spelling Tutor $32 Story Sketcher $42 Super Munchers $29 Super Solvers Midnight Resc $30 Super Solvers Spellbound $31 Super Spellicopter $21 Treasure Mountain $39 Twisty History VGA $29 Wacky Funster $18 Weekly Rdr Reading Comp $31 2400 AD $12 ADD Collector's Edition 2 $45 ADD Starter Kit $29 Bard's Tale 1 Char Editor $16 Bard's Tale 2 Char Editor $16 Bard's Tale 3 $32 Bard's Tale 3 Char Editor $16 Bard's Tale Construction Battletech 2 $31 Beyond Blue Event Horizion $36 Black Crypt $32 Buck Rogers Countdown $12 Captain Blood $9 Celtic Legends $32 Challenge of 5 Realms $44 Champions $37 Champions of Krynn $19 Champion of Krynn Char Ed $16 Cobra Mission $49 Companion of Xanth $36 Conan $16 Corporation $14 Curse of the Azure Bonds $15 Curse Azure Bonds Char Ed $16 Cyber Empire $32 Cyber Space $39 Cybergenic Ranger Dark Queen of Krynn Dark Queen Krynn Char Ed $16 Dark Sun $37 Dark Sun Grey Isle Exp Pak $34 Darklands $39 Darklands Master Edition $51 Daughter of Serpents $32 Death Knights of Krynn Death Knights Krynn Char Ed$16 Dragon Strike $15 Dragon Wars $12 Dragon Wars Char Edit $16 Dragons of Flame Drakkhen Drakkhen Char Edit Dungeon Master S34 Dusk of the Gods $24 Elvira 2 Jaws of Cerberus $19 Elvira Mistress Dark $29 Eye of the Beholder 1 $19 Eye of the Beholder 2 $38 Eye of Beholder 2 Char Edit $16 Eye of the Beholder 3 $39 Eye of Beholder Char Edit $16 Flames of Freedom MWII $28 Fountain of Dreams Fountain of Dreams Char Ed $16 Gateway Savage Frontier $32 Gryphon Masters of Havlar $38 Heaven and Earth $32 Heros Quest 1 VGA $24 Heros Quest 2: Trial Fire $21 Heros Quest 3 Keef the Thief Char Edit Keys to Maramon Char Edit $16 Legacy of the Necromancer $17 Legacy: Realm Of Terror $34 Legend $31 Legend of Valor $39 Legends of Drakka Lord of the Rings V2 $37 Lord of Rings V2 Char Edit $16 Loremaster $39 Lure of the Temptress $21 OOP. $31 $9 DOMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN TOOL S9 GAMEMAKER CRANTUR .COMEUTERGARTE $7 $28 $36 EXPLORE MAZES $12 DESIGN WORLOS 'GAME MAKER' allows you to create 256 color VGA adventure and arcade games without programming. Characters, monsters, and parts of a sceen can all be animated. Characters can gain or lose lives, score, hit points and 20 other attributes. Includes several full games, many scenes, monsters & backgrounds for you to use. $68 256 COLOR VELA $38 $38 MONSTERS PLAN MOVEMENT HPCAT GRAPHICS $37 $45 S12 TE MONSTERS Magic Candle 1 Magic Candle 1 Char Editor $16 Magic Candle 2 S21 Magic Candle 2 Char Editor $16 Magic Candle 3 $38 Martian Dreams $37 Martian Dreams Char Edit $16 Matrix Cubed $32 MegaTraveller:Zhodani $9 JUN CGW 2 $25 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs S6. Checks Held 4 Wecks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Oller, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. \"SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS "


"Deunew tially dangerous situation-which is to say, each time I enter a room!—has allowed me to make much more rapid progress. I am beginning to uncover the history of the house and its unfortunate inhabitants. The most recent owner committed suicide rather than allow himself to be enslaved by the demons he had conjured. Pieces of the story are contained in letters, books, and other documents I have found scattered throughout the house. Each document is a fragment; each holds only a piece of the puzzle. I will not rest until I have found them all. Where can I look for the rest? Where have I not been yet? I realize, as I glance up at the window, that it has become dark. I have been at this machine all day. Yet I cannot lift my hand from the kabbalistic key-pad, I cannot end the session, not yet, not with so much still undiscovered. I shall play the night through if need be. prepared to drive the Satanic hordes back to the depths of the abyss or die in the attempt. My pulse pounds in my ears, my hands grip the key-board tightly, and I crave the solution to this nest of puzzles. This is truly a diabolical simulation, rich in evil imaginings and unexpected twists. I cannot stop, though I am at it for hours. I am caught, and I give the designers of this devilish trap the full credit they deserve. Whosoever they may be (demons all, I have no doubt), they have captured my soul and will have it in their keeping until the story's end. [Translator's note: at this point the manu At the same time that I want to solve the script becomes illegible.] mystery, though, I dread its conclusion-for ...more horrible than I could have imag where, after this, can I turn for another? Havined. Strange travesties of nature abound, Strange travesties of nature abound, ing experienced t ing experienced this marvel, where shall I find with the forms of insects and amphibians and the like? Heaven grant that this be not the giant worms. I have slain an undead pirate in only simulation of its kind! I pray that I might a fierce sword duel, leapt from plank to plank find another across a haunted lagoon, traversed a dark [Translator's Note: Here the manuscript maze. While in the house I was free to roam ends. On March 17, 1911, looking haggard as I chose; I now feel channeled from episode and exhausted but wearing a serene smile, to episode, directed toward a fate at whose Lemuel Cork left his house, walking in the nature I can only guess. I preferred the explodirection of a nearby town. A neighbor reration of the house, but who would not? An ports that Cork was whispering the following inexorable descent into Hell would be chosen cryptic words as he walked: «The Seventh by no man. Guest... must find The Seventh Guest...\" He Yet, it is my fate. I approach an unholy altar, was never seen again.) Cow Monday, March 16 The underworld beckons! After much searching, I have found a way beneath the house, by placing... PILOTS VIBROADID NOMINAND) DER CORPS Our Brackets Convert Your Office Chair SE into a Realistic Cockpit! Experience The F-16 PREMIUM TEMPLATES\" Do you enjoy \"flying\" the super-sophisticated PC flight simulators available today? Is \"keyboard confusion\" your worst enemy-you know, frantically hunting keys to switch views, activate defenses, launch weapons, etc., (not to mention flying the plane)just to survive the mission? KEYBOARD COMMANDER CORPS flight simulator keyboard templates can end that overload and let you concentrate on flyin' and shootin'. Our high-quality, color templates turn any AT101 Enh keyboard into a realistic control panel for your favorite sim and our standardized, color-coded layout flattens the learning curve from one sim to another Forget \"Keyboard Confusion\", just remember to... Wote Thrust Master Controls Interface Dynamics Brackets Now Available!!! Strike Eagle III. Gunship 2000 Maximum Overkill, X-Wing Available in fine stores! Falcon 3.0/3.01 Aces of the Pacific Secret Weapons of tho Luftwaffo Jetfighter 1 & 11 B-17 Flying Fortress CY Air Combat DDDDD A-10 Tank Killer 1.5 F-15 Strike Eagle II F-117A Nighthawk Megafortress A.T.P. Flight Simulator 4.0 * High-quality, 3-D graphics * Standardized format Logical, color-coded layout * Affixes to keyboard * Fits all AT101 Enh. keyboards * Sturdy, laminated stock Hurry! Get 'em at Introductory Prices!!! 1 $11.95 Please Print Check Enclosed Money Order enclosed. Any 2 $21.50 12.10 deled/ Any 3 $30.00 4 or more $9.25 each Name Country S& H add $3.00 or C.O.D. add $6.00...CALL Address City KCC. Inc., Dept C State/Province Zip/Postal Code 1839 SW 148 Ave., #402 Davie, FL 33330 Items (Discounts por order only: Allow3.4 Weeks) DEALERS WELCOME 1-800-262-6066 Interface Dynamics P.O. Box 858 Send Check or Money Order for Wolfeboro, NH 03894 $59.95 One Armrest Bracket COD Orders Call $99.95 Two Armrest Brackets 603-569-4638 $6.00 Postage and Handling Circle Reader Service #61 Circle Reader Service #62 "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802—767—3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US PRAK,HIAPO & FPO $4 per order. Alr Mall to Canada $6 por order. Handling $1 per shipment, 2 Business Day Alr US $6 per order; PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea. add'i; AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mail $19 1st Item + $6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st Item + $6 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM ROLE PLAYING IBM HINT BOOKS IBM HINT BOOKS $34 'CAESAR' starts you as the governor of a province of the Roman Empire where you must build cities & rule wisely. Fortify your cities with walls and towersbut should your defenses fail, you can lead legions to crush the hostile barbarian tribes. Features an in depth economic model and more than 20 buildings to construct. S36 Strategy Plus Issue 10 or 11 $8 Strategy Plus Issue 12-30 Ea $5 Strike Commander Official $16 Stunt Island $16 Summoning $16 Tales Magic:Prophecy Shdw $12 Treasures Savage Frontier $10 Tunnels & Trolls $16 Ultima 4-6 Each $10 Ultima 7 $12 Ultima 7 and Underworld $16 Ultima Avatar Adventures $16 Ultima U Stygian Abyss $12 Ultima Underworld 2 S12 V for Victory $16 Wasteland $10 Wizardry 7 $16 Wizardry Cosmic Forge Yeager Air Combat Handbk $16 Zak McKracken S10 $10 Ultims ROME WASVT BUILT IN A DAY HOW LONG WILL IT TAKE YOU: Impressions $12 IBM WARGAMES $9 59 $19 512 $20 S10 $38 $19 Mega Traveller 2 $19 MegaTraveller 2 Char Edit S16 Mega Traveller 3 $39 Might & Magic 1 Key Disk $12 Might & Magic 1 Char Edit $16 Might & Magic 2 $12 Might & Magic 2 Char Edit $16 Might & Magic 3 Might & Magic 3 Char Edit $16 Might & Magic 4 Clouds Xeen$34 Might & Magic 4 Char Editor $16 Might & Magic 5 D Side Xeen $42 Mines of Titan $12 Pirates $6 Pirates Gold $42 Pool of Radiance $15 Pool of Radiance Char Editor $16 Pools of Darkness $38 Protostar $45 Ragnarok $34 Realms of Arkania $37 Rings of Medusa $24 Savage Empire $34 Savage Empire Char Edit $16 Secret Silver Blades $15 Secret Silver Blades Char Ed S16 Sentinel Worlds 1 Sentinel Worlds 1 Char Edit S16 Shadow Sorcerer Sleeping Gods Lie Space 1889 Space Hulk Space Rogue $30 Space Rogue Char Edit S16 Spelcraft: Aspect of Valor $38 SpellJammr:Pirates Rlm Spc $38 Spirit ol Excalibur Star Saga 2 Starflight 2 Stonekeep Summoning $38 Sword of the Samurai $12 Tales Magic Prophcy Shadw $29 Tale Magic Prphcy Shad CE $16 Third Courier $6 Times of Lore $28 Treasures Savage Frontier S32 Treasure Savage Frntier CE $15 Twilight 2000 VGA $24 Ultima 4 $35 Ultima 4 Char Edit $16 Ultima 5 $35 Ultima 5 Char Editor S16 Ultima 6 False Prophet $19 Ultima 6 Char Editor $16 Ultima 7 Black Gate $48 Ultima 7 Char Editor Ultima 7 Forge of Virtue Ultima 7.5 Serpent Isle $48 Ultima Bundle CD Ultima Trilogy $39 Ultima Trilogy 2 S48 Ultima Uworld Stygian Abyss $52 Ultima Uwrld Styg Abyss CE $15 Ultima Uworld 2 Labyrinth $52 Uncharted Waters $42 Unlimited Adventures $32 Veil of Darkness $37 Vengeance of Excalibur $16 Wasteland Char Edit $16 Waxworks $34 Wizardry Char Edit (1-3) $16 Wizardry 4 $19 Wizardry 4 Char Edit $16 Wizardry 5 S26 Wizardry 5 Char Edit $16 Wizardry 7 Crusaders $39 Wizadry 7 Crusadrs Char Ed $16 Wizardry Cosmic Forge $34 Wizardry Cosmic Forge CE $16 Wizardry Trilogy DHE $9 $19 'CARRIERS AT WAR' brings to life six crucial carrier battles of WWII; Pearl Harbor, Coral Sea, Midway. Eastern Shores, Santa Cruz, and Great Marianas Turkey Shoot. Seek out and destroy enemy carriers fleets, air forces Features hundreds of individually modeled ships and aircraft from that period. $37 PAROLE 688 Attack Sub $10 A-Train $16 Advent Willie Beamish $10 Altered Destiny $10 Bard's Tale 1-3 Each $10 Blue Force: Next of Kin $10 Buck Rogers Countdown $10 Castle of Dr Brain $10 Champions of Krynn $10 Civilization $16 Codename Iceman $10 Colonel's Bequest Conquests Robin Hood $10 Countdown $10 Curse of the Azure Bonds $10 Dark Queen of Krynn $10 Darklands $14 Death Knights of Krynn $10 Dungeon Master $10 Dynamix Great War Planes $16 EcoQuest Search For Cetus $10 Elvira 2 Jaws of Cerberus $10 Elvira Mistress Dark $10 Eye of the Beholder S10 Eye of the Beholder 2 $12 Eye of the Beholder 3 $10 Fascination $10 Free DC $10 Gateway Savage Frontier $10 Global Conquest Stratgy/Dk $21 Gobliiins Gunship 2000 S16 Harpoon $16 Hero's Quest 1-3 Each $10 Immortal $10 Indy Jones 4 Fate Atlantis $10 Island Of Dr Brain $10 Jetfighter 2.0 $16 King's Quest 1-6 Each $10 Laura Bow 2 S10 Leisure Suit Larry 1-5 Each $10 Lemmings with Disk $21 Lord of the Rings V1 $10 Lord of the Rings V2 $6 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes $10 Lost in LA LucasArts Adventure Book S16 LucasArts Air Combat Strat $16 Magic Candle 1-3 Each $10 Martian Dreams $13 Matrix Cubed S10 Might & Magic 2 $12 Might & Magic 3-5 Each $16 Off Book Leisure Suit Larry $12 Off Book of Ultima 2nd Editn $15 Olt Gde Roger Wilco's Sp Ad $12 Olf Guide King's Quest 2nd $10 Off book of Police Quest $12 Patriot $16 Planet's Edge S16 Police Quest 1-3 Each $10 Pool of Radiance S10 Pools of Darkness $12 Populous 1 & 2 Offl Strategy $16 Power Monger Strategy $16 Quest for Clues 2-5 Each $21 Quest for Glory Stratgy Guid $19 RUNS Issue #1-19 Each S6 Railroad Tycoon S10 Rex Nebular Cos Gen Ben $14 Savage Empire $10 Secret Monkey Island 1 or 2 $10 Secret Silver Blades $10 Simcity/Simearth Book $20 Simearth $16 Simlife Official Strategy $16 Space Quest 1-4 Each $10 Spellcasting 101: Official BK S10 Spellcasting 201 $10 Star Trek 25th Aniv $10 Starlight 1 or 2 S10 THE PERFECT GEN Action Stations $38 Action Stations Scenario 1 $14 Air Raid Pearl Harbour $22 Ambush at Soninor S42 American Civil War V1-3 Ea $22 Battle Stations Battle Tank Barbarossa $36 Battle Tank Kursk $39 Battles of Napoleon $24 Blitzkrieg Ardennes Blood & Iron $52 Blue and the Grey $42 Borodino Napoleon Invades $30 Bravo Romeo Delta $29 CW No Greater Glory $21 Campaign Carrier Strike Carrier Strike Exp Pak $19 Carriers at War $34 Carriers at War Exp Pak $37 Charge of the Light Brigade $34 Conflict: Middle East $14 Decision at Gettysburg $19 Dreadnoughts S42 Dreadnoughts Bismark $29 Dreadnoughts Ironclads S29 Dreadnoughts Deluxe $89 Fifth Eskadra $22 Fire Brigade $34 Fleet Med Gary Grigsby Pacific War S46 Gettysburg: Turning Point $36 Grey Seas, Grey Skies $19 Halls of Montezuma $24 Harpoon Harpoon Battle Set 2 or 3 $19 Harpoon Battle Set 4 Harpoon Challenger Pak SE $49 Harpoon Designer 2 S25 Harpoon Designer Series $17 Harpoon Scenario Editor $27 High Command In Harms Way $36 Kampfgruppe $59 Kriegsmarine $36 Line in the Sand S24 MacArthur's War Main Battle Tank C Germany $36 Main Battle Tank Middle East $36 Main Battle Tank N Germany S36 Man of War $36 Marianas Turkey Shoot $15 Midway S19 Northern Fleet $36 Operation Overlord S29 Pacific Storm Midway Cpgn $36 Pacific Storm Solomon Cpgn $36 JUN CGW 3 $27 $16 ST BATLES 518 ATEST TURV S25 $59 'GREAT BATTLES OF THE 20TH CENTURY'brings 20 new scenarios for the Perfect General game. Includes 1967 & 1973 Suez conflicts, Kursk, The Moscow Push, Stalingrad, Malta Long Binh Inferno, Crete, Falklands. Inchon, Operation Sea Lion, Pusan Per Saigon, Bataan, Fulda, Dnepr Br. Guderian Forward, & more. $23 $24 $45 S21 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs S6. Checks Held 4 Wecks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. \"SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS S32 "


"Scorpion's View Scorpia Finds Herself Alone in the Dark Scorpia is an experienced and respected adventure game expert. CGW is pleased to provide this forum for her distinctive and often controversial perspective. Torror seems to be the \"in\" genre this year, with several companies having such products already on the market or slated to be released in the coming months. Of course, horror games are nothing new, but there haven't been very many of them over the years. Outside of Infocom's The Lurking Horror, an adventure with a decidedly creepy plot, few titles leap to mind until we get to Horrorsoft's Elvira, and even after that, it is hard to think of other games in this area. So it's still a rich field, and the publishers are finally getting around to sowing a few seeds. The newer crop of spooky titles are more along the lines of Elvira than straight adventure: puzzles with a touch of hack-and-slash and weird things happening along the way. Alone In The Dark, from Interplay/I-Motion, is very much in that category. Drawing heavily (in some respects) on the works of H.P. Lovecraft, Alone is set in Louisiana during the 1920s. A private investigator is hired to visit an old house and retrieve a document from inside a piano stored in the attic. Naturally, there is more here than meets the eye, and before long this simple errand turns into a life-and-death struggle with the evil that infests the house. The designers have done a good job of establishing mood, a very important aspect for games of this type. Anyone familiar with Lovecraft's works knows that diaries, books, journals, letters, etc., usually play an important role in his stories. That is also the case here; there is much reading material to be found throughout the house. Some of it contains clues to solving puzzles, some fills in the history of the mansion, and some seems to be there just to enhance the eerieness of the whole experience. Reading is definitely an integral part of the game, and should not be skipped. Sound is used to good effect. Floors creak realistically when walked upon, as do doors when opened. Each weapon type has its own sound: the blast of a gun, the \"woosh\" of a sword, the twang of a bow. Your character grunts with the effort of combat, and cries out when injured. From time to time, odd moaning and wolf howls float through the air. Music is good, but perhaps a little too fastpaced. Something a bit slower and more ominous would have fit into the atmosphere better, particularly when walking through the empty (and not so empty) rooms. The music became annoying at times, and I turned it off occasionally. Graphically, the game has a unique feature: the use of different viewing angles throughout play. A typical adventure usually has one view, either \"you-are-there\" 3D, or some sort of third person perspective. While Alone uses the third-person view, this is done from different perspectives in different locations. These angles range from looking from the floor up to looking from the ceiling down. Years of watching horror movies have taught us that when the viewing perspective changes, it usually means that something is up (maybe creeping up!), thereby creating a certain amount of tension. This cinematic approach is used very effectively, keeping you alert and worried over what's about to happen. However, this same technique has drawbacks on occasion. There are some situations where maneuvering the character while the angles change can make your life difficult. Imagine running around narrow library corridors while being chased by a critter that can walk right through walls, while the perspective changes constantly as you move. Worse yet, in the end game, you have to wade into the middle of a lake, while Deep Ones (nasty water monsters) are coming up on Page 68 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802—767-3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US,PRAK, HI APO & FPO $4 per order. Air Mail to Canada $6 per order. Handling S1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR. HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea. add'l; AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment Europe, S. America Air Mail $19 1st Item + $6 ea, add'l. Asla, Australia, Africa, Air Mall S25 1st Item + $6 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM WARGAMES IBM STRATEGY IBM SIMULATION We $33 'MICHAEL JORDAN IN FLIGHT captures all the air artistry of Michael Jordan with unprecedented realism. Play 3-on-3 basketball, hitfrom the outside, drive the lane or execute the giveand-go with offensive play-calling. Hold the court against 32 real-life competitors. Features digitized graphics, and instant replay. $38 Panzer Battles $24 Patriot $44 Patton Strikes Back $12 Prelude to Jutland Red Lightning $12 Return to Falklands $28 Rommel Battles For N Africa S24 Rommel at El Alamein $36 Rommel at Gazala $36 Second Front $21 Stalingrad Campaign $36 Storm Across Europe $12 Third Reich $27 Typhoon of Steel $12 UMS 2 $19 UMS 2 Civil War $24 UMS 2 Desert Storm Scen S24 UMS 2 Planet Editor Under Fire $12 V Victory: Utah Beach V Victory: Velikiye Luki $44 V for Victory: Market Garden $44 V Victory Gold, Juno Sword $44 Victory at Sea $37 War in the Falklands $26 Warship that Changed Histry $26 Waterloo $19 Western Front $36 White Death $19 $38 S32 $19 $44 $49 $9 $19 IBM STRATEGY $42 $32 \"LINKS 386 PRO offers SUPER VGA graphics and advanced features designed for your 386 or 486. New features include computer opponent, save game option that allows your friends to play against you in an existing game, pre-recorded games from worthy opponents, and many game modes. $39 $29 $17 $34 LINKS(386 Imperium $26 Inindo $37 Koshan Conspiracy $32 L'Empereur $37 Lemmings $32 Lemmings Datadisk $19 Lemmings 2 Liberty or Death $37 Lost Admiral $24 Lost Admiral Enhanced $44 Lost Admiral Scenario Disk $23 Maelstrom $38 Mega Lo Mania $31 Mercenaries Tegel's $38 Merchant Colony $17 Millenium $15 Monarch $38 New World Order $38 Nobunaga's Ambition $25 Nobunaga's Ambition 2 $37 Nuclear War S9 Objection $34 Objection Enhanced Operation Combat $12 Pacific Theater Ops $42 Paladin 2 $34 Perfect General $29 Perfect General Scen Disk $21 Perfect General 2 $44 Perfect General Scen Disk 2 $23 Populous 2 $38 Powermonger $34 Powermonger World War 1 $21 Push Over $32 QQP Bundle $49 Railroad Tycoon $34 Railroad Tycoon 2 $52 Reach for the Stars $24 Realms Red Zone $32 Renegade Legion Interceptor $12 Robo Sport WIN $34 Romance 3 Kingdoms $42 Romance 3 Kingdoms 2 $42 Rules of Engagement $19 Rules of Engagement 2 $38 Second Conflict WIN $34 Seven Cities Gold 2 $38 Shadow President $34 ShadowGate WIN $29 Siege $21 Siege Expansion Disk $19 Sim Ant Sim Ant WIN $34 Simcity Simcity WIN $34 Simearth $38 Simearth WIN Simfarm S41 Simlife $41 Spaceward Ho! DOS/WIN S38 Special Forces $39 Spoils of War $34 Star Control $29 Star Control 2 $36 Star Legions $38 Starfleet 2 $38 Strategic Forces Sword of Aragon $28 Task Force 1942 $39 Tegels's Mercenaries 2 $44 Theatre of War $17 Traders $19 Unnatural Selection $32 Utopia $29 Vikings Fields of Conquest $37 War in the Gulf $38 Warlords No Tandy 16 Cir $12 Warlords 2 $42 When Two Worlds War $42 Worlds at War $19 $52 ATP Flight Simulator $29 A.T.A.C $34 A10 Avena A 10 Avenger $46 A10 Tank Killer 1.5 Enh $34 AH-64 Helicopter $46 Aces of the Pacific $42 Aces Pacific Mission Disk 1 $27 Aces Over Europe S42 Aces Europe Mission Disk 1 $27 Aces Europe Mission Disk 2 $27 Air Duel $38 Air Warrior SVGA $35 Allied Forces $12 Armoured Fist B17 Flying Fortress $39 Birds of Prey Blue Max Aces Great War $9 Campaign: Strategic Flight S $37 Car and Driver $38 Cardinal of the Kremlin $9 Carrier Command $12 Combat Classics $24 Das Boot Submarine Design Your Own Railroad $29 Dynamix Bundle 1 $29 Elite Plus Eye of the Storm Fit Sim $29 F117A Stealth Fighter VGA $42 F15 Strike Eagle 3 $44 F15 Strike Eagle 3 Aces Pak S49 Falcon 3.0 $42 Falcon 3 Scen1 Fighting Tgr $24 Flight Simulator 4.0 Fly the Grand Canyon $45 Great Naval Battles $44 Great Naval Batt Scen Build $28 Great Nav Bat America in Atl $21 Great Nav B Super Ships Atl $19 Gunship $12 Gunship 2000 VGA Gunship 2000 Scenario Disk $24 Iron Helix Jump Jet Jump Jet Aces Pack $50 Land Sea Air Trilogy $12 Land Sea Air Trilogy 2 $29 Lightspeed Mantis Experimental Fighter $39 Mantis Exp Speech Pak $19 Maximum Overkill S46 Maximum Overkill Missn D 1 $28 Maximum Overkill Missn D 2 S28 Mega Fortress $12 Megafortress Missn Disk 1 $26 Megafortress Missn Disk 2 $26 Megafortress Mega-Pak $38 Orbits Pacific Islands 2 Power Politics WIN Privateer Rags to Riches Reach for the Skies Red Baron $36 Red Baron Mission Builder $24 Red Storm Rising Road & Track Grand Prix U $37 Sailing Instrctr Pack VGA $239 Sailing Simulator VGA $42 Sailing Sm E Coast Voyages $39 Sailing Sm W Coast Voyages $39 Scenery Collection Set A Scenery Collection Set B $34 Scenery Collt California $37 Seal Team S42 Secret Weap Luftwaffe $44 Secret Weapons Exp 1-2 Ea S21 Shuttle $26 Silent Service 2 $19 Strike Commander Strike Commandr Speech Pk $24 Stunt Island S36 JUN CGW 4 $22 ACCESS $36 $9 $36 $32 RID A Train $38 A Train Construction Set $23 Air Force Commander Airbucks $36 Ancient Art War Sea Ancient Art of War Ancient Art of War Sky Armada 2525 Ashes of Empire Bandit Kings Ancient China $32 Battle Isle $32 Battle Isle Scenario Disk Battles of Destiny Big Business $12 Breach 2 $19 Breach 2 Scenario Disk $15 Buzz Aldrin Race into Space S42 Caesar Carrier Command $9 Castles $18 Castles 2 $36 Castles Northern Campaigns $19 Civilization $39 Civilization Master Edition Command HQ $19 Conquered Kingdoms Conquest of Japan $36 Crisis in the Kremlin Dark Seed $34 Dark Star $36 Dino Wars $28 Diplomacy Discovery Stp Columbus $34 Dragon Force $19 Dragon Lord $12 Dune $24 Dune 2 $44 El Fish $41 Empire Deluxe $37 Fields of Glory $36 Fighting for Rome S12 Final Conflict Fireteam 2200 $24 Fireteam 2200 Constrctn Kit $25 Fort Apache $34 Genghis Khan $37 Global Conquest $34 Gobliiins 2: Princes Buffoon $24 Dreadnoughts $27 $45  The most EXCITING SEA BATTLES ever fought $38 $36 $39   DREADNOUGHTS accurately models the looks, specifications and tactics of fighting fleets during the great age of the battleship. Includes 7 scenarios such as; Coronel (1914). Falklands (1914). Jutland (1916) and Dogger Bank (1915). Features a menu interface for entering commands, external 3D view, & hidden movement. $42 $12 $12 $19 $37 $17 $48 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Wecks. Money Orders Treated as Cosh. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with samo product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS "


"the side, and a tree in the lake is tossing fireballs your way. The initial not to mention Call of Cthulhu player, I knew this one was deadly. view is full-figure, but half-way into the water, it suddenly changes to Too late. Just looking at the title page alone is enough to kill you. a close-up of the character. This is not only disorienting, but makes it Beware of books with red or yellow covers. Save before you read! extremely difficult to see which way to go to avoid being killed. The Another problem can crop up in the end game. It is absolutely vital full-figure view should have been continued longer, that, after passing through the or at the very least, a close-up of the forward view Lada Saved Game «maze,\" you have at least a little oil ahead of the character used. As it is, this section of left in your lantern, or a spare can of the game will likely give many players unneeded oil, plus the lighter. Without those, frustration, and they may well have to go through you cannot finish. Once you enter this part more than once to complete it. After battle the tunnels under the house, there There is also a lot of jumping around necessary In a room is no going back up again until in the tunnels. In some parts, it's very tricky making About to do battle you're done down there. If you've the leaps, and the angle changes can make it more left the spare oil can behind, or even Another baffle so. Save often when hopping across pillars or over worse, used up all the oil, you are in rorren bridges. Deep Ones are always lurking in the In another room big, big trouble. water, waiting to rip you to shreds. At the staircase While there aren's many dark While there is fighting in Alone, it isn't by any rooms in the house, you can use up means a CRPG. Aside from hit points, there are no a lot of oil going through the library, physical attributes or skills, and there are no experience points or levels which is actually four rooms in all. The best thing to do here is get of any kind. Killing monsters has only one purpose-to get them out through it as quickly as possible. Pick up everything you come across, of your way. and wait until you're outside and the lamp oft) before reading Combat itself is therefore simple, and more a matter of timing than anything. anything else. Your character arms him or herself with a weapon (or If you waste no time in any of the dark rooms, you should still have uses fists/feet if no weapon is available), faces the creature, and lets some oil from the first can, with the second as a spare for later. Oddly, loose. Facing is very important it doesn't matter if you run out of oil going through the here, especially when using a maze, as the lamp will stay lit until you're out of it. So revolver or rifle. It is quite easy long as you have that second can in reserve, you're okay. to miss with those weapons if It was an unwarranted assumption on the part of the you're not looking in the right designers that a player would have sufficient oil for the direction. I much preferred big moment. Some people went through almost to the the sword in most fights, as end, only to find they had to replay a lot of the game, or you can be a little off and still most of the endgame, because they had no oil. Either hit opponents, and you don't they ran out of oil entirely, or left the spare can upstairs need ammunition. (there is only so much you can carry). All this could have Which brings us to another been avoided if an extra oil can had been placed somelittle sore point in the game. where down in the tunnels. Critters fall into three basic The interface is mouse-driven, although you can also categories: those that can be use the keyboard. It takes a little getting used to, but killed, those that are indeonce you have the hang of it, it is really simple and fairly efficient. structible, and those which require special methods to be removed. It Saving and restoring can be done at almost any time in the game, is not always easy to determine which type of critter belongs in which including combat. While there aren't many save slots available, there category. is one interesting feature to it: each save is accompanied by a small You can waste a lot of time trying to kill something that can't be picture, a \"snapshot\" of where the character was when the game was destroyed. The bathtub monster is one of those, and so is the big worm saved. This, along with the title (which can have only the standard (actually a Chthonian) that lurks in the tunnels. The rats in the cellar MSDOS eight characters), can be very helpful in determining which and the spiders in the garden are also unkillable. position to bring back. On the other hand, the immaterial critter in the Overall, Alone In The Dark is one library can be killed, but you need a special of those neat games with some irriweapon for that, and the strange creatures guardtating flaws. It sets a good atmosing the stairway down from the balcony require phere and maintains it well for the non-violent methods. most part. Using Lovecraftian overSo the first rule is: if you can't kill it right off, tones adds a lot to the game. The stay away from it until you've done more reading view shifts are a novel and effective and/or found some other items to try out. Be addition. Most of the puzzles are fair. careful with the cavalry saber. It has a special use The game did NOT crash on me, or in the game, and should not be wielded as a exhibit technical problems (big plus weapon, as it is prone to breaking. I found that right there). out too late and had to replay a substantial portion Graphically, the monsters could of the game. Leave the item safely in your invenhave been better; some of them tory; there are plenty of other and better weapons available. looked more ludicrous than horrible, dangerous though they were. The The game also has a couple of «gotchas.\" Most of the reading material viewing angles could have been planned more carefully, and the design is safe, but a couple of things aren't wise to read. Unfortunately, none in general should have been cighter to prevent nasty dead ends, such of the books have exterior titles, so they have to be opened before you as running out of oil in the tunnels or using the saber in the wrong know what you're looking at. By then, it could be too late. way. Since you've been warned about those, however, you should find For instance, I opened one book to the title page and saw \"De Vermis Alone In The Dark a nice change of pace from the usual run of Mysteriis\". No. We will not read this book. As a reader of Lovecraft, adventure games. CGW Page 70 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802-767-3382 Int'l 802—767-3033 Call 800—753-4263 Shipping to US PRAK,HI, APO & FPO $4 per order. Air Mall to Canada $6 per order. Handling $1 per shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 per order; PR, HI $12 1st Item + $2 ea, add'l; AK $19 1st Item + $2 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Alr Mall S19 1st Item + S6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st Item + S6 ea. add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. IBM SIMULATION IBM SPORTS IBM TRADITIONAL Syndicate $48 Task Force 1942 $39 Task Force Admirals Pack $52 Team Yankee 2 $27 Test Drive 3 $29 Test Drive 3:Road & Car $15 Their FH Battlehawks Bundle $44 Thunderhawk $21 Tornado $52 Ultrabots Sanction Earth $39 Voice Commander F117A $18 Voice Commander F15SE3 $18 Wing Commander WC Secret Mission 1 & 2 $20 Wing Commander 1 Deluxe $48 Wing Commander 2 $48 WC 2 Operation 1 or 2 $22 WC 2 Speach Mod $13 World Circut Champnsho Ed $45 X-Wing S41 'THE 7TH GUEST is a terrilyingly real virtual environ ment lurking on a CD ROM. Henry Staufwas a maker ofamazingpuzzles. His greatest creation is the strange mansion in which you now find yourself. Features video clips with live actors, bizarre games & puzzles, 22 fully rendered rooms to explore, and many ghastly discoveries. $56 $39 $26 IBM SPORTS ML Baseball All Star $17 ML Baseball Manager's Ch $19 ML Basketball All Stars $34 ML Football 2 $39 ML Personal Pro Golf $28 ML Wrestling 1990 $28 Micro League Football Delux $39 Microleague Basebll 4 USAT S31 Microleague Basketball $28 Microsoft Golf for Windows $39 Mike Ditka Power Football S32 NFL Challenge $60 NFL Chilnge TD 1984-87 Ea $15 NFL Chlinge TD 1988-91 Ea $22 NFL Challenge All Star Team $22 NFL Challenge Premium Ed $59 NFL Football $31 NFL Pro League Football 92 $24 NFL Video Football $39 Nascar Challenge $31 PGA Tour Golf $32 PGA Tour Golf Ltd Ed $45 PGA Tour Golf WIN $38 Playmaker Football S26 Power Hits: Sports $19 Pro League Baseball $18 Pro Tennis Tour 2 $32 ProFootball Analyst 92 Edt S19 Road to the Final Four $37 Summer Challenge $34 Super Car Pak $37 Tennis Cup $32 The Games Winter Challenge$34 Tie Break Tennis $12 Tom Landry Football $24 Tony La Russa Baseball 2 $36 Tony LaR Baseball2 Stadium $18 Tony LaR Baseb2 92 Team S12 Tony La Russa Baseb2 FM $18 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 $39 Wayne Gretzky League $26 Wilson Pro Staff Golf $23 World Circuit S32 World Class Soccer $28 $32 SAIDIANS O GUARDI 'AMAZON' recaptures the fun and excitement of the 1950's drive-in movies. Travel to unexplored regions of the Amazon, fight 10 foot ants, and find emeralds stolen by Cortez. Amazing cinematic effects such as multiple camera angles, flashbacks. zooms, pans, and fades. Features full digitized voices & sound effects. S36 $21 4D Boxing $17 ABC Monday Night FB $37 ABC Wide World Boxing APBA Baseball $24 APBA Base TD 1908-91 Ea S21 APBA Baseball General Man $29 APBA Baseball Wizard 2.0 $29 APBA Basketball $34 APBA Bowling $14 APBA College Basketball $32 APBA Football $34 APBA Micro Manager $32 ATP Tennis $34 Action Sports Soccer $25 All American College Footbll $36 All Star Sports Pak $15 American Gladiators Basketball Challenge $28 Bo Jackson Baseball $32 Carl Lewis Challenge $32 Cycles Grand Prix $28 Daily Double Horse Racing $19 David Robinson NBA Action $44 Days of Thunder $24 Front Page Football $39 Future Sports S28 Greens $34 Hardball 3 $34 Hardball 3 Players Disk S17 Hardball 3 Stadium Disk $19 Harlem Globetrotters $15 Hole In One Mini Golf Delux S12 International Sports Challnge $21 Jack Nicklaus Greatest 18 $27 Jack Nicklaus Unlimited Golf $27 Jack Nicklaus CD 1-5 Ea $15 Jack Nicklaus Clip Art $12 Jack Nicklaus Signature Ed $42 Jack Nicklaus SE Course 1 $14 Jack Nicklaus SE Clip Art $24 Joe Montana Football $31 John Elway Quarterback Lakers vs Celtics $17 Lance Haffner Baseball $36 Lance Haffner Boxing $36 Lance Haffner College BBall $36 Lance Haffner Football $36 Lance Hafner Hockey $36 Lance Haffner Pro Basktball $36 Links $29 Links Courses 1-7 Each $17 Links Pro 386 Golf $39 Links Pro Course 1-6 Each $20 Low Blow $12 Madden Football 2 $32 Mario Andretti Racing $17 Michael Jordan Flight Sim $38 IBM TRADITIONAL Dr Wong's Jacks & Vid Pokr $10 Edward O'Thorpe Black Jack $9 Electric Jigsaw $12 FS-Pro $21 Faces Tetris 3 $15 Family Crossword Puzzles $28 Femme Fatale $26 Femme Fatale DD1-3 Each $18 Floor 13 $15 Game-Maker $68 Games Master WIN $19 Games People Play $21 Go Master Ver 5 GO Master Ver 5 WIN $39 Go Master Dix Ver 5 $99 Go Master Dix Ver 5 WIN $109 Grand Slam Bridge 2 $32 Grandmaster Chess $32 Home Alone 2 Hong Kong Mah Jong Pro $32 House of Cards $12 Hoyle's Book Games V1 $21 Hoyle's Book Games V2 $19 Hoyle's Book Games V3 S29 Hoyle's Book Games V4 $29 Ishido $17 Jeopardy 1 or 2 Jeopardy 25th Aniversary Jeopardy. Super Talking Jigsaw Pinups Laffer Utilities WIN Lexicross Lotto Gold Monopoly Deluxe Oligopoly Omar Sharif on Bridge Omar Sharif Bridge WIN On Target Penthouse Jigsaw Pictionary Planet of Lust Price is Right Prime Time Hits Prime Time Hits 2 Punisher Puzznic Risk Risk WIN Rodeo Games Sargon 5 Scrabble Deluxe Scruples Shanghaii2 Sharkey's 3D Pool Shogi Master Sierra Family Fun Pak Solitaire Royale Solitaire WIN Solitaires Journey Stratego Strip Poker 3 Strip Poker 3 DD 1-6 Each Super Jeopardy Super Tetris Swap Terminator Chess Tetris Classic Trump Castle 2 Trump Castle 3 Turn-n-Burn Vegas Entrtnmnt Pak WIN Video Poker AlaCarte Video Poker Villa Crespo Video Poker WIN $19 Virtual Reality Studio 2 $64 Welltris $15 Wheel of Fortune 3 $9 Wheel of Fortune Gold $15 Word Tris $27 World Champion Backgmmn $24 World Champion Cribbage S24 JUN CGW 5 $10 $12 $12 $12 $12 S10 $10 Second Conflict The Galactic Conflict Continues... 'SECOND CONFLICT' is a game of interstellar strategy & conquest for windows. Control all aspects of the economy, military. and civilian population. Allocate resources to produce battleships, planetary defenses, stealth ships, transports and missiles. Features multiple human & computer players, & a scenario editor. $34 3D Pinball 3 in 1 Players's Pack 3D Pool Acquire Amarillo Slim's Poker Amarillo Slims 7 Card Stud Armada Villa Crespo CB Backgammon WIN Battle Chess Battle Chess 4000 SVGA Blackjack WIN Bridge 7 Bridgemaster Caesars Palace WIN Casino Craps Casino Game Pak WIN Casino Master WIN Casinos of the World Centerfold Squares Checkmate DOS/WIN Chess Net WIN Chess X Colossus ChessMeister 5 Billion & 1 Chessmaster 3000 Chessmaster 3000 WIN Clue Master Detective Combination Lock Cribage Gin King Crossword Creator Dealer's Choice Demon Blue Dr Floyds Desktop Toys Dr Thorp's Blackjack $19 $36 $19 $24 $29 $15 $10 $32 $25 $29 $21 $36 $12 $9 $20 S3A S29 $34 $15 $10 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectives replaced with same product. Offer, prico & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. SEE LAST PAGE FOR DETAILS $12 $29 $10 $26 $32 "


"Piercing the Veil SSI Releases Event Horizon's Veil of Darkness by Chuck Miller Con \"O chinen hhh, my head...the throbbing! I feel like I've been clobbered with a two-by-four. The last thing I remember was the storm. Thunder...lightening flashing outside the cockpit. Then, the controls went crazy; the plane began its dive. After that. I must have blacked out. I seem to remember dragging myself from the wreckage. But how did I get here, in this room, in this bed? And what name belongs to that angelic face looking down at me?\" \"Hello. Welcome to Csarda. My name is Deidre.\" Those familiar with Event Horizon's The Summoning will find the trappings of Veil of You have antared a village. Darkness (Veil) recognizable, as it is based set to conclusion. Veil, however, is one that upon the same game engine. However, rather held me in rapt attention until I had seen it than spending the entire adventure underthrough to its resolution. It constrained me to ground, the player-as-vampire-slayer-inplay until I had rid Csarda of the evil Kairn. training invests a majority of this quest above Yet, while Veil is clearly one of the most ground in a secluded Romanian valley. Inenjoyable quests I have played this year, it stead of battling hordes of dungeon denizens, does have one notable weakness — the expehe or she must defeat the earthly and undead rience ended all too soon. While The Summinions of the evil Kairn, vampire and lord moning seemed a bit too long in total playing of Csarda. In Veil, fantasy gives way to horror time (over 100 hours), Veilerred in the oppoas the player is introduced to a dark world of site direction, providing about 10 hours less werewolves and witches as opposed to wizards play than would have been ideal (only 20 or and wyverns, an experience balanced equally 30 hours is required to complete it). Still, the well with both challenge and reward. experience is one to be savored. Where There's a QUILL, There's a Way Veilprovides players with a welcome opportunity for a change of pace. Now, it is possible to stake out one's claim in the gothic realm of vampire hunting. Current releases seem to be trending away from staid dungeon romps and into the realm of horror (i.e. Accolade's Waxworks, CyberDream's Dark Seed, and I-Motion's Alone in the Dark, as well as Virgin's impending The 7th Guest and MicroProse's The Legacy and Return of the Phantom), a Putting the Bite on refreshing change that many gamers have the Competition? long awaited. The hero, though decidedly male, is named Graphically, Veil is not what I would define by the player at the start of the game (when as stunning. While the palette is well chosen conversing with the inhabitants of this darkto emphasize the \"darktheme of the game, ened land, the player is referred to by that the actual art, in some cases, is a bit crude in name, a welcome personal touch). Once play comparison to the VGA works of art provided commences, it soon becomes evident that Veil by other developers. Yet, the imagery is clean places greater emphasis on puzzle solving than and attractive, especially the character poron combat, a significant change from the traits, and does not detract from game play. emphasis in The Summoning. There is, in fact, The interface, designed with the player in very little combat in comparison. Most of Veil mind, has been refined from earlier games involves unraveling the secrets of Csarda and with added touches to complement the horfinding the bits and picces necessary to sucror style employed (1 especially like the body ceed in the quest and lift the curse that has in the casket used to indicate character conlong held the land in its grasp. dition, turning into a skeleton as damage is accrued). Game options are easily selected Put This in Your PIPE (printing of text, sound toggle, loading and saving) with plenty of save positions available and Smoke It! for those times when a quick restore is needed. To be honest, not every adventure succeeds Audibly, Veil is above average by current cqually well in holding my interest from outstandards, and provides just the right feel for ER TORTELB FEL TITLE: SYSTEM: PRICE: GRAPHICS: SOUND: Veil of Darkness IBM and Compatibles $59.95 VGA Ad Lib, Sound Blaster, Roland and Compatible Sound Cards Documentation Look-up, Symbol Identification Event Horizon Software, Inc. Strategic Simulations, Inc. Sunnyvale, CA (408) 737-6800 PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: Page 72 Computer Gaming World "


"CHIPS & BITS inc. FREE GAME WITH YOUR $75 ORDER* PO Box 234 Rochester, VT 05767 Fax 802—767-3382 Int'l 802—767-3033 Call 800-753-4263 Shipping to US.PR.AK,HI, APO & FPO $4 por order. Air Mall to Canada $6 per order. Handling $1 por shipment. 2 Business Day Air US $6 por order; PR, HI $12 1st item + $2 ea, add'l; AK $19 1st item + $2 ea, add'l. Handling $1 per shipment. Europe, S. America Air Mall $19 1st Item + $6 ea. add'l. Asia, Australia, Africa, Air Mall $25 1st Itom + 6 ca. add. Handling $1 per shipment, MAC GAMES AMIGA GAMES AMIGA GAMES   $32 Test Drive 2 Thunderstrike Time Machine Trump Castle 2 Turrican UMS 2 Universe 3 Untouchables Warhead Warlock Wild Wheels World Class Leader Board Xenophobe Yeager's AFT 2.0 Zone Warrior S17 'AIR DUEL' lets you experience air-to-air combat across the de cades with everything from a sopwith camel to a MIG 23. Features combat in 6 historic periods, ability to match aircraft from different time periods, a selection of 12 aircraft each with its own unique flight characteristics and weapons, & modem play. $38  $34 $24 S34 $25 $32 S26 $25 $26 $26 80 YEARS OF DOGFIGHTING $34 $32 $29 MICROPROSE      *FREE GAME OFFER $36 $38 $17 lubu 4th & Inches Battle Chess Checkmate Dragon's Lair Dragon's Lair COLOR Dragon's Lair 2:Time Warp S34 Dragon's Lair Esc Singes C $34 Hardball 2 Harpoon Harpoon Battle Set 2 Harpoon Battle Set 4 Harpoon Scenario Editor $27 Ishido $34 Lemmings $29 Lexicross $32 Life and Death Might & Magic 1 & 2 Monopoly Out of This World VGA PGA Tour Golf PGA Tour Golf Course 1 Pick'n Pile Pools of Darkness $38 Puzzle Master $32 Railroad Tycoon $45 Reach for the Stars $29 Red Baron COLOR $39 Secrt Monkey Island COLOR $38 Space Ace Space Ace 2 $34 Spirit of Excalibur COLOR $29 Starflight 1 or 2 $38 Super Tetris $32 Test Drive 2 $27 Test Drive 2:CA Challenge $15 Test Drive 2:Supercars $15 Trump Castle 2 $34 V Victory Vette $33 Warlords $29 Welltris $24 Where In Europe is Carmen $30 Where World is Carmen SD $27 Wordtris $29 Yeager's AFT $32 $28 Spend the specified amount on any in stock software and choose a free game from the corresponding list below. Offer subject to change or cancellation without notice. Valid only while supplies last. SPEND $75 $34 Dirgjonato Para Deer A little Undercover Were \"LEISURE SUIT LARRY 5 teams Larry up with Passionate Patty for a rollicking genderbending romp through the sleazy music underworld. Help them take on the Mob, the FBI, and the Citizens Against Nearly Everything in their spiciest caperyet. Features hand painted graphics, mouse interface, & some outrageous animation. $36 388 38 4th & Inches Artura Colorado Gunship Hole in 1 Mini Golf Dix Obliterator Third Courier TKO Trump Castle DD1 Trump Castle DD2 Video Poker for Windows $38 Death Bringer $28 Dino Wars $28 Dragons of Flame $12 Duck Tales $31 Elf Faery Tale Adventure $31 Fast Break $17 Federation $34 Fire Power Flames of Freedom MWII $29 Fleet Med $36 Flood $29 Globulus $22 Gravity $34 Greens Gun Boat Hard Nova HardBall Heatwave Heavy Metal $35 Heros Qst 2: Trial Fire $34 Hostage $31 HoverForce $31 Ishido $36 Jack Nicklaus Greatest 18 $27 Jack Nicklaus Unlimited Golf $39 Jack Nicklaus CD 1-5 Each $15 Joan of Arc $31 Journey $34 Keys to Maramon $32 Khalaan $34 Knights of the Crystalion $37 Koshan Conspiracy $32 Legend of the Lost License to Kill Lost Patrol M1 Tank Platoon Magic Fly Matrix Marauders $28 Mean 18 Golf $30 Might & Magic 2 $38 Millenium $24 Moebius $41 Murder $29 Never Mind $26 Night Breed $14 Night Shift Nitro $32 Omega Operation Spruance $34 Plague $28 Populous 2 Challenge $24 Populous World Editor $16 Powermonger World War 1 $21 Projectyle $28 Quix $25 RVF Honda $30 Red Storm Rising $29 Red Zone $25 Rick Dangerous Rings of Medusa $34 Road Rash Robocop 2 $34 Rommel at El Alamein $36 Search for the King $37 Secret Monkey Island $38 Shadowlands $20 Ski or Die Space Ace 2 $34 Space Quest 3 $34 Spacewrecked Star Control Starflight 1 Stellar 7 Stratego Street Rod 2 Strike Fleet Stryx $25 Super Space Invaders $24 Superman $28 Terran Envoy $27 SPEND $100 AMIGA GAMES VGA $19 ASIERRA $34 $25 Acquire Airborne Ranger Backgammon by George Big Business Blue Max Edward O'Thorpe Black Jack Future Wars Mac Arthur's War Magic Johnson Fast Break Operation Combat Pirates Punisher SC Out SDI Sound Star Tie Break Tennis The Tinies Under Fire $34 CARRIERS AT WAR $28 $31 $25 $32 Altered Destiny $37 Amazing Spiderman Amnios $29 Anarchy $24 Arthur Quest for Excalibur Artura Atomino $29 Batman Caped Crusader Batman the Movie Battle Chess 2 Chinese $29 Battle Command $26 Battle Master $38 Blockout $28 Blue Max Aces Great War $34 Bride of the Robot $28 Budokan $26 Cardinal of the Kremlin $32 Chamber Sci-Mutant Prstss $31 Chase HQ $28 Checkmate $36 Chronoquest 2 $34 Clue Master Detective Codename Iceman $15 Conqueror $34 Crackdown Cribage Gin King Cybercon 3 Dark Castle Dark Side Darkman Das Boot Submarine $34 Day of the Viper $33 DETS 'THE CARRIERS AT WAR CONSTRUCTION KIT provides an infinitely flexible tool for creating a particular battle or an original scenario. Build ships and planes, organize squadrons, draft maps, position air bases and adjust the artificial intelligence used by the computer. 3 new scenariosincluded; Wake Island, Guadalcanal, & Tarawa. $37 SPEND $200 $32 $28  CONSTRUCTION KIT 989333       Bridge 7.0 Cardinal of the Kremlin Chess Net Covert Action Dark Half Dusk of the Gods Free DC Megafortress Megatraveller 1: Zodani Patton Strikes Back Railroad Tycoon Sentinel Worlds Shadow Sorcerer Storm Across Europe Trump Castle 2 JUN CGW 6 $28 $29 Visa & MC Accepted. CODs $6. Checks Held 4 Weeks. Money Orders Treated as Cash. Most Items Shipped Same Day. Shipping times not guaranteed. Check compatibility before you buy. Defectivos replaced with same product. Offer, price & availability subject to change. All Sales Final. "


"MeuneID the game world. Though sound effects are sparse, the soundtracks are quite mood enhancing, stirring the player's sense of dread and suspense. The resulting atmosphere is as rich as that of any game I have played in recent months. still needs to be a few more creatures to battle during the game. For being overrun with evil, the land seemed too sparsely populated with skeletons, vampires and the like. (Note that while Veil does offer the player three levels of play, this only regulates combat difficulty and not the number of opponents). You are trapped behind the Vall of Darness! OLIE Die Epitaphs and Cartographs Documentation, always a strong suit with SSI, offers a gripping introduction to the game. The Prelude, which runs for 32 pages, is a well-written background to the events preceding Veil. Enjoyable fiction on its own, this piece sets the stage for the interactive horror to follow and enhances the mood conveyed in the quest. Conversations within the game, also written with great aplomb, add further to the development of the story and the internal tension. Asin previous releases from Event Horizon, automapping is provided for underground Vial of Holy Water w ..5 lb. locations (the mausoleum, cave and catacombs), allowing the player to print out maps if desired. Above ground locations, displayed on the Valley Map (new to this quest), are not expansive enough to disorient the player. Though locations are limited initially, as new locations are mentioned in conversation they appear on the map, increasing the number of areas to explore. Holy Water and Silver Bullets Though weaknesses are few in this adventure, room does exist for improvement. Animation is a little choppy at points, especially in animated close-ups. Adding a few more frames of animation would certainly help. The speed of movement of the player's character also seemed a bit slow. While smoothly animared, the ability to adjust speed would be a welcome feature. In addition, object management could stand some improvement, especially with regard to the selection of \"containers\" in which to carry one's possessions. Most pouches look exactly alike (let's see, which pouch has the potions in it?). There are also some \"hidden words» in this game that the player must discover by simple guesswork. This only poses a problem in two specific instances, but is a bit frustrating nonetheless. (See the two allcapitalized words on page 72 for assistance). Although there is a greater emphasis on puzzle solving in Veil than on combat, there Easy on the Garlic! Event Horizon is a growing company providing high caliber games. With strong releases like Veil, players have much to look forward to in the future. For the present, Veil of Darkness is an adventure that offers many hours of quality entertainment for the night stalker in each of us. While it may not make Game of the Year for 1993, it is definitely one that I am glad to have played. Now, if I can just get the smell of garlic out of my clothes...CGW The Skalatos misses! The WARGAMER'S ER'S NEW! FROM Computer Company       SIMULATIONS AIDE DE CAMP Authentic weapons capabilities with authentic combat results. Take ANY board wargame and play it on your PC. Play-by mail or modem. Unmatched detail down to individual rounds resolution. Save floor space and playing time. PENTRU A Ter r a OPETUS Over 100 weapons from 11 nations. Set in the volatile Middle East, Point of Attack operates on Create colorful maps, up to 30,000 hexes, by using the a platoon-section level. Create custom engagements, or drawing editor to design terrain and units. Multiple explore one of the five scenarios. Features night combat, user-defined zoom levels. Permanently save game set-ups adjustable weather conditions, morale and other intangible as well as turns including movement and combat for later factors, advanced artillery, and lots more. review/replay. Compatible with all game systems, theaters, scales and eras. Design your own game. The most realistic PC tactical combat simulation Imagination is your only limit. available! Requires a hard disk, VGA display, and at least 600K of RAM. Requires an EGA display and at least 512K of RAM. Mouse optional. (Board games must be purchased separately.) IBM only $54.95 IBM only $79.95 Mail checks/money orders to: Available only by mail. VISA/MASTERCARD CALL (408)554-8381 Please add $4.00 shipping and handling. HPS Simulations, P.O. Box 3245 CA residents add state sales tax. Santa Clara, CA 95055-3245 Please specify disk spec when ordering. CircleReader Service #60 "


"Might and Magic XEEN Xeen's future grows dim under the shadow of Alamar the Tyrant. Alamar has stolen the Cube of Power, a source of grand magic and key to the destiny of Xeen. The Queen is prisoner and the Dragon Pharoah is besieged at the royal Pyramid, deserted by his allies, and betrayed might by his friends. With the Magic collapse of the old orderthe 1229 KOSE ELE Doo IB3000 29 aoe covenant of peace between men and monsters lies in an ruins. The bleeding land cries 0465 out for heroes. >> Fifth in the award winn ESTAS Might and Magic series, Darkside of Xeen continues New World Computing's Join the Darkside of Xeen with the Clouds of Xeen and enter a realm larger than two worlds combined... 9 Enter the World of Xeen \"At last the Moons are aligned, and your destiny awaits\" tradition of excellence in gaming Circle Reader Service #74 NEW WORLD COMPUTING, INC. COPYRIGHT 1993. NEW WORLD COMPUTING, INC. MIGHT & MAGIC AND NEW WORLD COMPUTING ARE REGISTERED TRADEMARKS OF NEW WORLD COMPUTING, INC IBM SCREENS SHOWN. ACTUAL SCREENS MAY VARY. AVAILABLE AT YOUR LOCAL SOFTWARE RETAILER OR DIRECT FROM NEW WORLD AT 1-800-325-8898 (OR 1-818-999-0607 OUTSIDE U.S.) P.O. Box 4302 HOLLYWOOD, CA 90078-4302 "


"MeuneIn The Universe of BUCOS Wings by Chris A. Lombardi Photo Courtesy of Lucas Film any games have been long awaited by The wait is over, and the anticipation has base for the Rebellion's activities and the cengamers in the ten years of this hobby. culminated in X-Wing: Space Combat Simutral interface, X finds himself in a large spaceSix months, a year, sometimes two lator, an intense retelling of the story of the port with several accessways. Here, one gets a do gamers drool at ads, ogle magazine covers, Rebel Alliance viewed from the seat of a star feel of what's to come; pleasant graphics, and pester their local merchant for the date, flighter cockpit. The game is part adventure snatches of digitized speech, a slick and inforthe date, the date. But the wait for this prodgame, part simulator, and many parts of lav-mative mouse interface, and loads of atmosucr goes beyond the year since the project was ish Star Wars detail, born of a synergetic phere. Yet, one has little patience for announced. Some could mark the date back action between LucasArts' storytelling talappreciating such things at this point and, to 1983 when LucasArts' game division (nce ents, their extremely talented artistic staff, besides, X will wear a pixel pathway through Lucasfilm Games) was born our of the vision and their successful combat simulations this scene before the last Tie is flamed. of the film group and a million dollar grant group headed by Lawrence Holland (Battlefrom Atari. The only thing that could come hawks 1942, Their Finest Hour, S.W.O.T.L). to mind then was Star Wars. An incredibly LucasArts has been very careful to stress the ripe universe, a gaming company, a guaransimulation aspect of this game-most likely teed audience of many thousands—it was a out of marketing considerations—but there natural if there ever was one. And we vainly has been some debate among gamers on waited for many years for the obvious to whether that classification applies. Action manifest itself. game, simulation, it's splitting wookie hairs ACCURAT SULATOR Some, though, could put the date for the to me; X-Wing is one of those genre mixing beginning of this Great Expectation back games that eludes simple taxonomies and Liveste lillult lind Glina much further-back before computer games keeps BBSs in business with pointless debates. were a consideration-back, indeed, to 1977 One should expect a moderately complex when a generation of kids (myself at an imfighter simulation with many intense dogpressionable cight), spellbound by the magic fighting furballs, nail-biting missions, and of George Lucas' film, came out of the theaterm many hours of play, all culminating in The zooming several feet off the ground, their Final Mission—The Trench Scene. heads filled with the sounds of impassioned star fighter squawk, and their hands on the The Initiation stick of an X-wing The player comes into the X-wing universe as an untrained novice with a distaste for the Empire's politics and, presumably, many dead Womp Rats unders his belt. After successfully passing the rire of copy protection, the player checks in at the registration desk, X-wing: Space Combat Simulator taking on the persona of, for the sake of this SYSTEM: IBM (386/33 recommended, IMB RAM required, more recommended) article, Star Fighter X. The player does not VGA play Luke Skywalker (unless you provide that PRICE: $69.95 PROTECTION: Documentation Look-Up name) though X will find that his or her DESIGNERS: Lawrence Holland & Edward Kilham destiny will have uncanny parallels with PUBLISHER: LucasArts Luke's. San Rafael, CA (415) 721-3342 Entering the Flagship Independence, the TITLE: GRAPHICS: T LOS Page 76 Computer Gaming World "


"The first step is to the Pilot Training power. Their complement of torpedoes are Grounds. Unfortunately, unlike the hero of extremely dangerous, and will end up sinking the film, X cannot step from a sand speeder more than one of X's missions. into an X-Wing and know the difference between the targeting indicator and a dashThe Hero's Path board rivet. He'll have to fly through several hundred gates on a training course before With the Proving Grounds and the Historibeing awarded a flight certification. Each cal Missions under his belt, X is ready to enlist training level becomes progressively more difficult as more laser firing obstacles are placed about each gare and the allored level-complerion time is lowered. Though graduated in difficulty, these training levels will quickly become quite difficult for the initiate as he hits the first learning slope of the game-figuring out how to configure the power systems of the craft. Feel The Power, X Before discussing the power system, it must be mentioned that X will not only fly the X-wing, but the A-wing, and Y-wing as well. In the fiction of the game, the Y-wing is an older model of fighter and the slowest in the fleet. It bears two frontal lasers, an ion cannon used to disable ships, and a healthy complement of torpedos. The A-wing is the newest craft in the fleet and is the fastest and most manuveurable ship in the Rebel arsenal. The X-wing falls in the middle with its mid-range maximum speed and turning rate, its four wing-mounted lasers, and a small pack of torpedos. Each craft will be used somewhat randomly from mission to mission, so X had better train in each craft before continuing in a Tour of Duty. There are three tours; the first two with 12 missions and the third with 14. Though X is given the choice of enlisting in any one of them, it is logical and recommended that he follow them in order. Each tour has an ultimate object, explained in a few introductory paragraphs that scrolls off into a star field as in the famous introduction to the first Star Wars film. The story of the tour is developed further in the mission briefings and in cinematic sequences interspersed throughout the tours. These cinematic sequences are beautifully drawn and composed; their only fault is that there are too few: two for each of the first two tours, and three for the last. Fans of that Other popular space combat game, who became enamored of its \"branching\" storyline should not expect the same of X-Wing. In X-Wing the story does not play out the possibilities of failure; X will have to replay his missions until he finally succeeds. I won't waste space arguing the value of one over the other (it really doesn't matter to me—I never followed the \"failure\" branches of the Other game, anyway); players should simply know what not to expect. The missions themselves are nicely varied in objective. X will make atrack runs on fleer craft, rescue captured allies, defend ships from attack, and eventually make \"ground strikes\" on the Death Star. Some of these missions are cake walks for the experienced pilot, but others are extremely difficult; and the difficulty doesn't crescendo as one might expect. Here we arrive at one of X-Wing's weaknesses. X will find that he soars through four straight missions without so much as batting a lash, only to find that the next mission will have him stumped for hours—sometimes days! Though I didn't keep a tab, I've replayed some of these difficult missions upwards of two dozen times. I would suspect myself of being especially weak in the Force if I hadn't heard the same from others. The missions are simply unbalanced. E| = on. Though differing slightly in performance, each craft is operated in the same way. As mentioned, the key to success is power management. Each ship is somewhat like a flying battery that supplies power at a slow but steady rare. This power can be directed to the engines, the lasers, or to the shields. Diverting power to one area reduces the amount available to the others. Through the training missions, X will learn the series of keystrokes needed to move this power around, and will soon find that he is deftly directing the energy of his battery-powered craft like a skilled Jedi with his battery-powered sabre. Once a few flight badges are earned in the proving grounds, X moves on to the Historical Missions for his first taste of combat. There are six missions for cach craft here, cach a graduated step into a full-blown mission. Here one is introduced to the basic enemy craft: the TIE fighter, the TIE bomber, and the various larger craft used by both the Rebellion and the Empire. The TIE Fighters are the grunts of the Empire's force, and X will flame fleets of them before its all over. If the ships in X-wing are flying battery cells, then the X-wings are \"D\" cells, and the TIEs are watch batteries. Two or three laser blasts will cut them in two. The bombers are a little tougher, both in shield power and in fire MIST Star Destrorer fleet orbiting a Rebel base on the planet Orion IV. The Dark Side Through an exchange with LucasArts I've learned from them that the missions were designed as puzzles to be figured out and solved. This is entirely accurate. The tougher missions have a very specific \"solution\" that must be execured with heroic precision. Fly to point A, knock out fighters with inhuman accuracy, race to point B, knock our bombers with same, race to point C to nip off a second bomber squadron at the last possible second. While this is extremely challenging and will make for many hours of play, I'm not convinced that it's the most effective design possible. It yanks X out of the fiction of the game when he has to play a mission five times, just to figure out what his true objective is, and then, to play the next dozen times trying to execute the path perfectly. Often, success requires X to anticipate the June 1993 Page 77 "


"Deunen 50 1000 1911 I don't understand is why players are forced to go outside of the game into the nasty darkness of DOS to do this. I don't see why the player cannot make his own choice between playing the game \"realistically,\" that is, letting dead pilots lie, or having the capacity within the game to pretend that the fatal mission was just a bad dream. On a related note is the issue of wingmen. In most missions, X will be a part of a team of fighters, either as a wingman or a flight leader. In spite of the appearance of help, one arrival of enemy units, and unrealistically race should consider most missions to be solo misout into space to meet a «surprise\" attack from sions-wingmen are about as useful as a row the Empire. It's all a matter of balance, young boat on Tattooine. Even ace wingmen are Jedi, and on the sliding scale of Trivially Easy only short-term enemy diversions on most to Joystick Flinging Frustration, X-wingoften missions. Though they might take out the stumbles awkwardly toward the latter. From occasional fighter or flagship, X will end up atop the reviewer's high ground of hindsight, with the lion's share of the kills. One will still want good wingmen (if only for psychological it seems a player-controlled difficulty serring support) and so must develop them—the \"demight have been a good solution. velopment» usually consisting of poping into Related to the mission difficulty is the issue DOS and cloning pilots with the COPY comof pilot management, which has a few quirks mand. of its own. The Rebel fighters have an amazing cjection system which will automatically shoot X between the teeth of the jaws of death whenever he succumbs to a swarm of TIEs or accidentally slams into another ship. This will save his hide many times. Unfortunately, if the ejection system is damaged, X will die, and if not, he will often be captured by the Empire. Either way, he meets the same end; he is gone and can only be recovered by Reviving him from the main pilot screen. Unfortunately, a Revived pilot loses all score and all rank (though for some reason he will retain all his special honors and medals). So, While in critical mode, I should mention an if the player wants X to complete the game especially disappointing oversight: the docuwith any sort of rank, score, or dignity he score, or dignity he mentation. Larry Holland's previous flight must get through the game without getting simulators have had lavish manuals packed captured or killed. This is virtually impossiwith photos, history and detail—they have ble; I'd ber the price of an expansion disk that lead the industry. For X-wing, LucasArts no one has done it. commisioned a beautiful book/manual from So, if one plays within the confines of the Prima Publishing called The Farlander Pagame, X will end up completing the final pers. Its 100 pages packed full of pictures and mission rated as a Rookie a Rookie draped history from the films, the Papers follow the with honors, bur a Rookie no less). No selffictional account of one Keyan Farlander, a respecting gamer is going to allow this, so one young pilot not unlike our dear Pilot X. For resorts to making backups of the pilot files or some reason, LucasArts decided that this acquiring a nifty file editing program from a would be a \"collector's item\" that would only BBS. Editing or backing up pilot files to ship with the first 100,000 copies. Word has remove unsightly KIAs and POWs is a com it that these went remarkably fast, and so the mon practice in all combat simulators. What rest of the gamers will go without. What is left is a dry, black and white, 20 page booklet Inflight Map which isn't much more than a glorified (and poorly glorified at that) reference card. Very disappointing. ships, and especially with several torpedoes in the air, things became a bir choppy, though a quick switch into a lower detail level will usually smooth out the ride. At the highest detail level, the ships look quite nice; X will see identifying colors and insignias, as well as textured panels and ship accessories like gun emplacements and antennae. At the lowest level, all of this detail is stripped away. On a high end 486 one can play comfortably at a mid-range setting, but in the large scale bartles one will have to jump down a few notches. Other simulation features include the standard multiple ship views, with the interior views all meticulously drawn to reflect differences in cach of the three fighter types. There is also a Camera function that allows X to record his missions and review them from the perspective of any object in the mission. On the whole, the fight model is excellently execured and a joy to play. And LucasArts should be given a special combat medal for their heroic quality assurance; in 30+ hours of play, the game crashed but once. The Resolution Like the universe of Lucas' creation, X-wing is composed of both Light & Dark, Good & Bad. Also like the Star Wars universe, the bad. Also like the Star Wars universe, the Good soundly spanks the Bad when all is said and done. While I occasionally cursed the game when replaying a tough mission for the umpteenth time, still, I must say that I enjoyed the experience tremendously. In spite of Master Yoda's reachings to the contrary, (\"Adventure! Hmph! Excitement. Hmph! A Jedi craves nor these things.\"), I wait with mind-clouding impatience for the forthcoming add-on disks and sequel. CGW ing add-on dicke The Chariot of Deliverance Left Right Down LL Beyond these problematic peripheral matters lies the heart of X-Wing the combat simulation itself. The polygon-based flight model is cleanly implemented. On a 386\, the game plays smoothly when there are a dozen or so ships in the scenario. With more zoom ASIME 14 CLOSINC JG Spacecraft 5 of 15 2 EXE Page 78 Computer Gaming World "


"OVER 30,000 MOVIES W LIBRARY ADD YOUR OWN INFORMATION ON MOVIES, TV SHOWS OR ANYTHING ELSE TO OUR HUGE BUILT-IN FILM LIBRARY PERPETUAL TRIVIA GAME FOR 1 TO 4 PLAYERS **** THE ULTIMATE FILM INFORMATION SYSTEM **** 19-5 mu Tim NILO 1.0.1 LIU FILM REVIEW LIBRARY OVER 30,000 MOVIES LISTED 1 For IBM PC and TANDY compatibles. Supports all video formats. SRP $59.95 Made in USA. FLICKS! is the most comprehensive and sophisticated movie database ever. West Your Movie Knowledge with our Perpetual Trivia Game! C EXT Track actors, dintors, countries, categories awak puasonal library infomation, and more tegories. The whole family can play the FLICKS! Trivia Game, with different skill levels and time limits. \"Trivia Villa Crespo Software Find. Add and Collect Information on Your Favorite Movies, TV Shows and Home Videos. Easy-to-Use Graphical Interface. Animations and Sound Add to Your Enjoyment. Available at Software Sellers Everywhere! For more information, call 1-708-433-0500 or fax 1-708-433-1485. Villa Crespo Software. Inc. 1725 McGovern Street, Highland Park, IL. 60035. 1993 Villa Crespo Software Inc. Equipment mentions are Trademark Registrations of their tivecompanic Circle Reader Service #100 "


"A New Dimension Tim Tyler a.k.a. \"Tyre\" Toronto, Canada \"Merlin, I'll cast a cure spell on you.\" Ed Avis a.k.a. \"Merlin\" Camden, NJ 'Tyre! Help! I'm wounded.\" TM DRAKKER STAR RUISER Le s , \"lles, Balar, why derilen the door and eller the rear.\" WWW 243 Chat and play games with people from around the world without ever leaving your home. MPG-NET gives you something you can't find on floppy disk; on-line realtime contact with the most puzzling and challenging entity of all time. Another human mind. Play pulse-pounding, intriguing, forever challenging games with stunning graphics and vibrant sound. Games that are constantly improving so they won't get stale. Form strategies, share secrets and solve puzzles with up to 100 folks from around the world, twenty-four hours a day. In addition to our games we have Bulletin Boards so you can write public messages to other players, and Electronic Mail to send private messages. We also have Chat Rooms in which you can shoot the breeze LIVE with people from around the world. All you need is a modem, a phone line, and a computer; IBM-PC compatible, Macintosh, or Amiga. come visit a land where dragons C roam free, rodents grow to unusual size, and adventurers are the endangered species. Team up with players from around the world. Together, explore mysterious lands, armed only with your enchanted weapons, psionic spells, and wits. You'll find untold riches and glory while solving intriguing puzzles, and destroying the mightiest of beasts. MPG-NET brings you the ultimate in fantasy role playing. The year is 2300 A.D. We've discovered stardrive and colonized hundreds of new solar systems. In the process, however, we pissed off some very nasty aliens. To say they hate us is an understatement. They'll do anything to eliminate us from space. No compromises. This is all-out interstellar war. We need your help! Based on GDW's classic space combat game, MPG-NET brings you the on-line version of Star Cruiser a 3D, multi-player campaign of splitsecond action. 1992 MPG Net, Inc Multi-Player Games Network and MPG-Net are service marks of MPG-Net, Inc. The Kingdom of Drakkar is a trademark of Drakkar Corp. Computer network versions of Empire Builder. Star Cruiser, Operation Market Garden, and the Kingdom of Drakkar are designed and developed by Tantalus Inc. All other brand and product names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective holders. "


"in Entertainment ...Your Multi-Player Games Network. Brad Elk a.k.a. \"Sauer\" Louisville, KY \"If you need some help, just page me.\" Lori Zini a.k.a. \"Diana\" Waco, Tx \"What tore you up. Merlin?\" EMPIRE OPERATION MARKET-GARDEN DELE 1.038:50 MPG-NET is accessible from over 600 cities in the United States and over 80 cities internationally. It costs less than you think: $4.00 per hour in the continental US and $3.00 per hour in the N.Y. city area. These costs are all inclusive. There are no hidden communication fees. Dial toll free 800-GET-GAME and we'll send you your account number, password, start-up kit, and 5 free hours right away. For more information call 800-245-0317 VH1 NESRE LED ESRA Three elite Allied paratroop divisions Combining two great American drop into enemy territory. Their Cloves: Railroads and Money! mission, to seize the bridges leading up Now you can capture the to the Rhine — the last obstacle of entrepreneurial spirit of America and Allied advancement into the heart of build your own railroad empire. The Germany. They almost succeed. wheels of progress are you and up to Scattered remnants of Axis forces five other players from around the already defeated in France must guard world, locked in a power struggle of the Rhine the first-line of defense for epic proportions. the Third Reich. They almost lose. It takes planning and ambition to MPG-NET brings you the on-line build a railroad empire. And only the version of Operation Market-Garden, best will endure. Experience MPGGDW's classic two-player war game, NET's on-line version of Mayfair Games' based on the biggest airborne award-winning, classic board game. operation in history. MPG-NET Your Multi-Payer Games Networks 800-GET-GAME 800-438-4263 Circle Reader Service #73 "


"e Deyneu (illenium's Daughter of Serpents by Robin Matthews he gaming world's unofficial Year of Egypt-Anthony and Cleopatra, lost scrolls, The gaming world is not presented in the Horror is well underway. With the respells and a terrible curse. The player takes the typical graphic adventure third person perlease of SSI's Veil of Darkness, I-Morole of either a pre-defined character (the spective, but rather by way of a \"first person\" tion's Alone in the Dark and Shadow of the usual ones you might find in an Agatha Chrisperspective, seen through the eyes of the charComet, and the inevitable release of Virgin's tie novel, varying from landed gentry, acter. To those reared on more typical advenSeventh Guest, gamers are up to their necks in through wizened New York cop, to amateur ture games, the lack of a hero on the screen garlic, holy water and silver bullets. sleuth) or the player can create his or her own. may seem strange, but it does allow greater Into this hotbed of spooky software, UK \"The character creation routine is quite versadetail to be drawn into the locations. software house Millenium has unleashed tile and has lots of different professions and As per the latest trends, the game system has Daughter of Serpents. Designed by Eldritch skills allowing players to personalize their ta name—SIGNOS (Scripted Interactive Games of Hound of the Shadow fame, this is hero so that he/she is an expert in reading Graphic Novel Operating System). The mana graphic adventure with a degree of rolee with a degree of rolepapyrus scrolls, but not so hot on toxicology. papyrus scrolls, Dut not so not on toxicology: ual states that SIGNOS is a system designed playing. Eldritch's Hound was a very successThe story starts with a boat berthing in for \"plot-based computer role-playing games, ful Amiga graphic adventure, considered as Alexandria and its passengers disembarking, where dialogue and interaction with characone of the best of its kind released on the As one's character walks off the ship, a distin ters are a key feature.\" It basically works on Commodore box, and was ahead of its time, guished, fez-wearing gentleman is maniacally the premise of a limited number of locations though perhaps a bit too ambitious. stabbed by a locally dressed native. The native that are visited by selecting them from an Daughter of Serpents claims to have been is in turn shot and as he dies turns into a inventory-held map. In some locations at cerwritten as a tribute to the style of HP Love grotesque reptile creature. This occurrence tain stages of the game, one will encounter craft, in particular to the Cthulhu mythos. probably causes a mild stir, but the player just either NPCs or items. These are recognized The main themes of The Call of the Cibulhu toddles along and books into a hotel. by an intelligent cursor and can be commu(written by Lovecraft in 1926) were of the Depending on which profession the player nicated with or manipulated. total insignificance of the human race, and of has chosen, there will be a message for him or Conversations are depicted by cartoonish mankind only being able to retain its sanity her at the reception desk. This message sets speech bubbles. The only degree of interacby remaining ignorant of the horrors that the tone for that character the tone for that character's adventure, which tion in conversation is through the highlightsurround it. varies slightly from character to charactering of odd bits of text; this operates like the The plot of Daughters is set in the city of though the basic theme is a common one of typical \"keyword\" conversation system and Alexandria and revolves around Ancient intrigue, mysticism and MURDER! triggers further text. This inevitably makes Page 82 Computer Gaming World "


"Devnet M OTNOS   . TI the game linear and does not allow any real Much of the supplementary information can deviation from a single plot line. be ignored and, as long as you click the mouse The locations are few in number and, alquick enough, game length can be measured though graphically pleasing, they are re-visin hundreds of minutes. The initial character ited constantly and eventually become over creation routines create an expectation of vaused. The map approach is also hammered to riety, replayability and multi-solutions. In redeath as is the use of animated sequences. At ality this is not delivered and it is unlikely that one point the player's character relates what anyone will have the patience to click their eir has been happening to another character, and way through more than a second time. the player is forced to sit through a black and Documentation is sparse, but includes white replay of an earlier animation. This is some interesting notes for a paper and pencil pure padding, but bearing in mind the overall version which does add to the software prodlength of the game, this is not too surprising. uct. Other than the main gaming world screen, On the positive side Daughters does have two others can be accessed by moving the some very nice touches. There is some superb cursor to the lower right and left corners. One additional detail that is accessed by referring is an inventory: the other is a \"manipulation to a Thomas Cooks guide, and some of the area where items can be used and viewed. locations and sequences are very well preWhen selected, these screens actually replace sented. Also, notes are automatically made in the main view. These screens would have been a diary that can be readily referred to, avoidbetter presented by way of windows or drop ing reams of manually taken comments. down options, especially as there are so few Auto-mapping is an irrelevance, both because locations. The present system is unwieldy and of the method of travel and the limited numserves to disturb the limited atmosphere of the ber of locations. product. Ultimately, Daughter of Serpents is a disapThe other main problem with the game is pointment. The graphics are well crafted and its length. Hardened gamers who have the sound support is good. The storyline is cracked the likes of Crusaders of the Dark fine, and there is a wealth of background and Savant within a month will probably take historical detail, but the problem is with the about a full afternoon to complete Daughters. actual gaming system; it is linear to the extreme, and the player can hardly affect the game play at all. At times gameplay is merely a matter of clicking the mouse button to force up the next bit of text or the next automatic sequence. The overriding impression is one of looking at a slightly interactive demo. Again from the manual Millenium state that Daughters of Serpents «is probably the closest to the techniques used in graphic novels, although it could be described as an interactive drama.\" OK, it is graphic and, granted, it is novel, but regretfully it is neither interacrive nor dramatic. Hound of the Shadow did fail in some respects, but it did manage to succeed in many areas, particularly in the development of atmosphere. Daughters by comparison is almost totally sterile. Millenium states that Daughters of Serpents is an ambitious project, but nowadays the standards are so very high for both graphic adventures and role-playing. Pretty graphics and system acronyms do not a good product make, and for a certainty, Daughter of Serpents will not endure as long as have other pieces of Egyptology. Perhaps something can be retrieved from this gaming system, but currently, although it may look the part the game, it is as about as interesting as a camels hump, and probably is about as attractive as other parts of a dromedaries anatomy. CGW Graeco-Roman Museum Rue du Moore Alexandria Misa Jones Poate Restante Savoy Palace Hotel Dean Miss Jones, Thank you for your recent letter, enquiring about the procedure for obtaining archeological excavation permits. I do not normally involve myself with such matters, but as you come recommended by a friend of many 20 to      June 1993 Page 83 "


"BEST V BESTE of the All in the Family Traditional Coffee Table Games in the Shareware Family REST The world of shareware by Chuck Miller A role plas s much as I enjoy a good adventure or role-playing game, one where I can I immerse myself in a new and exciting world, I still find great pleasure in playing more traditional games. In particular, I enjoy the games I played when growing up, games with titles like Scrabble, Boggle, Monopoly, and the like. As such, my games of choice this month are Ishid-o-Matic for the Amiga, plus Wheel of Luck, and Yacht-Z for Windows on the MS-DOS platform. The Proper Way to Get Stoned A few years back, Accolade released Ishid, The Way of Stones, a computerized version of an ancient board game of skill, strategy and chance. Ishid, in its simplest form, is somewhat of a cross between chess and Go. Since its release, several clones have appeared, the best by far being an Amiga version named Ishid-o-Matic (Amiga RT #18544). Elle Setting Chuck 1500 SAYING 0:10 3600211 15,750 Flint Time 1500 Vanns PLAYER ONE Ishid-o-matic PLAYER THO AOGO ESO EAAA eece 00 @ @ @GOGA @ @ @ CDA e AAA ESA Rules for Ishid-o-Maticare brief. Stones can wheel and guessing a consonant or buying a only be placed on the playing field under the vowel. As long as the player is correct in his following conditions: 1) the field must be or her guesses, it remains their turn. Of adjacent to at least one stone, 2) the stone course, spinning a \"Bonus\" gains one a free must correspond with all adjacent stones in spin, \"Sorry\" results in a lost turn, and color and/or symbol, and 3) the number of «Broke\" wipes out one's current winnings. neighbors of the same color and of the same Correctly solving the phrase concludes the symbol must not differ by more than one. round. When the winning player reaches the When all possible stones have been placed bonus round, 256-color graphics are proaccording to these rules, the current game vided of the prize pictures. ends. Wheel Single player, two player and tournament Wheel of Luck (reusing the same sequence of stones) modes are supported in Ishid-o-Matic. High scores for each mode are saved to disk. No time limit is imposed on play. There is even a built-in AOOOOOOOOORUM NOGOROUWEZ help feature that identifies all possible stone Splo Wheel Euy Vowel solve placements per turn. Player Score Spins Tora! Ishid-o-Maticis compatible with most Amigas, at least through the A3000, and has been 1500 released as \"Free-Ware\" by its author, Robert Brandner of Austria. Evident from the start is Wheel of Luck the amount of care that has gone into this simple yet classy version of Ishido. Graphics Those with a Windows compatible sound are 32-color low res (320 x 200), more than card have the benefit of appropriate sound adequate for this title. Music is provided in effects. Options allow one to toggle sound the form of a MED module of Bach's effects, countdown timer and spin deceleraPraeludium #3, offering the player a pleasant tion. User editable support has also been proselection to listen to while deep in thought. If vided for the phrase file and sound effects, one prefers, music can be toggled off in favor avor allowing one to enter their own phrases or allowi, of simple \"click\" sounds or complete silence. Select different WAV files for oame-driven Ishid-o-Matic scores high marks. One can events. anticipate many hours of enjoyment with or Wheel of Luck is an entertaining shareware without a friend playing this strategy game. And who can argue with the price? offering worthy of the very reasonable $10.00 registration fee requested at the end of its 30 day evaluation period. Both Windows 3.1 and What Happened to Vanna? VBRUN200.DLL (the Visual Basic 2.0 runMoving over to the MS-DOS world, we time module) are required. If one would like have an excellent Windows version of TV's to practice up for their appearance on Wheel Wheel of Fortune, sans Vanna White. Wheel of of Fortune or just have some fun \"turning a Luck 2.0b by Dan Puraty is a well designed phrase,\" grab a copy of Wheel of Luckand give offering for fans of word puzzles and the it a spir popular TV game show. . Please send a check for $10 (US funds) to As with its TV namesake, Wheel of Luck register. Address all inquiries to provides up to three players with the opportunity to earn cash and prizes by solving a Dan Puraty phrase regarding a person, place, thing, saying 3536 Kent Road or event. Each player takes a turn spinning the Stow, OH 44224-4602 @ @@@@@e ?@e Ishid-o-Matic Game play is simple yet challenging. The goal is to place 72 stones on a board of 96 squares while matching adjoining stones by symbol and/or color. Each stone is characterized by a combination of one of six colors and one of six symbols, giving 36 different Stones with two of every kind. Points are determined by the number of neighboring stones of the same color and number. For instance, a one-way match (two stones) is worth only one point, while a four-way match (six stones) is worth eight points, plus a bonus for each four-way match constructed (beginning at 25 points and doubling with each successive match). Page 84 Computer Gaming World "


"NOW AVAILABLE —ON PCZOOL NINJA PF THE \"Nth\" DIMENSION 700 GREMLIN Electronic Innovative Design 768 Two Mile Parkway Goodlettsville, Tn. 37072 Phone: 1-(615)-972-8085 Fax: 1-(615)-851-6098 Circle Reader Service #50 "


"Deview Wheel of Luck U533 Boms Round Prizes Upper Total Three OTAK Four Of A Kind Full House Large Straight Yacht com a heren 1 4825 Lewe Total Yacht 20 ILOGO24 Combined Total LTD 096 102 Tople Home Wheel of Luck Of Dice and Men One game I played extensively when I was young was Yahtzee, a classic game of dice. While there have been many clones on numerous platforms, Yacht-Z 2.0 for Windows [Windows RT #549] is one of the best I have discovered. Its only fault is that there is no dice sound. Apart from this, the game is ne is excellent. Yacht-Z is actually a combination of Yahtzee and Triple Yahtzee, with support for up to four players. As with the original, the player has three chances to roll five dice to achieve the highest score. When \"Show Hints\" is selected from the menu, the scorecard will display in black the items that will yield points if selected. All others will be disabled (shown in gray). If \"Show Hints\" is not enabled, all scoring categories will be displayed in black. Another feature provided is the ability to Change Luck. This menu item is provided for those times when things just don't seem to be going one's way. Registration will clicit an explanation of how it works (or if it is just a placebo). A poor decision when selecting an item, fortunately, is not irreversible thanks to an Undo menu. If the wrong choice is made, ir can be reversed as long as the dice have not been rolled. High scores are also available from the menu, and one's game can be saved easily for completion later. Registration for Yacht-Z 2.0 is set at a reaYacht-Z 2.0 sonable $10. If you would like to play an (GEnic Round Table locations and file numold-time favorite on your PC, contact: bers appear in brackets when available). If you Bob Dolan do not have access to these services, you can 237 Willis Avenue usually write or call the game developer for an Rochester, NY 14616 evaluation copy. Remember, if you find a (716) 865-8248 shareware game enjoyable, please register it Each month it becomes more and more with the author. evident by the number of submissions received and by the new listings on BBSs that Send Us Your Best shareware authors are busy creating new titles for the pleasure of computer gamers everyIf you have authored a shareware or public where. Let's remember to properly compenmoch domain game and would like to have it consate them for their efforts so that they sidered for review in this column, please send continue to produce quality entertainment two complete copies (preferably on 3.5\" for all to enjoy. Until the next time, great disks) with documentation and a cover letter to: gaming to all! Games reviewed in this column are availBest of the Rest able through numerous distributors of shareComputer Gaming World ware and public domain software, as well as 130 Chaparral Court, Suite 260 on many national and private on-line services Anaheim Hills, CA 92808 CGW Secrets of Shareware Success With six months of the Best of the Rest column under my belt, I felt it media, with a neatly printed label. Many high quality, inexpensive necessary to address a concern of importance to shareware authors, label printing programs are available, both commercial and shareespecially those sending their work to CGWfor consideration. This matter ware, to enable one to print attractive labels for their disks. At the is critical to assure the eligibility of your software for review, as well as to least, use a new label and type the name of the program on it. its success in the shareware community. The issue is one of quality. 4. Include a printed or typed cover letter that describes the submission, Product value, both perceived and actual, is important to the success of providing one's name, address, phone number and the registration one's efforts. cost of the program. Fact sheets, photocopies of other reviews the What does this mean? Well, it boils down to that familiar acronym software has received, printed manuals and any other materials WYSIWYG What You See Is What You Get. In other words, the quality available should also be provided. of the software program one has written will be judged initially by the 5. Two complete copies of each product should be mailed to CGW appearance of what is received. When someone opens the mailer containincluding all printed matter. In addition, copies of both the shareing the disk of software provided, they should not find a recycled disk with ware and registered versions should be included and properly identhe name of the original program scratched out and the name of the new tified. Also, please carefully package the submitted materials using program scribbled over it in pen. This bespeaks shoddy workmanship and sturdy disk mailers for protection. poor quality. As unbelievable as it seems, we have received contributions Submissions that do not meet the above criteria will not be in this condition. Please remember that the name of this column is BEST of the Rest. Substandard work of any form will not fare well in the battle considered for review. The volume of contributions now being for coverage. received together with the limited review space each issue only So, what can one do to ensure that their work will even be examined? allows time to review the most outstanding products. Thus, some Here are a few simple and reasonable steps to follow to ensure the eligibility guidelines need to be established and maintained. Presentation of the \"sweat of one's brow» for consideration in these pages. does make a difference. Commercial developers invest considerable 1. Best of the Rest only reviews entertainment shareware. Do not send time and money in packaging and promoting their products, an any spreadsheet, auto maintenance, lottery or financial programs. area in which shareware authors need to invest more thought and Educational games are accepted and encouraged. effort. 2. At present, we can only provide reviews of software for MS-DOS In the end, following the above guidelines will help ensure one's and Amiga computers. Unfortunately, other systems cannot be success as a shareware author, whether one's product is reviewed supported at this time. in CGW or not. In either case, we wish shareware developers the 3. Submissions should be sent on a NEW floppy disk, preferably 3.5\" best of success. CGW Page 86 Computer Gaming World "


"We're playing serious games. MOWE allerle SONATA Close the door. Plug it in. Turn on the computer. And brace yourself for all the outrageous 16 bit CD quality sound you can handle. Whether you're behind enemy lines or slamming one out of the park, PORT-ABLE Sound sends you on a sensory collision course. The most war torn battlefields come alive. Fantasies scream into reality. And, the grunts and groans of the gridiron are enough to bruise even the toughest soul. Whatever your pleasure, you won't find more real sound. PORT-ABLE Sound is based on advanced Digital Signal Processing technology. so you'll enjoy the greatest compression capability with the highest quality sounds. Here's something else that will make your pulse race. With PORT-ABLE Sound you have all the right connections including an \"Audio-in\" for direct recording from a CD or tape player and a \"Line-out\" for powered external stereo speakers. To make things even cooler, PORTABLE Sound comes with an external speaker cable for outrageous sounds when you plug it into the hottest speakers you can find. Or take it to a friends house. It's totally portable. So get ready. There's nothing to do except buy PORT-ABLE Sound and plug it in. Plug in your speakers. And play. But, just one word of caution. Once you're plugged into PORT-ABLE Sound, you can kiss the day good-bye. PLUS, FREE SOFTWARE INCLUDING: Lotus Sound\" for Windows 3.1 a utility employing OLE (Object Linking and Embedding technology). WinReader for Windows 3.1, Digispeech's DOSTalk and DOSReader text-to-speech applications. Show & Tell For Kids for Windows an easy to use Multimedia Authoring program. PORTABLE Sound Features: Stereo or Mono playback 16 or 8 bits per channel, (sampling rates: 11.025KHz, 22.05OKHz and 44.1 KHz). Synthesized music, 9 melodic or 7 melodic and 4 percussive voices. Completely integrated solution. Supports DVI audio compression and all Windows 3.1 programs incorporating the Multimedia standard sound interfaces (WAVE, MIDI). Sound Blaster/AdLib compatible. DC powered. Smart printer parallel port pass through. An external speaker cable with a telephone type connector. MINIMUM SYSTEM REQUIREMENT: For DOS PORTABLE Sound applications, an IBM PC or compatible with 8086 CPU, 640KB RAM running MS-DOS 3.3 or greater. For Windows 3.1 or Sound Blaster/ AdLib applications, an IBM PC or compatible with 80386 CPU and 2 MB RAM. Package includes software on 3.5\" High Density diskettes. PORT-ABL Sound Digispeech THE SOUND SOLUTION inc. Corporate Office: 2464 Embarcadero Way, Palo Alto, CA 94303 Telephone: (415) 494-8086 FAX: (415) 494-8114 Sales Office: 550 Main Street, Suite J. Placerville, CA 95667  Telephone: (916) 621-1787 FAX: (916) 621-2093 Circle Reader Service #46 St Qural fucs Minor, Op. 131 Jose Jeste ca n a dew222 wind eu TE 101N "


"  dene Over There I'm U.K., You're U.K. Gudby Robin Matthews by Robin Matthews Get out o li to build with planes from the same era, or can be mixed and matched. The agility of the old WWI biplanes does not quite make up for the lack of air-to-air missiles, but one does have the wind in their hair. Dogfight will also come with half a dozen scenarios, cach with their own missions. One minute it's defending observation balloons against the Red Baron, next it's splatting Argentincan fighters over the Falklands. MicroProse UK is stressing that each airplane will have its own realistic characteristics and that it has been designed with an excellent learning curve. Dogfight will initially be released in the UK at press time, and both Amiga and ST versions are planned. develop... GENERATE FLEET GET COMPOSITE In the last few months, the Over There scheduling, so this may really appeal to those column would not seem the same without who want real depth in their strategy games. some mention of the prolific UK software When Two Worlds War will boast 256 color house, Impressions. This month is no excepgraphics, a two player link, and will not only tion with two releases pending; the first being When Two Worlds War, a strategic simulation support both Ad Lib and SoundBlaster cards, of interplanetary conflict in which the player but may possibly be one of the first software controls an entire planet's military resources titles to support voice control. Rumor has it in an effort to conquer a hostile neighboring that Impressions is working closely with Aria planet; the second being a Civil War game, on a voice recognition feature. More as things The Blue and the Gray. The small task of world management in The Blue and the Gray is the next proposed When Two Worlds War is conducted from a title in Impressions \"Miniature Series\" and super high-tech workstation which, via is due to appear in the second quarter. It deals equally high-tech software, allows the player with the Civil War and modestly claims to to design new craft and weapons, and direct recreate all its famous campaigns and battles. technological research. Once one's armed According to designer Edward Grabowski, forces are up to snuff, one can then set up the game will contain both real-timc anisophisticated missions and face the real chalmated combat (apparently with the combatlenge of the game. ants in authentic uniforms), and will also have professionally drawn stills to add to the atmosphere. Impressions states that «The Blue and the Gray is set to be one of the hottest wargames ever with superb graphics, a campaign game and fully animated battles re-fought over a map stretching from the Mid-West to the East Coast, from Florida up to New VER HIDE York.» Grand aspirations, indeed. Each battle will contain up to 200 separate When Two Worlds War and distinct animated figures, presented in 256 color graphics and using a further develBoth planetary surface combat and tactical opment of their point-n-click miniatures inspace combat is involved in the game. When terface. Terrain and fortifications will be the one is ready to invade, it is necessary to reconmore varied than any previous release, and it noiter the opposing planet in order to deteris Impressions' intention to release scenario mine the key installations and target-rich disks covering all the major battles. environments. Combat actually runs in real time, and space flight can either be computer Micro Prose UK, the same programming assisted or one can program missions using a team that created B-17 and ATAC have anpoint-n-click visual language. other flight sim waiting on the runway. Dogfight is very much a combat flight simulator, letring one pilot 12 different airplanes, from The dominant component of WTWW is Sopwith Camels through Spitfires, Sea Harthe construction of installations and project riers and F-16As. Contests can be selected De 09900 - FOREST: CREATE PIONETHELUE The Blue and The Gray More snippets are slipping out about Captive 2, due for release shortly from Mindscape UK. The storyline revolves around the world being controlled by huge state corporations which have been abusing its resources and grinding the planet into a state of decay. One of these huge corporations is \"BioCorp\" which has an increasing number of androids/robots that have started \"accidentally\" killing civilians. BioCorp has covered-up these small technical glitches and have framed innocent people for the murders. The player continues in the role of Trill (from the original Captive), and controls four Page 88 Computer Gaming World "


"800-448-6658 DISK-COUNT SOFTWARE 28°5 26 26 Pro Audio 194 media 49 49 Pro 16 MM6 45 38° 105 1995 Rotor Airball time do SB Multimedia Kt 560 129 3705 25 chan sama Healms Mickey ABC 2.3's 1908 390 370 42 Fr Lowest deliverd prices with great customer service. MASTER CARD, VISA, DISCOVER, AND AMERICAN EXPRESS ACCEPTED WITH NO SURCHARGE. SHIPPING IS ONLY $4.00 PER ORDER, PRODUCT INFO & OTHER BUSINESS: NOT PER ITEM 908-396-8880 A Train 39 El Fish Leather God Phb 2 24. Print Shop, New 36 Studyware Biology. CD ROM Manhole 49 Construction Set 22 Empire Deluxe Legacy Necromanc19es Graphics (ea) Calc.,Chem.. Econ. 22 Magazine Rack 25 Sound Cards Aces Over Europe 44 33 Enti Pak Win (ea) Legend of Kyrandia 35 Print Sp Companion 31 Physics, Statistic 25 Aesops Fablos Mantis 45° Ad Lib Microchannei 69 Aces of the Pacific 39°Eric the Unready Legends of Valour 38 Privateer Studyware LSAT 37 Aircraft Encyclopda 45 Marketing Master 39 Ad Lib Gold 1000 179 Mission Disk 25 Eye of Beholder 45 20°5 Legion's of Krella 37 Pro League Baseball35 Stunt Island Aloha Hawaii Mavis Beacon 39 ATI Stereo FX 109 AD&D Collect Ed 2 42° Eye of Beholder 2 38 Leisur Suit Larry 5 396 Prophecy 22 Summer Challenge 34 Amer Bus. Phnbk. 39 Mixed Up Mothy Gse 37 VGA StreoFIX 1MB 369 AD&D Starter Kit 4205 Eye of Beholder 3 42 Lemmings Prophecy of Shadow38 Super Tetris Amer Hert Pict Dict 75 Monarch Notes 75 Covox Snd Mster II 145 AD&D Unlimited 31 F 15 III Oh No More Addon 22 Protostar 3905 Take a break X-Word29 Arthur Teacher Trbl 41 Monkey Island 39 Gravis Ultra Sound 129 Adlbou&Juniorvol1340 15 ili Limited 49 Lemm. On No More 31 Putt Putt Parade 32 Pinball Audubon Mammals 37 MS DOS Archives 35 Logitech Soundmn 179 Air Bucks 340 F117a Stealth Fight 41 Lemmings 2 Putt Putt Fun Pack 26 Task Force 1942 37 Autodesk Explorer 119 MM Music Mozart 33 Media Vision Air Duel 3305 Facts in Action 31 Liberty or Death Quest for Glory 1 22 T.M.N.Turtle Arcade 25 Barney Bear Goes MM Music Vivaldi 33 Audio Port 139 Air Warrior SVGA 35 Falcon 3.0 45 Life and Death 2 32 Quest for Glory 3 39 T.M.N.Tunie Advnte 33 to School North Amer Fax Bk 55 CDPC / XL 1199° AlgeBlaster Plus 30 Oper Fight Tiger 25 Line in the Sand 25 Rags to Riches 35 Tengens Arcade HK 25 139 North Amer Indians 57 Pro Audio Spoc + into Space Algebra Made Easy 25 Family Tree Maker 42 Links Railroad Tycoon Terminator 2029 19° 390% Officers Bookcase M.M. Uporade Kit 765 50 Aliens Ate Babysitter 32 Farm Creativity Kit Links 386 Pro 45 18 ReachForThe Skies19\" Tmnt 2 Cyborchess 35 Batik Designs Our Solar System Alone in The Dark 35 Fatty Bear Birthday 31°S Course Disk ea 16 Reader Rabbit 35°S Tetris Classic 31 Battlechess PC Game Room Alphabet Blocks 290 Femme Fatale 26 386 Courses ea 19 Reader Rabbit 2 35 Tetris Trio Beauty & Beast 49 Peter & Wolf Upgrade Kit 955 Amazon F. F. Data Disk 21 Lord of Rings 2 37 Ready for Letters 35\" Beethoven Ninth The Legacy 33's Pool Shark 1996 Thunderboard 95 Ambush 37° Fields Of Glory 339 Lost File Sherick H 41\" Read 'n Roll VGA 31 The Lost Vikings 2905 Berlitz Think & Talk Presdntit Sut Geo 105 Thunder & Lightng 229 American Civil War 25 Flight Simul AT.P. 37 Lost Treas Infocom 42 French Reading Adv in Oz 36 Time Riders America35 105 99 Programmers ROM 59 Sound Blaster Ancient Art War Sky 35 Flight Simul (M.S.) 41 Lost Treasures 2 29 Rod Baron 39 Time Trekse Spanish 36 Publish it 69 Snd Blast Pro MCA 259 Ancient Empires A 30 Trc Cn 34 Bible Library Lost Tribe Mission Disk 17 Time Quest 37 Reference Library 59 Sound Blaster Pro 189 Animation Studio 75 ArctuScen Dsgn 28 Lost Vikings 2945 Realms Tom Landry Football 30 Bibles & Religon 30 35 S 8 Pro 16 2 39 Bookshell Armored Fist Aircraft Adv Facty25 Lure of Temptress 32 Retum O the Phntm33es Tony LaRussa Base. 17 San Diego 200 Ashes of Empire 45° #685 Magic Candle 3 37\" Rex Nebular Tony LaRussa 11 370 Britanica Family Chc 75 Secret Weapons 59 S B MM Starter Kit 459 A.T.A.C. 35 # 701 Mantis 39 Riders of Rohan Expansion Disk 15 Business Master 32 Seventh Guest 59 S B CDROM Intl 360 Automap 44 Airport Facty Loc 17 Mario is Missing 35° Ring World 3405 Top Class Sieries ea 16 Buzz Aldrin Race 59 Sherlock Holme 39 Sound Machine ind.. Automap Windows 57 Missing City Disk California 17 Risk for Windows 29° Traders Carmen World Dixe 65 1945 Sherl Holmes 2 42 SB, Speaker Joystick 95 Automap Europe FS Pro Mario Teaches Type 25 Risky Woods Treasure Cove Caroor Opportunities42 35 Sleeping Beauty 37 Roland SCC-1 GS 375 45 B-17 Flying Fortres 39 Great Britian 37 Math Blaster Mystry298 Road & Track Pres 35 Treasure Math Storm35 Cautious Condor Sound Works' 35 Sound Canvas 559 Bane Cosmic Forge 36 Hawail. Math Blaster Plus 290 Road to Final Four 37 Treasure Mountain 35 CD Game Pack Space Quest 4 37 Roland MA-12C ea 105 Barbie Design 16 Instant Facit Loc. 19 Math Blaster Wind 36 Robosports Wind 340s Treehouse Space Series-Apollo 49 SPEAKERS Shielded28 Barbie Fashion 25 Instrumnt Pilot Scen Math Copter Rodney Fun Screen 31 Tristan Pinball Spirit of Excalibur37 w/ 3 band Equilizer 45 Barbie Adventure 25 Japan Scenery 19 Math Rabbit Rock & Bach Studio 35 Christmas Carol Trolls 33 Stellar 7. Altec Lansing 200 219 Pilots Pwer Tis 240 Battlechess 4000 VGA 30 Math Zone Romance 3 King 2 39 Trump Castle 3 CIA World Fact 39 Strange Bedfellows 39 ACS 300 W subwof 299 Battlochess 4000 SVGA38 East/West U.S.ea 59 Mavis Beacon Type 29 Rome Turbo Science 30 CIA World Fact M/M 42 Star Child Battlefield MIDI Interface 3708 Rescue Air 911 17 Mavis Beacon Wind35° Rule Engagment 2 38 Turtle Tools Clipart Goliath 69 Star Trek Enhanced 49 Battle Toads Scenery St A or B 37 McGee 3 Pack 32 Sargon 36 Ultima 7 4705 Conan Cimerion 36 Street Atlas 99 Midiator 101 Serial 95 Battles of Destiny 350 Scenery Enhn Ed 25 Mega Lo Mania 290 Science Adventure 42 Forge of Virtue Corel Draw Upod 139 17 Talking Classic Tale 75 PC Midi Card Beat the House 290 Mental Math Games 37 Sound & Graphic 25 Crossword Cracker 32 Scooter Magic Castle32 Ultima 7 Part 2 47\" Talkng Jungle Safari 75 MOX-32 Betrayal at Krondor 350 Tahiti Mercenaries 37°S Scrabble Deluxe 30 Ultima Trilogy 1 37°S Curse of Enchantia 25° Time Mag Almanac 49 MPU-IPC Western Europe 19 Betty Crock. Cookbook MetroGnome Music 31 Sea Rogue Ultima Trilogy 2 Deathstar Arcade 476 30 Time Table Science 59 Cakewalk Apprentic145 Bill Elliott NASCAR 30 Follow the Reader 29° Dictionaries & Lang 30 Michael Jordon Flight42 Seal Team Ultima Underworld 47 Too Many Typefonts 35 The Miracle 325 Birds of Prey w/ Sound Source 40 Don Quixote Second Front 2005 Part 2 MIDI Software Bluefore Color or 1-2-3's 19 Education Master Four Crystal Trazer Sert Weapon Luftwt3945 32 Ultrabots Ultimate Shareware 59 Body Illustrated Ballade 47° Free DC Mickey's Crossword 19 Tour of Duty ea. 20 Electronic Cookbook 75 Uninvited Windows 31' U S Atas Bodyworks Band in a Box 69 Front Page Sports 39\" Mickey Jigsaw Pz 31 Sesame St. Ln Clas 31 Elect. Home Library 49 U.S. Adas DOS 31 US Atlas w/Automap 49 Bridgemaster 30 Cadenza G-Force Mickey Word Advent 25 Sesame St. Publish 25 Utopia US History Bug Bunny WikShp 31 Gambit 20 Cakewalk Micro Cookbook 4.0 32 Sesame St. Vol.101217 for Victory 12 a 42 US Presidents Buzz Aldrin Cakewalk Pro 39. Game Maker Microleagu 4 BaseB 32 Seven Cities of Gold 38 Vegas Gamos Win 1995 USA State Fact BK 45 ca Campaign Cakewalk Window Games:Summer Chig35 Microleague FB Dbx 32 Shadow President 39 Vell of Darkness Family Doctor 37\" USA Wars:Civil War 49 Capitalist Pig 38° Games:Winter Chlg 35 Microleague Soccer 25 Shadow Prophecy 30 Virtual Realty St 2 5ges Font Master USA Wars:Korea 49 Encore Car and Driver 37°S Gateway Piano Works Microsoft Golf Shadowgate Wacky Funstor 1995 Food Analyst USA Wars:Vietnam 49 39 Gemfire Carrier Strike Midnight Rescue o Play it by Ear 35 Shadowlands 2905 Fresh Arte Waxworks USA Wars: WW II 49 er Track Carriers at War 370 Global Conquest 35 Might and Magic 3 38 Shanghai II Wayne Gretzky 3 35 Front Page News 29 Voyage Planet 1-382.69 Midish Studio Castle 2 2.99 Midisoft Studio 35° Gobblins 1 or 2* 159 Might & Magic 4 40 Siege 38 G Force Western Front White Horse Child 2205 33 Min Castle of Dr. Brain 25 Music Byles Vol 1 30 Gods 65 Mike Ditka Olimt FB 37 Dogs at War Game Master 20° When2Worlds War 35 Who Killed Sam Rup 25 Music Mentor Ceasar 35° Grand Slam Brdge Il 31 Millie Math House 31 Sierra Action Five 25 What's My Angle 30 Game Pack 2 Willy Beamish 79 Chalinge 5 Realms 33 Music Printer Plus 419 Grandmaster Chess 36 Mixed-Up Fairy Tale 30 Wheel Fortune Vana 25 Sierra Award Winner 47 Gettysburg:MM Hist 43 Win CD Champions 35 Great Naval Battle 43 Mixed-Up Mother G$30 Sierra Family Fun Music Time 32 Goler Winkles Ady Where Carm San Diego 33 Wing Comm & Miss 45 Music Chemistry Works 38 Super Ships 20° Monkey Island 1 or 223 Sierra Starter Bndl 39 America's Past 3405 Golden Immortal 28 Wing Com/Ultima 6 45 49 Chessmaster 3000 29\" Greens 19 Quick Score Deluxe 99 35 Monopoly Deluxe 34 Great Cities Vol 1 Silent Service 2 Europe Wing Comm 2 57 Chessmst 3000 Win35 Gunship 2000 36 Moonbase Time Guinness Book Rec 59 Children Writ & Publ 39 WC 2/UH. Undrwid  Rhythm Ace Scenario Disk 24 Mystery at Museum 35 Sim Songwright 5 Guy Spy City USA World Atas Civilization 37 Guy Spy Trax for Windows 10 New Math Rabbit 29°5 49 Sim Ant French Ham Call USA Deluxe Adults Only Must be 21 Civilization MPE 45 Hardball 3 N.Y. Times X-Word 32 Sim City Windows World Deluxe 4405 Inspector Gadget 37°S Animation Fantasy 65 Joysticks Classic Adventure 36. Data Disk ea. 170 NFL Challenge Prem59 Sim Earth Wild Science Arcad350 Interactive Old Test 52 PC Pix Vol 1 of 2 65 CH Flightstick Coaster 25 Harpoon Designer 32 NFL F.B. Konami 30 Sim Life Dos/Wind 3505 Wilson ProStaffgolf 25° Interactive Storytime 45 Private Collection 65 CH Game Card 3 Comanche 31 420: Harpoon Signature 49° NFL Video Pro 45° Simpsons Woen:The Pricy Int Bus & Econ Atlas 39 34\" Priv. Pictures 1 or 2 65 CH Mach 3 Mission Disk 3 1 25° Harrier Assault 34\" Nigel's World 31 Snap Dragon Intro Games Fr/Sp. 79 32 Willy Beamish 25 Seedy Vol 1-7 ea. 65 CH Virtual Pilot Combat Classics 65 31 Headline Harry 37 No Greater Glory 2005 Snoopy Game Club 29 Wing Comandr 2 47 Jazz: Multimedia Hist 69 Storm 1 or 2 Comic Book Creator 17 Health & Diet Pro 65 CH Virtual Pilot Pro 84 26 Nobunagas Ambition 37 Solitaire Window 290 Wizardry Trilogy Jets & Proos 31°S 55 Visual Fantasy Cohort 2 65 Eliminator Game Cd 26 1 9 Heaven & Earth 30 Number Maze 36 Solitaires Journey 35 Word Muncher Jones in Fast Lane 37 30 Volcano 65 Conquered Kingdom351 Heimdall 1908 Omar Sharif Bridge 37 Space Ace 2:Bort 38 Word Torture Just Grandma & Me 36 Caddies 7.95ea. 3/$ 19 Conquest of Japan 35 Heros of 357th Operation Neptune 35 Space Adventure 42 Ital. Germ. Span 25 Jutland 544 Gravis PC GamePad21 Contraption Zak 25° Hole in 1 Golf Dbx 25 Orbits 29°5 Space Hulk Kings Quest 5 42 Wordtris Creepers 345 29\" Hong Kong Mahjong 32 Oregon Trail 28 Space Quest 4 World Atlas DOS Land Of Lore 39 Skins & Pads Crusader Drk Savnt39° Hoyle Bk Game 2 22 Deluxe 340s Spaca Quest 5 World Circuit Languages of World 99 34\" Dust Covers 15 Marx Flight Yoke Cuckoo Z00 69 3 10 Hoyle Bk Game 1/3 30 Origin FX Learn to Speak Span59 Spaceward Ho Writer Rabbit Grounded Wrist Strap 9 Maxx Pedal Humans Cyber Space Once Upon Time Spear of Destiny Leisure Suit Larry 42 X Wing Keyboard Skins Demonsgate '15 Mouse Yoke 32s Inca Out of This World Ubry of Art:Renaisn 65 Special Forces Your Prsnl Train SAT30 Static Pads Quickshot Game Cd 14 Libry of Art:Overview 65 Outnumbered Dagger ol Amon Ra 39 Incredible Machine 2ges Zodiac Signs 3945 .Large System Dark Half 15 Quickshot Warrior 39 18 Indiana Jones 4 37 Pacific Islands 2 Library of Future 290 Speed Reader 99 Zoo Keeper Wrist Pads 8 Thrustmaster Flight 69 Darklands 39 Pacific Wars Inspector Gadget 350 Zug's Spelling Adv 22 Loom Spellbound 49 Stax (Dust Repellent) 5 Thrustmaster Pro 109 Darkseed 39 Island of Dr. Brain 2945 Paladin 2 Lovely Ladies II Spellcasting 301 Ady of Eco Island 22 Statx Complete Weapons Con 70 47 Dark Sun Jack Nicklaus Signt3ges MacMillian Child Dict49 Paperboy 2 Spell Craft Dinosaur World 22 Cleaning System 15 Thrustmaster Pedal 109 Daughter of Serpnt 31\" Jeopardy Silver 25 Patriot Spell-it Plus Race Thru Space 22 Hours: M-P9AM to BPM Sat 10AM to 3 PM Dlx Paint Animation 85 Jeopardy Super 25 PC Globe SpellJammer Store Hours: M-F 9 AM to 6 PM Dlx Paint II Enhned 85 Jetfighter 2 Sat 10AM to 3 PM PC USA Sports Adventure Mice & Trackball 33 Store: 1060 Randolph Ave. Rahway N.J. 07065 Deja Vu 1 & 2 310 Adv. Mission Disk 19 PC Study Bible Appoint MousePen 70 Design Yr Own Hm 39 Bundle Price 49 Peppers Adventure 295 Star Control 2 350 Microsoft Mouse 85 Design Your Railrd 35 John Madden 2 Perfect General 36 Star Legions 37° Mouseman Serial 69 TERMS AND CONDITIONS Designasaurus II 23 Jump Jet Data Disk 22 Star Trek 25th Aniv. 37 Trackman Serial 79 Master Card, Visa American Express & Discover Accepted. No Diet Pro DOS/Win25/36 KGB 19 Phonics Plus 25 Star Trek AudioClip 340 Modems & Fax Surcharge on Credit Cards. By mail: P.O. Box 3, Carteret, N.J. Dinosaur Adventure 34 Kid Cuts Pirtale's Gold 38° Next Generation 385 Dog Fight 37° Kid Desk Playroom w Sound 31 Star Trek Screen Sav37 MaxFax 9624 Fx/Md 99 07008. All Sales Are Final. NO REFUNDS! Exchange on defective Dr Jam Wind. 59° Kid Pictures Police Quest 3 merchandise with the same item only. No exceptions. All Stickybr Math Tutor 30 Practical Peripherals Dr. Quandry Kid Pix Populous 2 Stickybr Pre-School 30 PM 14.4 Int. Products are now. We do not guarantee compatability. Shipping 129 Dragon Kid Pix Companion 25 Pool Shark Stickyor Read Tutor 30 PM 14.4 Ext. 175 chargos: 48 contiguous statos, $4 por ordor. Alaska, Hawaii, Dragon's Lair! 25 Kid Works 2 35°S Power Hits Kids Stickbr Spell Tutor 30 Sportster 9600 Int. 129 and Puerto Rico $10 13t pc., $1 ea. add. APO/FPO and P.O. Boxes 2 or Singe Castle 37 Kings Ransom 340 Movies Storm Across Europe 38 Sportstr 14.4 7.42309 $6 1st pe. $1 oa. add. Canada $8 1st pc. $1 ea.add. Hoavier Dragon Lair III 39\" Kings Quest 1 VGA 37 Sports Storybook Weaver 29es Zoom External 62 items extra. Foreign orders call for shipping chargos. N.J. Dune 2 36 King's Quest 6 45 Strike Commander 47° Zoom Internal 59 Residents add sales tax. Call for current price and Dungeon Master 29° Knowledge Advent 42 Battletech-Mech 32 Strip Poker 3 3 2 Scanners availability. GOVERMENT AND SCHOOL P.O.'s WELOOMOD. Ouantities Dynamix Bundle 42 LA Law Powermonger Data Disk (ca) 17 Scanmaker II 859 aro limited on this item. For your protection, we will only Eagle Eye Mystery 31° Land Of Lore Print Shop Deluxe 45 Studyware for ACT ship to the address the credit card company has on file. 201 133 Scanman 32 Eco-Quest 1 or 2' 290 Laffer Utility Graphic Coll (oa) 30 | GMAT,GAE,SAT 30 Scanman 256 259 | restocking fee on all refused items 1905 Encarta Endler:Call 33 European tydpd 2400 25 Sim Ant 30 32 4405 29 3903 Spectre SPETSERRES 38 Ins Meme 5989 A 39 Sprout! 31°5 38°5 35° 8. EFECTORANTES 25 Sci-Fi Circle Reader Service #47 "


"poreign correspondence lietas De Roho 2016 PUEELE droids as they try to free the wrongly jailed humans. The gaming world is set in huge futuristic cities over 4000 randomly generated, with 9 segments in each city and over 1000 buildings in each segment. The gaming system will let one play on after completing the goals, so this could be a real biggie. Other than their recent Ashes of Empire, UK software house Mirage has announced Starfighter Ace and The Jurassic Levels for Humans (recently imported to the US by GameTek). Starfighter Ace is developed by the Maelstrom programming team and is a fast-thinking space combat game using the latest technology, and 3-D glasses! It is claimed that while wearing the red and green shades the graphics jump right off the screen and give the nearest thing to virtual reality. The graphics use perspective, shaded solid graphics and scaled sprites, and it flies particularly well. : Space Crusader add-on of 80 more levels. Available both as a separare data disk and a stand alone product, there are more dinosaurs, more natives, and trickier puzzles. This should be available at the time of publication on both Amiga and PC formats. are acknowledged as an elite force, the most powerful and feared men in the Imperium. The discovery of the Warp Drive and Warp Space had catastrophic results as the minions of chaos escaped the warp. The first great space war followed and the Age of Strife began. A single man, the Emperor of Human Space gathered together the remnants of human society and formed them into an empire. The Legiones Asartes is the official warrior arm of the Empire. Space Crusade puts the player in command of a squad, and one must lead them through a series of 12 missions, boarding old space hulks, engaging foes, etc. A campaign game links all missions together. The troops have a good range of weapons and armor, and the tactics employed can vary greatly. The software version does not try and disguise its board game origins. With turn-based combat, movement phases, line of sight and squares, Space Crusade retains its roots, and does so well. The graphics are good, the interface works well once one is used to the offcenter perspective, and the sound support is adequate. Not the same approach as Krisalis's Laser Squad, and in most ways more appealing. Space Crusade has already been released on Amiga and ST, and is now available on PC. CGW of Starfighter Ace, bearing in mind the recent launch of X-Wing. It remains to be seen whether the Force is with Maelstrom or LucasArts. Starfighter Ace requires a 386 at minimum and will support Roland, AdLib and SoundBlaster. It should be on the shelves by press time. Gremlin Graphics Software, the Sheffield based company, has just announced the shipping of Space Crusade for the PC. It is a conversion of a highly rared board game of space combat and strategy at the squad level, and has been a considerable success on both the Amiga and Atari ST. Humans is a popular Lemmings me-too from Mirage, and The Jurassic Levels is an In Space Crusade the player controls a space commander and four space marines of the Legiones Asartes. The warriors of this corps IF IT WAS ANY CLOSER, YOU'D BE ON THE GOURT. CACTUS LEAGUE PROF L S SVO FASKETBAL FROM THE DEVELOPERS OF APBA PROFESSIONAL BASKETBALL Alth NOT AN ARCADE GAME IT'S THE MOST STATISTICALLY ACCURATE BASKETBALL SIMULATION EVER CREATED You can create teams with any of the real-life players you want! Or play games with the players on their real-life teams. It's up to you! Complete AutoSchedule Module, Statistics Module, Records Module and more! Perfect for fantasy leagues, but you don't need to be a basketball expert to have a ball, VERSION 3.0 NOW AVAILABLE USE YOUR VISA OR MASTERCARD CALL 1-800-336-9444 TODAY AND BE ON OUR COURT TOMORROW! HOCACTUS DEVELOPMENT COMPANY, INC. WE TAKE FUN SERIOUSLY For IBM PC/XT/AT/386/486s and compatibles. To purchase with check or money ordet, send $49.95 plus $4.00 shipping and handling 10 Coctus Development Company, tex 7113 Butnet Road, Suite 214, Austin, fexas 78757. Copyright  1993 Cactus Development Company, Inc. Customer Support (512)4532244, Fax: (512)453-3757. BBS (512)4533155, APBA Professional Basketbolis Hrodemark of the APBA Game Company, Inc, Loncaster, Pennsylvania CACTUS LEAGUE PROFESSIONAL BASKETBALL is a trademark of Cortus Derelopment Company, Inc. Circle Reader Service #38 "


"MEM. Sound BLAST puno BLASTER 3 BLASTER BLASTER Pro Whether it's the menacing snarl of a chainsaw or the banshee scream of your F-1 Tomcat, just remember: it isn't real. Until you hear it on a Sound Blaster.\" Sound Blaster fidelity adds a whole new dimension to PC games, not to mention multimedia and other applications. And Sound Blaster is compatible with more of your software than any other audio card. No wonder it's the best selling sound board of all time. So when you're ready to hear what your games really sound like, get in touch with your Sound Blaster dealer today. Or we may just have to send Bruno over to persuade you. Sound Sound CREATIVE BLASTER WL MX From games to stereo midtimedia to full-blown, CD-quality 16-bit Advanced Signal Processing audio....ve've got the Sound Blaster for you. Copyright 1993 Creative Labs, Inc Sound Blaster and the Creative Labs logo are trademarks of Creative Labs, Inc. All specifications subject to change without notice. International inquiries: Creative Technology Ltd., Singapore, TEL 65-773-0233 FAX 65-773-0353 CREATIVE LABS, INC. You never heard it so real. Circle Reader Service #45 "


"Superlegungeet CUSTOMER SUPPORT An Analysis of CGW Reader Responses by M. Evan Brooks feedback question in CGW #103 posed the following question: \"In your experience, which companies have the best, and which the worst, customer support? Why?\" A similar query was posed on both the GEnie and Prodigy nerworks. The e-mail responses were similar to the written responses, and for ease of statistical analysis, only the written responses have been used company's support as mediocre. Yet, the most surprising facet of the poll was that there were few clear winners or losers. Results are as follows (any companies with less than four responses have been omitted): Company Good Support Poor Support 360 here. Access Accolade Bethesda Dynamix Impressions Interplay LucasArts Maxis MicroProse Mindscape New World Origin QQP and Micro Prose. However, MicroProse customer support seemed dependent on whether or not one could get through the ubiquitous busy signal. If a human did answer, customer support was generally highly regarded. Indeed, one MicroProse support person stated that the number one complaint that they receive from customers is having to wait a long time on the phone for someone to answer their question. «They don't consider,\" wrote Doug Whatley in a Genie discussion, \"that they are calling the day they bought a new game that just hit the shelves and 50,000 other people bought the game the same day (and also called). Also, MicroProse did seem to have a number of complaints that it never responded to written inquiries. Finally, Amiga users were very critical of MicroProse; they noted that installation procedures were incorrect and that games were often \"buggy\" and never fixed. Bethesda Softworks was consistently rated as poor, as was Electronic Arts. With respect to EA, however, it is apparent that customer support is very product-dependent, with Customer support is a subject of much controversy. Consumers decry the availability of such support, while the companies decry the added cost and time. Both sides question the utility of such support, although obviously from different perspectives. Customer support is very dependent on the individual consumer. A summary of the results showed little consensus, with few trends apparent. A total of 220 responses were analyzed; generally, the responses mentioned more than one or two companies per card, therefore accounting for the larger number of results. Perhaps the first statement that should be made is that the survey is quite unscientific. Do CGW readers represent a viable sample of the computer gaming public, or by the very fact of their readership do they constitute a more hard-core audience. Similarly, over 40 percent of the responses mentioned bulletin boards and modem support. Does the average gamer feel comfortable with electronic mail; are they in fact modem-literate? Also, do peor ple who respond to such queries in fact represent the average reader? There are no easy answers to these questions, but the reader should be aware of the inherent biases. The results have been analyzed as a \"lovehate\" relationship. Few responses rated a wanao-wo-w-nous SSI Sierra Sir-Tech Spectrum Access was the clear winner in terms of customer support. However, Access has a limited product line. The bulk of their product support is for the Links products. Users especially appreciated the toll-free line; \"Why should I have to pay for support that should have been provided with the game?\" It remains to be seen whether or not the customer support will sustain its reputation when the company expands its product base. Both Dynamix and Sierra generally garnered high marks, as did Spectrum HoloByte Marie of Origin's customer support helps an avatar in need. Page 92 Computer Gaming World "


"Wing Commander Flys Faster! Sherlock Solves Faster! Carmen Sandiego's Found Faster! Countries of the World The Complete Twain The Best of the Bureau History of the World Che Complete Dickers Biographies Mororch Notes stoled American History Free CD D Indude pics Lightning CD Runs All Your CD's Faster! Do you feel the need for speed? Lightning CD Lightning If you've ever played a game or searched through a reference library, you know how slow CD's can be.  Is perfect for entertainment, reference, educational, and multimedia programs Rub Prins Cher 7000 Poster Sally Retete Werks W ALL DOS, Wiado Significantly reduces annoying video pauses Procta Lightning CD is the answer to your speed problems. Lightning CD is a CD cache that improves performance by moving frequently used information from your CD to RAM. The next time your computer needs information, it's available immediately. You'll notice the difference instantly. Includes six other powerful utilities for improving your computer's performance OS Also speeds up both DOS and Windows programs 93% Slower 81% Slower 62% Slower Lightning CD No CD Cache Lightning CD No CD Cache Lightning CD No CD Cache If speed is what you need, get Lightning CD to make all your CD's run Lightning fast. To order, or for the name of the dealer nearest you, call 800 967 5 5 5 0 Wing Commander Sherlock Holmes Carmen Sandiego Look for Lightning CD and other Lucid products at  COMPUTER    BE   SUPUCENTEN THE COMPUTER SUPERSTORE. EGGHEAD SOFTWARE North America's software upperta L U C I D CORPORATION lxil Corporation is located at 101 W. Remer Rood, Seite 450, Ridnon, TX 75082. Phone 2149948100. Fox 214-9948103. Lightning Lightrin for Windows, Lightning for DOS, er Lightning Cere trodemarks and Lucid is a registered trademark of Lucid Corporation. All other trademarks are acknowledged. Circle Reader Service #67 "


"Tech cuoport some games receiving excelis a marketing decision and lent support and others (esnor customer support. pecially European imports) WHERE PROBLEMS COME TO DIE A thoughtful reader becoming software orphans. noted that, \"Good cusOrigin was a special case. tomer support comes from One either loved or hated companies who are willing it—there were no in-betto bite the bullet and delay weens. Special criticism was the release of a new product made for Origin \"not admitin an effort to make certain ting to bugs, and then chargthe consumer receives a ing for updates\" (which complete polished prodostensibly fixed the bugs). uct. Good customer supAlso, employees were noted port is making sure you as \"borderline rude with very don't have to provide any dry personalities.\" I suppose later. rudeness with scintillating While a consistent thread personalities would be excusis not apparent, many users able? Besides, how much perrated customer support by sonality can come across a the «politeness of the custelephone on a computer tomer service reprequery? On the other hand, sentatives. A rude readers complimented Ori-Rab Bob Kinnear, Mark Parker, Bill Klymshyn, Dan Owens, John Roderick and Debbie Catania technician who treated the gin for \"knowing what the make up a portion of Sierra's \"Problem Killers\" consumer as a computer ilproblem is\" and \"their enthuliterate (even if he were) siasm for games is very catchWhile the Sound Blaster is the soundcard of would be sure to garner ing.\" Is there a contradiction here? choice for gamers, the company's customer negative dividends. Such rudeness was noted SSI was almost a tie. However, analysis of as almost a tic. However, analysis of support was singled out for condemnation. support was singled out for condemnation. in virtually every negative response. However, the individual response cards revealed that when the same company is praised for its Electronic BBS support was an anomaly. role-playing games (CRPG) products seemed knowledgeable and friendly technicians and to be well supported. The staff was quick to Some users found it liseful, while others then blasted for its rud respond and knowledgeable. However, war wanted a human voice. Of course, there was port, one begins to wonder. gamers were given short shrift and customer the user who disparaged a company for using Any new game is likely to garner many support seemed to cease once the product humans; he actually preferred clectronic bultelephone questions: therefore it is often dit shipped out the door. For a company that was letin boards! ficult to simply get through. Does this make founded by and for wargamers, it was a saddening, albeit not altogether surprising result. customer support unsatisfactory? To a user Then there were the responses that simply who can't get the new mega-hit up and runIn a marker economy, CRPGs speak volumes; could not be used. Customer support was ning, the answer is a resounding affirmative. wargames whisper. geared ar post-purchase assistance. Did the Paying for support aggravates consumers; However, special kudos should be given to company help the user if he had a problem both excessive on-hold and 900 toll lines are SSI designer Gary Grigsby. On his own (and with the program. Yet, a number of responses singled out for criticism. at his own expense), he is a regular on GEnie specifically mentioned Origin for late reAn interesting comment from a reader con(Scorpia's Roundtable, page 805). In the SSI leases. One response went so far as to list cerned registration. Although he registers all category, he will respond to any questions or product names and number of months depurchases, \"It is very rare thar manufacturers comments on Pacific War, and often posts his layed. While this may aggravate a user, I think notify me that updates to fix bugs or imanswers within 24 hours. His support is above it more properly belongs to consumer rela proved versions are available.\" I can sympaand beyond the call of duty. tions than technical support. Of course, this thize. All too often, it seems that registration While these results were limited to software report doesn't even begin to address the is merely a device for companies to get one's companies, a special place in the \"Hall of never-ending debate whether to \"get it out name on a mailing list. Generally, I register Shame\" should be reserved for Creative Labs. today with bugs or tomorrow bug-free.\" That every product under a slight variation of my name so I can determine who sells my name to whom and respond accordingly. In conclusion, there are no conclusions! Consumers want fast and polite responses. \"Powerful programs of growth and adventure\" Modem support is appreciated, although this THE MAGIC MIRROR ... a toolbox for your mind. E. Kinnie, would seem to constitute a minority (albeit a PhD., Clinical Psychologist. $39.95. vociferous minority) of the customer base. MAGIC MIRROR II ... experiences for your mind. $39.95. Pre-announced release dates which then are MERLIN ... an apprenticeship. $29.95. delayed aggravate the user, but consumers are I CHING... ancient Chinese wisdom and prophecy. $29.95. even more outraged by buggy products. Our MasterCard/Visa THE MAGIC MOUNTAIN... a journey into another reality. readers' requirements of customer support 1-800-545-6172 Not for children. Male and female versions. $39.95. may be summed up as \"make it quick, make (after 5 p.m.) SCREEN SAVER ... math art and fractals, lively and it friendly, make it free.\" Obviously, few comCall or write colorful. $19.95. panies are pleasing all of the people all the for free catalog. time, but the results do show that some comBlue Valley, 29 Shepard St., Walton, NY 13856 panies are doing a better job than others. Cow 666666 Circle Reader Service #36 Page 94 Computer Gaming World O "


"CD ROM HEADQUARTERS MISSON Specialists in International Sales  Competitive Pricing. Same Day shipping International Order Line (201) 677-1400 Fax (201) 677-9484 CONTROL SPORTS 4D Boxing... GAMES Alone in the Dark ..................37 Amazon.... ..........43 A Train... A-Train Construction Set. Mantis:Experimental Fighter ......43 Megatraveller 3........ ....43 Mercenaries...... ..40 Might/Magic:Clouds of Xeen....43 Monopoly Deluxe...... Oh No! More Lemmings! (Add)...22 PRODUCTIVITY AutoMap.... .... AutoWorks.... BodyWorks ... ...... Chemistry Works.. Family Doctor.... . Game Master...... Giffs Galore.. Golf Guide... Grammy Awards .............. Grolier's Encylcopedia ........99 Guinness Disc of Records .....39 88NB 25 Strike back and surprise your opponent with the APS 2001 Cobra, the only fully programmable, microprocessor controlled, optical joystick that works through the keyboard port. Experience the ultimate in performance without paying for costly gamecards or separate control devices. APS 2001 by Maxximum $69. Where in USA is Carmen .........32 Where in USA Carmen Deluxe....47 Where in World is Carmen VGA..47 Wing 2 Special Operations 1.....27 Wing 2 Special Operations 2 .....27 Wing Commander 2........ Wing Commander 2 Speech Pak 21 Wing Commander Deluxe ..........52 WARGAMES Air Dual... Aces of the Pacific... Air Force Commander...... Ancient Art of War in Skies... A.T.A.C..... ........ A.T.P. Flight Commander Aces of the Pacific. Ancient Art of War...... B-17 Flying Fortress...... Campaign.. Carrier Stnke.... . Carners at War........ Carriers War Constuction Set..37 Command HQ Classic..........22 Bill Elliot's Nascar Challenge.....32 Car & Driver ...........................40 Front Page: Sports Football .......43 Hardball 3.......... Hardball 3: Park Disk ..... .....Call Jack Nicklaus:Signature Ed......43 Jack Nicklaus Tour Disk 1or 2...20 Jordan In Flight..................39 John Madden Football 2.......... Links 386 PRO.... Links: Mauna Kea Course Disk. 20 Links: Course Disks ...... MicroLeague Baseball 4.... NCAA:Road to Final Four 2.....CALL NFL Pro League Football ...........47 NFL Full Motion Video PGA Tour Golf .......... World Circuit Racing..... Tom Landry Football ..... World Tour Tennis....................30 Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3....... SAW YOU MUST BE 21+ TO ORDER! Ecstasy contains over 560 megs, over 330 Adult Animations, 2600+ Hi-Res SVGA pictures, 470 erot ic stories. Animation Fantasies: Vol. 1, Vol. 2 or Vol. 3 contain over 100 Adult Animations each. Busty Babes includes over 4,200+ files featuring over 800 film stars! Order All 3 and Save. One for $69.Two for $130. or 3 for $120. NEL... SEXTASY ..37 Expert Office Design ..... Expert Pet Car.............. Expert Dos Tutor... ...... Floor Plan Plus.... Mavis Beacon 2 Windows .........37 PrintShop Deluxe for Windows...47 SOUNDCARDS 3938939 SOUD PUSHIME RRR Barbie's Glamorous Quest........27 Bard's Tale Construction Set ....34 Bard's Tale Ill....... ...........31 Bart Simpson Arcade Game......32 Bart Simpson:House Weirdness 32 Batman Returns......................43 Battle Chess 4000 SVGA........37 Beat the House.... ......32 Black Crypt... Bridge 7.0.....................32 Buzz Aldrin's Race Into Space..43 Caesar... Car & Driver...... Castles 2: Siege & Conquest....37 Challenge of the 5 Realms........42 Civilization... .43 Cobra Mission ......................47 Creepers................. .. 32 Crisis in the Kremlin.................37 Crusaders of the Dark Savant...42 Out of this World .............. Paladin II................ Populous 2..... ... Powerhits: Battletech ............32 Putt Putt Joins the Parade.........33 Quest for Glory 3..... .......43 Railroad Tycoon Classic ...........22 RoboSport for Windows.. ..37 Rome...................................CALL Rules of Engagement 2 ..40 Scrabble Deluxe.....................27 Shadow of the Sorcerer.. . 33 ShadowLands ..... . .32 Shadow President ... ....43 Shanf on Bridge ....... .....37 Sharif on Bridge for Windows.....32 Sim Ant... Sim Lile.... . Sim City..... . ..... Sim City for Windows.... ... 37 Not a Clone! Genuine Soundblaster chipset means 100% SoundBlaster compatability. Includes High Performance Speakers, An Ergonomically Designed Joystick & Gameport. Software includes Voxkit Voice Utilities, Talking Parrot. FM Intelligent Organ, Jukebox for Windows 3.1 & Castle Wolfenstein. By Bondwell..............$99. .40 Ad Lib Gold 1000........ ...179 Ad Lib Music Card ...............47 Pro Audio Spectrum 16...........199 SoundBlaster....... 99 Sound Blaster Pro.... 169 Sound Blaster Pro Basic .........139 Sound Blaster 16........ 249 UitraSound Card.................139 JOYSTICKS & Hockey League Simulator 2......37 EDUCATIONAL Virtual Pilot Virtual Pilot puts firepower right under your thumbs, gives you advanced aileron and elevator trim controls and extra throttle control for high-powered games. It's as close to reality as you can get without leaving your computer. by CH Products ...$69. It's as .69 Commanche: Maximum Overkill. 47 Commanche: Mission Disk 1....28 F15 Strike Eagle 2 Classic........22 F15 Strike Eagle 3...... ... Falcon 3.0.......... . Great Naval Battles: 1939-43.....47 Global Conquest | Harpoon..... Harpoon Battle Set #2043 Harpoon Battle Sets Harpoon Battle Set # 4.. Harpoon Challenger Pak Harpoon Scenario Editor ......... Jump Jet ............................43 Line in the Sand... Lost Admiral. Patriot... Pirates Gold .................. .....43 P.T.O.... Silent Service 2 Classic... Task Force 1942........... V for Victory ... .. 28 Algeblaster Plus................... Grammar Gremlins.............. Kid Pi. Kid Works 2...... Mario Teaches Typing Math Blaster Plus..... Math Blaster Plus Windows 37 Oregon Trail Deluxe...... Read & Roll VGA Reader Rabbit 2..... Reading Adventures in Oz. Reading & Me.. Storybook Weaver Speilit Plus Talking....... Super Munchers.... What's My Angle .......... Word Munchers... Zookeeper.................. Analog Plus............... .....25 BoeShu Colored Joystick............9 Flight Stick by CH Products ....42 G FORCE Yoke..... . .... .49 Gravis PRO Joystick for PC.........39 Gameport Auto CH Products...... Gameport (MicroChann) by CH.48 Flight Control ... ......... Weapons Control..... Thrustmaster Game Card..... FX 2000.. Mach 1 Mach Ill by CH Products ....... Mouse Wheel...... Mouse Yoke.. PC Gamepad by Gravis.......... Quickshot Aviator 5........... Quickshot Intruder 5......... Virtual Pilot..... .....69 CD ROM Guy Spy... Ham Call... Jets & Props KGB/CIA Factbook. Legend of Kyrandia... Lion Share... Loom.. Lost Treasures of Infocom 2..47 Lost Treasures of Infocom.....47 Mantis Experimental Fighter ..49 Mayo Family Health Book ......42 Mixed Up Mother Goose........30 Monster Disk (2 Disk Set).....49 Mother Earth...... Omar Shariff On Bridge .. Our Solar System ............ PowerPack Gold Publishers Paradise.......... Publish-It 2.0 Readers Library... Refernece Library..... Secret of Monkey Island........29 Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe.29 Shareware Overload....... ..19 Shareware Studio..... ..... Sherlock Holmes Detective ..39 Sleeping Beauty Software Jukebox. Space Shuttle Simulator Star Trek. Super CD.......... Talking Classic Tales. Talking Schoolhouse.. Too Many Typefaces.... Toolworks Refemce Library....39 US Atlas with AutoMap...... US/World Atlas... US History ........ U.S. Presidents....................39 U.S.A. Wars: Civil War.. Where in World Carmen .. Windoware..... Windowmaster Windows 1993. Wing Commander 2 Deluxe...52 Wing Commander/Ultima 6...39 World Atlas (MPC) .................34 ADULT CD ROM Animation Fantasy 1, 2 or 3.69 Asian Ladies.............. Busty Babes......................69 Erotic Encounters ........... Esctacy Hot Pix...............69 Hot Pix 2, 3 or 4......... Island Girls Local Girls Lovely Ladies......................49 Moving Fantasies ..............44 My Private Collection 1 or 2...44 25 22 43 X Wing ..34 Cyber Empires............. The Dagger of Amon Ra.... Daemonsgate................ 37 Darklands DarkSun:The Shattered Lands ..47 Daughter of Serpents.... 33 Design Your Own Railroad. Dragon's Lair 3..... Dune 2 Eco Quest 2........... Empire Deluxe... Eric the Unready Eye of the Beholder til Global Effect Grand Slam Bridge 2 GODS Guy Spy .. Heaven and Earth Home Alone 2. HongKong Mahjong Pro Hoyles Book of Games 3 The Humans.... Indiana Jones 4:Fate of Atlantis 40 Inspector Gadget........ Island of Dr. Brain.... King's Quest 5...... King's Quest 6.... Leather Goddesses Phobos 2...43 Legend of Kyrandia .........37 Leisure Larry 5...... Sim City Graphic Ancient Cities. 24 Sim City Graphic:Future Cities ...24 Sim Earth ................ Sim Earth for Windows..............43 Solitaire for Windows.. Space Ace 2: Bor's Revenge ....37 Space Quest 5. Spaceward Ho!..... Spear of Destiny Speedball 2... Spellcasting 301 Spellcraft:Aspects of Valor Star Control 2...... Star Trek 25th Anniversary Strike Commander..... Strike Command Speech Pak...22 Strip Poker 3.. Stunt Island.. Super Jeopardy ... ..... Super Space Invaders...... Super Tetris....... Terminator 2029....... Tracon for Windows........ Tracon 2:Air Traffic Controller....43 Turtles:Arcade Game............32 Turtles:Manhattan Missions......32 Ultima 7: The Black Gate .........52 Ultima 7's Forge of Virtue.. ....22 Ultima 7: Serpent Isle...........52 Ultima Underworld..... .......52 Weapons Control A hands on throttle with seven Independent controls including radar mode, weapons select, waypoint select and counter mea. sures.................$89. Flight Control-The best joystick for Flight Simulators. Compatible with all fight simulator packages as 2 but ton Joystick...................................................$69. Flight Control Pro.......................... ACM Expansion Game Card...............$35. 7th Guest... ..04 Adventures of Willy Beamish .29 American Bus. Phonebook ....39 American Heritage Dictionary.64 Animals in Motion ...............37 Animals (MPC) Barney Bear Goes to School..29 Barney Bear Goes to Space...29 Basics Electronic Cookbook ..49 Battle Chess (Enhanced).......29 BattleChess..... Beauty & the Beast. Bible Library.. Bibles and Religion. Britanica Family Choice.. Business Master CD Powerbox ChessMaster 3000 (MPC)... CIA World Fact Book 2 ... Call us and use your MC, Visa or Discover 800-999-7995 Ulrabots skillfully blends a futuristic robot theme with fully interactive, simulation-style cockpits and military bat. tle tactics. Astonishing 3-D ray-traced graphics, digitized special effects, and a stunning soundtrack make Ultrabots a spectacular audio visual experience! THEY'RE BACK!!! WITH NEW SKILLS, FOR A NEW WORLD. 12 brand new tribes of Lemmings, each with their own skills. skiers, surfers bongo players, snake-charmers, & more  puzzling problems with hilarious animation enhanced sound support by Psygnosis.........$32. International 201-677-1400 Fax 201-677-9484 Methods of Payment: We accept Visa, MC. Discover Card & Money orders. Personal checks allow 14 days to clear. School, State & City purchase orders accepted. Please send $2.00 for our Mission Control Communique 24 Page catalogue (free with order) Shipping: UPS Ground ($5 minimum) / UPS Blue ($7 minimum) APO & FPO ( $7 minimum) Overseas minimum $30 shipping (please fax orders) Send money orders or checks to: MISSION CONTROL, 551 Valley Road Suite 211 Dept. CGW593, Upper Montclair, NJ07043 Overseas & Military Orders given special attention! ULTRABOTS By Electronic Arts ............$39. Lemmings 2......... Life & Death II:The Brain...........27 Lord of the Rings Il: Two Towers 37 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes...47 Lost Treasures of Infocom........43 Lost Treasures of Infocom 2 .....37 The Lost Tribe.....................27 Magic Candle 3........................40 Clip Art Galore... ..29 Colossal Cookbook...... Compton's Encyclopedia.......99 Conan the Cimmerian...... DeathStar Arcade Battles.. Deluxe Scrabble. Desert Storm.... Dictionaries & Languages... Dune....... Education Master... Electronic Library........ Encyclopedia of Clip Art.........34 Ultima Underworld 2. Ultima Trilogy 2.. Ultrabots.... Virtual Reality Studio 2.0 Veil of Darkness........ Waxworks...... . Wheel of Fortune w/ Vanna.......27 Where in Time is Carmen ........32 888 Private Pictures I..................69 Smutware.................. So Much Stareware ...... Storm I, II or III. Triple X Exteme ............. Visual Fantasies...... Volcano... Women of Venus.... Women in Motion 49 Virtual Valerie Visual Fantasies.. Over 21 ONLY for Adult CD Rom! Circle Reader Service #69 "


"  Tapping Into The Infrastructure The Software Publishers Association Spring Symposium 1993 by Johnny L. Wilson Tt would be impossible to confuse the meetings of the SPA with magazine, chaired the panel and led off by observing that the conthose less-formal and more fanatical days of computing's carliest sumer software industry is an «improvisational\" industry. The indusLera. The days described in Steven Levy's marvelous Hackers where try is constantly changing its approaches in order to reach that goal of everyone admired a good \"hack\" (it meant finding a clever solution a broader market with its attendant results of a wider audience and a to a problem in those days) and sharing information wasn't just the more solid bottom line. The panel proceeded to confirm this obserright thing to do, it was the social law. The true \"bad guys\" in those varion by suggesting some new ways to reach that market. days were the monitors who kept fanatical young computer scientists Jeff Braun, president of Maxis, suggested that \"coopetition\" (comfrom getting to the system and getting information. petitors working together to link their programs and create extra With today's software piracy problem and the association of the value) would create a synergy between products that would make word \"hacker\" with software thieves, it would be hard to find indievery company's product even better. Braun's plan is an outgrowth of viduals within the SPA who had any sympathy for the \"hacker ethic Maxis co-founder Will Wright's desire to have an open and standwith its belief that software ought to be freely distributed. Software is ardized file format so that games can be integrated in new and now property, albeit intellectual property, and property must be interesting ways (many readers will remember our cditorial to this protected. So, it is not surprising that many members view the SPA's effect in CGW #74). anti-piracy campaign as its most important and successful activity. Braun and crew are putting their money and technology where their Entertainment software publishers wish that more attention was paid mouths are, by putting \"cooperition\" into effect and cooperating with to their specific needs in said campaign, but they recognize what their competitors. Mallard Software will be working on a product Eileen Rosenthal's (the SPA's counsel in this arca) group has accomthat converts SimCity structures into Microsoft Flight Simulator scenplished as a positive step. ery formats. When that is complete, gamers will be able to build their The early hackers would very likely be horrified, however, by the cities and fly around them. In addition, they are expecting Imagineer reluctance of SPA panelists to give \"real\" numbers or share useful to develop a racing game where one can race through their own information. Instead of the free flow of information which was SimCity. Maxis has also talked to Reality Technologies (Wealth transmitted from hacker to hacker in the early days, SPA panels often Builder) about linking a real estate investment program to SimCity. serve as guarded presentations based on the most general industry Braun would also like to see a 911 rescue game connected to SimCity wisdom. At times, said wisdom is authentic, but it is more often that would add value to both products. marketing jargon and corporate commercials. Yet, Braun's vision went beyond his own products. He observed that Fortunately, this year's Spring Symposium had several exceptions if all sports programs saved their statistics files in the same formats, a to this rule. Even those panels which usually serve as \"warm-ups, in software publisher could create a newspaper product that would which the discussion is often warmed over, had some panelists who incorporate data from any game into a desktop publishing program broke the mold. We will focus on those refreshing presentations in or utilize it in a multimedia version of a network sports wrap-up show. this report. Later, Braun was asked which platforms would become dominant The State of the Consumer Software Industry in the future. He simply cited a magic number of 1 million units sold. He observed that the current buzzword in high-tech industries is This panel is a perennial event. It usually serves to set the stage for infrastructure. Many people are betting on cable connections, phone comment during the conference and is usually one of the most lines, cellular radio bandwidth, old railroad radio bands which are not well-attended panel sessions. It also has the highest cliché quotient of being used, etc. Yet, he observed that, \"If it's a platform with over one the panels and the least real news. Many times, it degenerates into a million units, I'm gonna be there -even if the data is delivered Dickensian axiom like, \"It was the best of times. It was the worst of through the sewer system.» Now, that's improvisation! times.\" At any given conference it would be possible to get away with Jack Heidstadt of Electronic Arts followed up with a sound prociting such a paradox. nouncement regarding the future of the entertainment software inThis year, the panel was different. Keith Ferrell, editor of Omni dustry. He lectured the assembled crowd that, «Entertainment is Page 96 Computer Gaming World "


"COBRA MISSION The sexy role-playing adventure game You stumble back to your office after a long, hard day of detective work. You can't wait to get cozy with a bottle of whiskey, but your answering machine has an urgent message. \"This is a life and death emergency. Women are disappearing. Donna's missing. Please, come quickly.\" Donna's rescue is only the beginning of an adventure that indulges your wildest fantasies as it plunges you into fun and danger. While on screen you're dazzled by innovaWANTED: Private Investigator to Rescue Desperate Beauty. tive and original Japanese animation that's taking other countries by storm, and is now available in the U.S. Cobra Mission is unique.\" Computer Game Review\" \"...quite an original.\" Strategy Plus\" \"I have to admit I enjoyed it.\" \"Game Bytes\" Available now at your nearest dealer or call 1-800-258-MEGA. Or write: Megatech, P.O. Box 11333, Torrance, CA 90510 Visa, MasterCard, checks accepted, System requirements. 386 or faster machine with 640K RAM hard disk with min. 11 megabytes of available space required, mouse -recommended. Graphics compatible with EGA, MCGA and VGA (VGA highly recommended). Sound support: Sound Blaster, Thunder Board, Pro Audio Spectrum und Adlib. This game is not for the faint-hearted. It contains violence and some material inappropriate for minors under 18. MEGA TECH Circle Reader Service #66 "


"critical.\" Like Braun, he worried that the computer entertainment Then, Chaplin challenged the assembled group of predominantly industry spent too much time worrying about platforms and not disk-based publishers to consider the attraction of the disk-based about providing solid entertainment. He urged the talent assembled industry. He noted that the installed base of personal computer to build a positive brand recognition for their companies which could owners is increasing and the video game demographics are getting be ported to any media, any platform. older (and, presumably, more demanding). He contended that techAs anecdotal evidence, he noted how Popular Mechanics makes seven nological advancements in the computer game market were getting figures worth of income per quarter on a tool license which they attention from more consumers and that mass marker retailers such provided to WalMarr. If such a perception of value can be translated as KMart, Scars and WalMart were becoming more inclined toward from a print magazine to tools, how much more should the software carrying software. industry be able to define its business so that compatibility is not the Then, he preached an eloquent sermon on the barriers to exploiting issue. He suggested that studies of consumer behavior would lead one these positives. With limited space, retailers need software companies to believe that the TV monitor will be the console of the future (a to commit to standardized packaging. Standardized packaging has semi-veiled reference to his company's interest in the 3DO video game worked to the advantage of the video game companies and means that machine), but that it is important to build product that will translate retailers will not have to build separate racks to handle the products. across platforms. He also bemoaned the variables in system requirements, observing that many retailers will be reluctant to stock product that is not Lessons from the Video Game Industry compatible with all MS-DOS, Windows or MPC systems. Finally, he Lots of people talk about the differences berween the video game hit upon the high price of the hardware (something software publishindustry and the computer game industry, but Alan Chaplin of ASCII ers can do nothing about) and the 7.2) and 3.5 inch split that forces Entertainment Software had figures to back his observations. Not only retailers to have two separate displays of the same title. The implicit is Chaplin in a good position to make this comparison, since his conclusion was that the attendees were encouraged to work to lower company is a player in both markets, but his statistics were both useful these barriers through cooperation. and fascinating in creating a capsule portrait of both industries. At the same session, Randy Thier of Sony Imagesoft offered his lessons from the video game industry. Thier said to: amortize costs Computer Games over multiple platforms; err to the conservative side in purchasing Video Games inventory (video game cartridges have an extremely high cost of 1993 Income (in millions) $430 $5,900 goods); aspire to high quality, and integrate vertically (putting hardAverage Software Price $49-589 $19-569 ware, duplication, computer software, video game software and liHardware Price $700+ S49-$299 censed properties under the same corporate rubric). Packaging no conformity uniform packaging In short, Thier's presentation cycled around to the same conclusion Advertising print television/print ($70 million) Jeff Braun reached at the beginning of the conference. It isn't the infrastructure (the delivery system or platform and distribution sysChaplin also observed the differences in distribution between the rem) that matters, it is the product. A publisher with good product two industries. can place that product anywhere. Statistically Significant Computer Games One of the most interesting meetings which we attend at any SPA Symposium or Conference is the press conference where new demographics are released. The SPA regularly interviews a random Brands of PCs Installed sampling of computer 8% 1% or video game users Video Games and compiles the data for the benefit of its Apple 11 members. The figures released at this meetOther ing confirmed the assertion that personal computer users are fiComputer vs. Video Game Distribution nancially better off and have the advanIBM Compatible Chip Type After delineating these factors, Chaplin observed that retail space is tage of more educa286 shrinking in the video game world. Though Gary Kuzin, co-founder tion than the average 386 of Babbages, was to state in a later session (\"Trends in Distribution\") population in general that the idea of shelf-space wars is a myth, Chaplin used hard data ata and those who only and those who only from the video game world to enforce his assertion. play video games. However, the most interesting data conSystem Titles Available Titles Stocked cerned the mix of IBM 1993 SPA Consumer Market Study March 3, 1993 Nintendo compatibles currently Super Nintendo in use. As the chart shows, IBM compatibles claim the lion's share of Sega Genesis 250 100 the market and more than half of these are 386 or better. Statistically, financially and philosophically, the software market is Titles Available vs. Shelf Space changing. The question is, «Will the software industry be improvisational enough to adapt?\" CGW shwe Chan Rock Job Oct Metal Mal Order IBM Compatible Macintosh Toy Chains Mass Merchants Scan Only DK / Ref. urt am 24% 10% BONG 13% 486 Other DK / Rot 384 300 50 Page 98 Computer Gaming World "


"-Tech Gupport Memory Management and System Configuration for MS-DOS Games The following are sample CONFIGs and AUTOEXECs. by Mike \"Moondawg\" Weksler Notice that in the following examples, the Shell command is used. It is placed in the CONFIG.sys file to tell the system that command.com is placed in the C:\\DOS directory. Additionally, all of these files are placed in one directory called c:\\inits, to help keep them organized. If done in this manner, the only two files in ones root directory will be AUTOEXEC.bat and CONFIG.sys (WINA20.386 can be placed in the c:\\windows directory with the appropriate win.ini entry to tell windows where it is located). Here is a portion of my SYSTEM.INI file that shows the entry for relocating the WINA20.386 file: Dawg On DOS (386Enh] display=vddpvga.386 device-c:\\Windows\\wina20.386 EGABOWOA.FON=EGASOWOA.FON EGALOWOA.FON=EGA4OWOA.FON Example CONFIGs and AUTOEXECs for MS DOS 5. \"Extended MEMOYy-refers to MEMOTY al physical addresses above 1 Megabytes. The following configuration without the mouse driver works well as a \"vanilla\" configuration. Among other things, \"Dawg\" is our in-house hacker. He configures all of our game related bardware and software and he's been known to perform the occasional act of wizardry. Whether he's belping our writers with their technical problems, helping the technical support employees with their own products, running around hacking our rigs for beta versions of games that refuse to load, configuring sound cards that refuse to sound, or modems that refuse to talk, we feel that he's definitely picked up a few secrets. With that in mind, we've encouraged him to shed some light onto a subject that has us all cursing into his voice mail at one time or another. You are the first one on your block to purchase \"Palace of Beer Stein-3D,\" the hottest game on the market, only to install the game and watch DOS report that you have \"insufficient memory?\" No, it does not necessarily mean that you inhaled back in your college years, it means that your computer lacks sufficient memory to load and run your new game. With most contemporary computers it is unlikely that you have too little memory or RAM, but rather that your computer is not configured properly. CONFIG.XMS (extended memory) DEVICE=C: DOS HIMEM.SYS DOS=HIGH DEVICE-C:\\ MOUSE MOUSE.SYS SHELLEC: DOS COMMAND.COM CADOS /P FILES=30 BUFFERS=30 AUTOEXEC.XMS (extended memory) @ECHO OFF PROMPT SPSG PATH C:\\DOS;C:\\INITS Below is an alternate XMS configuration with access to Upper Memory Blocks via EMS manager, notice NOEMS command following EMM386.EXE: CONFIG.XMS (alternate extended memory). DEVICE=C:\\DOS HIMEM.SYS DEVICE=C:\\DOSIEMM386.EXE NOEMS RAM 2048 M9 (OR FRAME=E000) DOS=HIGH,UMB DEVICEHIGH=C:MOUSE MOUSE.SYS SHELL-C:DOS COMMAND.COM CADOS /P FILES=30 BUFFERS=8 AUTOEXEC.XMS (alternate extended memory) @ECHO OFF PROMPT SPSG PATH C:\\DOS;C:\\INITS LH C: DOSISMARTDRV Les Manley about to explain Extended and Expanded Memory in Les Manley 2: Lost in L.A. entertaining two gorgeous women in bed. They ask him to do it just one more time. Exhausted, our hero sighs and, with pen protector in pocket, begins to explain the differences between Extended and Expanded memory. I didn't have the privilege of interviewing Mr. Manley for this article, so I'll give you a quick overview. Back when the first IBM PC was held upside down and spanked, it could only address 1 megabyte (MB) of memory. A program that needed 64K of RAM was considered a real memory hog. The first 640K of RAM, or Lower 640K, was for loading programs and DOS itself. The remaining 340K, or Upper Memory was reserved for system stuff. When faster processors came out, hardware manufacturers slung RAM in excess of 1 MB onto the motherboards. At first, there wasn't any way for DOS to access that additional RAM, but eventually, software drivers, or special programs, were written which tricked DOS into utilizing the additional memory. This memory, called Extended or XMS memory, could only be used to store data and consequently, some of the first programs to Neophyte Memory Commander Academy Entrance Exam Before you read any further, let's see how you rate on my \"Dawg Scale of Rocket Science.\" Is your VCR still blinking 12:00? If you answered ves, please skip to the paragraph labeled \"Third Party Memory Managers.\" Otherwise, don your propeller beanie and blast-off with me. Extended and Expanded Memory: Getting a Clue! Who could forget the classic scene in Accolade's \"Les Manley 2: Lost in LA\", where Les is June 1993 Page 99 "


"Tech CIMOOTL CONFIG.EMS (expanded memory) DEVICE=C:\\DOS HIMEM.SYS DEVICE=C:\\DOSIEMM386.EXE RAM 2048 FRAME=E000 DOS=HIGH,UMB DEVICEHIGH=C:\\MOUSE MOUSE.SYS SHELL-CADOS COMMAND.COM CADOS /P FILES=30 BUFFERS=8 AUTOEXEC.EMS (expanded memory, with Soundblaster Pro settings) @ECHO OFF PROMPT SP$G PATH=C:\\DOS;C:\\INITS SET SOUND=C:\\SBPRO SET BLASTER=A220 17 D1 T4 C:\\DOSISMARTDRV CONFIG.QEM (Quarterdeck's QEMM) DEVICE=C:\\QEMMQEMM386.SYS R:4 RAM ST:M DOS=HIGH DEVICE=C:\\QEMM\\LOADHI.SYS /R:1 C:DOS SETVER.EXE DEVICE=C:\\QEMM\\LOADHI.SYS /R:1 C:\\CDROM\\FDCD.SYS /D:MSCD000 DEVICE-C:\\QEMM\\LOADHI.SYS /R:3 C:\\MOUSE MOUSE.SYS LASTDRIVE=Z SHELL=C:\\DOS COMMAND.COM C:\\DOS/P BUFFERS=20 AUTOEXEC.QEM (Quarterdeck's QEMM with CD drivers) @ECHO OFF PROMPT SPSG PATH=C:\\DOS;C:INITS SET TEMP=C:WINDOWSITEMP SET SOUND=C:\\SBPRO SET BLASTER=A220 17 D1 T4 C:\\QEMM\\LOADHI /R:3 C: CDROM\\MSCDEX/D:MSCD000 /M:10 C:\\QEMM\\LOADHI /R:2 C:\\QEMM\\FILES=20 C:\\QEMM\\LOADHI /R:3 CADOSISMARTDRV.EXE C:\\QEMMLOADHI /R:2 C: DOSIDOSKEY.COM CONFIG.MAX (Qualitas' 386MAX) Device=C:\MAX 386MAX.SYS pro=C:\max\max.pro DOS=HIGH DEVICE=C:\MAX\load.sys size=11504 prog=C:\\DOSISETVER.EXE DEVICE-C:\MAX\load.sys size=28560 prog=C:\\MOUSEWMOUSE.SYS DEVICE=C:\MAX(386load.sys size=27264 prog=C:\\CDROM\\FDCD.SYS /D:MSCD000 LASTDRIVE-Z SHELL=C:\\DOSICOMMAND.COM C:\\DOS /P FILES=30 BUFFERS=8 AUTOEXEC.MAX (Qualitas' 386MAX) @ ECHO OFF PROMPT $PSG SET TEMP=C:\\WINDOWS\\TEMP SET SOUND=C:\\SBPRO SET BLASTER=A220 17 D1 T4 C:\MAX1386load size=36208 prgreg-2 flexframe prog=C:\\CDROM MSCDEX/D:MSCD000 /M:10 C:1386MAXIQCACHE.EXE C:\MAX\load size=6400 flexframe prog=C:\\DOSIDOSKEY.COM Example CONFIGs and AUTOEXECs for MS DOS 6. CONFIG.XMS (with MS-DOS 6 Memmaker) DEVICE=C:\\DOS HIMEM.SYS DEVICE=C:\\DOS EMM386.EXE NOEMS HIGHSCAN X=CBOO-CBFF BUFFERS=8,0 FILES=30 DOS=UMB utilize it were RAM disk programs, software above 1MB without the above XMS and EMS which could emulate a hard disk in Extended drivers). However, there is an operating mode memory. The XMS driver that is used today can (brought on with the advent of the AT comusually be found in your CONFIG.SYS file and puter) called Protected mode. This mode is used is called HIMEM.SYS. MS Windows uses by operating systems such as MS-Windows and HIMEM.SYS to access up to 16MB of ExOS/2, where the operating system uses Virtual tended memory. Some games are written to RAM (i.e. space on the hard disk sometimes store data in extended memory and require the referred to as \"swap files,\" in order to access HIMEM.SYS driver to be in your CONmemory way beyond the actual physical RAM FIG.SYS file. installed on the computer). Additionally, softAs if the MS-DOS world of computing isn't ware in protected mode has the benefit of runconfusing enough, there exists another memory ning while other programs are using other areas of Virtual RAM. Hence, programs may run standard for getting DOS to access memory beyond the first IMB of RAM. It's referred to simultaneously. This is the basis of multi-taskas Expanded Memory, or EMS. In order for a ing. In the last few years, third party developers program to take advantage of EMS, the program have written programs called \"DOS Extenders.\" must be written to execute with EMS. Such These programs, when used in conjunction with programs will load themselves into areas above software written especially for use with them, IMB in 16K chunks called Pages. When data is will allow software to run under MS-DOS in required by the program, it makes a call to a Protected Mode. Novalogic's Comanche: Maximum Overkill is one such product. Protected special software program called an EMS Memory Manager, or EMM. The EMM will set up Mode programs enjoy the benefit of adressing B memory over 1 MB without the overhead ina special 64KB part of memory between 640KB and the first MB (also referred to as Upper curred in using an Expanded Memory Manager. Memory) as the EMS Page Frame, capable of working with up to four of the 16K EMS Pages. Loaded for Bear When a program needs some data which reIf you weren't into games, then you could stop sides in a 16K page frame above 1MB, the EMM right here. Most business programs, with the tricks DOS into thinking that it can access that exception of MS-Windows, and certain CAD data by mapping the required page into the packages, simply do not require large amounts EMS Page Frame in Upper Memory arca (usuof your computer's memory. Games, on the ally at Eoooh). In other words, the program other hand, require incredible amounts of memneeds data and the EMM points the program to ory. It is because games, more than any other that dara. DOS then thinks that it's all loaded software, push computers to the limit of the within IMB. It is interesting to note that data is envelope. Let's say you just ripped the shrink not being moved once it is loaded above 1MB, wrap off of Dynamix's Aces of the Pacific, only ic., upon first loading the program. During to read that it requires 604K of lower memory program execution, the EMM is furiously map (currently, the highest memory requirement of ping these 16K pages (i.e. showing the program any game) and additionally, the use of an Exwhere to find them). Although this can cause panded Memory Manager. You type CHKDSK your system to run at less than optimal effi and see that you have 613,000 bytes of free lower ciency, many games require Expanded memory. memory; no problem, right? Wrong! The proIn MS-DOS, the Expanded Memory Mangram requires 604K of memory. Remember ager is EMM386.EXE. This is a software driver from that dry boring DOS manual that 1024 which converts existing XMS memory into bytes equals a Kilobyte? If you divide 613,000 EMS memory, therefore, HIMEM.SYS is rebytes by 1024, you arrive at 598.6KB. As Maxquired in your CONFIG.SYS file before loading well Smart would say, \"Missed it by that much.\" EMM386.EXE. You may have seen the term So, what do you do? Well, besides reading the LIM EMS. LIM refers to the consortium of of rest of this article, you could take some superLotus. Intel and Microsoft, who set up the EMS fluous things out of your CONFIG.SYS and standard. Like Extended or XMS memory. EMS AUTOEXEC.BAT files. This is a good idea memory can only hold data. One example of anyways because I've seen such innocuous proExpanded memory is the video playback feature grams as Quicken's Billminder crash Wing Comfound in many of the flight simulations and mander! sports games. Another example would be for a There are several solutions to memory headsimulation to load the object data for other aches. First, I'll cover the basics of configuring aircraft and terrain data into Expanded memory. your system for both Extended memory and As the data is required by the simulation, the Expanded memory, then I'll go over third party Expanded Memory Manager (EMM) tricks Expanded Memory Managers, and finally I'll DOS into thinking that it's accessing data above discuss how to manage multiple configurations, 1MB. Why should I care about putting a few whether you are using DOS versions 5 or 6. MB of data into RAM when I have a 300MB hard disk? Simple. It takes forever to read data Mr. Cajun Man Says: off of your hard disk. RAM is much faster. Your program will \"hit the disk\" less during a flight, \"Configura-shone!» resulting in better performance. The lower 640K of a PCs memory is like my closer: Eventually, the floor gets crowded with Whenever Possible, shoes, dive gear, boxes, etc. When I need more Use \"Protection\" room in the lower area of my closet, I move some of the boxes and stuff right past the shelf (parMS-DOS runs in Real mode (i.e. the original tially full of other stuff), and up into the attic, operating mode whereby only one program will thus making more room on the floor. This is run at a time and is unable to access memory analogous to the system portion of MS-DOS Page 100 Computer Gaming World "


"SOUND GALAXY IT WAS AS IF YOU WERE IN THERE! Forget about a primitive game session where gunning down a jet fighter or running away from a fire breathing dragon creates a dumb effect. And you reacted because you see it coming. If not, it's a game over for you. CD-QUALITY SOUND Sound Galaxy NX PRO Extra change all that See and Do by giving you a whole new generation of sound technology that promises you superb CD-quality sound that match the best amplifiers and full stereo capability. EASE OF INSTALLATION All configuration settings are via software without the hassle of setting jumpers. SUPPORT MORE SOUND STANDARDS Let yourself go ga-ga over the full sound support for AdLib, Sound Blaster Pro, Covox Speech Thing and Disney Sound Source. And you find yourself hacking away the jungle of games and entertainment software available under both DOS and Windows environment. VALUE FOR MONEY Topping it all are the bundled software such as Monologue for Windows, Voyetra Audio Station & WINDAT MOLE, just to name a few, so that you can edit audio, animate and create stunning graphics on screen. And not forgetting the free speakers that allow you to blast yourself to glory as you see your scores chalking up. So step into the world of imagination with Sound Galaxy NX PRO Extra. MORE CD-ROM INTERFACE Besides the built in AT-BUS CD-ROM interface support for Mitsumi and Panasonic drives, the NX PRO Extra can also support the Sony AT-BUS CD-ROM drive simply by plugging the SG adaptor to the Mitsumi interface. It can be further upgraded to more powerful SCSI CD-ROM drives. Call us : 1-800-886 8859 Circle Reader Service #34 U.S.A. Office : AZTECH LABS, INC. 46707 Fremont Boulevard, Fremont, CA 94538. U.S.A. Tel : (510) 623-8988 Fax: (510) 623-8989 Head Ofice: AZTECH SYSTEMS PTE LTD ZI Ubi Road 1. AVS Building, Singapore 1440. Tel : (65) 741 7211 Fax. (65) 741-8678/9 Tlx : RS36560 AZTECH MONT WINXMS CIJELE All trade names & marks are registered trademarks of respective company. Specifications subject to change without prior notice. "


"h I MALAWI LASTDRIVE=Z FCBS=4,0 DEVICEHIGH /L:2,12048 =C:\\DOS SETVER.EXE DOS=HIGH DEVICEHIGH /L:2,28560 =CMOUSE MOUSE.SYS SHELL=C:\\DOSICOMMAND.COM C:DOSI /p DEVICEHIGH /L:2,44176 =C:\\DOS DBL SPACE.SYS /MOVE AUTOEXEC.XMS (with MS-DOS 6 Memmaker) @ECHO OF PROMPT SPSG PATH=C:\\DOS:C:\\INITS SET TEMPEC:WINDOWSITEMP SET SOUND=C:\\SBPRO SET BLASTER=A220 17 D1 T4 LH/L: 2,42384/S C:\\DOS SMARTDRV.EXE LH/L:1,6400 C:\\DOSIDOSKEY.COM CONFIG.EMS (with MS-DOS 6 Memmaker) DEVICÉ=C: DOS HIMEM.SYS DEVICE-C:\\DOSIEMM386.EXE RAM HIGHSCAN X=CBOO-CBFF BUFFERS=8,0 FILES=30 DOSEUMB LASTDRIVE-Z FCBS=4,0 DEVICEHIGH /L:3,12048 =C:\\DOSISETVER.EXE DOS=HIGH DEVICEHIGH/L:3,28560 =C:\\MOUSE MOUSE.SYS SHELL-C:\\DOSICOMMAND.COM CADOSI /p DEVICEHIGH/L:2,44176 =CADOS DBL SPACE.SYS /MOVE AUTOEXEC.EMS (with MS-DOS 6 Memmaker) @ECHO OFF PROMPT SPSG PATH=C:\\DOS;CINITS SET TEMP=C:\\ WINDOWSITEMP SET SOUND=C:\\SBPRO SET BLASTER=A220 17 D1 T4 C:\\DOSISMARTDRV.EXE LH/L:1,6400 C:\\DOSIDOSKEY.COM CONFIG.XCD (Memmaker XMS with CDROM drivers) DEVICE=C:\\DOS HIMEM.SYS DEVICE=C:\\DOS EMM386.EXE NOEMS HIGHSCAN X=CBOO-CBFF BUFFERS=8,0 FILES=30 DOS=UMB LASTDRIVE-Z FCBS=4.0 DEVICEHIGH /L:2,12048 =C: DOSISETVER.EXE DOS=HIGH DEVICEHIGH/L:2,28560 =C:\\MOUSE MOUSE.SYS DEVICEHIGH/L:2,27264 =C:\\CDROM FDCD.SYS /D:MSCD000 SHELL-CADOS COMMAND.COM C:\\DOS\\/p DEVICEHIGH /L:2,44176 =C:\\DOSIDBLSPACE.SYS /MOVE AUTOEXEC.XCD (Memmaker XMS with CD-ROM drivers) @ECHO OFF PROMPT SPSG PATH=C: DOS:C:INITS SET TEMP=C:\\ WINDOWS\\TEMP SET SOUND=C: SBPRO SET BLASTER=A220 17 D1 T4 LH/L:2,36256 C: DOS\\MSCDEX/D:MSCD000 /M:10 LH/L: 2,42384/S C:\\DOS\\SMARTDRV.EXE LH /L:1,6400 C:\\DOSIDOSKEY.COM loading the majority of itself above the first I EMMs. I like to start with Qualitas' 386Max MB of your computer's RAM. With first, then Quarterdeck's QEMM, followed by HIMEM.SYS and the command \"DOS= Netroom from Helix. Some games will crash HIGH\" in your CONFIG.SYS, DOS will load with QEMM and work with 386MAX, while itself in the first 64KB area above your first MB others prefer Netroom. When the dust settles, of RAM, also referred to as the High Memory they all give me around 620K. That's much Area, or HMA. Without loading DOS high, more than you'll ever need to run a game right? you are never going to get more than 575K free Wrong! There are now plenty of games that of lower 640K (or \"precious memory\"). This is run off CD-ROM discs. The single most imporexactly why configuring your rig «Vanilla\" (i.e., tant feature of the average third party memory clean without loading DOS high or any memmanager is that EMMs are capable of loading ory manager), will not necessarily get you more the software drivers necessary to run CD-ROM precious memory.\" With today's high-end drives into Upper Memory. It can be done with games, this simply won't cut it. DOS and a lot of trial and error, but the marReferring back to \"Dawg's Allegory of the ginal utility of doing that, versus the implicit Closet,\" I can make room on the floor by placing cost of just buying the third party memory additional items in the space available on the manager software will become readily apparent. shelf. This is analogous to loading some of DOS With some third pary EMMs drivers, it is posin that 320K above your lower 640K and under sible to load everything high and cnjoy around your first 1 MB the area referred to as Upper 620K of precious memory. Without a third memory. This area already has system stuff in it, party EMM, your best configuration without a but with magic words, DOS will load itself into lot of hacking will most likely net you around what are referred to as Upper Memory Blocks. 580K. Not bad, but I don't think that Virgin's In order to access the Upper Memory Blocks, Seventh Guest CD-ROM will be particularly an Expanded Memory Manager (EMM) must enjoyable without as much precious memory as be running. Again, following the HIMEM.SYS possible. If you are having trouble with command in your CONFIG.SYS file, you MSCDEX.EXE, it is most likely an out of date would need to load an EMM. To load the DOS version. You can place SETVER.EXE in your EMM386 file, you would see something like CONFIG.SYS file, or obtain the latest version this: DEVICE=EMM386.EXE NOEMS, folfrom your CD-ROM manufacturer. To update lowed by DOS= HIGH,UMB. This is telling a file to run with a later version of MS-DOS, your computer at startup that the EMM should run SETVER.EXE, followed by its path (usuallow access to the Upper Memory Blocks withally C:\\DOS), then the program name (i.e., out running the Expanded Memory Manager (if MSCDEX.EXE), and finally, the version of your game needed EMS, you would merely MS-DOS that the program is looking for (i.e., remove the \"NOEMS\" from the end of the 3.3). If you did this correctly, you will not get command). The subsequent DOS= the \"Wrong DOS Version\" message upon reHIGH,UMB command tells DOS to load up booting. into the HMA and any UMBs that are available, freeing up more precious memory. Rig for Smooth Running: What's the big deal about Upper Memory Multiple Configurations Blocks? Well, for starters, that mouse driver software and possibly your disk cache and any With all the possible configurations for runsound card driver software can be loaded into ning games on a PC (extended memory, exthe UMB area with either the DEVICEHIGH panded memory, extended memory with or LOADHIGH commands, thus freeing up CD-ROM drivers, expanded memory with even more conventional memory. I can free up CD-ROM drivers, and then configurations as much memory with DOS using from third party EMMs, not to mention your EMM386.EXE as I can with a third party \"normal\" configurations for trivial things like EMM. The difference, however, is that I have work and stuff), it can become quite confusing to go through much trial and crror with DOS, as to how to manage all the different CONwhereby the third party EMMs have special FIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT files. auto configuration software such as 386MAX's Working at CGW, I have amassed a huge \"Maximize\" and OEMM's \"Optimize.\" These collection of configurations, and to manage programs still require tinkering, but if you are them. I have come up with this solution: I call not comfortable \"hacking your configuration them «rig for\" or RIG 4\" batch files. These batch files, they're definately worth looking into. files copy a particular configuration file to my CONFIG.SYS and an AUTOEXEC.BAT and Third Party Memory Managers: then call a small .COM program which reboots Ghost in the Machine the computer. Refer to the sidebar for an example of a \"RIG4\" batch file. In this manner, Referring back to my closet analog, there several configurations may be created for indicomes a point where you will have diminishing vidual games. If one wishes to run Ultima 7 returns; when no amount of placing stuff up on (with its own memory manager), then one may the shelves will free the space below. When that set up a RIG4U7 batch file to copy the specific happens, it's time to install new shelves. There configuration files for that particular game into are third party contractors who will come out to your CONFIG.SYS and 'AUTOEXEC.BAT your home and completely rebuild your closet files. Similarly, one may set up a RIG4WIZ7 to into an anal retentive shrine. Much in the same set up for Wizardry 7, RIG4ACES, to run Aces way, third party Expanded Memory Managers of the Pacific. Additionally, I use these batch files (EMMs) come in and do the organizing for you. to configure between Extended and Expanded Many people ask me what is the best one to get. memory by using RIG4EMS and RIG4XMS My answer is that I have a \"quiver\" of them, respectively. For readers who are not able to because different games run with different download a reboot utility, I have included one Page 102 Computer Gaming World "


"Toch immer CONFIG.ECD (Memmaker EMS with CDROM drivers) DEVICE=CADOS HIMEM.SYS DEVICE-C:\\DOS EMM386.EXE RAM HIGHSCAN X=CBOO-CBFF BUFFERS=8,0 FILES=30 DOS=UMB LASTDRIVEEZ FCBS-4.0 DEVICEHIGH/L:3,12048 =C:\\DOSISETVER.EXE DOS=HIGH DEVICE=C:\\MOUSE MOUSE.SYS DEVICEHIGH /L:3,27264 =C:\\CDROM FDCD.SYS /D:MSCD000 SHELL=C:DOS COMMAND.COM C:\\DOSI / DEVICEHIGH/L:2,44176 =C:\\DOS DBLSPACE.SYS /MOVE AUTOEXEC.ECD CONFIG.ECD (Memmaker EMS with CD-ROM drivers) @ECHO OFF PROMPT SPSG PATH=C:DOS;C:\\INITS SET TEMP=C:\\WINDOWSITEMP SET SOUND=C:\\SBPRO SET BLASTER=A220 17 D1 T4 LH/L:2,36256 C:\\DOS MSCDEX /D:MSCD000 /M:10 LH/L: 2,42384 /S C:\\DOSISMARTDRV.EXE LH/L:1,6400 CADOS DOSKEY.COM in the sidebar in this article which shows how to startup, but you load DOS high (either into the write a small assembly program in a script file High Memory Area or the Upper Memory and use DOS's Debug program to assemble it. Blocks, or both). My CONFIG.XMS and The source is Kris Jamsa's 1001 DOS Tips, from AUTOEXEC.XMS examples under the MSOsborne/McGraw-Hill. DOS 5 section of the sidebar in this article One question the reader may have is, \"Why would be good \"vanilla\" configurations if you not just use a boot disk?\" Simple. I have at least leave out the Mousc driver. (To exclude a state20 different configurations. The disks would be ment from exccuting in cither of the configurascattered throughout my office in no time (or tion files, place the word \"REM\" in front of it). borrowed), and when I really needed one, it If your game still doesn't run, you probably would be long gone. have a sound card conflict. This one's good for 75% of game crashes. Reconfigure your game, What? Games that lock up? Nah, we've never using the hardware configuration routine found seen that before. Therefore, I offer a solution to in either the setup or install program that came handling multiple configuration files on your with your game and select PC speaker or No rig. sound. As I write this article, I am aware that MSHere's a few more tips for running games. Set DOS 6 will have memory management utililies, SMARTDRV.EXE to 256K. Why do this? Let's including Memmaker, which will configure say the average \"Gameframe\" rig has 4MB of your memory similar to one of the third party RAM. Write off your first meg for your game to EMMs. From what I have seen so far, Memrun in and for DOS. IF SMARTDRV.EXE is maker configured EMS at 575K (may have been running, it defaults to IMB. That leaves you low because it was loading Doublespace softwith 2MB to configure as either XMS or EMS, ware high), which would still require a third depending upon your game. Certain games party EMM to fly Aces of the Pacific or Falcon coming down the pipeline will require 2.5 MB 3.0. See the sidebar in this article for some minimum of XMS or EMS to run. That is why sample configuration files created using the MSyou may need to put a leash on DOS 6 Memmaker program. I am also aware SMARTDRV.EXE (just place the number 256 that DOS 6 will support multiple configuraafter SMARTDRV.EXE in your AUTOtions via a boot menu, and even run while EXEC.BAT filc). If SMARTDRV is running stepping through your configs one driver at a with its writeback cache enabled (default), make time! Unfortunately, we went to press just prior sure you type SMARTDRV/C before you shut to the release of MS-DOS 6 and while I haven't down your rig. This \"flushes\" the cache, writing seen this portion of the software running, I'm anything remaining in memory (like your save confident that my batch file solution will still be games), to the disk. To disable the writeback applicable — it's fast and it doesn't require any cache in SMARTDRV.EXE, place the letter of memory to run so there's no potential for it to your drive (without a colon) after the crash games. More advanced users may wish to SMARTDRV.EXE command in your AUTOsearch the online services and BBSs for a proEXEC.BAT file. For quick configuration file gram called BOOT.SYS. This program will preediting, try the MS-DOS editor. Type EDIT ar sent you with a menu upon booting allowing a dos prompt to bring it up. Also, you may wish you to select your configuration files at startup. rtup: to try the MS-DOS program DOSKEY.COM. The multiple configuration feature in MS-DOS This program will allow you to recall and edit 6 should be similar to this. If you want a menu vour command line entries using the arrow keys (and a delay) at each bootup, then this is for you. (like an Amiga). This can be quite handy. Help, I've Reconfigured my Rig, Why Does The TV but I Can't Boot Up! Have to Be on Channel 3? Before you reconfigure your system, you should make at least one emergency boot disk. Most people are uncomfortable programming Copy your AUTOEXEC.BAT and CONa VCR. Configuring a computer, however, docs FIG.SYS file to the disk and then, enter the not have to remain in the realm of rocket scienfollowing command from your DOS directory: tists. I hope that after reading my article, you SYS A: will have the tools necessary to manage your computer's memory and configure it. As a reThis will copy the MS-DOS hidden system sult, you should spend more time playing games files 10.SYS and MSDOS.SYS to the disk along with COMMAND.COM, the command interthan playing with your computer. Refer to the various examples of system configuration which preter. If you think that at least one boot disk is I have included in the sidebars of this article to for sissies, keep in mind that, without a boot disk see generic examples of configuring for Exof this nature, you may configure yourself into tended memory and Expanded Memory, and a situation from which you may not be able to also third party memory managers. boot again your system will just hang. Abandon all hope, ye who reconfigure here without For more information, check out Kris Jamsa's a boot disk. \"1001 DOS Tips\" Osbornc/McGraw-Hill. This book is a must have for anyone interested in Vanilla learning the fundamentals of MS-DOS computing. There's something in here for the novice Sometimes, certain games will just refuse to to the hacker. Additionally, the manuals that run. One option is to configure with a \"vanilla\" accompany both Qualita's 386MAX and QuarAUTOEXEC.BAT and CONFIG.SYS. This terdeck's QEMM contain a wealth of informaimeans that you don't load any programs upon ton regarding this subject. CGW Debug script to create BOOTME.COM Use an ascii editor (likeyour MS DOS editor) to create the following file. Save the file as \"BOOTME.SCR.\" To assemble this file using the MS DOS debugger, type \"debug < bootme.scr bootme.com\" The resulting BOOTME.COM file will cold boot your computer whenever you type \"BOOTME.\" Make sure that this file is in a directory located in your path such as C:\\DOS. N BOOTME.COM A 100 MOV BX,40 MOV DS.BX MOV BX,1234 MOV [72],BX JMP FFFF:0 R CX 11 W Example of a \"RIG4\" batch file using BOOTME.COM. This batch file will copy the necessary configuration files for Expanded memory to your CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT files and then reboot your rig. The SMARTDRV.EXE line is included in this example to show you how to dump the writeback cache (if it is running). Without this line, the batch file would copy the files to their respective places, however, the system would reboot before the files were actually written to the disk, which would result in no change taking place in your configuration. So, if SMARTDR is running and the disk cache is enabeled, don't forget to dump it! Save the following file as \"RIGHEMS.BAT\" @ECHO OFF COPY CAINITS CONFIG.EMS C:ICONFIG.SYS COPY C:\\INITSVAUTOEXEC.EMS C:AUTOEXEC.BAT SMARTDRVIC BOOTME June 1993 Page 103 "


"VKNG ) SOFTWARE, INC. Adventure/Role-Playing Past IBM Mac 37 37 IBM Mac A REALMS OF A ARKANIA IBM Mac 19 . . . Pools of Darkness Prophecy of the Shadow Quest for Glory! (VGA) Quest for Glory II Quest for Glory III Ragnarok Realms Realms of Arkania Red Crystal Return to Zork . 19 ea. 49 19  Ultima VI Ultima VII Forge of Virtue Ultima VII Part 2 Ultima Trilogy! Ultima Trilogy 2 Ultima Underworld Ultima Underworld 2 Uncharted Waters Warriors of Legend Wizardry Trilogy Wizardry 4 Wizardry 5 Wizardry 6 (Bane) Wizardry 7 (Crusaders) Wing Commander Secret Mission 1 & 11 Wing Commander I Deluxe Wing Commander II Special Operations ! Special Operations 2 Speech Pack Wing Commander III X-Wing   Hint Books 12 10-12 A-Train: Official Strat. Guide AD&D Cluc Books Avatar Adventures Bard's Tale III Chaos Strikes Back Chuck Yeager Handbook Civilization Clouds of Xeen Dagger of Amon Ra Darklands Dungeon Master GOMBOSSOSEDONDONJSD Realms of Arkania Sir-Tech breaks off from the Wizardry line & brings another great role playing adventure. Utilizes excellent graphics and sound. Very hot item! IBM $37 CONDomo : . . Kies Lemunings: w companion disk 15 Lord of the Rings Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Lucasfilm Air Combat Lucas Arts Adv. Game Book Harpoon Battlebook Heaven & Earth: Strat Guide 12 Magie Candle 2 Martian Dreams Might & Magic Official Guide Might & Magic III Patriot Official Strat. Guide Planet's Edge Pools of Darkness Powermonger Official Strat 12 Populous I & Il off. Strat. Book 12 Quest for Clues: Book of Orbs 11 Quest for Clues: Man of Swords ! Quest for Clues 3 & 4 16 ea Railroad Tycoon 12 Ragnarok Strat Guide 10 Rex Nebular Ringworld Run 5 Magazine 1-17 Secret of Monkey Island I & II 10 a Sherlock Holmes Sierra Hint Books Sim Earth: Official Strat. Guide 12 Sim Life: Official Strat. Guide 12 Star Control 2 Starfight I & II 8 e Star Trek 25th Anniversary 10 Strike Commander Guide 10 Stunt Island Guide Summoning Ultima: Official Book Ultima III-VI Ultima VII Ultima VII Part 2 Ultima VII & Underworld II Ultima Underworld I & II 10 ca. Vlor Victory #1 Battle Book 12 Veil of Darkness Wing Commander I & II Guide 12 Wizardry 6 (Bane) Wizardry 7 Hint Book IBM Mac AD&D Starter Kit AD&D Collector's Edition 39 . AD&D Collector's Edit 2 43 . AD&D Unlimited Advent. 37 5793 Bards Tale lill 31 . Bards Tale Constr. Set 32 . Betrayal at Krondor Black Crypt Castles Northern Camp. Castles II Challenge of Five Realms Champions of Krynn 19 Conquests of the Longbow 42 Curse of the Azure Bonds 15 Darklands 38 . Art Disk w/HB 13 . Darklands MPE 38 . Dark Queen of Krynn 31 Darkside of Xeen 42 Dark Sun: Shattered Lands 4/93 11/93 Grey Isles Camp. 4793 . Daughter of Serpents 32 . Death Knights of Krynn 19 . Dragonlance Collec. Ed. 43 Eric the Unready Eye of the Beholder 19 Eye of the Beholder 2 37 Eye of the Beholder 3 42 Four Crystals of Tratere 34 Gateway Savage Frontier 31 Gemfire Gryphon Master of Havlar 11/93 . Heimdall Inca Inindo King's Quest IV King's Quest V (VGA) 42 42 King's Quest VI King's Ransom Legacy Legacy of Necromancer Legend of Kyrandia Legends of Drakka Legends of Valor Lord of the Rings Lord of the Rings 2 Lost Vikings Lure of Temptress Magic Candle 2 Magic Candle 3 Martian Dreams Might & Magic 1&11 Might & Magic II Might & Magic IV M&M Clouds of Xeen 42 . Merchant Colony 32 . Pirates Gold 6/93 . Pool of Radiance  31 WING IBM Mac Veil of Darkness This gothic nightmare is not for the faint hearted. Plunge into a maze of vampires, werewolves and zombies accompanied with chilling graphics and sound FIX IBM $37 . Present Alone in the Dark 3/93 Amazon 38 Batman Returns Blue Force Next of Kin Spring Carmen San Diego: Past Carmen San Diego: Europe 34 Carmen San Diego: Time 34 Carmen San Diego: USA Carmen San Diego: World 34 Carmen San Diego: Deluxe 49 Carmen San Diego: Amer. Past 38 Castle of Dr. Brain Champions Classic Adv. Pak (LucasArts) 37 Dagger of Amon Ra Deja Vu 1 & 11 Eco Quest 2 Elvira Elvira 2 Freddy Pharkas Heart of China Indy Jones. Last Crusade Indy Jones/Fate of Atlantis 39 Leisure Suit Larry Trilogy 53 Leisure Suit Larry! Leisure Suit Larry 5 42 Lost Files Sherlock Holmes 42 Lost Treasures of Infocom 42 Lost Treasures of Infocom | 37 The Manhole Maniac Mansion 2 Out of this World Police Quest 1 Police Quest 2 Police Quest 3 42 Rocketeer w/Sound Source Savage Empire Sea Rogue Seal Team  Spellcasting 301 Strike Commander Speech Pack Uninvited (Windows) Veil of Darkness Waxworks Willy Beamish Wolfenstein/Spear Des. 16 31 37 39 . doe=24949 47 . . 37 37 42 . 42 37 Hardware 37 25 X-Wing Pilot X-wing, A-wing, or Ywing against the Imperial Empire. Includes combat training tours of duty, promotions, decorations, replay camera. Digitized music and dialogue from the movie. Must have! IBM $42 Savage Empire Secret of Monkey Island Secret of Monkey Island 2 Secret of the Silver Blades Shadowgate Shadowgate (Windows) Shadowlands Shadow Sorcerer Spellcraft Spoils of War The Summoning Tales of Magic Treasures Savage Frontier Ultima IV Ultima V 32 42 38 16 AdLib APS 2001 Cobra Joystick CH-Flightstick CH-Virtual Pilot Flight Yoke 2000 Gravis Eliminator Gamecard Gravis Joystick Gravis Pro Gravis Ultrasound Pilot Control Stand Pro Audio Spectrum-16 210 Pro Audio Spectrum Plus 145 SoundBlaster ASP 16 235 SoundBlaster Pro 180 SoundBlaster Pro Basic 150 SoundBlaster Microchannel 269 Thunderboard Thrust Master flight stick 69 Thrust Master Pro Thrust Master Rudder Pedal 109 Thrust Master Throttle Thrust Master TSR's REALME Dungeon Master Scrolls 12 Elvira 1 & 11 10 ca. Empire Deluxe Strat. Guide 12 Eye of the Beholder 2 F-15 Strike Eagle III Guide Falcon Air Combat Falcon 3 Strategic Guide Global Conquest Guide widisk 15 Great War Planes Gunship 2000 Strategy Guide 12 Jetfighter II. Strat. Guide Legend of Kyrandia Legends of Valor Future Armour Geddon Bad Blood Batuletech Powerhits Buck Rogers Buck Rogers 2 Breach 2 Cyberspace Dune Dune Il Epic Elite Plus Flashback Free D.C. Gateway Hard Nova Jonny Crash Fall Leather Goddesses Phobos 246 . Legions of Krella/Star Legions 37 \"M 6793 Mantis Speech Pack Martian Memorandum Mechwarrior 2 Megatraveller Megatraveller 2 Nova 9 Out of this World Planet's Edge Powerhits: Sci-Fi Privateer Protostar: War on Frontier Rex Nebular MPE Ringworld: Revenge Patri. Rise of the Dragon (VGA) Space Hulks Space Quest 1-11 Space Quest III Space Quest IV Space Quest V Spel jammer Star Control 2 StarFlight 1& 1 16 ca. 37 ca. Star Trek 25th Anniversary 36 Star Trek: Next Generation 30 . Strike Commander 49 Speech Pack Terminator 2029 Twilight: 2000 Ultrabots 0929 March Specials IBM A.T.A.C. 29 A Line in the Sand Champions of Krynn Centurion Death Knights of Krynn Eye of the Beholder F-16 Combat Pilot Int. Sports Challenge Links/Bountiful Course Disk MBT. Cen. Germany Overrun Secret of Monkey Island I Sim City Add-ons 1 & 2 Space Quest IV Starflight I & II 16 ea. Stratego Test Drive II: Supercars Treasures of Savage Frontier Ultima VI Wing Commander ! . %HQDSW Canon . Legacy You've just inherited a home from your evil ancestors. Explore over 400 rooms of terror in a desperate struggle to stay alive. Excellent graphics and sound FIX IBM $34 Latest and Greatest Battles of Destiny Conquered Kingdoms Dune II F-15 III Front Page Sports: Football Mercenaries Pacific War Star Control II Ultima Underworld II V for Victory Series 16 aa "


"1-(404) 840-7906 For information and release dates To place orders in U.S. and Canada Fax 1-(404) 840-7925 SAME DAY SHIPPING on items in stock. Hours: Mon-Fri 10am-10pm EST (6am-7pm PST). UPS Rates: Ground: $5.00 3-day Air: $6.00 2-Day Air: 7.00 AK & HI: 12.50 COD Add: 5.00 Overseas: Avail. Mail Rates: AK & HI: 6.00 Canada: 6.00 Overseas: Avail. Prices are subject to change so please call first! PHONE: (404) 840-7906 24 HR. FAX: (404) 840-7925 2890 Lake Colony Drive, Suite 12, Norcross, GA 30071 Please have credit card ready! Open Saturdays 10-5 for your convenience. Strategy Pre-WWII IBM Mac 22 IBM Mac FGR-VIETOAY Red Storm Rising Classic Shadow President Shuttle Special Forces Utopia . 18 . SimLife SimLife (Windows) Solitaire (Windows) Solitaires Journey Spoils of War Stunt Island Super Tetris Super Tetris (Windows) Tristan Utopa Virtual Reality Studio 2 Wacky Funsters Ween: The Prophecy Wordtris HBHHHHDB3 IBM Mac Ambush 4/93 . Ancient Art of War Skies 37 Blue and the Grey Caesar Centurion Civil War Vol. 1.2 or 3 Cohort 2 Conquered Kingdoms Conquest of Japan Discovery of Columbus Genghis Khan Gettysburg Gold of the Americas L'Empereur Liberty or Death Merchant Colony No Greater Glory Nobunaga's Ambition 2 Paladin il Prelude to jutland P.T.O. Rampart Red Baron (VGA) Mission Builder Romance of 3 Kingdoms 42 Romance of 3 Kingdoms 2 42 Siege Dops of War Warlords/Enhanced Warlords 11 6/93 Waterloo 19 . HBHHHHHHmB Sports Sci-Fi Battlefield 2000 Breach 2 Cyber Empires Fireteam 2200 Global Effect Imperium Mantis 41 Speech Pack Mechamander 10193 Mercenaries 37 Mercenaries 2 6193 Reach for the Stars 28 Robosport (Windows) 38 Rules of Engagement Rules of Engagement 2 Second Conflict (Windows) 34 Space Inc. Spaceward HO! (Windows) 37 Spaceward HO! (DOS) Spectre 37 Star Legions 37 Star Legions 2 8793 Theatre of War SVGA 31 When Two Worlds War 16 37 16 Empire Deluxe This is the modern version of the award-winning EMPIRE. Now with Super VGA, digitized sound FIX. network & modem capability, scenario editor, and more. A must! IBM $37 31 . . 4-D Boxing All-Amer College Frbll 92 Andretti's Racing Challenge ATP Tennis Bill Elliot Nascar Car and Driver 28 37 V for Victory: Market Garden The most popular WWII series in gaming software adds another proud product Simulates Allied airborne invasion of Germany in 1944. SVGA graphics required. IBM/Mac $43 IBM Mac Complete PGA Tour Golf 31 . Earl Weaver Baseball . 31 Earl Weaver Baseball ll 16 . Front Pg. Sports: Football 42 . Front Pz Sports: Baschall 3/93 . Front Pg Sports: Bsktball 93 . Games: Summer Challenge 35 . Games: Winter Challenge 35 Grand Prix 37 Grand Slam Bridge II Hardball 3 MLBPA Player Disk 15 Stadium Disk Hockey League Sim 11 Indy 500 Jack Nicklaus Sig. Ed. Golf 42 Course Disk #2 John Madden Football II 31 Jordan Flight Links Links 386 Pro Mauna Kea Crse. Disk 19 MicroLeague Baseball 4 33 NCAA College Football 92 37 NFL Challenge NFL Video Pro Football 47 PGA Tour Golf PGA Tourn. Crse. Dsk 15 PGA Tour Golf (Windows) 37 PGA Tourn. Crse. Disk 15 Pool Shark Pro League Baseball 37 Power Hits: Sports Tony LaRussa Ult Baseball 19 Add-On Disks Tony La Russa 2 92 Stats Disk AUNL Stadiums Fantasy Draft Wayne Gretzky Hockey 2 36 Hockey League Sim. Wayne Gretzky Hockey 3 Wilson Pro Golf World Circuit 39 32 37 % 32 . 6/93 37 . World War II IBM Mac V for Victory Met Garden 43 V for Victory: Casserine Pass 20 V for Victory: Stalingrad 30 30 Victory at Sea Warlords Western Front WW : Battles of Pacific 5/93 Sin Fawken General 42 24 Sheph 09 Modern 32 . . gBTHHH A-Train 42 Construction Set 24 Air Bucks Are We There Yet? Barcles of Destiny Battle Chess Battle Chess (Windows) BattleChess 4000 (VGA) BattleChess 4000 (SVGA) Buzz Aldrin's Race to Space 42 Caesar's Palace Caesar's Palace (Windows) 18 Chessmaster 3000 Chessmaster 3000 (Windows) Civilization Civilization Master Edition Classic 5 Classic 5 (Windows) Club Racquetball Command HQ Classic Design Your Train HHHHDHHHHH.HD Warlords Enhanced This classic wargame has been on top of CGW's Reader Poll for 2 years. Addictive medieval strategy game with 1-8 human/computer players. A+ rating IBM $19 Keyboard Overlays A-10 Tank Killer AT.P. Aces of the Pacific B-17 Flying Fortress C. Yeager Air Combat F-15 Strike Eagle 11 F-117A Nighthawk Falcon 3.0/3.0.1 Flight Simulator 4.0 Jetfighter I and II Megafortress Secret Weapons Luftwaffe 10  45 10 42 30 CD-ROM CARRIERS AT WAR IBM Mac Design Your R.R. Design Your Landscape Dominant Species Dominion Eco Quest 2 El Fish Empire Deluxe Eric The Unready Facetris III Flight Sim 4.0 Sound and Graphics Global Conquest Goblins Grandest Admiral Grand Slam Bridge II Heaven and Earth Hong Kong Mahjong Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Hoyles/Classic Incredible Machine Ishido Lemmings More Lemmings & Game 33 More Lemmings Lemmings 2 37 37 Lexi.Cross Life & Death 11 Lost Admiral Lost Admiral Enhanced 17793 Monopoly 28 Monopoly Deluxe DOS/Win 37 Origin FIX Screen Saver 25 . Perfect General WWII Scenario Disk 22 Great Battles 20th Cen. 25 Perfect General Enhanced 8/93 Pinball: Windows Pool Shark Populous Populous 2 World Editor Powermonger WWI Scenario Disk Power Politics Power Hits: Movies R.R. Tycoon Classic Reach for the Skies Risk Risk (Windows) Sargon V Scrabble Deluxe (Windows) Sharif On Bridge Sharif On Bridge (Windows) Shuttle SimAnt SimCity SimCity (Windows) SimCity Supreme ! SimCity Supreme II SimCity 2000 SimEarth SimEarth (Windows) SimFarm 19 38 IM 42 42 Aces of the Pacific WWII: 1946! RAF in the Pacific Aces Over Europe Campaign Disk! Action North Atlantic Action Stations v3.2 Data Disk Air Raid Pearl Harbor Air Warrior B-17 Flying Fortress Bantal Battlctank Barbarossa Bismarck Carpaign Carriers at War Const. Kit Carrier Strike Expansion Disk #1 21 Clash of Steel 4/932 Fleet Commander 6/93 Fleet Med German Raiders Atlantic 26 Grand Fleet Great Naval Battles Super Ships/Atlantie 19 Scenario Builder America/Atlantic High Command High Cmd. Enhan. SVGA 5/93 In Harm's Way Mala Storm Marianas Turkey Shoot 26 MBT Central Germany 39 MBT Kursk Midway New World Order 2/93 Pacific Theater Op. 5/93 Pacific War Panzer Battles 26 Patron Strikes Back 17 Reach for the Skies River Plate Rommel North Africa Second Front Secret Weapons Luftwaffe DO-335 plane disk HE 162 P-38 P-80 Seventh Fleet Slent Service 2 Silent Service 2 Classic Task Force 1942 Their Finest Hour/Bdhwks. 44 Third Reich V for Victory Urah Beach 43 V for Victory. Velikiye Luki 43 7th Fleet 39 AT.P. A-10 Warthog 12/93 A Line in the Sand 19 ATAC Air Force Commander Allied Forces Comanche: Max. Overkill Expansion Disk 1 Expansion Disk 2 Conflict Korea Conflict: Middle East Crisis in the Kremlin F.117A Nighthawk (VGA) F. 15 il Classic F-IS III F-15 III Voice Commander F. 19 Voice Commander Falcon 3.0 Operation: Fighting Tiger Falcon MC Flight Sim 4.0 Flight Planner Sound & Graphics Rescue 911 Scenery Design Global Effect Gunship 2000 Campaign Disk! Halls of Montezuma Harpoon v1.3 Batueset 2 or 3 Battleset 4 Harpoon Designer Series Harpoon Scenario Editor Harpoon Challenger Pak S.E. 49 Harpoon II Harrier Assault Jet Fighter 2 Add on disk JF2 wladd on disk Jump Jet Jump Jet \"Ace Pack\" KGB MI Tank Platoon MacArthurs War Megafortress Mission Disk 1 or 2 Megafortress Megapack Pacific Islands 11 Patriot E.... . 26 . 12 Roads to Gettysburg The 7th Guest Amazing Universe Battle Chess Battle Chess Enhanced Blade Buzz Aldrin's Race Space Capaign Case of Cautious Condor Challenge of Five Realms Chessmaster 3000 Conquest of the Longbow Creepy Castle Cyberspace Dagger of Amon Ra Dark Sun Destination-Mars 29 19 COSTRUCTION KIT ... Magnetic Scrolls Maniac Mansion 2 Mantis Manhole Enhanced Murder Makes Strange Deadfellows North American Indians Pacific Islands Pacific Islands 1 Prince of Persia The Secret of Monkey Island 47 Secret Weapons of Luftwaffe 57 Sharif on Bridge Sherlock Holmes Cons. Det 43 Sherlock Holmes Cons. Det. 11 43 Shutde Spaceship Warlock Space Quest IV Sar Trek 25th Anniv. Edition Total Baseball Total Distortion Ultima I-VI Bundle Ultima Undwld/Wing Co. Il Victor and Yondo Where World Carmen Deluxe 52 Wily Beamish Wing Commander Secret Missions 1 & 2 17 Wing Commander ll Deluxe 47 Wing Commander Ultima VI 57 Wolfpack .. Dune Carriers at War Construction Kit This kit allows modification of existing CAW scenarios or the creation of new scenarios. New scenarios includeWake Island, Guadalcanal. and Tarawa. IBM/Mac $37 .. .. Eco Quest Great Naval Battles Gunship/Midwinter Guy Spy Iron Heloc Jones in the Fast Lane King's Ransom King's Quest Y The Legend of Kyrandia Loom Lost Treasures Infocom ! Lost Treasures Infocom II M-1 Tank Platoon . . 37 43 .. "


"e pevnen PLACE YOUR BETS: Capstone Bets A Bundle-And Loses — While Konami Makes Their Point wo recent entries in the computer gambling genre couldn't do more to demI onstrate the yin-and-yang of software design gambits. Capstone has released its relatively giant Trump Castle III (TC3) while backing it with seven games, SVGA graphics and network play to boot. Then, almost as a side bet. Konami pur Beat The House (BTH) on the shelves with one little high-density diskette, five VGA games, and Surprise! — it comes up the big winner. The difference can be put in a sentence: TC3 attempts a lot and fails at much of it; BTH does less but does most everything very well. such artwork was quickly deflated by the rough-drawn graphics of the chips and by the oddly-cartoonish shuffling of the single-deck of cards that precedes and, later, interrupts play. Blackjack here is played by Atlantic City rules. (The major difference between Atlantic City and Vegas is that one may double down on a split). As a game, my preference is for Atlantic City rules because the additional doubles are simply more fun to play. In Beat The House, the game is played by traditional Vegas-strip rules, but there are other differences. The tables are designated by number-of-decks employed by the house. Tables with one, two, four, or six decks are available. The program will take bets from $1-$1000. Not only does this allow human players with diverse bankrolls to retain the continuity of their cash and play together, but Beat The House has a quite effective on-line tutor which may be employed for recommendations and instruction through play. The focus on the number of decks used allows the program to tailor its advice to the strategies of Getting Past The Doorman The installation of TC3's four 5-1/4\" HD diskettes took more than 55 minutes on my 386/33 clone. One develops an expectation that all the decompressing graphic files must be terrific. BTH. on the other hand, loads so quickly that one tends to figure the program is a real loser. Nothing could be further than the truth on both counts. by Mark Alan Willett At face value, the fact that TC3 has no password protection seems to be a plus. Yet, the password protection of BTH consists of strategic questions about the games themselves (accompanied with a page reference from the manual) and seems relatively inobtrusive. The protection actually reinforces gaming strategy, and one should find that they won't often need to refer to the manual in order to get into the casino. The manual itself is a full-sized book with half its pages dedicated to sharp gaming strategy. Into The Lobby Both programs use the larger environment of a casino as the framework for their game subprograms. Once one enters the TC3 casino, however, the graphic disappointment continues. While treatment of the casino walls is often rich, just as often the rest is primitive. Indeed, one quickly becomes aware, while wandering through the casino's rooms, that bad artwork in SVGA detail is still bad artwork. The artistic conceit is that the SVGA staircases and doors lead to rooms with baccarat, blackjack, poker, slot machines, craps, rouletre, and keno. With Beat The House, one enters through the gaudy neon-lit doors of a typical Vegasstrip casino. The main casino environment is an overhead graphic with blackjack tables, craps tables, a roulette table, a bank of slot machines, a bank of video poker machines and a registration desk. Unlike the dry and occasionally confusing option menus of TC3, BTH's registration desk is a quaintly effective point of entry to the casino. From here, it's on to the games themselves... Blackjack: Splitting Tens Tables in TC3 are selected \"realistically\" — that is, by the size of the minimum bet. Unfortunately, whenever one is playing with more than one human player and those players happen to have unequal wallets, either the poorer player has to artificially pad his or her pocketbook to play at the more expensive tables or the richer player has to play down to a lesser table to accomodate the others. In this sequence, Trump Castle III'sgraphics really shine for the first time. The overhead view of the five-seat table is rendered in such loving detail that one can feel the felt beneath the finger tips. Unfortunately, my revery for Sed The 10 Beer The lowe Slot Machines Slot Machines Suit Blackjack VGA/EGA Avery Roulette Video Poker Craps VU TRUMP CASTLE 324 Beat the COMPA Suive Beat The House Capslone 6 Tho Ultimate Gaming Tutor & Simulator TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: PLAYERS: PRICE: PROTECTION: PUBLISHER: Trump Castle 3 IBM SVGA, VGA, EGA 1, 2 by modem), 2-4 (Novell network) $59.95 TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: PRICE: PROTECTION: DEVELOPERS: DISTRIBUTOR: Beat the House IBM VGA $59.95 Documentation Look Up Spirit of Discovery Konami Buffalo Grove, IL (708) 215-5111 None Capstone Miami, FL (800) 468-7226 Page 106 Computer Gaming World "


"Deview basic play and to assist slightly more elaborate card-counting routines. BTH is a program which should assist every non-professional gambler to become a more successful one. the whcel pop-up on the screen, watched the ball circle round, watched it land in a black space, and then was promptly told I had landed on 19-RED! Where is the precision of those SVGA graphics when it's really needed? Imagine my equal amazement when, in a virtually identical graphic design, I placed the same bet in the all-VGA Beat The House. The wheel popped up, the ball circled, and it landed in a black space. Not only was it black, but it matched the number the program said was the winner. Attention to detail isn't always a function of the graphics display. reliance on craps \"happy news.» If one has three $25 bets down and loses two on a dice roll, TC3 glady trumpets the news that the player has won $25 on the third, ignoring the $50-loss. For those who wish to learn about craps, there are few better mechanisms than BTH's online tutor. Both single-odds and doubleodds tables are available. With craps, BTH also makes the finest use of digitized voice in either package. The stickman's chants add a color to computer play that makes the game more fun and more immediate. Bust! TILAGERS DISPONSOUDS Push PuNSURA Its Black wel Jack @ Merlot T. PASS LINE LEZIZ NOT rose Trump Castle 3 Blackjack Beat The House uses a four-seat table and a truly unique arrangement. The screen is divided into perspective views of each player's position at the table, and the game rotates between each view as if each were its own menu. In the center is an overhead view of the entire table, which becomes a mirror of the hands played as the graphic players wave the cards on or push them off when their human or computer counterparts decide to hit or stand. TC3 is prettier, but BTH more effective. In the long run, it's the addition of the on-line tutor that makes the big difference. Sadly, neither package allows for the surrendering of a hand (early or late). Since I want to be a better bettor, my preference leans to Beat The House. Au must dra SIKL Det YESlots: Lemons And Cherries Slot machines are another sucker's bet. Odds, for example, in Atlantic City are a minimum 83%. That's an incredible 17% house edge. One doesn't play slots to win To really, one plays because they're bright and moving and fun. But house odds are set across the entire concellos 87021 casino. One machine may be paying 93% while the machine next to it is paying 73%. tace PRO TUTOR In fact, putting a highand low-paying maTrump Castle 3 Craps chine next to each other is a common ploy in casinos since so many bettors play machines Craps: Shooter-Out in tandem. \"Serious\" slots players study acAnd Pay-The-Line tion on the casino floor before they put up their quarters and dollars. In CGW-editor Alan Emrich's online reBy numbers alone, TC3 has an incredible view of TC3 for Prodiov. he carefully delincview of TC3 for Prodigy, he carefully deline36 slot machines. Unfortunately, there is no ated a number of technical problems way to intelligently determine which maassociated with betting in craps. But there are chines are paying and which are not. So, still more problems associated with TC3 playing them is an even worse risk than in a craps. First, the documentation does not refreal casino. Adding graphic-insult to bettingerence \"No Call Bets.\" Also known as \"odds iniury, the design of all those machines is or \"free odds\" bets, they are additional bets virtually identical, all looking like a tribute to placed on existing Pass and Come line wagers ancient one-armed bandits. None of a modand are critical to the game since no percentern slot's light, gaudy and compelling nature age is given to the house. If one knows the is captured. If ever there were a group of slot game already, this is no problem since odds machines created for a funeral home, these are bets are accessible at the table. If one is unthe ones. To add to the funereal atmosphere, educated in craps, their existence or importhe reels on TC3's machines roll UP! tance in TC3 might not be apparent. Note odds bets for the Come lines are accessed BTH fudges its slots in favor of entertainthrough a pop-up menu on the \"No Call ment. The two modern machines (a threeBets\" linc, but only at the point that a bet is wheel/five-line option, and a four-wheel placed on that line. progressive) are colorful, attractively gauche...and set at very generous percentages A unique piece of progamming is TC3's 96% and 94%, respectively). They're not Y BETS completely unrealistic either, though. One should assume these are the ones near the door which have been set favorably to attract :::9 150 passers-by. Nevertheless, there are still long TOT 1 TO E ROLL BETS losing streaks on these machines. IANY SEVEN COME Another nice BTH touch: The progressive .4.9.10.11 jackpots gain in value, albeit slowly, even @@ FIELD when one is not playing, as if others were also E TI playing the machines in the casino. In TC3, PWAN' RAW PASS LINE 0 the only gamblers in the casino are the human and computer players of your choice. The 09@@ progressive jackpots grow real sloooooowwly PROLET there. Trump Castle 3 Craps The favorable odds found at BTH make the OGNI w to tutorial UN PAYS 165 H WSW U TAND DOUT OC Beat The House Blackjack Roulette: One Double-Aught And One Big Winner 2N11 SSV Most consider roulette a risky bet with those zeros and double zeros giving the house a big break. Still, there's some real excitement to be generated when a single-number bettor hits paydirt. It's hard to imagine that anyone could do anything wrong with a roulette display. There's the table, the chips and the wheel. What else is there? Imagine my amazement, please, when I placed $300 down on black in TC3, watched June 1993 Page 107 "


"MeuneIn slots enjoyable, if not a very educational exrn. Poker: Know When To Hold And When To Fold TC3 brings on \"real\" poker with 5and 7.Card Stud S-Card Draw and Texas Hold 'Em. Yet, any real player of the game knows that half of its strategy is the evaluation of the other players. Few gambling games have as much \"human interest as a good evening at a poker table. Unfortunately, TC3's computer players are unable to present a truly human face. So, unless one is playing with friends (at which point, why not get out a deck of cards and earn money the old-fashioned way?), one might as well be playing a machine. This, of course, is exactly what one does in BTH. Four video poker machines (Jacks-orBetter, Tens-or-Better, Joker Wild, Deuces Wild) are the offering. Also, there is an online tutor and a manual to educate the gambler into realizing that video poker is really a strategy game, too. Fold TC3, and hold BTH. Baccarat: Betting With The Dealer Giving credit where it's due, the result is simple. TC3 has baccarat, and BTH doesn't. Again, the beautiful felt table fights with the remainder of the graphics in TC3, bur I don't care. I love this game, and its absence in BTH picks 2-15 numbers, coughs up $ 1-to-$5, and is duly noted. wairs for a few minutes for the keno girl to On an odd note, TRUMP CASTLE II went inform one of the results. out of the way to explain that 5% of winnings Gone is the pleasure of scoring a copy of are lost when the gambler bets \"with the one's own ticket as the numbers are drawn. dealer,\" and that profit-shaving was incorpodealer; and that profit-shaving was incorpoOne cannot even see the numbers drawn in rated in the program. TC3 ignores it. TC3. There is no Keno parlor to visit. Even if TC3 is the program which has it, it just isn't Keno: Not Enough Numbers keno. Keno is another fool's bet. Still, as has been T And A: Tutoring pointed out by others, there's no other game where one can win thousands with a $1.30 And Atmosphere bet. Again, only TC3 has Keno. If anyone Ultimately, TC3 is atmospherically artifiwants to call it that. cial. It pretends to provide a realistic casino Keno is, in part, noted for the many ways experience which simply doesn't live up to its that the gambler's number choices may be billing. Maybe the nadir of this program is the selected, split and regrouped into multiple \"drinks girl.\" With this option on, a bar maid bets from a single ticket. Not in TC3. One in a low-cut outfit will arrive every few minutes to ask if you want a drink. The high point Acela OSAS of her visit seems to be that certain parts of her anatomy jiggle. Actually, it's a bad jiggle at that. Say «No» and she, thankfully, goes away. Say \"Yes\" and a $5 tip is automatically deducted from one's bankroll. Does she deliver a drink? No way. I've been panhandled before, but not like this. Fortunately, with its documentation and the online tutor, Konami's Beat The House delivers a gambling reality that can spell a difference the next time the amateur gambler goes to the casino. That makes Beat The House a sure bet. CGW Trump Castle 3 Keno 08 ROB0121 Would you like to play Keno 11012 Entertainment Software Consultants Is Seeking Qualified Candidates for a Progressive, New Entertainment Software Producer In Southern California THE ULTIMATE ROLE-PLAYING AID i Introducing The Ultimate Character Editor. This exciting new product features full mouse and keyboard support, online context sensitive help and a complete windowing system (does not require MS Windows to run). This editor allows you to edit most of the games listed below (including all of the Might and Magics, all of the Ultimas, all of the SSI games, all of the Bard's Tales, and more). The price i for this editor is $59.95. So, for the price of 3 editors, you will be getting ! 1 approximately 30 editors. Upgrades will be available to handle new games as they are released for only $9.95. CHARACTER EDITORS $19.95 each Might and Magic (1, 2, 3 or 4). Drakkhen, Pool of Radiance, Hard Nova, Bard's Tale (1, 2 or 3). Wasteland, Dragon Wars, Space Rogue, Wizardry (Edits 1-3), Wizardry 4, Wizardry 5, Bane of Cosmic Forge, Crusaders of the Dark Savant, Treasurers of the Savage Frontier, Sentinel Worlds I Knights of Legend, Secret of the Silver Blades, Curse of the Azure Bonds. Champions of Krynn, Space 1889, Keys to Maramon, MegaTraveller (1 or 2). Keel the Thief, Darklands, Escape from Hell, Ultima (3, 4, 5, 6 or 7). Dark Heart of Uukrul, Savage Empire, Tunnels and Trolls, Lord of the Rings (1 or 2). Countdown to Doomsday, Martian Dreams, Eye of the Beholder (1 or 2). Death Knights of Krynn, Fountain of Dreams, Magic Candle (1 or 2). Pools of Darkness, Ultima Underworld, Twilight 2000, Planet's Edge, Dark Queen of Krynn, and Prophecy of the Shadow. Interested Applicants Should Apply For the following Positions Computer Programmer (MS-DOS based) Graphic Artist Music/Audio Effects HINT BOOKS $9.95 each Might and Magic 1, Knights of Legend, Curse of the Azure Bonds, Champions of Krynn, Legacy of Ancients, Dark Heart of Uukrul, Wizardry (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, Bane or Crusaders). Eye of the Beholder 2 Might and Magic 3 (12.95). applicants should send a resume and brief letter of interest listing applicable commercial projects to: Entertainment Software Consultants 8780 19th Street, Suite #336 Alta Loma, California 91701 IBM listed. Apple, C64 and Amiga versions also available. Please add $4.00 for shipping and handling. Open from 9AM 9PM every day for your convenience. VISA GOSSELIN COMPUTER CONSULTANTS P.O. Box 1083  Brighton, MI 48116 (313) 229-2453 MasterCard Highly Competitive Compensation Confidentiality Assured All Applications Will Receive a Response Circle Reader Service #51 Circle Reader Service #58 Page 108 Computer Gaming World "


"NATIONAL LAMPOONS CHESS Maniac 5 BILLION and! at your local retailer. \"Whodunit Sweepstakes Look for the You Don't Buy This Dvergasire Well Kill This y a Cheng Dog.* The Most Burro Cher fan The City National Lampoon presents the to Grim Reaper rooks. They'll most outrageous chess program dispatch and dismember each ever made. Match wits with a other in ways even your demented perverted old Chess Maniac who mind has never thought of. has more than a few unspeak But should you like your chess able tricks up his sleeve and will unadulterated, we've got that too. use them all to rattle your con In spite of all these shenanigans centration. What else has the it plays a darn good game of game got? A chess set featuring chess. Will it beat the competition? unique live-action video actors-Hey, it ain't called Chess Maniac from belly dancing pawns 5 Billion and 1 for nothing! NATIONAL LAMPOONS CHESS Maniac 5 BILIONI men det Not an actual VGA screen shot. You wish. Spectrum HoloByte For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week 1-800-695-GAME (Orders Only) For technical questions call: 1-510-522-1164 (M-F: 9am-5pm PST Spectrum HoloByte, Inc. 2490 Mariner Square Loop. Alameda, CA 94501 * HEY, IT WORKED ONCE! This photo was a Lampoon cover in 1973. We're happy to report the dog died of natural causes. Circle Reader Service #94 "


"J etters Letters from Paradise : ESPANA too! It's just so hard to show them off to your friends. Gotta' Know When To Mold Them I happened to pick up the January issue of Computer Gaming World and was intrigued by your Homegrown Hardware Review. You said those guys «represent the vanguard of flight simulation enthusiasts\" and \"this is, by far, the most significant Bard's Tale Score What is happening with Bard's Tale IV. I have heard it briefly mentioned in articles, but that's all. I am dying to know more about whether or not Bard's Tale IV is in the making! Greg MacMartin Kanata, Ontario, CANADA The tale behind Bard's Tale IV is probably more convoluted than that within the game design itself. Once upon a time, Electronic Arts viewed its strength as being in \"interactive stories.\" They had several developers who produced these games for them, and an inhouse staff that loved to play CRPGs and adventure games, as well as develop them. Then, the thrust of the company shifted and some of those developers became publishers under their own aegis. Bard's Tale IV was on the drawing boards during this shift and, because of its successful past, was saved when many projects were canceled. However, it underwent a series of several false starts, design team changes, and producer reassignments. Right now the company is faced with taking the product through another personnel shift or committing software euthanasia. We will let you know when the future is clear. Your Wish Upon Command When is MicroProse going to do an East Front game in the \"Commander\" series? R. Doyle St. Louis, MO The \"Command Decision\" series is no longer in print. Though the products were extremely well-received in their 8-bit incarnations, there are currently no plans to produce such games for current platforms. Imagine I no longer have the need to purchase games. Years of vaporware titles have taught me that it's much more fun to just imagine them. T. Madden St. Louis, MO And the compatibility problems are solved, then strap the oxygen mask to the helmet. Forced air is fed through the mask to give the feel and sound of real oxygen. On the right-hand console is mounted a Thrustmaster FCS, along with the main system power switches. One switch and both CPUs begin to boot up. The primary system is a Gateway 2000 386/33 and the secondary is the old TI Pro (which doesn't even have a hard drive) which I've programmed to run through a simulated APU (Auxiliary Power Unit) start, INS Alignment (Inertial Navigational System), acquire GPS references (Global Positioning System), and provide information to the pilot for initializing the simulations and appropriate hardware settings. On the left console is all of the audio and communications equipment. Certainly not an authentic component, I've found that a telephone is a must since the whole rig is difficult to get out of in order to answer a call. And a household intercom serves to provide ground communications with the \"Airboss\" (my wife) if I fly too far or too long. It really ruins the realism when I'm in the heat of a dogfight and she taps on the side of the canopy to announce she's going to leave me if I don't get out soon. At least the intercom gives me a sensation that I'm truly isolated. My audio setup isn't as powerful as Jeff Jeeszel's, but it does provide attempt at a realistic fighter cockpit that we've seen.\" Well, you'd better look again at the enclosed photos and then, give me a call. Although my cockpit has been around for only about eight months, it really began in the fall of 1991 when I spotted an ad for surplus military ejection seats from an outfit called \"Aviation Artifacts\" in Missouri. I purchased a Vietnam era, McDonnell Douglas \"Escapac\" ejection seat from an A-4 Skyhawk for about $400 and had it shipped to San Diego by bus. Although, originally, I had intended only to make a nifty office chair, I later fell upon the opportunity to obtain an F-18 canopy! Well, things got a little involved after that and several months later, I had an entire cockpit in my office. The entire thing is abour il' x 5' x 3.5' wide and incorporates two separate CPUs (I had an old Texas Instruments Professional computer that was just collecting dust). Follow me, I'll give you a tour. After sliding the aft canopy back, you reach inside and hit the switch for the internal lighting, grab your helmet off the seat, retract the pyrotechnics safety-lock (no, the ejection rockets aren't really live) and climb in. Place the helmet on your noodle and Page 110 Computer Gaming World "


"etters into hostile territory and also, the quickest way to get out! The rig allows me to control both vertical and horizontal scan position on the maps and zoom in for detail when necessary (I can also watch my favorite cable channel). My wife hated the cockpit at first, then I let her fly Microsoft Flight Simulator 4.0. She lasted about 10 minutes before her first Cessna crash. She climbed out with a few beads of sweat on her forehead and exclaimed, \"I think I like it honey.\" Anthony Kutz | San Diego, CA Trust us, Anthony. You'll never get it off the ground. Bag Guy Is A Pushover! In issue #105, the Rumor Bag Guy does us an injustice. Proofreading not withstanding, we (military) who work on the island refer to it as Parris Island, not Perris Island. However, because the Rumor Guy is alright, he won't have to get down and do 50. Jerry Westfall Parris Island, SC It's a good thing he doesn't have to do 50. We don't think he could survive 5! Our Fly is UnZIP-Coded It is with pleasure that I'm writing this letter. I recently received my April 1993 issue. I impatiently opened the envelope. At the bottom of the envelope, there was a beautiful smashed fly (really). I am so happy with my new friend that I always keep it with me (not!). I love to receive free surprises once in awhile! To show you my gratitude. I'm sending you this authentic (dead) Canadian fly, ideal for fly collectors, to feed your cat, or simply to throw it away. Seriously, I just want to congratulate you for your excellent magazine. I read cach article carefully, it is very helpful when buying a computer game. Keep up the good work! Hugo Trepanier Lachute, Quebec CANADA Oh, no! Now, you've given away the secret of why Canadian subscriptions cost more. I suppose that now everyone will want a fly. cow The 5th Wave By Rich Tennant ORKENAANT about 6 watts to my Sound Blaster. Also on the left console is a Thrustmaster WCS. Because of the many different functions of all the buttons in various simulations, I've programmed thc TI Pro with a pre-flight checkout mode to help refresh my memory each flight. High and in front of the pilot is the main system monitor which functions as the HUD or outside world in the simulations. Below it and inside the cockpir is the second monitor slaved to the TI Pro system. Simulations like Falcon 3.0 and F-15 Strike Eagle III have become pretty complicated and the pace is too fast to keep looking at pages in the manual. Since I am only a part-time pilot (contrary to my wife's opinion), I use the TI to provide me with several different pieces of information accessible during my Flights: 1. RWR (Radar Warning Receiver) symbology, radar ground mapping symbology, etc. 2. Bomb-drop tables. Select your unguided free-fall weapon from the list and the computer will determine the correct weapon release range from target versus your speed & altitude. This is very useful in sims such as Jetfighter II which lacks a CCIP (Continuously Computed Impact Point) mode. 3. Thrustmaster WCS functions and fuel consumption information. 4. Flight cards. These present information such as takeoff and landing checklists, X-15 flight profiles, etc. Between the pilot's legs is a 5\" diagonal, color, moving map display. Actually, it's a TV tied to my home camcorder and mounted to a geared motor-driven tripod rig of my own design. It allows me to feed in actual ONC (Operational Navigation Charts). This might seem like overkill for now, given the limited ground detail in most simulations, but I'm planning ahead. It really is nice to know when you've crossed COMPUTER GAMING WORLD EDITORIAL SOETURE REVIEW EDITOR \"DO YOU WANT ME TO CALL THE COMPANY AND HAVE THEM SEND ANOTHER REVIEW COPY OF THEIR FLIGHT SIMULATOR, OR DO YOU KNOW WHAT YOU'RE GOING TO WRITE?\" June 1993 Page 111 "


") Roger Wilco Takes The Fifth OOGLT Space Quest V by Charles Ardai Yome people have a soft spot in their very beginning, and by the time Roger gets to about these scenes -they just wanted to get hearts for Abbott and Costello movies, the third planet it is clear that something fishy back to the comedy — but the studio said that some for Mad magazine. I have a soft is afoot. He investigates, discovers a program the romance had to go in. So, in it went. This spot for the Space Quest games. Such guilty of genetic engineering as ugly as anything Dr. is the downside to «more of the same\" — the pleasures all have at least this much in comMoreau ever concocted, and decides to put an bad stuff gets repeated, too. mon: once one has built up a taste for their end to it. The last third of the game consists For the most part, though, the stuff that gets brand of silliness, nothing but repeated expoof Roger's game of cat-and-mouse with the repeated here is good stuff: the endless stream sure can sate the appetite. So, no one could turncoat crew of the U.S.S. Goliath, Cpt. of gags the high adventure plot and the first be happier than I to see a new Roman nuQuirk, and the garbage monster their actions rate graphics and sound. There are also innomeral tacked onto a Space Quest box. unleash. vations introduced in Space Quest V, Space Quest V, the latest in the improbable Roger and crew also make a stopover at an including a refined interface and a longer, exploits of Roger Wilco: Janitor-to-the-Stars, R&R station (the «Spacebar\") during which less-linear storyline. Another innovation, unis more of the same...only more so. What the player gets to challenge Quirk to a game fortunately, is the game's unprecedented does this mean? It means \"more\" in both that is basically a 23rd Century version of number of typos («ther» for «there,\" \"pods» senses: \"another helping of\" and \"a larger Battleship. Later on, a set of access tunnels on for \"pod's», «your doomed is sealed\"); but, helping of.\" There are more pratfalls and board the Goliath function as the obligatory then, what can you do? Not every change can misadventures, more skin-of-the-teeth esirritating maze sequence, and a trip into an be an improvement. capes from the slavering jaws of death (and asteroid field leads to an exasperating realboy do some of those jaws slaver!), and more time \"docking game. In other words, Space Make It So sly asides that tweak every science fiction icon Quest V even has the little games-within-afrom The Fly to Alien to Star Wars, with stops game that fans of the series have come to Among the revisions to the interface are in between at Star Trek, Star Trek, and, well, know and dread. some changes in the icon bar at the top of the Star Trek. People with long memories will recall that screen. Gone are the useless nose and tongue icons. (How many things were there to smell Yes, if one has to identify a target that gets every Abbott and Costello movie had an and taste in Space Quest IV? That's right, hit more often than any other, it would be the obligatory, boring romantic subplot that ennone.) Instead, there are two versions of the late Gene Roddenberry's brainchild. The gendered a couple of obligatory, endless mu\"Talk» icon: the ordinary one and one that subtitle of this latest adventure, \"The Next sical numbers. No one in the audience cared contains an exclamation point. The latter is Mutation,\" is a near-pun on «The Next Genused to issue a command. eration,\" and when we first see our gallant hero he is performing the much-noted \"Pi SPACE QUEST V This handy icon enables Roger to take concard Maneuver\" (tugging down his tunic to trol of his ship and fly it to all corners of the get a better fit) to the strains of a barely galaxy. While there is a best order in which to modified version of the theme music from the visit the available planets, the player is allowed original TV series. From there on, there is a certain amount of leeway to come and go as he chooses. Similarly, while there are only almost no scene that goes by without a Star Trek reference, including a bit where Roger's certain situations in which such commands as crusty chief engineer refuses a request to pro\"Cloak ship,» «Fire,\" and \"Hail planet» make vide medical assistance. «I'm an engineer,\" he sense, the player has access to them any time exclaims, \"not a doctor!\" Roger sits in the captain's chair. This gives the player the feeling of being much more in Also on board Roger's first starship comcontrol than in any of the previous Space mand is an Uhura-esque communications of Quest games. Roger is not fate's plaything ficer named Flo; a mildly Sulu-ish helmsman anymore. He and the player are in command. named Droole; and, eventually, a science of There are also specialized icons that appear ficer, but I am not going to give away any surprises here. Roger's nemesis this time is a vaa , in certain unusual situations (such as the \"fly\" ASIERRA SIERRA icon when Roger is turned into a guess-what) square-jawed heavy named Captain Quirk and menus of dialogue choices that pop up (no, this is not subtle humor) who is involved TITLE: Space Quest V: The Next Mutation now and then so that Roger can have converin a nefarious plot to pollute the heavens by 569.95 PRICE: sations with members of his crew. This variety illegally dumping toxic waste. PROTECTION: Documentation Look-up of interfaces keeps the gameplay lively. It is Roger's mission, initially, is simply to take good to see that the folks at Sierra (actually, DESIGNER: Mark Crowe his ship to three galactic garbage pick-up PUBLISHER: Sierra/Dynamix Dynamix) have not gotten so used to the way points and return to Starcon with the refuse. things have always been that they are unable Things go wrong, of course, almost from the to try something new. The Next Mann SYSTEM: IBM (386/16 MH2 recommended) GRAPHICS: VGA Coarsegold, CA (209) 683-4468 Page 112 Computer Gaming World "


"FLASHBACK Action so life-like, you'll have to keep reminding yourself it's only a game. And not a movie. DODDDDDDDD. ALAR DULODDODDL.DDDV NAMANDIR MY film — at FLASHBACK a great That's because Earth has been infiltrated Flashback is the only by shape-shifting aliens action adventure game bent on world conquest! that uses movie-making To save Earth, you technology to the max. must fight through three We filmed real actors in fantastic worlds and 200 motion. Then we brought game screens! Solve everything to life on the dozens of mind-bending computer through puzzles. Get your cues rotoscoping, the digitizafrom over 75 fully anition and retouching of mated cinematics. live action Like film at a great 24 frames THE QUEST FOR IDENTITY movie, a second! Flashback . What's combines it all mean? an intriSimply the cate plot, smoothest exciting animation music ever! Run, score, jump, roll superb or stagger sound with effects, incredibly subtle and spine-tingling suspense fluid movement. Fire your and dynamite action. weapon and watch your Flashback. Now playbody recoil with remark ing at a movie theater... able realism! er, game store near you! Step into this awesome IBM TO ORDER: Visit your cinematic experience as retailer or call 1-800-245-4525 with Conrad B. Hart, VISA/MC (U.S. and Canada only). a scientist Creation and development, who's made Delphine Software International a horrifying 1993 U.S. Gold Lid discovery:  Strategic Simulations, Inc. All rights reserved DODOODOOD Art 1993 Delphine Sollware International ! Circle Reader Service #104 "


"MeuneIn GOTTA BUM DROOLE an Unlike the interface, not a whole lot is new whoopee cushion in the seat of Roger's comneatly into place as the music, graphics, and about the game's puzzles. This is not very mand chair. This gag wears thin after a while, sound effects, is the writing. It's not so much surprising, nor particularly disappointing; the especially given that it is repeated every single that the story is great — there barely is any puzzles have always been secondary in the time Roger sits down. story, just the flimsiest pretext for a series of Space Quest series. There is plenty of the usual: However, the effect is realistic, as is every adventures as it is that the dialogue and Roger finds a roll of antacids and a creature other sound in the game. Doors hiss open and narration are written with a dry wit and a who is spewing acid all over the ship; Roger clank shut, transporters hum and twitter, the sense of character that makes them a pleasure finds a glass of liquor and a packet of dehycontrols on the various control panels give off to read. The banter between Flo, Droole and drared aliens with a \"don't expose to alcohol\" highly suitable blips and bloops. Maybe most Roger is, for lack of a be Roger is, for lack of a better term to describe warning; Roger finds a laser torch and later satisfying of all is Roger's loud \"Duhhh!\" it, a hoor. Even if one takes away the comic comes up against a thick metal bulkhead. At whenever he becomes the victim of his own references to everything from Bugs Bunny to one point, Roger has to use a cryo-freeze Raiders of the Lost Ark to Dana Carvey's SPACE QUESTS THE NEXT MUTATION SCORE 470 chamber, but not to worry, there are instrucGeorge Bush, the text of the game is great fun tions printed on the side. The designers have on its own merits. not gone our of their way to rease the player's I'M SURE YOU'RE GONNA HAVE A Where Space Quest V is something of a brain. ELAST CAPTAIN BUT HE'VE letdown is in the gameplay. For one thing, the On the other hand, there are a few segame demands cursor placement so precise quences that rise above the norm. The chase that one can click the \"Command\" icon on between Roger and a sexy robot Terminatrix Flo or Droole and get a \"You are trying to across the landscape of Kiz Urazgubi is intriorder the wall around\" response just because cate and inspired. The ploy Roger uses to win the icon isn't placed exactly where the comLEMI his command is clever and takes a bit of puter wants it to be. Along the same lines, one thought to figure out (unless one sees the can position an oxygen mask entirely over solution in the partial walk-through printed Roger's head only to discover that the comin the documentation). The final moments of stupidity. (If they ever make a movie out of Space Quest V, they'll have to cast Homer puter will only accept it if clicked on Roger's the game, in which Roger has to find a way torso. to deal with a giant garbage blob, require Simpson in the lead.) The sound effects give quick thinking and a few leaps of logic. Even the game a richness and a texture it would not At one point, I assumed that the game the easy puzzles are fun, if one goes into the otherwise have and are largely responsible for would not let me transport off a planet because when I placed the communicator icon creating the sense that the player really is game knowing what to expect. interacting with, and having an effect on the on Roger and clicked, it didn't work. As it Souls more jaded than I might wonder why simulated environments he visits. turned out, I had just chosen the wrong porthere are still laughs to be mined from a character in a sci-fi spoof saying, \"Captain, tion of Roger's anatomy to click on. This kind As for the visuals, while it would not be of problem would seem to be easily corrected accurate to say that they are the best yet seen she cannot take much more of this!\" Still, the in the series, they are certainly up to snuff, and I am fact is that there are. Satirists have been going surprised that Sierra let it get back to this particular well for a quarter of a through to the final version of the game. Of which I mean as high praise. One interesting through to the final y century, and it hasn't run dry yet. Space Quest point is that more close-ups are used than in course, typos are easily corrected, too — but V may not be for everyone, but people who previous games to supplement the standard only if one bothers to catch them. find this sort of thing funny will find this side-view and medium-range perspective. Other niggling annoyances include the fact variant very funny indeed. This may sound like a good thing, but it is that trips from planet to planet start to seem and it isn't. In close-up, the artists clearly interminable after a while (even at \"lite Energize! draw (no pun intended) from a comic book speed\"), and that Sierra's decision to render sensibility. As styles go, this is fine-perfectly all icons in black-and-white, as opposed to Part of what makes Space Quest V so enjoy workmanlike — but while the results are nice full color in previous chapters of the saga, able is that it's not just funny. It's also exciting enough, they are usually something short of makes them hard to see against some of the and suspenseful, due in large part to its movie stunning, backgrounds. quality score, its atmosphere-enhancing SPACE QUEST & THE NEXT MUTATX SCORE 470 sound effects, and its remarkable visuals. However, the bulk of Space Quest Vis very good and, like the silly jokes and excellent The soundtrack is calculated to pull all the right strings, from the \"Now it's time to graphics, the occasionally irritating gameplay panic\" string that gets plucked just before is part of the package. It's what people expect when they buy a Space Quest game. They Roger is attacked, to the \"Your true love is dying and you may never find another\" string might even miss it if they were gone. over which composer Chris Stevens lightly When you think about it, it's the same way runs his bow after Roger's beloved Ambassawith the musical numbers in those old movdor Wankmeister is infected with the highly ies. No one really wanted to see them, but mutagenic \"Primordial Soup.\" It's not some of them weren't half bad: \"My Dreams Mozart, but it is better than most of whar Are Getting Better All The Time,\" \"Boogie passes for scoring on network television. In the standard scenes, however, one finds Woogie Bugle Boy,\" \"Let's Play House.\" If Stevens has a marvelous ear for musical wit the combination of gorgeous painted backthe combinarion of a nothing else, they gave you a chance to catch and reference and his contribution to the grounds and detailed, well-animated foreyour breath before you started to laugh again. game is no less substantial than designer Mark Crowe's. ground action for which Sierra has become Space Quest V, too, is fine just the way it is. known. The result is that this game, like most It certainly has its share of quirks (Captains \"Wit\" might not be the best term to deof Sierra's, is worth playing if only to see each included) but it's got more than its share of scribe Tim Clarke's sound effects; certainly, laughs, thrills and delicious scenery, too. I he is appealing to a baser set of responses when new setting as it appears. think even the most demanding Wilcophiles he places the sound-effects equivalent of a The fourth element, which clicks just as will be pleased. cow Page 114 Computer Gaming World "


"THIS OPPONENT IS PROGRAMMED TO BE CHALLENGING. this one wants to rip your lungs out. If you think you're good at games, then let's have some people are terrific, and even the prices are competitive. So real fun. When you're online with GEnie Multi-Player put some new life into your joystick, and sign on. We'll see Games, you're playing real people, in real time. Some of just how good you are. O Sign up now: 1. Set your modem the best players around the world. Splash a bandit in Air for half duplex (local echo) at 300, 1200 or 2400 baud. Warrior, and you've just taken out eight other guys, who'll 2. Dial toll free 1-800-638-8369. Upon connection, enter be back gunning for you. Blast a MechWarrior in Multiplayer HHH 3. At the U# = prompt, enter XTX99327,BLAST Battle Tech, and who knows? Could be that jerk from the then press RETURN 4. Have a major credit card or your coast. Could be a mercenary who's looking for a few good checking account number ready. For more information friends. With GEnie, the possibilities are endless, the in the U.S. or Canada, call 1-800-638-9636. 2 OL GEnie. GEnie 100% ORGANIC OPPONENTS multi-player games AIR WARRIOR MULTIPLAYER BATTLETECH STELLAR EMPEROR KESM41 corporation Air Warrior is a registered trademark and Stellar Emperor is a trademark of Kesmai Corporation Multiplayer BattleTech is a trademark and MechWarrior and BattleTech are registered trademarks of FASA Corporation. Circle Reader Service #54 "


"Devjeun Terminator Emulation : Mode HEST MES «Terminator 2029\" from Bethesda Softworks by Gordon Goble It is with fondness and perhaps a tear in the eye that we remember the compassionate character study of 1984, The Terminator. Featuring a hulking beast of a man with a tenuous grip on the English language as a hulking cyborg with an equally tenuous grip on the English language, this stunt-filled special effect showcase painted the bleakest of futures for the human race, at least in the good city of Los Angeles. Both The Terminatorand its eminently successful sequel revolved around critical current events that would eventually have a bearing on humanity's fate in the face of a 21st cenhuman Resistance movement. Led by one John Conner (Sara Connor's little boy all growed up), the Resistance has recently made a stunning discovery central to gameplay, While probing a Skynet vault, a prototype of a fully mechanized Terminator unit was found intact. With a few modifications and improvements, the Terminator is now ready to be used against its computerized creators. IN OUTODOCUSTONTT I cury mechanized rebellion. Yes, there was much in the way of destruction, mayhem, and death in both movies, but aside from a few glimpses into the next century, most all that good stuff took place in today's world. Closer scrutiny of the man vs. machine fight-to-the-death world of the future was possible only in one's imagination. But now, with the aid of an IBM-compatible 386 or faster computer with at least 1 MB expanded memory, one can experience firsthand the Bethesda Softworks version of life on the rubble-strewn battlefield of the year 2029. Like the star of the two movies, and the magnitude of the fictional war itself, Terminator 2029 is awfully large, although its installed size of 12 MB is a tad smaller than the 14 stated in the game manual. Fortunately, in an effort to clear up any installation or operational problems before they arise, Bethesda has thoughtfully included a small diagnostic program that can be run right off disk #1 before the somewhat lengthy install procedure is initiated. Blood on the Circuitry Terminator 2029 opens with a series of animated scenes depicting the L.A. war zone of thar year, bearing a strong resemblance to the first movie and providing a taste of what's to come. And certainly, what's coming isn't for soft, sensitive gamers; blood, burnt circuitry, and spare parts will fly with wild abandon. Most graphically disturbing will be the repeated animation of oneself when things haven't gone quite right, powerful plasma blasts ripping through one's lower body followed by a particularly violent decapitation Needless to say, life juices will splatter and drain over and over again. Before the gore, however, a little background and some game basics are required learning. The plot is basic good vs. evil; evil being the intelligent machines of «Skynet,\" and good, of course, being represented by the There's just one catch. Only a few precious individuals are physically and mentally able enough to don the \"Advanced Cybernetic Exoskeleton» (ACE). That's where the gamer comes in. The gamer's task is to run a number of incursions into enemy territory, laying waste to the bad guys and defending humanity. The ultimate objective of Terminator 2029 is revealed only at the successful completion of the final mission, and that objective is...well, you ll have to play the game to find out. In the meantime, an auspicious foray will capture more ground for the Resistance, while defeats will result in lost territory to the mechanized marauders. Fail several in a row, and the annihilation of humanity is assured. Following the aforementioned opening animation (which inevitably will be bypassed after two or three viewings), a very visual main interface is served up. From this screen representation of our hero's subterranean lair, monikers can be created, games loaded and saved, statistics viewed, etc. Unfortunately, TITLE: Terminator 2029 SYSTEM: IBM (386 with at least 1 MB expanded memory strongly recommended. Mouse strongly recommended.) PRICE: $69.95 PROTECTION: Documenation Look Up PRODUCER DESIGNER: V.J. Lakshman CHIEF PROGRAMMER: Julian Lefay PUBLISHER: Bethesda Softworks Rockville, MD (301) 926-8300 Page 116 Computer Gaming World "


"\"the ultimate power-trip simulation game\" Kansas City Star Shadow President The Simulation of Presidential World Power \"graphics are great, the sound is cool...incredible replay value\" Computer Game Review \"one of the most ambitious games of its type\" Video Games & Computer Entertainment \"as comprehensive strategy simulation as I've ever seen\" CTW Europe's Electronic Games Trade Paper \"the simulation engine is more detailed than any we've seen so far\" Computer Shopper Lo T OTEUTETT  1992 D.C. True, Ltd. are \"Best Simulation\" Finalist '93 SPA Awards \"Editors' Choice\" PC Games Magazine \"Excellence Award\" 3rd Annual Game Players PC Entertainment Awards \"TOP TEN \" Entertainment Software U.S. News & World Report\" \"Selected by Computer Gaming World, Game Players PC Entertainment, Computer Game Review and U.S. News & World Report YOU are the President M D.C. True, Ltd. creators of software for the mind and heart IBM & 100% compatibles 1840 Oak Avenue  Evanston IL 60201 To Order: Visit your local retailer or call 1-800-929-1243 Circle Reader Service #49 "


"Devnew LATIMEN T this is the only spot in which a game can be presently selected weapons, gridmaps of the saved and, since certain individual missions immediate area, and more. The amount of are particularly difficult (not to mention stuff going on at any one instant is impressive, lengthy), alternate saving techniques should and getting a grip on it all requires some have been incorporated. experience. Each mission combines elements of arcade A Brief Exchange shoot-em-ups with fighter jet navigation, On to the briefing room, where John Conweapon selection, and mayhem to the eyenor and two other superiors explain the curballs, as well as adventure games with the rent situation, supply new mission orders, occasional branching decision and labyrinand give the run-down on available weap thine environment. It ain't easy, but nobody onry. Not to appear prudish, but why is the ever said the salvation of humanity would be. one woman in the room (Technician Rachel Sterner), who is obviously an accomplished scientist, not only physically endowed bcyond all natural proportions but garbed in the scantiest of clothing as well? Is this sexist? Are Arnold's pecs chemically enhanced? The briefing room leads to the ACE Ordnance Bay where various weaponry is loaded aboard. Six separate weapons can be carried for cach mission, and choices will logically vary depending upon designated assignment. Advanced players will have a whole lot more to choose from, but all armament can be Once engaged in battle, primary and secongrouped into three primary categories: plasma dary weapons can be co-selected and triggered dar cannons, fusion grenades and missiles. by either left or right mouse buttons. The targers blow up so well that there are no decimated remains to crunch underfoot. Airborne Scorpions and Dragons, land based vehicles, and terminators alike all just seem to evaporare. By the way, care must be exercised when targeting, as fellow resistance members are on the field as well. Sadly, they will not recognize the ACE battle armor as an allied weapon, and will attempt to fire upon Mr. ACE. IF these game little warriors become a might too pesky, wasting one or two seems to be all in a As each mission is completed, more adday's work, but any more and the commander vanced armament becomes available and 4 will issue a stern warning. Many is the time will Technician Sterner becomes increasingly I've been tempted to...ah, forget it, weapons re friendly, offering a dinner invitation as aren't allowed in headquarters. reward at one point, which is just peachykeen if one enjoys a little female companion Fortunately, the ACE suit is self-repairing, ship with his radioactive fried rats. to a point. Minor damage (and much will be suffered) can be repaired on the run simply Ace of Spades by depressing the \"T\" key. But repairs can take some time (several minutes in extreme inOff to war, and the first cool thing to notice stances), and this is unfortunate for two reais the pseudo-virtual reality of the game, temsons: 1) one must be wary of approaching pered somewhat by the fact that movement is fiends during the repair procedure, and, 2) possible only through the keyboard's cursor one must be careful not to drift off to sleep keys. Each step—forward, backward, or sideduring the repair procedure because it's just ways-is in pre-designated increments, while plain b-o-r-i-n-g. Although a schematic diaturns are made at 90 degree angles only. gram in the corner of the screen features There's nothing in between. This doesn't flashing circuitry, this cases to be a source of seem to be the optimal implementation of amusement after the first few minutes. movement, especially considering that the Another battlefield complaint has to do movement system of last year's Wolfenstein with the radar system, which would be just 3D did a much better job and offered boch great if it worked properly! Too often Mr. mouse and joystick support. ACE is in the clear, only to be converged upon Aside from the real-time eyeball view of the surrounding landscape, the screen is jamadvanced radar sightings. Instantly materialtantly material packed with informative displays, revealing izing doom machines weren't supposed to be unseen enemies, damage taken and inflicted, part of the deal. The Seventh Mission of Synthbad Each mission has a distinctly differing purpose, from recovering wounded compatriots to recovering important data, or triggering massive explosions in the heart of an underground enemy bunker. It is when approaching clevator shafts to descend beneath the surface that questions are posed, such as, «You see an elevator. Do you take it?\" An interest ing element of Terminator 2029 that could have used some expansion is the venerable adventure game, and I found myself hoping in vain for a little more of this type of challenge and a little less fire-fighting/labyrinth resolution. This brings us to an important point. Normally, a dedicated gamer wants desperately to finish and \"win» his or her selected game, but it must be interesting en route. Unfortunately, along about the 1,000th destroyed target (and twentieth maze), Terminator 2029 lost this reviewer. It ceased to be totally engrossing, and began to feel like a glorified shooting gallery. Sure things looked (and sounded) great when being blasted to junk metal, but how much «killing machine\" can one person be? The answer is not this much. Those who are able to win the game in the optimal seven mission path, may not become as sated as this reviewer, but I would have liked to see this product serve as more than a shoor-'em-up. The fact is that Terminator 2029 shines graphically, features an interesting premise, and supplies ample audible realism and thunder. It runs as a good computer game should, bereft of any annoying midplay screen freezes. TESETTETES Unfortunately, the accompanying manual, though, designed in camouflage khaki and written to get one in the spirit of the game, falls shy in a number of areas such as equipment explanation, general troubleshooting tips, and an adequate index. Finally, a better method of movement control (namely, joystick) would have immeasurably improved my perception of this game. I don't know... maybe if the bodacious technician offered to take me dining and dancing in the rubble of post-war L.., I'd feel like suiting up once more...they say love does funny things.... CG does funny things.... CGW Page 178 Computer Gaming World "


"We Will Beat ANY Nationally Advertised Price*. We have more titles not listed. Call for the best prices. ............ ............ D BIT, WIT SOFTWARE Hours: 9 am to 9 pm Central Standard Time ............ P.O. Box 115023-343 A Train ....... ..... A Train Construction Set A10 Tank Killer 1.5 ....... Aces of the Pacific Aces of the Pacific: Disk 1 & 2.. Alone in the Dark. Ashes of Empire..... Batman Returns..... Battlechess 4000... Battles of Destiny.. Betrayal of Krondor.. Buck Roger's: Countdown to Doomsday.... Buck Roger's 2: Matrix Cubed. Buzz Aldrin's Race into Space. Caesar Castles 2: Siege & Conquest.... Civilization...... Comanche Maximum Overkill Conquered Kingdoms... Conquest of Japan..... Conquests of Longbow Creepers. Dagger of Amon Ra......... Darklands ................... Daughter of Serpents............ Discovery: In the Steps of Columbus ............. Dune 2................. Eco-Quest 2: Lost Secrets of Rainforest. Elvira 2: Jaws of Cerberus Empire Deluxe Eric the Unready.. F15 Strike Eagle 3 F15 Strike Eagle 3: Limited Edition Falcon 3.0.......... Floor 13... Front Page Sports Football. Gateway ....... Global Conquest. Gobliiins. Great Naval Battles Great Naval Battles: Disk 1-3... Hardball 3....... Hardball 3: Disk 1 Harrier Assault .... Hong Kong Mojong Pro .. Humans, The Inca.. ........... Indiana Jones 4: Fate of Atlantis Jack Nicholas Signature Golf.... King's Quest 5: Absence ............. King's Quest 6: Heir Today......... Laser Squad.............. Leather Godesses of Phobos 2.... Legend of Kyrandia..... Legends of Valor........ Lemmings Lemmings 2: Tribes Line in the Sand........ Links 386 Pro ....... Links 386 Pro: Disk 1-3.... Lord of the Rings 2: Dark Towers.. Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes... Lucas Arts Classic Adv. 4 pk..... Maelstrom ........... Magic Candle 3 Mega Lo Mania Megafortress Mega Pack ............... MiG 29 Fulcrum ...... Might & Magic 4: Clouds of Xeen .............. Monopoly Deluxe... New York Times Crossword Puzzles ............... NFL Football..... No Greater Glory Out of this World Pacific War Patriot. Perfect General.... Perfect General: DD1 .............. Police Quest 3: Kindred...... Populous 2 ........... Power Game Software 5pk. Powermonger.. Quest for Glory 3: Wages of War........ Rampart...... Realms........ Red Baron .......... Rex Nebular.... Kingworld... Rollerblade Racer.... Rome: Pathway to Power Second Front Secrets of Monkey Island 2................. Shadow President.... Siege ........... Siege: Dogs of War .... Sierra Award Winners 3Pk. Sierra Family Fun 3pk. SimCity SimEarth... SimLife............ SpaceQuest 4: Roger Wilco...... Space Quest 5: Next Mutation ...... Spaceward Ho... Specter ............ Spellcasting 301: Spring Break Star Control 2... Star Legions. Star Trek: 25th Anniversary ...... Strip Poker 3 Strip Poker 3: Disk 1-5.... Stunt Island..... . ... ......... Summoning, The......... Take A Break: Crosswords. Task Force 1942.. Tegel's Mercenaries .. Terminator 2029... Theater of War Tony LaRussa's Ult. Value 5 pk. Trump Castle 3............ Ultima 5: Warriors of Destiny ... Ultima 6: False Prophet ..... Ultimo 7: Black Gate ........ Ultima 7 Part 2: Serpent Isle.. Ultima Underworld: Stygian Abyss Ultima Underworld 2: Labyrinth of World.............. Utopia .......... V for Victory: Utah Beach .... V for Victory 2: Velkiye Luki............... V for Victory 3: Winter Garden..... Valhalla .......... Veil of Darkness.. Western Front... Wilson Pro Staff Golf. Wing Commander Deluxe ........ Wing Commander 2......... Wizardry 6: Bane of the Cosmic Forge....... Wizardry 7: Crusader's of the Dark Sevant. Wizardry Trilogy: 1-3.... World Circuit ...... X Wing ........ Joysticks & Game Cards CH Game Card III........ CH Flight Stick.............. CH Mach III....... CH Virtual Pilot Flight Yoke ........ Quick Shot Game Kit... Suncom G-Force Flight Yoke. Thrust Master Joystick.. Thrust Master Weapons Control. Thrust Master Pro Joystick... . Carrollton, Texas 75011 800/259-2453 ........ Fax 214/306-9603 $ 126 45 84 Sound Cards & Speakers Gravis Ultra Sound. Koss HD/1 Speakers. Koss HD/4 Speakers Media Vision Thunder Board W/F15.. Media Vision Pro Audio Spectrum 16 Bit .. Sound Blaster ........ Sound Blaster Pro 8 Bit Sound Blaster Pro 16 Bit. Sound Blaster Pro Basic 8 Bit ...... 179 9A 184 Most items shipped same day  UPS add $4 per order  2 Day Air add $6 per order Policies: All sales final. Check compatibility before you buy. We accept Visa/MC, money orders, personal checks (please allow 2 weeks for check to clear). Detectives replaced with same product. Price, availability & shipping times subject to change. Texas residents add 8.25% sales tax. 'Does not include closeouts, liquidations, or limited quantities. Circle Reader Service #35 "


"ITTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT The Legend Of Legend COMPANY REPORT A Company Profile of Legend Software by the CGW Staff uring the dismal gray decades of the Cold War, a monstrous Cast of Characters economic sector reached its fullest stature. President Eisenhower warned us about the Military-Industrial Complex in his Legend's modest goal is to produce four to six quality software farewell address, but the specter of an evil empire in the East continued packages per year. To accomplish this goal, the company has assemto feed its growth. When, after decades of an uneasy stand-off, the bled a core of vital personnel. Two of these long-term core workers Berlin Wall was dismantled, the gigantic sector gradually began to are Duane Beck, designer/maintainer of the systems architecture for deflare. the company's products and Glen Dahlgren, the assistant producer, One part of that sector is American Systems Corporation, a highcomposer and programmer who helped clean up the system. tech firm that builds systems for Trident submarines and other Duane was one of the originals at Legend, having worked with Bob military purposes. As the monumental military expenditures of the Bares on Sherlock. He worked with Infocom's in-house ZIL (Zork Cold War began to be reduced, the executives of ASC decided to invest Interactive Language) during the Sherlock process and remembers in non-defense-related ventures. One area of investment was cable ZIL as being similar to the programming language known as LISPO. television. Another area was entertainment software. According to Beck, the code used to construct Legend products is Mike Verdu, who serves as CEO of Legend Software, was an similar to C. In fact, he says that most of the outside software libraries employee of ASC during their period of diversification. Actually, they use are in C, but notes that they utilize some graphics libraries Mike had run his own company, Paragon Systems (no relation to which are written in assembly language. MicroProse-Greenburg, the former Paragon Software) prior to its Having seen code of all shapes and sizes at various software houses, acquisition by ASC. Verdu's Paragon Systems developed systems we expressed surprise at how clean and easy to read the Legend source architecture that ASC wanted so badly that code appeared on the screen. Beck explained that Glen had cleaned it purchased the entire company. In addiup and commented the system architecture tion, Verdu's company had done some of so that all of the game designers could the programming work on Sherlock: Riddle creare a pristine code that is easy to read. of the Crown Jewels for Infocom. Bob Bares, Then, they looked at each other and elected the designer of Sherlock, and Verdu became to share a disclaimer. Everyone at Legend friends at that point. So, when Verdu beagrees that Steve Meretzky is an exception came aware of ASC's desire to diversify, he to this rule of attempting to create pristine, and Bates presented a business plan wherein commented code. Meretzky still writes ASC would establish a subsidiary to publish code as though he is trying to get as much entertainment software. on the screen as possible (probably because The new company was originally slated to ZIL's editor only allowed about 12 lines on be known as \"Gameworks,\" but Borland the screen at a time). objected because of an old package which When we asked Duane's co-workers they had published under the same name. Mike Verdu, chairman, Peggy Oriani, director of marketing, what they thought his most significant proThe company name was changed to Legend and Bob Bates, president of Legend. gramming triumph was, they uniformly Software and the original deal looked very answered that the data compression routine good. ASC knew enough about start-ups that they only expected a was the neatest trick. Because games take up lots of space with text (in small return on investment if one product shipped in the first year. which seven bits are used per character with the last bit usually getting Yet, they expected so much of a return on two products that Legend wasted), Legend's technical team would manually extract the ASCII could not possibly have met the terms for a second round of funding. strings and compress them with Duane's modified version of HuffAs Verdu and Bates were soon to learn, no entertainment software man Encoding. By Spellcasting 201, Duane had automated the entire company is currently making that kind of return on investment. The process. Now, the text compression offers slightly better than a 50% partners looked ar affiliated label deals, realizing that they were trading compression rate. Gateway's 600K of raw text compressed to just profit percentage for distribution, and eventually signed as an affiliate under 300K with MicroProse. Later, when MicroProse was putting its energy into Glen Dahlgren does triple duty. Not only does he manage all outside going public, Legend elected to move to Accolade's growing affiliate artists and testers, but he wrote almost 1/3 of Gateway (including the program. game concept which kept mutating throughout the design process), Page 120 Computer Gaming World "


"There's Sound... \"Vroom, vroom\" ..And There's SoundMan. GUARANTEED COMPATIBLE or your money back LOGITEN SoundMan 16 delivers sound so real, 85% of the time people can't tell the difference from live sound. That's because it's packed with the absolute latest in sound board technology: up to 16-bit/44KHz record/playback, Yamaha OPL-3 stereo synthesis 20-voice chip, 100% Sound Blaster\" and Ad Lib compatibility, and more. SoundMan brings you the highest CD — quality sound available, for all your games and applications, in Windows« and DOS. From Logitech, the peripherals leader. At your dealer, or call  1-800-732-3026. Tw/ Trademarks belong to their respective owners. The Senseware Company OUND SoundMan 16. Get Real Circle Reader Service #76 "


"composes most of the music (ca. 40 pieces is the bean counter. Bates knows game per game), and implements the sound design from the standpoint of past expeeffects. rience. Verdu wants the games to push Another key member of the cast is Mark toward higher sales volume and a more Poesch. Mark does most of his work on polished interface. the Macintosh and then moves it to the Verdu thinks that the text-heavy look IBM. At the time of our visit, he was of Legend games gives them an archaic, working on problems related to SVGA. outdated feel. Bates believes in storytelHe expressed frustration at the lack of ling, insisting that text is necessary. Verdu standards within the industry and noted has a graphics orientation in terms of that there were at least five different chip interface; Bates has a verbal orientation. sets for SVGA. He went on to state that Together, they hope to keep evolving the VESA works, but insists that there is sigLegend interface until it becomes softnificant degradation in quality with othware that appeals to both orientations. ers. His stated objective during the interview was to integrate high-speed aniThe Legend braintrust at work. Raising the Curtain mation into the Legend games and use The one thing that both Bates and more rotoscoping in the future. Verdu agree upon is the necessity of careful risk management. Both have seen production costs, burgeoning staffs, and extravagant faciliProducer and Director ties put other companies on the market or out of business. So, the The management team for the company consists of Mike Verdu, immediate goal of the management team is to hit the point of releasing Bob Bates and Peggy Oriani. The men manage the company, while four products per year, making the graphics more attractive, and Peggy manages all production schedules, public relations, package and developing a more transparent interface. An even better piece of news promotional design and marketing from her office. Fortunately, is the fact that ASC is planning to sell the company back to Verdu, Peggy had run her own design firm prior to helping form Legend. s Bates, and two other partners over a period of time. such, she is lised to dealing with freelance artists and is able to be as Perhaps, though, the most ironic factor in the legend of Legend is directive or non-directive as she needs to be in getting an interesting that the little company that was begun by a defense contractor has variety of cover work for Legend products. For Spellcasting 301:Spring itself become a government contractor. The U.S. Department of Break, for example, she enlisted Hollywood poster artist Craig Nelson Justice has contracted with Legend to develop an adventure game to provide the glitzy feeling she wanted in the box art. which will teach the implications of the government's ethics code to Bares as president and Verdu as CEO make an interesting compleJustice Department employees. Sometimes, even in software legends, ment to each other. Bates is the de facto creative director and Verdu the story comes full cycle. Cow The ULTIMATE Play-By-Mail Offer FLAGSHIP magazine, with Ark Royal Games, C2 Simulations, Capitol Consulting, Deltax Gaming, Flying Buffalo Inc, Flying Dutchman Games, Graaf Simulations, Inner Dimensions, Rolling Thunder Games Inc and Twin Engine Gaming, is proud to make what may be the most exciting offer in PBM history. For $19.99, we'll give you: (a) A 4-issue trial subscription to FLAGSHIP, PBM's leading international magazine, with 56 pages each issue packed with news, reviews, and uncensored player comments. Every issue includes a sheet of discount coupons worth many times the cost of the magazine. (b) A coupon entitling you to $20 value of rules and/or turns in any of these games: Against All Odds, Adventurer Kings, Cluster, Continental Rails, Domination, El Mythico, Feudal Lords, New Order, Quest of the Great Jewels, Shadow Lords, Sirius Command, Space Combat, Space 101, StarGlobe, Starquest, Subterrania, Victory!, World Emperor II and Warriors & Wizards. You choose where you want to use the coupon: to help you, we will include an impartial description of each of them! The only condition is that you should not have played with that particular gamemaster before. Last but not least, if you are disappointed with the first FLAGSHIP, let us know within one month and we'll refund you the entire $19.99 by return. No handling fee, no requirement to return anything yes, you can still use the coupon. To try it, send $19.99 to FLAGSHIP, CGW special offer, PO Box 6105WSS, Gainsville GA 30504 "


"This Is The Only Hardware You Need To Shop The World's Ultimate Games Superstore. Shop On Line PRODIGY: Jump Computer Express CompuServe: GO CE EL FUSET Spectre Spectre Supreme is the sequel to the best selling cyberspace combat/action game. Contend with slicers, auto-gun turrets and hunter killers. Your deadly enemies now use radar shielding and optical cloaking. Fortunately. you now command smart missiles, seekers, proximity mines and Spinners. Get ready for the hottest electronic adrenaline rush you'll ever experience! (For Mac) Spectre PC delivers advanced simulation technology featuring full color graphics, breathtaking scenery with fluid 3D animation. Customizable battle cralt design. High quality digitized sounds. (For IBM DOS) Spectre Supreme $38 Spectre pc $32 Publisher: Velocity El-Fish El-Fish is your perfect opportunity to generate an exciting, life-like electronic aquarium. El-Fish employs the latest graphics rendering technology that helps you create realistic look. ing, fully-animated images that look and swim as if they were real fish huqging coral reefs in the Caribbean. Make your own colorful aquarium filled with unusual objects... shells, castles. mermaids...and populated by colorful and dazzling. seemingly three dimensional fish. (For IBM DOS) TEST Empire Deluxe Challenge your leadership and tactical skills in this addictive Wargame of exparsion and conquest Infantry, armor, fighters, bombers, troop transports, destroy ers, subs and aircraft carriers are yours to command as you encounter and overcome your opponents. Test your tactics and abilities with custom created worlds and opponents. Super VGA graphics to 800 x 600 with multiple zoom settings (For IBM DOS) GEnie: Type Express Delphi: Shop Computer Ex America On-Line: Computer Express $32 Publisher: Maxis Publisher: New World Computing The Legacy-Realm of Terror Ultrabois A 3-D animated, first person perspective LEGACY ole-playing horror VI adventure. The game, set in present day America, combines stunning graphic tech nology, amazing audio effects and deep realistic role-playing to create a terrifying interactive horror movie. Visit a recently inherit ed centuries-old house that has been rumored to have strange things occurring inside. Find and destroy the entity which controls the strange goings on in the house within a set time limit (For IBM DOS) Goblins 2 and INCA Goblins 2-Help two hilarious goblins rescue the kidnapped prince! Simultaneous multi-character mouse control. Highly animated characters with hilarious and often unpredictable personalities Humorous sound effects and lively background music. (For IBM DOS) INCA-Conquer space and explore ancient mysteries in an entirely new concept in computer gaming. Travel your way through time and space from ancient Peru to futuristic outer space star sys. fems. Intriguing and challenging puzzles of ancient Inca folklore. Sensational stereo soundtrack with authentic Inca instruments. (for IBM DOS) First contact turns to first blood as an alien craft enters Earth's orbit and drops its deadly cargohundreds of mindless gargan tuan robots emerge and begin the systematic destruction of mankind. The 'bot mission: eradicate all noncompatible life forms with extreme prejudice. Human weaponry is no match for these killer machines, but human survivors band together to create a strike force of ULTRABOTS. A second invasion is imminent and these captured and retro-fitted 'bots are Earth's only hope. (For IBM DOS) Orders accepted on our toll free number Mon-Sat 8:30 to 5:30 EST Visa, MasterCard, and Discovercard accepted. All credit card orders processed within 24 hours Continental US shipments: UPS Ground $5, Airborne Overnight $7 Corp, Gov't, Educ, APO, FPO. International orders accepted. No sales tax except for Mass add 5% Personal checks will delay shipment 5 business days. Products covered by manufacturer's guarantee Detective software replaced immediately. No CODs. Item availability and price subject to change without notice. 15% restocking fee for non-defective returns. $38 Goblins 2 $ 22 inca $32 $32 Publisher: MicroProse Publisher: Sierra Publisher: Electronic Arts Circle Reader Service #42 VISA 800-228-7449 COMPUTER DUCOVER vor SS The World's Ultimate Games Superstore 24 SMS Language Assistant Spanish Logo Writer Mckey's 123's Enhanced Mickey's ABC's Entended M 's Matt House Mystery at the Museums Oregon Trail Delux VGA Pepper's Adventures in tine Pytcom w/Sound Rock & Bach Studio SAT Personal Trainer SAT Call Notes Science Adventut MACINTOSH CD-ROM TITLES CD Batti Chess CD-Beauty and The Beas CD-Desert Storm CD-Electronic Arts Sample C Grolet Encyclopedia CO-JourneyMan Prat Co-Bust Grandma & Me CD-Just Grandma & Me CD-Photo CD Access Macintosh CD-Sherlock Detective Vol 1 CO Sports Trustrated Almanac CD Survey Western At CD-Victor Vector & Yonda CD-ROM DRIVES & UPGRADE KITS 540 Con CD 16 External Chino CDS-435 tot Drive Chinon CDX-435 Ermal Dive 410 Discovery Instit 475 Edutainment int B K 515 Fusion CD 16 (Interna 350 NCC Express Estimat 350 E nfopress External MAC Caution HintBook Comance Mason Desk ! Comanche Maximum Overkat Darktands Hint Block Disk Darklands VGA Darkbands Master Players Ed. Daughter of Serpents Dragon's tartal Dune 11 Eco Guest Rainforest Eht Ball Deluxe Empire Deluxe F-15 Strikt Eagle II Family Fun Pak woFree Castaway Flight S agan Scenery Cos I The Prince Button Hoyles Book Game Classe AMIGA RECREATION Con Dune Legend of Kyrandia Out of this World Sim STORY Sobies Journey Str Poker Strip Poker Data Disk IBM CD-ROM TITLES CDCD-Actes of Way Bearish CDA MPC VERSION CO-Bay Bear Goes to Space CO-Osman Movie Gude WIND Co-Curse of Enchantia CD Eco Ouest Search for Cetus CD Electronic Arts Sample Co-Goal Explorer CD-Got Guide MPCICAH) CD-Geo Encyclopedia Window CD-Laura Bow ! CD-Learn to Speak Spanish CD-MPC Music Mozart CUPC West Dugte CO PC Karaoke CD-Photo CD Access Windows CD-Scrabble Delore CD-Search for Cetus Fax: 508-443-5645 Voice: 508-443-6125 11670 -ta! SFAX 0011508-441-5615 | | | | 0 1 1 15 VI -tit & : 1. CH -Y-41), LII1111 Design Your Own Home Interiors Rex ticular Master Players Ed. Design Your Own Landscape HomePathway to Power House Punt Clinic Sceny Upgrade Bundle Print Shop Sid Mole's Trilogy Quicken MAC SimCity Graphics Set/Guide Wine Companion Space Quest V MACINTOSH RECREATION Star Control Adoen of Wa Beamish COLOR Strike Commander VGA B or's Nascar Challenge Terminator 2009 Capitalist Pig Tony L ussa laseball L Carers At War a Underworld Labyrinth Civilization Ultima VII Part 2 Serpentie C uation Master Player Ed Vel of Darkness Cognito Veil of Darkness Hint Book Eight Bar Delarenbal When the Prophecy Falcon MC Wilson Pro Stahl Golf HelCats Over the Pacific Wolfenstein Spear of Destiny Indana Jones Fale of Atlantis World Tour Tennis Lounge X-Wing Might & Magic MACINTOSH EDUCATION Omar Sharon Bridge A Train of this world Aloe Blaster Plus SCO Joshua's Reading Machine PREM Secret of Monkey stand Kesk Shanghai Mae's With House Samtid COM Sectre Supreme Treehouse mmmmmmmm Where in Space is Carmen Delux Wild Science Arcade IBM HOME PRODUCTIVITY Baby Crocher Dockook Betty Crocier Cocktook Windows INCA Bible Study Micro Kache Companion Micro Kechen Companion Window Party Pune De Pediatrie Indiana Jones Fate of Atlantis Jump + King's Ou VI-VGA Legends of Valout Legends of Valeur Hint Book Lemmings it Links 386 Pro 209 arden Here are only a few of the 3,000 products we've delivered to our satisfied customers. Just call 1-800-228-7449 to start saving time and money with Computer Express. Computer Express 31 Union Ave. Sudbury, MA 01776 HARDWARE "


"COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD \"I Came, I Played, I Conquered» The Board / Computer Wargaming Transition by Alan Emrich Art by Rodger MacGowan: Copyright 1993 RBM Graphics WARGAMAING WORLD In this issue ... Caesar Review by Allen Greenberg .. 126 emember when a CRT was a Combat Results Table and TSR stood for Tactical Studies Rules (before they discovered Dungeons & Dragons?) Actually, both Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson were excellent wargamers in their day, especially in the field of miniatures. Now these abbreviations, like so much in this wargamer's life, have been taken over by computers. Okay, so I've learned that a CRT is also a computer monitor and a TSR is something I need to get rid of to run my computer games. I can live with that. Adapting the \"ancient\" hobby of board wargaming to the computer age hasn't always been a smooth transition, but I will admit to being better for it. For instance, my circle of wargaming buddies has more than doubled since I discovered what a computer modem could do when plugged into a network. About half the war and strategy games that I play are on computer and a good many of these are played with another wargamer via modem. I download errata and read player's opinions on GEnie and other networks. GAPs (Game Assistance Programs) will be truly coming of age over the next few years. It's just getting berrer and better, right? Well, that's not what I've heard. Not everyone agrees with such a rosy assessment. Just as there have always been prophets of doom and gloom in the boardgame industry (where even I have joined the chorus in hopes of there being more introductory level games thar could be used for hobby recruitment), so there are those who say that computer wargaming can't survive. That strikes me as odd since the average board wargame will do 2,000 5,000 unit sales where computer wargames tend to start at 5,000 and, with the likes of Command HQ and The Perfect General as examples, can easily weigh in at around 75,000 copies sold. If you count Sid Meier's Civilization as a wargame, I wouldn't be surprised to hear that it had sold around 200,000 copies. Frankly, I'm not worried about the death of wargaming. I'm too busy enjoying them and trying to keep up with the plethora of new releases every year. When I started out in this hobby back in the early 70s, it was easy to buy every new release and eat your losses on the turkeys. With the price and quantity of new wargame releases these days, like you, I read the reviews carefully and really appreciate a good strategy article or replay to help me get the most value out of my wargame purchases. I just wanted everyone to know that I'm not kidding when I say we're all in this together — Wargamers bound by our love of this hobby. Old Business At press time, we were a few names away from filling the roster for the Empire Deluxe tournament. Next issue, look for the who's who in computer wargaming tournament play to be posted in these pages. Those who have registered early have been practicing and sending in feedback by Email and I am pleased to say that this is shaping up to be quite an exciting event. The feedback is just coming in on the Pacific War coverage. Generally, it seems that it was enthusiastically received. There was a lot of material presented and the vast majority of you felt it made an excellent inclusion for the game. We have no other features of that girth planned for any time soon, by the way. New Business I've been spending some time with Aide de Camp from HPS Simulations. The more I fool around with that program, the more I like it. Hopefully, I'll get a full review in soon. Without even reading the documentation, I've managed to put the entire map for GDW's popular board wargame A House Divided on my hard drive and have almost finished the counters. Soon, I'll have a complete, graphic play-by-Email kit. It works for virtually any board wargame and rumor has ir that the publisher/designer, Scott Hamilton, has been in touch with many board wargame companies concerning this product. Perhaps the \"big crossover» between board and computer wargames is closer than many think. In the meantime, I'll be heading up to The Computer Game Developer's Conference. There, I'll meet with the likes of Sid Meier, Mark Baldwin, Dani Bunten and so forth. Whatever wargaming dirt is to be found there, you can bet yours truly will be rolling in it to keep our readers abreast. Until you turn to these pages to read all about it,\" try to remember what CRTs and TSRs are. CGW Spaceward, Ho! Review by Martin Cirulis ... 128 Spaceward, Ho! Strategy Tips by Roger «Star-Tzu\" White . .. . . . . 132 Jim Dunnigan's Victory at Sea, a \"Behind the Screens\" look by Alan Emrich . . . . . 134 Pre-20th Century Wargame Survey by M. Evan Brooks ........ 136 Empire Deluxe Review by Sean Jeffers.... 144 Mega lo Mania Review by John Brassil .... 148 Page 124 Computer Gaming World "


"Opponents Wanted Those wishing to place their own (free) ads need only send us a postcard (or use the Notes section of the RID card), letter, FAX (714-283-3444) or E-Mail (Prodigy (EXPT40B), CompuServe (76703,622), The Sierra Network at Box 1048, GEnie and America On-Line (CGW]). Generally, we run them only once, so send another each time if you want to keep your name listed! The ads themselves should serve as reasonable examples as to how to write your own. However,  Include a brief description of the types of opponents and games you are interested in playing. Games being played other than direct by modem can be listed (trading save game disks or even face-to-face).  At least one (possibly more) telephone number(s) must be included. Do not forget the area code and mention whether they are Home, Work or Modem numbers.  Include your city and state so that people who call you will both: a) have a clue as to what time zone you are in and b) recognize it when they see it on their phone bill. We reserve the right to edit all Opponents Wanted ads to our standards of taste (such as they are). The Networks The following are voice contact numbers for many of the various on-line network services that connect gamers. Call them for more information on these networks. America On-Line: (800) 827-6364 CompuServe Information Service: (800) 848-8990 Digital Dreams Network: (800) 274-2814 GEnie: (800) 638-9636 Multi-Player Games Network: (800) GET-GAME National Videotex (NVtel): (800) 336-9096 Prodigy: (800) 822-6922 X556 The Sierra Network: (800) SIERRA-1 USA Today Sports Network: (800) 826-9688 Bulletin Board Systems Thunderbolt! BBS in Chicago, IL now offers online entertainment with Poker, Blackjack, Bingo, Galactic Empire, Zorgon, Quest for Magic, The Arena and Flash Games (\"The Next Generation\" of online gaming). Play RPGs with online multi-sided dice! Eric Spanitz, SYSOP. Modem settings 8-N-1, 300/1200/2400. Phone (312) 248-4822. Hack and slash your way through the real-time, multi-user game Legends, featured on The Batboard TBBS in Columbia, MO! True ADDaction awaits, as well as over 30 other on-line gaming challenges including ANSI Pro Football, role-playing, strategy, trivia and casino games. Prizes awarded for top scores, full access on your first call (and it's FREE!). Over 1 gig of free downloads, FidoNet echoes (including GAMING) and the adult role-playing game The Wild Side. Call (314) 446-0475, 24 hours a day. Opponents wanted for XSHIP, a space conquest strategy game. The game is played via BBS with two to ten players per game. Game turns update as fast as the players take their turns. For more information, call the Battlefield BBS in North Babylon, NY at (516) 669-0522 300/1200/2400 8-N-1. Call the Missile Silo BBS. Contestants wanted for HQ, F-29 Retaliator and many others. Tournaments to be held soon. Files, message base and (soon to come) on-line games. Bunning on Telegard 2.5 7 days a week, 24 hours a day. Located in Skokie, IL outside of Chicago. Call (708) 581-1735. Mention this notice in CGW for no-hassle access validation. HARPOON USERS UNITE! The Harpoon Users' Group (HUG) invites you to join the ranks of its members. HUG publishes the quarterly newsletter C31 which features articles on design tips, game strategy and tactics, weapons platform information, Harpoon product development and much more. HUG also operates the Harpoon Scenario Warehouse BBS where members have access to hundreds of user-created Harpoon scenarios. Our BBS can be reached at (718) 746-7466. Information on joining HUG is available on the BBS or by sending a stamped, self-addressed envelope to our new address at: HUG, PO Box 5138, Bryan, TX 77805-5138. The Delphic Oracle is an all-gaming BBS. Play RPGs (ADD, GURPS), play-byemail games (Diplomacy, ASL), Empires at War (a Napoleonic on-line game) and other games on-line. Find modem game players. Gamemasters and players wanted. Simi Valley, California (805) 582-9004 [2400 8-N-1] Free access. The Imperium BBS is looking for modem gamers like you! Tournaments are run for Knights of the Sky, Command HQ, The Perfect General and Global Conquest (just to name a few!). We have online games, message base and 3 gigs of files, too. Call one of our three nodes in Middleton, NJ at either: 1200/2400 (908) 706-0342: 9600 v.32 (908) 706-0305; HST Dual Standard 38.4 (908) 706-0321. The World of Windows is looking for some great game players like you! Try you skill and compete for monthly prizes. Sports: Drag racing excitement at The Motor City Raceway, a fishing tournament at The Freshwater Fishery, play in the Tournament Golf game or even pick your favorite NFL team and play some Pro-Bowl Football. In RPGs there is the post-apocalyptic horrors in The Land of Devastation, warriors collide in The Pit, explore SinBaul's Dungeon or conquer the galaxy during Trade Wurs 2002. For Strategy games, try our ChessMagic chess tournament, deluxe versions of Scrabble and Blackjack or solve a murder at the Who-Dun-It Hotel Modem settings are 8-N-1, 300-38400. There is free access and thousands of Windows games to download for off-line enjoyment. Call today at (305) 751-3117. The Electronic Estates BBS in Oak Lawn, IL invites you to join their Tradewar 2002 game. Fly your spaceship, battle the Ferrengi and other traders. Download TWRULES.ZIP before starting. Once you start, you may not restart for 4 months. Only 150 players maximum per game. Call (708) 424-6136. Space Station Aragon welcomes all adventure gamers to call (206) 277-5489 in Bellevue, WA. This unique board features free downloads of the latest demos from many major software companies and text files on subjects like Star Trek and Star Wars. Take part in our forums to discuss and get hints on the latest games. Take a break and play one of our adventure doors. Sysops Ilibard and Tiern. Dune BBS is seeking modem gamers like you! Modem warrior message area and on-line games. Running on remote access 1.1+. Operates 24 hours/day, 7 days/week. Located in the Milwaukee, WI area: (414) 571-0584 at 2400 14.4k; 8,N,1. Do you play Spaceward Ho!? Are you tired of beating 19 smart computer players in a small galaxy? Want a real challenge? Try fighting the most deadly, devious, dastardly, dangerous, diabolical, couble-crossing dealers of death and destruction this side of Deneb. In other words, against players just like you. Join the Ho! Down BBS for national multi-player games of Spaceward Ho!Call with your modem set at 8-N-1. We support 300 14400 baud rates at (206) 577-8868. Mention this notice in CGW and get one month of full access (up at a $10 value) for free. C'mon and test your metal!\" The Elfspire Tome is a fantasy role-playing GM resource bulletin board featuring role-playing cchos, on-line games, fantasy clip art and much more. Baud rates between 1200 9600, call (415) 595-2387. The Mac Commonwealth BBS is metro New Orleans, LA is sponsored by the National Home & School Mac User Group, a nonprofit organization promoting leisure and learning on the Mac. Our multi-line system features over 1 gigabyte of downloadable files, with emphasis on games and educational material. On-line magazines. Usenet newsgroups, OneNetTM conferences and Internet e-mail. Support file sections for over 60 commercial games! First Class graphic user interface. All lines support 1200 v.32bis 14,400 access. For information on BBS and group activities, send inquiries to NHSMUG, P.O.Box 640641, Kenner, LA 70064. BBS line 1: (504) 837-7984. The Gaming Connection BBS in Everett, WA specializes in connection modemto-modem players. Give it a call at (206) 742-4044, 24 hours a day. Join a Gaming Ladder and make new friends to challenge. Empire Deluxe and Harpoon scenarios, plus access to everying (including over 5,000 files) available on your first call! The PC Powerhouse BBS challenges you to join in the fun. Great on-line games include Tradewars 2002. Blackjack, The Pit, Sink 'em, Battleship and more. Over 6,000 files to download including all the shareware games from Apogee and EPIC MegaGames. 300 14400 baud, call (703) 348-1423 in Lexington, Virginia. Conventions Adventure GameFest '93 will be held May 21-23 in the Portland, Oregon area. Board, computer and miniature gaming of all genres, both tournament and open gaming, will be featured. There will be door and event prizes, a games auction and a miniatures painting contest. Pre-registration is $15 for 3 days, $12 for 2 days or $7 for 1 day. To be held at the Oregon Convention Center, 777 MLK Jr. Blvd. (Union Avenue), Portland, OR, Contact: Adventure Games Northwest, Inc., 6517 NE Alberta, Portland OR 97218; 503-282-6856 or 206-574-GAME. The Gen Con Game Fair will be held August 19-22, 1993 at the MECCA Center in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Meet some of your favorite editors from Computer Gaming World magazine, live and in person at their exhibitor booth! For more information, write to Gen Con Game Fair, PO Box 756, Lake Geneva, WI 53147 or call (414) 248-3625. Origins '93 will be held July 1-4, 1993 at the Tarrant County Convention Center in Fort Worth, Texas. For more information, write or call: Gemco, PO Box 609, Randallstown, MD 21133; (410) 298-3135. By Area Code Seeking opponents for Global Conquest. Please call Steffen H. in Wilton, CT at H-(203) 762-0541. Local opponents sought for The Perfect General, Command HQ, Empire Deluxe and others in the Seattle-to-Arlington area of Washington state. Call voice at (206) 252-4838 and ask for Leonard Coyle. The 24-hour modem number is (206) 742-4044. New York City gamer seeks opponents for The Perfect General. Please call Scan at H-(212) 661-2330. Looking for opponnets in modem gaming: Perfect General (with the WWII disk), and F-15 III. Call any time, leave a message if not home or ask for Jerry. H-(315) 622-2204. Opponents wanted for SVGA Air Warrior. Call Mark from Bryan-College Station, TX at H-(409) 764-9509. Seeking local opponents in the Pittsburgh area to play The Perfect General Conquered Kingdoms or Command HQ. Please call Jim K. at H-(412) 884-7197. San Francisco area gamer seeks modem opponent for Air Warrior. H-(510) 525-0930. I am seeking opponents to play any of the V for Victory battle sets and/or The Perfect General. I live near the Pentagon (North Virginia/DC: arca codes 703, 301 and 202). Call me, Robert Merrick, at H-(703) 243-3598 or send me E-mail on GEnie at [R.Merrick]. Secking local opponents in the Charlotte, NC area to play The Perfect General. Knights of the Sky or other strategy/flight sim games by modem. Contact George \"Bubba Miller at H-(704) 567-9718. Sceking opponents for professional football simulation, Tom Landry Strategy Football in the Hawaii area only. Contact me at H-(808) 423-9487. Sergeant \"Shifty\" Pierre challenges you to the battle \"In The Middle Again» from The Perfect General. Leave public message on Electric Estates BBS (815) 886-0109. I live in Chicago, IL. Cannon fodder welcomed! New Jersey player looking for (preferably) local opponents in 688 Arrack Sub, Knights of the Sky or F-16 Combat Pilot. Currently only can support 1200bps play, however, Will upgrade to 2400bps or more if there are worthy opponents out there! Please call Gordon at H (908) 225-5362 or E-mail on Prodigy at [RWMMIOA). Care to Juke? F-15 SE III or Falcon 3.0 opponents wanted. Local calls only. Call \"Q\" at H-1916) 339-1704. cow June 1993 Page 125 "


"OS YDPUPTTK All Code Leads to Rome 2. Impressions Caesar By Allen L. Greenberg peaceful years, and requires the player to rule such a province. Given some limited cash, the amount of which depends on the level of difficulty selected, players must begin to esYon need to allocate more Plabs lo fine prevention Yaesar offers players a chance to become to resist comparing a Roman city with a moda respected leader in ancient Rome — ern one, it is also difficult to evaluate Caesar the civilization which formed the basis without also drawing comparisons to Maxis for our modern western society. Just as a Software's Sim City. At first glance, the simimodern city contains a startling contrast of larities between the two games are more strikremarkable accomplishments and societal ing than their differences, and the newer game discrimination, so did a city of ancient Rome could easily be mistaken as a sequel for the contain a similar variety of achievements and older favorite. However, for those who eninjustices. Coincidentally, just as it is difficult joyed Sim City, yet wished for more buttons to push, knobs to adjust and wires to reroute, Caesar will provide all of these things and quite a bit more. Caesar is a major strategy exercise. Indeed, as one minor empire official was said to have remarked, \"If you can't start an imperfect, flourishing society here, then brother, you can't start an imperfect, flourishing society.» ROME WASNT BUILT IN A DAY HOW LONG WILL IT TAKE YOU? Impressions KA ARE E IFf 4432 tablish order. The major portion of the job involves setting up that province's capital city wherein Sim City veterans will feel most at home. However, matters such as inter-city trade, connections with the empire, and defense against barbarians, are all handled outside the city's protective walls. Players who successfully govern a province are rewarded with a more difficult area to supervise, along with a more restrictive budget. Waiting at the end of this line of provincial governorships is the title of «Emperor\" and the presumed ability to then exploit other provincial rulers. Others may find themselves figuratively exiled to Gaul like Pontius Pilate. Taking place in rapid-motion real-time, Caesar uses an intuitive point-and-click interface. Construction is accomplished by selecting an icon representing a structure, and then placing that structure on an overhead view of EFG EOA 2 IT OT ICT 6 259 Playing Pontius Pilate TITLE: Caesar SYSTEMS: Amiga, IBM (386SX+ recommended) GRAPHICS IBM: VGA PRICE: $59.95 PROTECTION: None DESIGNER: David Lester PUBLISHER: Impressions Farmington, CT (203) 676-9002 Rome, at the time of the birth of Christ, was enjoying its success as an unchallenged, rapidly expanding empire. Opportunities to expand Roman rule to unsettled provinces were plentiful. Caesar takes place during those Page 126 Computer Gaming World "


"OND 200 the terrain. Unfortunately, players must often the city's slums and will fail to enjoy the same success may be the most elusive goal in Caesar. switch to another menu of icons in order to increase in value as will other housing. DisThe empire demands an annual tribute which remove unwanted objects. An ever-present gruntled factory workers are also more prone increases with each payment. Rulers may \"bulldozer\" function, such as that available in to violence, and so extra police and religious draw a salary for their efforts and then donate Sim City, would have been highly appreciinfluence should be close at hand to control their savings to the city when it is needed. ated. this group of unhappy campers. Aspiring leaders who are unable to pay off the There are many structures from which to Adding to the city's resources are the Plebe empire after several years may finally be forced select and over 40 icons are required to cover ians, or \"Plebs.\" Not considered citizens of the to donate their heads to the Roman hierarchy. all of them. The icons are separated into four empire, these unfortunates have been drafted sub-menus, so as not to appear too confusing into public service and must therefore be In addition to these icons, players will also be given proper care. The Plebeians, who around dealing with lists of buildings, industries, barthis time in history were demanding a voice barians, soldiers and more. Initially, this in government, are responsible for such munseems a burdensome amount of information danc tasks as construction, maintenance and through which to plow. However, once Caefire prevention. They are also available to sar is up and running, most players will be serve as soldiers, although their limited qualidelighted with the degree to which the small fications clearly mark them as the \"Gomer pieces come together as a well-orchestrated Pyles\" of the Roman army. whole. The analogy between a city of ancient Rome p Housing a and one of modern times breaks down, of course, at the capital's boarders. Thirteen difLend Me Your Ears ferent races of barbarians wander the provPlayers with an AdLibor SoundBlastercomince, all of whom await the opportunity for a patible sound board will be treated to isolated, most unfriendly visit. Soldiers, organized into though frequent, sounds of the city. Water cohorts, must be given instructions for their flows, factories hammer, and the population patrol as well as how to respond to approachconverses loudly. A somewhat repetitive muing barbarians. Any army which engages an sic score is also available. The graphics are enemy must also be given strategic instrucquite pleasing, and include enough animation tions for each round of battle. Impressions to make the city scem lively. The number and EF ALLA 2 IT CT indicates that players will soon be able to variety of buildings which appear in the city, What Did The Romans mount a miniature-based, fully realized battle however, is so great that players may easily howeve with their forthcoming Cohort 2, an indeEver Do For Us? become confused as to each one's identity. pendent strategy game which will interlock Regulating the flood of information and Within the capital city, players must estabwith Caesar: minutiae in Caesar is its thorough, 135 page lish and maintain a system of roads, protective Should the barbarians beat at the city's gare, instruction manual. A separate tutorial is also walls and plumbing. Collected under the a well-fed militia is vital if the city is to be included which painstakingly guides the beheading \"infrastructure,\" these represent the protected; otherwise, buildings will quickly ginner through such subtleties as the differcity's blood and circulatory system. Roman begin to crumble. Investing heavily in the ence between right and left mouse-clicking. populations were dependent on an extensive armed forces is both an effective and popular There is also an admirable amount of on-line water system and were very fond of their way of strengthening the city against disaster. help in the form of text-windows which debaths. Other such vital structures include solDrafting citizens is less costly, though far less scribe the function of each of the game's many dier barracks and prefectures, towers, wells popular with the population. In any case, the icons. While Caesaris indeed a major project, and fountains. A very important facility, also barbarian threat is one which will plague playall aspects of the game are clearly explained included here in several varieties, are the pubers throughout their career in Caesar. somewhere in the game's packaging. In addilic forums which act as centers for governtion, Impressions has also been very active on ment and information. Overlying this Quality of leadership is rated at the forum various bulletin boards (including Cominfrastructure, the government is responsible in four categories: Peace, Culture, Prosperity for providing housing, industry, amenities, and Empire. However, money speaks far puServe, GEnie and Prodigy) and the releschools and major centers of entertainment. phone, offering players technical and strategic more eloquently than any forum member, advice. Without enough of these, a region of romanand rulers, through taxation, must show a tic Romans may soon become a roost profit cach year. This essential ingredient for Forum or Against Him of rowdy rioters. The goal is not simply to flood the Early on, many players may find Romans with buildings and instituthemselves leaping onto their CPUs, tions. Quality housing and jobs are fiddle in hand, while their province vital to success in Caesar, and this calls collapses in flames beneath them. With for some careful planning. Eight diftime and effort, however, Caesar proferent types of factories may be convides that rare quality in strategy gamstructed, depending on the economic ing — an experience whose rewards advisor's research. These workshops prove equal to its challenges. While the require a nearby industrial center to casual gamer may view the program as supply raw material, as well as a mara meal with one too many courses, ket to sell their products. All of these Caesar goes far beyond its Sim-City centers also require nearby housing origins and provides the serious player for workers. Unfortunately, these with a real lion's feast. Hail, Caesar! nearby houses are destined to become R t 2 * $ 5110 CGW June 1993 Page 127 "


"G. Dee) SHOOTOUT AT THE MILKY WAY CORRAL A Review of New World's Spaceward HO! . by Martin E. Cirulis .. only construct Fighters, Scouts, Colonizers, or Defensive Satellites, but with play came the realization that the tech-level angle gave me an incredible variety of choices. Yes, the only real combat ship is the Fighter, bur within that class I could design anything from a cheap, fast gunboat to a lumbering battleship as long as I kept up the research. The longer the game goes, the more design choices one is given; and of course the ship graphics are entertaining as all heck. I have seen friends pour all their empire's money into research, not because they needed the tech advantage, but just because they were dying to see what the next tech-level fighters would look like. your engines thunder through the last few breros, and ships acknowledge their moveseconds of touchdown burn. You crack ment orders with a shout of \"Hyaa!\" or 1 the cockpit and take a deep breath of an \"Whoa.\" A melancholy cowboy even drawls alien world, the exotic air is still thick with the \"Shucks!\" when a player's world is destroyed. ning metal from your In keeping with the designer's philosophy, recent victory. Somewhere a cow moos. combat is simple and straightforward. It conThis is the wide and woolly universe of sists of a number of automatic combat rounds Spaceward Ho! from New World Computin which cach surviving ship gets one shot. ing, a space exploration and exploitation The higher tech the weapons, the bigger strategy game with a decidedly Old West chunk of ship that can get wiped away: the theme. Apart from the novelty of its chrome, higher the shield rech, the smaller the chunk this game deserves a closer look for three that is wiped away. Worlds are destroyed in reasons: it's designed to be played by up to 20 the same way, except that it is chunks of human or computer players; it can be played population that are lost, and the entire planer on either one computer or a network and has only gets one shot per round. The winner is a version specifically for use with Windows; the last one standing. There are no retreats. and, in this reviewer's humble opinion, it is the Holy Grail of strategic computer games \"Thar's Metals in them the entertaining, introductory strategy thar Planets!\" game. The only resource in HO! is metal, and its HO! is about exploring alien worlds, only purpose is the building of ships. Unless spreading colonies, and pummeling those one wants to feel like Custer in a space-suit, sheep men from the system over yonder. The one shouldn't run out of metal. The only way entire game, in both DOS and Windows verto acquire metal is to form a colony on a sions, is driven by a point-click-drag mouse planet and then mine the heck out of it. There interface that's both highly intuitive and are no points for environmentalism in this highly graphic. There's nary a tedious step in game, though putting too much money into the game. This game is meant to be learned mining is less efficient than spreading it while playing. As the manual states in the around to terraforming and shipbuilding, Ultra-Quick Ho! Instructions: « Play with the These are the only three activities than can bar charts to adjust spending. Click on the occur on a world. messages in the map to make them go away. The initial size of the galaxy one chooses Drag from one star to the other to move ships. S. and the number of players involved in the Experiment. Conquer the Galaxy.\" That's game will determine whether metals are plenpretty much all one needs to know in order tiful or scarce, and no matter what, they will to get started always get scarcer as the game goes on. Keep In keeping with the galactic cowboy theme, this in mind when creating a game a the graphics and sounds immerse the player crowded galaxy is a lean and hungry galaxy. in a Gunsmoke-gone-mad universe. Some As to the ships one can build, there are only fighter ships bear slingshots or have dog's four basic types but each has a seemingly head nose cones. All the player's planets have endless supply of shuffle-card graphics based white cowboy hats to mark them, while enon one's tech-level. My initial feeling was emy worlds wear sinister bandannas or somdisappointment when I learned that I could TOT wwwe CUSPUTNO TITLE: SYSTEM: GRAPHICS: PRICE: PROTECTION: DESIGNERS: PUBLISHER: Spaceward Ho! IBM (DOS & Windows versions) SVGA, VGA, EGA, Hercules Mono $59.95 None Joe Williams and Peter Commons New World Computing Hollywood, CA (800) 325-8898 Page 128 Computer Gaming World "


"VELIKIYE LUKIM MARKET GARDEN UTAH BEACH VE FOR VICTORY RDEN UV  UTAH BEACH VELIKIYE LUKI ELUKI MARKET ARKET GARDEN FOR VICTORY FOR VICTORY FOR VICTORY WARGAMING WITHOUT COMPROMISE Strategy Plus Game of the Year V FOR VICTORY: UTAH BEACH THREE-SIXTY PACIFIC 2105 S. BASCOM AVENUE CAMPBELL, CA 95008 408-879-9144 AVAILABLE AT BABBAGES. COMPUTER CITY. COMP USA, EGGHEAD SOFTWARE, THREE-SIXTY DIRECT SALES: 800-653-1360 IN THE U.S. 800-697-2360 IN CANADA ELECTRONICS BOUTIQUE, WALDENSOFTWARE AND OTHER FINE SOFTWARE RETAILERS, Circle Reader Service #30 "


"Deview Tae Opions Spaceward Hot Susan in Suelin 250 Ships Galaxy Windo M Spaceward Htet Susan in Suelin 2500 at Prupus 2590 You the basis! MN en det Coroa Touc Voeta «Whaddya mean they goal, and we have sacrificed realism for fun One can finish in the time it takes to play an got Repeater Rifles?!» everywhere we could.\" average game of Monopoly. I have been a wargamer for most of my years In any kind of warfare, the technology level and a big fan of Spaceploitation computer The Big Round-Up of one's various weapon systems is at least as games since the glory days of the C-64, and I Even a game as well made as Spaceward HO! important as the number of those weapons (as found myself nowhere near as disappointed has some minor drawbacks, the largest being a certain snappy dressing Persian Gulf Dictaby the simplicity of this game as I thought I the way some games can grind down due to tor recently discovered). This law is reflected might be. In fact, the only thing the I have lack of metal. I think this Haw is pretty much heavily in HO! and the price for ignoring it is difficulty with is that the turns are over so intrinsic to the design, but most times there usually severe. Tech-levels are achieved by quickly. The urge to ponder each and every is a smart player who has stored away enough investing an empire's finances into research. little planet and ship is almost overpowering raw metal to administer the coup de grace to Of the five ship characteristics, weapons and when one first plays this game, but one soon most of his or her opponents. One should realizes that it's all being handled and it is sufficient to just get along with enjoying the game. Even at the maximum size and complexity of an empire, an average turn shouldn't take more than five minutes at the outside. This is \"beer and pretzels\" gaming at its finest. «The gang's all here!\" Though this game can be played quite well as a single player game, its real strength and beauty lies in its connectivity. I have been running it on a Windows for WorkGroups shields are the most important ones to keep network and it plays like a charm. I can only keep this in mind during any long, drawn out up with the Jones' (though the other three assume it runs as well in other network envi fights with other players. It is very frustrating have some important and sometimes very subtle effects on combat and exploration). to have a great fight for an hour or so and then ronments. Organizing a multi-terminal game Four fighters can defeat almost 20 fighters is quick and easy, and the turns compile very realize one is stranded because there isn't quickly on 386 machines. This game's develenough metal to build a new colony ship. that are unfortunate enough to be three techopmental history on the Mac shows in its This can even happen to experienced players levels behind in guns and defense. I've seen it smooth functioning in an icon-driven, multiif they get caught in the middle of the map. happen; it's not a pretty sight. Luckily the user environment. New World has taken game supplies a player comparison chart that Also, considering this attrition factor, there allows one to see graphically how far ahead or great pains to make computer players blend should have been a command to force the in with their human counterparts so that a behind the pack a player is. computer to declare a winner based on holdlarge game in the workplace becomes a game Further on the subject of technology, here ings and technology. As it is now, a player has of guessing who is an artificial intelligence to wipe out everybody else in order to win and is an important tip for any novice cowpokes and who is the real McCoy. The computer out there that the advice section of the manual end the game, which rarely happens in larger players take on ordinary first names, will doesn't stress quite enough: A fast ship is a games. Space II Sesalniy la 4630 happy ship! You can embroider that one into The lack of modem support is odd and your chaps, little buckaroos. slightly bothersome in a game that stresses a \"We don' need multi-player environment. Perhaps this oversight can be corrected in later versions. A no steenking Grognards!» mythical upgrade might also give a player a This game, while fast, furious and amusing, couple more combat options; I know it would is not a paragon of subtlety and detail. The be awfully nice to screen those valuable colprimary objective here is for a number of ony ships or retreat from combat altogether people to have a laugh and be able to play a sometimes. But perhaps this is the wargamer Sow This Typs Femme OK game out in an hour or two. (This assumes in me asking for unneeded complexity. every player has their own terminal. Doubling or tripling up players on a single comApart from this, HO! does what it sets out puter slows things down correspondingly, as name their ships using human names from to do and makes no apologies. In these days they play musical chairs). If one feels that in previous games, and will adopt their own of dubious marketing techniques for software order to conquer the stars one needs to comstrategies. This is a game that can give Bill it is refreshing to have a product that delivers mand the loading and unloading of every can Gates nightmares; a 20 player game of HO! exactly what the box advertises. Here is a of Zippy rocket fuel and carry every colonist means an entire Microsoft team gets nothing game that is simple to learn and difficult to master. The entertaining chrome and light screaming and kicking in their individual done on a Friday afternoon. feel of this product draws in many people who travel bags, such a gamer should probably Even with multiple players on a single madon't usually enjoy strategic computer games. avoid H!. chine it is enjoyable, however. In fact, HO! This alone makes it unique in the realm of Tactics here are superficially simple. Tech makes a great companion game whenever Spaceploitation games and certainly worth its is good. Numbers are very good. Protecting one is playing one of those boardgames that space on a hard drive for a long, long time. worlds is good. Achieving these things has has long, complicated turns with a bunch of been kept purposely quick and abstract in friends. Just set up HO! on the old comp in Now, if you'll excuse me, I got a wild ship order to speed up play. To quote again from the corner and cveryone can do their turns to catch and a galaxy full o' hombres to tamc. the documentation: \"Fun is our number one while waiting for action ar the kitchen table. CGW ina Class Fly Devlet Cost 91.62 Cast $174KS Metal Cast 1.154 Res 18 DO M 16 Cool Weapon 15 Page 130 Computer Gaming World "


"MICHAEL WINTERBAUER ILLUSTRATION DESIGN Ninja Taro Might and Magic 3. RAPON PISZLAC al Cru 87 Ulo Lazer SA SOCKS Wing Commander 1220 LYNDON STREET #22 SOUTH PASADENA, CA 91030 Spaceward Ho When you need the finest in computer game illustration, call Michael Winterbauer. Partial client list includes: New World Computing, American Sammy, JVC, Taito, Bandai America, CSG Imagesoft. The Software Toolworks, and Atlus. TELEPHONE 818 799-4998 FAX 818 441-3086 "


"( @traile a General Grog Nard Woos Victory Successful Strategy in Spaceward Ho! ( C ir! This Command Center isn't Spartan, it's Nouveau Francais!\" announced General Grog Nard. \"Oui Oui.\" announced his aid, Bernaise. \"But you are not here to admire my etchings ... I don't think. You are here to learn the secrets of mastering Spaceward Ho!, no?\" \"Ho! know? Yes.\" says I. Grog Nard grinned and leaned back. «I think of Victory as the rich merchant's daughter, and myself as the young officer with overdue gambling debts: she must be courted. You will find your way of courting Victory, but here are three secrers I employ to winning her hand: spend lavishly on technology, be coy in early colonizing, and be chintzy with metal.\" Tech, Always More Tech! \"To fight efficiently you must have technology superior to your enemies. Of course, you may win a desperate engagement here or there without it, but, like good health and French wine, there is really no substitute. 1-10 Spacewadel Seni Select Ile Options Tips Galaxy Window Whisper osalli Developers Cast S131,762 Predectes cost 21,817 Urtel Cost Range: 13 S Weapons. sling 1 by Roger-Tzu White \"This National Will, he is a good general, one or two other worlds profitable, to rerrano?\" chimed in Bernaise. form this gem.\" \"I recommend that technology never be any \"Why, monsieur?\" interrupted Bernaise. less than the longest bar on your budget chart, \"Because,\" the general patiently explained, and over half your spending most of the time. \"Your earliest goal must be to build a technoThe only time to deviate is when getting your logical lead over your neighbors and a modest, first colony ship built. Colonies are importwo to three world economic base. Ideally, tant, and to make them you need a colony you can do this with a small pack of scours ship.\" and a single colony ship, all at technology level two or three. The temptation is strong, bur don't build any more ships than you Maintaining Colonies absolutely need.\" \"Colonies provide you with the good things in life: metal, money and bases. But, Mon Dieu, they are expensive at the start! It's important to keep up the appearance of great growth, but, regrettably, you must not live beyond your means. Think of each new colony as a mistress. Start with one that is easy to develop one with a temperature in the 100-140 degree range. As long as it is colonizable, don't worry about how favorable the gravity is on this first world; gravity doesn't Scrap This Type Tenne affect how fast a world can become profitable—temperature determines that.\" The general smiled and continued, «Lavish money on this charming child-world. Make \"Oui, mon general, but why not build a it grow quickly so it will cease to burden you fleet to extend your great glory to all the quickly. Start another colony only when this stars?\" first child is moving toward self sufficiency. \"Don't get saucy with me, Bernaise! You Your second colony can be either another don't build Le Grande Armada early because attractive colony world or a metal world. If it's another drain on your re it's another drain on your resources — reit's a metal world, move in, mine it quickly, sources that need to be spent on colonies and and then move out. In the early game be quick technology, technology, technology! An early to abandon colonies. Extract what you desire fleet will soon be a puny fleet. It will use up from them and leave without a second precious metal, and it will become obsolete thought. before it leaves the design table. The great strategist pondered for a moIf an opponent launches a determined asment. \"Under some circumstances, your early sault, or occupies a key world, build enough exploration will uncover a world like this: fleet to foil him or her. Other than responding .95G, 350 temperature and 20,000 metal. to threat, build only enough fleet to protect The attractive gravity means this will be a your colony ships and open worlds for them. great world for you some day, but the hostile Move around enemy strong points rather temperature means it will take a long time to than through them. The galaxy is a big place. develop. In the early years, treat this world as just another metal world: mine it, then move \"But when, mon general?\" asked Bernaise. out. Come back later, after you have turned \"The middle phase is the time to build large perts eta Spaceward Susan in Solin 2580 Help um hita LE Untentunately PE lloc \"It is so.\" chimed in Bernaise. \"Technology has a hidden benefit as well as the obvious ones: your planet-based technologies improve immediately upon reaching a new tech level: no ship redesigning or upgrading is necessary. When a half million people fight with national will and superior technology, no puny half-dozen-ship fleet can overcome them!\" Page 132 Computer Gaming World "


"cer. Summary of battle at Owuitdin 2840. TT PR Round 2 TI Spaceward Hol Susan in Secl le 2580 Help Loc 22 Soovides Summary of the at Propus in 2550 fleets, to mine extensively, and to colonize start making 7th to 9th level fighters. When large fleet or a mature world so large and worlds you passed up in the early years. This the metal runs out, the average technology of advanced that your fleet is destroyed. Even if is the time to have two or three colony ships a silicon opponent fleet skyrockets, but the you have the reserves to replace this fleer, you active and an armada of fighters for each to number of ships in the flect declines. And have given thousands and thousands of units clear the way. As critical as the beginning era once the metal runs out, recovering from a of scarce meral to one of your opponents. This is, the middle phase is just as critical. The large fleet loss becomes very difficult. metal will come back against you as a high middle game is when you establish how much The general, pointing to a flickering com technology fleer hammering your worlds. metal you will have for the end game and how puter screen, continued Bernaise's education. large an income base you will have to keep \"The end game has three distinct characHuman versus Silicon opponents pushing your technology. There will be manyteristics: First, there is no free metalleff If you \"I understand this game can be played by large fleets cruising the galaxy in the middle want more metal, you must scrap your own many people, commented the younger offigame. Your computer opponents will show ships or destroy an enemy fleet over a world up on your planetary doorsteps with armadas of six to twelve fighters with fiveto sevenyou either own or will take at the end of the you either own or will take at the end of the \"Many people? True indeed! This is one of battle. In the end game metal is power. How level technology. You need to either kill these much metal you own completely determines the finest games this year for many people fleets outright or stay out of their way by play! To have a game that is so easily played how large a fleet you can muster. marooning them.\" yet supports such subtle tactics is a most \"Second,\" he elucidated, \"worlds lump into Bernaise' eyes widened, \"How do you mapleasurable breakthrough. three categories: mature-friendly, dead and roon an armada?\" \"The designers have cast off the shackles of mature-enemy. The mature enemy worlds accommodating NetBIOS and modems. Spaceward Hot Susan in Suet in 2040 IELA sport 200,000 or more people armed with They have designed purely for Windows and high technology weapons. Even though they use a shared file on a network drive as the have no ships around them, they are safe from communications medium. The result is a your fleets unless you attack with a dozen or game that's surprisingly easy to start, accomso technologically superior fighters. Sending modates perhaps ten players without getting small scouting expeditions becomes expensive bogged down (I've faced as many as five at one in the end game. The scouts will either live to time), and does an excellent job of camouflagreport a dead world or dic reporting an ening the human-computer difference. It's an emy-occupied world and leave their metal to excellent multiplayer game. the occupier.\" Skip I«Third,\" pontificated the officer, «it takes forever to jump technology levels, and even longer to design a ship that takes advantage of \"Simple. Keep colony ships away from it. the new technology once you've acquired ir. The enemy will jump as deep as his or her For instance, I often find myself using the first technology allows. If such an armada jumps third of my budger for building loch level deep into your territory and you can identify ships; the second third devored to finishing where it came from, take that launching my first 12th level fighter; and the remaining world and hold it. If a colony ship can't follow third devoted to researching 13th level techthe armada, the enemy ships will sit harmnology. I am building 10th level ships simply lessly until you can bring up a more powerful because I don't have enough money to spend fleet to 'salvage' its metal.\" to finish the 12th level in time to fight the battles that need to be fought. Once the first A slight pause accentuated the import of the 12th level comes on line, I cut off 10th level «In fact,\" asserted the general, \"the game's previous advice. Then, the general continued production immediately, build 12th level major weakness is that with many players, the lecture. \"To win the middle game, you ships, and start designing the 13th level ships there will be early losers, and these people will must have a technological edge. To finance my technology can finally support. If my be looking for something else to do. But there the technology you need profitable worlds, meral needs are acute, I stop fighting, scrap is a solution. One of the virtues of Windows but the more colonies you have, the more the 10th level fleet and reconstitute the metal is that it can multi-task, so start a second game money and metal it takes to ring them with as 12-level ships. of Spaceward Ho! All the players can enter defensive ships. The balancing of these necesthis second game, but those that haven't lost The general winked conspiratorially and sities is a most delicate task. So, when in continued, \"If you have the metal and techoch in the first game can invoke robot play in the doubt, spend on technology. A technology lead will accomplish the same defensive role nology to make one 'hammer' cet for the end second game and concentrate on playing in game, you will win. If not ... stalemate is not as launching satellites, but without using metthe first game. As people fall out of competial or extra money for equipping each planet. tion in the first game, they can take over their an uncommon ending.\" \"What's a hammer fleet?\" queried Bernaise. position in the second and keep playing there. Technology saves metal, and you need to be If a person is a fast mover, he or she can play chintzy with your metal in the middle phase \"A fleet so large and technologically adin both games.\" if you are to be a leader in the end.\" vanced that it can hammer mature worlds \"Thank you, General Nard.\" into submission without the loss of a ship. The End Is Near This fleet then moves from world to world «Any time, mon frere, and remember—\" followed by a colony ship. Use this flcer to \"Your etchings? I'm not sure when I'll have Bernaise could contain his curiosity, no reduce and colonize plancts. The more mathe time,» longer. \"When does the end game begin?\" he ture planets you control, the more income asked. «No, No!\" you will have to devote to technology and the \"The end game begins when metal runs out. faster your technology will progress. The one «If I may, mon General, remember: TechMost of the galaxy's metal will be in ships or thing you want to avoid above all is breaking nology, toujours technology.\" treasuries about the time computer players your hammer — either by facing an opposing \"Thank you, Bernaise.\" Cow HA Congratulations! You won the battlet 1 ng 0 You to lawo be June 1993 Page 133 "


"çmeak preveu TIME TAKE PROD NO. SCENE Playing the Process Q O Behind the screens with Jim Dunnigan's Victory at Sea by Alan Eumich Tn early February, I sat in on meetings that \"primary data digger\" for the game), they put sembled fighters packed in crates. Lectures on the press rarely gets to be a part of. Prothree months of research into a multi-page Japanese merchant shipping losses and their Lduction meetings for games are generally information package that the programmers of submarine supply system emphasized some of not very exciting and, except for obtaining Three-Sixty were to work their magic on. the gaming issues to be solved. Once all of the \"rumors of wars,\" not very newsworthy. Unfortunately, programming a computer issues were on the table, it was time for everyHowever, when the subject is a particularly came from what is essentially a boardgame one to put their heads together and try to find ambitious wargame design like Three-Sixty's design is not exactly a snap. There are things as many solutions and elegant implementaVictory at Sea, and when one of the personalithat are casily done (and easily corrected when tions as possible. ties involved is the dean of board wargaming done wrong) in a boardgame and celebrated military design that are a nightmare author, James F. Dunnigan, to program. When programthere could easily be a story. ming The Perfect General, for Such was the case during a instance, Mark Baldwin and critical stage in the developBob Rakosky of White Wolf ment of Victory at Sea. Productions told me of the many challenges they faced Defining Victory translating Bruce Williams' Victory at Sea may well be home-brew strategy the most ambitious wargame boardgame that he had project from Three-Sixty to played and evolved over date. Since the game is to be many years of playtesting. built on an entirely new Now, try to imagine proVictory at Sea design group game engine, as specified in gramming a boardgame deDunnigan's design notes, sign that doesn't even exist as the primary purpose of these a boardgame. No matter Fortunately, for every problem, the solution Jim Dunnigan, mectings was to translate \"Dean of Analytical History\" how talented the two sides was to rurn to history and use it as a baseline. Dunnigan's boardgame deare, there will be some inte With Dunnigan serving as a walking encyclosign into a computer game design. gration problems, and that's where things pedia on the subject, his quick moves to the wall map or computer screen resolved these Jim Dunnigan has designed over 120 board started getting interesting. matters and set the direction of every probwargames, most of which appeared during the lem's solution with some ease. Occasionally, 1970s. Although he is well versed in comLights, Camera, Action there would be \"game play\" element probputer technology (his latest book, a 1993 At these meetings, Jim Dunnigan was in his lems. With so much board and computer revision of The Complete Wargames Handelement. Holding court for the programming gaming talent in the room, many solutions book, shifted a great deal of its focus to comteam in the same way he does at all his lectures were suggested and \"case of use\" features deputer wargames), he is not a state-of-the art and in his guest shots on television, Dunnigan vised by the assembled crew. vised by the computer programmer the considers ita explained the entire war in the Pacific, subject spectator's sport\"). Therefore, when he deby subject. How were land-based air units Where's the Steak? signed what was to become Victory at Sea \"on transported to island bases thousands of miles spec» (putting together spread sheets, tables from where they were produced? Dunnigan Naturally, as the dialogue went back and and some rudimentary algorithms) with coexplains that \"jeep carriers\" were built on forth, additional game features were considdesigner Al Nofi (who Jim describes as the merchant ship hulls and used to ship disasered or reluctantly dropped due to various Page 134 Computer Gaming World "


"Mreunew LIITS 11 OS 11 chance of a tactical air or land combat game) have key words highlighted so that players get should show task forces from a top-down more detailed information on them, and a view. Two options were discussed, «realistic\" complete table of contents and index will and \"player enhanced» modes. In the realistic organize the approximately 100,000 words of mode, the player is glued to his flagship and text. (Dunnigan did mention that, \"four can only issue orders to other ships which books from now\" — equaling two years on those ships may or may not follow. Sighting his schedule — his publisher, Morrow, will will be restricted to whatever that ship could publish the text as a separate c.400 page sce, including enemy gun flashes at night if book.) Sadly, it does not look as though Dunthe smoke and weather are not too heavy. In nigan's on-line history book will be able to be the player enhanced mode, one can jump printed and merged at this point (word procfrom ship to ship, selecting targets and ordessing code, apparently, is not a game proconstraints. Philosophically, Jim Dunnigan nance for them and sccing the world from grammer's bailiwick). The marketing types, believes that \"The player should have access cach individual ship's perspective. With any of course, were intrigued with this whole to everything that won't blow up the game.\" luck, there will be a film replay of the battle, concept, but the hard-core wargamers will Currently, Victory at Sea is slated to run conlifting the fog of war and showing what actualso be pleased to know that they are getting tinuously at about an hour per \"tick.\" The ally happened. two Jim Dunnigan/Al Nofi products in one, scale, however, will telescope between a straFinally, fans of Gary Griesby's Pacific War a dynamically designed computer wargame tegic map (akin to that found in SSI's Pacific have not been ignored in the production of and a complete history War) and an operational or tactical game Victory at Sea. Mr. Dunnigan is a major presmargin where players have more direct command of ence on GEnie (he is the designer and organlate and concise style. the individual battles. Every ship is named izer of Genie's 100 Years War game) and has and tracked individually except for PT boats closely followed the discussions of Pacific War and Japanese DTs (anti-submarine patrol there. When discussing potential features to boats). Land units are all named at the diviadd or remove from the Victory at Sea design, sion level, although there are many indethe feedback of wargamers on GEnie was pendent brigades, regiments and even some heard loud and clear. \"Oil is popular,\" Jim Dunnigan commented berween sips of a ship and politics will be, if included, a remarkhighly caffeinated soda, «So is politics.\" What able system. will become of these and other wargamer Victory at Sea, in the campaign game, as requests in the finished product of Victory at sumes that the Japanese cannot win the war Sea remains to be seen, but one thing is in absolute terms. Basically, victory will be certain; both the designer and the programmeasured by beating the historical result. The ming team would love to put it all in, if they The crowning touch came when Project Japanese must hold on longer than they did could. Manager Rod Graves announced that the historically, and the Allies must beat the time copyrights to the moving, Richard Rogers clock and keep their casualties down. Once A Theme (and Theme Music) soundtrack from the late 1950s TV series, Japan is isolated by Allied air control and its Of course, the best design in the world isn't Victory at Sea, had lapsed and would be availgoing to matter much if it doesn't sell. So, able for the game. This soundtrack, comDunnigan met with the Marketing Departbined with the ambient video and the ment at Three-Sixty, as well. His mission was hypertext reference, is designed to add a lot of to explain in his inimitable style what Victory \"sex appeal\" to Victory at Sea, potentially at Sea was supposed to be and why it would moving the product into the broader reaches be special. During the engaging monologue of the market. which ensued, the picture became clear: Victory at Sea was to be a wargame with an Where Credit is Due on-line history book included with it. It could be just as easily sold as an on-line history book Three-Sixty certainly deserves a nod for with a complete simulation included with it. allowing us to observe their design and marFor those who have not made the connection keting meetings. Seldom does the press get to merchant shipping sunk, either the Emperor yet, Jim Dunnigan was the editor of Strategy sit in meetings concerning the difficulties of will surrender or there will be a coup in which Tactics magazine for eleven years (1969Tactics magazine for eleven years (1969design integration or the schemes of marketthe Japanese military leadership decides to 1980) during the \"glory days of board waring. Ironically, one of Jim Dunnigan's books fight to the last man (which would force the gaming. That magazine's philosophy, is pritled Dr ittle Secret Tou r Allies to conduct their \"Operation Olympic\" beginning the day Jim took over as editor, was felt I was getting for this story. All the sources plan—the invasion of the Japanese home isto be a military history magazine with a game were opened, everyone spoke freely about the lands). In the scenarios, objectives will be included which would underscore the lessons good, bad and ugly of the design and marketcovered in the main article of the issue. Victorying of a major wargame release. Having been \"weighted\" along historical values. at Sea has set out to be the modern day, witness to the 99% perspiration involved in Fans of modem and PBEM gaming could computerized equivalent of those classic is the creative process, I believe that most warfind no good news in the discussions along sues. gamers should be thankful that theirs is the that line. Implementation was described as Using a hypertext system similar to that most enjoyable part of the process—playing \"difficult\" and the chances of including such used in popular encyclopedia programs, playthe finished product. If Jim Dunnigan and features \"remote.\" The tactical game shoulders can interrupt the real-time play and call Three-Sixty can translate their ideas and ideoffer a lot, assuming it all makes it into the up relevant historical text for any point or als into program code, Victory at Sea should game. Tactical naval battles (there is little action occurring on the map. This text will be a decisive victory for every wargamer. Cow TU COME toonste epilers 0. URAR AVS <Fiew M edia June 1993 Page 135 "


"TV Survey An Annotated Listing of Pre-20th Century Wargames by M. Evan Brooks survey of games based in this period necessarily those on the \"cutting edge» today. should be aware that prices shift downward was originally published in CGW#75 It is doubtful if the computer world will ever rapidly. I (October 1990). With the large numdevelop its classics like Monopoly of the ber of new games being released annually, we boardgame genre. Those games that do tions/modifications, please send them to me felt an updated version necessary. The preachieve classic status will only be seen by in care of this magazine or via modem (on 20th century period continues to be a nenewer generations of users if the simulations GEnie, address: M.E.BROOKS; on Prodigy, glected wargaming realm, with the games that are converted into newer machine formats. HFTN43A). are published cmphasizing a few specific peThus, surveys such as this are updated and riods. But there are large periods of history revised so that the user may have some indiLEGEND (NA = Data not available) which have yet to be touched: the Peloponcation of what is/was available. It should be LINE 1 — Title nesian Wars, the Thirty Years War (1618noted that the ratings are an individual prefLINE 2 Machine Format: (At)ari/(C)ommo1648), Byzantine warfare, and the \"Age of erence, and do not necessarily reflect the dore/(Ap)ple II/(T)RS-80/II(GS)/(Am)iga/(ST)/ Sail\" for example. opinions of the publisher of this magazine. (M)acintosh (1)BM; Even in the short time since the first appearRatings deteriorate over the years, since the CGW Articles: Issue #'s in which game was ance of this list, the character of the computer \"half-life\" of a computer game can often be \"holic of a como mentioned (bold print refers to major article); market has change dramatically. The gaming measured in months. Company/Designer/Date of Publication/Price industry is no longer shifting as rapidly among different computer types as it once (O/P = Out of Print) Please note platform availability; a five-star Rating: was. During the 8-bit era. games bad to be game on an Atari 800 that is several years old = Good use as a magnet holder produced for different machine types, each of is not of the same sophistication as a new = Avoid which was completely incompatible with its product designed for an SVGA PC 486-33. = Marginal competitors. Today, the MS-DOS machine However, it has been given its rating for what = Average to Good has gained a virtual domination of the marit did, to a lesser extent what it still does, and = Very Good Highly Recommended ket, but incompatibilities within the MSperhaps for the place it holds in this reviewer's DOS market itself are becoming more varied heart and memory. Of course, the designers N-R = Not Rated than the 8-bit market ever was. Dos 5.0 and look askance at these ratings, and often deluge LINE 3 — Difficulty Level: (Beg)inner/(Int)ermediate/(Adv)anced expanded memory have become necessities; the magazine with voluminous complaints. Emphasis: CGA graphics are extinct, and newer games Again, these are intrinsically subjective, and a (Land)/(Nav)al/(Air)/(Dip)lomatic/(Economic require SVGA graphics cards; clock speeds discriminating reader should be able to temLevel of Command: (Tactical/Operational/ below 33 MHz are becoming unsupported, per the ratings with this writer's normal re(Sur)ategic and it is likely that the machine of the near views in order to ascertain the inherent biases. # of Players (M = modem plav) future may be the 486-66. The games themIn all candor, I have intentionally taken steps Tactical: man-to-man up to company level selves are growing ever larger, and it is not to reduce the ratings of older games; the (turns represent seconds to hours) unusual to have a game with ten high-density computer market's \"flavor of the week\" simOperational: battalion-level to division-level (turns represent hours to weeks) disks. Sound support also causes a disconnect ply cannot sustain an older platform vehicle Strategic: corps-level to theater army or higher between machine use, and there is no fix likely and product. (turns represent weeks to years) to appear. Prices are difficult to determine for older Military Organization: In checking the CGW Hall of Fame, be games, since they are so heavily discounted, Fire Team 2-3 sure to understand the obsolescence built into assuming they can be found at all. Thus, be  Squad 9-12 the ratings. It illustrates games that were aware that the prices are only a rough guide  Platoon 40 50 unique and successful when released, and not line. Also, since this guide is for reference, one  Company 120 150 Page 136 Computer Gaming World "


"curveu BATTLES OF NAPOLEON A CONSTRUCTION SET  Battalion 500 1,000  Brigade 3.000 5.000  Division 10.000 15.000 . Corps 20,000 80,000 Army 100.000 up AIDE DE CAMP (1) HPS; Scott Hamilton; 1993; $79.95; N/R Int/Land-Nav-Air/Tac-Op-Str/l Not a game as much as a gamer's aid. This utility program will assist one to convert any board wargame to computer output, albeit without the AI. Once files are created, games can be played by E-mail. A library of boardgame conversions by veteran gamers is already under way. ANCIENT ART OF WAR (Ap/1/M; #5.2) Broderbund; Dave and Barry Murray; 1984; $44.95;** Beg/Land/Tac/1 A tactical rendition of various \"battles,\" this product was an enjoyable game, but any relation to history is purely coincidental. Some of the scenarios are unbalanced, but the game is easy to learn and has its own scenario cditor. ANCIENT ART OF WAR AT SEA (Ap/I/M; #41,CGF Winter 1987) Broderbund; Dave and Barry Murray: 1987: $44.95;** Beg/Nav/Tac/i Using a system similar to Ancient Art of War, it plays well as a game, but not as a serious study. In fact, optimal tactics herein encourage use of single ships to defeat enemy fleets as opposed to fleet actions. Sad to say, it is the only game of the \"Age of Sail\" on the MS-DOS platform. en STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS, INC. ARMADA (I/ST) PSS; Peter Turcan; 1990; O/P: ** Adv/Nav/Op/1 A British product, this covered the defeat of the Spanish Armada (1588) by a motley crew of Eng. lish adventurers, opportunists and patriots. Using a \"commander viewpoint\" and typed-in commands, it is somewhat difficult to learn the basic mands is an die o r be basic system, but it presents a unique perspective. cf. also Waterloo, Borodino. ever designed insofar as subject matter is concerned. BATTLES OF NAPOLEON (Ap/C/I; #57,60,83) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Chuck Kroegel; 1988; $49.95; ***+ Adv/Land/Tac/1-2 A detailed tactical study of the Napoleonic Wars, this product may lack the graphic flash of some more popular designs, but its play value and historical accuracy mandated its acquisition for anyone interested in the period. Included scenarios are portions of the Battles of Borodino, Auerstadt, Quatre Bras, and Waterloo plus a scenario editor. BLUE GREY, EDWARD GRABOWSKI'S (Am/I) Impressions; Edward Grabowski; 1993; $69.95; N-R Int/Land-Nav/Op-Str/1 A forthcoming simulation of the entire American Civil War. BLUE POWDER/GRAY SMOKE (Ap/C/1; #35,CGF Winter 1987) Garde; Ralph Bosson; 1987; O/P: + Int/Land/Tac-Op/1-2 A Civil War tactical game covering portions of the Battles of Sharpsburg, Gettysburg, and Chickamauga. It utilized an interesting graphical approach, but one which became tedious and distracting. An ambitious design, but one which did not meet with critical or consumer success. BORODINO: 1812 (At/C/I; #41) Krentek; Steve Krenek and Stephen Beckerr; 1987: $59.95; + Int/Land/Tac-Op/1-2 The Napoleonic battle covered in an operational approach, the game is playable, although the graphics are not state-of-the-art. BORODINO (I/ST) PSS; Peter Turcan; 1990; O/P; **+ Adv/Land/Op/1 A British simulation of the Napoleonic battle utilizing the \"commander's-eye\" approach (cf. Waterloo, Armada). Never released in the United States. BROADSIDES (Ap/A1/C; #4.3) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Wayne Garris; 1983; O/P; *** + Beg/Nav/Tac/1 Probably the most successful ship-to-ship simulation of Napoleonic warfare, it had good entertainment value. While some maneuvers are over-simplified (e.g. tacking), it remains the standard. While load time can be time-consuming, this writer still plays it on an Atari 800. BY FIRE & SWORD (I) Avalon Hill; Steve Estvanik; 1985; O/P; 0) Int/Land/Op/1-2 A semi-historical abstraction of medieval warfare that's simply not worth the disk it's copied on. CAESAR (Am/l; 103,104) Impressions; David Lester; 1993: $59.95: ***+ Int/Land/Op-Sur/l Sim City in Rome. Begin as a low ranking Roman bureaucrat and work up to \"The Purple. More of a game than a simulation, but it can be fun. CASTLES (Am/l; #79,86) Interplay; Scott Bennie; 1991; AUSTERLITZ (Am/C/I/ST; #70) Cornerstone; Stephen Beckett and Steven Krenek; 1990; $49.99; Int/Land/Op/0-2 The Napoleonic Battle of Three Emperors, it is a logical successor to Krentek's earlier products (Napoleon At Waterloo and Borodino: 1812). Incremental improvements did not disguise the fact that the graphics were obsolete when released. BANDIT KINGS OF ANCIENT CHINA (Am/I/M; #65, 88) Koei; Kou Shibusawa; 1989; $59.95;\" Adv/Land/Op-Str/l A \"simulation\" of 12th century China, the game utilizes magic as well as Chinese medieval strategic play. One of the more esoteric computer games ANCIENT BATTLES (1; #59) CCS; R.T. Smith; 1989; $39.95; + Int/Land/Op/1-2 One of the more serious simulators, this covers the Battles of Hydaspes (326 BC), Zama (202 BC), Cynocephalae (197 BC), Pharsalus (44 BC), and Chalons (451 AD). The graphics were not inspiring when released, but they are functional, and a scenario generator allows user expansion. ANNALS OF ROME (Am/C//ST: #58) Electronic Arts; PSS; 1988; $29.95;\"+ Int/Land/Str/1 A grand strategic view of the Roman Republic/Empire, this simulation offered many innovative concepts. However, it was graphically dull and suffered from a lack of completeness. Despite its flaws, it succeeded on many levels. (Note that the 16-bit versions are much more playable than the 8-bit ones) BATTLE OF ANTIETAM ANTIETAM, BATTLE OF (Ap/Ac/C/I; #27) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Chuck Kroegel and David Landrey; 1985; O/P; Adv/Land/Tac-Op/1-2 A detailed simulation of the Civil War battle, Antietam is a relatively accurate historical depiction (although the map is reversed, with north being portrayed at the bottom of the map). McClellan's \"slows\" are depicted in a frustrating lack of command control which reveals just how golden was his opportunity to destroy the Army of Northern Virginia in a set-piece battle. June 1993 Page 137 "


"0+ Adv/Land/Op-Sur/1-2 Bascd on the Victory Games boardgame of the same title, this product covers the American Civil War (1861-1865). It shows how one can take a highly playable boardgame and turn it into an unplayable computer product.\" Marred by incomplete rules, incomplete graphics and incomplete programming, Civil War stands out clearly in any \"Crowd of Losers.\" Interestingly enough, Avalon Hill promised a corrected disk, but don't hold your breath. $59.95: ** dominion over the Indian sub-continent in the Int/Land/Tac/l heyday of Imperialism. Construction and defense of Middle Ages upscale CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER residential housing graphically well-done and in(At; #4.3) Mach-ina; R.C. Chiofolo; 1983; O/P; itially fascinating to watch, Castles can quickly become somewhat tedious. Is there a game in here, Int/Land/Str/1 or is it a software toy? An economic simulation of the British Empire, CASTLES: THE NORTHERN CAMPAIGN this is a text-intensive product. Very dared, but it (I) Interplay; Brian Fargo; 1992; $29.95; ** remains an interesting simulation. Int/Land/Tac/ CHARGE OF THE LIGHT BRIGADE THE An expansion to Castles, with additional scenarios. (Am/ST/I) Impressions: Edward Grabowski; 1991; $49.95; N-R CASTLES II: SIEGE AND CONQUEST Int/Land/Tac/1 (1; #96,99,102,103,105) Interplay; Vince DeA recreation of one of the most idiotic military Nardo; 1992; $59.95; **** \"battles\" ever fought. Mediocre graphics and poor Int/Land/Op/1 user interface; available in Britain only. The sequel to Castles, only emphasizing gameplay at a higher level. Much more of a wargame than CHICKAMAUGA the former, and worthy of examination by anyone (Ar; #5.3) GDW; Worlds to Conquer; 1985; interested in the period. O/P; + Int/Land/Tac-Op/1-2 CENTURION: DEFENDER OF ROME A boardgame company's foray into the computer (Am/l; #74,85) Electronic Arts; Kellyn Beck; simulation market. The game was marred by poor 1990; $24.95; **+ graphics and slow play. Int/Land/Op-Str/1 CHICKAMAUGA, REBEL CHARGE AT A graphical tour de force a historic tour de farce. Chariot racing, gladiatorial combats, and detailed (Ap/Am/At/C/; #40) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Chuck Kroegel; 1987: $14.95; **+ military battles would seem to be the answer to an Int/Land/Op/1-2 Emperor's dream. However, its relation to historical versimillitude is coincidental. Another of SSI's Civil War battles, this covers the subject quite well, although the battle itself ofren CHAMPION OF THE RAJ degenerates into a confused slugfest through the (Ai/ST/I; #78) Level 9; NA; NA; NA; N-R ubiquitous heavily-wooded terrain. Int/Land/Str/1-6 CIVIL WA . A strategic struggle to achieve British control and (1; #51) Avalon Hill; Steve Estvanik; 1988; $35; LOOKING FOR A SPORTS TITLE? CALL FOR CURRENT PRICING AND SAME DAY SHIPPING. SID MEIER'S CIVIL WAR (working title) (1; #105) MicroProse; Sid Meier; 1993); N/R Int/Land-Nav/Op-Str/ Not even the title is finalized, but maven designer Sid Meier is expected to produce another blockbuster. Only the Eastern Theater will be covered; historically, the East was a stalemate, while the theater of decision proved to be the West. Like No Greater Glory, victory will be determined by whether or not Lincoln can manage to win reclection in 1864. CIVILIZATION (Am/M/I; #92,93,94) MicroProse; Sid Meier; 1991; $69.95; *** Int/Land/Str/1 A \"Sid Meier classic\" covering civilization from 4000 BC to 2100 AD. More addictive than crack, it should come with its own warning label. The only deficiency is that it is so rich and textured that the documentation is incomplete, thereby almost necessitating the purchase of a companion book. GAMER'S GOLD THE PLAYBOOK OF SPORTS-RELATED SOFTWARE If you're a computer sports fan, you want to know what software is available, how similar titles compare, and you want the latest releases at attractive prices. That's why our complete Playbook describes dozens of strategic simulations, awesome action games, and specialized utilities from little known sources. We want to be your source for hi-tech sports. The Playbook is free with all phone T> BASEBALL BASKETBALL BOWLING ACTION EDUCATION CALENDARS FISHING ARE COLEETING FLIGHT GAMES FOOTBALL HANDICAPPING GOLF HOCKEY SIMULATORS HORSERACING STATISTICS MOTORSPORTS OLYMPICS CEREBELF SAILING SAILING 800 747-0908617 576-6700 ONSKUNG W 675 Moss Ave  Cambridge MA 02139 U T ENNIS TAKE YOUR BRAIN OUT TO THE BALLGAME Circle Reader Service #56 Page 138 WE PAY CASH FOR USED IBM GAMES also Nintendo, Super Nintendo, and Sega Genesis We want your current used games* 1-800-377-8578 call for authorization before shipping WE SELL USED GAMES IBM, Nintendo, Super Nintendo, Sega Genesis All games are tested & IBM disks virus checked Call for current title availibility AMER'S F WE ACCEPT VISA, MasterCard Most items shipped same day. S5 UPS/S7 2nd Day Air Games must be complete with all disks & printed materials and in the original box. Incomplete games will be returned at your expense. GAMER'S GOLD 1008 W. 41st Street Sioux Falls South Dakota  57105 Circle Reader Service #40 Computer Gaming World "


"qurvey CLEAR FOR ACTION (At; #4.6) Avalon Hill; Michael Stradley; 1984; $5.00; 0+ Int/Nav/Tac/1-2 Napolconic naval warfare, this \"Age of Sail\" simulation may still be overpriced at the current asking price. Marred by poor graphics, poor interface and marginal entertainment value. Who CC CLIPPER (At) PBI; John Bayes; 1982; O/P; * Beg/Nav/Tac/1 An \"educational\" simulation (with all the baggage that entails), this simulation represents a voyage of an 1850 Clipper ship attempting to deliver its cargo and maximize its profits. Its high point (?) lies in teaching the player basic compass direction (0-360 degrees). The first computer simulation of Napoleon's most famous battle. Being one of SSI's very first games, it is clearly dated. CONQUEST OF JAPAN (Am/I) Impressions: Edward Grabowski; 1992; $59.95; \"\" Int/Land/Tac-Op/1 Pseudo-historical game of medieval Japan. It is marred by a user interface that is difficult to use and a random setup which makes any pretense to history purely coincidental. CONQUERED KINGDOMS (I; #100,102,103) QQP; Bruce Williams and Thurston Searfoss; 1992; $59.95; \"+ Int/Land/Op-Str/1-2; M A game of medieval strategy and fantasy. While gameplay is high, this reviewer admits to a distaste for obscuring decent wargames with fantasy clements. DAWN OF CIVILIZATION (At; #4.2) Super Ware; George Schwenk; 1984; O/P; N-R Beg/Land/Tac/1-4 Players lead a band of primitive hunter-gatherers in their daily struggle to feed themselves and fight back marauders. DECISION AT GETTYSBURG (1; #72) Tiglon; Jeffrey R. Wickersham; 1990; QOF COHOR (Released in the United States as Fighting For Rome. See below.) COHORT II (1) Impressions; Edward Grabowski; 1993; $29.95; NA Int/Land/Tac/1-2 An upgrade of Cohort. For those owning the first release, an upgrade is available for $14.95. Aside from an upgrade of graphics and gameplay, the new version is part of an interlocking game system module with Caesar, allowing the user to \"drop down\" and play out the tactical battles. Dan Cermak; 1985; O/P; **+ Beg/Land-Nav/Op-St/1-6 A strategic simulation of the European attempt to dominate the globe in the 19th Century, this is a very playable, albeit ahistorical, game. Supply and logistics are non-existent, and some strange results occur (e.g. Japan invading Africa with 1,000,000 troops), but as a light diversion, Colonial Conquest can be fun. COMPUTER NAPOLEONICS: The Battle of Waterloo (Ap) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; John Lyon and Joel Billings; 1980; O/P: N/R Adv/Land/Op/1 Adv/Land/Op/1-2 An operational simulation of the Gettysburg Campaign, its \"new\" graphics (VGA) were not sufficient to overcome the lack of a friendly user COLONIAL CONQUEST (Au/Ap/C/S; #5.5) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; THE ROAD FROM SUMTER  APPMATTOX June 25, 1861... \"The first shots of the Civil War have been fired... Fort Sumter has fallen. Volunteers NtiWork on both sides rush to their colors. Across the Union Daily Tribune the cry mounts ... ON TO RICHMOND.\" Union forces under General McLellan seize The Road From Sumter to Appomattox covers the Harper's Ferry. entire Civil War from the opening guns of Bull run to the final surrender. All the military and economic imight of the Union or Confederacy is at your command. FEATURES: Human or computer opponents. Naval system includes ocean and river going vessels. Over 100 individually named and rated generals. Economic system includes foreign trade and blockade runners. Control the promotions and dismissals of those generals. Beautiful 256 color VGA map that stretches from New Orleans Continuous-play, daily pulses, send orders-whenever to Philadelphia, from Kansas City to Bermuda, you like Fully integrated tactical combat system emphasizing command Different unit types combine to form divisions and corps. control and quick resolution of even the largest battles.  Full control over the national production system. Scenario editor allows players to construct their own battles or A detailed supply system using railroads, wagons and ships. play those already included. Send cheque or money order to: $54.95 ADANAC COMMAND SYSTEMS CORP. . IBM or AMIGA 102 — 1345 West 4th Avenue plus $5.00 S&H  Must have: Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6H 3Y8. 1 MB H.D., Mouse, Telephone: (604) 739-1162 TOTAL $59.95 US Keyboard, 286 or more Circle Reader Service #32 June 1993 Page 139 "


"STRATEGIC STUDIES GROUP interface. Being the first VGA wargame did little to render this other than a marker flash-in-the-pan. DECISIVE BATTLES OF THE CIVIL WARI (Ap/C/M/I; #49) Strategic Studies Group; Roger Keating & lan Trout; 1988; $40.00; *** Int/Land/Tac-Op/0-2 The Battlefront system adapted for the American Civil War. SSG products inspire either vast admiration or marginal distaste, with their emphasis on \"fog of war\" and lack of command control. Covers the Battles of Bull Run I-II, Shiloh, Antictam, Fredericksburg and Chancellorsville. DECISIVE BATTLES OF THE CIVIL WAR II (Ap/C/I; #54,65) Strategic Studies Group; Roger Keating and lan Trout; 1989; $40.00; Int/Land/Tac-Op/0-2 See above. Covers the Battles of Gaines Gold, this product is an arcade-like African explorer game. It owes its ancestry more to Hollywood (King's Solomon's Mines) than to history. HIGH SEAS (Ap/1: #43) Garde; Ralph Bosson; 1987; $49.95; LORDS OF CONQUEST (AdAp/C/ST/I; #32) Electronic Arts; Eon Software; 1986; O/P; ***+ Beg/Land-Nav/Op/1-4 A classic wargame, this abstract simulation is easy to learn and play. It comes highly recommended, although its age and later conversions to 16-bit systems have been mediocre at best. LORDS OF THE RISING SUN (Am; #60,61) Cinemaware; Doug Barnett; 1989; $49.95; *** Inc/Tac-Op/1 A graphical masterpiece, it is only marginally a game of the unification of Japan. MAN OF WAR (1) Simulations Canada; NA; NA; NA; N/R Int/Nav/Tac/NA A \"promised\" forthcoming game with minimal graphics, but one that covers a period conspicuously omitted in the 16-bit world, the \"Age of DECISIVE BAITLES OF THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR Volume 1 Gaines Milto Chattanooga. MePluto Qudra) Sail.\" not a commercial success. Easy play and adequate graphics could not otherwise overcome a marginally historical simulation of Roman tactics. LEGIONS OF ROME (Ap/I) Aigis Circle; NA; NA; NA; N/R xxx/1 MEDIEVAL LORDS (I; 85,86) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Martin Campion; 1991; $59.95; *** Int/Land/Str/1-10 Storm Across Europe transposed to the Middle Ages. Strangely enough, it succeeds better than the original. While the graphics are less than inspiring, the game play and history present interesting challenges. MERCHANT COLONY (Am/ST; #86) Merit; Impressions; 1991; $49.95; L'EMPEREUR (Am/I; #92,95) Koei; Kou Shibusawa; 1991; $59.95; + Adv/L-Nav/Op-St/1-2 Napoleon's career as seen through a very different perspective. Most of Koei's previous efforts had been devoted to the East (cf. Genghis Khan, Nobunaga's Ambition, etc.), and this was their first product to cover a period more familiar to Western culture. As such, it was a failure. There was little of the ambience of the Napoleonic Era, and tactical combat seemed to yield artillery with ranges of 20 Int/Nav/Tac-Op/1-2 An Age of Sail simulation, this product emphasizes joystick maneuverability. Graphics are somewhat convoluted, as is overall game play. HOUSE DIVIDED, A: BULL RUN (M/I) Three Sixty; Atomic Games; 1993;NA;N/R Int/Land/Op/1-2 Part one of a series to debut in 1993. Similar to V For Victory WWII design. HUNDRED YEARS WAR (All; #100) GEnie; Jim Dunnigan and Al Nofi; 1992: $6.00/hour; ***+ Int/Land/Op-Str/1-300; M The English-French Wars (1337-1453), with emphasis on all facets of society both strategic, operational and tactical (ranging from individual jousting to attempting to produce an heir). A thoroughly rich and textured ambience produces a unique gaming experience, but one that will require extensive time for full play. Estimated total cost per game may be in the range of $300. INCUNABULA (1; #5.5) Avalon Hill; Steve Estvanik; 1985; O/P; ** LIBERTY OR DEATH (1; 101) Koei; Kou Shibusawa; 1993: $59.95: NA Int/L-Nav/Op-St/1-2 Koci tries again in a Western orientation. Ranged fires seem to be a continuing problem given the scale of combat, and naval invasions become somewhat protracted. Int/Land/Str/1-4 A Civilization-type simulation, one must attempt to found a lasting culture. Political/military from the macro-scale, with marginal graphics. CINEMAWARE na US Int/Nav/Op-Scr/1-2 Hudson Bay, British East India Company the age of Trader Barons. The game is marred by poor graphics, a poor interface and marginal historical accuracy. NAPOLEON AT WATERLOO (At/C; 4.3,5.2) Krentek; Steve Krenek; 1985: O/P; *** Int/Land/Op/1 An carly version of Napoleon's Waterloo, the game is commendable for ease of play, but marred by ahistorical tactics necessary for victory. NAPOLEON'S CAMPAIGNS, 1813,1815 (Ap; #2.1.2.2) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Paul Murray; 1981; O/P; *+ Int/Land/Tac/1-2 As a computer-moderated boardgame with intense fog of war, its obsolescence is clearly visible. NAPOLEON I: THE CAMPAIGNS 1805-1814 (Am/ST; #98) RAW; Frank Hunter; 1992; $49.95; *** Int/Land/Str/1-2 A campaign game of the Napoleonic Wars, with \"functional\" (i.e. minimalist) graphics and the capacity to integrate miniatures. NOBUNAGA'S AMBITION (Am/M/I; #51) Koei; Kou Shibusawa; 1988; $59.95; **** Int/Land/Op-Sur/1-4 A fascinating simulation of the attempt to unify Japan under the rule of an effective leader, this product emphasizes diplomatic and economic as well as military perspectives. LORDS OF THEL JOAN OF ARC: Siege The Sword (Am/ST/I; #68) Broderbund; Carlo Perconti; 1989; $44.95; **+ Int/Land/Op/1 The first game released covering the Hundred Years War (or an aspect thereof), Joan Of Arc is more of an arcade game than a serious simulation. Adequate graphics and coverage of a hitherto neglected period of warfare do not fully make up for a series of arcade sequences couched in a historic milieu. LEGIONNAIRE (Ap.C; #2.6) Avalon Hill; Chris Crawford; 1982; O/P; **+ Int/Land/Tac/1 A Chris Crawford sequel to Eastern Front, it was Page 140 Computer Gaming World "


"curvey PIRATES OF THE BARBARY COAST ROAD TO GETTYSBURG (Ac/ST/I) TDC Distributors; Hal McCrery, (Ap; #2.5) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Paul MurCraig Morchouse; 1986; O/P; ray; 1982; O/P; + Beg/Nav/Tac/1 Int/Land/Tactical/1-2 An arcade-like game with mediocre graphics and A computer-moderated boardgame for the Civil marginal gameplay. Rescue the merchant's daugh War, its obsolescence is clearly visible. ter, kill the pirate; \"In like Flynn\" but without his panache and clan. ROMANCE OF THE THREE KINGDOMS (Am/I; #49,51) Koei; Kou Shibusawa; 1988; POPULOUS $69.95; ***+ (Am/I; #60,61,62,66) Electronic Arts; Bullfrog: Int/Land/Op-Str/1-4 1990; $29.95; *** The unification of China as gamed via the same Int/Land/Op-St/1-2 system as Nobunaga's Ambition and Genghis Khan, A quasi-arcade game, but one with sustained playit emphasizes aspects of role-playing to a larger A quasi arcade game, but one with sustained value. The major problem is that one cannot find degree than the former product. \"new worlds to conquer\" without being successful at the predecessor levels. ROMANCE OF THE THREE KINGDOMS II (Am/I) Koei; Kou Shibusawa; 1991; $69.95; **** Int/Land/Op-Str/1-4 Nobunaga's Ambition Updated version with better graphics, sound, Al. ROMANCE OF THE THREE KINGDOMS III (Am/I) Koei; Kou Shibusawa; 1993; NA; N/R Int/Land/Op-Str/1-4 Upcoming, updated version with better graphics, sound, and more scenarios. ROME AND THE BARBARIANS (At/C; #4.3) Krentek; Steve Krenek; 1984; O/P; ***+ NOBUNAGA'S AMBITION II (1; #78) Koei; Kou Shibusawa; 1990: $59.95; **** Int/Land/Op-Str/1-4 An updated version with improved artificial opponents and much improved graphics. NO GREATER GLORY (T; #90) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Ed Bever; 1991; $59.95; **+ Int/Land/Op-Str/1 Ed Bever's follow-on to Revolution 76. A military and diplomatic strategic simulation of the American Civil War (1861-1865), it had all the \"bells and whistles\" but was definitely a case where the whole was less than the sum of its parts. Perhaps it tried to do too much, mixing military battles and political machinations into a difficult game to win. The lessons of history were well done. Also, the computer \"cheats. NORTH & SOUTH (Am/ST/I; #72) DataEast; Stephane Baudet; 1990; O/P; + Beg/Land/Str/1 The comic-book version of the American Civil War, this product lcans heavily to arcade-type play and graphic sequences. A French import, it is just about what one would expect from a country which has made Jerry Lewis a national icon and eats cheese that smells like people's feet. OLD IRONSIDES (Ap; #3.3) Xerox Education; Jack Rice and Richard Hefter; 1982; N-R Beg/Nav/Tac/2 A simple introduction to Age of Sail tactics. PARIS IN DANGER (At; #3.5) Avalon Hill; John Bell; 1983; O/P; * Int/Land/Str/2 A computer rendition of the 1814 Napoleonic Campaigns, it was marred by no computer Al, a clumsy interface and slowness. PARTHIAN KINGS (Ap; #4.2) Avalon Hill; David Bradley; 1983; O/P; N/R Int/Land/Op-Str/1-4 Strategy and magic in a fantasy setting. PERFECT GENERAL: CIVIL WAR (I) QQP; Bruce Zaccagnino; 1994(?); NA; N-R Int/Land/Tac-Op/1-2; M A successful design released for an earlier period, it should prove interesting. PIRATES! (C/GS/Am/ST/M/I; CGF #2) MicroProse; Sid Meier; 1987: $44.95: **** Inc/Nav-Land/Tac-Op/1 A genre break-through, this is a fascinating simulation of the Age of Piracy. This reviewer's initial impression was somewhat muted, in that he did not know if the product had \"legs,\" but it stands up far better than most computer simulations. \"If I had one review to change...\" Be aware that the various versions differ in quality. PIRATES GOLD (M/I) MicroProse; Sid Meier and Paul Murphy; 1993; NA; N-R Int/Nav-Land/Tac-Op/1 An update of the MicroProse classic, this has the potential to be a true \"Five-Star\" release. Anxiously awaited. Int/Land/Op/1 A strategic approach to the Roman Empire, it remains a challenging simulation. Graphics are marginally adequate, but play value is high. ROURKE'S DRIFT (Am/I) Impressions; Edward Grabowski; 1990; $24.95; N/R Int/Land/Tac/1 Previously released in Britain, a graphically updated version is planned for a 1993 American m ore COGA KOEI POPULOUS II (Am; #94,97) Electronic Arts, Bullfrog: 1992; $49.95; ***+ Int/Land/Op-Str/1-2; M An updated release, more attuned to Mount Olympus. One must transmogrify himself into a deity (query — \"deus in machina\"?). Similar play value, but with added graphics and options. POWERMONGER (Am/I; #78) Electronic Arts; Bullfrog: 1991; $49.95; * Int/Land/Op-St/1-2 Populous with a military emphasis and an economic basis. RAM (I) Avalon Hill; Steve Estvanik; 1985; O/P; * Int/Nav/Tac/1-2 A tactical simulation of trireme warfare in realtime. An often-ignored subject in wargaming, the treatment herein renders it hors de combat. SARATOGA (At) APX; NA; O/P, * Int/Land/Op-Str/l An unabashed clone of Chris Crawford's Eastern Front, this product proves that a World War II game system does not necessarily transfer well to the American Revolution. SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD (At/Ap/C/M/I; #4.3,4,5) Electronic Arts; Dani Bunten: 1984; $14.95; ***+ Beg/Land-Nav/Tac-Op/1 An arcade-type rendition of the Exploration and Conquest of the New World, this is a classic game. Graphics on the 16-bit machines are poor, but on the earlier releases, the game remains a classic. SEVEN CITIES OF GOLD II (I) Electronic Arts; Dani Bunten; 1993; NA; N-R Beg/Land-Nav/Tac-Op/1 Originally planned for the Columbus Anniversary, it is obviously late, but it should still garner a heartfelt welcome from users familiar with its predecessor. SHATTERED ALLIANCE, THE (Ap; #2.1) SSI; NA, 1982; O/IP: * Int/Land/Tac/1-2 Tactical ancients using fantasy units. The game featured seven pre-built scenarios and an editor. SHILOH, THE BATTLE OF (At/Ap/TRS-80; #2.1) Strategic Simulations, REVOLUTION 76 (GS/I; #65) Britannica; Ed Bever; 1989; $49.95; Int/Land/Str/1 A thought-provoking look at the American Revolution, involving both political and military as pects. Different regions have different perspectives, and the user must forge the \"Clamorous Colonials\" into a unified and effective nation. June 1993 Page 141 "


"curvey SSI's more recent and more accurate rendition of the Battle of Shiloh. DOTOUT SIEGE (1; #99) Mindcraft; Ali Atabek; 1992; $59.95; **+ Int/Land/Tac-Op/1-2 Castle warfare for the fantasy-minded. GUNFIGHTS OF THE WILD WEST 1992: $59.95: Int/Nav-Land/Op-Sur/1-2 The \"Age of Exploration\" dated a century later, with mediocre graphics and gameplay. SWORD OF ARAGON (1/Am; #65) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Russell Shilling; 1989; $39.95/$49.95; *** Int/Land/Tac-Op/1-2 A medieval sword-and-sorcery simulation. this game yields a high playability factor, although its graphics and user interface are only marginal. SWORD OF THE SAMURAI (1; #67) MicroProse; Lawrence Schick; 1989: SIEGE: The Dogs of War (I: #100) Mindcraft; Ali Atabek; 1992; $29.95; N-R Int/Land/Tac-Op/1-2; M Expansion disk for Siege offering new castles and a modem-to-modem option. SIX GUN SHOOTOUT (At/C/Ap; #5.4) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Jeff Johnson; 1985; O/P : ***+ Int/Land/Tac/1-2 A Western simulation, owing more to Hollywood than history, it is easy-to-learn and even more fun to play. Do not expect to learn any historical insights into the Old West; just sit back and go along for the ride. SONS OF LIBERTY (Au/C/Ap/I; #46) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; David Landrey and Chuck Kroegel; 1987; $14.95; 48K ATART SET SWIORD OF THE STRATEGIC SUSULATIONS. Inc.; David Landrey and Chuck Kroegel; 1981; O/P: + Beg/Land/Op/1-2 SSI's first rendition of the Civil War battle, it is a true beer-and-pretzels type of game. Easy to learn and play, it is marred by marginal graphics and aliistoric results. KEJAK A Quest for Horror In Prudal Japan SHILOH: GRANT'S TRIAL IN THE WEST (Av/C/I/S: #43) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; David Landrey & Chuck Kroegel; 1987: $39.95; Adv/Land/Tac-Op/1-2 SSI's Civil War engine simulates the American Revolution, Covering a somewhat neglected period, this simulation is both accurate and detailed. SPOILS OF WAR (Am/1; #99,#105) RAW; German Design Group; Adv/Land/Tac-Op/1-2 MICROPROSE OUT TIME DAYS Out Time Days is a Play-By-Mail game of life on a strange world. Emphasizing role playing and inter-player communication, OTD is a game for those who like to join with other players around the world in figuring out puzzles, creating working economics, exploring large sections of worlds. undertaking or tracking criminal activities, or lielding capable armies. The worlds explored are living, vibrant locales that will change through your character's actions. With the ability to journey in many eras (you'll start in a medieval-like location), you'll enjoy adapting to new sets of abilities and restaints or you can focus on a single place and become well established. OTD is a combination Science Fiction-Fantasy game. It is 99% computer moderated to ensure fairness, and 1% GM moderated to allow for creativity. A maximum of 1 turn per week is allowed. Cost per turn is $5.00. The game is open-ended with each * new character playing a vital role. A special startup is available if you mention this ad. Receive a rule book, startup turn and 5 turns for just $5.00 ($20,00 outside U.S. and Canada). a $35.00 value! Dependable, weekly, error-free turns since 1984 Hit Hit III K.DUSFs Wanna try it lactical space game and pay only $20 for the entire game? Then ask for information on Space Combat. To sign up or for more information write to: Twin Engine Gaming, 3254 Maple Leaf Ct., San Jose, CA 95121 Circle Reader Service #96 Page 142 Computer Gaming World "


"Curvei O/P: .. Int/Land/Tac-Op-Str/1 The unification of Japan as seen by MicroProse. In the same vein as Pirates, the game was not as successful, although game play and historical research were evident. Ducis, melee sequences and set-piece battles characterize this Oriental oeuvre. getting closer to being a useable product, and another generation or two should see it finished. UNCHARTED WATERS (M/I; #94,95) Koei; Kou Shibusawa; 1992; $69.95; Int/Nav/Tac-Op/1 The Age of Exploration\" with a map that is geographically incorrect, and a user interface which could bear improvement. Game play can be interesting THEATRE OF WAR (1; #97, #102) Three-Sixty; Bill Banks; 1992; $49.95; + Int/Land-Air/Op (Abstract)/1-2; M A wargaming first-i.c. first SVGA release. This is its biggest claim to fame; takes the worst aspects of chess and wargaming and bundles them into a mediocre product. VIKINGS (Am, I; #96) Realism Entertainment; Brian Vodnik; 1992: $59.95; N-R Int/Land/Str/1-6 WATERLOO U.M.S. (Am/ST/M/I; #43,48,51) Rainbird; Ezra Sidran; 1988; $39.95; + Adv/Land/Op-Str/1-2 A visual feast, but a playable desert, U.M.S. is incorrect on two counts, being neither universal nor a simulator. It lacks a naval option, and the user interface is quite clumsy. The initial disk includes the Battles of Arbela, Hastings, Marston Moor and Waterloo (the last of which omits the Prussians in toto). Similar to the boardgame Britannia, but ahistorical, it has received favorable early responses. WARGAME CONSTRUCTION SET (Ac/C/I/S) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Roger Damon; 1986; $14.95; **+ Int/Land/Tac-Op/1-2 A design-your-own simulation covering warfare from a tactical level throughout history. Marred by a system more attuned to World War II tactics than to a generic battle system. WARLORDS (I; #81,89) Strategic Studies Group: Steve Fawkner; 1991; $50,00; ** Int/Land/Op-Sur/1-2 An eminently playable wargame with strong fantasy elements. CGW's Wargame of the Year, 1991. WATERLOO (Am/ST/I; 72,73) Strategic Simulations, Inc.; Peter Turcan; 1990; $59.95; ***+ Int/Land/Op/0-2 SSI's import of the British simulation of the famous battle as seen from the \"commander's eye.\" Much more of a wargame than the historic staff simulations more commonly produced, it is a fascinating though frustrating game. Designer Peter Turcan has also designed Borodino and Armada. WOODEN SHIPS & IRON MEN (C; #48) Avalon Hill; S. Craig Taylor and Jim Jacob; 1986: $35.00: *+ Int/Nav/Tac/1-2 A board game classic and a computer game disaster, this rendition suffers from poor graphics and play value. CGW 1BM PC U.M.S. II (Am/ST/M/I; #87) MicroPlay; Ezra Sidran; 1990; $59.95; ** Adv/Land/Op-Str/1-2 A sequel to UMS, this simulation is more detailed. If at first you don't succeed, fail, fail again. Covering the Campaigns of Alexander the Great, it is STRATEGIC SIMULATIONS, INC. SOFTWARE CLOSEOUTS CAPE COD CONNECTION 24 HR ORDERING (only) 1-800-729-6733 SUPPORT/INFO 1-5 EST Mon-Sat 1-508-457-0738 IBM Wing Cmdr 2..... $49 Pacific War........ $52 Eye Beh. II......... $39 SIMULATION Sp Ops 1 or 2.... $26 Populous 2........ $39 KO VI.............. $52 WW II: 1946....... $26 Rome................ $33 Leg. Kyrandia.... $39 Aces/Pacific....... $52 Spacoward Ho.. $39 Leg. of Valour.... $39 Air Warrior ......... $49 IBM Star Legions..... $39 Mag. Candle 3.... $39 Commanche...... $46 The Lost Adm.... $39 M&Mag. Xeen.... $46 Dreadnoughts... $46 STRATEGY ATELST V For Vict 1........ $46 Paladin 2........... $39 F15 III ................ $59 Bat of Destiny... $39 V For Vict 2........ S46 Ringworld ......... $39 Falcon 3.0 ....... SS2 Caesar ............. $39 Western Front.... $39 Spellcraft ........... $39 OpFlying Tiger .. $26 Carrier Strike..... $46 Ult. Underw 2.... $52 Fireteam 2200... $29 Carriers/ War....... $46 IBM ROLE Ult VII.............. Gr.Naval Bat's... $46 Castles 2............ $39 Gr N Bat Ships .. $25 Civilization......... $46 P LAYING Jump Jet .......... $46 Cong. Kingd...... $39 Amazon............. $46 Sec Weap Lul.... $46 Patriot ........... $46 Ch. 5 Realms..... $46 CAPE COD Plane disks en... $20 High Comman... $45 Crus. Drk Sav.... $46 Sim Life ... .... $46 Liberty or Dea ... $39 Dune 2............... $39 GUNNEGYUN Task Force 42... $46 Monopoly Del.... $39 WILL SELL X-Wing............ 546 YOUR INTERESTED IN SELLING YOUR USED USED SOFTWARE? SOFTWARE Give Cape Cod Connection a call at 1/508-457-0738 for details! $950 Mitar $16.50 BAT $16.50 Star Saga $14.50 Dragonlord $ $14.50 Prati IBM AMIGA, APPLE, COMMODORE 64/128, ATARI ST, MAC & MORE IBM ARCADE_GAMES: IBM SPORTS SIMULATIONS: SUPER BUNDLE FOR C-64/128 Arkanoid UI $14.50 TV Sports Football $14.50 10_GAMES FOR $14.50 Bubble Bobble $14.50TV Sports Basketball $14.50 Includes: Demolition Mission. Operation Woll $14 50 Super Sunday S 9.50 $14.50 NBA Basketball Army Moves. Bad Street Brawler. $ 9.50 Rambo III $14.50 Blades of Steel $16.50 Tai-Pan. Fist. Tai-Celi, Mutants. Renegade $14.50 Double Dribble $16.50 Cyrus Chess, Doc the Destroyer, Sky Shark $14.50 Monday Night Football $29.50 & Uridium. Less than $1.50 each! Harmony $16.50 John Elways Football $ 9.50 Cycles $16.50 Sharkey's 3D Pool $19.50 SUPER BUNDLE FOR AMIGA Pick 'n Pile $16.50 Pro Tennis Tour 1 $16.50 10 GAMES FOR $14.50 The Ball Game $ 5.00 Microleague Football $14.50 Vampre Empire, Sky Blaster, Triple X. Savage $14.50 Microleague Baseball $14 50 Crystal Hammer, Final Mission, Little Cybergenic Ranger $14.50 Tennis Cup $16.50 Final Orbit $14.50 Grave Yardage $14.50 Dragon, Eskimo Games, Powerstyx, Son Batman Caped Crusader $14.50 Subuteo Table Soccer World & Cover and Smart Treasure Trap $16.50 Downhill Challenge Skiing $14.50 IBM STRATEGY GAMES: Superbike Challenge $14 50 IBM ADVENTURE GAMES: Waterloo $19.50 Championship Football $14.50 Buck Rogers 1 $19.50 First Over Germany $19.50 Championship Baseball $14.50 heroes Lange $19.50 Sons of Liberty $19.50 Championship Goll $1450 Dragons of Flame $19.50 Red Lightning $19.50 Pro Beach Volleyball $16.50 Question 1 $16.50 Under Fire $12.50 Superstar Indoor Sports $ 950 War of the Lance $19.50 Gull Strike $14.50 Superstar Hockey $19.50 Roadwar Europa $16.50 IBM FLIGHT SIMULATORS Phantas 11 $14,50 Mid-Winter $19.50 F-15 Strike Eagle $16 50 Lime & Magik 514.50 Firezone $14.50 Solo Flight $16.50 SDI $14.50 Gunship $19.50 Berlin 1948 $16.50 Tomahawk $ 950 Fireteam 2200 $16.50 Super Huey !! 9.50 Delunder of the Crown $1450 Dambusters $ 950 Star Glider 11 $ 16.50 Navconi 6 $ 9.50 Xiphos $14.50 $14.50 Leather Godesses of Phobos Das Boot U Boat Simulator $19.50 Cartier Command $ 14.50 Sands of Fire $16.50 Sky Chase $14.50 IBM_CD-ROM SOFTWARE: IBM TRADITIONAL GAMES: David Wolt Secret Agent $14.50 Barney Bear goes to School $19.50 Amarillo Siim's Real Poker $14.50 Blue Angels $14 50 CD Grab Bag $ 1500 Friday Night Poker $14.50 Rocket Ranger $14.50 CD Game Collecton $39.00 Blackjack Academy $9.50 Air Strike USA $14.50 Chessmaster 3000 $44.00 Jigsaw $16.50 Blue Max $195 CD ROM Collection WCIA BattleChess !! $19.50 IBM EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS: Soldon Immortal $ 39.00 Super Password $ 9.50 President Elect $ 9.50 Great Cties of the World $1900 WILD & COOL GAMES: $49001 World Geography S 95 Hound of the Bisheries Continuum $16.50 US Geography $ 9.50 Pones n the Fast Lane $39.00 Drakkhen $19.50 Banney Bear goes to School $14.50 to School $1450 Kng's Quest 5 $29.00 3DGamemaker $ 500 Discover Numbers $ 49.00 Weird Dreams $14.50 Discover Alphabet $ 5.00 Maed up Mother Goose $39.00 Sex Olympics $16.50 Discover Math $ 500 Phoenix Shawre 20 $24.00 Sex Vixens from Space $14.50 Grade A Math 1-2-3 $16.50 Secret of Monkey Island $49.00 Holmes Consulting Detective $49.00 TO'S more items for all Much Shuveware VISA/MC ORDERS CALL TOLL-FREE different computers. Apple. Ultima 16 Bunde $49.00 1-800 676 6616 $39.00 Atarl, Amio C64128 MAC VGA Spectrum Credit Card Orders Only !($25 minimum) & lots more 18MMS-DOSI! Wing Communden Utma 6 Bunde Wing Commander Bunde $49.00 $49.00 COMPSULT TO ORDER: Send check or money order including shipping charges of $5 for U.S.A. $8 for Canada, $16 all others. Californians must include 7.25% sales tax P.O. BOX 5160 To receive our complete catalog of over 2,000 items for all computer types, send SAN LUIS OBISPO $2 incash or stamps to the above address. The catalog is FREE with any order. CA 93403 To check for an item not listed here, call(805)544-6616. Circle Reader Service #43 June 1993 $14.50 Mines of Itan We hope you enjoy our new economical format. All remains the same, however except we have discontinued the Membership Option (we will honor members until their expiration date). PLEASE NOTE THAT CCC HAS ENDED THE PRICE WAR AND RAISED IT'S PRICES. In order to run an efficient and economically sound business we must see profits. It's time to put sanity back into this industry and we hope you, our customers Understand our needs and support us. Our NEW pricing scale is calculated on 35% OFF Product Relail. Mail should be sent to: 21 Pleasant View Avenue, Falmouth, MA 02540. UPS Shipments within Cont. U.S. are $5 per order. Overseas rates are based on package weight. Delective software replaced with same only. There is a 15% restocking fee. Circle Reader Service #39 Page 143 "


"DUID) Doing It Deluxe Megalomaniacs Succumb To Empire Deluxe Epidemic A Review and Strategy Guide For Suffering Addicts by Sean Jeffers Tews flash: The California Journal of ports up to an SVGA standard and all of the quire more phone lines than most people own Psychiatric Medicine announced that major sound boards. Each unit type has indi(a possible solution later, however). As to the Dr. Watta Quack has developed a vidualized theme music that plays during its latter, the original game developed a tremenradical new theory in the treatment of incesturn, and combat berween units has been dous play-by-email (PBEM) following on nusant megalomania. The story of his discovery spruced up with explosions, machine gun fire merous national bulletin boards. As such, the rivals even the most bizarre manifestations of and ricochets. These \"Bells and Whistlesare design team anticipated a similar phenomena the disease, which afflicts nearly 30% of the nice, but would not, by themselves, justify a with Empire Deluxe and streamlined the inpopulation with delusions of grandeur. Natunew rendition of the original game. Of far terface which supports this type of interacrally, this statistic includes victims whose greater significance are the interface and con tion. Failing to find sufficient human symptoms have yet to progress to the point nectivity improvements. opposition, the player may activate vacant where they seek treatment, such as the Reverpositions with computer opponents whose end Al Sharppun. Faced with an expanding I Came... skill level may be set at easy, standard or list of patients that was rumored to include expert. Yeahboy Amifat, an elderly gentlemen from Empire Deluxe supports up to six players, Argentina that insisted on being identified as any number of which may be human controlReturning to the highly desirable, but currently hard to configure, issue of live six player \"Dolphie\" and an endless string of Elvis imled. As it is difficult to gather six megalomagames, the solution is less difficult than it personators, Dr. Quack found that treatment niacs together in one room (excluding Dr. might first appear. Given the following that of megalomania occupied the majority of his Watta Quack's waiting area), many players Empire has already established on-line, any of practice. Burdened with the tales of hundreds will take advantage of the modem and playof wanna be power brokers, Dr. Quack took by-mail features of the game. With regard to the national BBSs could rely on a strong a vacation to Las Vegas, to attend the annual market base of users if they fielded a host the former, a live six player game would reversion of Empire Deluxe. It appears that the convention of Adult Video Film makers (an The Modem Version Of The Award Winning Classic source code would support such a developamateur hobby of his). As his thought procment with only minor revision, and one of the esses were so muddled, he wandered instead services currently offers a six player strategy into the gathering halls of the Consumer war game the magnitude of Empire Deluxe. Electronic Show. Confused by the sudden The only issue of concern would appear to be change of scenery, Dr. Quack \"came to,\" so that of turn delays, which might also be solved to speak, in front of the New World Computthrough some configuration changes. ing booth. It was there that he was first exposed to Empire Deluxe and, in an instant, Until players come in contact with one realized that this \"tool\" would provide a vianother, which can take between 100-200 carious outlet for even the most demented turns on a full size board (200 x 150 tiles), all sufferers of the disease. Today, Dr. Quack's players could be resolving turns, or blocks of patients sing the praises of Empire Deluxe. Dr. turns (10-20) simultaneously. When the Quack closed his presentation to his colcomputer detected that the buffer zone (deleagues with a 10 second film clip (slightly termined at five tiles, for example) was grainy and out of focus) of a freshly shaven reached, the player who was ahead in turns Dolphie, who held up the game manual, would be frozen until the other player caught winked at the camera and stated, \"It has up. Following that, each player would have changed my life.» five seconds to move each unit, cumulative NEW Granted, this fictional portrayal of the lubased on the number of units in the field. By natic fringe isn't representative of most adusing the automove features of the program, dicts of the original Empire, but some of them the player would speed game play as well as Empire Deluxe are bound to cross the line with Empire DeSYSTEM: allowing himself a little additional flexibility luxe. For the benefit of those who missed the GRAPHICS: SVGA, VGA, EGA with the remaining units. PLAYERS: 1-6 (Modem, Network, Sneak Preview (Issue 101, page 152), some and E-Mail options) These suggestions should not be considered brief background is in order. Empire Deluxe PRICE: $59.95 PROTECTION: Documentation look-up all-encompassing, but are offered only as food is not a sequel to the original, rather it is a DESIGNERS: Mark Baldwin and for thought on how such a configuration re-design to incorporate some user feedback Bob Rakosky (of White Wolf New World Computing could be approached. Should one of the servon the original product and update the inter| HollyPal, CA ices accept and succeed with this challenge, face and graphics. Empire Deluxe now supthe end result would be beneficial to all conWORIO COMPUTING Duende TITLE: IBM PUBLISHER: (818) 999-0607 Page 144 Computer Gaming World "


"D@ @In HINS 329 PEDIA cerned. If not, rest assured that Empire Deluxe is still capable of inducing \"blackout\" syndrome, an irrevocable condition where victims look from the CRT screen to the clock and find themselves incapable of explaining the loss of entire blocks of time to their spouses, or other concerned parties. and logistic support. In fact, most aspiring world conquerors, such as Alexander, Napoleon and Hitler, saw their hard won Empires decline because they had grown so large that the simple logistic problem of moving troops and supplies to every possible point of incursion became insurmountable. They eventually collapsed under their own weight. The next section will explore some of the options available to players for rapid efficient move ment of troops to the front, but first it is necessary to examine some important aspects of production. In Empire Deluxe, the economic model of the original game has been modified to reflect the dynamic impact of far flung ambition on once stable economies. The first revision is that each city begins the game with a production efficiency rating, which can vary from 60-160%. The rating acts as a modifier on the base number of turns required to produce each unit type. Instead of remaining static, making possession of some cities always more advantageous than others, the efficiency rating can change throughout the game. Every time a city is attacked, for example, the rating is lowered by a random amount. Thus, a border city that is highly contested may be I Saw... The worst thing for any despot to discover is that they actually control a lot less of the world than first believed. This condition, spawned by the incessant meddling of explorers, has lead many a sovereign to dip in the coffers and begin building armies of conquest. Naturally, if one must tolerate exploration at all, at least it should be thorough, so as to know what one is getting into. The \"New World» has always conjured images of poor, innocent, ignorant civilizations ripe for exploitation, but occasionally one awakens a slecping dragon by mistake. In Empire Deluxe, any unit can be used for exploration, but some are better suited than others. Within a land mass, Armor units are the best explorers because they have twice the movement rate of infantry on clear terrain and equal movement on all other terrain except mountains, where they are prohibited. Further, if they encounter a neutral city, they can attack it and, if successful, will provide an infantry unit as \"change\" in the next turn. This unit can continue exploration from thar point in licu of having to bring another unit from the originating city to the front (which can take a lot of rurns on large continents). The largest continents are still islands, however, and control of one of these does not a conqueror make. Exploration of the seas is a necessary evil, and only one unit distinguishes itself in this category, the destroyer. One or two destroyers should be sent abroad at the earliest opportunity. Using the \"auto-explore\" feature is desired, while retaining the ability to intervene and directly control their movement at any point (such as when an interesting enemy coastline appears). Manually outlining enemy coasts will reveal much of the interior, depending on the size of the island or continent and will allow the player to begin estimating the required size of the invasion force. No successful military campaign ever occurred, however, without sufficient economic To complicate a similar campaign being mounted against oneself, the player has a couple of options. The first involves employing several fighters stationed in the potential target city conducting sweep patrols (now an automated function, with the player specifying only the patrol points) in the hope of picking up and engaging incoming bombers outside the range at which they can do damage. As fighters move six spaces in a turn, and have a sighting range of two spaces, this allows intermittent coverage out to eight squares, the range at which a bomber would need two entire turns to arrive. This time delay is often sufficient to evacuate important units, such as capital ships under repair, should the bombers penetrate the fighter screen. A less effective, but less costly, alternative A for non-coastal cities is to place infantry picket units five squares away from the city in the direction of the perceived threat. These units would detect incoming bombers and fighters one full turn before their arrival, allowing the player to scramble one or two city-based intercept fighters. The infantry would provide the added benefit of being ready to counteract any land threat to the city, Although these tactics are defensive, and no one ever ruled the world by defense alone, protecting critical rear areas from attack can preclude one from having to draw resources away from an offensive at the worst possible time. Consequently, it is important to discuss a few more defensive principles before defining a strategy of conquest. As each continent or island is secured, all possible incursions must occur from the sea. To prepare for and defend against amphibious assault, it is imperative thar one have the earliest possible warning. Players should utilize as many of the following options as are geographically and economically feasible. First, each land mass is surrounded by waters which will have different characteristics based on the proximity of other land masses. For the purpose of this discussion, gaps between land that are three tiles or less in width shall be referred to as straits, four to six tiles as channels, and greater than six tiles as open ocean. Posting a submarine in a strait virtually assures detection (if not destruction of approaching transports. If the transport is escorted by a destroyer or cruiser (traveling two tiles in front of it) then the submarine Corders reduced to rubble, figuratively speaking, so it is not economically viable for either side to possess it. Such cities may improve their efficiency very slowly by selecting \"no production\" from the city menu, thereby allowing inhabitants to concentrate on reconstruction inets instead of supporting the war effort. Secondarily, players may mount a strategic bombing campaign on enemy cities. When a bomber \"hits\" a city, and no other units are present in the city, whatever unit is in production is destroyed, and the city's production efficiency is reduced by a flat 10%. If other units are present, there is a random chance that they will be selected in lieu of the city as a target. A single hit in this fashion destroys the unit outright, even if it is a lengthy investment such as a Battleship, which would endure 12 hits in other types of combat. It is important to note that strategic bombing campaigns are often costly in terms of aircraft, but are extremely efficient in softening up particularly tough opponents. Who knows, one might find a virtual Pearl Harbor waiting to happen. June 1993 Page 145 "


"Deunen N ak Biletti Icavice N NWW --NN --WNW --may be destroyed, but the player will still be aware that an amphibious assault is imminent. Destroyers are the best choice for channels, as it can cover the entire width in two turns or less because of its speed. It is still possible, however, for lucky transports to bypass a destroyer screen undetected, but no system is foolproof. Using fighters and/or bombers on patrol routes is the best option for open ocean surveillance. Naturally, the bigger the area to be covered, the more aircraft that are required. I Conquered... The first step in any plan of global conquest is to develop an offensive weapons mix and a means to mobilize it through proper production Securing one's starting continent is the first order of business and it should be pursued exclusively with infantry and armor. Once accomplished, production of a transport is the next order of business. Usually, at least one other land mass is visible from friendly shores and it will be the target of the first excursion abroad. If the friendly continent has at least two cities other than the starting city, six infantry units or two armor and two infantry should be available by the time the transport is finished. These units can be assembled at the port of embarkation via the \"move to\" command. Once loaded, the transport can be ordered to the debarkation point via the same command. Initially, on larger boards anyway, the player will only come in contact with neutral cities. As such, it is too early to worry about counter-attack or even defending the somewhat helpless transports. A fully loaded transport will usually be capable of conquering two or three cities, which may be the total number on the first invaded continent. If this is the case, the first new unit the player should produce is the bomber, for immediate use in ence in scouting the surrounding areas of the two continents under control. Another city on the newly defeated continent can be ordered to produce destroyers, for long range exploration. The transport should be ordered to return to its original city, where another load of units should be awaiting its arrival. When several new areas have been identified by exploration, the player can establish convoy routes to rapidly ferry troops to the front. A convoy is set up by selecting patrol for a transport located in the port of embarbuild times. If one is uncertain how such kation and specifying a target city on a new determinations are made, it is necessary to continent as the point of debarkation. The consult the following table and subsequent transport will then leave the port of originadiscussion on the mechanics of the combat tion with any units that are available and routine. travel to the invasion point, continuing the cycle to reinforce the beach head until the Unit Characteristics player provides other orders. It is vital that the Unit Type Attack Defense Damage/hit Damage player continue moving newly produced arInfantry mor and infantry to the port of embarkation 2 2 1 Armor 22 2 as the transport will not wait until it has a full load to depart. If it is discovered that the Fighter 2 Bomber 2 2 2 enemy is using convoys, and has also failed to Transport 1 set up protection and early warning as discussed previously, it is possible to conduct a Destroyer 2 naval blockade. Station several destroyers or Submarine 2 Cruiser 2 capital ships off his coast and destroy the fully loaded transports as they depart, thereby inBattleship 2 Carrier flicting a much more critical blow than straAirbase N/A 2 tegic bombing of the same port could achieve. City N/A 2 As the waters of the world become more As the waters deadly, protecting fully loaded transports be1 vs. Shore bombardiment: 4 defending against armor in comes vital. This is initially accomplished by a river file or any non-infantry unit in mountain or forest tile. providing a destroyer or cruiser escort. Sub Same as above sequently, the player may want to build task I when bombing cities * 1 for attack and defense vs. fighters forces of several transports, escorted by 7 vs. air units ('all naval units have same limit) cruiser/destroyer screens, battleships to ° 7 vs. shore bombardment counter surface threats, and even aircraft carriers whose air wing can provide early warn\"The Unit Characteristics Table displays the ing. Forward looking screens are best, with chances of victory for any possible encounter. only minimal protection to the rear against The attackers strength is always divided by the occasional marauding destroyer (the only the sum of the attacker and defender's defense unit with sufficient speed to catch up to the ratings and expressed as a percentage. For task force). example, assume that an infantry unit is deThe presence of close air support on the fending a river coastal hex against attacking battlefield is not as decisive in Empire Deluxe armor. The resulting equation would be as in the real world, but they can aid in 2/(2+4), which equates to a 33% chance of softening up tough amphibious objective arsuccess for the armor unit or a 67% chance cas. It is fairly casy to move aircraft to the that the infantry would stand its ground. front by hopping from city to city for refuclSubsequently, let's assume a cruiser conducts ing. The optimum spacing between cities or shore bombardment on the infantry. In this air bases (which can be built by infantry units) instance, the equation would be 2/(2+1), or a is 12 tiles. This distance is spanned in two or 67% chance that the Cruiser would destroy three turns by fighters and bombers respecthe infantry unit. As one can see, the math is tively. As such, they begin and end turns simplistic, allowing quick tactical decisions in without wasted movement and can reach the the heat of battle. The only difference for front in minimal turns. Close air support computer Al opponents is that their algoremains the weakest of all the mission areas rithms will often commit forces to attacks for fighters and bombers, with a fighter equal with a low percentage of success. By underin strength to an infantry unit, but taking up standing the combat model, the player will to three times as long to build. Bombers faren not make the same mistakes and negate any slightly better because their ability to inflict advantage normally possessed. two hits puts them on equal footing with armor, and they have roughly equivalent I Had Lunch... VII 3 World conquest can make a player very hungry. Hungry for physical sustenance (a natural byproduct of the time involved in being a dictator), hungry for additional strategy and tactics to use in the game, or even hungry for more worlds to conquer. It is hoped that this primer will whet the appetite of novice despots in their quest for glory. One thing is certain, however, Empire Deluxe will be a welcome addiction (sic) to the library of every serious strategy gamer. Cow Page 146 Computer Gaming World "


"HAVE YOU SEEN THE LOST VIKINGS? Tilbe TIIDUS HEEFSELI BE STA Interplay Productions 17922 Fitch Avenue Irvine, CA 92714 (714) 553-6678 01993 Interplay Productions and Silicon & Synapss. All rights reserved. The Lost Vikings is a trademark of Interplay Productions, Inc. Silicon & Synapse, Inc. To order The Lost Vikings, call 1-800-969-4263, or see your local retailer. Circle Reader Service #59 "


" ) The Gods Are Definitely Cazy Ubisoft's Mega lo Mania by John Brassil Megalomania n. 1. Psychiatry: a mental disorder in which the subject thinks himself great or exalted. 2. A tendency to magnify or exaggerate. 3. A really big Chinese noodle. Which of these applies to the game in question? Read on. The latest offering from Ubisoft is a conversion of a Sensible Software game called Mega lo Mania. Splitting up the word \"megalomania\" into three parts for no apparent reason (if there's some sort of pun or other wordplay involved, it's beyond me) symbolizes the game as a whole. A lot of attention has been paid to things which aren't that important and the main elements have been neglected. MEGALOMANIA The credits and opening screens are nicely done and help to establish the setting of the game. The fictional set-up describes the process through which civilizations are assigned their eternal supreme beings. At the edge of the universe are gathered \"gods and all round nasty pieces of work\" to participate in the \"game of the power crazy.\" Here, in the coliseum at the end of the universe, four teams of human pawns led by vying deities slug it out using whatever weapons evolution has granted them, be it stick and stones, or nuclear warheads. on up. (What's the 27th letter? I'll never tell. It's not a new one, though.) The islands can be played in any order within the epoch, and Ah'll Do The Thinkin' Around the gamer-as-conqueror is given 100 men Here! with which to accomplish the task. Any men not allocated to islands in the current epoch Gamers have a choice of four roles to play. are carried forward and placed in a \"fresh The red team is led by Scarlet, Demigoddess blood bank.\" This is important, because of the Pleiades, who is \"fiery and aggressive.» gamers will need more than 100 men in some The yellow leader is Oberon, Self-Appointed King of Algol (some sort of programmer, I of the later epochs. Also, it is a wise idea to suppose), who is \"backstabbing and ruthless.\" start putting men in stasis during the last three Leader of the green team is Caesar, Godfather epochs in order to get ready for the 28th of the Trapeziun Mafia, reputed to be \"vinisland, known as the \"Mother of Battles.\" dictive and unpredictable.\" Finally, there is Each island is composed of two to sixteen the blue team, led by Madcap, Andromedan sectors. Mercenary Supreme, known to be \"cunning After one allocates the number of men to be and deadly.\" The computer will play the three used on the current island, the starting sector teams not chosen. I used Madcap most of the is selected. Sometimes the human player time (I like blue), but there seemed little moves first, sometimes the computer moves difference between the computer players. first. If there is more than one computer There are nine \"epochs\" of three islands opponent, the human might even move beeach. Each island has a name starting with a tween the artificial opponents! The number different letter of the alphabet, from \"Aloha\" of computer opponents varies from island to UM PC 3.5\" Zb TITLE: SYSTEM: REVIEWED ON: GRAPHICS: PRICE: PROTECTION: PUBLISHER: Mega lo Mania Amiga, IBM IBM VGA, EGA $49.95 Documentation Look-up Ubisoft Sausalito, CA Page 148 Computer Gaming World "


"DBI) building these one-shot weapons of mass destruction as quickly as possible. island, by the way, and less is not always easier. One reason is that it is possible for one to form alliances with the computer players (who can also ally amongst themselves), which prevents them from attacking the player, and also prevents any member of the alliance from building new towers. Incidentally, it is important to pick the right starting sector, since the distribution of resources on a given island is not equal. The only way to do this is to pick a sector, look at the resources, and escape back to the island selection screen. The computer will taunt the gamer for doing this, both with a \"Quitter» label underneath the player-character's picture and some nasty laughs if the sound is turned on. It would have been nice to be able to view the sectors without going through all that abuse. Each epoch has a starting tech level and requires the player to research new inventions in order to advance beyond that level. Epoch One starts out in 9500 B.C. with rocks and As mentioned earlier, troops which have been placed in stasis from earlier sectors are available for a big melee of an endgame known as the Mother of Battles (maybe Saddam has the trademark on \"Mother of All Battles\"), which is the 28th and final island. Well, that's what the manual says, anyway. There is supposed to be some sort of icon which appears on one of the menus which allows one to \"shur down\" a sector and carry the troops forward. I started looking in the seventh epoch and never did see it. When I successfully completed cpoch number nine a message informed me that I had failed to clear the final hurdle\" because I had no troops to fight the final battle, and I was then rudely deposited in the first epoch. @ @ Of Course, This Means War! Battles are resolved by placing unallied armies in the same sector. This is done by drawing troops from a tower and pointing to a sector adjacent to one already controlled. (Unless they are air unirs which do nor have to be adjacent to the destination territory.) Fights are generally to the death, as there is a severe penalty for removing an army joined in battle. The animation depicting the battles is quire well done. Sadly, the on-screen figures tend to use their weapons in a random fashion, rather than looking purposeful. An unfortunate design oversight is the way in which the game is saved. It is not possible to save between the three islands of an epoch. One might as well hang on for the last island battle once the first two have been conquered, since choosing the Save option gives the player an 11 character password for the current epoch. When one \"restores\" a game with the password, the game resumes at the beginning of the epoch, ignoring one's previous success on the other islands. The basic strategy for the early rounds is to conquer each island with as few men as posSE Unfortunately, the initial version of the game was such that, not only is it not possible to finish the game, it is not possible to leave the game! I was forced to power down the computer in order to exit, suggesting a severe lack of quality control somewhere in the development process. The game is also fraught with other annoyances, such as the illegible reproductions of game components in the manual. In fact, the nicest thing that can be said about the manual is that is printed on recycled paper. sticks. That may not sound like much, but it's better than the pebbles unarmed men must fight with. No matter what the tech level, one must gather resources to build weapons. At first, this harvesting of material resources can be accomplished right off the landscape, but it isn't long before it is important to build a mine and start digging for minerals with comic names like \"planetarium\" and \"parasite.\" In addition ro the mine, one also will need a factory in order to build more complex weapons. Labs are required to research new advances, which come in three flavors. First, there are four levels of shields used to repair damaged buildings. Second are the defensive weapons. Each building has from one to four defensive rowers in which defensive troops can be placed. The defensive arsenal can be stocked with anything from sticks to bazookas to SDI lasers. Lastly come the offensive weapons, which are used to beef up attack strength, and run the gamut from the aforementioned rocks, through catapults and fighter planes, and up to the flying saucers of 2001 A.D. sible to preserve them for the later rounds. Grow the armies, build new towers if needed, and crush those enemies. In the later epochs, when nuclear weapons become available, it is wise to expend all possible energy in building them as fast as possible, since that's what the computer is doing. So, the game becomes a matter of picking the right territory and That's All Folks! Let's pretend for a moment that all these problems were rectified and that Mega lo Mania worked as the designers intended. While the graphics are actually quite good, not enough attention has been paid to gameplay. Each island follows the same general pattern of \"Build infrastructure, amass army, and bash rower\" until nuclear weapons become available. Then, the strategy becomes \"Nuke thy neighbor.\" The game is sorta' cute, in a way, but cute is not at the top of my list of requirements for a good strategy or wargame. Maybe, it would be fair to say that I just wasn't too crazy about Mega lo Mania. Cow June 1993 Page 149 "


"Taking a peek six lost U.N. delegates and foiling the plans of their six cybernetic replacements. The CD-ROM version adds music and speech, but this may not be enough to save the game from a clumsy interface and dreadfully slow CD-ROM access time. Kids used to the quick thinking and even quicker acting Inspector Gadget may not recognize his computer analog as the same guy. IBM, IBM CD-ROM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #3. PORSENIN SLUSHOT Redre Latate. CLUB SWING Stranami Hol letal Toolscores Pinehurst Links Course Disk DO Access Software, Inc. 4910 West Amelia Earhart Dr. S. Lake City, UT 84116 (800) 800-4880 PINEHURST LINKS CHAMPIONSHIP COURSE: Access' acclaimed golf system finds another luxurious landscape in which to flaunt its graphic superiority. This add-on disk whisks golfers on the wings of their high-powered PCs to North Carolina and its exclusive Pinehurst Resort & Country Club. Pinehurst offers a wearying 7,028 yards of green in lush surroundings. The new course can be used with any of the three Access-developed programs; Links, Links 386 Pro, and Microsoft Golf Relax, have fun, but watch the pine sprigs in your slacks! IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #1. BERNHAR STRESS GERBRAN ENEROX NGO Eight Ball Deluxe Changeling Software 596 Elm Street Windsor Locks, CT 06096 (203) 623-1963 PAX IMPERIA: THE GALACTIC EMPIRE SIMULATOR: Sometimes big games come in small packages—and Pax Imperia is one of those deceptively enormous gaming experiences. Macintosh owners who dream of micro-managing a galactic empire are in business with this product, which someone has glibly named Spaceward, Ho! cubed. The day-to-day tasks of ruling an empire-managing an economy, directing espionage, consulting advisors are only half the game. Add to these responsibilities: the detailed design of one's own species a la SimLife; the direction of technological research; the design and construction of planets with a few SimCity-like development tiles; and, of course, leading troops into tactical shipto-ship battles. Expect to spend some time wading into the detail of this real wow-er! of a strategy game. For 1 to 16 players. A future version will support nerwork play. Mac ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #4. Amtex Software PO Box 572 Belleville, Ontario, Canada K&N 5B2 (613) 967-7900 EIGHT BALL DELUXE: \"Chalk up!\" Amtex's original release, Tristan Pinball, won every sort of award from the Macintosh community for its realistic translation of pinball look-n-feel. Well, Tristan couldn't hold a flipper to their latest release. Eight Ball Deluxe incorporates all the sounds, all the lights, all the action of the real award-winning pinball machine. The digitized speech tells you to \"Shoot the EightBall,\" and \"Rack 'em!» Even the spacey background noise that became standard on machines in the mid-80s is digitized and omnipresent. This product belongs in the same evil Desktop folder occupied by the likes of Tetris and Solitaire. Mac ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #2. OHR 20000 2001 Inspector Gadget File Telt Came Repu! We loved 200000 Pax Imperia FILE GENERAL AREA OBJECT CONDITIONS Azeroth 3020 Issaquah-Pine Lake Rd. Suite 341 Issaquah, WA 98027-7255 (206) 392-9941 INSPECTOR GADGET: Go-go gadget disk drive! Dr. Claw and his M.A.D. badboys are keeping the Good Guys in jobs. They've stolen the U.N. delegates to the Council on the Environment and are out to wreak all sort of eco-havoc on the ecosystem-unless Gadget can stop them. The young player takes the role of both Penny (Insp. Gadget's niece) and Brain the Dog (man's best hacker), alternating between the two characters as they proceed through this adventure game that borrows its inspiration from Carmen Sandiego. Young sleuths will travel the world looking for the Domark 1900 South Norfolk Street, #202 San Mateo, CA 94403 (415) 513-8929 VIRTUAL REALITY STUDIO 2.0: Ah yes, \"virtual reality,\" the really cool buzzword that's meaning has been stretched to include just about anything on a computer. Despite their abuse of the term, Domark has created an interesting 3-D modeling tool for the average computing Joe. VR Studio 2 is a real-time 3D object/environment creation utility. The package includes a collection of readymade objects, a sound effects editor, a simplistic animation creator, and a VCR playback function. After piecing together the 3-D environment, users can walk, drive, or fly through it, and can even record their trip for later playback with the VCR utility. A creative individual could have a good time with this package, but be warned-realizing the full potential of the program requires a bit of programming in a simple BASIC-like language. IBM ($99.95). Circle Reader Service #5. POLOS 529582 293: 978 99626163 2062320000A Virtual Reality Studio 2.0 Page 150 Computer Gaming World "


"ZERO'S & ONE'S JUNE SPECIAL $4 OFF 2ND GAME ORDERED IN JUNE* (800) 788-2193 *Prepaid orders only:Order any game from this ad and receive a $4 discount from your next order placed before June 30. HARDWARE CREATIVE LABS: Discovery 16:CDR Drv & SB16 489.00 Discovery 8:CDR Dry & SB Pro 419.00 Edutainment:CDR Drv, SB Pro, GCD Sftware 469.00 Snd Blaster 16 218.95 Snd Blaster Pro DIX 139.95 Video Blaster 329.95 Video Spigot 427.00 MEDIA VISION: Fusion 16 CDRom Dry & 16 Bit Snd Cd 499.95 Pro Aud Spect 16 Snd Cd 179.95 Pro Audio Spectrum 16 MM Kit 959.95 TOSHIBA 3401 200ms Int w/Pas Cable 499.00 AI TECH: Pro PC/TV Plus 323.95 Pro VGA/TV Plus 636.95 Video Surge 615.95 OTHER SND, MM, & VIDEO CARDS: ATI Ultra Grph Plus w/2mb 308.00 Computer Eyes RT 434.95 Gravis Ultra Sound 138.95 TelevEyes VGA-TV 229.95 WIN TV 399.95 STICKS & YOKES CH PRODUCTS: Auto Ill Game Card 29.95 Flight Stick 35.95 Mach II 28.95 Virtual Pilot Yoke 62.95 GRAVIS Analog Pro 37.95 Game Card Hi Speed 29.95 THRUSTMASTER: ACM HiSpd Game Card 26.95 Weapons Control 72.95 Flight Control 59.95 Flight Control Pro 99.95 Rudder Pedals 99.95 MODEMS Prices too Low to Print: call Supra call Zoom Sample Listing of Products FLT SIM/WAR Cobra Mission 47.95 Sim Ant 35.95 Sim City 29.95 Conquered Kingdoms 35.95 A Line in Sand 26.95 35.95  29.95 Air Warrior SVGA Sim Earth 42.95 Ambush 41.95 Dagger Amon Ra 41.95 Sim Life 41.95 Armored Fist 42.95 Dark Half 34,95 Simpson's Arcade 29.95 ATAC 34.95 Dark Sood 41.95 Space Quest V 41.95 B-17 Flying Fortress 41.95 Darklands 41.95 Spear of Dutiny:Wlfnetn 35.95 Battle Isle 29.95 Daughter of Serpents 32.95 Spellcasting 301 3 5.95 Birds of Prey 31.95 Design Your Railroad 34.95 Spellcrft:Aspects Valor 35.95 Campaign 35.95 Discovery:Columbus 35.95 Star Control II 35.95 Comanche:Maximum Ovrk 43.95 Dragon Lair III 35.95 Star Trek 25th Anniv. 35.95 Carrier Strike 41.95 Dragon Lairo:Singe's 35.95 Stunt Island 33.95 Carriers at War 34.95 Dune Il 35.95 Teen Mut Ninja Trtles 29.95 Conquerd Kingdoms 35.95 Dungeon Master 29.95 Terminator 2029 41.95 Conquest Japan 35.95 Dusk of Gods 32.95 Time Quest 29.95 Empire Deluxe 35.95 Eco-Quest2:Rainforest 29.95 Traders 19.95 15 Stirke Eagle III 43.95 Elvira II 39.95 Ultima Underworld II 47.95 Falcon 3.0 44.95 Flight Sim 4.0 37.95 Eric The Unready 35.95 Ultima VII Part 2 47.95 Flight Sim Add-Ons call Gemfire 29.95 Ultrabots 36.95 Harpoon Chlgr Pak Sig Ed 47.95 Global Effect 19.95 Veil of Darkness 35.95 Jetfighter 11 39.95 Goblins 2 24.95 Wacky Funstore 19.95 Jump Jet 41.95 Heimdall 21.95 Waxworks 35.95 Liberty or Death 35.95 Home Alone 2 27.95 Wing Commander II 47.95 Lost Admiral 35.95 Humans 25.95 Wizardary VII:Creaders 41.95 Megafortress Mega Pak 37.95 Inca 34.95 CD ROM Pacific Wor 47.95 Indy Jones 4 35.95 Patriot 43.95 Kings Quest VI 44,95 7th Guest 59.95 Patton Strikes Back 14.95 Kyrandia (Legend) 34.95 Arthur's Teacher Trbls 41.95 Perfect General 35.95 LA LAW 34.95 Composer's Qst MPC 54.95 Secret Weapons Luftwife 42.95 Legends Valour 37.95 Dinosauer Adventures 41.95 Special Forces 29.95 41.95 Eco-Quest 1 Leis. Suit Larry 5 41.95 Strike Commander 47.95 Task Force 1942 Encarta MM Encycl. 269.95 35.95 Lemminge 2 38.95 Global Explrer DeLorme 99.95 Theater of War Lord of Rings:2 Towers 35.95 19.95 Inspector Gadget 35.95 V Victory 1.2. or 3 en Lost Treas Infocom II 29.95 43.95 Magic Candle III 37.95 King's Quest VI 41.95 ENTERTAINMENT Magnetic Scrolls 24.95 Just Grandma & Me 38.95 A-Train Maniac Mansion 14.95 Kodak Photo CD 29.95 A-Train Construction 22.95 Mantis 31.95 Mars Explorer 43.95 ADD's call Mario la Missing! 34.95 MS Cinemania MPC 54.95 ADD:Unltd Adventure 37.95 Mercenaries (Tegals) 37.95 Monarch Notes 81.95 Action 5-5 Sierra Gms 24.95 Might & Magic IV 41.95 Old Testmanet Interact 49.95 Adventre Startor Sierra 19.95 Monkey Island 2 2 5.95 Our House Fam Circus 41.95 Air Bucks 35.95 Out of This World 36.95 Prophone 1993 Ed 199.95 Alone in the Dark 35.95 Paladin 11 35.95 Putt Putt Joins Parad 44.95 Amazons 38.95 Police Quest 3 39.95 Rodney's Fun Screen 39.95 Arcade Hits 24.95 Prophecy by Sierra 24.95 Sherlock Holmes 3 46.95 Armourgeddon 39.95 Populous II 37.95 Space Adventure 61.95 Back to Future II 26.95 Price of Persia 29.95 Space Quest IV 41.95 Bart Simpson-Wierdnes 29.95 Quest for Glory III 41.95 VGA Spectrum 1 29.95 Batman Returns 41.95 Ringworld 35.95 Willy Beamish 41.95 Batltch 1,2&Mechwrior 31.95 Romance 3 Gngdoms 39.95 Wing Commander II Dix 56.95  35.95 Rome:Pathway to Pwr 29.95 Wing Commander II/Ultima Carmen San Diego call SciFi:5 Actvision Games 26.95 Underworld 58.95 Castles 11 35.95 Shadow Prosident 41.95 World Fact Book '92 59.95 Challenge of 5 Realms 39.95 Shadowlands 29.95 WINDOWS Civilization:Master Playr49.95 Sherlock Hlms:Lst Filos 42.95 Alphabet Blocks 29.95 ClassicAdventure-Lucas35.95 Siege 22.95 Audio-Star Trek V.1 34.95 MS Golf 42.95 Musicator GS 1 97.95 Origin FX Screen Svr 24.95 Spacoward Ho! 35.95 Star Trek Screen Sur 44.95 Tako Break Crossword 22.95 Uninvited 35.95 Winsense 44.95 SPORTS Car & Driver 37.95 Front Page Sports Ftbl 41.95 Hole In One Mini. Golf 24.95 Jack Nicklaus Sig Golf 41.95 Jordan in Flight 36.95 Unks 386 Pro 41.95 Mauna  19.95 Banff 19.95 NFL Pro Football 1992 35.95 NFL Video Pro Football 35.95 Sports Adventure 47.95 Tony La Russa Bobl II 37.95 Wayne Grtzky Hocky 3 35.95 World Circuit Grnd Prix 35.95 World Tour Tennis 31.95 EDUCATIONAL ACT Studywaro 29.95 Alge-Blaster 29.95 Calculus 24.95 Castle of Dr. Brain 29.95 Dinosauor Adventure 32.95 Eco-Quest Rainforest 29.95 Inspector Gadget 34.95 Island Dr. Brain 29.95 Kid Works 2 34.95 Lost Tribes (Soc. Stdy) 24.95 Mario Teacher Typing 24.95 Math Rabbit (New) 29.95 Mickey's ABC's Ench. 19.95 Millie's Math House 29.95 Mystery at Museum 34.95 Operation Neptune 34.95 Oregon Trail DIX 35.95 Playroom 29.95 Putt-Putt Fun Pak 25.95 Ready for Letters 34.95 Rock & Bach 34.95 Time Treks 35.95 Treasure Math Storm 34.95 What's My Angle-Goom 29.95 41.95 AND A WIDE RANGE OF OTHER TITLES FROM A...TO Z..! Boca call ALL IBM COMPATIBLE ZERO'S & ONE'S 6472B WINDY RD. LAS VEGAS, NV 89119 ORDER: 800-788-2193 FAX: 702-897-1571 TECH/INFO: 702-897-2797 INTL: 702-897-2797 Prices and availability subject to change. All sales final. We do not guarantee compatability. All software is factory fresh and unopened. We are not responsible for manufacturer's defects. Contact publisher regarding defects. Shipping: 1st game $5; add'l games add $1 each inContinental US. 2nd Day Air $6 1st game, add'l games add $1 each in Continental US. COD add $5.00. All prices are US Dollars. WE ACCEPT M/C & VISA. Circle Reader Service #102 "


"Taking a peek Mallard Software, Inc. 3207 Justin Road Flower Mound, TX 75028 (800) WEB-FEET JAPAN SCENERY UPGRADE: This isn't just another chunk of Flight Simulator square-mileage with a polygon Mr. Fuji. No, Mallard has gone beyond their normal scenery offerings with this package. Sure, one can tool around the islands of Japan in their Piper Cub, but why settle for that kind of hp when one can hop behind the prop of a Zero-Sen, a Hellcat or a Corsair. And if they're not enough, one can even pilot the supersonic F18 Hornet. Now, of course, Dynamix, Spectrum HoloByte, and MicroProse aren't losing any sleep over this new competition, but Flight Simulator aficionados may still find some thrills in this package; not the least of which is landing one of the WWII fighters on the U.S.S Yorktown, Enterprise, or the Japanese Akagi. Banzai! IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #6. confronted by a menace from another dimension (and, no, his name isn't \"the Guardian\"). To defend his homeland, the player must draw together the five realms of the title. The player is assigned one of four character classes (warrior, wizard, diplomat or thief) based upon a 12 question multiple choice quiz (and, no, the questions are not posed by a gypsy). Though the game is not terribly original (as hinted at parenthetically), it does have some neat new features. To wit; a paint program that enables one to paint their own character's countenance; the \"PAL\" player-character system which allows members of one's party to act as distinct personalities outside of the player's control; and two combat options, Quick and Descriptive, which give one the option of completely automating combat or explicitly giving orders step-by-step. Beyond the new features, it's more Hit Points, Halberds, and Hack'n'Slash on a grand scale. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #8. Japan Scenery Upgrade USE... 3 DO... WH02 MAP FOLLOW BUND SYSTEM Mo Rome Pathway to Power JOIDE Microsoft Corporation One Microsoft Way Redmond, WA 98052-6399 (206) 882-8080 (ask for Bill) MICROSOFT VIDEO FOR WINDOWS: Microsoft's Funniest Home Vidcos? Maybe. Computing videophiles can now import and edit video images from their cameras, VCRs, and videodiscs (with an appropriate video capture card). Cutting, pasting, compressing, even converting Mac QuickTime video into IBM format—all of these functions and more can be yours if the price is right. The package even includes a CD-ROM with stock video footage that can be incorporated into one's business presentations, multimedia projects, or summer vacation footage. (Geez, one could really impress the Jones' with skillful editing of the trip to Poughkeepsie). IBM, CD-ROM optional ($199). Circle Reader Service #9. Challenge of the Five Realms Maxis 2 Theatre Square, Suite 230 Orinda, CA 94563-3346 (510) 254-9700 ROME_PATHWAY TO POWER: All roads lead to Rome, but some are better paved than others. Hector, the player's character in this lightweight adventure game, has certainly chosen a rocky path-bur no one said the rise from peon to Caesar was going to be easy. Hector begins this quest as a slave in the doomed city of Pompeii, that lovely port with the breathtaking view of Mt. Vesuvius. He can't hang around long, though, and must use any means necessary to escape; and if that means planting a knife in the back of a bourgeois fat-cat, then so be it. This is no goody-goody save-the-world quest. Hector's \"Brutus\" imitation sets the tone for the rest of Rome as he claws his way through six 3-D isometric environments to the ultimate seat of power and degradation. The tone is light and irreverent, the interface is point-n-clicky, the docs are sparse though entertaining (and in six languages), and the puzzles will best suit the beginning adventurer. Rome is certainly a departure from Maxis' usual fare; one should not expect anything Sim-like in this British import. IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader Service #7. V WHOSEALAN BOLSOS Microsoft Video for Windows MicroPlay 180 Lakefront Dr. Hunt Valley, MD 21030-2245 (410) 771-1151 CHALLENGE OF THE FIVE REALMS: Based on an original story by Marc Miller, the creator of the Traveller people-and-paper RPG, this CRPG puts players in the boots of a character who is Presto Studios PO Box 262535 San Diego, CA 92126-2535 (619) 689-4895 THE JOURNEYMAN PROJECT: It is well-known that the Macintosh has become the unofficial platform of choice for artists, and so it is that the most interesting creative developments in multi-media have all been developed on it. The Journeyman Project is, for the brief software moment, the pinnacle of these creative multi-media efforts. Unfortunately, its beautifully rendered \"photorealistic\" environment is the scene of an over-used plot: The player takes the role of a Temporal Security agent whose job is to time-skip around human history repairing futurethreatening rips in the fabric of time. The Computer Gaming World The Journeyman Project Page 152 "


"Top Titles at the Lowest Prices! 800-554-9925 ComputAbility Since 1982 CGW 6-93 FAX: (414) 357-7814 TECH INFO: (414) 357-8181 HRS (CST): M-F 8am-8pm, Sat 11am-5pm P.O. Box 17882, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53217 Call Us On Our US/Canadian Toll Free Number! Consumer Electronics IBM 37.95 47.95 4995 37.95 39 95 31.95 37.95 39.95 SOUND CARDS CREATIVE SOUND CALL! BLASTER.16 ASP CREATIVE LAUS. ING. 42.95 42.95 37.95 34.95 29.95 19.95 34.95 3495 34.95 3595 Ultima VII Part 2 Ultima Underworld il Ultrabots Uncharted Waters United for Windows Unlimited Adventures U.S Civics. V for Victory Market Garden V for Victory Ulah Beach V for Victory i Velikrye Luli Veil of Darkness . Wayne Gretzke 3. Wangid Warriors of Legend................ Wax Works Ween The Prophecy When Two Worlds Wat...... Where...Carmen San Diego, Each Where...Carmen Past Where... Carmen USA Deluxe Where. Carmen World Deluxe Wild Seence Arcade Wilson Pro Stall Golf Wing Commander 11 Speech Accessory Pack Special Operations #1 of 2 Wing Commander Deluxe Wirardry Crusaders Data Savant World Atlas 40 World Orcut Champ Edition World Science Arcade World Tennis World Tour Tennis World Circuit Grand Prix XWing Zodiac Signs Harpoon Signature Edition 4798 Heimdall 2495 Indy Jones 4 Fate of Atlantis 34.95 International Sports Challenge.... 30.95 Jack Nicklaus Unlimited 3495 Legend of Kyrandia 34.95 Lemmings 1 012 28 95/34 95 Light Quest... 3195 Links 29.95 Firestonio Bountiful Course Disks..... 17.95 Lord of the Rings 2 or 3 34.95 Lords of Time... 29.95 Lost Treasures of Infocom 39.95 Maddon Footbal 31.95 Mega Fortress 37.95 Mission Disk 1 of 2 25.95 Mercenaries 3795 Megatraveler 2 Mig-29 30.95 Might & Magic ill 34.95 Napoleon 29.95 Navy Seals. 25.95 No Greater Glory 39 95 On No More Letting stand alone On tot Mote Lemm add-01 21.95 Out of this World 46.95 PGA Tour Golf 31.95 Gall Tournament Course disk 17.95 Perfect General 3495 WWII Scenario Disk 19.95 Pinball Dreams 2495 Pinball Fantasy P.Fighter Plan 9 from Space Pools of Darkness  16-Bit Stereo Sampling & Playback for Voice Channel  Enhanced 4-Operator, 20-Voice Stereo FM Music Synthesizer  MIDI & CD-ROM Interfaces  Windows 3.1, SB & SB Pro Compatible 29.95 44.95 38.95 2495 15.95 20 95 49.95 39.95 40.95 34.95 MEDIA WA VISION 39 95 PRO AUDIO Multimedia PC AMIGA ARS 888888888888 $175 Atrain 39.95 Agony NEW! 34 95 29.95 29.95 31.95 Pro Audio Studio 16 $215 39 95 34.95 3095 36 95 34 95 19.96 39.95 MODEMS ZOOM The Challenge scenario disk Powermonget Prehistoric Prophecy of the Shadow Red Zone Road Rash Secret of Monkey Island I or II Shadow of the Beast Il or Ill Shadowlands Shanon lige 29.95 Shuttle 29.95 Sim Ant 3495 Sim City 29.95 Sim Earth 2995 Solitaires Journey 34.95 Space Hulk 3195 Star Controlll..... 34.95 Star Trek 25th Anniversary 295 Strip Poker 3...... 29.95 Tales of Magic: Prophecy Shadow 37.95 Terrain Envoy The Challenge. 20.95 The Light Corndar 2995 Tom Landry Football 29.95 Twighlight 2000 34.95 Ultima IV or V 37.95 29.95 Viking Field of Conquest 36.95 Warriors of Legends 19.95 Where in the Carmen each ... 29.95 World Circuit 3495 Call For More Titles! Utopia A Line in the Sand Aces of the Pacific 39.95 WWII 1946 add on disk... Aces Over Europe .......... AD&D Dark Sun Shattered Lands....... 47 95 AD&D Unlimited Adventures................... 31.95 ADIBOVADIJUNIOR VOL 1 Adventures of Pinocchia 45.95 Air Bucks. . . 34 95 Air Traffic Controller 3495 Air Warrior Aircraft & Adventure Factory 24.05 Airforce Flight Assignment. 39.95 Aladdin and His Wonderful Lamp Alone in the Dark 24.95 Amazon 39 95 Ambush 37 95 Ancient Art of War in the Skies... 31.95 Armored Fist Aspects of Valor 5905 ATAC 3495 ATP Tennis 31 95 AT Air Command 3495 B-17 Flying Fortress 39.95 Bad Blood 31 95 Barrons Book Notes Batman Returns 39.95 Battles of Destiny Ball Chess 4000 Super VGA/ 29.95/3495 Battlefield 2000 3706 Betrayal at Kondot .... ..39.95 Big League Ballpark disk hardball 1795 Black Crypt B RÔ Body Illustrated Buzz Aldrin Race into Space...... 31.95 Campaign Car & Driver 37.85 Carrer Strike South Pacific 39 95 Expansion Set Camers of War Carriers of War Construction Kit 3495 Castles 1 or Il 3495/34.95 Ceaser Challenge of the Five Healms. 34.95 Champions ... 34.95 Civilization 44.95 Classic Adventures Clouds of Xeen Cobra Mission 4695 Comanche. Maximum Overkil 42.95 Mission Disk 11 of 12 . 259525.95 Conquered Kingdoms............ 34.95 Creepers 2995 Crusaders of the Dark Savant.................. 41.95 Curse of Amon Ra Curse of Enchanta...... Cyber Empires 31.95 Damensgate VGA. 3495 Darklands 1995 Darklands MPE Dark Ha Dark Sun... 47.95 Daughter of Serpents 31 95 Deja Vu for Windows 31 95 Dinosaur Adventure Dominant Species 2995 Dragonslar 3 34 95 Dr. Floyds Desktop Toys... 24.95 Dune 11 34.95 Eagle Eye Mysteries....... 31.95 Ecoquest. The Search for Cetus. 49.95 Eight Ball Deluxe 39.95 El Fish Electronic Aquarium 34.95 Elviral 3995 Empire Deluxe 34.95 Entrepreneur Business Planner 49.95 Etic the Unready 34.95 Exodus .24.95 Eye of the Beholder 2 or 3. 37.95/37.95 F-15 12 Classic premium 19.95 F-15 Strike Eagle lll........ 34.95/49.95 Fables & Fiends Legend of Kytardia 34.95 Falcon 30 44.95 Disk 1 Operation Fighting Tiger 2 4.95 Final Conflict......... 29,95 Financial Workshop Flashback ........ 31.95 Flight Assignment Air Force Flight Simulator 4.0 Pilots Power Tools 24.95 Freddy Pharkas... 39.95 Front Page Football FX Screen Saver Gambit. 32.95 Gary Grisby's Pacific War German 50 Global Effect Goblin IlGrand Slam Bridge II 31.95 Great Ilaval Battles...... 42.95 Scenario Builder/Expans Disks ea 25.95/20.95 America in the Altantic 1995 Hard Ballll or Ill. .29.95/34.95 Harpoon Designers series .. 17.95 Harpoon Designers' Series 23.95 Harpoon Signature Edition Harriet Assolt Heroes of the 357th 17.95 High Command $295 Moyles 1 Classic 2995 Humans INICA 3495 tacredible Machine 2995 Indy Jones 4. Fate of Atlantis 3495 Island of Dr. Brain 2996 Italian 50 J Nicklaus Sign Tout 2 12.95 Jack and the Beanstalk .35.95 John Madden Football 2 31.95 Jump Jet 39.95 Jump Jet Ace Pack 19.95 Jungle Book Kaa's Hunting 35,95 Jutland 49.95 King's Quest 6 44.95 La Russa Baseball Laser Squad 24.95 Learning at Home 29.95 Legacy, The 3995 Legacy Realm of Terror 34 95 Iepends of Valout Leisure Suit Larry 5 39.95 Lemmings 2995 Oh No! More Leninos (add-on).........21.95 Lemmings tl. 34.95 Liberty of Death Links 386 Pro... 39 95 Miura Rea... 19.95 | Lin| , Lord of the Rings I: Two Towers ..... 34 95 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes 4295 Lost Treasures of Infocom. 39.95 Lost Vikings 299 Lunar Command 34 95 Lute of the Temptress 29.95 Magic Candel 20.95 Magic Candle III 370S Mantis/Speech Pack.......... 39.95/19.95 Math Rabbit Enhanced 29.95 Mario Missing Mega Lo Mana Megatravele: llor lll. 34.95 39.95 Michael Jordan in Flight 37.95 Might & Magic III. 34,95 Monopoly Deluxe for Win Mozart's Magical Music Machine. 20.95 MS Golf for Windows 42.95 Multimedia Music Vivaldi 35.95 Mystery at the Museum 34.95 PHI H5-1975 29.95 NFL Pro League Footbal NFL Video Pro Football............ 44.95 Mo Greater Glory 39.95 Omar Sharif on Bridge Windows 29.95/29.95 Origin FX Screen Savet Out of this World.. 34.95 Pacific Theater of Operations 39.95 Paladin 2 34 95 Patriot 42.95 Pathway to Power 2995 Pepper's Adventure in Time 2995 Perfect General 34.95 Pinehurst CC Golf Course. 19.95 Pirates of Gold Edition 39.95 Pirates of Gold 39.95 Populous il... 3795 Power Politics 29.95 Powermonger WWI PrintShop Deluxe . .. 44.95 Graphics Libraries: Business... 29 95 Graphics Libraries: Sampler 29 95 Privateer 47.95 Pro League Baseball....... 34.95 Proto Star: War on the Frontier ...... 3995 Quarky Turbo Science 29.95 Quest for Glory 3 Rags to Riches... 34.95 Realms of Arkan 34.95 Ring World 34.95 Ring World: Patriarch's Revenge/premium 34.95 Robocop 3D 31.95 RoboSport 24.95 Rock and Bach Studio 34.95 29.95 Rules of Engagement SCOUT Seal Team 37.95 Secret Weapons Luftwaffe. 39.99 Expansion Disk 123 or 4 Serpent Isle (U7 part 2) 47.95 Seventh Guest 65.99 Seven Cities of Gold 31.95 Shadow President Shadowgate for Windows 31.95 Shadowlands 2995 Station Bridge Enfanced Sid Meier's Bundle 2995 Siege / Expansion Disk 20.95 20.95 Sim Ant DOS/Windows 349573495 Sim City DOS Windows 29.95/34.95 Sim Earth / Windows 29.9529 95 Si Farm 34.95 Sim Life 39.95 Software Jukebox Agrade builder.........39.95 Software Jukebox The Arcade ..39.95 34.95 Sound Graphics, Aircraft ... 24.95 Space Hulk... 37.95 Space Inc. 34.95 Space Quest 5 39.95 Specal Forces 29.95 Spectre Supreme.... 39 95 Spectre 00S premium 34 95 Spell Craft 3495 Spellcasting 301 3495 Spelm er Pirates of Realmspace 37.95 Star Controlli 345 Star Legions 37.95 Star Trek Screen Savers for Win 32 05 Strike Commander 47.95 Strip Poker 3/datadisk 995/15.95 Summoning 37.95 Sweet & Low, American Folk Songs 35.95 Syndicate TA Break Pool 29.95 Task Force 1942 39.95 Task Force Admirals Pack 44.95 Tegels Mercenaries 37.95 Terminator 2029 20 95 The Prophecy 24.95 Theatre of War 17.95 Tom Landry Football Tony Larussa Baseball 36 95 Tornado Traders 29.05 Treasures or the Savage Frontier Tristan 29.95 Ultima VII Forge of Virture Data Disk...... 20.95 Air Force Commander ..... Air Support Bard's Tale Curistruction Birds of Prey Black Crypt.... Burz Aldrin's Race Into Space Campaign Carmen San Diego Each Carmen San Diego America... Castles Campaign Disk Castles 11 Civil War.... Conquest of Japan Creepers Crusaders of the Dark Savant Cyber Empires Cytron Daemonsgate Dark Seed Death Knights of Krynn .... Delux Music Il Deluxe Paint IV (while supples last) Demoniak Desert Strike Discovery Columbus Dragon stat 3 Dund Elita Il Jaws of Cerberus Eye of the Beholder I or ll ... Eve of the Storm F-10-18 Fabies & Fends: Legend of Kyranda Fighter Dual Pro Final Contact Gateway to the Savage Frontier Great Ilaval Battles Harpoon Battleset #4 Harpoon Designers Series Battleset V.32 bis Internal/External .......................S185/S205 V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 Int. . ..... $195 V.32 bis Send/Receive 14,400 Ext. ................ $235 37.95 34.95 2995 39.95 31.95 29.95 34.95 39.95 31.95 77.95 97.95 30.95 3195 34.95 3495 29.95 39 95 37.95 2995 Rome Supra Corporation Supra Fax Modem V.32 bis, Internal with Fax Software, DOS/Windows ..... $189/$189 SupraFax Modem V.32 bis, Ext. alone ............. $245 with Fax Software, DOS/Win ..............$265 / $265 &&&& Software available only on 3.5\" disk or combination packs. No individual 5.25\" disks are available &&& 800-554-9925 $32 $75 .............$39 *****.......$19 JOYSTICKS Advanced Gravis: Analog Joystick Eliminator Game Card...... $30 PC MouseStick.. CH Products: Virtual Pilot / Virtual Pilot Pro .................. $69 / $89 Flight Stick Hi Speed Adaptor .... Gamecard 3-Auto / Gamecard 3-PS/2 ....... $30/549 MACH 3 Joystick .............. .................... S29 Maximum: MAXX Flight Yoke .......... ...... MAXX Pedal .................. Kraft: Kraft KC3... Kraft Trackball w/Foot Controler .................... Kralt Thunderstick ................. Thrustmaster: Flight Control... Weapons Control ........ $75 Thrustmater Pro......  One of Wisconsin's Top 10 of Software Available. Women Owned Businesses. All Products Sold . Corporate Government & Carry Manufacturers! School POS Welcome. Full Warranties & VISA Moscard Documentation.  APO, FPO HI, AK No Surcharge Puerto Rico & Canadian on Credit Cards. orders welcome: 6% Most Orders Shipped Min. $6. International within 48 Hours, Orders Shipped First Class  Software Shipping only Mail Insured: S5 per order, not per title. 15%. Min. $15. If mail cost Hardware: 5% Min. SS. exceeds calculated amount. .C.O.D orders welcome, you'll be billed additional with only a $5.00 Charge. Call for Free Catalog . We Ship Latest Version &Items Not Listed Prices luctuate beyond our control & may change for heller or worse. Detective returns must have a Retum Authorization number. Call our 1.80to obtain a Retum Authorization at your return will not be accepted. Shipping & handling are non-refundable. All sales are final. All returns are subject to a restocking fee. ......... $75 ............. S119 Circle Reader Service #44 "


"  l somewhat non-linear adventure unfolds as the player combines both adventure gaming problem solving with a quick action-gaming trigger finger. Though its story is trite, Journeyman is a landmark effort in multi-media development, offering a queer futuristic soundtrack, nice sound effects, well-performed video/voice acting, and the aforementioned, stunning graphics. It's unfortunate that \"Macheads» (affectionately used) are the only ones able to enjoy this beautiful piece. Mac II with CD-ROM and 8 megs RAM. ($99.95). Circle Reader Service#10. kill, breasts that jiggle, knights that brutally murder young maidens ah, yes, it must be \"humor National Lampoon style. Calling itself «the world's first humorous chess game\" (apparently not appreciating Interplay's attempts), this product offers a mediocre chess opponent in a rarely funny, occasionally offensive, and frequently lame context. The chess pieces are nicely rendered in live-action video, but the technical whiz-bang can't save it from its still-born concept. Though it bills itself as \"bawdy\" it is more often brutal, both in terms of truly senseless violence and its ax-murderer's sense of comedic subtlety. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #13. SIRLUST ST RIUS Yay PUBLISHING Lara PUBLISHING PC Karaoke Whoopit Upl Enable Whoop It Up WideIcon Event System Events Setup Shutdown Stop Sign Icon Question Icon Escalco Ailesisk Icon General Protection Error Syuten Events Dieren Events Sound fern wheep soundt Application Cuanden) Hande Test aber way anisol war Sirius Publishing 7320 E. Butherus Suite 100 Scottsdale, AZ 85260 (800) 247-0307 PC KARAOKE: The ultimate exhibitionist's toy comes home to your PC, the included microphone begging to be plugged into your sound card and caressed with the lusty vibrato of your voice. Eleven classic sing-a-longs are included on the initial CD, including \"Pretty Woman,\" \"New York, New York,\" \"Twist and Shout,\" among other pop perennials, and the package includes a catalog of dozens of other disks that can be ordered. Your sound board plays the music (sans lead vocals) and the back-up chorus, while the words to the song are highlighted on the screen. All you need to provide is your raspy, tone-deaf interpretation to embarrass your family and irritate your neighbors. IBM CD-ROM. ($129.95). Circle Reader Service #11. Audio Clips Total Recall Star Graphics 1800 S.W. Ist Avenue, Suite 545 Portland, OR 97201 (800) 831-7611 Q: The \"Q» is probably for quick,\" \"quirky\" and \"qute,\" as they best describe this inventive diversion for Windows owners. The game is played on a hexagonal grid formed into one Meta-Hexagon, wherein creep invisible alien ships. The player moves his or her laser cannon around the perimeter of the hex, firing occasional shots into the inky black. If a shot directly hits an invisible alien ship, the player is told so, but the location of the ship is not revealed. If the shot glances off of the side of a ship, the player is told that, too, and the entry and exit points of the laser blast into the Meta-Hexagon are shown. With this information, the player must figure our exactly where the ships are hidden. While it is nothing to go quazy over, it is a nice diversion of the coffee break kind. IBM ($19.99). Circle Reader Service #14. POO 0018-1 00:00:00 Chess Maniac 5 Billion and 1 Sound Source Unlimited 2985 E. Hillcrest Drive #A Westlake Village, CA 91362 (805) 494-9996 AUDIO CLIPS TOTAL RECALL & TERMINATOR 2: The man who made his name with well-articulated pectorals and ill-articulated one-liners can now and forever be a part of your Windows environment. All of the best punch-lines from Arnold Schwarzenegger's two latest starring roles have been condensed and canned in two separate packages. No longer will you exit Windows with an unceremonious drop to the DOS prompr; now, Arnold will wish you on your way with an \"Hasta la vista, baby\" or \"Your terminated.\" There's plenty of comic relief here for the humanoid who spends too much time with icons and mice. IBM ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #12. CTTML Strategic Simulations, Inc. 675 Almanor Ave. Suite 201 Sunnyvale, CA 94086-2901 GREAT NAVAL BATTLES—AMERICA IN THE ATLANTIC: What if the Japanese had not been involved in WWII and America's Pacific fleet was used against Germany? The historian's speculations are now the computer gamer's playthings with this addition to SSI's simulation of large scale naval conflict, Great Naval Battles. This expansion disk includes several new ship types; the Pensacola-, New Orleans-, Gearing-, and Fletcher-class destroyers, and the South Dakotaand lowa-class battleships. In addition, these boats are pitted against Hitler's floats in three campaigns and several hypothetical battles promising the gamer «40 hours of all-new game play.\" The ships can also be integrated into the scenario builder (sold separately) for use in Computer Gaming World URLIDO Eileen Spectrum Holo Byte 2490 Mariner Square Loop Alameda, CA 94501 (510) 522-1164 CHESS MANIAC 5 BILLION AND 1: Puppies that piddle, body odors that Page 154 America in the Atlantic "


"Conversions RECEIVED wania EBBE EXE Vikings Sim City Bain $9.00 CD $6 $9.00 Amiga: Atrain (Maxis) The Bard's Tale Construction Set (Interplay) IBM PC: Elf (Ocean) The Tinies (Inline Design) Vikings: Fields of Conquest (Realism Entertainment) Macintosh A-Train Construction Set (Maxis) Stellar 7 (Dynamix) MS Windows: Casino Pack 1 (Mindscape) Cogito (Kalisto) SEGA Genesis: PGA Tour Golf II (Electronic Arts) Super Nintendo SNES: Shanghai SUN/UNIX: Sim City (Dux Software) Black Jack MARAMIDALADJONERADAS PELAS The Tinies Casino Pack 1 HAPPYLAND OPY SEN PILKKIS KURR IKKEK 22212 KROGS 011 2013 Stellar 7 Cognito 36-37 139 59 32-33 Access Adanac Apogee Software Aztech Systems Bit Wit Blue Valley Software Broderbund Cactus Development Cape Cod Connection Cerebel Info. Arts Chips & Bits Advertisers List Flagship Magazine 122 Formgen Gamer's Gold 138 Gamctck 38-39 GEnie 115 Genovation 15 Gossclin Computer 108 HPS Simulations 74 Impressions 18, 19, 21 Interface Dynamics 66 Interplay Keyboard Commander Lance Haffner Games Liberty International Lucid Group Logitech Mallard Software 61 Mission Control 95 MicroProse Software 27, 29,31 MPG Net 80-81 New World Computing 75 Origin Systems 164 147 Paper Mayhem Psygnosis Quarterdeck Office Systems Readysoft Realism Entertainment ROM Time SDJ Entrprises Sideline Software Sierra On-Line Sir-Tech Spectrum HoloByte Strategic Simulations Three-Sixty Pacific Thrustmaster Twin Engine Gaming U.S. Videotel Viking Software Villa Crespo Virgin Games Zeros & Ones 143 138 63, 65, 67 69, 71, 73 123 143 153 91 117 87 89 12-13 85 108 41, 43, 45 47, 49, 51, 53,55 3 109, 163 11,113 129 42 naan 142 Computer Express Compsult Computability Creative Labs DC True Digispeech Disk-Count Software Electronic Arts Electronic Innov. Design Entertainment Software Consult. 59 104-105 16-17 115 June 1993 Page 155 "


"Taking a peek ahistorical situations of one's own device. IBM ($29.95). Circle Reader Service #15. our editors is already busy logging his 400+ home video titles.) On the gaming end, Flick! generates trivia questions with multiple choice answers, the subject matter of which is defined by the user (for example, players can define subjects like \"Westerns from 1940 1960\"). Highly recommended for serious flick fans. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #18. V For Victory Market Garden Three-Sixty Pacific 2105 S. Bascom Avenue, Suite 165 Campbell, CA 95008 (408) 879-9144 V FOR VICTORY-MARKET GARDEN: V FOR VICTORY: Three-Sixty's series of popular V For Victory wargames continues to evolve, the interface and artificial intelligence improving with each new incarnation. This latest simulation recreates the bold Allied air drops behind German lines to capture a bridge across the Rhine in Holland. This battle ended up being immortalized as the Allied disaster that it was in the novel, A Bridge Too Far, but the course of events could have gone very differently. A good historical situation lovingly recreated, this looks like the best of the V4V bunch so far. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #16. Waite Group Press 200 Tamal Plaza, Suite 101 Corte Madera, CA 94925 (800) 368-9369 VIRTUAL REALITY PLAYHOUSE: One in a series of books-with-software covering various fringe computer topics, Waire Group's Virtual Reality Playhouse introduces its readers to the young field of sensory immersion experiencesaka virtual reality. The book by Nicholas Lavroff lightly covers various VR-related topics like dara-gloves, stereoscopic vision, tacrile feedback, 3-D audio, and the potential applications of the technology. The collection of programs includes a simple 3-D modeling package, a collection of 3D wireframe objects that one can view with the included red-blue 3D glasses, a simplified version of DoMark's Mig-29 Fulcrum flight-sim (no combat), and a 3D \"adventure game,\" among others. There's no real sensory immersion here, but the book does include instructions for modifying a pair of Sega LCD shutter glasses for use on a PC. All told, its an accessible introduction to the topic. Recommended for budding cybernauts. IBM ($22.95). Circle Reader Service #19. Spectre LOMA* of Simba Velocity Development 2161 Union Street San Francisco, CA 94123 (415) 776-8000 SPECTRE: Macintosh networks have long been the sole domain of high intensity, multiplayer action gaming. Now, finally, IBM networkers can share in the shoot-em up fun. Originally released for the Mac, Spectre has made a seamless transition to the DOS world. Several players (we don't know exactly how many, though the manual speaks of 6-8) can race tanks around a poly-filled environment resembling the old coin-op BattleZone. The possible scenarios include a good ol' slugfest where the most kills wins, a flag rally where the most flags grabbed wins, or a variant of Capture the Flag, called Raid. The action is very fast-paced, with tanks zooming every which way, bullets falling like rain, and the occasional tank leaping into the air. This one could very well have a group of friends \"jacked into the net\" for unhealthy periods of time. AppleTalk (Mac) and NetBIOS and Novell IPX (IBM) networks are supported. IBM, Mac ($59.95). Circle Reader Service #17. CAROSTI TIHTIGE Flicks! SUPERSCAPE YERTUAL REALITIES INFOR 312KGTINFO TUER Virtual Reality Playhouse Wilson Software PO Box 612674 South Lake Tahoe, CA 96152 (916) 542-4854 CASINO VIDEO POKER: Thirty billion bucks were tossed into the ravenous guller of the Five-Eyed Thief last year, and most of those pesos never again saw the light of day. Victims of this seductive bandit may want to do themselves a favor and take a few lessons from this program. Though its graphics are rather bland, it offers useful functions for those searching for an edge over the House. (Ok, you'll never, ever legally get an edge on them, but one can hope.) The game offers 32 payoff scales (though there's no deuces or jokers wild), progressive jackpots, and it tracks your strategic errors. The error tracker shows how much the strategic blunders have cost you, and even allows you to replay the blundered hands so you can have the answers to the gambler's ever present question, \"What if?» IBM ($24.95). Circle Reader Service #20. 2 HELP EXIT STACK PIROS Villa Crespo Software 1725 McGovern Street Highland Park, IL 60035 (708) 433-0500 FLICKS! FILM REVIEW LIBRARY: Although nine parts database to one part game, Flicks! is still enjoyable to use, if just for the database's subject matter. Not only do users receive a starting library of over 30,000 movies (with lots of information abour each), but they can amend and edit it to suit their home use needs. (One of BRO AM Ede 19 Casino Video Poker CGW Page 156 Computer Gaming World "


"COMPUTER GAMING WORLD HALL OF FAME The games in Computer Gaming World's Hall of Fame have been highly rated by our readers over time. They have been rated for their impact on the computer gaming hobby during their peak period of influence and acceptance by our readership. Note that the dates listed for each game are the copyright dates and may precede the actual release dates. Specific formats listed are those which CGW has in its possession. Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh  KARPOON Harpoon is based on modern naval miniatures rules by Larry Bond, a retired naval officer and sometimes NATO naval wargames referee. The game quickly became a standard because of its vast and easily accessed database of modern naval intelligence, its unique user-determined staff assistant feature (which can be relegated to simple bookkeeping or participate in the game as an advisor) and continuing customer support in terms of early bug fixes, later battleset additions and scenario editor). The game offered a new look and feel, as well as proving that wargames could still sell. The Bard's Tale (Electronic Arts, 1985) Many formats Chessmaster (Software Toolworks, 1986) Many formats Dungeon Master (FTL Software, 1987) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Earl Weaver Baseball (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Empire (Interstel, 1978) Amiga, Atari ST, C-64, IBM F-19 Stealth Fighter (MicroProse, 1988) IBM Gettysburg: The Turning Point (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1986) Amiga, Apple, C-64, IBM Gunship (Micro Prose, 1989) Amiga, C-64, IBM Harpoon (Three-Sixty Pacific, 1989) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many formats King's Quest V (Sierra, 1990) Amiga, IBM, CD-ROM M-1 Tank Platoon (MicroProse, 1989) Amiga, IBM Mech Brigade (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1985) Many formats Might & Magic (New World Computing, 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM, Mac M.U.L.E. (Electronic Arts, 1983) Atari 8-bit, C-64 Pirates (MicroProse, 1987) S Many formats Railroad Tycoon (MicroProse, 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh Red Baron (Dynamir, 1990) Amiga, IBM, Macintosh SimCity (Maxis, 1987) Many formats Starflight (Electronic Arts, 1986) Amiga, C-64, IBM, Mac, Sega Their Finest Hour (LucasArts, 1989) Amiga, Atari ST, IBM Ultima III (Origin, 1983) Apple, Atari ST, C-64, IBM Ultima IV (Origin, 1985) Amiga, Apple, Atari ST, IBM Ultima VI (Origin, 1990) Amiga, IBM War in Russia (Strategic Simulations, Inc., 1984) Apple Wasteland (Interplay, 1986) Apple, C-64, IBM Wing Commander (Origin, 1991) IBM, Sega Wizardry (Sir-Tech Software, 1981) Many formats Zork (Infocom, 1981) Many formats Kampfgruppe (Strategic Simulations Inc., 1985) Many formats Kampfgruppe SERI Kampfgruppe was the tactical wargamer's dream when it was released in 1985. It allowed gamers to engage in tactical level armored conflict a la the boardgame Panzer Blitz without having to perform all the bookkeeping. It was visually superior to Avalon Hill's Tanktics (essentially a computer-moderated boardgame which preceded Kampfgruppe by almost five years), did not have the distracting real-time mode of SSI's earlier Combat Leader, had a better interface than Avalon Hills TAC (Tactical Armored Combat), and featured a built-in mechanism for designing one's own scenarios. The Amiga conversion still has some of the more awesome sound effects ever heard on a computer wargame. June 1993 Page 157 "


"Xing Reader Poll #105 Top Adventure Games GAME COMPANY King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck LucasArts Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts Star Control II Accalade Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. Accolade The Secret of Monkey Island LucasArts Eric the Unready Legend Quest for Glory 111 Sierra Sherlock Holmes CD ICOM 10 Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electonic Arts VOU AWN COMPUTER GAMING WORLD SCORE 10.40 9.99 9.90 9.87 9.73 9.72 9.60 9.56 9.55 9.46 Top 100 Games Preset Computer Game Magazine Type ST SP O O O O OG RP WG,ST Ultima Underworld AD Score 10.77 10.73 10.67 10.45 10.42 10.40 10.32 10.28 10.26 10.26 9.99 9.96 VONO Top Role Playing Games GAME COMPANY SCORE Ultima Underworld Origin 10.45 Ultima Underworld Il Origin 10.32 Eye of the Beholder II SSI 9.56 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 9.49 Might & Magic III New World Computing 9.41 Ultima VII Origin 9.34 7 Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World 9.34 Eye of the Beholder SSI 9.10 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Sir-Tech 9.05 10 Ultima V Origin 9.00 RP SP AC ST AD WG AD ADAC 9.90 9.87 ST 9.85 AC 9.80 9.79 9.75 ANGELEDESUDE ST WG AD AD SI WG SI AD WG AD,RP Top Simulation Games --0000-s Game Company 21 World Circuit MicroProse Civilization MicroProse Links 386 Pro Access Ultima Underworld Origin Conquered Kingdoms QQP 26 King's Quest VI: Heir Today... Sierra Ultima Underworld II Origin Front Page Sports Football Dynamix 9 Wing Commander II Origin Solitaire's Journey QQP 11 Monkey Island 2: Le Chuck's Revenge LucasArts 12 V for Victory: Velikiye Luki Three-Sixty 13 Indiana Jones: Fate of Atlantis LucasArts 14 Star Control II Accolade 15 Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Electonic Arts 16 Wolfenstein 3-D Id Software 17 Dune II Virgin 18 The Perfect General QQP 19 Les Manly in: Lost in L.A. Accolade 20 The Secret of Monkey Island LucasArts 21 Falcon 3.0 Spectrum HoloByte V for Victory: Utah Beach Three-Sixty Pacific 23 Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic 24 Eric the Unready Legend 25 Pacific War SSI Quest for Glory III Sierra Eye of the Beholder II SSI 28 Sherlock Holmes CD ICOM 29 Great Naval Battles SSI 30 Aces of the Pacific Dynamix 31 Wizardry VII: Crusaders of Savant Sir-Tech 32 Links Access Warlords SSG Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes Electonic Arts 35 Hardball III Accolade 36 The Incredible Machine Dynamix Might & Magic III New World Computing 38 Stunt Island Disney Might & Magic: Clouds of Xeen New World Ultima VII Origin 41 Chessmaster 3000 Software Toolworks 42 High Command Colorado Comp. 43 Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade 45 Lemmings Psygnosis 46 Second Front 47 Tetris Classic Spectrum HoloByte 48 Amazon Access 49 The Castle of Dr. Brain Sierra 50 Eye of the Beholder SSI GAME COMPANY World Circuit MicroProse Falcon 3.0 Spectrum Holo Byte Comanche: Maximum Overkill NovaLogic Aces of the Pacific Dynamix Stunt Island Disney Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe LucasArts Gunship 2000 Microprose Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Electronic Arts Red Storm Rising MicroProse Silent Service || MicroProse RP SCORE 10.77 9.63 9.61 9.53 9.34 9.27 9.06 9.06 9.04 9.03 OU AON RECIE? 1434332348*3*3*3*3*343*788484883343488388 49 50 SELEKTORITETET ETEELLISEE3333855CEBDEBRERESES 9 10 AD WG.ST SI RP SP WG,ST AD SP ST 9.73 9.72 9.63 9.63 9.61 9.60 9.56 9.56 9.56 9.55 9.54 9.53 9.49 9.47 9.47 9.46 9.44 9.41 9.41 9.34 9.34 9.34 9.32 9.29 9.27 9.27 9.21 9.17 9.14 9.13 9.11 9.10 34 RP Top Strategy Games RP ST WG SI VOULAWN GAME Civilization Solitaire's Journey Hong Kong Mahjong Pro Dune II The Incredible Machine Chessmaster 3000 The Lost Admiral Mech Warrior The Island of Dr. Brain Populous II SCORE 10.73 10.26 9.85 9.79 9.41 COMPANY MicroProse QOP Electonic Arts Virgin Dynamix Software Toolworks QOP Activision Sierra Electronic Arts SP AC SSI WG 9.05 8.94 8.91 8.81 10 AC AD AD RP "


"AD WG WG LINDO Top Wargames 9.09 9.09 9.08 9.06 9.06 9.05 9.05 SI AD.RP GAME Conquered Kingdoms V for Victory: Velikiye Luki The Perfect General V for Victory: Utah Beach Pacific War Great Naval Battles Warlords High Command Second Front Conflict: Korea COMPANY QQP Three-Sixty QQP Three-Sixty Pacific SSI 9.05 AD SCORE 10.42 9.96 9.75 9.63 9.56 9.54 9.47 9.29 9.17 9.09 SSI SI 8 9 10 SSG Colorado Comp. SSI AD,RP AD RP WG,ST AD 9.04 9.04 9.03 9.02 9.01 9.00 9.00 8.98 8.98 SSI WG AD 8.96 com ENDET wa Dar CT SI Top Action Games 1 AD Sierra SSI SSG Electronic Arts Microprose Sir-Tech Sierra QQP MicroProse Sierra MicroProse Sierra Sierra Origin QQP Sierra SSI Dynamix Activision MicroProse MicroProse Psygnosis Sierra Dynamix Access Electronic Arts Accolade MicroPlay Legend Electronic Arts MicroProse SSI Sierra Mindcraft Dynamix Interplay Interplay Legend Electronic Arts SSI MicroProse AD COCOWN COMPANY Origin Id Software Psygnosis Spectrum HoloByte Psygnosis Interplay Bethesda Virgin Konami MicroProse GAME Wing Commander 11 Wolfenstein 3-D Lemmings Tetris Classic Oh, No! More Lemmings Out of this World Terminator 2029 Conan the Cimmerian Speedball 2 Ancient Art of War in the Skies SCORE 10.26 9.80 9.21 9.14 8.92 8.57 8.41 8.10 7.92 7.32 51 The Dagger of Amon Ra Conflict: Korea 53 Carriers At War 54 Chuck Yeager's Air Combat Gunship 2000 56 Bane of the Cosmic Forge Quest for Glory I (VGA) The Lost Admiral 59 Red Storm Rising Conquests of the Longbow 61 Silent Service II 62 Quest for Glory II 63 Police Quest 3 64 Ultima V Battles of Destiny 66 Space Quest IV Western Front 68 The Adventures of Willy Beamish 69 Mech Warrior 70 F-15 Strike Eagle III 71 F-117A Oh, No! More Lemmings 73 The Island of Dr. Brain 74 Rise of the Dragon Martian Memorandum 76 Indianapolis 500 77 Elvira 78 Command HQ Spellcasting 301: Spring Break Populous II 81 Rex Nebular Gateway to the Savage Frontier 83 Hoyle Book of Games, Vol. 3 84 Siege 85 Heart of China 86 Castles 2: Siege and Conquest Battlechess Gateway 89 Starflight II 90 Battles of Napoleon 91 F-15 Strike Eagle II 92 Pools of Darkness 93 Typhoon of Steel 94 Armada 2525 95 Buck Rogers Legend of Kyrandia Carrier Strike Out of this World 99 Megafortress 100 NFL Pro League Football 983333433*3*34939933*83*33434433383 *334324334*333 SP RP WG,ST AD 10 ST AD RP ST ST AD 8.94 8.93 8.92 8.92 8.91 8.89 8.89 8.83 8.82 8.81 8.81 8.81 8.79 8.79 8.78 8.77 8.75 8.72 8.72 8.72 8.71 8.70 8.69 8.68 8.67 8.63 8.57 8.57 8.57 8.57 Top Sports Games ST ST AD GAME COMPANY Links 386 Pro Access Front Page Sports Football Dynamix Links Access Hardball III Accolade Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf Accolade Indianapolis 500 Electronic Arts NFL Pro League Football Micro Sports The Games: Winter Challenge Accolade PGA Tour Golf Electronic Arts Tony LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball SSI DO YOU AWNSCORE 10.67 10.28 9.47 9.44 9.27 8.83 8.54 8.50 8.49 8.49 SSI RP WG SI RP WG ST RP AD WG AC SIST SP SSI Interstel SSI Virgin SSI Interplay Three-Sixty Pacific Micro Sports 8 9 10 8.55 8.54 Poll is based on reader survey cards in each issue of CGW and published two issues subsequent. Data on more than 100 games is archived and top ten lists may contain games which scored below the Top 100 cutoff. Games on unnumbered lines have scores equal to the line above. Q = Top game of type. AD=Adventure, RP=Role Playing, SI=Simulation, ST Strategy, WG=Wargame, AC=Action, SP=Sports The Computer Gaming World Poll A monthly survey of the readers of Computer Gaming World Magazine. "


"See Reader Service Card for Special CD Offer PC Research Hits List of Top-Selling Software What You've Been Playing Lately February, 1993 Rank PC Games (MS-DOS) Title and Source Space Quest V (Sierra On-Line) Comanche: Maximum Overkill (Nova Logie) Links 386 Pro (Access) Sim City (Maxis) Ultima Underworld II (Origin) Kings Quest VI (Sierra On-Line) Links Mauna Kea (Access) Front Page Sports: Football (Sierra On-Line) Falcon 3.0 (Spectrum HoloByte) Silent Service II (MicroProse) Wing Commander (Origin) Kings Quest VI (Sierra On-Line) Populous II (Electronic Arts) Police Quest (Sierra On-Line) Beat the House (Konami) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft) F-15 III Aces Pack (MicroProse) Civilization (MicroProse) Aces of the Pacific (Sierra On-Line) Wolftenstein 3-D/Spear of Destiny (Formgen) The Feedback Forum of Reader Response Every month our mailbox fills to capacity with hundreds of Reader Input Cards from our many loyal and outspoken readers. Over the years we've found these cards to be an invaluable source of feedback. Within 10 days of the release of our latest issue we can expect to see dozens of cards begin pouring in with comments, suggestions, encouragements, tirades and many good laughs, in addition to the data for our Top 100 game poll. Through your efforts, we know which articles were hits, which flopped, how many tyypos an grammatical errors we've let slip through in addition to the many well-articulated opinions on anything and everything related to gaming. This column is set aside to give our readers a voice, and to display the results of our \"Playing Lately?\" field on the Reader Input Card. Thanks for taking the time to fill them out..and keep em coming! Playing Lately? Results For CGW #105, April 1993: X-Wing (LucasArts) Ultima Underworld II (Origin) Civilization (MicroProse) Conquered Kingdoms (QQP) Gary Grigsby's Pacific War (SSI) Empire Deluxe (New World) World Circuit (MicroProse) F-15 Strike Eagle III (MicroProse) Wizardry VII: Crusaders of the Dark Savant (Sir-Tech) Alone in the Dark (1-Motion/Interplay) inion Rank Rank 3-Man Amiga Games Title and Source 688 Attack Sub (Flectronic Arts) AD&D Gateway to Savage Frontier (Strategic Simulations) Realms (Virgin Games) Civilization (MicroProse) Operation Combat (Merit) Macintosh Games Title and Source Prince of Persia (Broderbund) Microsoft Flight Simulator (Microsoft) Civilization (MicroProse) Sim City Supreme (Maxis) Award Winners: KO V & Red Baron (Sierra On-Line) CD-ROM Products Title and Source MPC Wizard (Aris Entertainment) Cinemania (Microsoft) Wing Commander/Secret Missions I & II (Origin) Battle Chess (Interplay) Street Atlas U.S.A. (Delome) World View (Aris Entertainment) Mantis (MicroProse) Win CD (MicroProse) Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe (LucasArts Compton's Encyclopedia Upgrade (Compton's New Media) It s All Just A Popularity Contest In issue #105 we asked readers what criteria they use when making purchasing decisions. As always, your responses were wildly varied and interesting. The prime consideration was, of course, a game's topic one only buys games in which they're interested. Many people buy games from favorire publishers based upon their past track record. While not the most frequent, our favorite respondents where those who used CGW reviews in their consumer equations. We re flattered! Many readers also indicated that they had a favorite designer or two whose names would prompt an instant purchase. We were pleased to see this. For many years designers have been wrestling with their publishers over the issue of designer credits. During the early years of gam ing it was the rare exception when a designer was given credit on the packaging of a game. If a designer was credited it was usually in small, unassuming print cucked somewhere near the legal disclaimers. Slowly, designers have been getting the box ink and the recognition they deserve, to the point that there are now several designers who seem to be \"household names\" (at least in a household of gamers). The followSing list is a collection of the names most frequently mentioned in your responses. We felt that this column was the appropriate place to print this Who's Who of Game Designer, as it's in small print and at the back of a product. We thought they'd feel right at home. Sid Meier (Pirates, Railroad Tycoon, Civilization) Gary Grigsby (Kampfgruppe. Carrier Strike, Pacific War) Damon Slye (Red Baron, Aves of the Pacific) Ron Gilbert (Monkey Island I & II, SCUMM adventure system) Chris Roberts (Space Rogue, Wing Commander I-II. Strike Commander) Lawrence Holland (Battlehaioks 1942, Tveir linest Hour, S.W.O.T.L., X-Wing) Richard Garriot aka Lord British (Ultima series) Roger Keating lan Trout (Reach for the Stars, Bartlefront series, Carriers Ar War) Roberta Williams (King's Quest series, Laura Bow series) Al Lowe (Leisure Suit Larry series) Steve Meretzky (A Mind Forever Voyaging. Sorceror, Leather Goddesses of Phobos. Spellcasting series) Lori & Corey Cole (Quest For Glory series) Rank in Nooie This list is based on units sold by Software Eto, Babbages, Waldersoftware and Flectronics Boutique for more information, please contact PC Research ar (0343521025 Page 160 Computer Gaming World "


"matches The Patch File Computer game programs have grown so massive and the num-not supported by SSI. 1/24/93 ber of possible configurations has become so huge that incompatiPower Politics Update: Fixes all known bugs. 12/11/92 bilities and glitches seem to be breeding ar an exponential rate. Quest For Glory III «B» Patch: Corrects all known game play errors. Consumers and publishers are both frustrated at the need for 12/03/92 adding patches into \"buggy\" programs, but they seem to be an Shadow President Update Version 1.0b: This version will run in ca. 30k interim solution that is going to be with the hobby for a while (pre less memory than the previous version. It also includes minor adjustments sumably, until a standard platform configuration is agreed upon). to the internal processing. 2/12/93 So, until the golden age of standardized platforms and bug-free SimLife Upgrade V2: Fixes minor problems in Maxis' A-life simulator. programs, Computer Gaming World will publish a regular list of the 2/10/93 latest updates of which we are aware. Solitaire's Journey Patch V1.03: This is a patch for those having problems These patches can usually be downloaded from either with saved Tournament games and those having mouse troubles. 2/12/93 Compuserve or GEnie, but can also be obtained from individual Space Quest 5 Patch: Corrects the following: (1) Inability to Restore or software publisher's own BBSs or direct from the publisher with Quit after running out of time on WD-40's ship. (2) Inability to skip polproof of purchase. We continue to urge publishers to keep us ishing the Star Con crest in EGA mode. (3) Loss of cursor when Roger updated on the latest versions/parches to their games. steps off the log which spans the river on Kiz Urazgubi. 2/26/93 (* indicates new files.) Star Control 2 V1.1: Fixes several small problems. 12/11/92 *Aces of the Pacific 1946 Add-On Disk Update: Single Missions will now Star Legions Update: Fixes some machine-specific lock-ups, problems with be saved correctly, and several fixes have been made to Career Pilots, phasers firing out of the FOV, changes to mission ratings, fixes to award including the elimination of known Shell System Errors. 3/10/93 sequence. 1/15/93 Amazon Raft Bug Fix: Fixes the problem getting the raft out of the box in Sumpter to Appomattox Update: Fixes the \"Build» routine and elimithe airplane. 12/12/92 nates the memory error that some gamers were having. 3/13/93 *Ancient Art of War in the Skies Update: Version 02 of the game. Task Force 1942 Update: Corrects the waypoint problem, among others. 3/01/93 2/15/93 Batman Returns Update: Latest version of Konami's Bat-venture. 1/24/93 LaRussa's Ultimate Baseball V1.1: Upgrades SSI's baseball simulation to *Caesar with Stacker: Allows players to use Impressions' game with the the latest version. 1/29/93 Stacker utility. 3/05793 *Tom Landry Football V. 1.03 Update (IBM & Mac): Corrects problems Civilization Version 1.0.8 (Macintosh): Latest and greatest version of the with high-speed modem play. 3/06/93 reigning king of strategy. 2/23/93 Twilight 2000 Colonel Upgrade (VGA only): Adds extra sounds and Darkseed Version 1.5 Update: Latest version of CyberDreams' adventure, graphics, and adds a new ending to the game. 2/2793 1/20/93 Ultima VII Version 3.4: Lord British fixes some minor leaks in the roof of *Darklands Version 07 Update: Latest version of MicroProse's RPG. Castle Britannia. Updates from Version 3.0 to 3.4. 2/17/93 3/05/93 *Ultima Underworld I Patch: Replaces old patch to UWI. 2/25/93 F-15 Strike Eagle III Install Update: For those having trouble with the Ultima Underworld II Patch: Fixes the strike\" problem, local bus diffiinstall program. 12/23/92 culties, and a few others. 2/24/93 F-15 Strike Eagle Help Info Text: Text file containing known problems and suggestions for those having problems with the sim. 1/08/93 The PRODIGY Weekly Top Ten F-117A Stealth Fighter V.04: Update to MicroProse's jet simulator. 1/29193 Computer Gaming World is Prodigy's on-line games expert. Look for Front Page Sports Football: A new version is available which improves us in their Game Center, a forum where users read articles posted onupon the original release in many ways. 2/15/93 line by CGW and exchange messages on the bulletin boards (we can Full Count Baseball V5.1 Upgrade: Expands play-by-play and offers a new be reached there at EXPT 40B). The Prodigy Game Poll is run by screen layout. For owners of V5.0 only. 12/06/92 Prodigy based on a list of games provided by CGW and is updated Great Naval Battles/North Atlantic Update: Updates all GNBNA files to weekly. Note that it is not a cumulative rating over time (like the version 1.2. 2/23/93 CGW Top 100 Poll). Instead, the Prodigy Game Poll is a weekly Gunship 2000 Islands and Ice Patch Version .085: Corrects keyboard \"snapshot\" of game popularity with gamers rating their favorites on a lockour problems some gamers are having. 2/11/93 1 10 scale. The highest total point earners make their Top 10. We Hockey League Simulator 2 Update V1.11: New version for the IBM. provide this data to our readers as another barometer of \"what's hor\" 2/3/93 in computer gaming Island of Dr. Brain Update: Fixes \"Ooops 10\" error, music room puzzle, and several other problems. 12/23/92 Jack Nicklaus Signature Edition Rev 1.5: Fixes the Mini-Moss effect GATEPELL caused by several objects being placed after a hill crest. 12/16/92 TOP TEN RANKED CHMES *Links 386 Pro Update Version 1.09: Includes new drivers for specific Week of March 26 to April 1 video cards, a new Sound Blaster Pro 16 driver, and fixes the Harbour Town Hole 14 lockup. 3/3/93 SCORE TITLE RANK SCORE TITLE Magic Candle III Version 1.16: Fixes problems with Sound Blaster sup|3119 Hottenstein-3 6 1894 Aces or facilit port, mirror of honesty/candlewick problems, difficulties with tranferred 2547 Civilization ? 1734 Falcon 32 characters from MC2, and other minor glitches. 2/17/93 2398 kings Quest VI 8 1616 Ilm Underuarid 2171 Big Commander 2 9 1572 Front PO FOOTB *Mantis Update (IBM): Adds new features and improves gameplay. For 2058 X-wing 10 1571 Links 58 fra disk-based version only. 3/01/93 NFL Pro League Football '92 V1.1: Contains many upgrades, fixes, and QUOTE TRACK leis you track additional schedules. 1/26/93 your personal lis of stocks, Pacific War V1.06: Fixes the bombardment bug, the West Coast defense bonds and funds. LOOK bug, the missing unit bug, etc. An \"unofficial\" upgrade from Gary Grigsby Menu X-ref Jump Path Copy Tools Help Exit June 1993 Page 161 "


"gdtomal Why Do Reviews Take So Long? tate of the Magazine: It was a relief to attend a session on \"PC Review Labs: How They Work\" at the recent Softlishers Association Spring Sympo. sium. No matter how careful and professional one tries to be in this business of journalism, there is always a nagging fear that someone is doing it better, easier and more logically. As I listened to the editors of the major personal computer magazines that cover hardware and business software, I could almost hear myself talking. For example, most of the general computer magazines divide their coverage up into three types of feature articles: First Looks, Reviews and Surveys. The former is usually based on beta software, reviews are always based on finished product, and the latter is a comparison of several pieces of software in the same arca, all of which can be tested via a common benchmark. The first type of feature is roughly equivalent to our Sneak Previews. As Kevin Strehlo of Infoworld observed, «The intent here is to provide an impression, not be rigorous in the examination.\" The concern is not with shaking down a program, but describing a piece of software that the test lab staff thinks will be significant when it is released. This is not \"hype,\" as some in the computer game press have called our sncak previews, rather it is the written description description of \"discovering the software. The test lab staff reports the bugs that they encounter to the software publishers and such bug reports do not end up in the stories. If the bugs are not fixed, they are mentioned in the reviews. reviews. Reviews are handled in much the same way as they are at CGW, with the exception that these general computer magazines often have larger staffs and can write more of the reviews in-house. Still, I was happy to hear my fellow editors insist that they would not review product off demo disks or documentation. In the computer game press, it seems there are some magazines that are willing to write articles without even touching, much less experiencrize entertainment products in an objective ing, the game itself. manner? Further, the editor of PC Week stated that Other magazines avoid the issue. They crehis lead times are 60-90 days out. This is ate numerical ratings which seem objective, roughly comparable to CGW's lead-time. It even though they are based on subjective is almost impossible to play a game all the way ratings. Just putting one's feeling into numthrough (which we expect our reviewers to bers isn't being objective. Even if one had do). write the fearure, and ger the review obiective ratings, we're not sure they would edired, designed for the printed page and off mean much. A flight simulation that ran at a to the printer in less than 60 days. At times, faster number of frames per second than a we can work miracles, but they take a lot our leading flight simulation might yet be inferior of us. If the company only sends us one copy because its graphics could be blockier, less of the game, that process moves to the 90 day detailed and less satisfying. A CRPG (comcycle because we have to hold the product puter role-playing game) that uses higher in-house long enough to write up our \"Takresolution graphics might not be as effective ing A Peek\" paragraph prior to sending the in helping gamers suspend their disbelief as a review copy to the out-of-house reviewer. game which uses better artists at a lower resoI wanted to offer a standing ovation when lution. A strategy game with modem-to-mohe said, \"Once a product is out a week and we dem capability might not offer enough don't have it you're probably not going to solitaire play value to make it a better buy be reviewed.\" With a 60-90 day lead time, than the one without. It is easy to get caught getting a review copy to a magazine even one up in \"featuritis» when one attempts to be week after it hits the store shelves means that objective with regard to matters of individual it can take three to four months for the review perception and value judgments. F to appear in print, depending on what time Basically, we feel that our growth at CGW of the month the copy arrives. In CGW's casc, has had something of a trade-off. When the we feel obligated to print a \"Taking A Peek\" magazine was part color/part black&white as soon as possible, unless we think we can and less than 100 pages long, we had just turn the review around inside of a month about the shortest lead time in the computer (sometimes our editors get such \"game-lock\" game press. Our readers wanted a full-color on a particular game that they aren't gerring magazine. Many wanted a \"perfecr-bound\" any sleep, anyway). In such a case, we might spine so that our increasingly larger issues skip the \"Peek\" and get the review into the would not fall apart. Those who purchased us magazine with superhuman (i.e. dedicated gamer) effort. sign. Our long-time loyal readers still wanted Unfortunately, I couldn't resonate as much thorough reviews where they could tell that with the remarks on product surveys. The the reviewers had played the games and could offer some hints and strategies. general computer magazines have it made. It's easy to compare spreadsheets by having them In effect, we traded a longer lead time for go through the same kinds of calculations. It's all of the above. In actuality, we would still easy to compare word processors, feature-bylook slow compared to some magazines. We feature, and have the software handle the believe our reviewers should finish the games. same kinds of documents. They can time That takes time. Not everyone believes that. performances and create nifty charts which we think our readers know the difference. summarize the results. How can one summaCGW Page 162 Computer Gaming World "


"ALL FLIGHT SIMS ARE NOT CREATED EQUAL. Some Are More Real Than Others RealTHE ALLIES MOST DEADLY STRIKE FIGHTER TORNADO world graphics. Incredibly detailed mission planning HRER Fly missions with up to five other Tornados. Digital Integration spectrum HaloByte INCLUDES 2.PLAYER MODEM VERSION You've played the latest flight sim games, now brace yourself \"smart\" and submunition weaponry for the real thing. When it comes to first-class authenticity, with pinpoint accuracy in any weather, day or night. down-and-dirty realism, and a target-rich environment, nobody And it's not just you against the enemy. Up to five other comes close to Tornado. Tornados help you corner your adversary in high-speed Pilot the Gulf War's most gutsy strike aircraft at breakneck synchronized attacks that determine the outcome of your speeds over three explosive combat areas loaded with real missions and the success or failure of the campaign. world details delivered at a high frame rate buildings, Tornado even delivers the most sophisticated mission structures, roads, power lines, trees and much, much more. planning ever seen on a home computer. A satellite overview From tanks to TV towers to rivers and railways, Tornado's of the airfield and the surrounding areas lets you set and unsurpassed 3-D world is so authentic, you can see the mesh analyze your flight plan and profile. And the most intricate of fence surrounding a communication tower. fighter mission planning system ever devised lets you set At sea level, there is no faster fighter jet than a Tornado. the autopilot parameters and check Hugging the earth at a heart-stopping your waypoint flight times and fuel speed, the Tornado is an extremely consumption. difficult target. Meanwhile, it can Tornado. deliver nearly 10 tons of the latest Realism that'll blow you away. Digital Integration Tornado, from the Distributed by Spectrum HoloByte company that brought you the award-winning DOM Swetrunk Spectrum HoloByte, Inc. 2490 Mariner Square Loop, Alameda, CA 94501 Falcon 3.0 For Visa/MasterCard orders call 24 hours a day, 7 days a week: 1-800-695-GAME (Orders Only) For technical questions call: 1-510-522-1164 (M-F: 9am-5pm PST) Digital Integration is a trademark of Digital Integration Ltd. Spectrum HoloByte is a registered trademark of Spectrum HoloByte, Inc. Circle Reader Service #95 FALCON "


"TOTANDER o 79 the release of Strike Commander marks the completion of two years of intense software development. Using our ols RealSpace graphics system — the industry's most advanced technology — ORIGIN has created a flight simulator of uncompromising quality and realism, interwoven with a gripping cinematic story. We could write a book describing each feature, documenting the attention to detail and defining the monumental effort this game represents. But since a picture is worth a thousand words... enough said. F-16C , undercarriage ORIGIN We'create worlds Available at a software retailer near you or call 1-800-245-4525 for MC/Visa/Discover orders. AN ELECTRONIC ARTS COMPANY P.O. Box 161750 Austin, TX 78716 01992 ORICIN Systems, Ine Strike Commander and Red Space are trademarks of ORIGIN Sysgoms, Inc. ORIGIN and We cregte worlds are Jegistered trademarks of ORIGIN Systems, Inc. Electronic Arts is a registered troderpark of Electronic Arts. Eirele-Reader Service #15 "

