Features
16
Lights! Cameral Action!
Timothy Trimble does a first "take" of
Disney Software's Stunt Island.
22
The Consumers Come Home to Roost
New software, new faces give new meaning to "pressing the flesh"
at The Summer Consumer Electronics Show.

30
More Than Par for the Course
Jack Nicklaus gives his John Hancock to Accolade's
Jack Nicklaus Golf & Course Design: Signature Edition.
by H. E. Dille

38
A Different Kind of Space Quest for Mac Users.
Tony Reveaux takes a seedy (CD?) adventure on Reactor Software's
Spaceship Warlock.

42
A Knight to Remember
Nobody should feel "rooked" with Software Toolworks'
Chessmaster 3000.
as "checked" by Tim Carter

44
Poly-Want Adventure
Interplay imports a French poly-filled adventure which is clearly
Out of This World.
as visited by Allen Greenberg

48
Pontifications From The Computer Game Developers Conference
A CGW feature which is not a bug!

58
Writing Your Own Legends of Future Past
Chris Lombardi's "Ranger" visits the new text adventure role-playing
world from The Digital Dream Network.

60
What's in a "Virtual" Name?
3-D meets 2-D at Dormark's Virtual Reality Studio.
Charles E. Smith shifts shapes

64
Burning the "Magic Candle II" at Both Ends
Waxing on again about Mindcraft's Magic Candle II:
The Four and Forty. by Stefan Petrucha

72
Diamonds Are For Players
CGW scouts "APBA" products from Miller Associates.
by Win S. Rogers

BO
Pen"Ultimate" Add-On Disks
"Tony La Russa's Ultimate Baseball" expands the playing field.
by Win S. Rogers

84
Encyclopedia Lemicologica
Robert Gardner, Jr. leads garners through more
"taxing" levels of "Lemmings."

98
Entrepreneurs in Space!
CGW orbits on the wild side in GEnie's "Federation II."
by Johnny L. Wilson

102
Divine Assistance
Even the "gods" need tactical and strategic advice on occasion.
by Jeff James

116
"Computer Third Reich"
Case White comes to life in Avalon Hill's grand strategy game.
by Wyatt Lee

120
Skulker by a Nose
A four-player "Global Conquest" replay that ends in a horse race.
by Roger-Tzu White

12B
Stacking the Deck in "Carrier Strike"
Alan Emrich briefs CGW readers on Gary Grigsby's latest game.

130
Taking the Conn in "Fleet Commander"
Part II of Commander Alan Zimm's Design Notes

134
The "New Look" War
CGW considers Three-Sixty's abstract wargame, "Theatre of War."

Departments
8
12A (Margin of Insert)
20
34
68
70
70
71
92
100
105
104
114
133
135
136

Taking A Peek
Questions for the CGW Poll
Rumors
Over There (European Games Report)
The CGW Poll
PC Research/SPA Top Games
What Have You Been Playing Lately?
Hall of Fame / Advertisers List
Edutainment (Educational Games from CES)
Stock Watch
Scorpion's Mail (Game Hints)
Scorpion's View (Ultima VII)
Computer Wargaming World Editorial
Reach Out and Crush Someone (Opponents Wanted)
Conversions
Editorial

Taking A Peek
Briter, Inc.
14 Rolling Road
Wynnewood, PA 19096-3521
(215) 642-2859
58 BEST EGA/VGA SHAREWARE GAMES:
Get the spade out of the shed and shovel these
"best of shareware games onto your HD. Arcade games, gambling games, board games,
sports games, games, games, games! The package even includes Bass Duel 1.1, that 2-player
head-to-head fishing simulation classic. Play
along while watching the Fishing Channel on
cable. Also includes Apogee Software's Commander Keen #1 ' #2, but does not include
their soon-to-be-classic 3-D adaptation of Castle Wolfenstein. IBM ($49.00). Circle Reader
Service #1.
Bungie Software Products
5455 South Hyde Park Blvd.
Garden Level
Chicago, IL 60615-5805
(312) 493-2849
MINOTAUR — THE LABYRINTHS OF
CRETE: For up to seven players over an AppleTalk network, Minotaur comes from the
Mad Maze, Net Trek and RoboSport school of
Macintosh netware. Up to seven players maneuver concurrently in a randomly created
maze in an attempt to find and use better
items, defeat the occasional wondering monster and slay the other players in the game.
Characters are individually created with three
adjustable attributes, assigned a "class" and
turned loose. With over 50 different spells and
items, the player aid cards provided become
highly useful. Using a keyboard interface, there
is no "AI" in the game, but each package contains two master disks for instant hook-up to a
friend's Mac. Macintosh ($89.99). Circle
Reader Service #2.
Capstone
Miami, FL
GRANDMASTER CHESS: Daring users to
compare this product to Chessmaster 3000 and
Sargon V, Capstone has served up this, another
high-end, super "brainiac" chess program designed to challenge the masters and tutor beginners. Complete with a mind-boggling array
of options and both 2-D and 3-D layouts (in
SVGA only), graphics have also been provided
for different looking sets of pieces. Players'
won / loss records will be maintained and will
be rated with a U.S. Chess Federation ranking.
Supports major sound cards and, interestingly,
the Disneys Sound Source. A worthy addition
to the line of top-flight chess programs. IBM
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #3.
TRUMP CASTLE II: A comprehensive casino
collection now made even more complete,
Trump Castle II features lavish digitized animations intended to hold together the various
gambling games as players move from section
to section of the casino. Along with the multiple variations of Baccarat, Blackjack, Craps,
Roulette, Video Poker and Slots included in

the original Trump Castle, this deluxe edition
adds Lots-O-Slots with nine more slot machine types and Poker (ironically, a game
which is illegal in New Jersey) in its five and
seven-card stud, five-card draw and Texas
Hold 'Em varieties with four computer opponents to play against. IBM ($79.95). Circle
Reader Service #4.
EarthQuest Inc.
25 University Avenue
Palo Alto, CA 94301
(415)321-5838
TIME TREK Disguised as yet another edutainment title and following in the wake of
Carmen Sandiego's success is a very well-researched collection of historical hypercard
stacks. While the collection of games intended
to "get people into history" seem a bit contrived and are occasionally confusing, the organization and presentation of historical facts
in its database is top notch. Included is a timetable modelled after The Timetables of History
as well as subject stacks on topics like the Explorers, Science, Daily Life, Religion, Wars,
Empires — all illustrated with scanned images
and maps. Though the graphic presentation
lags behind its many competitors, this product
has far more depth that most. Ages 9 to Adult.
Mac Consumer Version ($59.95) Educator
Version ($89.95). Circle Reader Service #5.
Free Spirit Software
720 Sycamore St.
Columbus, IN 47201
(812) 376-9964
BRAVO ROMEO DELTA: With movies like
"Fail Safe" and "Dr. Strangelove" (or How I
Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb)
as the classic cinematic retellings of "toe-to-toe
nuclear combat with the Ruskies," it was only
a matter of time before a game like Bravo Romeo Delta came along to do a serious treatment of the unthinkable. This time, as commander of NORAD forces, the player must
skillfully execute PD-59 (a Presidential Directive calling for a limited nuclear response so as
not to escalate the war). Winning the war in
such a way that post-war popular opinion remains favorable is hard to remember when
launching ICBMs and tracking their journey
into the former Soviet Union. Played in "real
time," one can command either side. Amiga
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #6.
Hollyware Entertainment
13464 Washington Blvd.
Marina Del Rey, CA 90291
(310) 822-9200
HOI: When Hoi discovers that the disturbing
rumblings from his innermost being aren't
lunch, but rather his manhood coming into
full flower, he sets off across the Madlands in
search of a mate lying in wait in the Great Beyond. Poor Hoi finds the Madlands to be a
nasty place in which practically everything can
kill him. The player's task is to maneuver this
defenseless creature over impaling spikes,

Taking A Peek
around buzzing bees, past hissing bombs, over
cute magic mushrooms....it is so-o-o cute one
could just sit and smile enchantedly as Hoi
dies over and over again (Hoi's primary activity) . This one is probably more suited to Cartridge Land than anywhere else. Amiga
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #7.
Infogrames
84, rue du 1er Mars 1943
69628 Villeurbanne Cedex, France
ETERNAM: This game does nothing to refute
the stereotypes about the French and their inscrutable sense of humor. This one is just
plain weird in both story and design. On the
one hand, we have a "WertWorld" sort of storyline in which the player is vacationing on a
medieval "Fantasy Island" On the other, we
have a design that borrows presentation modes
from every adventure game genre. In all of five
minutes, one can experience a free-scrolling,
first person 3-D environment; a Sierra-style
third person environment; digitized, animated
images; fully animated cartoon images in the
vein of the Dragon's Lair laser disk game; as
well as many odd cinematic effects, all thrown
into a blender and frapped into a chunky adventure game melange. Top everything with a
dose of exaggerated Jerry Lewisesque slapstick
and we have one bewildering game. All a nonplussed American can shruggingly say is, "Vive
la difference?!'
IBM (No price provided). Circle Reader Service #8.
Konami
Buffalo Grove, IL
(708) 215-5111
GODS: As previewed in CGW #96, this action game set within the mythos of the Greek
pantheon is more than just "twitch, flex and
die." With a variety of keys, doors, traps, and
levers to twiddle as well as "kinetic-strategy"
problems that involved arcade action combined with strategy, it looks as if this action
hulk might actually have a brain. Amiga, IBM
($39.95). Circle Reader Service #9.
NFL: As previewed in CGW #94, this game is
to football as Accolade's Hardball III is to
baseball, that is, a solid game balanced more
toward the action-oriented gamer than toward
those with a more statistical bent. The game
boasts an NFL team name license but not an
individual player name license (Pssst, here's a
tip. You can change the player names if you
want, but if it comes down to the Player's Association, you don't know me and I don't
know you.). IBM ($49.95). Circle Reader
Service #10.
The Learning Company
6493 Kaiser Drive
Fremont, CA 94555
(800) 852-2255
METROGNOMES' MUSIC: While many
"edutainment" products teach the three R's
(that is, Reading, wRiting and aRithmetic),

Metrognomes has the fourth R "Rhythm." Actually, that is only a part of what kids (and
this tin-eared parent) can learn. Several games
are included in the package which teach about
tempo, pitch, beat, notes, etc. through 27
popular songs. Recommended for ages 4-7,
parents will need to do very little explaining
before kids can go wild with the mouse and
start exploring on their own. IBM ($49.95).
Circle Reader Service #11.
Maxis
Orinda, CA
(510) 254-9700
A-TRAIN: In the "software toy" tradition established by Maxis in their Sim line, comes
this Monopoly/Railroad Tycoon hybrid. Players/tinkerers must build a rail network, establish routes, and schedules trains in order to
create a profitable line. They can then branch
out and build high-rise office space, stores,
golf-courses, amusement parks, hotels, and ski
resorts on their way to acquiring an immense
empire, through their "company-town".
There's even a simple stock market model in
which one has the option to invest in 24
stocks. Without any competition, save for
one's own management ineptitude, users play
the game of high finance in a bubble. IBM
($69.95). Circle Reader Service #12.
Mindscape
Novato, CA
(415) 883-3000

THE FOUR CRYSTALS OF TRAZERE:
The story is nothing new — a kingdom under
attack by the forces of evil — and certainly the
game elements we've seen before — a four
member party of adventurers of traditional
class-types, attributes, and abilities, with an ingredient-mixing magic system and a real time
combat system. Yet, though comprised of
hackneyed elements as it is, Trazere does offer,
quite literally, a new perspective on role-playing. The main interface looks very much like
EA's Populous with its 3-D "isometric" world
view and game control icons scattered about
the periphery. Also adding a nice touch is the
fact that the player's party-of-four can actually
play both a strategic and tactical part in the
war going on around them by both engaging
enemy armies in combat and recovering items
of power for use by the forces of light. All in
all, Trazere can be a fairly complete part of a
nutritious CRPGing diet. Amiga, IBM
($49.95). Circle Reader Service #13.
Pilo+ Software
P.O. Box 811
Middleton, WI 53562

(800) 745-6758
PC PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS ANALYZER Fortunately, the "PC" in this product's title does not stand for "Politically Correct." Instead, this historically correct time machine is a combination database and almanac
of past presidential elections, complete with

Taking A Peek
charts and graphs (which can all be printed
out). While many questions about past elections can be answered, winning strategies for
the 1992 election can also be explored. Designed by an educator for enjoyable classroom
use, Election Analyzer will poll well with all
budding social scientists. IBM ($39.95). Circle
Reader Service #14.
QQP
1046 River Ave.
Flemington, NJ 08822
(908) 788-2799
SOLITAIRE'S JOURNEY: As previewed in issue #95 (page 100), this amazing collection of
105 solitaire games is built around a fine
graphic look, including "campaigns" to link
games played (into "quests" and "journeys"). If
you don't buy this game for yourself, get it as
the perfect gift (then, borrow it). IBM
($59.95). Circle Reader Service #15.
RBM Software
13117 Broughton Way
Austin, TX 78727-3147
(512) 388-0830
FIELD GENERAL 6.0: This shareware gridiron simulation boasts a stout list of features
including weather effects, an opponent tendency-tracking feature and lots of little options, like the use of two point conversions,
International rules play and a no-huddle offense. Though the game action is not animated in any way, the play is shown via a
chalkboard feature which traces the players'
paths during the action. The game does not
support any current or historical team play,
but looks like a quick, thorough way for two
pigskin nuts to lock their strategic horns over a
couple frosties (drinking with the A.I. is not
recommended). If placed upon the field of
available football simulations, this product
would most likely be an ugly, though tough
and wiley nose-guard. Supports CGA and
VGA graphics modes. IBM ($25.98). Circle
Reader Service #16.
Software Toolworks
Novato, CA.
(800) 234-3088
WORLD ATLAS: Recent global events have
so revitalized the cartography industry that a
vigilant paranoic could easily size up a conspiracy theory to fit. Now, add to the slew of reworked, revised and re-revised world atlases
this package which now "INCLUDES MAPS
OF THE REPUBLICS," as well as a horde of
nifty features that will send the geographically
minded into a paroxysm of delight. Included
are 4,400 maps, graphics of world flags, audio
of national anthems, graphs, tables, and data,
data, data. New features include the ability to
transfer data out of the program for use in
presentations, the ability to input new data at
one's whim, and a mess of hypertexty marking, notemaking, and linking capabilities. It's
certainly the last atlas one will need — this

month. IBM (69.95). Circle Reader Service
#17.
Spectrum Holobyte
Alameda, CA.
(510) 522-1164
CRISIS IN THE KREMLIN: As previewed in
CGW #95, this game is a simulation of holding sand in your fist. Your fist is that of the
Soviet General Secretary and the sand is played
by the former Soviet states. The player's task is
to manipulate the various social, political and
economic models in an attempt to mold the
Soviet Union in his own image. "Live" TV
footage documents the players success and failure. IBM ($69.95). Circle Reader Service #18.
SSI
Sunnyvale, CA
(408) 737-6800
TONY LA RUSSA EXPANSION DISKS:
The CGW "in" basket runneth over with a
slew of expansion disks for Tony La Russa's Ultimate Baseball Hold on to your caps, ball fans
— these may knock your stirrups off. Reaching into the magic box we pull out both the
American & National League Stadium Disks.
Sold separately, these two disks contain the
blueprints for such classic ballyards as the Old
Yankee Stadium, Griffith Park, Old Comiskey
Park, as well as all active Major League stadiums. Next, we pull out the Fantasy Manager
Disk which enable fantasy nuts to draft up a
division, or league, or any combination. A
Tony La Russa ROM construct will even advise you on the draft. One can design manager
personalities and even their team uniforms. Finally, we come to both the 1990 and 1991
team disks including all that juicy data that
has been accruing in the stat books for the last
two years. Combine all these together and
we've got a lot of boxes and a lot of disks, all
of which you must purchase separately. IBM
— Stadium Disks ($19.95), 1990 & 1991
Team Disks ($19.95), Fantasy Manager
($19.95). Circle Reader Service #19
Villa Crespo Software
Highland Park, IL
COFFEE BREAK SERIES: These are the first
four games in a line of budget priced software
products that were designed for fast, exciting
play. Packaged in brightly colored 5.5" square
boxes which are only .5" deep, they are, perhaps, the first impulse item software.
CASINO CRAPS: With many surprising little
features that we didn't expect to see in a
budget priced item, Casino Craps has the box
man changing shifts and the dice being passed
to colorful characters around the table. Of
course, there's a quality craps game in that little box, with all of the betting features you
would find in a first class casino. IBM
($12.95). Circle Reader Service #20.
DR. WONG'S JACKS+ VIDEO POKER: A
slightly "stripped down" but still remarkably
comprehensive version of their Stanford Wong's

Taking A Peek
Video Poker, the fine, core elements of the
game have remained as has some of the important play analysis options. Some play variations
and sound support are also included, giving a
lot of "oomph" to this little package. IBM
($12.95). Circle Reader Service #21.
AMARILLO SLIM'S 7 CARD STUD: A
faithful honing down of a single game offered
from their Amarillo Slim Dealer's Choke product, it maintains all of the relevant options
(such as betting limits, check and raise, antes,
etc.) and sound effects (including digitized
male and female voices). With a full, eightplayer table and complete statistical analysis,
Las Vegas gamblers will enjoy this casino
standard on a disk. IBM ($12.95). Circle
Reader Service #22.
ON TARGET: This is clearly a piece of "souped up shareware in a box," but what a piece
of shareware! The classic two-player artillery
duel of estimating firing angles and varying the
gunpowder has evolved nicely into a sci-fi motif. Fought against a night backdrop, players
score points for "casualties" when taking out
the opponent's cannon. Player histories and
variables such as wind add a lot of replayability
to a long time favorite. IBM ($12.95). Circle
Reader Service #23.
Virgin Games
Irvine, CA
(714) 833-8710
DUNE: A grand adventure game with strategy
elements, the player takes the role of Paul
"Muad' Dib" Atreides who must overcome the
torrent of problems post by the political
machinations of the House Harkonnen and
the hostile environment of Arrakis itself. Visu-

the hostile environment of Arrakis itself. Visually appealing, the storyline is somewhat
loosely based on the both the books and the
David Lynch film, creating situations and imagery that will seem new and familiar at the
same time. The French (who designed this
product) have a way with Fremen, and with so
much world to explore and so many familiar
characters to interact with, Melange may prove
to be the spice of adventure gaming. IBM
($49.99). Circle Reader Service #24.
THE MAGNETIC SCROLLS COLLECTION: The creators of the graphic adventure
adaptation of Alice in Wonderland have put together a "best of the rest of" package that includes a most unlikely threesome of interactive
novels. In Fish! players assume the role of an
inter-dimensional agent on the tail of the
Seven Deadly Fins, a slippery school of anarchists with ichthyocidal intentions. In Corruption, garners play the part of a young, upwardly mobile corporate exec who discovers
that there are some rotten logs on mahogany
row. And in The Guild of Thieves, players don
the persona of a young man with a gift for
sleight of hand who must lie, cheat, and steal,
steal, steal his way into the most elite of thieving circles. All three stories are told through
the very flexible Magnetic Scrolls interface,
which supports a small screen of graphics,
iconic mapping and inventory system, a compass rose movement icon, and, of course, a
text parser interface. All three are written and
illustrated remarkably well, and boast a healthy
dose British humour at its wackiest worst.
Amiga, IBM ($59.99). Circle Reader Service
#25.

Sneak Preview
ward and then, over the camera, as it exits out the back door.
[Camera angle - from hot air balloon behind and above barn]
The plane exits from the barn door and
then, climbs while making a sharp left
roll. The plane ends up inverted and flies
past the balloon with the view of the barn
below the plane.
[Camera angle - spot plane behind lead
plane]
The bi-plane rolls back to normal level
flight towards the setting sun.
The Stunt Man
With the abundance of flight simulation
and flight combat simulation products in
the computer gaming market, it is nice to
see a fresh and innovative product come
along. Stunt Island from Walt Disney
Software is such a product. While these
may be bold words, they are quite
well-deserved since Disney has
taken the concepts of flight simulation, movie making and world
building to create a product that
will stand out from the rest. Stunt
Island which is planned for release in the fall of 1992, is being
promoted as a stunt flying and
movie-making simulator. However, my definition of Stunt Island
is that it is a stunt flying, set creation, movie camera, film production and special effects team simulator. It may sound complicated,
but it is actually quite easy.
The story of Stunt Island is that
a bunch of movie studios got together and purchased a small group of islands off the coast of California for the
sole purpose of providing a private place
that specialized in the filming of high-risk
stunts. The player assumes the role of
stunt pilot, film editor, director or a mixture of these roles. As a pilot, the player
can compete in a Stunt Pilot of the Year
contest, fly various stunts in front of the
cameras or just explore (translation: buzz)
the island. The island itself offers a major
treat to any armchair pilot looking for
new thrills. There are canyons to fly
through, trees to buzz, bridges to fly under, power lines, barns to fly through,
mountains, lakes, ocean, rivers, desert,
forests and lots more. One of the
"canned" stunts that comes along with the

product is the flying of a bi-plane through
an open barn (as described above), which
is quite good at getting the player used to
the thrill and excitement of coming out
the other end of the barn in one piece (after a few attempts, of course). There are
also over 40 different types of aircraft
available for flying stunts. For example, an
F16, U2 spy plane, F117 Stealth fighter,
747, A10 Wart Hog, Cessna 172, Mig
29, and Mustang are just a small sample
of what is available. (Wanna try a DC10
through a canyon? Actually, it is a little
big for the barn.)
In the Stunt Pilot of the Year contest,
the pilot is assigned increasingly difficult
stunts to perform in exchange for bonuses. The fewer the number of takes to
complete the stunt, the better the bonus
becomes. At the end of the contest, the
pilot with the best earnings will have the
newly completed airfield named after him
or her.

movement, effects) assigned to them
when certain criteria are met. For example, when a bomb is dropped from the
plane and hits the Transamerica building,
the building can explode along with the
sound of an explosion.
Up to eight cameras can be placed in almost any position for filming the stunt,
which basically gives one camera in the
airplane cockpit, one camera in the spot
plane (which can be positioned at any angle around the stunt plane), and then six
free cameras for placement anywhere on
or above the island. The amount of zoom
that a camera uses can also be adjusted.
Via the use of the animation, the objects
can also be made to fall down, roll or do
any other type of movement. (I even suc-ceeded at driving a "big foot" truck
around in the woods and then, after getting it up to about 70 MPH getting it airborne and flying around the island. This
might just be a feature in the pre-released
version. grin)
The Editing Room

The Set
Flying is only a part of this incredible
program. As the stunt coordinator, the
player is able to create sets and stunts in
just about any imaginable way. Using
over a 1000 different objects (such as
buildings, cars, people, aircraft, balloons,
tents, clouds, etc.), the player can manipulate a scrolling map field to place and
animate these objects for the stunt. The
process of creating a set, scenery and a
stunt can become quite time consuming
and involved. The set can be as simple or
as complex as the player wants it to be.
Just like in the movie industry, it can
sometimes take weeks to build a set for
shooting two minute's worth of film.
Each object can also have actions (sound,

Another major portion of Stunt
Island is the Post Production
work. By using footage from the
eight different cameras, the
player is then able to enter the
editing room and splice together
a full feature action film for
viewing in the movie theater. Via
a split screen, the editor (player)
is able to view any one of the
eight films, define a film segment
and then "paste" it to the actual
movie footage. The films can be
fast forwarded, stepped through,
reversed, frozen and have special
effects and sound added. This part of the
program took a little getting used to (it
helps to read the manual!), but once the
controls become familiar then it is real
easy to put together a "high quality" action shot. Other effects such as color
shifting, fade, music and credits can be
added to the film. The special effects will
also support the use of the Sound Blaster
products for recording voice and sound
and incorporating them into the film.
Once a movie has been completed, it can
be viewed in the movie theater. Disney
representatives have mentioned that a
separate movie viewer may be included
with the product that can be distributed
freely to anyone for viewing films. (I can

Sneak Preview
see it now! Compuserve and BBSs will be
packed with great action shots.)

The Film Critic
The graphics of Stunt Island are just
down right great! Since the program is
written completely in assembly language,
the programmers have done a great job of

doing three-dimensional rendering and
light source shading without compromising speed and smoothness. The shading of
the aircraft will change as the camera angles around (or spot plane) moves to different perspectives. A large amount of
work has also gone into the environment
of Stunt Island. Instead of just plain old

flat brown or green for the land masses
there are boulders, canyons, mountains
and trees. Lots of trees!
Stunt Island has also done a good job
with the flight characteristics of the
planes. In the pre-release version that I

used, the flight characteristics of the individual aircraft all seem to be the same, except for the speed variances, and climbs
seem to go on forever. The folks at Disney assure us, however, that the flight dynamics of the aircraft will be greatly improved before the product is released.
The pre-release version of the manual is
quite informative and
contains a lot of pictures for demonstrating the usage of the
program. A special
section on the movie
industry is also included and is quite
helpful for understanding some of the
problems and complexities of building
sets, finding set locations and picking the
right scenery.
Overall, Stunt Island
is one incredible program. It is guaranteed
to turn a lot of heads and maybe even set
some new standards for "VCR" viewers in
other flight simulation products. Walt
Disney Software has done a great job of
presenting the process and complexities of
movie making, stunt design and stunt flying into a complete, easy to understand
interface. Not only will this program be
appealing to any armchair pilot, but it
should also attract
anyone who is interested in the movie industry or anyone that
likes programs that allow the creation of environments (such as
SimCity, etc.), since
the building of sets
and scenery can become quite involved.
With this product,
Disney Software is
proving that they can
live up to their own
standard of good,
clean and quality entertainment. After all, it was Disney that
coined the word "Imagineering" and with
Stunt Island the imagination can run wild!

Industry News
card companies as part of this disk. Speculation also suggests that Accolade is looking for
a way to incorporate 1992 season data in a
1992 release, but no final decision has been
made.
Although most of the news in the software
industry was centered around product announcements and demonstrations at the Summer Consumer Electronics Show, there are a
few items which are worthy of note.
After a round of litigation in which PC
Globe allegedly entertained two corporate suitors, Broderbund Software (NASDAQ: BROD)
agreed to acquire PC Globe, the publisher of
geographical software, for a one-time payment
of $1.5 million to PC Globe shareholders. On
June 5, 1992, a U.S. District Court judge dismissed all claims surrounding a previous acquisition agreement between PC Globe and
Intracorp (parent company of the Capstone
label). Creative Labs is expected to announce
a 16-bit version of the SoundBlaster Pro sound
board within the next few months.
Dark Horse Comics, the fast-growing and
sometimes iconoclastic comics publisher in the
Northwest, is believed to be working with
Origin on a Wing Commander comic. James
Hudnall, one of the most prolific Dark Horse
scripters, will be writing the book.
Cineplay Interactive, publishers of Free D.C.
and Will Vinton's Playmation, is currently polishing an as yet untitled presidential election
game. One suggestion is "Lies, Damn Lies and

Politics," but we're not sure that one will play
in Peoria.
The University of Chicago has entered into
an agreement with Maxis to provide students
with copies of SimCity in order to test the
abilities of new artificial intelligence software.
The university's AI classes will observe how
well their program can perform, in comparison
to human urban planners, by using the SimCity simulation. The computer science professor incharge of the experiment, Dr. Kristian
Hammond, says that they chose the program
because, "SimCity is the closest thing we could
find to real life for testing artificial intelligence
on a personal computer. Traditional computerized games, such as chess, have narrowly-defined rules and a limited number of endings.
In SimCity, there are no `right' or 'wrong' answers, but an unending series of decisions that
can lead to a wide variety of results." University students will be running the simulation on
Macintosh IIfx computers.
Accolade is expected to announce an
MLBPA license for Hardball III data disks.
Rumors state that the disks may use real photos of the players a la baseball cards and that
the company may be signing an agreement
with one of the more prominent collectors'

SSI's AD&D line is expanding with Spelljammer: Pirates of Realmspace, based on the "people and paper" supplements published by
TSR, Inc. The Spelljammer rules allow for
"swords and sorcery" in space, sort of John
Carter of Mars meets the ruling family of Amber.
In another licensing agreement, SSI will
publish a computer game version of TSR's A
Line in the Sand land-based modern warfare
in the Middle East.
Wargamers curious about the Carrier Strike
Expansion Set from SSI, will be pleased to
know it includes six scenarios (five historical
and one "What if?" scenario). The latter is a
1947 campaign which takes the tack that the
war continued and weapons advanced. The
new "campaign" has missiles and advanced
tactics. Like many other expansion sets, the
new set will also update the game itself (featuring on-board ship repairs and some new algorithms).
For those who are concerned about the Rumor Guy's presidential campaign and absence
from these pages, we will neither confirm nor
deny his current success. We will expect him
to return if either a Republican or a Democrat
ends up in the White House, however.

Industry News

S

THE CONSUMER ELECTRONICS SHOW:

ometimes, it's better to leave matters a mystery. Sometimes, a hemline should stay that extra inch
longer. Sometimes, it's preferable not to
meet that Hollywood starlet in real life.
Sometimes, it's disillusioning to find out
from your favorite novelist what he or she
really meant when that story was written.
So, it may well be that the 1992 Summer
Consumer Electronics Show will be remembered as one of those sometimes.

Maybe it wasn't such a good idea to
open the doors on what used to be a
trade show. Maybe it wasn't such a good
idea to raise the curtain on consumer
electronics' "dress rehearsal." After all,
CES is a time when computer game publishers demonstrate releases that still have,
at least, three to eight months more work
ahead of them. A lot of consumers may
see the software flash and game chrome
jury-rigged together and actually believe
that all those animated opening sequences
(code conjured to mesmerize buyers and
distributors) are actually what the playing
portion of the game is going to look like.
Plenty of garners, walking through aisles

more crowded than a level of Lemmings,
are bound to think twice about a game
that crashes during a CES demonstration
or features place-holder art and text.
Frankly, many are likely to discover that
viewing the software presented at CES is
akin to watching the daily rushes taken at
a major motion picture studio. To those
with experienced eyes, they can be very
enlightening. To those who are more ac-

quainted with the end product, there is a
major disappointment with the missing
sounds, lack of continuity and absence of

pacing due to the fact the footage has not
yet been edited.
Opening the doors of CES to the consumers removed some of the mystery
from the process, but provided publishers
with several new problems. First, many
corporate buyers did not want to rub elbows with the crowds. CES offers a cacophony of sounds even without the roar
of the crowds. Adding the latter to the
high decibel dissonance that already existed (and already made it tough to do
business on the show floor) was the factor
that made many buyers try to make all
their appointments during the first two
days of the show. While they could probably cover all of the major publishers during that time-span, they certainly did not
have time to explore and check out those
unusual little jewels to be found with
smaller, niche publishers. This could
make it harder than ever for innovative
products from new start-up publishers
and small publishers to hit the store
shelves this fall and winter.
Second, some computer game publishers
were so worried that consumers might

Industry News

NO LONGER BEHIND CLOSED DOORS
carry away bad first impressions of unfinished product that they refused to show
their works in progress on the show floor.
Instead, they showed them off the floor,
again behind closed doors. So, once again
the consumer was not allowed to see what
a complex process it is to bring a game to
market.
Third, many publishers were forced to
bring larger workforces to populate (and

one's feet is bad enough, but some
worked most of twelve straight hours).
The result was that many tired exhibitors
who would normally have been delighted
to deal with their mostly adoring, but
sometimes complaining public, found
themselves feeling slightly aggravated at
them and later, feeling somewhat guilty
for feeling that way about the people who
support them by purchasing the products.

sometimes guard) their booths because of
the incredible extended hours on Saturday
night (the usual nine hours straight on

To be sure, the Electronic Industries Association (sponsors of the
event) may have wanted to generate
extra excitement and guarantee that
the usually light Sunday agenda was
as jampacked as the first three days,
but it seems to have backfired. As a
result, CES conversations which
would normally have been full of
the latest industry gossip and comparing of notes on this product and
that one suddenly became focused
on "What do you think about all of
these consumers?" Ironically, the
presence of the ones who support
the industry turned the attention of the
assembled industry away from those prod-

ucts that cause entertainment software to
be an industry in the first place: the technological marvels that will excite us as the
next few months progress.

We Can Rebuild Them, Better
Than Before
Software engineering, seemingly unheard
of during the debacle of late Christmas releases in 1991, appears to be taking hold.
At Sierra, Steve Joseph was hired to oversee just such design forethought. Teams
are now building tools that will allow objects and characters to function identically
in many game settings (or even, possibly,
on The Sierra Network). At MicroProse,
Lawrence Schick and the rest of the design team are building their game of
ship-to-ship combat in WWII's Pacific Theater
with a view toward interconnecting it
with its sequel, Flat Top (Working Title),
carrier combat in the same theater.
New World Computing has an even
bolder plan. Both the next Might &.
Magic (Clouds of Xeen) and its sequel
(Darkside of Xeen) will use a refined version of the M&M III engine. Both will be

Industry News
self-contained games with their own
quests and endgames. However, players
who have both on their hard drive will
not only be able to move back and forth
between games (each world is very literally
the flip side of the other), but such players will be able to experience a third
endgame equal to about 1/4 the size of

the game (assuming they complete both
quests with the two games still on the
hard drive.
In a similar vein, Origin is planning
mission disks for Ultima VII: The Black
Gate which will actually serve as "add-in"
disks rather than "add-on" disks. They are
being designed so that they fit into sections of the game rather than simply adding more square miles to the game world.
Omnitrend Software, a small independent publisher and developer, may
have actually foreshadowed such developments when they designed Breach 2 and
Rules of Engagement (man-to-man and
ship-to-ship tactical combat, respectively)
to interface such that one could board a
ship via Rules of Engagement and finish the
battle using Breach 2. Since Breach 2 and
Rules of Engagement were not distributed
by the same company, however, the Interlocking Game System portion of both designs was never really marketed. Now,
Omnitrend has signed an agreement with
Impressions (the British software firm)
and intends to release Breach 3 and Rules
of Engagement 2 with particular emphasis
on the interlocking nature of the games.
Indeed, Impressions seems to be investing
enough in the Connecticut firm that alert
consumers could expect a major expansion in Omnitrend's line by 1993.
Software engineering is not only a
means of providing extra value and continuity for gamers, but it is also a means of
solving some of the problems associated
with the mass slippage which the entertainment software industry has seen in the
last two years. The more companies can

build on common elements, the more
likely they will be to produce follow-up
products in a reasonable amount of time.

Recycling Made Easy
One trend which CGW reported upon
in the WCES Report (Part I, CGW#92,
p. 26) is continuing. That trend is the use
of ambient video. Originally seen in
games like Chris Crawford's Patton Strikes
Back (for Broderbund) and Spectrum
HoloByte's Crisis in the Kremlin, this
technique is soon to make its appearance
in such titles as: Three-Sixty's Victory At
Sea (film footage of actual battles), Interplay's Castles II (using scenes from Charles Laughton's Henry the VIII) and Buzz
Aldrin's Race Into Space (using news footage of presidential addresses and space
launches), Konami's (and Spirit of Discovery's) NFL Video Master Football (using old NFL video footage), Sega's Joe
Montana NFL Football for their CDROM (using some video and digitized
voice), Psygnosis' tentatively entitled Carl
Lewis Olympic Challenge (digitized track
and field footage) and MicroLeague

Sports' upcoming line of sports games
(using archival television footage). Virgin's Dune -CD has the rights to 30
minutes of footage from the feature film
and will likely use the bulk of it in the
CD version.
In addition to archival footage, many of
the licensed film and television projects
will be digitizing the sets and artwork
from the original properties. Konami's
Batman Returns digitized and enhanced
pictures of the actual movie sets (even
though the game is not keyed to the
film's plot). Capstone's An American Tail:
The Computer Adventures of Fievel and His
Friends uses digitized backgrounds from

the films to provide atmosphere for their
potpourri of puzzles and L. A. Law uses
digitized images of the actual sets as the

backdrop for the adventure game. Azeroth Software, developers of the Adventures of Inspector Gadget game, have been
able to digitize both backgrounds and
characters to use in that game.
In addition to using archived video to
enhance products, several companies are
shooting their own video for use in computer games. Sony Electronic Publishing
is nearing release on Sewer Shark, an interactive "action"-style game for Sega's
$400 CD-ROM platform (which includes
both the Genesis and the CD-ROM
player) to be launched in the U.S. this
September (with up to 20 titles available,
at launch, in September) where the player

guides his/her robot through a maze of
previously filmed sewers and corridors.
They also have a music video game for
the MPC platform called, Make Your
Own Video. Both products were originally
developed for the aborted interactive television format from Hasbro of a few years
back. The use of videotape in the earlier
format caused time-lags and access problems, but the use of CD-ROM storage
has allowed the developer, Smart TV, to
overcome those problems and present
playable designs. Sega is also publishing a
Smart TV design for their CD-ROM system. Entitled Night Trap, the game requires players to rid a haunted house of a
multitude of ghouls. We are told that a
pre-infamous Dana Plato played one of
the women which the player must rescue
during the game. Also, as many CNN
viewers already know, Buena Vista Software's Unnatural Selection (a wild strategy
game of genetic engineering gone wild)
uses footage that was filmed at Walt Disney Studios, especially for the game. Finally, Cyberdreams used digitized film in
order to get smooth animation in their
Darkseed product, an adventure game set
in the universe of macabre science-fantasy
artist, H. R. Giger (whose work inspired
the original Alien).

Industry News
Three-Deep
Another trend which has been noted in
the last few CES Reports is the use of
continually more sophisticated three-dimensional graphics. Last August (CGW
#85, p. 12), the first installment of our
Summer CES coverage talked about Novalogic's Ultrabots and Battleground 2000
projects (originally developed for Data
East). The former used fully-rendered
three-dimensional models and looked like
a major breakthrough, while the latter
looked amazingly like the 3-D polygonfilled technology with terraced overlays
used in Chris Robert's Strike Commander
for Origin (also covered in that report).

cing in their Mantis: XF5700 Experimental
Space Fighter game. Meanwhile, Chris
Roberts continues to insist that Strike
Commander will do all that he's promised
by the time it is released this fall. At CES,
Roberts demonstrated 3-D rendered
buildings where Garoud shading was used
over polygon-filled targets, as well as texture mapping and light sourcing (to enhance detail and lighting angles). Though
the demonstration ran at 15 frames per
second on a 486-based IBM computer,
Origin was not showing a playable simulation at that rate.
Amiga owners are not left out of the
three-dimensional technology, either. In
Psygnosis' Air Support garners will need
to wear 3-D glasses (provided with the
product) in order to get the right perspective. Air Support features real-time battles
in which the gamer chooses between 16
different combat vehicles.
Maxis' El-Fish (short for electronic fish)
may very well become the ultimate executive desk toy or computer-literate yuppie
showcase. The program allows players to

This year, Novalogic states that both of
their products carried over from 1991 are
ready to be published, but that financial/legal considerations are holding up
their publication. The company has continued to advance their technology, however, and demonstrated Maximum Overkill, a helicopter simulation that processed
3-D elevation on the fly. In the demonstration, the helicopter flew through a
three-dimensional Grand Canyon at an
impressively fast frame rate. John Garcia,

president of Novalogic, states that the
programmers have had to go back to pure
assembly programming in order to get the
speed required.
Also noted in the WCES Report was the
fact that Paragon Software was capturing
3-D models to film and creating computer models, complete with light-sour-

Chess 4000 also uses clay figures to get a
three-dimensional feel. Battle Chess 4000
features improved algorithms (tested in
the company's impressive Checkmate

product) and a new set of animations
built around a zany pulp science fiction
universe instead of the fantasy genre utilized in the original Battle Chess release.
Interplay is also publishing a Super NES
game called Claymates. Featuring cute clay
animations, players metamorphose from
one type of funny animal into another as
they move from obstacle to obstacle. In a
different venue, Dynamix is using some
of their 3-D technology to develop a football game with a unique look and feel. As
yet untitled, the game looks to be a hybrid of strategy and realistic action.
MicroProse's F-15 Strike Eagle III takes
3-D mapping to a new level of realism.
Any computer pilot who identifies with
the phrase "going downtown" will get a
new sense of what that means in the upcoming F-15 Strike Eagle III. Andy Hollis'
team has taken an aerial military map of

"breed" 3-D rendered fish with catalogued genetic characteristics. The fish
will perform with "authentic" behaviors
similar to the models of the "artificial life"
school. The program generates these behaviors on the fly and the fish swim "realistically" around the electronic fish tank
presented on one's monitor.
Of course, if fish are not one's style,
there is yet another piece of 3-D software
that just might be a popular "yuppie toy."
Cineplay Interactive is publishing Will
Vinton's Playmation for Windows. Instead
of using polygons, the system uses "spline
patching." This technique allows the user
to sculpt and bend the objects which are
being defined, rather than restricting the
"creator" to the blocky look identified
with pure polygons.

Baghdad and calculated a three-dimensional map from the elevations noted on
that map. When players perform missions
around this simulated Baghdad, they will
be encountering more of "the real thing"
than ever before.

The animation for Interplay's Battle

Still, the most talked about use of 3-D

Industry News

rendering at SCES, like WCES before it,
was Virgin's The Seventh Guest. Not satisfied with filling up one CD with quality
art, animation and an original score from
The Fat Man (George Alistair Sanger of
Loom, Wing Commander and Castles
fame), Trilobyte (the game's developer) is
filling two CDs with some of the most
remarkable art and sound ever seen in a
computer game. The adventure is set in a
haunted mansion and does a marvelous
job of conveying the eerie atmosphere of
the storyline.

Tailored to Fit
One trend that has always been in the

computer game industry, but seems to be
resurfacing with more versatility than
ever, is the ability to customize a program
to meet one's own agenda. Sports games,
particularly statistics-based sports games,
have generally had the ability to customize rosters and leagues. Also some strategy
games, such as Strategic Studies Group's
Carriers at War and Battlefront series,
Strategic Simulations, Inc.'s Warship and
Panzer Strike games and MicroPlay's
UMS II, have always had a design kit,
while products like RAW Entertainment's
Action Stations! add-on disk provide a design capacity for existing programs that allow players to generate their own scenarios. In that tradition, QQP announced
that they would be publishing a deluxe
edition of The Perfect General in 1993
that would include a design kit, along
with upgraded Al and the addition of aircraft and machine guns. Ironically, SSG's
Carriers at War (for the IBM) could have
been shipped in the first quarter, but has
been significantly delayed by the publisher's decision to include a design kit which

is significantly more powerful than the
one in the original Apple version of CAW
At Summer CES, several games emphasized this "tailoring" factor in games.
Most noticeable was the number of
gamer-controlled options in Maxis' SimLife. Whereas SimEarth was often criticized because the gamer could not control
enough or see enough direct result from
his/her decisions, SimLife lets players develop their own creatures, food webs,
mating habits, adaptive capacities, mutational probabilities and more. Not only

can one develop biomes from the ground
up, but one can use the simple paint program provided to create the right look for

Industry News
make "realistic" facial expressions during
the course of the game.
Also, Impressions will publish a construction kit as part of Omnitrend's Paladin 2, the sequel to their earlier fantasy
wargaming system which translated Breach
into enchanted realms. The construction
kit will enable players to modify the existing quests and create original ones.

turn-based modem play. In addition, Impressions officially stated that they are
working toward modem play as a significant part of their mission. Three-Sixty's
Theater of War will also allow gamers to
play by modem.
Flight simulation fans should note that

Reach Out and Crush
a plant. Not only can one establish the
"rules" for a given species by using onscreen "sliders" and a plethora of on-line
help features, but one can make that creature look like a mythological beast or a
hybrid creature using the paint program.
Paragon Software's Challenge of the Five
Realms will allow garners to use a paint
program (or possibly, import a digitized
photograph of themselves) in order to
place themselves into the fantasy game (to
be available on both standard IBM clones
and in a CD-version). The programmers
are using a "face technology" that should
allow one's custom on-screen characters to

Modem games continue to garner a following and, at this CES as in the past,
several important announcements were
made for those who like to "reach out
and crush" human opponents rather than
artificial ones. New World Computing
has purchased the rights to do an IBM
network version of Spaceward Ho!, the
strategic space conquest game that has enraptured so many Macintosh garners. According to Jon van Canegham, the game
will allow up to 19 human or computer
players, according to any mix, to compete.
Another encouragement is that QQP's
Conquered Kingdoms (see the description
under "This Means War") will feature

MicroProse and Spectrum HoloByte
have announced that they plan for garners
to be able to link F-15 Strike Eagle III
and Falcon 3.0 for modem-to-modem
dogfights. Psygnosis' Armour-Geddon (an
IBM conversion with enhanced graphics
from those of the Amiga and Atari ST, as

Industry News
well as a CD-ROM version with bitmapped vehicles) will not support modem
play, but will allow garners to compete
head-to-head with serial connection (null
modem).
This Means War
QQP not only announced an upcoming
expansion disk to The Perfect General entitled, Greatest Battles of the 20th Century,
but the company announced three other
wargames as well. In addition to the previously mentioned deluxe edition of The
Perfect General, QQP plans to release
Battles of Destiny and Conquered Kingdoms. The former is a game of conquest in which the player tries to gain
control of a multitude of random
worlds and the latter is a medieval
strategy game. Battles of Destiny is expected to feature decision-making on a
tactical scale, rather than the strategic
scale normally assigned to world conquest games.
Conquered Kingdoms is due in Fall
'92 and is expected to appeal on several
levels. First, the game allows balanced
competition (21 different AI levels for
those who cannot find a human opponent) in the medieval world with melee
combat, ranged combat and siege combat
where eight basic (historical) units and
seven fantasy units can mix it up across
nine different world maps. Second, as
noted earlier, the game allows players to
compete via modem. Finally, there is a
campaign game in which the player tries
to become King of all Cascatia (the imaginary land in which the campaign is set).
Players build fiefdoms and recruit nonplayer characters on their way to their ultimate coronation. Combat is handled in
an enhanced scissors, rock, paper style
with new elements (i.e. spies with much
the same power as in Stratego) thrown in.
Conquered Kingdoms is only one of the
wargames based on medieval combat
which are due to appear in 1992. Mindcraft's Siege takes place in the world of
The Magic Candle and allows players to
recruit and deploy armies consisting of
numerous fantasy races, each with their
own strengths and weaknesses. The

graphics are outstanding and the on-going
real-time combat offers a different style of
game than the turnbased QQP game. Interplay's Castles II: Siege and Conquest offers yet another style of game. Built off
the successful Castles system, the new design not only adds the visual chrome discussed earlier, but also features enough
strategic elements to satisfy the wargamers
among the castle building set.
Strategic Simulations, Inc. is no longer
known as, primarily, a wargame company,
but the prolific publisher continues to

ter is strictly available on Amiga and Atari
ST at the present time.
Perhaps, the most ambitious publisher
of wargames in the current market, however, is Three-Sixty Pacific. Their Vis fir
Victory series (with Utah Beach available
on both Macintosh and IBM) has received significant acclaim from "converted" board wargamers and a second
game, based on the eastern front (WWII)
battle of Velikiye Luki, is slated for release
before Christmas. Further, just in case
wargamers were expecting more of the
same from Three-Sixty Pacific, the
company elected to publish an abstract
wargame called Theater of War (see the
sneak preview in this issue).
Finally, Three-Sixty plans to release
Patriot, covering strategic land warfare
in the Persian Gulf, in the fall. Patriot

publish its share of wargames. Gary Grigsby's Carrier Strike (see the review in this
issue) was just released for the IBM and a
new (and huge!) game based on the entire
Pacific Theater of War is on its way later
this year. Meanwhile, two British publishers are attempting to take up some of
the slack left by SSI's less ambitious
schedule. Impressions plans to release Air
Force Commander in the U.S. by the time
this issue hits the stands. It involves air
warfare in the Persian Gulf. In 26 scenarios, the player acts as the overall commander for all air resources and the
ground support necessary to "keep 'em
flying." In a different vein, Impressions
has revamped their Samurai game for release as Conquest of Japan. Although the
overall campaign is non-historical, the
real-time miniatures-style battles use
authentic formations from feudal Japan
and the action is very interesting. RAW
Entertainment is currently readying Fleet
Commander (see the design notes in last
month's issue and the current issue),
WWII strategic naval conflict and has just
released Napoleon I. The former will be
available on the IBM format and the lat-

uses some novel approaches that bend
wargame conventions. For example,
there are no pre-set and non-modifiable
zones of control in this wargame. Instead, the user shapes the zone of control
as a means of assigning the patrol area to
a given unit. Although the game is no
longer slated to be a "land-based version
of Harpoon," it does look like a fresh approach to command simulations.
More "Open Door" Policy
Next month, CGW will continue to
summarize the exciting new possibilities
unveiled at the Summer Consumer Electronics Show. Simulations, strategy games,
adventure games, CRPGs and action
games will be covered in Part II of our
report.

Review

The Golden Bear Gets A Facelift
Jack Nicklaus Golf er Course Design: Signature Edition
by H.E. Dille
Jack Nicklaus Signature Golf is more of
an evolutionary than revolutionary design
within the genre of computer golf games.
Its predecessor, Jack Nicklaus Unlimited
Golf & Course Design, was revolutionary in
that it allowed players to duplicate their
favorite courses from scorecards or design
entirely new ones, limited only by their
imaginations. Although Unlimited remains the only product that boasts this
feature, it is constrained by lower resolution and a more limited palette,
as well as poor sound card support. Consequently, when Access Software released Links,
with near photographic quality,
digitized graphics and superlative sound support, Accolade
lost a significant portion of
their market. Further, as additional Links course disks were
developed, an increasing number of players made the transition. Signature represents Accolade's bid to recapture some of
these converts, as well as retain
and reward their loyal Unlimited following with some significant, if not revolutionary,
program enhancements.

with a penchant for drawing programs
will be happy to know that any graphics
file with an .LBM or .PCX extension can
be imported to Signature. This potential
for truly individualized courses should
prove exciting to players who frequent the
Accolade bulletin board to swap designs
(408-296-8800 1200/2400 baud, 408296-8810 9600 baud). For those without
the patience or inclination to develop images pixel by pixel, Signature comes with a

A View From The
Gallery
The most noticeable improvement is, predictably, the shift to
the VGA standard. Although
Links will retain the title for
"best graphics overall," players
will be delighted with the additional flexibility Signature provides them in the
Course Design module. Virtually any object can be created in loving detail using a
palette of 176 colors, six standard brushes
and seven distinct stroke styles. Objects
may also be exported from course to
course and the edit feature utilized to jazz
up existing Unlimited courses for use by
the new system (Warning: Once modified, the courses will no longer be usable
by Unlimited) Additionally, those players

full library of objects for modification or
incorporation into course designs. Another improvement over Unlimited is the
ability to "plot and play" newly designed
holes without exiting the module, thereby
allowing for refinement of each hole "on
the fly" as it were.

Finding A Foursome
Computer golf, unlike its real life counterpart, is often a solitary pursuit. Although Signature supports up to four

TITLE: Jack Nicklaus Golf & Course Design
Signature Edition

players on a single machine, finding a foursome is as difficult as
ever. Fortunately, Accolade will
soon announce a limited partnership with the Prodigy network
that may prove the most evolutionary development that Signature has to offer to owners of
other programs. Beginning in
June, Prodigy will offer Signature
players on-line tournament play
for an additional $7.95 per
month. Players can compete in
Opens with up to 149 contestants, or organize an Invitational
with 4-32 players of their choice.
Further, tournament courses can
be downloaded and played offline, a major cost savings to those
among us with excessive BBS
costs. Players will be required to
post their scores daily to keep the
leader board current. Additionally, Prodigy will offer a separate
area for upload/download of
course designs and object files.
Given that on-line support of
various computer and fantasy
baseball leagues has generated a major following, I predict that the Accolade/Prodigy initiative will receive substantial backing from modem golfers.

The First Tee
Before addressing the ball, players must
become members of the club. New club
members establish their player files by
specifying their level of difficulty: novice,
advanced or expert (increasing impact for
wind affect and proper wrist snap), which

tees

they will use, from Championship to

ing Range, Putting Green or practice any
hole on the course.

Playing A
Round

Ladies, and may even edit the character's
style to conform to a favorite professional
or one's own ability. Additionally, it
is possible to dictate the character's
proficiency with each club (expressed
as a percentage) and strength (from 0
to 120 percent of the rated distance
for a given club). These features can
also be used to generate computer
opponents. The program comes with
a dozen pre-generated professionals,
including the Golden Bear himself,
but players may create an unlimited
number of others for use in tournament play, another new improvement over Unlimited. Besides stroke
and skins play, Signature offers tournament play for up to 72 players
(only four may be human controlled
"club members," however). Tournaments can be from one to five rounds and
the leader board is displayed at the completion of each hole. While at the club
house screen, one can also select the Driv-

The mechanics of
Signature are virtually
indistinguishable
from those used by
Unlimited Players
control the strength
of their backswing
and timing of their
wrist snap on a sliding, graduated scale.
The center section of
the scale is divided
into 10 percent increments of the rated distance for the chosen
club, thereby allowing rudimentary con-

trol of the backswing, exclusive of wind or
turf factors which can affect the distance
of the shot. Good rules of thumb are to
take one club size more than normal for
light rough and two club sizes for heavy

rough. Wind and course conditions are
randomly generated at the beginning of
each round and I was particularly impressed with how the program recreated
the difference's between normal, wet and
dry greens. Once on the green, players
have a break indicator arrow with a numerical value (the higher the number, the
greater the break) and an unobtrusive
overlaying light green grid to assist in shot
placement. The grid may be turned off at
the player's discretion but the shadowing
of the greens seemed insufficient to properly judge shots when this was done.

The 19th Hole
Back in the clubhouse, players will be
happy to find that the program has kept a
tally of their statistics for future reference.
Also, a select few may find their names
posted in the Hole in One club. The only
things that seem to be missing
are nasty golf course hot dogs
and a cool one of choice.
As stated previously, Jack
Nicklaus Golf & Course Design:
Signature Edition doesn't break
much new ground. As such,
owners of its predecessor may
rightfully question whether
they want to pay the fairly
hefty price for the new version
(at this writing Accolade is not
offering a reduced upgrade fee
for registered users, but they
should). Everyone else with an
avid interest in the sport, however, could do a lot worse
than Signature when considering a new purchase. It is a solid offering
that will have a lot of legs, despite decreasing retail shelf life, largely due to the
on-line offering from Prodigy.

Foreign Correspondence

Over There
by Paul Rigby

oming from Eldritch Software/Millennium is a sort of Interactive Drama type game which mixes adventure with
role-playing and is played in the first-person
perspective. Called Daughter of Serpents, the
storyline is rather complex and interwoven, so
much so that spouting too much about it
might blow the whole plot. However,
Eldritch's Chris Elliot did offer, "It's about
ghastly things happening in 1920s Egypt, Alexandria to be precise. Very much in the
Lovcraftian gothic horror mode. Without giving too much away it's basically about survivals from the great library of Alexandria — the
greatest library in the classical world — and
it's to do with a book of forbidden knowledge
which was part of that library."

C

Creating a character, as in any RPG, is important but in this game it is more complex.
There are six occupations to choose from.
Each is important as players will only receive
information in the game that their character,

in real life, would normally receive. However,
there is a certain amount of overlap, as happens in real life. For example, it is not impossible for an Egyptologist (an academic) to have
magical skills (which are more mystical). The
player's character can also 'specialize' in a subject. So, taking the Egyptologist, one might
specialize in 'Egyptian Myths and Legends' or
spread his/her 'points' evenly around other
skills.
The challenge that this icon-driven game offers is almost all interaction-based. Combat is
not used to any extent. Problems, surrounding
people, are the essence of the gameplay. One
of the most important and, potentially, exciting areas of the game is the interaction area.
Characters speak via speech bubbles, similar to
comics. However, all the text in the bubbles is
hypertext. That is, the text is 'live'. One can
click on selected words which will trigger the
character to tell the player more about a person/place/object/etc. The hypertext is modified. That is, it is not a browsing tool as per
usual. In Serpents it is "context-sensitive"
which allows the text to respond to situations
and a changing conversation. In addition,
there are three threads running through the
game (resulting in three separate endings). The
release of Daughter of Serpents, on IBM and
Amiga, is due around October.
Magnetic Scrolls is developing a solo-charac-

ter RPG called Haunted (a working title) due
for release on the IBM in November. The
player visits a house that they have recently inherited from a deceased relative. However, expect the horror to follow. Wandering the endless corridors (with the aid of automapping)
the player will be confronted with over 20
'miscreations' of life, controlled by an entity
that possesses the house, but some of these
creatures will be valuable in helping to release
the house from the entity's grip.
Switching genres, Microprose UK and development house Sleepless Knights are working
on the sequel to Airborne Ranger. Special
Forces, as the game is entitled, much more resembles Interstel's Dragon Force than its immediate predecessor in its execution, however.
The game asks the player to compile a team by
studying the specialist skills required for each
of the sixteen missions throughout the world.
One can gather intelligence about the enemy
and plan lines of attack for a wide variety of
terrain, climate and environments. The player
is able to control his men individually or coordinate the activities of the team as a whole.
Also, the team can create diversions, use covering fire and employ the tactics used by many
real-life Special Force teams. Special Forces is
out now out on the Amiga and Atari ST.
Next, from Impressions, is Discovery — In
the Steps of Columbus a game which allows its

Foreign Correspondence
title to say it all. The game begins after Columbus has done the hard work. Then, it is
the player's chance to discover six new worlds.
One can sail in uncharted waters and, when
land is found, build a settlement, initiate the
ecological collapse of our mother Earth by
chopping down forests (to simultaneously provide timber and space to build upon), grow
crops, mine for minerals and then, ship the
produce back home to sell and raise money to
find further discoveries. Discovery is entirely a
mouse driven game that allows the player to
rustle up armies to invade competing colonies,
develop settlements and so on. Extra features
include eight types of ship, land and sea battles, mutiny, pirates, explorers poking their
scouts into one's business and so on. Discovery
— In the Steps of Columbus is currently available on the Amiga.
From the team who brought Bloodwych to
the world, comes Legend, Mindscape's new
CRPG for IBM and Amiga. The plot surrounds Trazere and the people within. The
place is in chaos, as the people are suffering
from hideous mutations. There is, as I'm sure
everyone will be surprised to hear (wink, wink,
nudge, nudge), an evil force at work. The
"Why?"s and the "How?"s are left to the party
of four independently controlled characters to
figure out. The game offers a variety of view-

points from the animated overhead map to the
first-person static screens in the many towns to
the 3-D isometric dungeon perspective which
is viewed and interacted with in a similar way
to Populous. Features include automapping,
the ability to rally characters for battle, and an
animated magic spell-mixing screen using
mortar and pestle.
Created by The Grue!' for Borphee Computers is a text-only adventure for the Amiga
called, The Four Symbols (TFS). Seems that the
four sacred symbols have been stolen from the
village church and the player has volunteered
to bring them back. Well, I say volunteered —
the player has also been accused of witchcraft,
so it's either that or the big barbecue! A large
game of around 100 locations, TFS contains
no real mazes, displays some solid research
into the game's various subject areas, lots of
devious puzzles and a few intriguing NPCs.
Priced at £6.50 and available from Borphee
Computers, 64 County Road, Ormskirk, England, L39 1QH.
Anyone who would like to contact me can
do so on CompuServe (75300,1503) or by
mail to 20 Malvern Road, Liverpool, England,
L6 6BW [please include three 'international
reply coupons' for a reply].

Note: The above games, and any of the other
games mentioned in "Over There" in past issues, can be obtained from:
Computer Adventure World,
318 Kensington, Liverpool England, L7OEY
Tel: 01144-51-263-6306.
Premier Mail Order,
Trybridge Ltd.,
8 Buckwins sq.
Burnt Mills, Basildon, Essex England,
SS13 1BJ
Tel: 01144-268-590-766
Fax: 01144-268-590-076
Software City, Unit 4, BDC, 21 Temple St.
Wolverhampton, WV2 4AN.
Tel: 01144 902-2504.
24 Hour credit card hotline:
01144 902-25304.
All of the above telephone numbers assume
you can dial direct. If you have any trouble
contact the international operator.

TITLE: Spaceship Warlock
SYSTEM: Color Macintosh
or greater with 4 MB RAM, CD-Rom drive
PRICE: $95
PROTECTION: None
PUBLISHER: Reactor, Chicago, III.

Review
connected by elevators and
map-viewers are provided at intervals along the corridors to
help players determine their exact locale. Players will need the
special map that accompanies
the maze on the engineering
deck, but it will test one's problem-solving skill to determine
what tools will be needed to fulfill your mission. Further, it is
the protagonist's task to mount
the gun turret, fight a Kroll ship
to a standstill, enter the ship,
use the blaster against the Kroll
crew and return with more
brains than he started with. It
will also be bumpy going when
Hammer sends him, sans map,
deep into the gnarly Kroll asteroid to capture the goggly goods
and, to man the guns yet again
when the merciless Kroll patrol
fleet dares to stand between the
Warlock and the long lost home
planet, Earth. Remember, home
is where the h I.

One predominant visual in Warlock Is the watch cursor. With
rich graphic data files like this
on CD-ROM, it takes time to load
up each next file. Another characteristic that can diminish the
sense of reality is that the combat interface tends to cause objects to flash In a color-negative
type of reversal. The weakest
function in Warlock Is the combat interface. It is a spongy,
wobbly, "fuzzy logic" kind of aiming and firing control that tends
to frustrate experienced gamers
who are aware of better systems.
The good news is that players
who own Macromind Director,
the animation program that
Spaceship Warlock was authored
in, can access the clips in the
Data Files folder, where many —
but by no means all — of the

scenes and characters can be
viewed and played. For one's
personal experiments (only!), it
is possible to copy objects and
actions to merge into custom
micromovies. Reactor, the Chicago-based team of Mike Saenz
and Joe Sparks, created most of
the imagery, sound, music and
voice themselves. Saenz and
Sparks are, at this moment,
slaving away to complete their
next interactive optical opus,
Screaming Metal. Their team
has developed their own animation engine that leapfrogs
Macromedia Director, and even
Apple's QuickTime. Hopefully,
that should melt the watch cursor like the dial in a painting by
Dail. If Metal has even a parsec
of the craftsmanship, beauty,
bounce, humor and wonder of
Warlock, ft will Indeed perpetuate the growth of this new genre
of personal interactive gaming —
the CD-ROM movie.

Review

Software Toolworks' Chessmaster 3000
By Tim Carter
some creative icons for those bored with the more traditional
chess pieces. The documentation is complete, if somewhat cryptic.
The user interface supports joystick, mouse and keyboard applications. Of course, none of this is new to either the user of Chessmaster or gamer who plays any other computer chess system.
TITLE: Chessmaster 3000
SYSTEM: IBM
# PLAYERS: 0-2
PRICE:$49.5
PROTECTION: None
PUBLISHER: Software Toolworks
Novato. CA

C

onsidering the success of previous Chessmaster programs,
along with the rather fixed nature of the game of chess
itself, one must ask how long Software Toolworks, or any
other publisher for that matter, can continue to expect consumers
to spend hard-earned dough upgrading their chess programs. The
question really is how much can Software Toolworks add to previous Chessmasters to make the purchase of an upgrade worthwhile? The answer for this incarnation of Chessmaster is — a lot.

The Usual
Suspects
As one might expect, many of the
core features of the Chessmaster system have been upgraded to current
standards. The graphics are sharp
and smooth, and sound support is
offered through Soundblaster and
Ad Lib cards. There are the usual
2-D and 3-D displays, as well as

What's New?
In going beyond what is already out there, Software Toolworks
has added a number of options that make Chessmaster 3000 a
truly impressive sequel. One departure from traditional chess programs is in the way computer opponents are presented. Chessmaster 3000 moves away from a strictly hierarchical series of difficulty
levels and, instead, presents a number of distinct computer personalities. The inherent skill of these opponents ranges from very
simple (Novice) to very difficult (Chessmaster). Between these extremes are fourteen personalities which have no obvious ranking.
Some are modeled after great chess players of historical significance while others reflect a particular style of play. The skill of
each personality is controlled by setting the amount of time that
the computer has to think, as well as the number of moves that it
attempts to plot out. Therefore, any of the personalities can be
adjusted to meet the level of the human player without altering
their "personality."
The addition of personality to computer opponents makes the game
more enjoyable in both the short and
long terms. In the long term, the
ability to play repeatedly without encountering a similar strategy time and
time again gives Chessmaster 3000
real durability in terms of keeping
one's attention. In the short term,
playing against distinct personalities
is simply more entertaining. (Although it is definitely a greater blow
to one's ego to lose to an opponent

Review
named "Woodpusher" than to be defeated by one with the pseudonym of "Chessmaster.")
It is also possible to create new computer personalities from
scratch. Players have the opportunity to set seven characteristics
that determine how the opponent will play. For example, one can
determine an opponent's: aggressiveness, knowledge of opening
moves and ability to see and construct a series of moves. An opponent can also be directed to favor certain pieces over others or
to favor positional advantages over the taking of pieces.
While some players may be initially thrown off by the lack of an

(and a choice of five styles of notation is provided), the people at
Software Toolworks seem to have made a concerted effort to ex-

plain as much as possible in user-friendly language (i.e. plain English).
During a game, a variety of different options are available to
both assist play and further improve one's playing skills. At any
given point Chessmaster can analyze positions, provide a series of
advised moves and explain in plain language why a certain move
is a sound course of action. Early in the game, this advice revolves
around a standard opening and possible variants. However, once
in the middle of the game, this analysis is based on the computer's logic alone. Chessmaster will also analyze moves already
made for strengths and possible weaknesses.
The on-line advice does have some weaknesses, however. Since
one of the keys to game play is the inclusion of such a vast array
of distinctive personalities for the computer opponents, it would
be nice if the advice reflected this, as well. As it is, the advice
provided is fairly inflexible in its strategy, almost invariably suggesting a series of one-for-one trade-offs to gain a positional advantage. As one might expect, this is of more use against some
opponents than others.

Checkmate in Three
obvious set of difficulty levels, the depth and strength of the system will become clear once the computer personalities and the
opponent creation option are fully explored.

A Chess Program With Class
One of the real strengths of Chessmaster 3000 is its utility as a
learning program. Before playing, one can call up both introductory and advanced strategy tutorials, as well as a database of over
100 openings. This is an excellent way to introduce new players
to the game using a hands on approach. New players will want to
be familiar with the system of notation in use before attempting
to use the tutorials.
In addition, Chessmaster comes with 150 classic matches on file.
As in previous versions of Chessmaster, the documentation includes a brief background on each match. Now, however, there is
also a series of notes written into the database which provides
observers with periodic updates on the strategies being employed.
One great improvement over older chess programs is the addition of plain language in all aspects of communication between
the player and the Chessmaster. While chess notation is still used

In conclusion, Chessmaster 3000 is a most impressive upgrade of
a generally sound chess system. The addition of plain language,
both for notation and on-line advice, marks a significant step towards a completely accessible chess program. The emphasis on
learning is also well done. One can only hope that future versions
will meet the high standards of Chessmaster 3000.

Review

John Carter of Interplay
Out of this World Beats the Pulp out of a Genre
by Allen Greenberg

TITLE: Out of This World
SYSTEMS: Amiga, IBM
REVIEWED ON: Amiga
PRICE: $59.95
PROTECTION: Code Wheel
PRODUCER: Delphine Software
DISTRIBUTOR: Interplay Productions
Santa Ana, CA.

n the latter half of the previous century, as well as the early part of this
I one, the wisest and most perceptive
visionaries probed the depths of the unknown and used their prescience to herald
the future in such a way that it lifted our
sights toward the new frontiers of both
inner and outer space. Nothing was hidden from them as they chronicled the unprecedented experiments which were carried out in the secluded facilities of mad,
modern geniuses. Such inspired scribes of
Earth's potential achievements were given
only the finest of parchment on which to
set their prophetic visions. It was called
"pulp." Is it any fault of Jules Verne that
the United States has invested billions in
a space program when all that was actually necessary to reach the moon was a
900 foot cannon? Has not Edgar Rice
Burroughs already introduced us to both
the giants and the royalty living on Mars,
as well as demonstrating an amazingly
economical way of journeying there without so much as an airplane? It is with
great pleasure, therefore, that we have
come upon an interactive computer program whose authors have clearly paid attention to these sages of pulp. Out of this
World (OOTW) properly depicts science
in its "purest" form, complete with reclusive scientist, freak accident, strange creatures and, of course, another world (indeed, the European version of the game
was entitled, Another World).
OOTW is an elegantly crafted arcade
game, presented in a modern adventure

game format. Less intense than most arcade games, it contains a gratifying degree
of non-verbal puzzle-solving along with its
share of running, jumping and wanton
demolition. Although most of the game is
played using a flat, two-dimensional point
of view, the designers have liberally embellished the action with quick shifts in
perspective so that the player is treated to
a truly cinematic (or at least worthy of
prime-time television) performance. Creatures seen from a non-threatening side
view suddenly appear in a full, D.W.
Griffith-style close-up. Imaginative,
off-angle views are also used on occasion to depict special sequences. The
action clearly follows a pre-set script
rather than the endless
wave-ftrscnioudtarce
exercises. 'Whether this is, in fact, an
adventure game in arcade format,
rather than the other way around, is
truly a philosophical question best left
to minds who are paid less-per-word
than this reviewer.
OOTW depicts the adventures of a scientist chosen by fate to be hurled from
his laboratory into some other universe.
The events which lead up to this occurrence are depicted in the program's introduction — arguably, one of the most
imaginative pieces of non-interactive
story-telling ever associated with a computer game. The world on which the scientist finds himself, clearly inspired by the
much-loved pulp worlds of the aforementioned Edgar Rice Burroughs, is ruled by
a race of despotic slave-keepers. Assuming
the scientist survives long enough to be
captured by the fiends, he (after all,
"pulp" is notoriously sexist) must then
navigate his way to freedom. Most of the
action involves navigating the labyrinth
which surrounds the alien prison while
dealing with the guards and creatures who
populate it. Of special interest is a likable
fellow prisoner who quickly becomes a
loyal companion. There is also an interesting multi-purpose zap-gun which func-

tions as a type of alien Swiss Army knife.
Unfortunately, the Amiga version of the
game ends very abruptly and many players
will feel short-changed with the final
scene. Fortunately, the IBM version contains additional "footage," about an hour
or two worth for most players.
At times, OOTW reflects the formula of
the Dragon's Lair series of games. In response to some surprise event, the scientist must make a sudden, yet carefully,

timed decision in order to preserve his
life. At other times, the player is allowed a
more free-form style of combat during
which timing is less important than maintaining a constant barrage of fire in the
face of the enemy. The zap-gun is capable
of three different functions and these
must be applied with a modicum of strategy in order to be successful. On the
Amiga, all of the game's input and control is via the joystick and there is no option to use any other device such as the
mouse or the keyboard. Fortunately, the
IBM version offers additional controls.
Often, the results of a movement command are dependent on the hero's circumstances and this is left for the player
to discover by trial, error and death.
OOTW, like most arcade-style games,
does not allow a game to be saved in progress. While this is de rigueur for the action gamer, it may come as a shock to the
adventure gamer who attempts to cross
over into this hybrid. Instead, the player
is given a four-letter code at any time his

Review
adventure gamer who attempts to cross
over into this hybrid. Instead, the player
is given a four-letter code at any time his
character is killed. The entire game is divided into several segments, each of which
is associated with one of the codes. So, at
the time of death, the player is given the
option of resuming the game at the beginning of the current segment, rather than
being forced to return to the opening of
the entire adventure. The player may also
enter the code sequence to immediately
return to that segment the next time the
game is booted up. This works well only
as long as the trouble spot, the spot which
caused the player to die, takes place relatively close to the beginning of the segment. Although far better than being
forced to repeat the entire game, it may
still prove a frustrating experience to continuously repeat a segment — which may
contain several difficult maneuvers — until it is completed. The system would have
been more useful, and less repetitious, had
the game been divided into smaller, more
numerous, segments. The alternative, of
course would have been to allow games to
be saved at any point and written to disk
in the traditional manner.

In their most successful adventure game
to date, Future Wars, Delphine proved
their talent for generating superior sounds
and graphics. In OOTW, the programming team has again come up with some
impressive material. Polygonal graphics
have never been put to better use, while
the sound effects on the Amiga play "can
you top this" with the pictures , they embellish. With its artistic perspectives and
seamlessly-smooth animation, OOTW
makes for a presentation which will be
difficult to surpass.
In what appears to be an effort on the
part of Interplay and Delphine to avoid
confusing their customers with excess verbiage, the amount of documentation for
OOTW has been reduced to a mere fraction of what appears on their warranty information card. Although the sincerity of
this effort should not go unacknowledged,
there are still areas of information which
deserved better coverage. The fact that the
joystick serves more than just the standard
"run, jump and shoot" functions is nowhere mentioned in this brief pamphlet.
Similarly, novice players will likely be
confused by the lack of information on

how to use the copy-protection code
wheel. Unfortunately, the code-wheel
(known "affectionately" by many players
as the code-wheel from hell) seems to
have used more ink than the manual itself. Although experienced players should
have little trouble using this product, why
discourage first-time players? If nothing
else, an increase in the volume of instructions will make the warranty appear less
complicated.
Brevity, in many parts of the world, may
be a virtue. OOTW could easily have
avoided that particular virtue, however,
and benefited from several extra disks
worth of game-play. What Delphine has
given us, however, is certainly an estimable piece of work. Thousands of arcade
games have been imported from Europe,
most of which defy successful completion
by anyone who was not born on Krypton.
Perhaps it's just another of Murphy's
"laws" that one of Europe's most playable
and enjoyable arcade efforts must also be
the one which ends, at least on the
Amiga, in the shortest amount of time.
For the sake of "science," we can only
hope there will be more.

Industry News

Part II of CGW's Coverage of the Sixth Annual Computer Game Developers Conference

O

ne of the most fascinating aspects
of rubbing shoulders with the
seminal minds in the entertainment software industry is discovering just
how much most of these designers care
about their products. For most, game design is a passionate business; while, admittedly, for others it is simply a less-structured way of making money via computer
programming. These highlights are designed to share the pinnacles of that passion.

Sports Games (Don Daglow,
Tony La Russa Ultimate Baseball)
Don Daglow is passionate about baseball. After long hours of number-crunching at his Beyond Software development
house, he goes home to play with baseball
statistics. He is actively involved with SABRE, the world's foremost group of statistics-based enthusiasts for the national
game, and was the primary producer on
the original Earl Weaver Baseball as well
as the primary impetus behind Tony La
Russa Ultimate Baseball, He believes that
it is a requirement for successful designers
of sports games (in particular) to be immersed in the sport. His reasoning is that
people care about sports. One can walk
into any sports bar in the country and
start an argument over the identifity of
the greatest pure hitter of all time, the
best running back ever, NHL television
contracts, players overlooked in the allstar voting of any league or the relative
qualifications of any coach/manager in
any league.
Such interest/passion is a two-edged
sword, according to Daglow, because
there is a pre-sold element to sports games
and a continual seasonal cycle that renews
interest, but there are also a priori (before
one ever experiences the product) expectations about what a sports game is going to
be like. Those who care more about "realworld" performances are going to be disappointed in games that abstract statistics
and leave out certain utilities, while those
who are more concerned about simulated
action in a given sport are going to be disappointed if they are reduced to a coach-

ing/managing role. Hence, in sports
games in particular, a designer must be
aware of what he/she is trying to accomplish.
Daglow presented five factors for design
decisions.
• Target Audience
• Data Intensity

vs

Interface Intensity

• Simulation vs Action
• Focus
• Control
Targeting one's audience breaks quickly
into an age category. Children are much
more interested in the action to be found
in a particular sport than they are in recreating full seasons, managing their favorite players and forming leagues. In general
(at least, in the past), this has defined a
large part of the differences between cartridge-based and disk-based sports games.
The disk-based games, with superior storage capacity, were more ideal for numbercrunching, season replays and individual
leagues, while the cartridge games offered
interface advantages (standardization, no
installs and fast access) and provided an
ideal arena for playing individual games.
On-screen players tended to be bigger on
the cartridge games because the emphasis
was on individual action, while the players tended to be presented in smaller versions on computer monitors in order to
offer more of the feel of team play on a
large playing field. Such considerations
have changed due to a confluence of design, but it is still important to target
one's audience.
The second factor, data intensity versus
interface intensity, follows immediately on
the heels of the target audience. If one is
simply trying to present a vicarious sense
of participating in the football plays being
run on a computer monitor, for example,
it is certainly more important to design an
interface where the player can have visual
cues to receive the handoff, anticipate a
blocker to follow and select a hole to dash
through than it is significant to purchase
and input the actual statistics of the sec-

ond-string running back of the last place
team in an actual league. For those of us
who want to coach real players or identify
with such as we try to perform their onfield feats of prowess, however, it is more
important to feel like those are authentic
stars on the screen, not lame imposters
bound by our own less-than-superstar coordination. For the latter, it may be more
important to show a wider angle view of
the play and have less-specific action
points. Rather than taking a handoff, for
instance, it might be enough to let the
player select a hole and determine when
to zig-zag across the playing field according to the flow of the play. Also, the data
intensive gamer is going to want more
plays to call and the ability to design custom plays, while the interface intensive
gamer simply wants quick and easy access
to a reasonable assortment of plays.
The designer of a simulation, to examine
the third factor, is much more likely to
consider the physics of a sport than the
designer of a pure action game. The latter
simply presents the perception of the action. The former is concerned with the
realistic nature of the action. The action
designer wants to make sure that the
gamer feels like he/she is in the midst of
the play. The simulation designer is concerned that the gamer feel involved in a
play that is unfolding realistically.
The fourth design issue, which will depend on one's answer to the first three, is
the question of focus. This is, of course,
the age-old question of exactly what is
shown on the screen. Would it be a cockpit view in a hydroplane simulation or an
overhead view? Would there be multiple
camera angles or would the visual presentation be strictly first-person? Just as a
filmmaker knows at all times what the
viewer should be seeing, so should the
game designer.
Finally, the sports game designer must
be concerned with the issue of control.
How much control will the gamer have
over play design, playbook, play selection,
roster, line-up, substitutions and formations? Should there be a certain number
(text continues on page 54.)

Industry News
of pre-set plays? Should the gamer be able
to modify them? Should the gamer be
able to control one player or more? All are
questions that will have bearing on the final form of the design.

Artificial Intelligence (Roger
Keating, Carriers at War)
Too often, Roger Keating pointed out,
the so-called artificial intelligence (AI) is
tacked on at the conclusion of a project
rather than carefully integrated from the
beginning. Since most computer gamers
purchase these games in order to have a
challenging computer opponent at their
convenience, such lack of design integration is something akin to criminal neglect.
In speaking of the development of computer opponents, Keating offered a caveat
that such "AI" is not what is traditionally
meant by the textbook approaches to artificial intelligence. In a game environment,
the computer AI must be built from
scratch, since the computer opponent
does not have the life memories and experiences to draw upon in decision-making
and inferential learning. Keating stated
that every single moment is "brand new"
to a computer. Hence, he offered the following guidelines in developing "AI" for
computer game opponents:
•The data base
•The mechanical utilities and
• Establishing the decision process.
First of all, Keating suggested that game
designers should consider the structure of
the database for the game from the perspective of how it will be accessed by the
AI. The designer should determine what
is going to be in the data base, what the
usefulness of that data is (to both the human and artificial opponent) and where
the data plugs into the game design. Keating suggested a grid system for the data
base as being the most efficient means of
structuring the information required to
undergird the game.
After developing the data structure,
Keating stated that the designer should
develop mechanical utilities which govern
the way data is funneled to both the computer and human player. Keating insisted
that these information flow utilities must
be designed so that both the computer
and human player share the same limited
intelligence. Otherwise, the computer is

apt to cheat. Obviously, some computer
opponents do have access to more information than the human player, but Keating suggested that this is sloppy design.

ers do not really balance play. Instead, he
suggested that the important activity for a
designer is to concentrate on the perception of play balance.

Finally, after determining the data to be
delivered to the players (and to the algorithms that drive the program itself), one
is ready to write the so-called "AI." Keating warned against having the computer
opponent hard-wired to react the same
way to the same formation, thrust or tactic. Rather, he suggested that the computer be given a "set" of options derived
from the limited intelligence, then allow
the computer to make random decisions
of simple choices based on these sets. In
such a way, Keating believes, computer
opponents will seem more intelligent and
less predictable. At the very least, the
computer opponent should not be easily
tricked in the same way (as in the famous
northern feint tactic for War in Russia).

Goldberg based his position on the
boardgame proposition that play balancing is guaranteeing that both sides (or all
sides) have an equal opportunity of winning the game. Thus, he argued that computer games do not have genuine play
balance because the computer opponent
does not generally have an equal opportunity of winning against the human player.
After all, the human player is the customer, so why would a designer create a
game where the computer opponent won
regularly (unless said designer was masochistic)?

Project Management and Financial Analysis (Ivan Manley, The
Third Courier)
Ivan Manley is the president of Manley
& Associates, Inc., an aggressive development house in Issaquah, Washington.
Ivan and his wife, Carol, have worked on
original projects and conversions for
nearly every major publisher in the industry. Ivan presented facts and figures related to the project management for a
computer game. Manley is uniquely qualified to present such a project paradigm
because his pre-computer game industry
background was in project management
and financial analysis at Boeing Computer Services for 17 years. Since many
CGW readers are curious as to how an
actual computer game is developed, here
is a sample project plan from Manley &
Associates.

Play Balancing (Eric Goldberg,
on Prodigy,
and Dan Bunten, Global ConThe Next President

quest)
This dual presentation asked the question as to whether play balancing is a necessary part of design or not. Eric Goldberg, whose experience comes largely out
of the boardgame arena prior to his recent
designs for the Prodigy Interactive Network, took the position that game design-

He admitted that human players often
perceive the games as balanced, but noted
several adjustments in the human player's
favor. In arcade games, for example, the
human has three or more lives against the
many screens of enemies. In other games,
there are save positions where the player
can "over-balance" against their environment by ensuring a reset if one strategy
happens to misfire. There is no such risk
management in a live multi-player game
(nor in real life).
In strategy games, some play-balancing
occurs via victory conditions. If one player
(whether human or computer) starts out
in a fairly untenable position, the victory
conditions can be adjusted so that the disadvantaged player wins if the dominant
player doesn't conquer him/her until a
certain time (or date) within the game's
fiction. If one player begins with significantly more resources in an economic
strategy game, it may be that the player
with the most percentage growth wins.
In other games, "real-life" balance issues
exist. When Goldberg was designing The
Next President he had to make sure that
any player from any given part of the
country would feel that they had equal influence on the game's resolution. So, the
design built in a geographical parity that
does not actually exist in real presidential
elections. His guideline was for designers
to decide on the "feel" for a given game
and adjust the balance to the right detail
level.
Goldberg ruffled plenty of feathers,
however, when he contended that a
CRPG does not need play balancing any-

Industry News

Industry News
more than a software toy or a pinball
game. Several designers in the audience
contended with him on this point and
CGWs editorial staff certainly disagrees.
In CRPGs, the game design must be such
that the possibility of winning or losing
adjusts to the player characters as they improve. If sections of the game are too far
out of balance, the game is frustrating
rather than fun. Even in CRPGs, the
monsters and NPC villains need to have,
at least, an almost equal chance to win
and the players need that very real possibility of losing.
With regard to pinball games in particular, one member of the crowd insisted
that there had to be a proper balance between "rescuing" the ball when it threatened to roll out of play and "losing" the
ball. Anyone who has ever played a wornout pinball game in the arcades, with a
center groove where the ball invariably
dropped between the flippers, would have
to agree that they are not going to play
any pinball games where the play balance
is off. Indeed, who would play SimCity if
they felt that the entropy kicked in too
fast and unrealistically or if the disasters
kept coming in ever faster sequence such
that they never had a chance to rebuild?
Indeed, one of the greatest criticisms
against SimEarth is that the Gaia features
(except on the most difficult level) tend to
correct many of the player's mistakes
without the player being able to see the
correction occurring.
Dan Bunten had a different perspective
on play balance. Since Dan designs multiplayer games, play balance is particularly
important. He began his discussion with a
plea for multiple-channels for input.
Some gamers prefer one style of input
while others prefer another. In multiplayer games, in particular, it is vital that
the mouse user not have any advantage
over the joystick user nor keyboard user
over the mouse user. From interface considerations through game mechanics, successful designers of multi-player games
need to consider balance.
In revealing some of his methodology

for play balancing, Dan admitted that
there were some "quick and dirty" means
of play-balancing games. Asked how he
balances his games, he opted for a one
word answer, "Cheat." Asked how he
would defend that practice if a gamer
caught him, he said, "Lie!" in a folksy
rhythm of misdirection. Then, he went
on to reveal some of his actual methods.
For example, in M.U.L.E. and Global
Conquest, there are random events which
can affect the flow of play. The programs
are constructed, however, so that players
in the lead can never have good luck and
the trailing players can never have bad
luck. Only for the players in the middle
are the events truly random. Another
"quick and dirty" means of play balancing
is to use age handicapping. Naturally, the
style of game will affect which way the
handicapping swings (i.e. younger players
might have an advantage in a game requiring dexterity where older players
might have an advantage in a game which
relied on life experience or a strategic
storehouse of knowledge).
Whatever one does in terms of play balancing, playtesting is the "forge" of balance. It is, according to Bunten, absolutely vital. Dan revealed that he uses the
critics of his last game as part of the core
of his playtest group for the next game.
Further, he su ggested using playtesters
that fit the target market as one gears toward releasing the next game.

Lessons from Patton Strikes Back
(Chris Crawford)
Without Chris Crawford's original vision, the CGDC probably would not exist. So, it is particularly appropriate to
close this two part report with a few
thoughts from Chris about his latest design. Chris suggested three basic approaches to designers that should work
for any game.
First, the project should begin with a
clear mission statement (high concept). If
the designer can state in a few simple
words what he/she is trying to do, it will
save a lot of time in both selling the de-

sign and making the plethora of design
decisions down the road. The high concept keeps projects on the tight track and
enables marketing departments to pitch
the product to the right people, later on.
Second, the game's programming team
should begin by writing "goodie twoshoes" code. Careful, clear and commented code at the beginning will save a
multitude of hours during the "crunch
time" toward the end of the project when
one must put a "hack" here and a "hack"
there in order to make that deadline. At
least, those who start with "goodie twoshoes" code have a reasonable chance of
knowing where those quick "hacks" need
to go.
Third, he wisely encouraged the assembled designers to "bake the cake" first and
then, make the "icing." If the designer or
design team has a design that they are
happy with, they can easily add-on the
glitz to the marketing department's desire
during the latter stages of the game. In
this way, the game is more likely to be
what the designer had in mind from the
beginning and still leave the producers
and product managers feeling good about
having an impact on the project. The obvious cynicism aside, Chris did make a
significant point. The glitz grabs a customer's attention, but it is the game that
both holds that attention and causes the
customer to recommend the program to
someone else.

Do You Know the
Way to San Jose?
The Computer Game Developers Conference has become an institution, but it
is a maturing organization. This year's
conference had the best program balance
ever, in terms of subjects, feature tracks
and variety of speakers. It was also the
best-suited facility for the conference
compared to the venues in the past. One
thing is certain, the organizing committee
does not intend to stand on their laurels
(Be that Brenda Laurel's laurels or anyone
else's) and next year's conference promises
to be even better.

Review

Multiplayer Role-Playing in Cerebral-Space
by "Ranger" Chris Lombardi

Review
drawing from the well of forms that
make up the 'graphics' of the mental
eye. Action involves typing short sentences, usually two or three words, and
speech is simply a matter of typing the
addressees' name and a message in
quotes. One initially has the usual problems with the parser, which appears unforgiving until one learns its particular
dialect, but it is better than most in that
it understands partial spellings of names
and commands ("Bod" is sufficient for
"Bodhisatva") and has single letter
equivalents for common commands ("k"
for "kill", "1" for "look"). Of course, this
facility for abbreviation didn't do
Ranger any good during the aforementioned war when high level heroes began
to attack the Ravagers using the "ra " abbreviation.
The text interface might turn away
some, considering the level of graphic
intensity most gamers now ask of their
role-playing and graphic adventures, but
my humble opinion finds the text interface preferable to any other alternatives.
Though games of this sort have tried
graphic front-ends, I think they actually
detract from the experience. I have a
hard time identifying with a little
pixelated figure and no cartoonish interface could communicate the range of expression the "Legends " system implements textually. The range of gestural
expression is very broad; from coughs,
to winks, to frowns, groans, blinks, babbles, and cheers. I've collected a list of
more than 50 with more yet to discover
and more continually added at players'
requests. Until that distant future when
telepresence makes it possible for roleplayers to take tangible form in cyberspace, I'm more than happy to do my
adventuring in cerebral-space via textual
suggestions.

Keeping the Legend Alive
Though the game universe and interface is well developed, it is really the
dedication and perspiration of the Game
Masters that keeps the Legends realm an
exciting and dynamic community.
Nearly every night during prime usage
hours, the GMs will put on an event of
some sort. Often, these are mini-quests
where the players must recover some
item or overcome some violent threat.
At other times, they are more involved.

Once, the king of Fayd, King Frederick,
invited the players to his castle for a
feast during which there was a murder.
The feast, then, turned into a
Host-Your-Own-Mystery Party where a guest at the
banquet was identified as the murderer
and apprehended. The war described in
the introduction was another, more involved scenario. (BTW, the forces of
Fayd eventually defeated the Broodlord
though the powers of evil went so far as
to crash the system in a last, deperate
grasp at victory.)
At other times, these events are less
dramatic. Oracles have appeared offering wisdom to the worthy or interesting
characters have shown up in the town
square offering information and goods.
And, in this realm as in our own sense
of reality, these visiting deities and
hawkers are not always on the up and
up. The game masters have been known
to 'have a little fun' with players. In
fact, once my character fell most embarrassingly into the hands of a charlatan
offering "Pyramid Power" through suspiciously shaped caps. The caps turned
out to be as potent as those of the mid70's fad and Ranger was out 25 hardearned gold pieces.
Something is always going on in Fayd;
whether it's the meeting of one of the
many organizations in the realm (like
the lawkeepers, foresters, thieves guild,
or a religious/magic-using circle); contests in cartography; competitions in storytelling or a criminal trial for a character who has breached the bounds of the
community's laws (which are few but
swiftly enforced). All of this activity
serves to flesh out the community that
the players create amongst themselves
and give them the impression of playing
in a universe of constant motion.
In addition to the nightly mini-quests,
every Saturday afternoon is host to a
major quest, very much like traditional
group dungeon adventures. The Legends
game masters typically use these major
quests to unveil new areas of the Legends game universe. Players will band
together at the appropriate time and be
sent on a mission to some previously
unheard of area of the realm. These
quest tend to be well designed, with
dungeons filled with puzzles and riddles
of an interesting variety. The quests tend
to, naturally, bring out the best role-

playing from the characters, but, as extra
incentive, players are graded on their
performance in three categories: puzzle
solving, role-playing, and a combination
score, with experience points awarded
accordingly. The fantasy is reinforced
through storywriting contests in which
the account of a quest is documented
and added to the history of The Realms
which the player characters are continually creating.
The quests are generally a good time,
though the text streams can get out of
hand when ten or more people are involved. Anyone familiar with large
group role-playing knows what its like
when everyone simultaneously gives
their opinion on the nature of the fuchsia
liquid on the Altar of X. Put 15 chattering players in one room on-line and it
can get a bit bewildering, especially for
new players. Of course, these sorts of
things are always a problem when doing
anything with a large group of people.
Fortunately, the players typically don't
remain together in one group for the entire time, but tend to split off now and
again as the scenario permits. Also, the
game masters are, as of this writing,
looking into ways to divide up groups
during quests to eliminate some of the
group adventure frustration.
It is just this dedication and responsiveness to players by the Legends
group that makes this system one of the
best available. Their love for their project and of the role-playing hobby seeps
through at every point. Needless to say,
it comes highly recommended from this
gamer who has spent over 100 hours
with it over the past two months. One
caveat, however, Legends of Future Past
is terribly addictive and is not cheap. At
$6.00 an hour this is no casual hobby,
but if multi-player role-playing is one's
game, it is definitely time to don one's
favorite alter-ego, check into the local
adventurers guild and poke around. It
just might be "The Realm" in which
one's personal Legends are made. CGW
For more information about the
Digital Dreams Network and its Legends Of Future Past live role-playing
system, contact the game masters via
modem at (800) 937-7644 or voice at
(508) 757-5737.

Review
There's An Editor That Shapes Game's Ends
A Look at Domark's Virtual Reality Studio

by Charles A. Smith
defined distance and, if programmed to do so,
will fire on a user. Primitives can be resized
and moved throughout the 3D area. Primitives
can be combined to form a group of more
complicated objects like homes or vehicles.
Unfortunately, without circles, curves, or
spheres, Virtual Reality Studio worlds tend to
be blocky and angular.
Objects can be defined as visible, invisible, or
destroyed. Invisible objects can be triggered
and made visible. Destroyed objects can be
triggered and, as a result, permanently removed. Objects can be painted and shaded
from a palette of 256 color VGA, 16 color
EGA or 4 color CGA.
TITLE: Virtual Reality Studio
SYSTEM: IBM
PRICE $89.95
GRAPHICS: VGA, EGA, CGA, or Tandy Graphics
SOUND: Ad Lib or PC speaker
PROTECTION: None
PUBLISHER: Domark
DISTRIBUTER: Accolade San Jose, CA

s one of the few computer programs
which allows users to create their own
D interactive environments, the misnamed Virtual Reality Studio is a baby step toward this technological future. Domark has
taken the "Freescape 3D System" underlying
such games as Dark Eclipse and Darkside, given
it a high tech name (albeit an unfortunate and
deliberate marketing misnomer) and a friendly
user interface, and served it up to the public as
a "virtual reality" construction set. In spite of
the name, this product does not allow consumers to create total immersion experiences.
It is a 3-D construction set, nothing more and
nothing less.
The world is divided into areas which designate cubes of 8192 X 3 "units" or "steps."
One can have up to 254 areas in a "custom"
reality. Such areas can represent rooms, yards
or, even, interiors of vehicles, but the areas
have no geographical relationship to each
other. One cannot, for example, look out the
window of a house to see the backyard (unless
these objects are placed in the same single
area).
After areas are defined, objects of different
sizes and shapes can be placed into an area to
fill out an environment. Basic object types are
called primitives (cuboids, pyramids, rectangles, lines, triangles, quadrilaterals, pentagons,
hexagons, and sensors). A sensor is a single
point that can detect a user's presence within a

Animation and interaction with objects are
achieved by writing short programs called conditions. Fifty-one conditions use instructions
which make up the Freescape Command Language. To program a cube to move both up
and down as well as side to side, a user would
edit the conditions to read as follows:
INCLUDE (2)
START
LOOP(20)
MOVE (40,0,0)
AGAIN
LOOP (20)
MOVE (-40,0,0)
AGAIN
RESTART
The animation begins when the user shoots
the floor. There is also a bank of memory
(variables) which can be used to store and view
information relating to the environment and
its effects. "Variable Manipulation" instructions will set a value, add and subtract values
to and from variables, or compare values.
"Object Manipulation" instructions make
objects visible or invisible. "Vehicle Commands" affect movement rates. "Conditional"
instructions allow the execution of a program
when an object is shot, involved in a collision
or has its sensor activated. "Miscellaneous
Commands" print text messages, set colors,
play sounds and set a timer.
The editor employs clear icons and pulldown menus. Upon loading the program, a
user is greeted with the Main Screen composed of a menu selector, view window, an
info bar identifying the current location, short
cut icons, mode icons, and Freescape icons

which allow the user to walk or fly in any direction.
If this sounds complicated, that is because it
is, indeed, complicated. The Virtual Reality
Studio is not for the fainthearted or the
bootup-and-play-without-looking-at-the-manual
crowd. Each area has to be painstakingly created and assembled, one object at a time.
I was shocked to find a library of only one
large object, a single helicopter, for placement
in an area. This is the only one of numerous
objects illustrated on the front and back of the
program package as being readily available to
the user. Since a more complicated object like
an automobile will require creating, sizing, and
placing approximately 14-20 primitives, this
oversight is no small matter, especially for
those with limited time and little artistic talent. There is also no library of conditions that
users can port easily into their "worlds."
A "Studio" game is included as part of the
program package to illustrate the types of environments a user might create. The object of
this game is to escape from a mysterious world
and return to Earth. This reviewer failed to
find any way to cut objects from this sample
world for use in other 3-D worlds. Why these
items are not made more readily available in a
library accessible to the user is a mystery itself.
The size of the program on disk is surprisingly
small: approximately 300K. In an era of nine
megabyte and more games, users are certainly
shortchanged here. Requests on the Domark
BBS as to whether an online library of objects
or conditions exists or not, went unanswered.
The sample game is rather lame. Once the
novelty of having unlimited control over
movement wears off, there is little there. Ultimately, however, it is the Freescape world itself
which this reviewer found unsatisfying. What
is initially interesting to visit, soon becomes a
heartless and barren place. Users wander from
one space to the next as though exploring a
deserted city long abandoned by all forms of
life, whether human beings or their monstrous
foes. Objects like robots or vehicles may appear and move along rigid paths, but these
things are nothing more than zombie machines created and then, apparently, abandoned by their masters. Users with no interest
in programming are advised to stay well away
from Virtual Reality Studio.

Review
I Can't Eat Another Byte, My Gurtex is Killing Me
Mindcraft's "Magic Candle II"
by Stefan Petrucha

TITLE: The Magic Candle II: The Four and Forty
SYSTEM: IBM/Tandy & Compatibles
PRICE: $69.95
SOUND CARDS: Roland, AdLib & Sound Blaster
DESIGNERS: Ali. N. Atabek & James B. Thomas
PUBLISHER: Mindcraft Software, Torrance, CA 90501

O

n the surface, The Magic Candle
II (MC2) Mindcraft's second
foray into the realm of the four
and forty, begs comparison to its spiritual
father, Ultima. In some ways, it would be
easy to dismiss MC2 as a "poor man's"
version of that game. In terms of the
graphics, player interface, screen composition, even the use of dialogue and NPCs,
the game seems identical, with minor exceptions, to older versions of that benchmark series. To be fair, few games could
stand up to the state-of-the-art Ultima
technology. Still, on a technical basis,
MC2 doesn't fare well at all. For example,
a card enclosed with the game apologizes
for the missing mouse driver. Maybe a
few years ago this would have seemed reasonable, but these days...

The game graphics, while by no means
shoddy, are similarly archaic. The party,
represented by a series of squarish illos,
are arranged in a flat, static configuration.
When the group can't fit through a particular corridor, a Formation command
must be used to re-arrange the marching
order.
Two major game features, however, are
unique to the Magic Candle series. The
first involves the size of the party. While
the main group can only consist of six adventurers, over thirty NPCs form a sort of
"auxiliary" corp that can be assigned to:
work at shops, train in various skills, or be
sent off to wait long lonely months at
various strongholds. To be honest, this reviewer found it hard to keep track of everyone. As we speak, several loyal hobbits

are still hard at work at in the city of Telermain, wondering when their leader will
return.
The second major innovation is the
"Notes" feature — a great idea that
proves to be more trouble than its worth.
Rather than requiring pencil and paper,
MC2 "records" game info for the player
as the game progresses. Unfortunately,
these "notes" are either uselessly massive
(when set to NORMAL or MAXIMUM)
or they fail to record important data
(when set to MINIMUM). A new "notes"
file is generated every play session, causing
even more frustration. Files from earlier
sessions must be accessed outside of the
game, using a word processing program.
Sadly, this reviewer found himself spending a lot of time searching through notes
files, and ultimately taking notes on them.
It should be possible for "key" information to be encoded so that these files can
be streamlined. In any case, this feature
should either be vastly improved or taken
outside and shot.
This is probably difficult to believe by
now, but beyond these problems, this reviewer actually enjoyed the game a great
deal. While MC2 is a surface failure, on a
more basic story-telling level, it is a resounding success. The fantasy world, eccentric and fun, is in many ways more engaging than the glittery "huff and puff" of
the more advanced CRPGs. The word
"adorable" comes to mind, but that might
turn off the more macho player. "Charming", were it not for the magic pun, might
be a more apt description.

Review
invisible party members tromped around
invisible monsters.

Basically, the plot involves the rescue of
four Eldens (the "four" of the four and
forty), who have been candle-trapped by a
johnny-come-lately demon named Zakhad, and hidden throughout the evil land
of Gurtex. Naturally, they must be saved
by the player's huge and somewhat difficult to organize stalwart band. Along the
way, players encounter a host of typical
towns, dungeons, towers and castles that
ultimately lead to a closing sequence (involving an egg, an orb and sending a
crown prince to bed) that presents the
odd world at its quirky best.
One of the major ways MC2 conveys its
sense of world is through its NPCs. They
talk often, sometimes randomly, expressing their hopes and fears, conveying bits
of historical info and reminding the
player about important clues. These little
intrusions into the tramping and stabbing
of game play go a long way to creating
the atmosphere that MC2 excels at. Ultima flirts with random NPC commentary, but MC2 has all but perfected it.
Though the music is minor and non-descript, the sound effects, like the story, are
delightful. There are whooshes and thuds
during combat, a rather gross sound like a
cat with a hairball to indicate a character
has been poisoned and a "twinkle" for
some spells that must have been lifted
from "Bewitched." Though most of the
sound bytes got at least a giggle out of
this reviewer, we have yet to play a game
where certain sounds (repeated over and
over) don't eventually grate on the nerves
(Will game designers and sound programmers never stop using those incessant

"tromp-tromp" walking noises? This reviewer still has a headache).
On the lighter side, the aforementioned
Formation command turned out to be an
excuse for one of the better game puzzles.
Certain hallways are mined with a series
of dastardly "teleportals." In these instances, Formation must be used in inventive ways to maneuver around them — an
excellent example of how a seeming weakness can be turned into a strength.
In general, MC2 is not a game for the
impatient. Travel across the lands of Gurtex involves frequent rest, lots of food and
lots of battles. Finding the sundry story
threads is difficult, often requiring slow,
leisurely exploration. Unfortunately, some
of the more important story threads are a
little too well-hidden. This reviewer often
found himself "dead-ended."
Combat's a little magic happy. In the
later stages of the game, its difficult for
even a good warrior to get in more than a
few kills. Likewise, finding the right spell
books are crucial, but once the player has
them, certain simple strategies present
themselves. For example, using a Timestop
to freeze foes for an extra turn, followed
by a Zutyun (there go those names again)
to destroy their armor, generally led this
reviewer to an early victory, often before
the monsters could fire a retaliatory shot.
In rare instances where the monsters can't
be destroyed in those first rounds, the
Disappear spell provided ample protection. This proved particularly interesting
when the monsters responded in kind,
leaving the room apparently empty while

As far as documentation goes, it is disappointing that most of the character and
story notes, in essence, the game's selling
points, are buried in the back of the manual, behind all the game play info, when
it seems the other way around would be
more advised. There's a paragraph book
which must be consulted from time to
time during game play. While the prose
within it is pithy and amusing enough,
such books in general are not appealing.
Any mechanism which takes the player
physically out of the game is an unnecessary distraction. [Ed: This, of course, is not
a universally held opinion among CRPGers.
We have heard exactly the opposite observation with regard to the off-line paragraphs
from Wasteland, Dragon Wars and Star
Saga I & II, fir example.]
All in all, The Magic Candle 2: The
Four and the Forty is a strong effort, but
a mixed bag. Those who want a great musical score and the capacity to push the
limits of their new 486/33 boards with
SVGA graphics, will be sorely disappointed. For those, however, to whom a
CRPG means story, quirky characters and
plenty of atmosphere, Gurtex is the ideal
place to plan a long and entertaining
computer vacation.

Bestseller List

Review

Ballpark Under Construction
Miller Associates' APBA Major League Players Baseball 1.5
by Win Rogers
TITLE: APBA Major League Players Baseball 1.5
SYSTEMS: IBM
# OF PLAYERS: 1-2 and League Play
PRICE: Master Edition with 1991 Season Disk $39.95
Stat Master 2.0: $39.95
Micro Manager 1.0: $49.95
Baseball Wizard: 2.0: $39.95 most other season disks $24.95
Duerk's Electronic Baseball Encyclopedia 1.10: $29.95
PROTECTION: Linmit on copies allowed (Micro Manager only)
DESIGNER: Miler Associates
PUBLISHER: Miller Associates, 11 Burtis Ave., Suite, New Canaan, CT 06640

APBA Major League Baseball's version 1.5 has
been out a year now, but the release of its MicroManager add-on makes this a whole new
ball game. While the implementation of this
and other Miller Associates innovations leaves
room for improvement, they hold great promise for baseball simulations of the future.
APBA is the computer version of the classic
baseball table game that has been around since
1951. Like Strat-O-Matic and Pursue the Pennant, table-game rivals that have also been translated to the computer, computerized
APBA is a manage-only game that eschews graphics, animation
and arcade action in order to appeal strictly to the statistics-andstrategy baseball fan (Strat-O-Matic Version 3 was reviewed in
CGW#94). There may always be a market niche for serious nongraphic baseball simulations but only if they use the memory they
save by not excluding graphics in favor of statistics, more innovative playing options and analytic tools, and more realistic models.
The basic APBA Baseball offers an attractive interface for two
players to manage teams playing against each other. It comes with
complete 1991 Major League Baseball Players' Association statistics
and utilizes the many other player disks sold by the company.
The screen, less cluttered than Strat-O-Matic's, clearly shows the
current lineups, the line score, the defensive players and baserunners with their abilities, and the batter and pitcher with their performances thus far in the game. Additional information is available through keystrokes and a menu. Play-by-play text appears in
a window and the speed at which it appears can be modified to
suit the gamer's pace. Miller Associates believes subjective elements are important in its models as well as the objective numbers, and the time they took to develop this clever, nicely-varied
play-by-play text is appreciated. Injuries play a part in the simulation, but warming up a pitcher before bringing him into the game
does not. Like Strat-O-Matic it operates in a play-by-play mode,
not pitch-by-pitch. It does not include Strat-O-Matic's ballpark
differentials.
A box score can be printed out at the end of the game. One can
manage rosters, trade players, and create a new "organization" (a
group of leagues, divisions, and teams) through the Draft program, which is provided with each player disk and is run from

DOS. A copy of DRAFT.EXE must be stored in each data subdirectory and can address only the players and organizations in that
subdirectory.
The basic game, the so-called "Master Edition" of APBA Baseball
is quite limited. The gamer cannot access the statistics from a
series of games, play against the computer or have the computer
play both sides. Unlike Strat-O-Matic it offers no way to program
a season of games and replay that season in superfast mode. The
procedures in "Draft" for creating a new organization and trading
players are cumbersome. The add-on modules that increase the
capabilities of the game are pricey, especially since they probably
can't be found in software stores and will have to be ordered from
the publisher at full price. They add some features that other
computer games have had for years and provide some unique capabilities, but they are not smoothly integrated and the game still
lacks some desirable features. The name APBA, however, is a revered name with a definite mystique (starting with the mystery of
what the letters stand for), and the game has devoted followers.

Putting the Pieces
Together
With this upgrade players can finally keep all
APBA utility programs and data disks in subdirectories on their hard disks if they have
enough disk space. Two of the available addons to the basic program have recently been
upgraded. They are not accessed from within
the game but run from the DOS prompt. StatMaster 2.0 allows one to keep standings and
statistics for all games after one has initialized the organization.
APBA game results are saved as box scores that can be viewed in
the StatMaster module. After a cumbersome updating process one
can view or print league standings, individual and team performance statistics and league leader lists in a variety of categories.
Wizard 2.0 allows one to change the ratings of existing players
or create new players for the game either by entering statistics
created from scratch or by importing them from Duerk's Electronic
Baseball Encyclopedia (described below). Wizard creates a rough
approximation of the rating card that the APBA company would
create for that player. The gamer can modify statistics and ratings
to suit any pet theory about how data from different years should
be "normalized." However, it does not accept data broken down
against left and right-handed opponents, and so all its created
players have the same platoon differential.
Wizard works better than Draft at initializing an organization so
that stats can be kept from its games. It will not copy an organization from one subdirectory to another, but with patience a new

Review
combination of teams can be created on a different subdirectory.
One must first copy the players of the desired teams to a new data
subdirectory a team at a time. Players will not be assigned to
teams on the new subdirectory so one then needs to create a new
organization on the new subdirectory, set up the teams anew and
stock them through Draft.
Another add-on, the General Manager (not tested), allows
gamers to organize a league to play APBA over a modem through
the Computer Sports Network. On-line buffs should be warned,
however, that General Manager 1.5 is not compatible with the
new MicroManager and StatMaster utilities. This may mean keeping two different versions of APBA on one's hard disk.
The publishers supplied me with a Beta copy of yet another
add-on utility to be sold separately, Draft 2.0,
an upgrade of the utility currently provided
with each player disk. Draft 2.0 will run from
DOS and access any and all data disks and
subdirectories, though it will still deal with
only one subdirectory at a time and will not
move players or teams between subdirectories.
It will make it easy to initialize new organizations and will help garners draft the best possible teams by allowing them to filter and sort
the available players by various criteria. It will
include a Markov Expected Runs Calculation and the Pankin
Line-Up Optimizer, innovative analytic tools that evaluate the
run-producing capabilities and overall strength of different lineups
and lineup orders.
Miller Associates also publishes Duerk's Electronic Baseball Encyclopedia, first released a year ago with the season-by-season records
of all players active in 1990 and now appearing with 1991 data.
Owners of the first release can buy the new data disk and merge
the two data sets. Disks of player data from earlier eras are promised. Duerk's Encyclopedia stands on its own as an interesting
product apart from any connection with APBA Baseball. It is an
interactive reference tool that allows searches, sorts and comparisons of its data in a variety of ways that facilitate fantasy league
research, historical study, and comparative player evaluation.

This exciting product could eventually provide the ability to sort
and analyze data from all eras of baseball history, and, with the aid of Wizard to put any
player onto an APBA roster. This would reduce the cost of buying previous season disks
from the manufacturer and the effort of entering player data by hand. I hope the rumor is
true that the product will be expanded to incorporate Linear Weight Run values from Total Baseball to make it an even more useful
tool. It would be nice if it could export data
to spreadsheets (now possible only through
the clipboard when it is running under Windows) or to other publishers' baseball simulations.

Talkin' BaseballTalk
The biggest news about APBA, however, is the MicroManager

module. APBA fans can finally manage a baseball team against a
computer opponent or watch two computer-managed teams play
each other. Nearly all baseball programs have built-in managers,
and Earl Weaver Baseball II and Strat-O-Matic now have "programmable" managers that can be customized not only with saved
lineups and pitching rotations but also with respect to their tendencies to yank the starting pitcher, play an aggressive running
game, pinch hit in the late innings and so forth. The MicroManager module goes much farther, and provides access to a sophisticated artificial-intelligence language, BaseballTalk, that gives. the
serious baseball strategist the ability to construct managerial decision rules from scratch and thus have complete control over the
"personality" of each manager. In modeling managers of past eras
for more realistic replay one is limited only by one's knowledge,
imagination and patience.
The MicroManager module also adds the capability to replay a
series of games (up to 255) between any two teams, with human
or computer managers, the latter following preset lineups and
pitching rotations. It is not able to schedule or replay a complete
league season.
BaseballTalk is a challenging programming language with no
short-cuts for the casual fan. One defines concepts, creates functions that manipulate those concepts, and sets levels of confidence
that the outcome will be successful, so that if more than one strategy is possible the manager will select the one most likely to succeed. The resulting "playbook," or collection of decision rules, is
saved under whatever manager name the gamer chooses. APBA' s
managers can be team-specific, not just generic. That is, the rules
can dictate whom to use in pinch-running situations by actually
designating a particular player or players by name, not just in
terms of the players' speed ratings.

Blackie and Blaze
The program comes with sample manager playbooks for
"Blackie Dugan" and "Blaze Pascual" to serve as examples. Each
playbook runs to about a hundred pages when printed out. Blaze
is quicker to remove his starting pitcher than Blackie, less likely to
platoon, and more likely to wait for the big hit where Blackie will
try to bunt and steal for a run. The gamer can access the playbook of each manager, make modifications, and save the result
under a different name, which is much easier than building a
manager profile from scratch. Eventually the company hopes to
provide more model playbooks and overlays, on the analogy of
Lotus templates, to assist the novice. The manual is a good introduction to this complex, open-ended utility, and Miller Associates has a book in preparation, Baseball Strategy: Blackie Dugan's
Playbook Explained that will be must reading for those who want
to get the most out of the MicroManager.
The MicroManager is not a separate utility program but has been
integrated into the game itself. This can cause confusion to those
not already familiar with APBA, because one may have to look
through two manuals to figure out some menus. The MicroManager can operate in "run" mode (i.e. invisibly) or in "step" mode,
with a window that opens to show the computer evaluating decision rules — an interesting learning tool. While in "step" mode
one can have the simulation stop at every point where the man-

Review
ager has made a strategic decision, or stop only where certain selected rules are involved. However, when I was playing against
Blackie in "run" mode the program asked him questions about
sending his runners home or trying for an extra base that should
not have appeared on the screen.

not pay for the expensive MicroManager add-on now unless they
understand its limitations and want what it has to offer — infinite control over the strategic options that open up after a game
has begun, but requiring mastery of a complex programming language.

It is important to understand the limitations of the MicroManager in its current incarnation. Blackie doesn't check-in until after

Other improvements would help to justify the cost of these
modules. The manuals were printed before the programs were finished so there are last-minute changes to look out for on inserts
and README files. The utilities could be better integrated and
accessible through a program shell that would not require exiting
to DOS. Routines for updating stats and trading players between
subdirectories could be more transparent and less cumbersome.

the playing of the National Anthem; he cannot set a lineup or a
pitching rotation on his own (though the manual seems to suggest
otherwise). The gamer can write a decision rule specifying a pitching rotation or implement one without using BaseballTalk by
means of the five different lineups that can be stored, but Blackie
will follow it mindlessly. He can't keep track of whether his pitchers have had too much work over the past few games and make
changes or recognize that his opponent is starting a lefty and
modify the starting lineup accordingly. This reduces the realism of
the result when a series of games is played between two teams
with computer managers.
Despite the great potential of the Micro Manager, APBA is still
essentially a one-game-at-a-time simulation. The company is planning another module that will broaden Blackie's view beyond a
single game and make full-season replays possible. Buyers should

At this point APBA Baseball with its array of companion products is a work in progress, an impressive ballpark under construction. Devoted APBAers will applaud the MicroManager, and all
baseball strategy buffs can learn from it. While difficult to master, it gives great power to the user and lays bare the logic that
underlies all baseball simulations. The link to Duerk's Electronic
Baseball Encyclopedia opens up the possibility of selecting rosters
from thousands of eligible players. These developments are unique
and exciting, but for what it delivers today, at the price asked,
APBA Baseball would not be my first choice for a baseball simulation.

Review

Sights and Sounds of the

Summer Game
Accolade's Al Michaels Announces HardBall III
by Win Rogers

TITLE: AI Michaels
SYSTEM:
IBM Announces HardBall
# PIAYERS:1-2 and league play
P RICE 55 9.95

power, and can dictate hit-and-run, steals and squeeze plays.
When batting one uses the joystick to make contact with pitches
that are on the corners and not coming across the center of the
plate.

PROTECTION:Code-Wheel Look-Up
DEVELOPER:MindSpan

Michaels at the Mike

Review
and slow, and the jerky quick-cutting cameras of EWB2 that
break-up the flow of the action.
There are convenient control centers for modifying team and
player data. One can change the uniform colors, home stadium,
default lineup and pitching rotation of each team, as in other
games, but can also design a custom logo for the team (with a
little paint program supplied), designate the team's "star player,"
and store a brief text about the team that
is displayed alongside the star player's
profile whenever the team is selected for a
game. One can also designate who
owns" the team; when a team is owned
its games will be flagged by the computer
during season replays to be played out in
detail.
The player data screen shows base-season data and ratings for that player as
well as statistics accumulated during the
current replayed season if there is one in
progress (not as much data as is stored in
EWB2 or TLRUB, though). One can select the specialty pitches of each pitcher
in priority order. One can also choose a
picture of the player or choose to have no picture at all, preferable
when dealing with the statistics of real major league players.
Trading players between rosters or cloning players onto new rosters is somewhat complicated. Like TLRUB and unlike EWB2,
there must always be 26 fully-stocked teams in the active database. New teams are created by copying a
team to a different set of leagues or a set of
leagues to a new file and writing over the
players. Players can be exported one at a
time and stored on separate files, then imported onto different rosters. If a player is
imported onto a roster slot, the previous
occupant of that slot is gone (unless he has
previously been copied or exported). This
means that a simple one-for-one trade requires two exports followed by two imports, with the gamer switching back and
forth between the two teams in between.
Some gamers may find it preferable to create and modify their rosters under EWB2's
more flexible rules and simply import the
finished rosters into HB3.

Play the Whole Season
Like its main competitors HB3 can be played in "league" or
"exhibition" mode, and league games can be played out by human or computer opponents. The computer can replay a full season in a matter of hours, more quickly than EWB2 but not as
speedily as TLRUB. However, it will not do so unattended. It
Plays out a week's games at a time (it took about twenty-five minutes to play each week on my 16MHz 386SX), and, annoyingly,
has to be prompted to go on to the next week. Standings and
player performance figures can be checked at any time and a
sketchy box score is available at the end of any game that has
been played out in full.
As first released, the HB3 utility for replaying a complete season
is so rudimentary it includes relief pitching, but no other substitutions. In one season replay, not one of the six or seven reserve
players on any roster got so much as a single at-bat in an entire
computer-managed season replay. Accolade states that this will be

corrected. Also, since only one roster is stored for each team, there
will be no way to platoon a player to strictly play against lefthanded pitchers. Injuries, also, do not play a part in this simulation. The season replay module does include a clever innovation
where the replay stops halfway through the season and selects allstar rosters for each league, based on the best cumulative performances in that season. One can play out the all-star game or watch
the computer do so.

B. Y. 0. Players
HB3 provides twenty-six rosters of
pseudonymed players and avoids the licensing costs associated with real player
statistics by allowing people to convert
their EWB2 and TLRUB player disks into
HB3 format. This is a wise step and, I
hope, a harbinger of greater standardization in this industry. It encourages
people to try out HB3, since there's no
need to enter player statistics, make a large
new investment in player disks or find lots
of additional space on one's hard disk.
HB3 has a less complex database than either of its competitors
and does not need all the data elements they save. It would be
nice to have this utility expanded to allow HB3 to import from
Duerk's Electronic Baseball Encyclopedia for past years' performances or the STATS on-line service for current player data.
HB3 rosters must contain ten pitchers
and fifteen position players. The game
can easily access any number of different
sets of leagues and rosters. The importing process is well-designed and goes
very smoothly, but there are pitfalls. The
utility cannot handle three-barrelled
names like Oil Can Boyd or players with
middle initials. Fortunately, the HB3
utility imports the ten pitchers and fifteen position players on the twenty-fiveman TLRUB rosters, while ignoring the
five reserve players. I could not import
teams from the TLRUB Great Teams
1901-68 disk, though I had no trouble
importing the teams supplied with
TLRUB and those on their 1990 stats
disk. Also, HB3 will import teams from EWB2 but not from earlier versions of EWB. EWB2 teams should be checked prior to
importing to be sure they have exactly ten pitchers and fifteen
position players on the active roster. If not, HB3 will lose a player
and not be able to find the tenth pitcher or fifteenth position
player. HB3 does not recognize the starting pitchers from EWB2
disks, however.
HardBall III packs more features in a single box than any of its
competitors. Gamers looking for eyepopping graphics and an excellent arcade mode, but a less than state-of-the-art statistical and
reporting capability, will find this an excellent choice, preferable
to Bo Jackson Baseball. It gives younger fans a taste of the world of
baseball strategy and statistics. Those not interested in an arcade
mode may also consider waiting to see what the on-deck batter,
MicroLeague Baseball 4 (not available as of this writing) has to
offer.

Review

TITLE Ultimate Baseball Expansion Disks
SYSTEMS: IBM
$ OF PLAYERS: 1-2 and league play
PRICE: S Expansion Disks, $19.95 and $14.95; see review
for details. Available in 5.25" or 3.5" format; some 5.25
disks are high density. Requires Tony La Russa's Ultimate
Baseball and a hard disk..
COPY PROTECT: Document lookup in basic game,
nothing on these disks
DESIGNER: Beyond Software
PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations

Strategy

Last issue, CGW offered solutions to Levels
1-15 of the Taxing Levels. This issue, we continue our explorations of one of the more difficult sections of the original hit.

Taxing 16: Mary Poppins' Land —
HMDHFINMGL
Make floaters of the first two Lems out of the
chute, then make the third a blocker on the
right. Let #1 walk over the tall barrier, but
have #2 build when he is a little over half way
up the incline. This will turn him back. Now,
let him walk down to about the halfway point
and build back toward the entrance chute. Let
#1 walk to and build against the slight step-up
at the right side of the "pool." When he turns
to the left, he must build up to the barrier.
When both bridges are completed (or within a
few planks of completion), detonate the
blocker and send the rabble to the great furry
beyond.

Taxing 17: Marks the Spot — MDHFAJLNGU
The Lems will be going to the left on this one, but first they will
have to build to the right. Order the first Lem out to mine and
then have the next couple of Lems behind him build stairs to
slow them down. When the miner is deep enough to turn the
others, make him build. Have a Lem who has been all the way to
the left and is returning right, take about 2 steps on the level
surface and begin to build. When his stairway has taken him beyond the chute, have a Lem bash the bridge to keep any curious
little ones from following. Keep on building up until the bridge
reaches the right-hand corner of the gap in the overhead surface.
As he is about to complete his bridge, start clicking rapidly in
order to be certain that your next build to the left starts as high as
possible on the first bridge. Once the bridge to the left is completed, you need to build back to the right and again to the left
but, THIS IS IMPORTANT, adjust these builds to be certain
that the last build finishes almost at "Lem height" from the ceiling. Do that and all your troubles for this level are over (almost).
Any lower, and you will find your little friend getting into all
sorts of trouble. Now that the bridge is complete and he is walking back and forth, let him begin to bash to the left and the exit.

There should be NO brick over his head as
he bashes. When he is an inch or two from
breaking into the chamber to the right of
the exit, go back and repair the bridge.
When he does break out, catch him
QUICKLY as he drops to the slanted brick
just under his feet and make him build to
the other side. That done, bash on into the
exit.

Taxing 18: Tribute to M. C. Escher — DHFIJLMOGN
Have the first Lem out walk to the wall
and build when he is at the very center of
the blue block next to the one-way structure. (You want his bridge to finish at a
point no more than "Lem high.") Now,
THIS IS IMPORTANT! Catch him as soon
as he turns and let him build back to the
left. When he is about 2/3 of the way to the
left wall, select a Lem who is walking left and is approximately
under the builder. Make that Lem a bomber. He will walk up on
the bridge before he detonates, keeping the others out of the
builder's way. As the builder nears the left wall, click rapidly on
the mouse button. It will ensure that he builds from as high to
the left as possible. You need to do that so his stairs will take him
above the entry point under the chute. Once the builder reaches
the one-way structure, let him step off (be sure he is a floater) and
follow him until he is about 5 or 6 steps short of the exit. Let
him build over the exit and seal against the right wall in order to
turn him back. Let him bash when he reaches the wall of the
one-way structure. When he breaks out on the other side, he will
bash through the short bridge and free the others. Make the lead
Lem out a bomber when he is two full blue blocks out from
under the one-way structure. He will walk up the bridge over the
exit and detonate, making it possible for the others to get home
in time for lunch.

Taxing 19 — Bomboozal - HFANLMDPGK
All you have to work with in this one are walking bombers. It's
a special mission which demands the use of only highly qualified
and motivated troops. For that reason, I have selected the 503rd
Female Kamikaze platoon, a unit of the battle tested 75th Lem-

Strategy
ming Combat Ordnance Battalion. Use these people properly
and they will get the job done
for you on the first attempt.
(Which is good, because very
few of the Kamikaze types seem
to reach retirement age.) Make
Lem #1 into a bomber when
she is directly over the left edge
of the first fireplace. Allow #2 to
pass and activate #3 when she is
directly over the right edge of the same fireplace. When the second bomber detonates, she will create an opening into a center
compartment. The strategy here is to keep the Lems in fire free
compartments at all times. Allow the first right moving Lem in
that compartment to reach a point that is directly over the left
edge of the fire below, and then make her into a bomber. She will
courageously blast into another "safe" room. Go back on top and
make a bomber of a Lem who is directly over the right wall of the
first room the Lems walked over. With her demise, the Lems will
have access to the last safe room, down on the right-hand side.
Now catch a right moving Lem as she is over the left edge of that
fireplace. She will go to the right wall, detonate and earn her
posthumous Medal of Honor. Your unit has made it out with a
minimum loss of life and lem. You should be proud of them.

Taxing 20: Walk the Web Rope —
FINLMDHQGT
This one should have been called "Helter Skelter." It's one of
several to which there is no clear or clean way to do it. While
there is no solution, there is a strategy. I do this one in the following
manner. Place a blocker at the very
bottom and proceed to use all your
climbers. You don't need to worry,
they aren't going anywhere. As they
begin to climb all over the web,
start clicking on them in an attempt
to clear a path up through the web
and out over the long "tightrope."
In some cases you can bash, others
you can mine (if the climber is
walking downhill). If you cut
through where you don't want to
go, then bridge over it. Once you
have the path cleared, let one of the
climbers go to the far end and up
the other web. Don't worry, this
one is easy. Let him walk up and
bash the First section of the web. Continue to do that until you
have a path cleared to the exit. Now, go back and remove the last
obstacles from the path of the other Lems. You can mine (downhill) or bash to eliminate the strands of web which may remain. I
would not mine the very last strand, (the one holding the Lems
in). For some reason, when I mined that one, he went on through
and spilled all my little friends. Once you break that last strand,
then all you need to do is give them the time to get to the exit.
Look to the top of the screen. At times, a climber will get caught
up there. You can free him by having him mine or dig. This one

gets my vote for the one level I would like to "86". And to the
sadist who designed this one, this message.....may your favorite
daughter become a willing love slave to the unwashed, illiterate
and illegitimate son of a highly disreputable used camel dealer on
the outskirts of Bag Dad.

Taxing 21: Feel the heat! — FAJHLFHBHW
Make the first lemming into a climber. When he is just past the
center of the steel plate above the flame thrower, have him build.
When he has laid about 8 planks, then go make another climber
as he comes out of the chute. Let the second climber mine just
short of the steel plate and, when he turns, instantly mine again.
When your builder starts his third bridge, you can forget him and
watch the miner. If he does not stop mining, then make him
bash. Now, have a cool one...

Taxing 22: Come on over to my place —
IJHLFHFCHP
There are a number of ways to do this one. The way to get it
over the quickest is to make floaters of the first two Lems out.
Ignore Lem #2 and have #1 begin to dig at the end of the floor
section just before the exit. When he is about knee deep, make
him build to turn him back to the left. When he steps up out of
his hole, make him build. Continue building until the bridge begins to save the falling Lems. Let him step off and walk left to the
end and then build to the far wall. This will turn him so that he
can add to your tally of lemmings.

Taxing 23: King of the Castle — NHLFHFADHM
This level is easy if you know how to overcome it. Build across
the gap and have other Lems
build behind #1 just to slow
them down. When the first
Lem drops over on the other
side, let him take a couple of
steps and build stairs. Let the
second one over build right behind the first, and have the
third build right behind the
second. All bridges must start
on the floor and must touch one
another. It's easy. After the
third bridge is started, catch a
right moving Lem and have
him build up to the next level.
From this point on, it's all
gravy. You can save 100% with
this technique if you want, or
let one or two die falling off the first bridge to save builders if you
like (an ethical dilemma left to the judgement of the player).

Taxing 24: Take a Running Jump —
HLFHFINEHV
Make builders of the second through fifth Lems out of the
chute. This will slow them down while #1 goes to prepare a safe
route ahead. Let him build across the gap which is located over
the exit. Take this opportunity to pause the game and step up the
flow to 99. Let the first Lem to step off the bridge continue while

Strategy
you again build to slow down 2 to 4 of those who follow. When
your lead Lem has reached the tiny crack between the blocks
which angle down from up above, have him build. The object is
to seal off that crack and prevent him, or any other Lem, from
walking through it. If he seals off the crack but manages to step
on through, then catch him as he goes across the top and have
him build from the edge, back in the direction from which they
all came. Once he gets down on the other side, reverse him by
having him build under one of the bridges left by the others.
Down below, all you need to do is have the first Lem who turns
back to the left, drop down on the lower link of the chain and
build to the exit. Mission complete.

Taxing 25: Follow the Leader — LFHFAJLFHO
After the first four or five little souls are out, step up the flow to
99. After the lead lem has walked beyond the depression between
the first two "solid" mounds, have Lem #2 bash while he is at the
lowest point. Catch the first Lem to walk back to the left and
have him bash also. This will create a "holding pen" in which to
store the little buggers while Lem #1 builds to the exit (make the
pen fairly long before you build to stop each of the bashers). Let
Lem #1 build from a point a little beyond the half-way mark on
the last mound. When it become obvious that he has begun his
last bridge, go back and have a Lem in the holding pen bash to
the right. The completion of his job marks the completion of
yours.

Taxing 26: Triple Trouble — FHFIILLGHX
There are several way to play this one, all variations on a single
theme. This is the way I prefer. Catch #1 over the "doughnut"
and let him take about two steps
and dig. Go down to the right
and catch a Lem just as he hits
the corner and the INSTANT he
turns, make him build. Do the
same on the left side. Go back to
the right and make a climber. Let
this climber get up on the deck
and take two short steps before
you make him build. If your timing is just right, his bridge will
make contact with the "doughnut" before he turns back. If not,
you can complete it on his return
trip. Let a Lem in the "doughnut" take a few steps up the side
and make him mine. If you pick
your spot just right, he will come
out where your builder left off. Go back and restart the bridge in
the right pit. Restart the bridge in the left pit and as soon as you
are past the point where new Lems are dropping, pick a little guy
you can trust and have him mine through the bridge. This can be
a bit tough because of the crowd, but not that tough. Let your
builder build into the "doughnut" and then repair the broken
bridge. Single out one Lem and have him bash. As soon as he
breaks into daylight, have him build in order to stop him. This
should give you 100% and a small round of applause from a large
pack of lemmings.

Taxing 27: Call in the bomb squad —
LGAOLLFHHK
This one is really very straightforward. Except for the fact that
you have to blow away too many of your little friends, there's not
much to it. Put a blocker on each side of the structure to prevent
"walk aways" and then, build a stairway from the right top edge
toward the left. Build to the overhead until the builder quits, then
make a blocker at the top of the bridge. THIS IS IMPORTANT
Do not, I say again, do not try to use the builder as a blocker. You
can be much more precise by allowing some other Lem to walk to
the top and block. Place him as high as you can, then detonate
him. Repeat the process, building as required to get higher and
higher into the overhead. When you do break out, if you are
lucky, they will go to the right. If not, then place a blocker to the
left, then build back over the gap to the exit. If you must place
the blocker to the left, allow him
take about three steps first or the
bridge back to the right may
block others who are trying to
climb up out of the hole.

Taxing 28: Poor Wee
Creatures
—
FINLLFHIHN
Make Lem #1 an athlete and,
when he is under the overhang
on the upper horizontal bar, let
him build some stairs. This will
turn him around. Let him then
build to the ledge over the chute
and walk off the ledge to the
block below. Turn him to the
right by having him build into
the left block, then make him build at the far right. He will build
to the pole and turn back to the left. Turn him back to the right
by building against the block on the left. He will go up his bridge
and climb up to where he first built. Let him get to the top of
that bridge and build again, turning him to the left. Pick your
spot and mine down to the top of the bridge under the chute to
release the others. When he does break through, don't forget
about him. You will need him. Turn him back by building as you
did before. When the Lems drop down to the lower level, have
one bash to the right. Make the first little guy to the trap a
blocker just in front of it and then detonate him. Have the first

Strategy

Lem to drop into the hole left by the suicidal Lem bash under the
trap such that the rest will follow him under the trap and out to
the exit. That should just about do it for level 28.

Taxing 29: How do I dig up the way —
IFANLLFHJX
Make the first three Lems dig instantly and you should have two
who get by. Make them floaters and go back and make a blocker
of the first Lem to walk to the left. When your floaters are down
on the log bridge, make the trailing Lem build to slow him down
and have the lead Lem build from the edge of the gap to the
other side. Have one Lem build a short bridge up to the side of
the cliff (I'll explain later) and have the other go back and build
up to their bridge over the gap in the logs. This will leave you
with a bridge in the shape of an inverted V, which will allow the
others to run back and forth in safety. Make the first Lem back to
the cliff wall into a climber and when he is just short of the exit,

have him dig about waist deep, then build. When he turns, have
him mine. When he is on level with the top of the short bridge,
change him into a basher. The short bridge gives you more control than you would have if you tried to make the mine come out
in exactly the right place.

Taxing 30: We all fall down — FINLLFIIJQ
Don't be misled by the fact that the flow for this one is set to
one. Try it that way and you will just waste your time. Quickly
move to set the flow to 70-75. Allow the leader to get all the way
to the end and make him dig. Let each Lem to follow slightly
overlap the Lem ahead of him and dig. This would be just about
impossible without the F11 (pause) key, but because you can use
the F11, you can control the action very easily. If you have really
great hand to eye coordination, go ahead and do it without the
F-key.

Industry News

Getting Mellow in the
City of Big Shoulders
by Sara Reeder
eing a native Californian (which is strange enough: at last
count, I think there were exactly nine of us in the entire
state), I fell subject to an odd sort of vertigo, a sense of
being off-world and out of sorts, when I came east for the Chicago CES in June. The January show in Vegas isn't that hard to
handle: hey, I've lived in Hollywood and San Francisco, and I
know from weird. (Anyone who saw that picture of me in last
month's issue won't dispute this.) But get me east of the Continental Divide, and I can't shake the nagging feeling that I'm not
in Oz anymore. No matter how many times I clicked the heels of
my red cowboy boots together, it still wasn't like home ...

B

Maybe it's the fact that the ground doesn't abruptly rearrange
itself every month or so. Or it's all those people actually smoking
in public places — an act that can get you banished to the Nether
Regions (or, at least, Orange County) back home. Nevertheless,
wandering into McCormick Place, home of the Summer CES, is
tantamount to turning the gain knob on the whole strange trip all
the way up to ten — and leaving it there for four days.
To fully appreciate the surreality of the situation, you need to
understand that, in addition to the colossal Sega and Nintendo
booths (both of which occupy about ten city blocks, eat up
enough power to dim lights all the way to Milwaukee, and put
enough sound out of their mammoth speakers to make the floor
thrum and resonate quite reassuringly), CES is also the "must-go"
show for folks who make car burglar alarms and the X-rated videos you see down at the local video rental shop. So, for the past
few CESs, as the edutainment revolution kick-started to life and
took off, the usual cognitive dissonance that afflicts me the moment I step off the plane has become damn near mind-bending.
On your left, ladies and gentlemen: armed-to-the-gunwales Ferraris and the stripped-to-the-navel porn queens. On your right,
SimLife, Reader Rabbit 2, and Just Grandma and Me.

A Child's Garden of Green ware
The "greenware" trend first noted in these pages two months
ago is fast evolving into a diverse and rampant rain forest. In
addition to SimLife, which looks very lifelike indeed, and which
Maxis swears will ship for the Mac this summer (DOS and Windows to follow), we were much taken with the preview of Davidson's Zoo Keeper, which puts elementary and middle-schoolers in
charge of a 50-animal zoo. Between keeping all the animals fed
and healthy, ensuring that their habitats are comfortable for them,
and staving off "troublemakers" (little anthropomorphs that represent human behaviors that work against animal survival), it looks
like it should be complex and engaging. The graphics also cut
some new ground — they're a nice blending of digitized photos
of the animals and their habitats (provided by Jack Hanna of the
popular ZooLife TV show), and hand-drawn animations. The
icon-based interface promises to make it fairly easy to play, and

the game currently includes an on-line info directory of American
zoos, to encourage kids to think about getting involved.
The many fans of Zug the talking Megasaurus will be pleased to
learn that Davidson is giving him his own software line. In addition to EcoSaurus (now retitled Zug's Adventures on Eco Island)
and Zug's Spelling Adventures, the line includes two new titles:
Zug's Race Through Space and Zug's Dinosaur World. Race Through
Space exposes 5-12 year-olds to the basics of the solar system; Dinosaur World appeals to 3-8 year-olds who are mired in the everpopular (and seemingly never-ending) dinosaur phase. You should
start seeing Zugware stomping the shelves this fall.
Even though Maxis appears to have SimLife just about in the
can, they were a bit shy about pegging a launch date for El-Fish
— a sort of SimAquarium that picks up where the famous After
Dark fish screen-saver left off. Too bad: there are a lot of parents
out there who would love to give their kids a pet for Christmas..
.especially if they were offered one that you don't have to feed,
walk, housebreak, sleep with, clean up after, or flush down the
toilet when it dies.

Let's Do The Time Warp Again
Based on the surging wave of history and geography products
coming down the pipeline, someone — like maybe me — should
actually spend some time writing an in-depth column about the
genre. (Hmm. Watch this space.) After all, Broderbund and Electronic Arts are bringing Where In The World Is Carmen Sandiego?
to the Sega Genesis in the next few months (*gasp!* Edutainment
on a cartridge machine?). And Davidson released the Mac version
Headline Harry and the Great Newspaper Race, which includes
QuickTime video movies, and some sound and graphics improvements over the DOS version. Looking farther ahead, Sierra OnLine is also developing a history game of its own, to be titled
Twisted History. More about this after the January show.
The entire CGW crew was deeply impressed by Shadow President The Simulation of Presidential World Power. Robin Antonick,
who programmed John Madden Football for Electronic Arts, is the
designer of this combination fantasy role-playing game/political
simulation that has impressive potential as a learning tool for high
school and college students. A deft and intricate weaving of economics, politics, foreign relations, defense issues, and ecology, the
game includes instant on-line access to the CIA World Factbook,
with in-depth info on over 150 countries. Everything about the
beta version we saw looked cutting-edge. But enough said —
given the enthusiasm of the CGW editorial staff, it's a sure bet
you'll see an in-depth review of it on these pages very soon.

Classics, Revisited
Both Davidson and The Learning Company announced new,

Industry News
improved, updated, upgraded, or otherwise enhanced versions of
existing kids' classics. Davidson showed the next version of KidWorks 2, their best-selling Macintosh art program. The new revision includes a reworked interface, some new tools, a major revamping of the sound output system, and — best of all — support for color Macs. KidWorks 2, along with the Windows version
of New Math Blaster Plus, should be in the stores by the time you
read this. The Learning Company introduced the next extension
in their Reader Rabbit line — Reader Rabbit's Ready for Letters, a
reading-readiness program with five charming modules that drill
kids on matching, shape recognition, and basic word skills.
They're aiming it at 4-7 year-olds, but it's the kind of thing that
even bright 2- and 3-year-olds might get a kick out of.

In Other News...
At the Konami booth, the big editorial news was that Park
Place Productions, the San Diego-based company best known for
Draft & Print and dozens of cartridge game ports, had transmogrified itself with a new company name. The brilliant red-and-blue
Spirit of Discovery logo was flying high above two original new
education programs due for Christmas release: Facts in Action, a
fast-moving trivia game designed to introduce players to a wideranging collection of culturally important facts and faces; and The
Body Illustrated, a beautifully detailed anatomy tutorial that will
bring back waves of nostalgia (or waves of nausea, for the queasy)
to anyone who built a Visible Man model in their younger days.
The company intends to create a series of specialized Facts in Action data disks for various subjects and age groups. And if The
Body Illustrated lives up to its promise, it could be the ticket to an
easy "A" in anatomy for high school and college students.
MetroGnomes' Music, a new release from The Learning Company is cracking open another new genre — music software for
primary schoolers. As one who survived a dozen years of music
education that was short on play and long on time, effort, guilt,
drills, and occasional raps on the knuckles, I'm very enthusiastic
about the potential of computers to give my own kids some great
musical experiences — without the pain. The product, which just
recently shipped, offers five activities geared toward ear training
and rhythm development, and helps kids create simple tunes on
their own.
What with John Sculley giving Grandma and Me demos to any
group that will listen, it's no surprise that Broderbund is already
wrapping up the second entry in their "Living Books" series. Arthur's Teacher Troubles, due out this fall and based on the book by
Marc Brown, is aimed at a slightly older age group (6-10) than
Grandma. But, based on the first 12 screens shown at CES, it
should prove that Grandma was not just a creative fluke, and that
Mark Schlicting's development group may have the wit and
imagination to keep the magic in the series indefinitely.

Overheard...
Psygnosis is in the early stages of planning a Lemmings product
specifically aimed at kids. . .and yours truly will be branching out
as a contributing editor of Kids & Computers, CGW's new sister
publication that's due to hit the stands in October. See you there!

Strategy

by Johnny L. Wilson

E

ven though it is only a text game,
Federation II has become one of

those "cyburbs," a conceptual reality, or telecommunity where gamers
establish a "real" social environment
in the midst of an imaginative universe, where I must regularly visit
my friends. Federation II is, ostensibly, a space trading game. The goal
of the game is to advance through
the ranks of capitalistic advancement
by accumulating Imperial Groats
(the game's currency) and Trader
Credits (experience points) until one
becomes part of the conclave, that
exalted tier which contains the six
wealthiest players in the Federation.
One moves from the interstellar
equivalent of "gypsy" trucker to the
cosmic cognate of shipping magnate.

an on-line grapevine that regularly updates
traders on the "special" jobs available to aggressive pilots. There can only be ten of these

The second type of job involves the SlyNet,

Federation
Federation II would be relatively entertaining to the novice pilot, even if all
he/she were allowed to do was to: a) locate and explore all the planets in the
solar system; b) make enough groats to
pay off the player's ship; c) solve some
of the puzzles on the various planets and
d) avoid being shot down by pirates.
Nevertheless, the nerve center of the
game cannot be found in these activities.
While these activities are necessary, the
real center of the Federation universe is,
as the Idiot's Guide notes, Chez Diesel.
Chez Diesel is a bar located on Mars.
On any given night, one can plug into
Federation space and "hear" (via the
computer's monitor) the communications channels filled with invitations to
"meet me at CD's." At Chez Diesel, one
can gossip; engage in any imaginable action (typing the verb "act," followed by
a description of any activity will send
said description to all of the assembled
characters in a given location); make
friends (by typing "Buy round Diesel's
Old Peculiar" or whatever libation to
which one is inclined); trade information necessary to solve puzzles and consummate deals.

To accomplish this stellar feat of status
enhancement, the player needs to locate
the right office to get a permit to purchase and operate a transport vessel.
Luckily for players who download the
on-line documentation files, an abbreviated version of The Idiot's Guide to Federation II, the docs tell one exactly how
to get a permit and how to purchase a
ship at the shipyards. Unfortunately, the
cosmic capitalist must purchase his/her
first vessel by financing the massive expenditure. So, each player starts out
heavily in debt and undercapitalized.
As an independent pilot, the player
must accept one of three types of jobs to
pay off the massive debt owed on his/her
initial spaceship. The first type of job
simply requires the player pilot to type
"Job" at the prompt and Transportation
Central (the computer program) will assign a
milk run where the player hauls a shipload of
ordinary commodities from one planet in the
solar system to another. These runs will barely
cover the player's fuel expense and, on top of
this, the bank slices off 10% of the drayage
fees for each load as payment on the player's
loan. The milk runs are also only worth one
Trader Credit (of which one needs first, hundreds, and then, thousands, to advance
through the ranks).

The Real Center of the

On one night, Chez Diesel was rocked
by the most peculiar actions. One Zargleswart, a dapper novice who was obviously looking to fondle a female trader's
cargo, decided that a trader named
Delta just might be the right target.
Now, get the picture ...
higher paying jobs (in both groats and credits)
in play at a time. Alert pilots will get immediately into position to accept these jobs, load
the ship immediately and transport quickly to
the "pay-off" planet.
Finally, the third type of job is to accept
contracts directly from the more experienced
players. This is not only beneficial and encouraging to the rookie pilot, but it facilitates the
expansion of the veteran trader's empire by allowing him/her to be involved in other jobs,
puzzles or investments.

Zargleswart felt light on his feet, indeed. His baby blue jumpsuit was resplendent
in the strobe lights of Chez Diesel and he felt
he could dance on the ceiling with his Nike
Zero-G Trainers. He threw his flowing Kevlarlined (bulletproof) cape behind him in a move
that would have made Bela Lugosi envious and
promptly kissed the first friendly female trader
in sight.
Yes, Zargleswart felt very clever as he doffed
his virgin white top hat, but stopped short
when he observed that everyone was staring at
him. In fact, Delta was staring at him. What
could possibly be so interesting? Zarg focused

Strategy
his eyes more carefully upon Delta by typing
the "Ex" (Examine) command. Delta was no
woman. She wasn't even anyone's wife (if you
remember the archaic and sexist joke). In fact,
"she" looked decidedly more like Han Solo
than Michelle Pfeiffer.

after a painful and ignominious death; imbibe
ale or ingest food in order to restore stamina
points and upgrade one's ship with the weapons required to waste those interstellar pirates
(mostly computer players, but occasionally aggressive humans).

Yes, it is a good thing that Federation space
is such a friendly place. Delta shrugged off
Zargleswart's first adventure game foray into
the gay lifestyle as a symptom of too many
Pan Galactic Gargle Blasters and goosed Zarg's
bottom in one of those manly, male-bonding
sorts of ways that manly men alleged do in
athletic locker rooms. Of course, news of such
an alternate lifestyle behavior (however ill-informed) was recorded in the Spynet Journal
(the on-line equivalent of the Solar System Enquirer) and both players received quite a bit of
razzing in the next few play sessions. It demonstrates how things work in Fed space,
though.

Then, when one reaches the third rank (Adventurer or Adventureuse), one can use the interstellar link and perform hyperjumps to a
myriad of additional planetary systems, each
with their own distinctive character and many
with new puzzles. These new planets are, in
turn, owned by high level characters who have
earned enough points to be able to design,
procure and maintain their own planets.

Hyperspace, Not Hypertext
Of course, if players simply made trade runs
from planet to planet, met at CD's and talked
to each other, Federation II might not be quite
as interesting as it really is. Fortunately, players
need to explore the surface of various planets
in order to: find objects to give to certain nonplayer characters in order to solve certain puzzles; locate insurance offices to get re-insured

When one reaches the next level, one is no
longer dependent on either Transportation
Central or SlyNet for jobs. One can speculate
on individual planetary exchanges and set up
one's own lucrative runs between planets.
Once that becomes de rigueur, the next level
allows one to set up a customized trading
company (complete with stockholders and,
possibly, dividends). At the pinnacle of entrepreneurship is the ownership of a planet
which one can design to his/her personal
specifications.
Of course, any game with even a modicum
of role-playing will also have its nadir (i.e.
death). The good news for Federation II play-

ers is that death does not have to be permanent. One dies, but the player that has purchased insurance will have guaranteed that a
clone will replace him/her immediately. This
seems simple enough and provides enough risk
that characters face meaningful death if they
choose not to insure their characters and
means that such a demise costs them something (even if only groats).

Would You Buy a Used Planet
from this Trader?
In short, Federation II is a marvelous social
environment that uses simple, text-based game
mechanics as an excuse to have an on-line
party. To the game's credit, there is an ever-increasing amount of variety as one advances
within the game and this firmly holds one's
interest (an important matter when the player
is paying $6.00 per hour). To be sure, one
could carp on the inevitable parser snarls and
reset problems, but this would be superfluous
since most on-line text games suffer from these
problems. What one really carries away from
Federation II, however, is a satisfied sense of
having been "away," having visited a "real"
imaginary place, somewhere. In fact, it's a cyburb where I wouldn't mind living.
Federation II is available on the General
Electric Information Network at $6.00 per
hour.

With "The Software Toolworks," Timing Means Everything
The CGW Stock Watch is a graphic look at
the relative health of publicly traded computer entertainment software companies.
The charts and commentary presented on
this page are a reference point for hobbyists and potential investors, but should not
be used as a primary tool for investment.
As always, investors are advised to perform
their own diligent research prior to investing. This information has been gathered in
advance to meet the magazine's production schedule, and market adjustments
may have occurred since then.
In writing about The Software Toolworks
(NASDAQ: TWRX), one is tempted to
recycle the lyric from Kenny Roger's "The
Gambler." Rogers sang that, "You gotta'
know when to hold 'em, know when to
fold 'em," which would have been particularly true for investors who held Software

Toolworks stock during the period from
January of 1989 to mid-1992. For those
who purchased the stock prior to Software
Toolworks' acquisition of Mindscape, Inc.,
the stock performed almost 800% better
than the broader market (as measured by
the 500 stocks indexed in Standard &
Poor's 500). Mindscape's Nintendo license,
in particular, brought a great deal of optimism to investors during the next few
months.
Like the broader market, however, TWRX
fell during the latter half of 1990. An investor who purchased the stock at the apex
would have seen the investment decline
even faster than the overall market. Also
reflecting the broader market, TWRX recovered slightly during the Persian Gulf
Conflict, but sank throughout the late
spring and summer after the company un-

veiled a loss of $1.78 per share at the close
of the quarter ending March 31, 1991.
Investors regained enthusiasm for Software
Toolworks stock in late 1991 and early
1992. The company began to show a
profit, once again, on a combination of
higher profit margins, new products (the
Miracle Piano Teaching System was beginning to get penetration and the company
was successful in bundling a wide range of
CD-ROM products with new drives and
machines) and higher sales (a 40% increase, by one estimate). Unfortunately,
the stock dipped below the broader market once again when the company announced a fourth quarter operating loss
that analysts suspect may augur an operating loss for the full fiscal year.

Game Hints
Keeping The Enemy From Becoming II Populous
Hints and Strategies for Electronic Arts' Populous II

by Jeff James

s many Amiga garners are undoubtedly aware, emerging
victorious in Electronic Arts' Populous II (developed by
Bullfrog) is no small feat. To earn a place among the heroes of Greek mythology, the player must do battle with nearly
three dozen deities culled from the fertile mythic lore of ancient
Greece. The ultimate goal of a Populous II gamer is to defeat the
mightiest of the Greek gods — Zeus, the all-father, leader of the
Greek pantheon. Although dozens of supernatural powers are
available to aid the player in this quest, the immortal opponents
one must face quickly become faster, more intelligent and more
enduring with the defeat of each world. While there is no absolute path to victory, there are several strategies which all aspiring
demigods would be wise to follow. While the following "commandments" are not divinely ordained, they are sound advice and
worthy of consideration.
1. Thou shalt know thine enemy — and thyself.
In their eagerness to wreak havoc, many
Populous II garners may neglect to peruse

the contents of the conquest and game
options screens. The former shows the
supernatural powers available for use on
the next level, describes their effects and
allows the player to view a portrait and
short description of the opposing deity.
The game options screen, accessed by
clicking on the game options icon during
play, displays the powers and restrictions
currently in effect for each deity. Studying these screens provides the information needed to plan an effective strategy.
2. Thou shalt know thy goals.
After assimilating the contents of the conquest and game options
screens, the player should choose a goal for the current world. If
the primary goal is to conquer the current world, the enemy
should be defeated as quickly as possible. If the goal is to earn
experience, the player should still try to finish the battle quickly,
but use a wide assortment of powers to do so. Finally, if the goal

is, ultimately, to defeat Zeus
(which is what most garners
will shoot for), a balance of the
previous two strategies should
be used.
3. Thou shalt keep thy lands
flat.
This is perhaps the single
most important rule in Populous II, just as it was in the
original Populous. By raising
lowlands and flattening mountains, you create more area for
growing crops. More crops lead to bigger settlements, leading to
better weapons and, in turn, leading to stronger, more numerous
and effective groups of followers. Between attacks, the player
would be wise to flatten as much land as
possible.
4. Thou shalt keep thy followers active.
Building a large, robust population of
followers is a prerequisite for victory.
Walkers must be kept moving and erecting
new and larger buildings. To influence
them to do so, position the mouse pointer
over the center of a building and press the
right mouse button. A new walker is created and leaves the building, ready to create a new settlement.
5. Thou shalt honor the best defense by
using a good offense.
Just as in football and modern warfare, Populous II rewards players who seize the initiative (Carpe Ludum?). Forcing the enemy to
react to one's actions is crucial to winning the game. Losing that
initiative forces an aspiring demigod to spend more time repairing
damage and saving followers, resulting in less time for flattening
land and taking the fight home to the enemy.
6. Thou shalt use powers of an enduring nature.

Game Hints
While sending storms of wind against
enemy walkers may look impressive, some
of the most powerful forces in Populous II
are of a less viscerally-stunning nature.
Long-term effects are especially effective,
such as the plague, swampland and fire
effects. The baptismal font power is especially useful, able to turn the enemy's
own walkers against him. Crippling a foe
at the outset of combat with a long-term,
force-sapping power reaps great rewards
towards the end of a battle.
7. Thou shalt smite down the leader of
thine enemies.
It may be tempting for one to use destructive powers on individual enemy walkers, but a seasoned Populous II player knows that
such actions are folly, a vain striving after the wind. Instead, concentrate individual attacks on the mortal leader of enemy walkers.
An enemy who finds himself/herself repeatedly creating new leaders has less time for attacking.
8. Thou shalt send heroes against thy foes.
One of the most effective powers to use against an enemy is the
commissioning of a hero. The heroes (or heroines) in this game
include: Perseus, Hercules, Odysseus, Achilles and Helen of Troy.
Unlike other powers, where the player must spend time directing
the course of destruction, heroes can be aptly described as "fire

and forget" weapons. After creation, he-

roes aggressively hunt down one's enemies, continuing to do so (without any assistance from the player) until all enemy
walkers have been destroyed or the heroes
themselves are eliminated.
9. Thou shalt prepare for attacks from
thine enemies.

Although time is best invested in attempting to keep the enemy on the defensive, it never hurts to be prepared. Building walls, paving roads, planting trees, and
other defensive/constructive measures, can
result in a better defensive position. In
particular, ringing one's territory with a perimeter of raised land
can be especially effective against streams of lava and tidal waves.
10. Thou shalt seek the powers vested in silicon.
In the last few hundred worlds, the computer is able to flatten
his own lands with frightening speed. Although bound to decrease
the amount of experience one attains from winning the current
world, turning the computer assistance to the "on" position in
the game options menu will help a player quickly flatten territory
for use by his followers.
If thou shalt follow these commandments, then shall thy games
be strong upon the face of thy computer monitor.

Game Hints

Scorpion's Mail

o here it is, summertime already.
You probably noticed we didn't get
around to doing the spring cleaning
in here. Maybe it will have to be summer
cleaning (or autumn, or winter, or...). I
don't know where the time goes these
days.

S

It seems like only yesterday it was Christmas,
and now the year is more than half over (Fred
doesn't mind, though; he always looks forward
to the annual Grues convention in August).
Ah well, sooner or later, we'll get it done (I
hope).
This time, we have a little something special
for Amiga owners. Those of you who recently
bought Ultima VI may have noticed a certain
omission: no command card in the box. Oops.
That makes it a bit hard to play, especially
when you aren't sure how to save the game
(grin). So, while you wait for Origin to send
you a command card (which has all sorts of
information), I am giving below the necessary
keyboard commands to help you along. And
with that said, let's get on to this month's
mailbag.
Ultima VI: These are the basic commands
for the game: A (Attack; this lets the Avatar
alone attack something); B (Begin/End combat); C (Cast spell); D (Drop); G (Get); L
(Look); M (Move); R (Rest); T (Talk); U
(use). Control commands: Ctrl-S (Saves the
game); Ctrl-R (Restores the game); Ctrl-Q
(Quits the game without saving, so be sure to
save first!); Ctrl-H (Help mode on/off); Ctrl-Z
(music and sound on/off). Parry commands:
1-8 puts that person into solo mode. 0 returns
the person to the party. The solo character
must be in sight of the group for 0 to work.
Treasures Of The Savage Frontier: Most
people breeze through this one until they
reach the Ice Peak. Then, they have a hard
time trying to find the entrance to the fabulous treasure cave. Well, it is a little difficult to
locate (after all, there's no sign that says, "This
way to the final encounters!").
To make it a little easier, look for a door on
the second screen at around 3,13. That's the
beginning of the path to the entrance.

Ultima Underworld: Many players are experiencing frustrations in trying to get the Ring
of Humility. Remember those instructions
about staying away from the middle of the
room? What they should have said was, "as
soon as you set foot in there, get as close to
the wall as possible and keep hugging the wall
until all the switches have been pulled." You
really do have to be very close to the wall. I
also recommend saving before you go in, just
in case. And remember to check your position
on the auto-map so you pull the switches in
the right order.

Might & Magic III: Holocard #1 seems to
stump a lot of people. They find all the cards
except that one. It's in the Fortress of Fear,
folks, and like it or not, you have to go
through that silly business with the levers to
get the holocard. Mr. Mummy King has it,
and you'll just have to pay him a visit. Some
other players are having a bit of trouble in the
Cathedral of Carnage with the movable altar
heads. I'll bet they missed something back in
the Temple of Moo. Or maybe they didn't realize the order is left to right as they look at
the heads.

Secret of Monkey Island II: Wally could
probably do something about those map pieces
for you, if only he could see. Unfortunately,
his regular monocle is gone forever (nope, you
can't get it back, sorry). So, you'll just have to
find some sort of substitute. Of course, one is
available somewhere. I could enlighten you
about that, but you'll have to do your own
research this time.

Adventures of Willy Beamish: Willy could
probably do all sorts of neat things (and get
into all sorts of neat trouble), if only he could
get away from the babysitter. After she goes
batty is a good time to suck up to her, preferably with baited breath (or at least hands). I
bet she'd go for something warm and furry
(no, not mink coat!).

Eye Of The Beholder I: The bonus for the
third level is an easy one. I could say that what
goes in can come out again, but that sounds a
little kinky (grin). However, I couldn't really
come up with a real gem of a clue, so you'll
have to make do with that one.
Eye Of The Beholder II: A number of inquiries have come in asking about the infamous Mindflayer level. There are many of
those Mindflayers, and they are tough to kill.
Unfortunately, aside from the stairs up to
Dran's lair, there ain't nothin' special about
that place. All you get is the experience for
killing the flayers; no goodies or special stuff.
So, unless you really want to take the time out
to kill all those critters, your best bet is to just
hustle upstairs for the final encounter. That
stone ankh you find is the same; there's no use
for it (no portals anywhere around here, and
I'll bet a lot of people were running around
looking for a non-existent portal).
Elvira II: One thing a few folks are having
trouble finding is the hidden altar that has
those all-important black candles. They haven't checked out the bedrooms carefully
enough. Remember to look under everything,
and look around the room, too (sometimes,
these secret entrances aren't easy to spot).

Magic Candle II: For those who missed my
original article on this game a couple issues
back, it does have some bugs. One relates to
Ziyx and the special scrolls. He's supposed to
tell you where to research the particular scroll,
but unfortunately he never recognizes them.
The best thing to do is call or write Mindcraft
and ask for the most recent upgraded version.
There were other problems besides this one
and you'll be better off with the later version
of the game. If you prefer not to wait, you can
just check all the libraries (there are only three,
fortunately) until you find the right one for
each scroll.
And that's about it for this look into the
mailbag. Remember if you need help with an
adventure game, you can reach me in the following ways:
On Delphi: Visit the GameSIG (under the
Groups and Clubs menu).
On GEnie: Stop by the Games Roundtable
(type: Scorpia to reach the Games RT).
By US Mail (you must enclose a self-addressed, stamped envelope if you live in the
United States): Scorpia, PO Box 338, Gracie
Station, NY NY 10028.
Until next time, happy adventuring

OPINION

Scorpion's View
Origin's "Ultima VII: The Black Gate"
as told by Scorpia

Scorpia is an experience and respecte d
adventure game expert. CGW is pleased
to provide this forum fir her distinctive
and often controversial perspective.
Ultima VII: The Black Gate opens to a
dead black menu and somber music.
That, along with the black box cover and
voluntary MP-13 rating, indicates this is
going to be a dark game. Not damn the
sense of graphics, but dark in the matter
of content. You arrive in Trinsic via an
unexpected red moongate to find yourself
at the site of a gruesome murder. lolo is
also present and explains that two hundred years have passed since your last
visit. As you investigate the murder and
its ramifications across Britannia, you find
that those two hundred years have not all
been happy ones.
A severe seven-year drought has recently
ended, causing food prices to soar, and
the Britannian Tax Council has been
passing ever harsher taxes (some of which
go to help support the estates of the nobles). People everywhere complain about
corruption and incompetence in the government. Lock Lake is scummy and polluted, its once-pristine shores choked with
garbage and animal bodies, mainly because a mining company has been dumping waste into the lake.
The Gargoyles moved from their shattered homeland to settle on the island of
Terfin. Some have gone on to live in Britannian towns and cities, to be met with
intolerance. Beyond any differences in
color, creed, or culture, the Gargoyles are
not human, and racial tension is escalating quickly, especially in Vesper, a hotbed
of anti-Gargoyle prejudice.
Among the Gargoyles themselves, matters are not well, either. Elders bemoan
the younger generation's rejection of the

old ways; fewer all the time visit the
shrines of Control, Diligence, and
Passion. Even worse, the wingless worker
is becoming increasingly
disatfe
with
bwehiatsncford
class.
status
compared to the winged ruling
Among Britannians, a similar division is
starting to emerge over The Fellowship.
Begun twenty years ago, its philosophy
spread rapidly across the land, gaining
many converts. While it purports to be a
benevolent organization, an "us vs. them"
attitude is developing between members
and non-members, driving people apart.
Britannia isn't storybook anymore.
However, don't think you're here to
bring peace, joy, and love, waving your
hands to make everything nice again. The
Avatar only appears in Britannia when
some dire outside menace threatens the
land, and this time is no different. This
time, the menace is The Guardian. It is
no secret that The Guardian is up to no
good; you have only to sit through the introduction to know he and his plans are
thoroughly evil. Preventing those plans
from coming to fruition is the main object of the game.
The Changing of the Trumps

As the opening chapter of a new trilogy,

Ultima VII ushers in a number of changes
from previous games. For one thing, there
is no character creation as such. You
choose only name and gender, the Avatar's attributes are all preset. The gypsy
woman and her virtue questions are now
things of the past.
While conversation is still an important
part of play, it is now entirely mousedriven. Text appears on the screen over
the graphics (all action stops during chats
with people). You generally begin with
the standard "name," "job," and "bye,"

other keywords or phrases appear as the
conversation progresses. Additional words
may also appear based on earlier talks
with other people. A click of the cursor
on any word or phrase brings up information about it.
All actions are, in fact, mouse-driven in
this game. The right button controls
movement, while the left button does
everything else, from starting conversations to examining items, looking at your
inventory, exploring the contents of various containers, picking up objects, checking party stats, opening doors, reading
signs and operating machinery. While the
mouse interface is simple to use, it becomes somewhat awkward when you
want to check everyone's hitpoints after a
combat. Using the mouse, you must first
double-click on yourself. This brings up
the first screen, showing armor worn and
items carried. Then, you click on the
heart symbol, which brings up the second
screen that displays your attributes and hit
points. To look at someone else, you
must now double-click on that person,
followed by a click on his or her heart
symbol to see the stat screen. This gets
old pretty quickly. Fortunately, there are
hot keys in the game that bypass this and
other redundancies. Using these keys will
help keep down wear and tear on the
mouse, and save time as well.
The shrines still exist, but are sadly neglected and, apparently, non-functional.
To increase any of your stats, you must
find a trainer (there are many), pay a fee
in gold, and have the necessary training
points (which come with gains in experience levels).
Graphically, Ultima WI: The Black Gate
is excellent. While it uses the same topdown, three-quarter view introduced in
Ultima VI, the graphics are far better in
every respect. Not only are they larger,

OPINION
but much more finely detailed and colored. Forests look like real forests.
Swamps are appropriately yucky. Oceans
have currents and swells. Shadows of
overhead clouds can be seen on the
ground. Overall, the visual representation
of the world is a first-class job.
Also, music and speech are used to good
effect in the game. There are several different tunes that play at appropriate
points for short periods of time. Most important is the foreboding music that
comes up when anything hostile is in the
vicinity, whether you can see it yet or not.
In most cases, this gives you time to get
out of the area if you don't want to engage in combat. Speech is limited to the
Guardian. The first time he talks to you,
out of nowhere, is a very unsettling experience. His remarks, with their undercurrent of amused mockery, are peppered
throughout the game, but used sparingly
enough to make them very effective.
For all that, any product that pushes the
limits of technology is going to have
problems and Ultima VII certainly has its
share. These can be broken down into
three broad categories: technical limitations, bugs, and design weaknesses.
While Ultima VII is advertised as a 386
game, the ideal system for it is a 486/33
with 4 megs or more of RAM and a large
hard drive. On anything less, it is going
to be slow, and the less you have, the
slower it will be. On my 386/20 with
only (only!) two megs of RAM, it was
very slow. Disk access was almost continuous. There were many times when my
party stopped dead in its tracks, often for
several seconds, while the program went
to the drive. When there was a lot of animation on the screen, movement became
even more excruciating, particularly in
dungeons. Overall, I estimate that the
slow speed of the game added about a
week to my playing time.
A number of people who've played on
"lesser" machines have reported that speed
was more tolerable if they had memory
above 2 megs. The additional memory
was used as a disk cache, and helped to
make the game run faster. If you have 4
meg or more on your machine, set up the
extra as a disk cache.
Another consideration is hard drive
space. Ultima VII is huge, and requires a
lot of room. Figure about 21 meg for the

game files alone. Add in another 2 meg
that is required just to boot up. Then,
calculate space for your save files at about
400,000 bytes per file (they start smaller,
but grow as you progress through the
game), to a maximum of ten files (you
can, of course, have fewer than 10; I had
to squeak by with only four). Overall, you
will need anywhere from about 23-27
meg free on your hard disk to play the
game. One thing to watch out for is the
fact that the program does not take that
"bootup 2 megs" into account when it
calculates how much space you have for
save games. This little fact is not mentioned in the docs; I learned about it the
hard way. Supposedly, there was room on
my drive for eight save positions. Unfortunately, once they were all filled in, the
game would no longer boot, since I then
had less than 2 megs free. I had to delete
half the saves in order to free up the necessary space.
Speaking of boot-ups, you will have to
create a special, "plain vanilla" boot
floppy to bring up your system. Origin
uses its own custom memory manager,
called "voodoo memory", which is not
compatible with commercial memory
managers. The disk is simple to make
(since there is very little in the CONFIG
and AUTOEXEC files), and despite complaints from some people, is not really
very onerous to use. Besides which, after
you're done playing, you can simply take
the disk out of the drive and reboot with
your usual configuration. This "voodoo
memory" was meant to be a solution to
the compatibility problems that arise from
multiple configurations. Unfortunately, it
seems to have created some problems of
its own. These bugs are the more insidious because they are random in nature,
and don't happen to everyone. Since they

are random, Origin has not yet been able
to track down the exact cause(s) and, as I
write this, there is no fix for any of them
but one. This one occurs in the final dungeon, on the Isle of The Avatar. Shortly
after entering the tunnels, you come to a
metal wall near the prison cells. The wall
is supposed to retract as you approach it.
For some people (myself included), it refuses to budge. Should this happen to
you, try restoring to an earlier save and
playing on from there. Try all your saves,
if possible. If nothing you try makes the
wall descend, save the game at the wall.
Copy that save to a floppy disk, and send
it to Origin. They will manually edit the
file and send it back. You have to do this,
because you must get past that wall —
there is no other way to finish the game.
I've been told that the wall problem can
be avoided by visiting the Shrine of the
Codex and reading the scroll inside before
you visit the dungeon. Naturally, gamers
who find themselves in the dungeon before they encounter the problem will need
to restore to an earlier save and read this
before entering the dungeon.
Another bug is missing graphics. A
friend of mine was able to leave Trinsic
simply by walking west; there was never a
wall around the town in his game. Other
people have reported parts of cities missing when they entered (this could sometimes be cleared up by leaving and re-entering). This never occurred in my game;
the graphics were stable throughout. In a
similar vein is the missing body or bodies
in the Minoc sawmill. A murder takes
place there shortly before you arrive and
you are supposed to investigate the murder scene. However, no matter how many
times I went in there, no bodies were present. This apparently does not happen to
everyone. Other players have seen the

OPINION
corpses. Fortunately, this is a side plot,
and the missing bodies will not affect
completing the game. While tracking
down the Ethereal Ring, I was told to
speak to Draxinusum, the Gargoyle leader
on Terfin. Sorry to say, "ring" (ethereal or
otherwise), never showed up as a conversational option. Luckily, I happened to
know that the Sultan of Spektran had it
(the ring is an important item that you
very much need).
Once in awhile, the game will lock up
for no apparent reason. Everything stops,
and there is no response to mouse or keyboard. Ultima VII froze on me twice, but
rebooting cleared up the problem with no
detrimental results as far as I could tell. In
the matter of design flaws, there is the
"key problem." The program deletes keys
from your inventory when you sleep anywhere, whether you have used them or
not. This is a "feature," not a bug. Fortunately, this "feature" is being eliminated
in versions 3.1 of the game. If you don't
have that version, you can get around the
problem by putting all your keys in one
pack and dropping that pack on the

ground before you sleep. The keys will
still be there in the morning. Try not to
forget that, because a deleted key is gone
forever. The only way to get it back is to
restore to an earlier save, when you still
had it or before you found it.
Combat was one of the least fun aspects
of the game. You have no direct control
over anyone except the Avatar. The best
you can do is set people to such things as
"attack nearest," "attack weakest," "attack
strongest," "flee," etc. There is no explanation of what the program considers
"strong" or "weak."
Most of the time, though, that doesn't
matter as opponents usually come in ones
or twos. Unfortunately, this means your
party crowds around the enemy and tends
to inflict more damage on each other than
on the opponents. This happens even
when people are equipped with distance
weapons like bows and magic axes: for
some reason, they still get in very close
before using the weapons. Only Dupre
was smart enough to stand well back with
his magic hammer.

Magic is another weak point. Several
spells do not work as described: "Protect
All" doesn't; it's supposed to keep the
party safe from hazards while travelling,
but I don't recommend walking over caltrops, even when this spell is up. "Peer"
shows you a map of the world, but neglects to indicate your position. "Wizard
Eye" shows only outdoor views, even
when cast underground. "Reveal" rarely
reveals anything: neither invisible doors,
secret passages nor invisible opponents.
Also, because of crowding, offensive spells
can be deadly to your party. They really
have to be cast at something before combat begins. The only spell I used (and
then only when we faced multiple enemies) was "Magic Storm," which worked
very well.
Also sorely needed was a solo mode for
the Avatar. There are several instances
when the Avatar must act alone. This requires talking to every party member, telling him or her to "leave" (the group) and
"wait here." Later, of course, you must
talk to each person again and ask them to
rejoin. This, by the way, is also the

OPINION
A Scorpion's Eye View of "Ultima VII: The Black Gate"

W

ile there is no character creation as such, you must be careful about training your Avatar.
You are the only person in the party who
can cast spells, so some combat training
will have to be sacrificed in favor of magical advancement. Since the number of
times you can train is limited, you will
have to decide early on just how much
you want to devote to fighting and how
much to magic.
Magic, as noted in the main article, is
not terrifically helpful in combat. However, you still need spells for such things
as healing, dispelling fields, and unlocking
magically-locked doors. These all require
mana, and the more you have, the better,
since it regenerates rather slowly. The alternative to high mana is finding a safe

place and just standing there for awhile
until the points come back.
Since you are the only spellcaster, training everyone else is simplified: you look
for the best combat teachers. For pure
combat, no one beats De Snel at The Library of Scars in Jhelom. His training
costs only 4 gold and 2 points, and generally adds +4 to +5 to combat skill.
However, you can't neglect strength or
dexterity too much. Strength determines
not only how much you can carry, but
how many hit points you have, on a
one-for-one basis. Dexterity determines how
fast you are in combat, and you certainly
don't want people to be slowpokes in that
area. The best all-around trainer, therefore, is the Gargoyle Inforlem on Terfin.

His training, for 50 gold and 3 points,
adds +1 to both Strength and Dexterity,
and +2 - +4 to Combat Skill. The add to
combat is variable; for example, one time
Iolo got +2, another time, +3. For the
same price, Inforlem also provides mage
training, giving +2 Intelligence and +3
Magic. This makes him a handy
one-stpfralwhi'metonup.Ki
mind, though, that as you get into the
higher levels, you may need to go to other
trainers. This is because 30 is the maximum for both skills and attributes. There
is no point in paying for training that you
can't use. The only problem with training
is that you don't really know what you're
getting until you've got it. To avoid unpleasant surprises, you may want to save
before visiting a new trainer for the first

OPINION
time and restore if you don't like what
you get.
Who you have in your party is up to
you. You'll probably want the usual trio
of lolo, Shamino, and Dupre. Shamino is
at the Blue Boar in Britain and Dupre at
the Bunk and Stool in Jhelom. Spark, the
kid in Trinsic, should not be overlooked.
He comes with mucho training points
and, once you have some cash, you can
train him up to be equal to, or better
than, any adult in the party. Beyond
those, there are the familiar faces from
yesteryear: Sentri, Katrina and Jaana, as
well as the ranger Tseramed (Demarest
spelled backwards; check the game credits).
Jaana is now a healer, and I had her in
the group for a brief time. Naturally, I
figured she would be an asset in helping
heal the walking wounded. As it turned
out, that wasn't the case. She fixed up
Tseramed one night in Skara Brae. The
afternoon of the next day, I asked her to
heal someone else. She replied she had to
wait awhile before healing again. At that
point, Jaana was sent on her way back to
Cove. Who needs this? You're better off
with your own healing spells and rings of
regeneration, or even a pay-to-heal healer.
Since you're here to save the world, worrying about petty cash should be far down
on your list of things to do. The best way
to make money is at the House of Games
in Buccaneer's Den, playing Triples. The
"any triple" pays off a 26-1. Don't be too
greedy, though. A 100 gp bet will net you
2600, but that's also 26 stone in weight
that you have to distribute among the
party. Win too much, and you may not
be able to carry it all.
Getting around at the start can be a
problem. As you soon learn, the Orb of
Moons is not reliable. Half the time, you
break your nose and bounce off a you try
to enter a moongate. Ships are expensive.
The very best way to get around (and a

great timesaver), is our old friend, the flying carpet. You can find this at the entrance to dungeon Despise (not a place
low-level parties should enter) by following the Lost River into the mountains.
You will not need to join the Fellowship
if you have the magic carpet. The carpet
has improved flying ability now, and can
zip right over cities, mountains, and
oceans. There are a few places it can't
cross (usually a house on top of a mountain), but overall, you can get most anywhere with it, except Skara Brae, which
has no place to land, so you must take the
ferry.
Speaking of Skara Brae, you might be
misled by Mordra's insistence on the "one
vial of mandrake essence." In fact, the vial
you find in her hut is empty. The actual
essence is the glowing potion.
There are many side plots and quests in
the game. Following these through generally gives you some brownie points, a little experience and a feeling of satisfaction
at helping someone out of a hole. I was,
however, a trifle upset that Sprellic in
Jhelom didn't offer us, at least, a free
night at the inn for saving his miserable
life. There are some things, however, you
can ignore. Trying to track down Abraham and Elizabeth is one of them. No
matter what you do, they will always be
one town ahead of you, and eventually
the trail dies out. You won't catch up to
them until the very end, so put your time
into something more productive.
On Ambrosia, there is a mysterious
house with a magically-locked door on a
tiny island in the bay. There is also some
sort of hideout behind a false wall in the
SE end, near the campfire. Sorry to say,
both of these places have nothing of interest in them. This is very annoying, since
magic fizzles a lot in Ambrosia (no magic
works when the sparkles are on the
screen), and you have to wait a long time
before you can cast a spell.

Everyone wants magic weapons. You can
"borrow" some from Serpent's Hold. The
key to the armory is hidden in one of the
bedrooms. Your party will protest when
you take it, but they won't say "boo"
when you hand out the goodies.
However, do be careful about your actions. If your people start complaining
about your behavior too much, they
might also start leaving the party.
Their actions in this regard are very inconsistent and puzzling. For example,
they yelled at me when I removed caltrops from the entrance to a cave. Yet it
was lolo himself who suggested that we
return to the Royal Museum after hours
to "borrow" the eight virtue stones. Those
stones are good to have, once you've
learned "Mark" and "Recall." Using these
can get you around very fast, and they are
100% reliable.
There are three magical generators, but I
will only say something briefly about two
of them. Have a glass sword handy before
entering the Tetrahedron (what's inside is
quite nasty). Before entering the cube,
bring along a ring of regeneration or some
healing potions, and a light source. Magic
doesn't work in there. You'll need to see,
and you will also take some damage, no
matter what.
There is no listing in the docs on the
abilities of various weapons and armor, or
what different potions do. However, there
are a couple of places in the game where
you can read a book to find out about
them. One such place is Inforlem's training establishment. Check out the volumes
there and you shouldcome across the one
you want pretty quickly.
Finally, in case you're having trouble
finding the right way through the game,
the main path begins up at Empath Abbey. Good luck!

Humor

Games we'd Like To See
by Chuck Moss

he

player character stands at the
big brass door, collected wealth in
hand. The door opens. Inside ...
aaagghhh! It's a subpoena! Down another
40 hit points, everyone wonders if our
hero/heroine can possibly make it through
another month?

T

Welcome to Divorce Wars, newest computer
role playing game from MicroTorment. Divorce Wars is set in the fictional realm of Legalmania and players must negotiate the treacherous mazes and landscapes of Sundered Matrimony, puzzles, challenges and mortal combat
abound, finally confronting an evil monstrous
warrior/wizard/world-swallowing demon: The
Ex.
Players begin by choosing one of four character
types: plaintiff, defendant, priest/psychologist,
or lawyer/thief. The player begins the game
with a skill (First Level Legal Knowledge), a
$150,000 dollar house, a life insurance policy,
some savings and two kids. Protect these assets,
folks. They melt all too rapidly!

Divorce Wars
From the opening sequence, the player is
handed a summons to appear in Divorce
Court, a terrible dungeon filled with monsters
which will strip a player to the bone. To survive and triumph, the player must descend to
Legal Alley and recruit a company of nonplayer characters, with varying skill and ethics
levels. It's important to get the right combination of skills: best mix is hungry lawyer, mad
accountant, crooked psychologist, and greedy
private detective. They'll fight loyally, but only
so long as one has the gold to pay them!
From here on, it's mayhem galore, as the
player's merry band puzzles out Motions and
Depositions, ferrets out assets, follows paper
trails, and hides his/her own wealth, all heading
for the showdown in front of The Judge and
that all-important Final Decree. Victory is determined by adding up "preserved cash" points

and a relative standing on the Emotional Agony Index.
Divorce Wars is available for IBM and Amiga,
with EGA or VGA graphics which are superb.
The fangs on one's Ex drip with gore and it is

possible to almost smell one's lawyer's bad
breath. The combat sequences go quickly and
are handled via a unique resolution system: the
player with the most money wins!
Warning: Next Section Contains Specific
Game Hints:
Spend lots of cash up front for a lawyer who
combines a high skill with a low rating on the
ethical index. Stay out of Bureaucracy Maze
until the protagonist's Legal Savvy Level
reaches 25. Hide all assets under "the kids."
Spend charisma points to butter up The Mediator ... it pays off in the inevitable encounter
before The Judge. Don't try to fight a Family
Law Attorney all alone: these specialized killing
machines are virtually unstoppable. Be nice to
the bailiff and, above all, always have lots of
money handy.
Better yet, the magical spell of being good to
one's spouse can often postpone or preclude
the demonic transmogrification into The EX.

COMPUTER WARGAMING WORLD
"I Came, I Played, I Conquered"

Broadsides & Gripeshot
by M Evan Brooks

Wargaming Personalities Debate Hobby's Future
The following bulletins were posted in April and May
of 1992 on the GEnie Games RoundTable (Category
4, Topics 11 and 14). We thought we would share
what some of the hobby "giants" are saying about the
current state of wargaming.
Richard Berg:
(Richard Berg is a long time board wargame designer
and critic known fir his expertise in ancient and
American Civil War subjects).
Personally, I find computer historical simulations
clumsy and frustrating — and that's making allowances for the (still) somewhat gruesome graphics they
exude. My main complaint is frustration ... not in
winning, etc., but knowing why the game is working
the way it does. You make a move, the computer
handles the rest. But you, not knowing how the
game "works" (e.g., what is the Combat Results Table, how does movement affect morale or cohesion
and a long list of other etc.'s) simply take that game
system on blind faith. There's simply too much
"deus ex machina" going on in the black box for me
to ever become more than cursorily interested in the
two or so dozen computer games I have sitting on
my shelf.

116
Review: Computer Third Reich
120
Replay: Global Conquest
128
Review: Carrier Strike
130
Designer's Notes: Fleet Commander
134
Sneak Preview: Theatre of War

—The end result is that I rarely learn anything (I
mean in terms of history) when playing a computer
game because I don't understand why anything is
happening. And history, for me, is never what —
always why. Board games are truly democratic —
everything is out in the open; computer games are
run on a "need to know" basis and, as far as the
designer/company is concerned, your "needs" are insignificant.
Jim Dunnigan:
Dunnigan is the founder of SPI and is generally
regarded as "the Dean of board wargaming." He has
designed dozens of wargames, led SPI and Strategy 6Tactics magazine through their glory days of the 70s
and currently authors books on modern military affairs.)
Good point, RA. We saw the dearth of opponents
among adult garners during the focus groups in the
late 1970s. Demographics being what they were,
there was no solution other than computer games.
Solitaire [board] games were only a partial solution
as they added more mechanics (for the "opponent").
Moreover, as gamers got older, they wanted more
meat in their games. But they also didn't want more
complexity, as they had less time for gaming. Moreover, they had more money ("the hobby of the overeducated" as we used to put it). No wonder computer games became so popular. Computer game
publishers have also discovered that many wargamers
can (and do) buy the latest and most powerful com-

puters to play the latest games (which is why you
need at least a 386 or high end Mac).
Chris Crawford:
(Chris Crawford has been a "guru" of computer game
design from this hobby's inception in the late 1970s
and early 1980s. With titles like Eastern Front, Patton vs. Rommel Balance of Power and most recently,
Patton Strikes Back to his credit, Chris is a certified
wargamer and historian. Chris also edits The Journal
of Computer Game Design in his copious "spare
time.")
Yes, I agree ... that there just isn't a market anymore for "wargames for the rest of us." Which
means that we can write off the entire wargaming
niche in about five years. We are now well on the
way toward repeating the experience of boardgames
in the late 70s and early 80s. Basically, the Grognards took over and the publishers had to jettison
the "boardgames for the rest of us." This dried up
the supply of new gamers and, as the population
steadily fell, this caused sales to fall, which resulted
in lower-quality games, which caused sales to fall
even further until the whole thing just ground down
to almost nothing. SPI went bust and boardgame
design was taken over by a tiny group of small companies that were supported by the tiny group of
Grognards who just wouldn't give up. That's the
way things stand now, with board wargames still out
there, but certainly a shadow of their glorious days
in the 70s. I think that computer wargaming is now
going to go down that path. I did my bit to reverse
that course, but it just wasn't meant to be. Too bad.
As I said, I give it five years.
Jim Dunnigan:
It's natural for markets to mature and, as they mature, they achieve a size where they fragment into
niches. Some of the niches become larger than the
original concept that get everything going. Markets
also suffer from coming into and out of fashion.
Happened with model railroads and Science Fiction
several decades ago and so on.
Wargames were the first simulation games. Until
the fiction stuff came along (fantasy and SF), anyone
eager about simulations had to play wargames until
D&D came along. SPI had a chance to go for niche
or go for broke (on the assumption that there was a
mass market for wargames). There wasn't, there isn't
and so it goes. If you service your niche, you can
still make money publishing computer wargames.
Many publishers are doing just that and will continue to do it. I collected a lot of data on that subject for the forthcoming new edition of The Wargamer's Handbook and found that the wargames market is larger now than it was in the heyday of paper
wargames during the 1970s. Computers made the
difference.

As a side note, right up until I left SPI, the simpler
games (Quads, for the most part) sold very well, as
did the monster games. It was the games that were
neither fish nor fowl that got into trouble.
Chris Crawford:
There's something interesting here. As pointed
out, there will always be the hard core of dedicated
wargamers. But the wargames industry has, at times,
been able to break out into a larger audience with
special products. I'll not make a fool of myself by
pontificating about boardgames, so let me talk about
computer wargames. My first experience with this
phenomenon was with Eastern Front (1941), a wargame that sold fabulously well — far better than
anybody (myself included) expected. Our customer
feedback forms clearly showed that most purchasers
were not wargamers. A similar phenomenon occurred with Patton vs Rommel — I got a lot of feedback along the lines of "I used to play those old
Avalon Hill wargames, but I haven't played anything
since then until Patton vs Rommel came along."
The model I'm thinking of has a core of dedicated
wargamers surrounded by a much larger shell of
"dilettante wargamers." The dilettantes are enticed in
by the occasional simple wargame and a few of them
are then mutated by "Grognard Rays" into dedicated
wargamers. (This is known as the "Crawford BMovie Theory of Wargame Marketing"). Anyway, if
we wipe out that outer shell of dilettantes, the hard
core will wither.
Chris Crawford:
Yes, Peter, I have to admit that the hard core will
never disappear, but I think that it can and will diminish in size. The question here is, from where do
hard-core wargamers come? Let's face it, there's a
hump you have to get over to become hard-core, a
minimum amount of effort required to learn the vocabulary and folkways of the subculture. Who will
induce a newbie to make the effort and who will
help him?
Obviously, there will be some direct, hard-core
proselytizing: hard-core members directly recruiting
new hard-core members. The problem here is the
magnitude of the step required when the newbie is
completely green. A hard-core wargamer who grabs
somebody off the street and starts jabbering about
how great Harpoon is will not likely make the sale.
Indeed, the gulf between the hard-core wargamer
and the average person is so great that such proselytizing behavior is more likely to be off-putting.
What's needed here is some sliver of common
ground, some gulf-narrowing common experience
that demonstrates favorable inclination on the part
of the potential acolyte.
This is where the games for the non-hard-core
come in. If they can provide an intermediate step,
then they can attract soft-core players into the hardcore. There are a huge number of potential hardcore players. Right now, we are enjoying a large
number of hard-core garners, largely because (I suspect) there was a great many intermediate-level computer wargames over the last five years. It's good that
we are satisfying their elevated tastes with games like
Harpoon and Civilization. But I hope that we don't
cut out the intermediate-level games that got us here
in the first place. I fear that this is, indeed, what is
happening.
Jim Dunnigan:
Nevertheless, games like Harpoon. Civilization and
the simulators sell big numbers. The game's the
thing. As I regularly remind my editor, I write books

for a core audience, but I'm also buying an expensive lottery ticket with each one I turn out. In the
book business there are always those mid-list titles
that all of a sudden break big. People are strange and
markets are stranger still.
Chris Crawford:
We discussed the evolution of the term "Grognard" earlier — I had to be set straight on a misunderstanding about it. The consensus seems to be that
the term is ultimately derived from a French verb
(grogner, I believe) that means "to complain." From
there, it was applied to veteran soldiers of Napoleon's armies who, apparently, spent a lot of time
complaining.
Mark, I just can't accept your position that there
just isn't any difference between good games for veterans and good games for beginners. It strikes me as
a "what I like is what everybody likes" kind of argument (and I've read far too many customer feedback
cards to believe that). Of course, as the audience
changes and we eliminate the beginners, it becomes
a kind of self-fulfilling statement.
Jim Dunnigan:
Computer wargames have an advantage over manual wargames in that you can have difficulty levels all
the way from "shoots and ladders" up to "Grognard
heaven." The simulators have been doing that for
years and the dweeb level most have is usually the
only level I can operate at (no eye-hand coordination
to speak of and joystick or mouse doesn't help me at
all). If you can crank up the intensity, you'll generally end up with something the Grognards will like.
Apparently, this works.
Speaking of "Grognard," anyone out there with a
complete set of S&Ts from the 1970s will probably
find the first use of the term "Grognard" in one of
the OutGoing Mail columns in the early 1970s. We
had a lot of Napoleonic enthusiasts hanging around
SPI in those days (including several who did their
research in the original French and German language
sources). I believe it was John Young (who died in
1975, alas, so I cannot ask him) who first came up
with the term (he spoke French). He noted that no
matter how complex a game was, there were always
hard core gamers who wanted more complexity or
more rules or .... well, you get the idea.
Dondo Aldrich:
(Dondo is an astute GEnie user who may have really
hit on something)
My two cents: Please, note that all examples given
in the last few posts of crossover hits are of non-specific games (as opposed to Patton Strikes Back, which
recreates a specific battle or historic occurrence). If
nothing else, this means they can be replayed again
and again. PSB, as fine a game as it is, loses replay
value pretty quickly.
Furthermore, games like Empire, Civilization and
so on hark back to the really classic all time games
like chess — that is, you arc given a set of pieces,
told this is what they can do and then, go to it. The
way the rest of the game unfolds depends on what
the players do with the pieces. In many of the "strategic simulations," there are an awful lot of restrictions in what one can do. This is, of course, because
the point of a PSB is to recreate a certain set of conditions.
I simply think the public as a whole is more likely
to be interested in a game with good replay value
and changing results than in determing what would
have happened in some battle they know little about

if some general they have never heard of had done
something other than what he did.
If you are designing games solely for the money,
you had best keep the chess -go - backgammon model
in mind, rather than trying to recreate a specific historic situation.
Chris Crawford:
Dondo, that's a damn good point! I hadn't noticed
the fact that the successful games Mark referred to
are all "generic situation" games. Jim may correct me
here, but I think I recall a comment he made in the
pages of S&T once that, in the boardgame world,
the "generic situation" games were all failures (Combined Arms and several later attempts in that direction, as well as Strategy I) while the bigger hits were
always specific to a situation. Jim, is that correct? If
so, then we have a truly interesting inversion here.
If this be so, then it suggests a number of things.
Perhaps wargame enthusiasts, who seem to prefer the
specific battles, do indeed have some natural proclivities that run counter to the interests of the general population. And then there's things like UMS
and Dan Bunten's generic style games, or my own
Global Dilemma why did these games fail?
There's something fishy going on here ...
Jim Dunnigan:
Computer wargames on specific battles have been
successfully published. They don't sell the numbers
that non-specific games do for several reasons:
1. Computer wargames came along as manual wargames were deep into the futuristic games (always
the best selling category). These were generally more
non-specific than historical games. Computer wargame publishers simply picked up what the manual
game publishers were already doing.
2. Computer wargames take advantage of being
able to make simulator type games playable. These
never worked well in manual format. The closest
manual games could come to exploiting simulators
were in the very successful tactical games (and it isn't
easy making a tactical game playable. I still vividly
remember the brainstorming required to get PanzerBlitz working 23 years ago). Tactical games also tend
to be non-specific.
3. Most computer wargame designers start out as
programmers, whereas most manual wargame designers are history buffs who can organize data and
write it all down. Early SSI games show how many
computer wargame designers solved their research
and design needs in one swift motion (I was flattered). In any event, the computer wargame designer
is not as much a history buff as the manual wargamer designer. Again, more non-specific wargames
are the result.
4. Computer wargames increased the wargame
audience substantially. But in the process, it "diluted" the previous manual wargame audience by
bringing in more people who were not history buffs.
The 1970s wargamer was largely a "historical" wargamer. The game was a means towards the study of
a specific historical event. The 1980s wargamer was
interested in warfare in general and no so much specific historical events. Indeed, many of the more successful computer wargames deal with future history
(contemporary or science fiction).
Here is where we will end our eavesdropping on-line.
Hopefully, this food fir thought" will stimulate the debate in the pages of Computer Wargaming World.

Review

Plucking Chestnuts from a Polish Fire
Avalon Hill's

"Computer Third Reich"
by Wyatt Lee

TITLE: Computer Third Reich
SYSTEMS: Amiga, Atari ST
PRICE: $39.95
PROTECTION: Document Look-Up
DESIGNER: John Prados, Donand Greenwood
and Larry Butcher
DEVELOPER: Thalean Software
PUBLISHER: The Avalon Hill Game Co.
Baltimore, MD

At the launching of the Battleship Tirpitz on
April Fuehrer's Day, 1939, Adolf Hitler served
notice on the world that he would not brook
any intervention into Polish-German disagreements (concerning the pre-Versailles borders
of Germany and the so-called Free City of
Danzig) by the soon-to-become Allied nations.
"He who declares himself ready to pull the
chestnuts out of the fire for these [Polish]
powers must realize he burns his fingers."
(William L. Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the
Third Reich, p. 467). Within two days of this
pronouncement, Hitler was to order all
branches of the Wehrmacht to prepare and
submit their battleplans by May 1, 1939. Case
White, as the offensive against Poland was
coded, was to be launched on September 1,
1939. This would plunge the world irrevocably into World War II.
Computer Third Reich (C3R) is the computer
version of Avalon Hill's classic boardgame, The
Rise and Decline of the Third Reich (31?), and is
based on the conduct of strategic warfare in
World War II. Unlike wargames which simply
supply orders of battle so that players may
place the appropriate units on the map, corresponding to each unit's actual or hypothetical
deployment in history, 3R (and its computer
wargame version) confronts garners with a
larger picture. The armchair generals who
command the armies in both 3Rs must con-

sider the economic advantages to be gained
from their conquests and must "purchase"
each unit which is placed on the board. Economic gains are measured in terms of basic resource points (BRPs) which are spent on units
during the construction phase of each seasonal
turn. Hence, orders of battle are generated
from the success or failure of previous operations as opposed to gleaned from the pages of
history. Also, many wargames are simply the
replaying of one particular battle or series of
battles, where both 3R and C3R present the
ebb and flow of a full campaign across the entire European theater of war.

Movement and combat are handled just as
one would handle them in the boardgame. Instead of picking up a cardboard counter with a
military symbol on it, one clicks on a counter
and then clicks hex by hex across the map.
Unfortunately, the interface does not allow for
one to take back a move once the right mouse
button has been clicked. This becomes increasingly less of a problem, however, as one becomes used to the interface. Combat is handled using the same combat results tables and
dialogue boxes pop-up to ask the opposition
about naval or air interception when such
could be applicable.

As noted in CGWs sneak preview coverage
of this game (#86, p. 22), C3R uses an earlier
version of the rules than the current edition of
the boardgame. It is faithful to the earlier rules
and having the computer handle all the game
mechanics means that the magazine-sized
manual (30+ pages of fine print on 8 1/2" x
11" paper) could be reduced to the equivalent
of ten such pages. C3R is ideal for teaching the
basics of the game to beginners and placing
the game on the computer facilitates saving
games for both multi-player games at the same
computer and play-by-mail games between
two players.

The interface is designed to be as intuitive as
possible. The programmers put plenty of buttons into the game that allow players to scroll
around the map at various angles and increments. With a big map such as one has in
C3R, that is a very welcome feature. At one
time or another, I've been thankful for them
all. Unfortunately, the interface is not always
as intuitive as it was designed to be. Sometimes, a player must click on the "Exit" button
in-between individual actions (such as the construction phase for each major power controlled or each distinctive "breakthrough" to be
exploited), while at other times, hitting the
"Exit" button will abruptly end the entire
phase for all of the player's countries. Such interface inconsistency caused this reviewer to be
brutally defeated during his first playing of
C3R, but rarely caused any problems thereafter.

Unfortunately, the way the turn format is
handled, the program is only useful for assisting two players in a play-by-mail format where
players send the disk back and forth. Further,
Amiga owners will not enjoy being forced to
use DF0: for both the program and the save
disks (There is a Fix, however. See the sidebar.).

Horses Against Tanks!
C3R begins with the Axis powers ready to
declare war on Poland and execute "Case
White." Indeed, the Axis player begins the
game by deciding just which countries to declare war upon and on which of three fronts
(Western, Eastern and Mediterranean) to fund
offensives. The game is played in turns, each
of which represents three months of combat,
and consists of phases for: declarations of war,
funding of offensives, movement, combat, exploitation movement and combat and strategic
redeployment. Then, at the beginning of each
calendar year of combat, the player must fund
strategic submarine and air power.

Blitzkrieg Ober Alles
Just as it is necessary for players to take out
Poland early in order to be able to have a reasonable shot at winning on the eastern front,
so is it necessary to conquer Poland almost immediately in order to have a chance at winning
in C3R. This is particularly true when one is
playing against the artificial opponent.
Much has been said in informal reviews
posted on networks and bulletin boards concerning the game's AI. Suffice it enough to say
that the Al offers sufficient challenge for beginners and inexperienced players. It is sufficiently proficient at exploiting weak points in
a player's "center" and utilizing the strategic
redeployment, but it is not as nimble is calculating when to press the advantage. For example, it is so aggressive that it will tend to keep

Review
throwing units at a key point when it could
weaken that point by attempting an end run
and forcing the defender to spread out. On
other occasions, it will attempt to breach an
enemy's front, even when only one or two
units can do so. Naturally, said units are cannon fodder on the enemy's very next turn.
Further, the artificial opponent tends to overbuild during the early seasons of the year and
be especially vulnerable to all-out offensives
during the latter seasons of the year.
Another complaint against the artificial opponent is that it is slow. Though
Avalon Hill thoughtfully provided a
sliding scale by which garners can
speed-up the Al's pace (at the cost of
competence, as in many computer
chess programs), it does get frustrating to watch the computer spend as
much time "cogitating" over a winter
season construction phase when it
does not have enough Basic Resource
Points to build more than one unit
as it does when it has all of its BRPs
during the spring season construction phase.

Diplomacy with a
Bayonet
Computer Third Reich is a very welcome computer game for those of us
who have always wanted to play 3R,

but could never find opponents or gather up
the courage to play the experienced wizards at
the local or national game conventions. It allows one to become acquainted with the basic
mechanics of this classic (and thought-provoking) system without becoming bogged down
by those mechanics when one is ready to play.
The artificial opponent is just good enough to
afford a couple of solid games for each scenario and the campaign game as a whole, before one is ready to lay it to waste like Hitler
ripped through Poland. Experienced players

should only purchase the game if they wish to
play it in "play-by-mail" competitions. C3R is
ideal for sending turns by mail on saved game
disks with one exception, players will have to
work out in advance how to handle the dialogue boxes for air interdiction. So, anyone
ready to, as von Ribbentrop accused the Polish
ambassador in March of '39, conduct diplomacy with a bayonet, should probably consider C3R as a viable option.

Searching for DF0:
An astute Amiga owner on GEnie
suggested the following fix for any
Amiga users who were tired of having
to work out of the DF) drive. S.
Emerson suggested that gamers use
Newzap or another sector editor to
open up the reich.prg file on their
user disk (not the master disk). Then,
they should type search for df0:
(Warning: Make sure the colon is
typed.) Next, they should replace
every occurrence of DF0: with C3R
and exit.
Now, by writing a script into the
start-up file, as follows, one can install
the program on a hard disk:
assign c3r: (path/name of where
the disk contents are) stack 10000 cd
c3r: reich.prg.

Replay

Where Angels Fear to Tread
A Replay of Dan Bunten's "Global Conquest"
"In the kingdom of four-player games, the person with three phone lines shall be king."
by Roger White
Computers can talk to each other, but few computer games take advantage of this. It's even rarer to find a computer game that talks to many
other computers and becomes a multiplayer, multi machine game. This is
what Global Conquest is: an up-to-four-player, strategic-level wargame
that is played by connecting up to four PC-compatible computers. It's
also a game that shows why multi-machine gaming is still rare — the
task of making a four player game happen is still an elaborate one. Global
Conquest can be played with less than four human players (none, actually,
are required), but this replay had the ultimate: the four human players
combatting each other in the same, on-line game.
The first task in setting up four player Global Conquest is finding the
computer that will be the "host. The host is the computer that is
equipped with three COM ports and connects to three other computers
by either direct connection or phone line. Host candidates are not found,
they're made. This author transformed his LAN file server into a host by
adding a COM board and booting it as a DOS machine rather than a
file server. COM1 connected directly to the PC
that normally acts as the LAN workstation, COM3
connected to a modem controlling my phone line,
and COM4 connected to a modem that was connected with a long extension cord to the next door
neighbor's phone line (the mouse ran COM2).
The next challenge is common to bridge, doubles
tennis and any other four player game: finding the
fourth player. Two enthusiasts can usually find a
third quickly, but that fourth player always takes a
search. Rustling up fourths for Global Conquest is
greatly aided by access to an electronic forum of
enthusiasts such, as Compuserve's Modem Games
Forum or a gamer's BBS. A side benefit of finding
players on an electronic forum is that anyone who
uses an electronic forum also knows how to use a
modem.
Making three modem connections happen in
quick succession is like saying "Peter Piper picked .
" three times fast — other players should applaud
the host person when the connecting process is completed. Here are
some hints to smooth the connection process out:
1) Call and coordinate on voice with all the players just before attempting the connection. Let them know what order they will be called in.
Confirm their modem phone number and the baud rate to be used. Tell
them how long they should wait before they should try calling you to
find out what has happened.

rent commercial game design, and designing a scenario is perhaps 25% of
playing the game. Ironically, this important feature isn't democratic" in
four player play: the host player is the only one that can select a scenario,
any scenarios chosen by the guest players simply won't matter. So, if one
is going to be host player, it may be wise to spend some pre-game time
describing or negotiating the scenario with fellow players.
All players have a limited amount of attention and skill which they can
apply to the challenge of playing the game. The choices made in building
a scenario determine how that attention is distributed between the various aspects of the game such as: mastering the rules, interacting with
other people and interacting with the "special events" that the game can
dish out.
The basic choice is between using player attention to play against the
computer or using it to play against the other players. In a solo game,
there is no choice to be made: all the attention is devoted to playing the
computer. In the four player game, however, the host player/scenario
designer has to make a choice.
For instance, if Wild Cards are chosen, a player
gets to devote attention to dealing with, say, Dyslexic Virus where right and left are switched. The
attention devoted to mastering right-for-left
switching is attention that can't be devoted to negotiating a plan with Player B to drive Player C
from a strategic city. The simpler the scenario and
the more familiar its features are to the players,
the more time they will devote to playing against
each other rather than playing against the scenario's environment.
"Fuse selection" (the method in which the end
of the planning phase is determined) will indicate
how much diplomacy can take place. If the fuse is
short and triggered by the first player hitting the
execute button, there will be little diplomacy. If
the fuse is long or the turn length fixed, players
will have time to chat" and engage in diplomacy.
Finally, in four player games, one human player is going to start losing
ground very quickly. If this person hangs up, though, the game ends. If a
long scenario is planned, it is vital to pick people who won't need their
gaming line for something else, once they lose.

2) Call the most patient player first. This person will have to endure
watching a connection that does nothing for up to five minutes while the
other connections are being made.

This is the annotated history of a four-player game of Global Conquest. First, let us introduce the players as they hunkered down over
their screens-and-mice for this epic game.

3) In the real world of telecommunications things rarely work right the
first time. This is real-world telecommunications amplified three fold.
Expect that set-up will take a while. Rule of thumb: allow a half hour of
set-up time for the game and add a half-hour for each player that the
host has never made a modem connection with before. If this is the
initial try at being a host, test each modem connection locally the day
before the big event.

In the Amber corner sits Richard Blocveteran of uncounted games of
Strategic Conquest, Command HQ and now, Global Conquest Richard's

4) The host player must select to be the Amber (Yellow) player. Furthermore, none of the "guest" players can select to be Amber. They will
be Cyan, Magenta and Ocre, in that order, as they are connected into
the host.
Global Conquest's scenario designer is one of the most elaborate in cur-

style is a deadly combination of stealth and diplomacy. The simplicity of
this scenario will favor his tireless efforts at coalition-forming. The open
visibility will hinder his stealth activities, however.
In the Magenta corner, Roger-Tzu runs through his ritual mouse-moving and clicking pre-game exercises. Roger-Tzu wrote the book on Command HQ and developed the "Cap Kill strategy in that game to a high
art. He goes for fast growth in the early game and has a reputation for
snatching victories out of hopeless-looking situations.
In the Ocher corner, dimly visible, is Skulker — Global Conquest
playtester and master of the 2023 scenario in Command HQ The simplicity of this scenario will grate on him, but his long experience with

Replay
Global Conquest and Command HQ (plus the fact that he's a programmer
in "real life ) will help him locate every possible technical advantage the
scenario offers.

In the Cyan corner is Jeff Beutler — another GC play tester and a
man with a play style that makes pit bulls look like pacifists.

The Setup
Richard's (Amber) comments: During city selection, I'm looking for a close cluster of cities so I
can have a good defense, but as I'm picking m7
third city, I notice that the island near Ocher s
Metroplex (corner city) isn't occupied by anyone,
so I take the big city there. In retrospect, a big
mistake: I hadn't fully considered the large armada
that was likely to come out of the Ocher Metroplex early in the game.
Roger's (M agenta) comments: The land mass is
far from my Metroplex, so the cities I pick must be
mutually supporting. I start with a city in the south
near some cross-shaped swamps. Cross-shaped
swamps are sure to have oil fields in them. As city
selection continues, no one is contesting me in the
area so I get a tight cluster of cities on the south
end of the main land mass. There are three oil
fields and three neutral cities nearby and I'm isolated from the northern part of the main land mass
by a neutral city and the capitol. This starting position is an excellent one all around where I can clear the natives out of the
south end of the island, then move north to engage the others. I plan to
bring a big fleet up the east side of the island to provide support.
Skulker (Ocher)'s comments: As a straight-forward "beat up on your
neighbors" scenario with full visibility, I must fight, at least, two of the
other players and it's best if I can pick a fight with the 3rd. The challenge is doing this without having my units chewed up. Diplomatically,
my best hope is attacking Jeff because Roger and Richard are within
yelling distance of each other and they play together a lot.
I start with a city on the north side of the main
island and then pick others to cluster around my
initial start, making sure no one concentrates on
the isles near my Metroplex in the upper-right corner. Roger clusters on the south end of the island
and the natives control the middle. Richard and Jeff
are intermingled in the northwest portion of the island — including, somehow ,sharing Omaha at the
start. Richard holds one city on the isle nearest my
Metroplex.
Jeffs (Cyan) Comments: I decide to go for control of the cities on the north side of the big island.
I will cluster my cities there and expand my holdings to cover the entire north area. I want the cities
in the north-east corner, in particular. They are better developed (economically) than those on the upper left and more of them are inland cities (making
them less vulnerable to sea assault). I'm not going to
have a strong navy in the area soon because my Metroplex was is so far
away.
Once I have control of the north, I will gain ground by moving forces
south until the whole island is mine. I'm not going to make alliances
with anyone — this way I can get points quickly
by killing them all. I
will also do my best to prevent a two-on-one situation from developing.
The trouble began right away, though. I'm not able to get the northeast
cities as Ocher beats me to them. I go for the northwest cities instead.
This puts me between Ocher and Amber, but I hope I can hold out and
protect what I have until later in the game.

Sound Off (The Game Log)

Note: The turns in a Global Conquest game are numbered in descending
order.

Turn 30 Amber (Richard): Uh, Oh! The computer has assigned an
army of mine and Jeff's (Cyan) both to Omaha at the start! My army
loses the battle for Omaha which leaves me weak in the center. I find my
lone unit in Albany, on the island near Skulker's Metroplex, is hanging
in the breeze and Skulker is moving on it.
Turn 30 Magenta (Roger): Alone on the south
end of the island, I blitz for the nearby resources
to begin building my economic base and offer alliances to everyone. Since I'm going to be concentrating on killing off the natives for a few turns,
alliances will give me an economic boost.
Turn 30 Ocher (Skulker): The starting positions
make Richard (Amber) & Jeff (Cyan) the obvious
initial opponents. In particular, I plan to eliminate
the threat posed by Jeff.
Turn 30 Cyan (Jeff): My position looks bad. I'm
split and surrounded by enemies, but Richard
(Amber) is also starting in a bad situation, so it
could be worse.
Turns 29-26 Amber: I send my Albany unit
south to escape from Skulker's (Ocher)
Metroplex force, but I lose it and the burb (GCs
generic term for all urban areas). With the "instant" loss of Omaha, Albany and their respective
units, my position in this game is now a pile of lemons. I would resign
here and now, if it were possible to do so without upsetting the rest of
the game. Instead, I try peace overtures to Skulker (Ocher) and Jeff
(Cyan). Neither respond immediately, but I finally set up an alliance
with Skulker. I battle with Jeff for northeast cities while Skulker sends a
"human wave" army of infantry after me (one of his favorite tactics). I try
to make a stand in Madison, but I feel as if Custer and I suddenly have a
lot in common.
Turns 29-26 Magenta: Jeff (Cyan) is bee-lining
an invasion armada from his Metroplex to the
south end of the island, my end! Richard (Amber)
is tied down in the north fighting Jeff and Skulker
(Ocher), so my first contest be holding Jeff
off: a one-on-one situation where he faces all of
my army with only half of his army. Excellent!
Skulker is assembling an impressive northern-island presence. This will be a force to be reckoned
with soon enough.
Turns 29-26 Ocher: Richard flees Albany. I
send my navy to kill him at sea, while an infantry
unit takes the city. Whatever units Albany builds,
I will send to take out Jeffs Metroplex to the
south. I make an alliance with Richard, while I
poundJefatkhminrlsebw
Jeff, Richard and myself.
I send the Navy to the southern part of the main
island to sponge a few points off of Jeff's invaders
headed there from his Metroplex. After I've taken the minerals and my
cities have had a chance to build some additional units, I move forces
east and downgrade my alliance with Richard to a ceasefire. His head will
be next on the block.
Turns 29-26 Cyan: Richard has elected to team up with Skulker and
wipe me out. I'm not sure why he would decide to do this. It would
make more sense to work with me to try to weaken the stronger opponent. Instead he's taking losses attacking me while the stronger player,
Skulker, is chasing us both out of the region.
Turns 25-21 Amber: With the fall of Madison, my chances of a conventional victory fall to nil; I spend the rest of the game conducting
guerrilla warfare against Skulker.
Turns 25-21 Magenta: I'm suffering from "Native Disease," spending

Replay
too much time and resources fighting natives. Because I'm still attacking
natives while beating Jeff off the south part of the main island, my points
are getting sucked down. Skulker is helping attack Jeff, which means that
he's getting points and keeping them! Skulker has mustered an impressive
north island army and is sweeping Jeff and Richard before him. Richard
is switching to a raiding strategy. Jeff, who is point leader, decides to
duke it out with Skulker and keep racking up points.
Turns 25-21 Ocher. I break the ceasefire with Richard and start slogging through his cities while I take Jeffs remaining city on the main
island. I send a naval task force to take out Jeffs Metroplex. (He has
become everybody's enemy since he has built up a sizable point lead). I
send the rest of my navy north to support ongoing operations on the
main island.
Turns 20-16 Magenta: Jeff is all but wiped out and Skulker is sending
an invasion force toward Jeffs Metroplex. I send a bigger force slightly
behind Skulker's to wipe out both Jeff's and Skulker's forces and thus
gain a bunch of points at both their expenses. I send two transports to
raid behind Skulker's lines. One dies at sea, the other sneaks off for either
Albany or Skulker's Metroplex.
Richard and I are now teammates. We decide to make a stand at
Omaha on the north west corner of the island. I feint an attack with
Omaha's defending troops on Memphis, then move them back. Skulker
moves for Omaha with blitzed troops from St. Paul and the vanguard is
massacred on the outskirts of the city—one small victory for Roger .. .
However, Skulker has just too many forces in the area. Consequently, my
counter attack out of Omaha suffers heavily.
Turns 20-16 Ocher. I fight against Richard for Memphis, his last city
on the main isle. The task force arrives at Jeffs Metroplex and starts to
bombard the sole infantry defender there. Jeff builds a sub to defend his
Metroplex. I move my battleships in close to keep the sub away from my
transport and further soften up the land opposition. My infantry blitzes
down the side of the "board" and into the Metroplex.
Meanwhile Roger has dropped our alliance and is sending a large naval
force to stomp on this, my besieging task force. Just as I take out Jeff,
Roger's fleet arrives to start sieging my forces at Jeff's former Metroplex.
I've gone from besieger to besieged very rapidly and hole up in my newly
conquered corner.
Turns 20-16 Cyan: Skulker can wipe out either Richard or myself. He
decides to finish me off first, however, because I have a higher point
total. I have only my Metroplex left, so it's time to assemble the MBD
("Metroplex Bunker Defense') task force. The MBD force will consist
of a single land unit and as many subs as I can build. Skulker's battleships will do so much damage bombarding any defending land units I
build there that I won't win by battling his land forces as they cross the
docks of the Metroplex. Instead, I need to quick-kill his incoming transports before they can even touch the shore. To do that, I need subs. I
spend my banked cash to build submarines as quickly as possible.
I'm able to wipe out two of Skulker's battleships, but I can't cut
through to the infantry transport. If my last sub had started on the north
side of the Metroplex instead of the west side, I would have had a
chance. I saw Roger coming behind Skulker with a mass of stuff but
Roger didn't have any land units in his bunch, so I just needed to sink
that one infantry transport unit of Skulker's to buy enough time. It
didn't happen and I am, therefore, knocked out of the game. I become a
spectator and formulate plans for the next game.

"Neutral" half time
Commentary from Magenta:
Skulker is clearly in a winning position. I'm the only one with an army
left to face Skulker, but he outscores me in points by two-to-one. Jeff has
the highest score, but he's is about to disappear entirely. Richard is third
in the game's point totals, but he has no army left with which to collect
more points, and he soon be joining that vast "dead unit pile in the sky."
There are two possibilities for me to defeat Skulker: 1) I can swallow
enough of his behind-the-line cities to disrupt his economic base, and
then defeat him in some big battles on the main island to rack up an

Replay
astounding number of points, or 2) I can use another way to win that
doesn't concern itself with point scores.
That other way turns out to be an obscure rule: if a player controls all
four of the corner Metroplexes, plus the native capital, he or she wins no matter what scoring option
has been selected for the scenario. While Richard
and I play on, we have a friend of ours, Marty, research the documentation.
Turns 15-11 Amber: Roger and I work out the
final Cap Kill strategy, and a technique for insuring
that Roger gets all the quickness bonuses: Roger hits
"Execute immediately and I wait until he is really
finished before I hit Execute." It's a downright devious plan, but all is fair in love and war(games). In
the meantime, I send infantry units out of my
Metroplex, either to raid the north shore of the
main island or to reinforce Roger's defenses there.
Turns 15-11 Magenta: Albany falls to me! I
quickly get the battleship that Skulker had almost
completed there. This battleship moves on with the
infantry to take Skulker's home Metroplex. Jeff Beutlet's former Metroplex falls while the Omaha battle
rages on. My second Omaha sally is met and bested
by massive Ocher reinforcements; Skulker has me on the run here, so the
remainder of my assaulting force retreats.
Skulker responds to one of my raids with a beautifully timed rescue of
Frankfort, but he loses his own Metroplex at the same time. That gives
me three of the four Metroplexes. I'm on my way to fulfilling the alternate victory conditions. I instantly dispatch an infantry unit from Roger's

former Metroplex to my ally Richard's metroplex to arrange a "bloodless
coup" there (with his consent) and go for the big win."
Omaha stands but Skulker is "braid" attacking, meaning that only one
defender at a time is taking damage and returning
fire. He will win if I don't bring in enough reinforcements to thwart this braid attack technique of
his. I'm moving money into the town to bolster
the defense there by. rapidly purchasing units and
using the "teammate control level to move one of
Richard's Amber infantries in too.
Turns 15-11 Ocher:
Roger and Richard are allying and ganging up
on me. Good! If I survive will man a lot of
points. I plan to just hold onto
to the main i s land,
fi them back and maintain my lead in points. I
lose Albany and will be losing Jeff's Metroplex
and my own Metroplex. too. Suddenly, I'm holding onto just the central island. What are Roger
and Richard thinking?
Turns 10-6 Magenta:

Things still look pretty hopeless, but I carry on.
My "grand fleet" that wiped out Jeff and Skulker's forces at Jeff Beutler
Metroplex moves north through the eastern seas trying to catch Skulker's
"Ochre Armada" fleet in a decisive engagement. I m assembling a mixed
force in the northeast cities I took from Skulker. A "nick 'o time" build
of mine saves Springfield from a Skulker raider. Sometimes luck does
smile upon old Roger-Tzu.
Marty confirms the rule stating that holding all the Metroplexes and
the Capital is a surefire victory condition. I go into a classic, pattented

Replay
"Roger-Tzu Cap Kill Mode" and all forces now have one of two tasks: 1)
advance on Little Rock (the planetary capital and home of Ozark
Softscape — some coincidence, huh?) or 2) go raiding into Skulker's
burbs behind the lines to distract his attention from my real goal. I start
using my treasury and the support-moving feature to build additional
infantry armies in my cities south of the little Rock, gearing up the the
cap kill.
Richard declares war briefly so that I can take his Metroplex, the fourth
and final one I need. I also start picking up Quickness Bonuses by letting
Richard be the last mover, rather than the first. The Northeast force
moves for Detroit and captures it from the west side of the island.
Richard is foiled from taking Memphis by a stubborn submarine captain of Skulker's. The submarine takes damage until a relieving infantry
shows up. This was Richard's last hope of holding a city after giving his
Metroplex to me. Richard follows Jeff into oblivion (sic transit gloria
Richard).
Turns 10-6 Ocher. I have 437 points versus 209 for Richard and 186
for Roger. I think this is an unsurpassable lead. With a dozen infantry
units in the north half of the main isle, I have little to worry about.
Richard is offering to be teammates with me. I decline because it's just
too risky. It would allow him to move my units into Roger's jaws. [Note
from Richard: this offer was purely a distraction tactic. We were trying to
keep Skulker busy thinking about other things while we developed our
"something else" plan to capture the Metroplexes and Capital.]
Turn 6 Ocher. I think I'm losing ground, but I should hold onto
Omaha with no problem. There are four infantry armies, three subs and
two battleships defending it. It will take a heck of a siege for Roger to get
it.
Turn 5 Magenta: All my forces make their move for the capital. The
die is cast.

Turn 5 Ocher. Richard will go down this turn!
Turn 4 Magenta: My main fleet finally catches up with Ocher's main
fleet just off of Omaha; the long-sought decisive naval engagement begins. Unfortunately, Ocher has reinforced his fleet and my fleet gets
mauled badly. Fortunately, it's unimportant. This "trick Trafalgar tactic"
was only a distraction to keep Skulker from moving up to blunt my
attack on Little Rock. The sounds which immeninate from an AdLib
compatible sound card during a naval battle always makes players zoom
in to look at it. It is a horrendous cacophony. I'm hoping that Skulker
doesn't look back too quickly.
Turn 4 Ocher. The score is 612 for me versus 325 for Roger. The
game is in the bag, particularly since Roger has run into natives again
and his score is going down.
Turn 3 Magenta: Skulker finally understands the

capitol threat and
blitzes all his nearby units for the capital but it looks like the distractions
have paid off and he's going to be too late. It's going to be tough for him
to get through to Little Rock — his access to the capital is hampered by
native forces in intervening cities north of the capital. If he doesn't make
it through, I will snatch a victory out from under his nose.
Turn 3 Ocher: Ah ha! Roger is trying to take Little Rock and win that
way. I'm blitzing all available forces outside of the capital to reinforce it if
it looks ready to fall.
Turn 2 Ocher. I'm waiting for Roger to get most of the native defenders out of the way before I intervene in the capital. I have one infantry
waiting until the second half of the turn to move into a corner of Little
Rock. I'm having it wait for half a turn in the hopes that when it arrives
it will survive there until the end of this turn. It is all a question of
survival right now. Whew, the unit made it without a single pulse to
spare! I think Roger's brilliantly planned coup has been foiled at the last
possible moment.

Replay
Turn 1 Magenta: In yet another display of timing wizardry, Skulker
weaves forces through the gaps between the northern native forces and
keeps Little Rock neutral, even though I've finished off the last of the
native defenders. Cities only change control when in possession of a single player and, since we are fighting over control of it, it will remain loyal
to its previous owner, the natives.
Turn 1 Ocher: I rush all nearby forces into Little Rock to make sure it
doesn't fall. (I made a mistake last turn and two units were "R"epeating
the wrong move!) At the game's end, I won on points with 759 to
Roger's 291.

Conclusions:
Amber: A lone city hanging out isn't good idea against human players.
Computer players will seldom bother one but other humans, rightly, see
it as easy pickings. In this scenario, concentration of force is everything.
Magenta: The speed with which the other human players got into point
acquisition caught me off guard. In games with computer opponents, I

can take time to build a large city base by attacking the natives first, then
use that economic base to wipe out the computer opponents. In this
game, that strategy was leaving my point count far behind everyone
else's.
Ocher. The ending was closer than I anticipated. Then again, Roger is
very rod at developing surprise endings, so I really should not be too
surprised after all. I was almost distracted too long, but managed to save
the win by some fast action during the last three turns of the game.
Cyan: In hindsight, it might have been better to try and compete with
Roger for control of the south part of the island. When Richard started
working with Skulker it really surprised me and led to my early departure
from the game. It also made Richard a non-factor in the game. He was
too weak to stop his former teammate when Skulker turned on him. I
thought the game could have been won by Roger. He had the advantage
in cities but he lost points on an alliance he really didn't need. Skulker
was able to take advantage of the play of others and secure a nice victory
for himself.

Review

TITLE: Carrier Strike
SYSTEM: IBM
# PLAYERS: 0-2 (at the same computer only)
PRICE $59.95
PROTECTION: Document Look-Up
DESIGNER: Gary Grigsby
MUSIC Donald Griffin
PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations, Inc- Sunnyvale, CA

ome games lend themselves to instant categorization; i.e., this game
is a winner, that game is a loser.
Not so in the case of Carrier Strike, the
welcome new operational level WWII Pacific Theater game from once prolific wargame publisher SSI. Instead, designer
Gary Grigsby has created a package with a
depth that goes beyond mere first impressions (be they good or ill) and require serious further examination of a subject presented so carefully in this game. While
not as wide or deep as the ocean its battles are fought over, Carrier Strike requires
a sounding of depth and wide search pattern in order to be reviewed properly.

S

Carrier "Front"
Using the same interface as his previous two
games, Second Front and Western Front, the
first impression I had looking at the screen display was "What is this, Carrier Front?" The
same laborious menu structuring that is so
clunky-yet-familiar-to-Grigsby-Gaming-Fans is
back again to ease system veterans into play,
complete with mouse support. With the exception of adding clouds (which range in intensity from fluffy white to threatening dark
gray), a player could swear this was another
Front game by zooming the map to its two
different scales.
Skip Basic Training

The interface déja vu aside, carrier warfare
remains a different animal than land warfare,
so many players will seek initial enlightenment
from the game's tutorial. Unfortunately, this
proves to be a bad move. The tutorial is
poorly written, cumbersome and far less than
complete. It says so much to accomplish so lit-

tle that its most redeeming feature might be
that it is buried on page 48 of the 120+ page
manual. Hopefully, players will have tried to
learn the game the "hard way" which, in the
case of Carrier Strike turned out to be the easy
way.
Fortunately, the interface is reasonably intuitive and it won't be long before planes are flying, bombs are dropping and carriers are burning in silhouette against the beautiful Pacific
sunset. Actually, the ease at which play proceeds (once the system is mastered) lends
much to recommend this game. Whole battles
can be decided in less than an evening and
entire campaigns in about 10-15 hours.
Control Freaks Need Not Apply
More akin to an SSG wargame than a traditional SSI wargame, players take on more of a
"command perspective" when issuing orders to
their units. Each individual piece is not controlled by the player, being moved hex-by-hex
as if the player's hand were some god's. Instead, one can order the direction of task force
movement, split and combine those task forces
(within fairly strict limits), send out the search
planes from carriers (including setting the centerline of the search arc from each carrier) and
form, as well as launch carrier groups. This latter operation is handled remarkably smoothly
on a "flat top" interface screen, allowing players to move individual planes or whole squadrons to fuel, arm (there is a variety of ordnance available), take the elevators up to the
flight deck (or down again) and then launch
(or land) airplanes. Capacities limiting all of
these functions are neatly represented through
pie graphs and create an effective combination
of realism and ease of play.
Players cannot control the operations of landbased air forces nor move individual flying aircraft willy-nilly in expedient flight patterns like
some deranged politician gerrymandering a
map. Instead, the player is the fleet commander, not the supreme commander of all
forces in the area. Forming up strikes, launching them, assigning search planes and CAP
(Combat Air Patrol) missions is an almost ef-

fortless exercise, leaving players to concentrate
on difficult decisions rather than difficult procedures. This system will certainly disappoint
the control freaks, but I found it quite compatible with what I was looking for in a game
on this subject. I heartily approve of the way
command decisions are handled in Carrier
Strike. (It's too bad a "control freak" toggle
couldn't be set to appease the alienated wargarners out there by allowing them more deified capabilities during game play).
Something New From Grigsby:
Graphics and Sound!
As a welcome addition to the ever growing
stable (staple?) of Gary Grigsby designs are
more graphic interludes and some real sound
support. Now, this isn't The Perfect General or
Patton Strikes Back, brother wargamers, but the
nice (albeit 16-color) VGA screens showing
fleets and airbases (particularly when they are
attacked) add an awful lot for those who are
used to Gary's Front games. These graphics are
likely to pale in comparison to SSG's long
awaited IBM release of Carriers at War with its
heavy emphasis on state-of-the-art graphics
support, but so what? The look of Carrier
Strike is a big step forward and one we want to
encourage more of the same from the crew
who launched this title.
Adding to the enjoyment was an inspired,
militaristic opening theme (another first for an
SSI wargame). The music was created by newcomer Donald Griffin of Computer Music Consulting (who was inadvertently left off the
manual credits). Sound effects, too, have been
added, with enough torpedo splashes, bombs
dropping and ack-ack sounds to keep one's
ears tuned into the game. Unfortunately, the
SoundBlaster support was hard-coded into
IRQ7, leaving many owners to receive their

sound effects from their PC speaker.
The Usual Unusual Features
What new computer game would be complete without the occasional unusual "feature"
being found in it? In Carrier Strike, it is difficult to get a feel for the various operational

Review
ranges of one's strike forces except
through trial and error. Many a
strike will be launched against targets
that every man-jack in the crew
knows didn't have a snowball's
chance of reaching the sighted enemy, only to go out, head back and
have many of the planes splash down
in the drink en route. Even more annoying is to have search planes, who
should know better (particularly since
they are controlled by the game's artificial intelligence, once launched),
not quite making it back to their carriers and getting a bit wet under the
wings as their pilots try to coast their
way home on fumes. While it is difficult to say if these features are, in
fact, bugs, they certainly feel like
them and, in my opinion, perceived realism is
all that matters to most wargamers.

Harboring the Docs
Save for the tutorial, the documentation does
such a thorough job of explaining the game
that special kudos are in order. While
the game plays easier than the docs
actually read any gamer who takes a
special interest in this game will find a
wealth of information to be garnered
from a closer examination of the
documentation. The docs come replete with a comprehensive Table of
Contents, tons of tables and formulae
used in the game's programming,
maps and detailed information on all
of the ships and planes (complete
with their armor and armament). A
fine historical article by Martin Campion fleshes out a sound, complete set
of wargame rules reference notes.

For those who were expecting to see
an epic campaign game covering the
entire war in the Pacific, land and sea,
for all of WWII, don't worry. That
game is still forthcoming and very
much appears to be a combination of
the Front games and Carrier Strike.
One might venture to say that "Grigsby's Grognards" will be able to drive
right into this one with nary a glance
at the documentation.

both side's forces (the enemy forces are, of
course, estimated by the amount of activity expected). Players will have the opportunity to
sortie out that month and risk their fleets
(ships damaged in battle might be many
months before being repaired and those sunk

A Wing and a Prayer

Campaigning
The great forte of Carrier Strike, besides its quick, clean play, is the ability to link
battles together to form a campaign game.
Each campaign game consists of several
month-long turns where players are given an
intelligence estimate of enemy activities and

For those who are interested, an experimental version (1.1x) of Carrier
Strike is available on GEnie (file
#4825 on the Games RoundTable). It
adds an extended memory function
which reduces the amount of disk access time for owners of extended
memory, increases the chance for airplane landing damage based on flight time (to
penalize the overly strong second and third
strikes which can occur in the game) and puts
up a screen between the American player phase
and the combat phase during a two-player option (hiding information from the
Japanese player). Presumably, the results of these experiments will appear
both in a potential later version of
Carrier Strike and in Gary's pacific
theater wargame.

are out tor the rest of the war) or to sit and
for additional strength, forfeiting campaign points in the process. In all, the campaign is a fast, riveting little system that will
keep Carrier Strike fresh for quite a while and
give it plenty of replayability.

wait

There's no doubt in my mind that
Carrier Strike is only getting the full
attention it deserves because of the
high expectation level created by the
impending release of Carriers at War
from SSG. Carrier Strike is likely to
be overshadowed by that game's release, and that is too bad. Quite simply, the campaign feature alone
makes Carrier Strike unique among
its peers. This, combined with its
quick playing time and thorough docs will
beckon for a rightful place for this game on a
player's shelf. Frankly, no matter how many
shots are taken at this game, it has a durability
that always seems to bring it in for a safe landing.

Designer Notes

Fleet Commander

C

by Commander Alan Zimm

ommander Alan Zimm is the designer of Action Stations!, a tremendously accurate and realistic command simulation of World War H naval
combat, extremely well-rated by our readers
in spite of its lack of graphic chrome. In
this article, Alan shares the life experiences
and design considerations that led to the development of Action Stations! as well as his
upcoming Fleet Commander. Last issue,
we concentrated on the rise of Action Stations! This issue, Commander Zimm presents his initial ideas for Fleet Commander

July 1987: London, England
I've been assigned to brief the results of some
analytical work to CINCUSNAVEUR One of
the advantages of an occasional trip to London
is the chance to visit Foyle's, one of the
world's greatest bookstores. I visited with one
of my English correspondents over dinner. He
gave me a translation of the German
Kriegsmarine investigation into the loss of the
Graf Spee. It seems that they attributed the defeat to poor battery management, just as reflected in the simulation when I had modeled
the River Platte scenario! And, to top it off, he
managed to unravel the problem of the
rate-of-fire calculation — it seems that the Leander
class ammunition hoists were slower than the
minimum fire interval of the gun mount, effectively limiting the rate of fire to about 75%
of the designed rate of fire of the gun turret.
I'll bet that when we plug in that lower ROF,
the hit rate in the simulation will be dead on.

August 1987: Washington, D.C.
Dead on. I am now ready to set some objectives for the simulation. Lots of reasons. First,
by modeling the system fundamentally (rather

than abstractly), we give the player more to
think about. Pending the creation of a fully
comprehensive virtual reality in a computer,
we have to recognize that 99.9% of the fantasy
is created in the mind of the player. Graphics
help, and sound helps, but that is basically of
transitory attraction. (How many disabled the
bridge-building animation in Railroad Tycoon
after seeing it only a few short times?) The environment is triggered in the player's mind by
creating a world of sufficient detail that behaves like the real world and is self-consistent.
Second, by modeling the system fundamentally, one allows the player to explore alternatives realistically. One of the things learned
from Action Stations! was that, no matter how
much thought was put in to anticipating what
players would do, someone out there would try
something bizarre, unique, unprecedented and
probably unsanitary. Low-resolution models
can't handle every low-order mental detonation inspired by the teenager in us all. If a result is generated that is obviously incorrect or
inconsistent with the fantasy world the programmer has worked so hard to create, the
fantasy world in the mind of the player is broken and the entire simulation loses credibility.
Low-resolution modeling is subject to these
breaks. If created properly, high-resolution
modeling can handle the bizarre and reward or
penalize unusual efforts in accordance with
their merits.
One of the biggest problems with high-resolution modeling is the display of data. Assume
an air search program accounts for air clarity,
weather, smoke, dirty windshields, the pilot's
drink consumption and all the rest. The player
who wants to master the simulation will want
to work with those variables in order to maximize his performance. So, he needs two things:
first, a display of all the relevant information
and second, an understanding of the effect of
the variable on the results of the activity. In

general, if the player does not have the information displayed, he won't take it into account in his game play. Then, when the results
don't meet expectations, he will get frustrated
and accuse the game of being capricious, inaccurate and random.
Case study: an early versions of Action Stations! included a "fatigue factor," affecting gunfire rate of fire and gunfire accuracy. This was
explained in the manual, but there was no display of the current fatigue levels. We started
getting letters from folks complaining about
how their ROF and accuracy was dropping. In
a later version, we included a simple display —
"A" through "F," representing "Rested"
through "Pooped" — and converted jeers to
cheers. Seeing the factor displayed triggered
players to think about fatigue and include it in
their tactical considerations.
Right now, I'm envisioning a multi-level
game. On the fleet commander level, one
places oneself in a single ship. One is limited
to controlling the course, speed, guns and aircraft, but is visually limited to what could be
seen from one's flagship. Forces would be controlled by message traffic (radio, light and
flags).
The other level would be the "God" mode
(as in current AS!) wherein one can get all and
control all. Carrier warfare in the FC mode
would then be a combination of hide-andseek, management of intelligence and management of resources. To make the game authentic, one must include all of those elements that
impact on those decisions! For example, to
track down the enemy, one will need one's
own search assets. However, land-based search
aircraft must also be factored in. The utility of
non-organic information is based on the accuracy of the report, the accuracy of the navigation and the delay time required to get the report to the users.

Designer Notes
Signals intelligence (on both sides of the Pacific War) was also highly developed. At Midway, the Japanese carrier force was in strict radio silence to the extent that it was hampering
operations. When they were in the fog, they
had to break radio silence in order to communicate with their replenishment group — their
destroyers were desperate for fuel, and the
navigation of the replenishment group was off.
This implies several things that need to be included: group navigation inaccuracy;, communications between forces and fuel and replenishment requirements.
It also implies that if the communications requirements between forces are not properly
modeled, the imperatives for the player to
communicate are removed and thereby, this
source of intelligence is restricted. This was a
significant source of localizing information —
for example, in the Marianas battle, the U. S.
obtained several HF/DF fixes that were within
40nm of the actual position of the Japanese
carrier forces.

January 1992
You'd never believe what can put a complete
stop on a project. Gas tanks. Of all the standard references on WWII aircraft, none of them
include the size of the fuel tanks! That is kind

of critical. The problem stems from the fact
that the "range" figures are not precise. They

may differ in whether they include warm-up
time, climb to altitude, loaded or unloaded,
landing pattern time, combat time over target
and lots of other variables. Some indicate
range at cruise speed (about 75% throttle) and
some at "max endurance" speed (that'll make
about a 20% difference alone). The problem is
that references give the SBD (a USN dive
bomber) a range of about 1000 nmiles, and
yet the standard maximum "strike range" was
considered to be only about 225 nmiles! What
I'd like to do is calculate fuel flow for some
sets of conditions: loiter, cruise and military
power, each for loaded and unloaded conditions.

February 1992
I've run some calculations on fuel flows
based on a few aircraft for which I have full
data. It seems that fuel flow in combat was
about 4 to 6 times the loiter fuel flow. So, 12
minutes in combat over the target for an F4F
would burn up an hour's worth of fuel and
reduce range by about 150 nmiles. These calculations are still going to be difficult — the
data is too spotty. What I'll have to do is run
some engine horsepower and
weight-versus-fuel consumption curves for the various aircraft that I do have, and try to apply those
figures to the others.

Late February 1992: Washington, D.C.
Eureka! The archives have just the data I
need! I still need to do some conversion calculations, but at least I have some decent range
and fuel tank data. I even found a document
that gives fuel flows for U. S. Navy aircraft at
various speeds and loads. We're in business!

Sneak Preview
It, It, It Doesn't Go Any Further!
A Sneak Preview of Three-Sixty's "Theatre of War"
by Alan Emrich

and, given that Theatre of War is, arguably, "art," the question
remains "is it a good strategy game?"

"Oh, Is That What That Is!"

eave it to Three-Sixty Pacific to put the "theater" in Theatre of War, their soon-to-be-released strategy game that really must be seen to be believed. Theatre parts the curtain
on SVGA graphics (640x280, with a full 256 color palette) using
a VESA driver, with the stage set in three dimensions even as the
pawns assemble, each resembling Macbeth's "poor player that
struts and frets his hour upon the stage and then is heard no
more." The sound card, like any good orchestra, will crescendo
and decrescendo (although I'd like to kill the kettle drummer)
during the play, even as the audience is riveted to the bass soloist
speaking his lines with the clarity and authority of James Earl
Jones doing a Max Headroom impression. The dawn of each
game begins with an off-Broadway opening night tension (one
can almost hear a directorial
shout of "Action!').

There but to
Impress
Any first look at Theatre of
War will be insufficient, requiring at least a double-take. With
the only frame of reference to a
strategy game players will find
being a "board." with squares
and "pieces" standing, chesslike, in their gates, one is left to
wonder what demented decorators were sentenced to years of
hard labor with their graphics
tool kits and left alone to create
the "look" of Theatre of War. In
what can only be described as art deco poured into an ultra-contemporary mold, the sliding, spinning pieces do move gracefully
across the stage. Telling the players without a scorecard, however,
takes some time, for they are so stylized that recognition is a
learned process and not an intuitive experience. In this regard, the
SVGA graphic alchemy, poured by the magical and crafty hands
of Grant Campbell, Rick Banks and Bob Monagham, seems designed to supersede the game in the box, rather than to support it.
While this savory eye-candy is tasty (and won't rot your teeth)

"Art for art's sake" is a nice rallying cry for artists, but "games
for gaming's sake" might be the plea from designers Rick Banks
and Paul Butler. After adapting to the almost visceral visuals, it is
time to crack this game, piece-by-piece, like so many walnuts in a
tensely hushed room. I greeted each discovery of: a) what a piece
actually is; b) what that piece actually does and, even more importantly, c) how to get it to perform a desired action, with a silencebreaking inner cheer of joyous discovery. It is a fascinating process, to say the least, and not one without its rewards. Learning all
of the pieces and their nuances in each of the three sets provided
is a chore, but the siren-like glitz offers so much promise that one
is compelled deeper into the game. If the value of a good thing is
to have done it, I'm glad that I rode out the learning curve which
I perceived as being too long for a "simple" strategy game. In the
end, it was worth it.

From Pawns to
Pugilists
Each of the three sets of
pieces is the focal point for several unique scenarios. The first
set features medieval pieces and
includes: pawns, swordsmen,
archers, a chariot, catapult and
your emperor. Here, hand-tohand combat is stressed as there
are only the two missile unit
types available. Instead, most
battles are resolved as units enter the same space as an opponent, at which time the pieces
animate and slowly grind each
other down. Like the pieces
themselves, watching the animations took some getting used to, but following the two information bars for each piece, strength and endurance, brought me
back into the realm of strategy gaming quickly enough. Battles are
fascinating, moment-by-moment attritional experiences, save for
the occasional decisive missile shot which (as one might expect)
can completely destroy some units. Units do not die quietly,
ever, as the titanic "oooph!" sound akin to James Earl Jones being
slugged in the stomach so amply punctuates. When this happens
to your emperor, the war is lost.

Sneak Preview
The two other sets of pieces include the Great War World War
1) set and a contemporary set. Naturally, the World War 1 set
includes early tanks, machine ["gattling" (sic)] guns, soldiers and
one heavy artillery piece. A player's general and supply tents
round out the logistical end of the piece mix. The contemporary
set centers on a player's "base" piece, supported by two critical
radar units, linking together the fire of missile launchers and
scramble fighters. There are also tanks and a "knock out" bomber
unit. Each set presents an entirely different style of warfare, requiring different strategies and tactics in order to succeed. Actually, it might be better described as saying that each set is an
entirely different game, each sharing some common features, but
quite individual in their own right.

Playing the Strategy Side Up
There's a limited amount of "wargaminess" to Theatre of War,
but not much. The squares come in three terrain types (which can
become degraded either deliberately or through combat and can
also be improved by one's pieces). Both movement and logistics
slow down over harsh terrain. Logistics? Well, yes, sort of. While
much of the game centers around protecting one's own emperor/general/base while knocking out the opponent's, as units
wear themselves out, they can "rest" and recuperate their strength
(or resupply their missiles). To this end, an effective line of
smooth squares back to the player's "king" piece will ease matters
considerably. Some pieces can sleep out in the field, but most
come home to roost (er, rest). Fairly simple stuff for wargamers,
but it will add new elements to those who are attracted to Theatre
of War primarily because it looks like a wild Chess variant.

Solitaire Puzzles
Each scenario, when played against the computer opponent, is
more of a puzzle than a game. More akin to different 'levels" in
Lemmings, they get progressively harder and one will do well to
learn them in order. Once mastered, the challenge they offer for
repeat play is negligible, since they become, in effect, "cracked."
Fortunately, each set of pieces had ten to fifteen scenarios in the
beta copy examined, ranging from enemies who stand perfectly
still (to give players a chance to adapt to the interface, thank
goodness) to those who are particularly clever or vicious. So what
should players do after running the gauntlet of all these scenarios?

Human Connections
Play another human, of course! Two players can play on the
same computer taking "turns" of from one to sixty seconds.
When the time is up, the player must cease issuing orders and
pass the machine to the other player. Fortunately, Theatre of War
is another in the growing list of modem playable games. A strategy game with a Chess-like nature such as Theatre of War will
probably be a natural for the growing legions of modem strategy
gamers. While the modem interface was a bit rough (but working) on the beta copy previewed, assurances from the design team
indicate that it will be smoother when the finished product is
shipped.

Game Design Philosophy 101
One design philosophy clear) permeates Theatre of War, and
that is "graphics abet- interface. The Populous-like "orders" icons

(mercifully tied into "generic" hot keys for each piece set) and the
spiffy, rolling 3-D map views are perfect examples. While this
"entertainment mode" is something to look at, it will not be an
intense gamer's first choice for serious play. Fortunately, for the
more "serious" gamer, a 2-D overhead version of the map can be
selected for display. It can be zoomed down as far as one single
square, or out to the size of the entire playing surface. Unfortunately, while in this 2-D "player's mode," important information
access is lost pertaining to unit strengths and fatigue, which are
included in the limited perspective "entertainment mode." Therefore, the serious player has a dilemma; either observe the entire
map or know what his unit's strengths are. Not a satisfactory state
of affairs, that.
Since this article is a preview of an unreleased game, much may
yet be changed prior to its arrival on the store shelves. It is the
purpose of a preview to give the reader insight into the "look and
feel of a forthcoming product and some of the underlying design
philosophies behind its foundations. Theatre of War is a difficult
game to describe, because so much of the package is "look and
feel" that readers will still almost be required to go to their local
software store to experience it first hand. It is the kind of product
that was made for a traveling salesperson's "dog and pony" show
type promotion. I suspect that the same people who bought Wing
Commander to show off their computer's "muscle" will be in line
for Theatre of War once they see it (and they will probably be
pleasantly surprised that there is a decent game in the package,
too). Hard core strategists are more likely to find themselves in a
quandary; for behind all the glitzy "theater" in Theatre of War,
behind the interface, there seems to be the makings of an interesting strategy game that was made for head-to-head play.

Industry News

What Is Senseless Violence?
by Johnny L. Wilson
lthough we are sometimes accused of
such, we have no desire for CGW to
come the official arbiter of computer game mores. We must be doing something right because we get assailed on one
hand for "worrying" over the inconsequential
violence in an arcade-style game while, during
the same period, we are set up as "straw man"
representing "immorality" in computer games
on a nationally syndicated radio program. Our
editor's advocacy of a system where software
publishers would standardize upon a voluntary
rating system (before state legislatures decided
to "rate" games involuntarily) brings protests
that we are advocating a system where artistic
freedom will be threatened, rather than suggesting a solution where artistic freedom could
be protected. Yet, at the same time, we have
been criticized for publishing screen shots of
scantily clad women and unsavory situations
when we were covering games filled with scantily clad women and unsavory situations. Our
critics do not seem to understand that a primary reason for covering games in the first
place is so that readers can decide whether a
game is for them or not. Obviously, we did
our job too well.
With all of this under consideration, this editorial is not being written to nominate CGW
as the industry's ethical umpire. Nevertheless,
any thinking person (not defined simply as
those who agree with this editor or a
consensus of our readership) ought to have the opportunity to ask questions, prod thinking and
challenge the "accepted" ways in which computer games (or anything else) are created.
Such discussion may actually lead to more
creative ways of dealing with authentic human
issues. At the very least, they may affirm the
"accepted" ways of crafting these products.
This particular discussion was prompted by a
frivolous use of violence in an upcoming computer game. We shall not identify the game by
name, because it could change substantially or
be shaped more sensitively before it actually
reaches the market. It featured a huge
mechanoid trying to destroy wave after wave
of miniature homo-sapien soldiers. The
mechanoid stomped on these little soldiers and
shot them with its weaponry, setting their
tanks and helicopters on fire and even riddling
paratroopers into pulpy masses by the time
they reached the ground. These little bitty soldiers exploded into volcanic eruptions of blood

an absolutely sure hit for all the wrong reasons. Garners will rave about the "cute" little
animations (where itty-bitty humans are dying) and the life-like movements of the
mechanoid. They will love the detailed graphics and the feeling of absolute power when
maneuvering the mechanoid. Yet, the game
visually presents a violent scenario where, in
an unrealistic manner and in total contradiction to the realistic-looking blood, death is
symbolically trivialized.
Admittedly, the game may say something entirely different when the designer gives the
player a motive and builds a fiction around
which these human wave battles will occur,
but at first glance, the game allows the player
to use unlimited ammunition and ruthless tactics to destroy as many humans as possible.
One has to wonder what this says about the
value of human life. I mean, we're no longer
talking about slaughtering the aliens of some
sci-fi scenario in gleeful xenocide (pun intended), we're talking about the entertaining
slaughter of human representations.
One of CGW's editors was playing an updated three-dimensional version of an old action game classic. In the new version, one kills
human enemies in a life-like first-person perspective. He showed this game to a non-gamer
who was horrified. Suddenly, our staffer realized that he had not been offended because he
still thought of the exercise as a "game" and of
the enemies as the stick-figures they had been
in the classic version of the game. "What are
we saying," asked my colleague, "when we depict life-like carnage in a game where the design is geared for you to kill nearly everyone
you encounter?"
I think that the current state of game design

dangerously understates the inadequacy of violent solutions to human problems. When we
design games that force the player character to
shoot his/her way out with no chance to reflect on who is being shot or why, we are reinforcing the concept that life is cheap, advocating to a lesser or greater degree the use of
senseless violence. I do not believe we need to
remove violence altogether, but that we do
need some "action" equivalents to the little
boy in Wasteland Most of us shot the rabid
dog (we only know of one person who managed to get out of the situation without shooting the dog) and faced a little boy chasing us,
crying and shouting to any who would listen
that we had shot his dog.
I know "shoot-outs" are a heroic metaphor
of the individual against all odds. Even my
nine year old son knows that they are an arcade convention where the enemies are meant
to be abstractions. As he wrote in his journal,
"I get to play games where you get to kill a
lot. My mom calls them shoot-'em-ups. I call
them fun." Nevertheless, when real weapons
are used, they are not used on abstractions. I
would like to see games where player characters may alienate entire villages or groups if
they happen to kill, maim or alienate a nonplayer character that was neutral or coming to
help the player's group. I want there to be
consequences. I want player characters to meet
some widows or widowers and surviving children of those wrongfully killed. I want player
characters to pick up the pieces after a firefight
or try to get "Hero Insurance" to pay for incidental damage when they destroy buildings
and artifacts during a melee. Maybe the
hero/heroine should be indicted occasionally
and face a trial, leading to an ending that is
not desired. Perhaps, the protagonist should
have more non-violent options, a Hopalong
Cassidy option where cartridges in the fire distract the gang of bad guys long enough to escape without shooting or The Shadow option
where one turns the bad guy's conscience
upon himself. One thing I do believe is that
violence without consequences is a bald-faced
lie. At times, it is more deplorable than others,
but the entertainment software industry (like
the film, television and comics industries)
needs to rethink the message we're sending.
(To be continued)

