I

VOL. 3 NO. 2

Mar.-Apr. 1983

Features
SOME READER COMMENT

9

Comments from R.I.D.s

COMPUTER GAMES IN 1983
A Report on CES and HIA

COSMIC BALANCE

10
Russell Sipe

Tactics and Ship Design

14
Floyd Mathews

An Overview of the Series

18
David P. Stone

ZORK!
ULTIMA II
The Revenge of the Enchantress

LATCH ONTO THE BULL
The "Bear" Facts about MILLIONAIRE

ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT RESULTS

23
James A. McPherson
26
Johnny L. Wilson
30

Results of CGW's 2nd Annual Tourney

LISTEN TO THE MOCKINGBOARD
Sound and Speech for the Apple II

EPIDEMIC
"An Apple (or PC) a day. . ."

READER INPUT

33
Thomas Cleaver
39
Valerie Trott
48

Game Ratings of the Past 10 Months

Departments
Letters

2

Inside the Industry

3

Hobby and Industry News

3

Real World Gaming

4

Taking a peek

5

Atari Arena

20

The Learning Game

36

Microcomputer Mathemagic

38

Micro Reviews

41

Reader Input Device

48

Dear Editor:
I am an avid gamer and have
been for all but a few early years of
my life. I advanced through the various levels of the gaming world
much like any other gamer my age,
and I faced the same dreaded
problems what with the lack of
opponents and the mounds of
paperwork involved with role-playing. Therefore it was only natural
that I realize the potential of the
computer in this area. However all
the computer related magazines
began to drift more into the technical aspects of computing and a
well written detailed review of gaming software became harder to find.
Then came COMPUTER GAMING
WORLD. Long had I wished for just
such a magazine and I pounced on
a subscription faster than a starving
dog on a ham hock. I have read
and re-read every issue thus far and
I look forward to each new issue
impatiently. However, of late I have
began to fear that you too will be
drifting to a more technical aspect
rather than staying with your namesake. There have been several hints
in various articles that you may
indeed include articles of a technical nature and although it may be
selfish, I hope you will refrain from
doing so. There are multitudinous
articles on that end of computing
in other magazines and as a result I
do not subscribe to them but I buy
them one issue at a time depending upon interest. You are the official voice of the computer gamer
and as such are filling a void inherent in us all. Please try to keep it that
way lest we drown in a sea of
technicalities.
Another bothersome area for me
is the sniveling rivalry between
computer enthusiasts. There is the
APPLE group, the ATARI group, the
TRS-80 group, the PET group, and
lord knows what others. Many times I
have felt that I am personally being
chastised because I happen to own
an APPLE II PLUS. I have nothing
against ATARI, TRS-80, or PET owners.
Why do they insist upon making
snide remarks about the APPLE II
PLUS? For example there are three
such remarks of childish rivalry in the

READER COMMENTS, page 43 of
your VOL. 2 No. 5 issue, I quote,
"There is a senseless preference
shown for APPLES and ATARIS over
the TRS-80 graphic junkies."; "Too
many games are first developed for
the APPLE then converted to the
ATARI. ATARI users must then suffer
with sub-par graphics and sound";
and "Go monthly and put in some
ATARI articles, This past issue had
more for the ATARI than other. But
APPLE users have enough magazines of their own without giving
them 3/4ths of this one also"
un-quote,
Competing for top honors in the
'My computer is better than yours"
contest does nothing to further the
hobby of computer gaming, but a
little understanding and co-operation could make quite a difference. I
agree that when it comes to software and software reviews practically every computer system except
for the APPLE suffers. The question is,
who do you blame for this problem?
The editors cannot justifiably be
blamed as they rely heavily on outside contributions, so who on the
outside can be blamed? Is it reasonable to lay the blame on the
ATARI users because there is an
insufficient amount of good software and/or software reviews for the
TRS-80? Of course not. The only people who can be blamed are the
users themselves. Someone has to
write the software and the reviews,
therefore if the PET users feel left out
then they must accept the responsibility of doing something to correct
the situation. The same would hold
true for any computer system and
the users of that system.
I would like to see the computer
enthusiasts of today come together
in friendship and co-operation to
make the hobby as exciting and
rewarding as it can be. While there is
nothing wrong with loyalty to a particular computer system, detrimental comments about other computer systems can easily be avoided
and should be, for they serve no useful purpose.
Stephen Stahl
Brazoria, TX

Dear Editor:
Thank you for promoting Robotwar activities. It is a game that
requires continuing competition
with other players to be fully
appreciated.
I was very frustrated when I found
out I'd missed your first tournament. I
couldn't rest until I'd organized a
local tournament, which we've
been holding every 2 months ever
since. Richard Fowell, creator of
"Norden", is one of our club
members. We are currently holding
our tournaments at Rainbow Computing Inc. 9719 Reseda Blvd., Northridge, California.
Concluding there must be others
in this great country that might be
searching for Robotwar
competin.Ialsrgzd"pot
Robotwar tournament. It is held the
1st of every month with a $4 entry
fee to cover prizes and postage.
Anyone interested may receive rules
and mailing instructions from:
Frank Krogh
P.O. Box 5337
North Hollywood, CA 91616
We've had 3 postal tournaments
as of December 1st, 1982. The
winners were: "Stalker" by Pat
Bachelder from Andrews, TEX;
"Norden2" by Richard Fowell from
Palos Verdes Estates, CAL; "Samoth"
by Tom Schai from Roseville, MINN.
Good luck on your 2nd Annual
Robotwar tournament.
Frank Krogh

INSIDE THE INDUSTRY
by Dana Lombardy,
Associate Publisher Game Merchandising

Last issue we listed almost 400
different new game software titles
that were released in 1982. Looking
at the data provided by the survey
forms returned from the computer
game publishers, we find some
interesting facts.
Out of over 150 computer game
software publishers, 81 listed their
1982 game releases, 6 were still
active but had no new game
releases, one was out of business,
and one was no longer publishing
game software. 69 were sent forms
but never replied, despite two
separate requests. Of the 81
responding, a total of 394 games
were produced in 1982 (about 5
games per company). If we assume
that at least 60 of the nonresponding companies also had
game releases last year, that would
bring the total number of computer
software games published in 1982
to 694!
A list of the 30 most prolific game
software publishers follows. Even
when including the games from
none-reporting companies, these
30 software publishers (20% of the

HOBBY AND
INDUSTRY NEWS
Broderbund Software, Inc. has entered the
CARTRIDGE game market with its first two Atari
cartridge releases: CHOPLIFTER! and SERPENTINE.
Both games are 16K.
Broderbund also announced its entry into the
VIC-20 market with three cassette programs
MARTIAN RAIDER, SHARK TRAP, and
MULTISOUND SYNTHESIZER. All three programs are
for the unexpanded VIC-20 and have suggested
retail prices of $19.95.
THE GAMES NETWORK, a
computer-gasbylcompn,hasredtulofis
Iwo month charter membership drive ( November
1, 1982 - January 1, 1983). According to Thom
Keith, Executive Vice President of Network Affairs,
"a total of 190 systems signed charter membership reservations, 166 systems signed charter
agreements and an additional 11 systems
became affiliates." During the first two weeks of
January, 103 more systems signed on, bringing
the total to 470 systems; representing a potential
of over five million subscribers. The Games
Network will go "on line" in September.
SubLOGIC has announced the release of their
game, "NIGHT MISSION" PINBALL for the IBM PC.
The game will run on any IBM PC with 64K and an

game manufacturers) account for
nearly half of all game releases in
1982. In fact, just counting the top
ten on the list shows that these firms
(7% of the industry) account for
one-quarter of all 1982 game
software releases.
It must be noted that this list does
not rank the companies by their

size or the number of any one
particular game sold. Some of the
publishers with only a few game
releases in 1982 had tremendously
successful titles. This list is just one of
several methods of measuring
America's most rapidly-growing
hobby: computer gaming.
The 30 Most Prolific Computer
Game Publishers of 1982
Number of
Releases
22
20
19
18
15
14
13
13

Publisher
Avalon Hill
Atari Program exchange
Thorn EMI Video
Datamost Inc.
Spectral Associates
Epyx/Automated Simulations
Adventure International
Broderbund Software Inc.

IBM Color/Graphics Monitor Adapter. It will be
available on disk and sell for $39.95.
McKelvie Programs, P.O. Box 53076, Phila., PA
19105, has released GAMEMASTER, a new
program for the Timex-Sinclair and ZX-81
computers. GameMaster is a control and record
keeping system for role-playing fantasy adventure games. It is compatible with TSR's
Dungeons and Dragons role-playing game.

13
13
13
11
11
11
9
9
7
7
6
6
6
6
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

Futureview Inc.
Gebelli Software Inc.
Sirius Software Inc.
Hayden software
Strategic Simulations Inc.
United Microware Industries
Artworx Software Co. Inc.
Sierra On-Line Inc.
Datasoft Inc.
Synergistic Software
Avant-Garde Creations
Insoft Inc.
Sublogic Communications
Syncro Inc.
C&C Software
Computer Kinetics Corp.
Creative Software
Instant Software
Micro Lab
Spinnaker Software
Swiftly Software Inc.
Synapse Software

(The remaining 51 companies
that reported publishing games in
1982 had four or fewer titles
released.)

as a character's gold, experience, attributes,
spells, and other items that Wizardry players
need printed.
Two more new releases from Sir-tech are PITS
OF PERIL, an arcade game for the Apple II (48K),
and POLICE ARTIST, a childrens game which is
basically a face recognition program for ages 7
to 14.

Michael C. Katz , former vice president of
marketing and corporate communications at
Coleco Industries, has been named president
and chief executive officer of EPYX Sunnyvale,
CA.

Penguin Software has announced that, as of
March 1, 1983, they will be lowering the price of
their games to $19.95. This will include both their
old titles and their new ones (Thunderbombs
and Crime Wave).

Automated Simulations/EPYX has updated its
computer football game, TUESDAY MORNING
QUARTERBACK to reflect the 1982 football season. The game is available on disk for the TRS-80
(48K) and the Apple II (48K). It sells for $29.95.

Softwaire Centre International now has 22
franchises opened or under construction nationally. Over 100 locations may be secured by June,
according to their president, Glen Johnson.

Automated Simulations/EPYX have also expanded their line of products for the VIC-20. The
new additions are SWORD OF FARGOAL; RESCUE
AT RIGEL; CRUSH, CRUMBLE AND CHOMP!:
MONSTER MAZE; and RICOCHET. The first three
are 16K cassettes with a suggested retail price of
$29.95. Monster Maze is available on cartridge
and retails for $39.95, while Ricochet is 8K on
cassette for $19.95.
Sir-tech has announced the release of the
third WIZARDRY scenario, LEGACY OF
LLYLGAMYN. Also out for Wizardry is WIZIPRINT, a
printout utility designed to print such information

Infocom, Inc. and Osborne Computer Corp.
have announced an agreement that paves the
way for Osborne to distribute the full line of
Infocom's entertainment software.
Avalon Hill has added three new titles to their
list of games for the IBM PC. COMPUTER FOOTBALL
STRATEGY, VC, and B-1 NUCLEAR BOMBER all
require 48K and sell for $21.00, $25.00, and $21.00
respectively.

Continued on p.40

REAL
WORLD
GAMING

PROGRAMMING
For those who may have joined
this series late, here is a brief recap
of the previous installments.
A simulation game is a game that
mimics a real world field of interest.
It can allow players to experience
some of the excitement of being
anything from a stunt pilot to a millionaire businessman. In the last
three issues we have covered the
System Definition, Data Collection
and Model Development phases in
constructing a simulation game.
System Definition is the first step. It
is similar to making an outline of
your subject for a speech or an article. You define a "system boundary"
that tells what things are "inside
elements" and what things are
"outside influences". At this point
you also list the relationships between
the elements of the system.
Next comes Data Collection
where you observe and investigate
the system you have chosen as the
basis for a game. You try to answer
the questions "How often do things
happen?", "What quantity of things
occur?" and "How do things affect
other things?".
In Model Development you take
all the pieces of information that
you collected about your system
and "boil them down" to probabilities, averages and ranges. All outcomes and relationships have to
end up as some form of numeric
data or you can't use them in your
game.
Now that everyone is up to date

we are ready for the next step
—Progamin.
Although this phase
does include actual computer programming, it involves much more
than just writing code in your favorite language. You are now faced
with the job of designing a GAME!
Up until now we have talked about
developing a simulation model. This
model (if done well) should be a fair
representation of what things are
like in the real world. But, just as
animation by itself does not make a
good arcade game, a good simulation game needs more than simply
a model!
The previous three sections of this
column covered some of the technical aspects of the design of a simulation game. The information presented was mostly objective since
systems simulation is based on
scientific methods. However, the
design of a game is more of an art
than a science. There are very few
rules and even those are occasionally broken to produce good games.
So, the things I present here cannot
be footnoted and referred to in a
text book. They are "approaches"
that others and myself have used to
create games.
One approach uses a tool called
a story-board. This is a script of the
game as it will be experienced by
the players. The story-board will help
you examine the flow of the game
before you spend a lot of time writing the program. Included in the
story-board are all of the main features you will use in your game. This
information will allow you and others to better imagine what it will be
like to play your game. It is easier to
revise your design to fix any problems at this point than later when
you are chasing program bugs.
One main element the storyboard helps you visualize is how the
players will interact with the model.
From the standpoint of the model
design, the key question previously
was "How does the system function?". Now you have to decide
"How will the players affect the system?". The player interaction with
the system can be thought of as
their decisions. There is some rela-

Dan Bunten

tionship between the number of
decisions you allow the players and
the realism of the simulation. But it is
not a simple relationship. Participants in real life systems typically
(though not always) have numerous alternatives open to them.
However, it is not necessary to give
players all the options the system
can support to make a realistic
game. For instance in a business
game I wrote, Cartels & Cutthroats,
only seven decisions were needed
by players to manage their hypothetical companies. Obviously, in
the real world there are many more
factors for a corporate president to
analyze. However, for playability it
was more important that the decisions made be direct and simple.
Even with this small number of inputs
it was possible to create a very realistic "feel" through a mixture of randomness and factor influence.
Thus, to complete your game
design you need to know how many
and what types of decisions players
will have to make. You must also
plan how they will input the information. Although a keyboard provides
the greatest flexibility, serious consideration should be given to game
input devices. Paddles and joysticks
are a lot less intimidating than a
keyboard to almost everyone. In
addition, from a programming point
of view it is often easier to flag bad
inputs from a joystick than to catch
a bad key press or misspelled word.
Input is only half of the player
interaction of your game. The other
part is the output from the system to
player. Although it is possible to
produce a simulation game where
all of the output is in the form of text,
my own experience indicates this
may not be desirable. In 1979 I wrote
a football game, Computer Quarterback that was based on exhaustive research on the outcomes of
combinations of offensive and defensive plays. For each running play
against each defense I derived five
values that were used to generate
outcomes. For each passing play
there were seven variables used to
determine the outcome against
each defense. Overall, this model
Continued on p.47

In addition to games mentioned elsewhere
in this issue, the following products have been
received by CGW. Some of these products will
receive more detailed attention in future issues.
Readers wishing to review any of these
products should contact CGW.
Adventure International
Box 3435
Longwood, FL 32750
MACES & MAGIC #2—THE STONE OF
SISYPHUS: A graphics/text adventure game
by Chameleon Software. Several of its unusual features include a well executed
coded hint sheet and very large numbers of
potential weapons and types of armor. Atari
(48K), Apple II, TRS-80.

Avalon Hill Game Co.
4517 Harford Rd.
Baltimore, MD 21214
ALIEN: A computer game based on the
theme of the movie of the same name. The
alien, which will metamorphose to more
deadly forms as time goes on must be
detected then captured or destroyed. Apple
II. $28.00
GFS SORCERESS: The first in a continuing
series of games based on the saga of Joe
Justin and Selena Sakarov. A two-word text
adventure game. In addition to the disk and
rule book you get "Restless Universe" a fictional story that introduces the adventure
and the "Galactic Federation Naval Officer's
Manual."

CBS Software
Hagerstown, MD 21740
K-RAZY KRITTERS: A Space Invaders type
game for the Atari 400/800. 10 levels of play.
Cartridge.
Funsoft
28611 Canwood St.
Agoura, CA 91301
TIME RUNNER: Similar to a maze-chase
game, TR involves the hand-eye skills of
running around a maze and the strategy
skills of surrounding parts of the maze to gain
points. Wrap your trail around a box and get
so many points. Atari 400/800 disk or tape
(16K). $29.95
Hexcraff Inc.
P.O. Box 39
Cambridge, MA 02238
GENESIS - THE ADVENTURE CREATOR: Here is
a real sleeper. Game generating programs
are becoming more and more popular (e.g.
The Arcade Machine, Pinball Construction
Kit). Genesis is an adventure game generator. In "The Creator" portion of the program
you create your map, objects, commands,
and text. You can create your own custom
adventures. We like it. Apple II (Atari, IBM PC,
Comm64 coming). $49.00
Howard W. Sams & Co.
4300 W. 62nd St.
Indianapolis, IN 46268
CAVES OF OLYMPUS: A hi-res adventure
game using two-word command format.

You must explore the Caves in search of a
spaceship with which to escape the Laren.
Animation and sound effects are nice
additions to the standard adventure game
format used in COO. Apple II.

MUSIC GAMES: Using the reinforcement
technique of learning, Music Games teaching the elements of music. Categories of
games/lessons are: Ear Training, Listening,
Note Recognition, and Rhythm. The hi-res
program even includes Bach's "Solfeggietto"
at a tempo of your choosing. Apple II.
(lmagic
P.O. Box 2055
Saratoga, CA 95070
DEMON ATTACK: (lmagic has translated their
popular Demon Attack Atari VCS game to
the Atari 400/800. The cartridge based
arcade game is well done graphically,
however the game design itself is nothing
new (basic Phoenix type game). Game
variations allow two player games, advanced games, and tracer shots that can be
controlled after firing. Atari 400/800
William Kaufmann, Inc.
95 First St.
Los Altos, CA 94022
AWHAT'SOFUNYBCMPTERS:
book of cartoons by S. Harris. The Cartoons
cover such subjects as artificial intelligence,
invasion of privacy, and home computer
applications. $6.95 in paperback.

Metacomet Software
P.O.Box 31337
Hartford, CT 06103
THE PROGRAMMABLE CUBE: A simulator and
game based on the popular Rubik's Cube .
The simulator shows all six sides and simulates
motion for each move. A complete solver
guides the user step by step through the
solution of any scrambled cube. The program
uses a simple-to-learn special programming
language. Apple II.
Mirror Images Software
1223 Peoples Ave.
Troy, NY 12180
Color Graphics Adapter necessary on all Mirror
Images IBM games.
HEXTACY: A symbolic ' territorial war game
with some similarities to the Oriental game
GO. However, unlike GO, "stones" need not
be exclusively surrounded by one's opponent's stones. A stone surrounded by more
than one player's stones is captured by the
player with the most stones surrounding said
stone. The significant thing about Hextacy is
that it can be played by up to three players
plus the computer as the four player. Apple
and IBM PC. $34.95

HIDE AND SINK: You play against the computer in this sea war game. There are three
versions of play: Standard H&S, Super H&S,
and Super-Salvo H&S. The standard version is
basically a souped-up computerized version
of the pencil and paper game "Battleship".
Your ships are hidden on a 10x10 grid and
the enemy takes shots trying to hit your
hidden ships while in your turn you try to hit
his hidden ships. "Super" and "Super-Salvo"
add missiles and increased firepower. A
nighttime option makes sighting more
challenging. Apple and IBM PC. $34.95
SPYDER: A arcade game of invading the
cave of the Arachnid King. Play involves
shooting descending Spyders, stooping
crawling Spyders, and destroying eggs. The
number of points awarded for each Spyder
or egg killed depends on such factors as how
you killed it and where it was at the time. IBM
PC.
TACHYON: An arcade game with elements
of the old "Star Trek" computer games. The
galaxy is divided up into 25 quadrants. Each
quadrant contains one of the following:
refueling station, space storm, blackhole,
enemy fighters. Action within a quadrant is
executed in arcade like action as you use
your lasers and torpedoes to survive. IBM PC.

Muse Software
347 N. Charles St.
Baltimore, MD 21201
THE CAVERNS OF FREITAG: This is going to be
a popular game. According to some of the
people at Muse TCOF is better than their
popular Castle Wolfenstein. We agree. TCOF
is an underground fantasy adventure in
which you work your way through a large
maze to seek out and destroy the evil dragon
Freitag. You can select from three different
display modes. The three modes allow you to
get a variety of overhead views: from close/
detailed to far/plain. Other features include
spells, increasing rank, selectable speed and
level of play. Apple II.
Nexa Corp.
P.O. Box 26468
San Francisco, CA 94126-6468
CAPTAIN COSMO: An arcade game that
has similarities to Defender but has the
appearance of a children's game. Both the
fiction and graphics of the game seem to be
geared to youngsters. You as the good
Captain must turn the grumpy Munchies into
happy Smilies with your Somanizer ray.
Spacey Stacey and Devious Dan attempt to
thwart you. However the appearance of the
game notwithstanding, at advanced levels
CC is just as challenging as any arcade style
game. Apple II. $35.00

Penguin Software
830 4th Ave.
Geneva, IL 60134
PIE-MAN: A "different" kind of arcade game.
You are working in an automated bakery
(we don't know why your job hasn't been
automated). You must take the pies as they
come out of the conveyor, put whipped
cream and a cherry on them then take the
finished pie to the pie bin. Sacks of flour,
greasy floors, and tipsy wedding cake bakers
make your job more difficult. Apple II. $19.95.
Note: It is nice when companies add little
extras to their products or packaging. In the
case of Penguin Software, they take their
mascot(s), penguin(s), and situate him/
them in the artwork in a manner related to
the game. In Pie-Man the penguins wear
baker's hats.
SPY'S DEMISE: A arcade game in which you,
the spy, attempt to reach the top floor of the
Russian diplomacy mission and capture an
encoded message. Play involves crossing
each floor while avoiding the guards. Each
floor contains parts of the encoded message.
When all parts are gathered you can crack
the code and send the answer to Penguin. If
you are the first person from a state of the
U.S.A. or Canadian province, or other country
to solve the puzzle you can win a Spy's
Demise T-Shirt from Penguin. Apple II. $19.95.
Note: The penguins are wearing "spy" coats.

TRANSYLVANIA: A hi-res two-word adventure
game in which you rescue your basic
damsel-intr.Gphcsaewldon.ApI
$19.95. Note: the penguin runs away from the
haunted mansion, eyes covered in fear.
Rena-Soft
1070 Shary Circle
Concord, CA 94518
ARTESIANS: A four-level arcade game in
which you attempt to steal water-filled jugs
from the fourth floor ("it's the water" you
know). The first level is a Pac-Man like maze.
Level two involves crossing conveyer belts
and walkways (Frogger). Level three involves
negotiating moving gears and barrels
(Donkey Kong). The fourth level is where you
fill your jars. Apple II. $34.95

Strategic Simulations
883 Stierlin Rd. Bld, A-200
Mountain View, CA 94043-1983
GALACTIC ADVENTURES: A science fiction
adventure game with spaceship and manto-man combat. Based on the Galactic
Gladiators game, GA expands the scope of
GG while providing the ability to design
adventure campaigns for others to play.
Apple II. $39.95

Sierra On-Line
36575 Mudge Ranch Rd.
Coarsegold, CA 93614
CROSSFIRE: The IBM PC version of the popular
arcade/strategy game. You must destroy
aliens before they destroy you as you make
your way around the city streets. $29.95
ULYSSES: The IBM PC version of Hi-Res
Adventure #4. You are Ulysses in this twoword adventure game. You must retrieve the
Golden Fleece. Two disks. Documentation is
beautiful, $39.95
Soft Images
200 Route 17
Mahwah, NJ 07430
BLACK JACK STRATEGY: A totally new Black
Jack program by Norman Wazaney Jr. This
one is much more user oriented than
BLACKJACK MASTER (TRS-80, see review in
2.2). The program includes the game, a
black jack tutor, and a simulator in which
you can try out your strategies. The system
provides step-by-step instructions to help
raise the player's level of skill—without relying
on card counting, Apple II. $69.95
PANDEMONIUM: A word game for the Apple
and TRS-80. The object of the game is to
place twenty-five randomly generated let-

ters onto a five-by-five playing board matrix
in order to construct three, four, and five letter
words. There are several game variations
available. Any number from one to a full
party can play. S39.95
SINGLES' NIGHT AT MOLLY'S: Two solitaire
card games make up SNAM. Royal Flush uses
a 5x5 matrix and 25 randomly drawn cards.
The object is to place the cards onto the
matrix in such a way as to achieve the
highest possible score. Sly Fox is a computer
version of the 2 deck solitaire game which
requires more skill than luck to win. Apple II.
S29.95
Sirius Software
10364 Rockingham Dr.
Sacramento, CA 95827
FLIP OUT: A nice little strategy game in which
a hi-res screen of gates open and close to
trap or release marbles which must be made
to fall to the bottom of the playing field. A
mental challenge. There are nine different
playing "fields". Apple II. Atari.
WAVY NAVY: A Space Invaders type game in
which your ship rides giant waves while trying
to shoot down enemy aircraft. The wavy
effect adds the challenge of varying the
distance to the enemy aircraft. Underwater
mines must also be avoided. Apple II. Atari.

SubLOGIC Corp.
713 Edgebrook Dr.
Champaign, IL 61820
NIGHT MISSION PINBALL: The Atari version of
NMPB is now out. An 18pg. Adjustment
Manual comes with the game to customize
it to your liking. See micro-review in 3.1. S34.95

THESEUS AND THE MINOTAUR: A 3-D full color
maze game in which you must rescue the
princess Ariadne. Not nearly as detailed as
Wizardry but somewhat better for graphics.
The creatures appear in the maze itself,
rather than in a separate window. Apple II.

Xerox Education Publications
Computer Software Div.
Middletown, CT 06457
TSR Hobbies, Inc.
P.O. Box 756
Lake Geneva, WI 53147
DAWN PATROL: DP has promise as a more
detail flight/combat simulator in the tradition
of SubLOGIC'S Flight Simulator and British Air
Ace. However it takes time to learn the
system and the upper wing is positioned
realistically but annoyingly right across your
forward line of sight. Apple II.
DUNGEON: A computerized version of their
popular board game of the same name. As
a solo adventure forget it. As a multi-player
game (up to eight can play) in which each
player is vying for the same treasures,
Dungeon is worthwhile. Good graphics and
packaging. Apple II.

OLD IRONSIDES: For some time now we have
wanted to see a good "Fighting Sail" era
naval game incorporating many of the
elements of "Wooden Ships and Iron Men",
Avalon Hill's award winning board game on
fighting sail. Although Old Ironsides is not as
detailed as the AH board game, it does an
excellent job of recreating the "feel" of naval
combat under sail power. The two ships each
have six guns per side and six rounds of
power. Guns can be eliminated. Powder is
used up. Powder is replaced at a rate slower
than you fire rate therefore you must keep an
eye on your ammo. You can sail off in the fog
and fire from it's safety. All-in-all a very good
game of which we hope to share more in our
next issue. Apple II. S39.95
STICKYBEAR BOP: An animated shooting
gallery of Stickybears, ducks, planets, balloons, etc. Each round requires more skill. Free
posters and stickers. For ages 3 and up. Apple
II. S39.95
Mind Games, Inc.
420 So. Beverly Dr., Suite 207
Beverly Hills, CA 90212
THE DESECRATION: A hi-res/text adventure
game with a difference. Embedded in the
game are three arcade game sequences.
At certain points in the adventure you will be
faced with an arcade game challenge. If
you fail to survive the arcade sequence, you
die and must start over. TD is the first in a
planned series of games. Apple II. S37.95

SOME READER COMMENTS
Here are some answers you readers sent to us in
response to recent questions on the READER INPUT
DEVICES.

THE MOST IMPORTANT OCCURRENCE IN
COMPUTER GAMING IN 1982 WAS:

WHAT WAS THE PRIME REASON YOU
PURCHASED A PERSONAL COMPUTER?

— The capture of the gaming market once
dominated by Apple and TRS-80 by the Atari.
— SSI's acknowledgement of Atari gamers and
their expansion of their Atari line.

The breakdown on this question from RID #5 was:
Entertainment
Business
Education
Programming
Word Processing

74%
17%
9%
5%
3%

Several readers indicated two reasons why they
bought a computer hence the responses totaled more
than 100% by category. Those that picked two
categories picked entertainment along with one of the
other four.

WHAT WAS THE SINGLE MOST IMPORTANT
GAME RELEASE AND/OR OCCURRENCE IN
THE COMPUTER GAMING HOBBY AND
INDUSTRY IN 1982?
This question, also from RID #5, brought a wide
range of responses. Most of the respondents selected a
game release as the most important game/event of
the year. Topping the list of MOST IMPORTANT GAME
RELEASES OF 1982 were: Guadalcanal Campaign (25
votes); Choplifter! (12 votes); Wizardry (11 votes);
Eastern Front (7 votes). Others that received votes as
the "most important game release in 1982" were:
Legionnaire; Galactic Gladiators; Southern Command;
Pursuit of the Graf Spee; Napoleon's Campaigns 18131815; David's Midnight Magic, Time Zone, Ultima II, The
Mark of the Sun, Cytron Masters, Aztec. Among those
selecting a "Most important occurrence in computer
gaming in 1982" there was a wide range of opinions.
Here are some of those opinions:

— Announcement of the improved Apple II
coming out early in 1983.
— That the news media awoke to the booming
growth of the microcomputer and told the general
public.
— Introduction of strategy/action games which
combine strategy and arcade action.

DO YOU PREFER BUYING GAME PROGRAMS FROM DISCOUNT MAIL ORDER
HOUSES OR FROM LOCAL RETAILERS?
WHY?
This question which was asked in RID #4 gained a
lot of response. Everyone had an opinion on this one.
Of those responding the breakdown was:
Local Retailer
58%
Mail Order House
38%
Both
4%
The most common reason given for buying from the
local retailer was the opportunity to preview the game.
the most common reason given for buying from a mail
order house was lower prices. The question of customer
support was a toss-up. Some felt they got better
support form the local dealer since he could often
replace a product on the spot. Others thought that
they got better support from the mail order house
which knew more about the games and had a better
selection from which to choose. Some said that they
would like to buy from local retailers but because of
Iocation (Alaska, Spain, etc.) were forced to shop
through the mail.

COMPUTER GAMES IN 1983: A Report
Russell Sipe

The Winter Consumer Electronics
Show held recently in Las Vegas gave
us a glimpse of what will be the trends
in computers in 1983 and beyond.
CES, which showcases consumer electronic products, covers much more
than computers, but this particular
edition of CES illuminated the fact
that personal and home computers
are the wave of the future in the
electronics field.

THE CHANGING
MARKETPLACE
Perhaps the most significant fact
that CES revealed was that the line of
demarcation between personal computers and home video systems has
disappeared.
Until very recently it had been safe
to say that there were two types of
machines which play computer
games in the home. One of these
being the home video machine
(costing less than $300 and cartridgebased), represented by machines like
the Atari VCS, Mattel Intellivision,
Magnavox Odyssey, and ColecoVision. The other type machine one
could play computer games on was
the personal computer such as the
Apple, Atari 400/800, IBM-PC, TRS-80
etc..
However with the introduction of
the Vic-20 in 1982, the cost of
computers coming down, and the
functional power of the game
machines increasing, we can no
longer look at the field as two distinct
entities. Manufacturers are now
looking at the home electronic market
more as a continuum which they can
reach with three types of machines,
the home video machine, the HOME

computer, and the PERSONAL computer.
The home computer is seen as a
machine which IS a microcomputer
much like the personal computer but
is marketed for the family and
designed to meet applications in the
home rather than in business. For
example, the Atari 400/800 is now
seen as a home computer and the
Apple computer is seen as a personal
computer. The former costs less,
emphasizes entertainment and other
home related functions such as
educational programs. Choosing this
type of target and combining it with
mass merchandising techniques has
resulted in Atari by passing Apple.
Game manufacturers, realizing this,
have begun to change emphasis
from the Apple to the Atari. While the
Apple has been used by many as an
entertainment device, its' main
function is perceived to be as a
business or professional machine. The
IBM pc also falls into the personal
computer category.
According to David Blumstein,
Executive V.P. of Softsel, a major
software distribution company, the
Apple is now on the decline as an
entertainment machine in terms of
market share. The manufacturers are
looking instead to the mass market of
the home computers such as the
Atari 400/800, Commodore Vic-20,
and TI 99/4A. Blumstein goes on to say
that "the (game software) industry is
following the marketplace and the
marketplace is in the small home
computers".
"This is not to say that Apple is being
abandoned", says Blumstein, "There
will always be good Apple game
products. In fact the Apple products

should be of better quality in the
future (due to the competition from
the home computers)". The Apple
games will become more and more
strategic and cerebral oriented while
the home computers will maintain
the arcade orientation presently so
popular. Arcade games will not
disappear on the Apple but strategy
and adventure games will dominate
personal computer game software in
the future speculates Blumstein.
Jon Loveless, of Synapse Software
which has several Atari 400/800
programs on the market, also sees
"thinking" games as the wave of the
future. People are becoming dissatisfied with the hand-eye co-ordination game and are beginning to
look for something more mental
according to Loveless.
Something of the same viewpoint
can be seen in the thinking of Mattel
Electronics. At the computers/games
conference held at CES Richard Hoag
of Mattel pointed out that Mattel will
be putting emphasis on "user modifiable games". User modification is a
feature found on many strategic
games (e.g. the ability to select the
forces and or strengths of each side in
a military simulation).
Another aspect of the changing
computer game marketplace is the
status of the individual game designer. One speculates about possible
raiding of personal computer game
companies by the big mass merchandising cartridge game manufacturers to find top game designing
talent. At this point it has not been a
problem, but what about the future.
Doug Carlston of Broderbund Software
feels that personal computer software
houses such as Broderbund will always
be able to be attractive to game des-

igners not only because they pay well
but also because designers working
in or with personal computer software
houses are an active part of the
creative process, not just a cog in a
corporate wheel. Carlston sees this
creative relationship between the
companies and the designers as a
key reason that companies like
Broderbund will be able to compete
effectively with the mass market
giants.

No one has to be told that the
market for computers and computer
games grew enormously in 1982. In
terms of computer games, entertainment software makes up 45% of the
volume for home computer software
and, according to Future Computing
of Richardson Texas (a consulting
group on computer marketing), that
market share should grow to 58% by
1987. The only other area that is
expected to grow is educational
software which now makes up 12% of
the software but should command a
21% share by 1987 (see chart).
With the growth of the personal/
home computer marketplace comes
the growth in Number of products
available. In recent days both Atari
(Atari 1200) and Apple (Ile) have
released new computers. While these
two machines are more business
oriented and fall into the personal:
computer category, never-the-less
they will bring more customers into
the computer game marketplace.
Mattel has announced the release
of the Aquarius Home Computer
System. Retail price for the basic unit
will be under $200. Some of the more
popular Mattel Intellivision games will
be available for the Aquarius Home
Computer.
Mattel also plans to release a
computer keyboard upgrade to their
Intellivision game system and call the
new system the Entertainment
Computer System. It will, according to
Gary Moskovitz, Mattel Marketing
director, be "right between video
games that compute and computers
that play video games".
The Sinclair and TI 99/2 computers
are two low-cost entries that bear
watching in the months ahead.
If CES revealed nothing else, it
revealed that computerized entertainment will be a major force in the
1980's. There is in that marketplace a
need for the game retailer who can
offer computer game products and
give the consumer expert advice in
choosing where to spend his entertainment dollars.

HIA REPORT
Another show of importance to
computer garners took place in January.
The Hobby Industry Association of
America (HIA) held it's annual convention and trade show in Anaheim
during the last week of the month.
One of the divisions of HIA is Adventure
Gaming. The member companies of
this division are major manufacturers
of strategy board games as well as
role-playing games. These companies
produce most of the "Dungeons and
Dragons" type games as well as nearly
all the strategic and/or wargames
that can be found in any game store.
Avalon Hill has been one of the few
companies in HIA that have also been
producing computer games. Although not a member of HIA, SSI is
another computer game manufacturer whose games are similar in
subject matter to the type games
produced by these board game and
role playing game companies.
While it is true that computer games
have not been a major product of
these companies, this year's HIA is
significant in that many HIA/
Adventure game members made it
known that they are working on
computer games. In 1983-1984 we
will see many of these companies
enter the computer game field with
releases of personal computer games.
EON PRODUCTS will be developing
computer games for The Children's
Computer Workshop. ColecoVision
has licensed to do FLYING BUFFALO's
role-playing ga, has released there
first three games, Dungeon!, Dawn
Patrol, and Theseus And The Minotaur
(all for the Apple). DISCOVERY GAMES
has a WWI air game for the TRS-80
entitled Over There. In March they will
release a game called Flying Tigers
which places you inside the cockpit
of a WWII fighter (Apple II). STEVE
JACKSON GAMES is talking with
companies about computer versions
of some of their games. Nothing firm
yet. TASK FORCE GAMES showed 16K
computer versions of their board
games Starfire!, Survival, The War of
The Worlds, and Asteroid Zero-Four
(all for the Atari 400/800). GAME
DESIGNER'S WORKSHOP is working on
an Apple version of their Asteroid
game (not to be confused with the
arcade game Asteroids). YAQUINTO
GAMES is releasing computer versions
of several of their board games:
Timewar, Starfall, C.V., Panzer,
Shooting Stars, Swashbuckler (not to
be confused with DataMost's Swashbuckler - a totally different game),
Attack of the Mutants, and Market
Madness. These games will run on

Apple, Atari, TRS-80, IBM-PC, Vic-20,
and Commodore 64 (can you believe
it?!). AVALON HILL GAME COMPANY
demonstrated several new games at
the show including The Alien, Gypsy,
Flying Ace, Close Assault, Space
Station Zulu, Facts in Five, and
Fredricksburg. CYBER ENTERPRISES displayed the new disk version of their
TRS-80 chess program, Cyberchess.
The were three computer industry
companies showing at HIA. In addition
to COMPUTER GAMING WORLD,
DATAMOST and RESTON SOFTWARE displayed their wares.
All-in-all it looks like there will be
many more companies producing
strategy computer games in 1983.
This is a plus for the hobby. However, a
word of caution is in order. Successful
board games sometimes make poor
computer games. It will behoove
designers and manufacturers to
analyze what goes into a successful
computer game and make sure that
their games, whether translations of
board games or original designs,
contain sound computer game
design elements (e.g. good human
engineering and documentation,
etcetera),

COSMIC BALANCE:
Tactics and Ship Design

Cosmic Balance is possibly the
best tactical space wargame available today. It has many positive
features, such as the ability to design
an infinite number of new ships,
simultaneous movement and fire, a
variety of weapons and equipment,
intricate tactical possibilities, a very
competitive subroutine for solitaire
play, the "feel" of a good Startrek®
episode, good graphics, optional
combination with a new strategic
game, and the speed and sophistication of machine language programming.
Good tactics and ship design
require a basic understanding of the
available weapons and equipment.
With this in mind, the manual proves
to be very informative, and the
summary of systems on the last page
is very helpful.
The tactical options in this game
are numerous and complex. The
following ideas are only an introductory guide. On the first turn you
should check the mass of the opponent's ships. If his mass is greater
than yours, then you should immediately try to disengage unless
you have reason to believe that he
has unarmed transports/or lower
technology ships. Do not hesitate. If
you decide to run, then RUN. If his
speed is equal to or greater than
yours, he has ten turns to overtake
you before you can warp out. If he
inflicts sufficient damage to your
warp drive, your ship will explode if
you try to warp out. You cannot risk
even one reconnaissance pass because your first approach may be
your last.

Floyd Mathews

On the first turn, if you discover
that your mass is greater than the
enemy fleet's, then you should press
him closely and try to destroy as
many ships as possible in the first ten
turns before he warps out.

he will move next, but you should
try. You may be able to detect
patterns in how he maneuvers
which will enable you to predict his
next move.

If both fleets have about equal
mass, then you should approach
cautiously in an oblique or spiral
course. If the enemy fleet begins
inflicting more damage than you,
he may have higher technology
ships or better designed ships, and
you should try to disengage immediately.

In general, you should not move
in straight lines too often; making it
easier for the opponent to predict
your next move. It is better to approach your target in a curving or
spiral maneuver in order to keep
him guessing, and also to hopefully
trigger premature fire by him at
long range if he has set his weapons to fire at the "last instant"
command.

If you have any ships that have
mainly long range weapons, such as
Ship A (see listing); they should ob-

viously stand away from the enemy
ships. However, if the range exceeds
100, the computer's ships may automatically try to warp out in solitaire play after ten turns.
If you have more than one ship
with short range weapons, you
should keep them in a close formation and try to gang up on a single
enemy ship, preferably his smallest
ship first. Once you select your
target, it is probably best to stay
close and continue firing at it, as
your fire will become increasingly
destructive as you wear down his
shields. Additionally, you will probably get more victory points for
destroying one ship than for partially
damaging two and, in the new strategic game, there will be automatic
free repairs for all damaged ships
which escape.
Carefully observe which shields
the enemy is firing through, what
types of weapons he fires, and
whether his fire is more effective
than yours at different ranges. If it
appears that he has few weapons
in certain areas, try to maneuver
one or more ships in close on that
arc. If your weapons are more effective at a certain range than his,
then try to keep that minimum distance between your ships. If he is
using weapons for which you have
special defenses, such as belts, then
be sure to keep your belts fully
charged. All of this is easier said
than done, as you don't know where

You should try to plot courses
which will bring you in close to the
target and then back out to a safer
distance all in the same turn. As you
make your pass by the target, your
short range weapons should be set
on the "time point" command to
blast him at the estimated shortest
range, but do try to leave some
margin for error in the angle of your
approach, or your weapons may
not be able to bear on the target. If
you are successful in timing your fire
at the shortest feasible range, and if
his weapons shoot at longer range,
you should be able to inflict substantially greater damage than you
receive. Try to avoid ending the turn
in a position close to his ship, as this
might give him a free "cheap shot"
at the start of the next turn.
You should use the "time point"
command to set your weapons to
fire in several bursts on consecutive
time points in order to inflict maximum damage, not all on the same
time point. Each burst should be
calculated to inflict about 40 damage factors in order to overwhelm
any shield. After the shield is penetrated, if any damage factor strikes
a layer of armor, all additional
damage in that time point will be
deflected. Therefore two bursts of 40
damage factors each in two consecutive time points will probably
be more destructive than one burst
of 80 in one time point. Armor will
deflect much of the damage from
each burst, therefore it is better to
have several smaller bursts than

one large burst. As you begin to
wear down his shields, you should
try to reduce the size of each burst
to 30 or less on a greater number of
time points, as less damage will be
needed to overwhelm his shields.
The plasma torpedo is the only
weapon which can destroy armor
sectors, but it must be used at point
blank range to be effective. If it is
fired at long range, it will not inflict
as many damage factors, or the
target may simply turn away from it
and outrun it. Ideally, you should try
to time this weapon to fire at a
range of five or less as the target is
moving toward you, so that he will
have less time to take evasive action. You should also try to launch
one light seeker on the same turn
as you fire the plasma torpedo so
that the seeker will hopefully reduce
his belt strength before the plasma
impacts the target.
If you are giving more damage
than you are receiving, then press
him closely so that he will not have
time to recharge his shields or escape. However, if he succeeds in
breaching one of your shields, you
should try to withdraw temporarily
to repair the shield before making
another close pass. Try to keep the
breached shield facing away from
him until it is recharged.
If an enemy ship takes a straight
line course away from you, this probably means either you have critically injured him and he is trying to
escape, or you have destroyed
enough of his subwarp drives so
that he can no longer maneuver at
subwarp speed and is coasting
away from you. Either way, you
should immediately pursue and try
to finish him off. If you observe that
he has no weapons covering one of
his four rearward facing arcs, then
try to overtake him with a converging course approaching through
that arc. It may be unchivalrous,
but it is better to pound a cripple
through a defenseless arc than to
trade punches through his strong
arcs.
Your priorities for allocating your
ship's power to its various systems
will change as the tactical situation
changes, but the following generalities should be useful in most situations. Electronic counter measures
are a good investment of power,
and you should always use them.
Electronic counter-counter measures are also very effective. Speed
and course changes should be your
second priority for allocation of
energy except at point blank

ranges. At short ranges you should
give priority to charging and firing
weapons over recharging shields,
but reverse this order of priority at
long ranges. Draining shield batteries in order to obtain additional
power to boost other equipment is
not a good idea, unless this is your
only way to charge all of your weapons at short range.
The program's subroutine for solitaire play against the computer is
very effective, and you can improve
your own play by understanding
how the computer "thinks". On
each turn the computer first identifies which arc of each of its ships
has the strongest combined value
for both shields and weapons, and
then plots a course which will hopefully turn that arc toward the closest
player ship. Hence, if arc one or
eight is the strongest, the computer's ship will fly directly toward the
target. If arc four or five is the
strongest, the computer's ship will
fly directly away from the target. If
arc two is the strongest, the computer's ship will spiral toward the
target in a clockwise turn. If arc
seven is the strongest, the computer's ship will spiral toward the
target in a counterclockwise turn. If
arc three or arc six is the strongest,
the computer's ship will spiral away
from the target in a clockwise or
counterclockwise turn. If all arcs
have equal strength, the computer
arbitrarily selects arc eight as the
strongest, and tries to turn that arc
toward the target. If the range between the computer's ships and the
player's ships exceeds 100, the
computer's ships may try to warp
out after ten turns. Be warned, the
computer is very effective at predicting the target's course and timing fire at the closest range.
The computer's priorities for allocating power to its systems are as
follows: First, it charges multiple turn
charge weapons such as disruptors
and plasmas. Second, it charges
electronic counter-counter measures, and third it charges belts.
Fourth, it makes speed and course
changes, and charges single turn
charge weapons such as phasers.
Fifth, it charges electronic counter
measurers. Lastly, it charges transporters for boarding parties and
recharges shields.

The main idea about ship design
is that there is no single perfect
design. If you know the capabilities
of the opposing ship or ships, you
can probably create a special design which will be superior to that
particular opponent. Therefore, you

should always design your ships
secretly and arrange to play against
unknown ships in order to get the
most challenging competition.
The starship designs provided with
this article are only introductory
models, and each could be improved with modifications. Each
ship is a large dreadnought designed for command by the computer in solitaire play against a
human player, but you could of
course use or modify these ships for
use by a player.
The major consideration in designing ships is the intended use of the
ships. For the new strategic game, it
will be important to develop new
designs for large unarmed transports, fast commerce raiders, small
unarmed scout ships, and cheap
slow convoy escorts. But for the
CGW starship design tournament,
you should probably concentrate
on single dreadnoughts for ship to
ship combat. Under the tournament's 250 victory point ceiling for
entries, a single dreadnought should
have several advantages over an
entry composed of several smaller
ships. First, the single dreadnought
will have more space for weapons
and equipment than any entry
composed of several smaller ships.
Second, ships in multiple ship entry
would have to duplicate the single
dreadnought's costs for warp drive,
armor, shields, subwarp drives, engines and belts. Third, the dreadnought's size should give it greater
survivability than any smaller ship,
therefore even if all the judges do
well against a dreadnought entry,
the dreadnought will at least have
a better chance of escaping with a
respectable score by warping out to
safety after the tenth turn.

Ship A is a fighter carrier which
should be effective against any
single ship with a small number of
belts. It has no armor and high
speed, just like a naval aircraft carrier, and has strong rear arcs so that
it will spiral away from the opponent. Lacking armor and short
range weapons, it depends on
speed and distance to escape injury. This design may not be able to
destroy another dreadnought before it warps out, but it has a good
chance of running up a small positive victory point differential, which
could be decisive under the CGW
starship design tournament rules.
Ship B is designed to transport
boarding parties for capture of
enemy ships. This type of ship could
be a big winner in the CGW design
tournament because you get extra

victory points for capture of enemy
ships. This design requires lots of
engines and excess power because
transportation of boarding parties is
a very low priority in the program's
solitaire play subroutine. The target's
shields must be penetrated before
marines can be beamed aboard.
Although this ship is very slow and
clumsy, it doesn't need much maneuverability because transporters
have unlimited range and are
omni-directional. The forward arcs
have been made much stronger
than the other arcs so that the

COSMIC BALANCE
STARSHIP DESIGN
TOURNAMENT
Computer Gaming World announces it's COSMIC BALANCE
STARSHIP DESIGN TOURNAMENT.
Design an unbeatable ship using
Strategic Simulation's COSMIC
BALANCE and you can win a
free SSI game of your choice. All
entries must be received by
CGW by April 30, 1983, in accord
with the following tournament
rules:
1. One entry per person. CGW
reserves the right to publish descriptions of all entries. Your entry
disk should be labelled with your
name, address and telephone number. The disk envelop should be
labelled with your name, address,
phone number, either Apple or
Atari, and each ship identified by a
letter commencing with the letter

computer will turn the ship toward
the target in order to hopefully close
to effective phaser range.
Ships C, D and E are short range
siege phaser dreadnoughts. Ship C
has strong forward arcs and speed
so that the computer will hopefully
rush in close enough to increase
the effectiveness of its short range
weapons. Ship D has high speed
and a strong arc two so that the
computer will hopefully spiral in to
increase the effectiveness of its
phasers. Ship E is very slow, but it

"A" for your first ship, along with
tech level. Include return postage if
you want your disk back.
2. A panel of three or more judges
will play each entry. Each judge will
use a ship or ships consistent with
the tournament rules. Your entry will
be played by the computer at level
two in solitaire play.
3. Each entry must be worth no
more than 250 victory points. Each
game will be played on Scenario
Five: Dogfight. There can be no
more than four ships per entry. Each
ship must have a range of one, and
no ship can have a maximum
speed greater than 32. No dreadnought can have more than 12
drives.
4. Each entry will play each judge
once. The difference between the
entry's and the judge's victory points
will be recorded at the end of the
game. Each entry's score differentials
against all judges will be averaged.
The entry with the highest average
score differential will be declared
the winner of the tournament.

has omni-directional weapons so
maneuverability is less important.
This ship will not be able to run
away, but it should inflict a lot of
damage on any pursuer. Ship C
also has a plasma torpedo, as it is
the only design which the computer
will probably be able to bring to
point blank range where plasmas
are most effective. The computer is
usually ineffective in using plasma
torpedoes, as it tends to fire them at
long range.
Continued on p.40

5. After ten turns, if any entry
warps out of retreats to a range of
more than 100 from the judge's
ships, and if the judge's ships do not
pursue, then the entry will not receive
full credit for any victory points
recorded unless the entry suffered at
least 25 percent damage; if the
entry suffered less than 25 percent
damage it will only receive half
credit for any victory points recorded;
if the entry suffered zero damage
then it will receive zero credit for any
victory points recorded. The purpose
of this rule is to discourage ship
designs which immediately retreat
from the judge's ship or ships, because each game with such a
design might last too long or might
end in a stalemate if the judge
decides not to pursue.
6. Send entries to COMPUTER
GAMING WORLD, P.O. Box 4566,
Anaheim, CA 92803-4566. Mark your
package "Anaheim Ship Design
Contest"
7. Winner will be announced in
the July-Aug. 1983 issue.

I

ZORK!:
An Overview

David P. Stone

cave creatures that make meals of
adventurers when the lights go out.
Also, Zork I is inhabited by a thief
who is apt to pick a fight, pick your
pockets, or both.

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:

Zork I, Zork II and
Zork III
TYPE:
Adventures
SYSTEM:
Many
FORMAT:
Disk
# PLAYERS: One
AUTHORS:
M. Blanc, T. Anderson.
D. Lebling, B. Daniels
PRICE:
$39.95ea.
PUBLISHER: INFOCOM

The Zork trilogy is a series of three
enjoyable, exciting-to-experience,
text-oriented adventures. Unfortunately, describing an adventure,
without revealing clues, is like trying
to describe a treasure chest without
saying exactly what's in it. You'll just
have to believe me, Zork is filled
with many valuable jewels, and
forgive me if I inadvertently slip you
a clue to solving one of its many,
many mysteries.
In ZORK I, The Great Underground
Empire, you begin your adventure
west of a great white house. From
there you must explore and gain
entrance to the underground
empire. Points are gained by finding
the twenty treasures and putting
them into the trophy case. But, as
you might expect, the treasures are
not easily found, First, riddles must
be answered, puzzles solved, and
hazards (such as an axe wielding
troll) overcome.
The most common hazards are
the grues. Grues are carnivorous

In ZORK II, The Wizard of Frobozz,
you begin in a Stone Barrow,
already within the underground
realm. You earn adventuring points
by discovering treasures and by
accomplishing difficult feats. As in
Zork I, this usually means using the
right objects in the right room in the
right sequence. The consequence
of failing to do so is death or
frustration, or both. Zork II is
inhabited by a prankster wizard
who is obsessed with hexing you
with spells that begin with the letter
"F". Unlike the thief in Zork I, the
wizard is more of a nuisance than
an adversary.
In ZORK III, The Dungeon Master,
your goals are to discover treasures
and solve puzzles such as how to
successfully operate the machinery
in the technology room. The
documentation for Zork III states
that "...your quest hinges upon
discovering the secret purpose of
the Dungeon Master who will
oversee your ultimate triumph — or
destruction — in the realm of Zork."
These words have left this adventurer
truly puzzled. I achieved the total
potential score (seven out of seven),
yet I did nothing to make that
game description make sense. So,
there may be even more to Zork III
than I've discovered.
Each adventure in the trilogy is
different (and sold separately, by
the way), yet each retains the same
feel and flavor — like visiting three
different towns in the same foreign
country. Each adventure occurs at
a definite point in time in the history
of Zork. The adventures are pretty
much independent, although I
would recommend experiencing
them in sequence.
The original Zork was developed
over five years ago on a DEC
System-10, inspired by the Crowthers
and Woods original adventure:
Colossal Cave. Zork I and II are
based directly on the original Zork

(with only a few changes and a few
new predicaments). Zork III is, as far
as I can tell, entirely new. More
details on the history of the
program's development can be
found in these articles by the
game's authors: "IEEEE Computer",
April 1979, and "byte", December
1980. (Good reading if you're into
adventure software design.)
Many features, besides its longevity and years of play-testing, come
together to make Zork great.
However, the one feature that
makes it truly superior is its userfriendliness. Most of the userfriendliness can be attributed
directly to the parser. A parser is the
portion of an adventure computer
program that analyzes your input
and, if well done, responds appropriately. What this means to the
adventurer, is that Zork allows you
to enter commands not only as
complete sentences, but as very
complex complete sentences. For
example:
TELL THE ROBOT "PUSH THE TRIANGULAR AND THE SQUARE BUTTON."
In other adventures, I sometimes
knew what I wanted to do, but had
to experiment with different combinations of two word (verb/subject)
input to overcome the program's
limitations. Not so with Zork. Virtually
every one of my commands was
understood.
To add to its adventurer-friendliness, Zork tries harder than any
other adventure I've ever seen to do
what is commanded. Consider this
exchange (Zork's replies are in
parenthesis):
OPEN THE DOOR
(Which door do you mean?)
TRAP
(Done.)
Notice that Zork discriminates
between like objects (in this case,
different doors) in the same
location, and a single word of input
is all it takes to get you going again.
If Zork makes an assumption
about your command, it lets you
know:

OFFER WATER
(To the Troll)
Adventuring is further facilitated
by Zork's ability to recognize
abbreviations and to accept
multiple commands by recognizing
commas, conjunctions (such as
"and" and "but"), and periods. So,
this command is valid:
N.NE.SE.DROP ALL BUT LAMP
ZORK recognizes the above
abbreviations (for compass directions) and carries out your command. You can even ask "WHERE"
and "WHAT" questions!
WHERE IS THE LAMP
(You are carrying it.)
Even though the Zork parser is
state of the art, its not definitive.
Due to space limitations, Zork

sometimes does not recognize
words that it uses in its colorful,
detailed room descriptions. This is
true despite the fact it does
recognize over 600 nouns and 100
verbs.
As I mentioned above, Zork is all
text—that means no graphics. None
are needed. The authors have not
skimped on the vividly detailed
descriptions of each location;
descriptions to which not even Atari
graphics could do complete justice.
For example:
SOUTH
Great Cavern
This is the center of the great
cavern. A great room of
flowing color has been carved
out of the limestone.
Stalactites and stalagmites of

many sizes are everywhere.
The room glows with dim light
provided by phosphorescent
moss, and weird shadows
move all around you. A narrow
path winds among the stalagmites. There are many little
trails leading in here and
there, but a good one leads
southwest toward the edge of
the room, and another leads
northwest.
These eloquent descriptions give
their readers a real sense of the
place. However, they are more than
just flowery verbiage that takes up
disk space. Often, clues to solving
the mysteries of Zork are cleverly
embedded in the prose.
Zork is like most other adventures
in that it consists of many episodic
plots (one episode, for example,
being to acquire a particular
treasure). You must do the routine
things that all adventurers do: fight
foes, explore room, find objects, and
piece them together to solve
puzzles that yield treasures (or
points). As always, objects are
seldom useful in the same room in
which they are found (for example,
don't count on finding a locked
chest and a key that fits in the
same room.) Usually the obstacles
or riddles can be solved by logic or
common-sense (like finding keys to
doors). Occasionally, they are
not-so-logical (like rubbing things not
ordinarily rubbed).
The mechanics of testing your
hypotheses about how to use
objects or get past obstacles is
nicely done. For starter, the Zork
screen display is straight-forward.
The text scrolls up (and off) and the
top line displays your status: location
( by room name), score, and
number of turns taken. You always
know where to look — either at the
very top or the very bottom of the
screen.
There are a host of special oneword commands to simplify and
facilitate your adventuring (wouldbe adventure software designers
take note). For getting into and out
of the adventure there's QUIT, REContinued on p.46

Allen Doum

THE ATARI ARENA
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Alien Garden
TYPE:
Arcade/Memory Game
SYSTEM:
Atari (400 or 800)
# PLAYERS: 1
Bernie DeKoven and
AUTHOR:
Jaron Lanier
BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Plattermania
Childrens Game
TYPE:
# PLAYERS: 1 to 4
Micheal Rarren and
AUTHOR:
Bernie DeKoven
BASIC INFORMATION
Monster Maze
NAME:
TYPE:
Maze Arcade Game
# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
Robert A. Schilling
ALL: SYSTEM: Atari (400 or 800)
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: EPYX (Automated
Simulations, Inc.)
Sunnyvale, CA
Not every Atari owner has a disk
drive. Not every Atari owner has a
tape drive. But we all have cartridge
slots. This is one of the reasons that
software publishers are, and will be,
producing more games in cartridge
format. But there is another reason
that is more interesting for computer
garners.
Last year twice as many 400's
were sold than 800's. That means if
a software publisher produces a
game that requires more than 16K
RAM, he limits himself to about one
third of his potential market (plus
those people who have upgraded
their 400's, of course). Not all of that
16K is available for the programmer's use, however. Hardware
and operating system overhead
requires memory; so do screens
and/or custom character sets. While
several very good games will fit into
16K, there are many that do not,
Disk or cassette storage can only
partly provide relief, Cassettes aren't
random access, and even disk I/O
time will take the pizazz out of an
arcade game.
Cartridges become the great
compromise. With up to 16K ROM

added to the system with a
cartridge, the amount of programmer usable memory is more
than doubled. (Cartridge memory
overlays RAM if you have at least
40K. 8K cartridges only overlay the
last 8K of a 48K system.) That means
that games that require 32K for a
disk version, may require only 16K
for the cartridge version.
The drawback is that cartridges
are more expensive to manufacture
than disks or cassettes, so the prices
will be generally higher. Even so,
1983 is likely to be "The Year of the
Cartridge". The larger market open
to cartridge games means that
there may soon be a glut of new
cartridge titles.
Alien Garden is the first of three
new cartridges from EPYX. In this
game the player moves a "cosmic
critter" through a garden of 24
flowers. At first all of the flowers are
identical, but when the "critter's"
mouth, wings, or stinger touches a
flower, the flower will react in one of
three ways:
1. The flower may grow.
2. The flower may "mutate" to
the next generation of flower.
3. The flower may explode, eliminating that part of the critter.
The garden constantly scrolls
vertically, reversing direction at the
ends, or when any of the above
reactions take place. If the player
loses his mouth, the game ends. The
wings and stinger will regenerate
any time a new generation is
introduced. The critter's mouth can
eat the flower. If this happens the
player scores one point for each
part of the flower eaten, times the
number of different generations in
the garden.
While the patterns caused by
"growth" are nicely done, the rest of
the graphics are poor. What is
particularly disappointing is the
lack of color. Graphics zero (0) is
used, with white on a black
background. Some of the flowers
are green or purple thru "artifacting". However, only four flowers
can be on the same horizontal line.
That means, if graphics one (1) or

two (2) had been used instead,
each generation could have been
displayed using a different color.
The critter is displayed using
player/missile graphics, and since
these have their own color registers,
the critter didn't have to also be
white; but it is.
Alien Garden seems to be best
categorized as a combination of
arcade and memory games, although there is no way to adjust
either the difficulty or the speed of
play.
Plattermania is based on the
juggler's routine of balancing
spinning plates on top of poles. At
each level the players (up to four,
taking turns) must keep spinning an
increasing number of plates for at
least eight seconds. Bonus points
are awarded for more plates or
more time. The player controls a
clown that slides back and forth,
starting or spinning the plates with
a touch of the action button. Any

plate that falls before the goal is
reached counts against a supply of
plates. When that supply is gone,
the game is over.
During each round the number of
plates left is displayed, the goal
appearing during the interludes,
which are nearly as long as the
rounds of play. Since the same
circus tune plays during each
interlude, with no way to turn it off,
this game seems aimed at children,
but the children who played it for us
got bored nearly as fast as the
adults.
Monster Maze uses a somewhat
familiar theme. The player (one
only) wanders through a maze
picking up gold bars that lie almost
everywhere. There are monsters
chasing you, but if you get one of
the vitamin pills that are laying
about, you can destroy them.

There are three major differences
between Monster Maze and

(surprise!) Pac-Man. First, the maze
has 16 levels. Holes in the floor of
one level, will drop the player, or
monsters, down to the next. Second,
the game is played from a point of
view inside the maze. It is not strictly
animated, as you jump to the next
space. You can get an overhead
view, but may not move while doing
so. Third, the graphics are terrible.
This game will also be available on
the TRS-80, with no changes
necessary in the maze graphics
except background color. (The
monsters in the Atari version use
player graphics, and there are some
sound effects.)
The speed of play is slow, even at
the higher difficulty settings, and
the monsters move more quickly
while the player is moving than
they do while he is standing still.
In all three of these games the
ideas seem undeveloped and the
implementation amateurish. Alien
Continued on p.40

ULTIMA II: A Review

before Mondain was rubbed-out he
had been training an apprentice. The rumor continues by stating
that this apprentice has grown even
more powerful than Mondain and
that the new evil spreading throughout the land is the result of this force.
Your quest is to find and destroy
MINAX, enchantress of evil, apprentice of Mondain.

IN THE BEGINNING

Ultima II
TYPE:
Fantasy
SYSTEM:
Apple II
FORMAT:
Diskette
# PLAYERS: One
AUTHOR:
Lord British
NAME:

PRICE:
PUBLISHER:

$59.95

Sierra On-line

You can stop holding your breath,
ULTIMA II has finally arrived. Lord
British's sequel to ULTIMA continues
the saga with enhanced detail and
a larger universe.
This is an adventure across time
and space that takes you from threedimensional dungeons deep in the
ground through time doors to the
future and interplanetary trips
throughout our solar system, plus
more!
This colorful hi-res program has
you traveling across a scrolling
landscape of grasslands, mountains,
and oceans with constantly moving
waves.
The game resides on two disks with
three sides of data. Along with the
instruction book there is a cloth map
of the world showing the approximate locations of the time doors. It is
wise to read the instructions carefully.

THE QUEST
In Ultima I your quest was to
destroy the archevil Mondain. At
the time of his demise you might have
thought that the adventure was
finished. However, rumors have been
spreading, and it is believed that

As in ULTIMA, you must create your
character and play the game on a
separate play disk; you only use the
master disks for booting and going in
to space. This does save wear and
tear on the original disks.
To create your character you must
distribute 90 points between the five
attributes (strength, agility, charisma, wisdom, and intelligence),
choose your sex, class, and profession.
In distributing points for attributes I
concentrated on giving the most to
agility and intelligence, recognizing
that each attribute must have a
minimum of 10 points. Agility is your
skill at wielding a weapon and I
wanted to be able to use the
deadliest weapon as soon as I could.
Intelligence increases your skills in
bargaining and, more important, in
the casting of spells. You learn
quickly in the dungeons and towers
how important this ability can be.
Strength determines the damage
you can inflict on a foe in a fight.
Stamina reflects your ability to
defend against attack. Charisma
governs your success in bargaining
with merchants and Wisdom is what
you need to cast spells successfully.
Once you begin play you will be
able to increase your attributes as
high as ninety-nine. This is not as
easy as it sounds, nor is it inexpensive.
In your choice of sex (sorry folks,
only male and female is available)
you can increase certain attributes.
A male character will increase your
strength by ten and a female will
increase your charisma by ten.
You then pick between five races
and four professions: human, elven,

James A. McPherson

dwarven, hobbit and fighter, cleric,
wizard, thief. Each of these adds
points to certain attributes.
There are also magic spells
available to clerics and wizards. You
have nine spells in three categories:
Spells both Clerics and Wizards
can use:
1. Light—creates magical illumination
2. Ladder down—teleports you down
one level in a tower or dungeon
3. Ladder up—teleports you straight
up one level in a tower or
dungeon
Cleric's Spells:
4. Passwall—destroys the wall in
front of you
5. Surface—teleports you immediately to the surface
6. Prayer—calls for divine intervention to destroy your foe
Wizard's Spells:
7. Magic Missile—offensive magic
weapon
8. Blink—randomly teleports you
anywhere on the same level
9. Kill—attempts to obliterate your
foe by magic
These spells are purchased in
stores and can only be used in
dungeons and towers. They are for
killing and teleporting.
When your character is complete
you are ready to explore Ultima II.

THE WORLD OF ULTIMA II
There are five time periods in
Ultima II connected by time doors
that appear off and on throughout
the game. In order to be confident
of your whereabouts these time
doors should be mapped, which you
can do with the aid of the cloth time
map provided.
The time periods range from the
predawn legends era to the postapocalyptic A.D. 2112. Each period
has unique locations and inhabitants to help or hinder you in your
quest. You must talk or as they call it
"transact" with everyone in the
game otherwise you will miss some
important clues, clues that are
required to finish your quest. You
may even meet someone you know.
Continued on p.45

LATCH ONTO THE BULL:
The "Bear" Facts About MILLIONAIRE!
Johnny L. Wilson
net worth and status of up to 14
players, the prodigious amount of
data involved in each different
market environment means that
only one game can be saved at a
time. This is not clearly stated in the
original manual, but will be cleared
up by a new manual which is now
in preparation.

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Millionaire
Investment Strategy
Apple, Atari 400/800,
IBM PC, Osborne
and other CP/M systems
FORMAT:
Disk
# PLAYERS: 1
PRICE:
$79.95 to $99.95
PUBLISHER: Blue Chip Software
Woodland Hills, CA

Ever notice how many books there
are about How to get rich in the
stock market? Ever wonder why
someone who had really gotten
rich on the market needed to write
a book? I know I have. I'm also glad
that Jim Zuber didn't write a book.
He took his experience on the stock
market and used it to create a
useful instrument with which to
educate and entertain. MILLIONAIRE
doesn't pretend to offer an esoteric
system for making one's fortune, but
it does have a marvelous capacity
for introducing one to the basic
mechanisms of the stock market. It
doesn't offer the spurious potential
of making a killing on the market
that some fictionalized simulations
do, nor the exotic gimmicks like
selling short (see UNFAIR CRITICISM).
It does, however, offer the user a
chance to improve his/her investment sense through experience and
increased options at each level of
expertise. MILLIONAIRE is an exciting
game, but its availability for
business-oriented computers
suggests its potential as a teaching
tool, as well.

MILLIONAIRE enables one player
to buy and sell fifteen different
recognizable stocks in five different
industry groups over the course of
seventy-seven weeks of transactions.
The computer creates ninety-one
weeks of stock market environment
and reveals thirteen weeks of history
before the player is allowed to
begin purchasing securities. Each
week (game turn), the player will
receive four basic tables of data
prior to the "command mode"
(where the player may research,
buy or sell). These are: 1) Stock
Market Graph (showing the overall
market trend); 2) Industry Group
Graph (one graph from one of the
five groups, each week); 3) News
(earnings reports, volume
indications, industry trends,
company announcements and
news which may affect business);
and 4) Market Report (changes in
prices, high and lows, and average
share changes on the market.
After this sequence, the player is
free to do research (examine
graphs of individual stocks or industry groups, review news reports,
or peruse his portfolio); start a
transaction (buy, sell or borrow);
advance to the next week; or save
the game. IMPORTANT NOTE ON
SAVING THE GAME: though the
program is capable of retaining the

Each player begins play with
$10,000 as a Novice and seeks to
increase his net worth to the levels
of $12,000 (Investor), $18,000
(Speculator), $40,000 (Professional),
$100,000 (Broker) and, of course
$1,000,00 (Millionaire). Each plateau
adds new variables of strategy. For
example, an Investor is able to buy
on margin (borrow a percentage of
the total purchase price of your
stocks), while a Novice works on a
strict cash basis. Once a player has
achieved a net worth and status,
the computer keeps it on record
and the next game begins from
that net worth. This enables up to 14
players to "compete" over a long
period of time.

SYSTEM DEFINITION
(see CGW 2.5, p. 35)
In creating the simulation, the
designer studied years of financial
journals in order to determine the
relationship of earnings, volume,
news announcements, general and
industry trends to specific stocks.
The fifteen stocks were selected on
the basis of their more or less typical
behavior. In general, the research
showed that there are three basic
variables which work together at an
approximately equivalent weight.
These are: 1) the overall stock
market picture (Bear -, Bull +, or
Mixed); 2) the industry group
(growth, glamor, stable or
depreciating); and 3) the stock
itself (sound corporate management and policy, growth potential,
solid marketing base and reasonable research and development).
The documentation noted that
earnings reports are often discounted (Wall Street-ese for
"ignored") and that volume can
indicate either big gains or big

losses. Therefore, the change
probabilities are based on the three
major indicators noted above.
There are, according to the
designer, approximately 1521
possible combinations of stock
prices alone and an equivalent
number of possibilities for the
general market and industry trends,
as well. The fact that these
probabilities influence each other
indicates a very satisfying "continuous" probability system as
opposed to the strict "discrete"
probability of boardgames and less
sophisticated programs (see CGW
2.6, p. 16 for further information).
This enables the player to use

realistic strategies in playing the
game.

STRATEGY NOTES
Pay attention to news! Every news
event has effect on a given stock
and often on an entire industry
group. for example, a technology
innovation by IBM will usually
indicate a swift rise in IBM prices for
the next week or two and often has
a derivative effect on CONTROL
DATA and NCR, as well. In my
games, hard times for BENDIX (Auto
Industry Group) is a significant
signal for me to unload GENERAL
MOTORS or AMERICAN MOTORS, as
well.

Pay attention to trends! Since the
trends of the market in general,
industry group and stock in particular are given equivalent weight
in the probability matrix, it is highly
unlikely that a stock will rise when its
own industry group and the market
in general are declining. I can testify
that this is a realistic feature, having
owned hotel stock during the 1974'75 Bear Market due to the Arab Oil
Embargo. My company had increased earnings and real growth
and expansion, but couldn't buck
the trends.
Discount earnings! Very rarely
does an earnings report cause a
significant change in the real stock

market. This is, perhaps, because
there are numerous ways to "hide"
actual earnings in corporate expansion, depreciation, new acquisitions and tax shelters. Therefore,
very rarely do they affect the stocks
within the parameters of the game.
Dollar cost average! In spite of
the obvious educational opportunities to be gleaned from this
program, it is, after all, also a game.
Now, whereas I might want to sit out
of the real market for a time, I
usually want to get into a game as
fast as I can. That can be fatal in
MILLIONAIRE, because it faithfully
creates some realistic Bear markets,
What can be done?
One strategy is dollar cost averaging. This means to buy stock in
small quantities on a regular basis
instead of one large quantity all at
once. Many people eschew this
strategy because you have more
brokerage fees, but it is successfully
used in real life by small investors
through the New York Stock Exchange's Monthly Investment Program (MIP). The theory is that 100
shares of stock at $10 each needs
to appreciate $2 per share for the
investor to make 20% on the
investment. However, 200 shares of
stock at $5 each only needs to
appreciate $1 per share for me to
make 20% on my investment.
How does that help me make
money during a bear market? First, I
select what I believe to be a sound
stock (for example, EXXON). I buy
10 shares of EXXON at $60 per share
($600 invested) and it starts to go
down in price. Some weeks later, I
spend $600 more to buy EXXON at
$40 per share. I now have 25 shares
and have spent $1200 (plus commissions of course). If I had just held
on to the first 10 shares, the price
would have to reach $66 per share
for me to make 10%. However, by
buying on the down trend, my
average cost on 25 shares is $48 per
share and the stock only needs to
recover to $52.80 instead of $66 in
order for me to make 10%. I keep
buying the stock at regular intervals
and bring the break-even point
down. This way, I can be in the

market without worrying about
whether it has actually hit bottom
or not. This enables me to "play" the
market on the downside while
continually minimizing my risk
(assuming the stock is sound
enough to ever actually recover).
The "dollar cost averager" won't
make phenomenal amounts of
money, but if he selects sound
investments, he should make
consistent profits.
Be careful with options! When a
player reaches the level of Speculator ($18,000), he is eligible to use
CALL options. A CALL option anticipates a significant rise in a stock, so
it provides for the investor to be
able to purchase the stock at a
slightly higher price (the STRIKING
price) at a later date. This assumes
that there will be a much higher
purchase price on the stock at the
later date and thus, the investor
makes money on the difference in
value. Since options are much less
expensive than stock, the investor
stands to make significantly more
money if he is correct than he would
with the full purchase price of the
stock at stake. When a player
reaches the Professional ($40,000),
he may use PUT options. A PUT
option anticipates a significant
decline in the stock, so it provides
for selling the stock at a slightly
lower price (the STRIKING price). This
means that the difference between
the much lower price and the
slightly lower STRIKING price (if the
investor is correct) is the potential
profit.
Since options are a time valued
mechanism, recognize that values
of options usually drop as they near
their expiration dates. This means, of
course, that one should only invest
in options on stocks where there is
an expectation of significant
fluctuation in the relatively near
future. For example, it would be
foolish to be hedging against a
Bear market using "dollar cost
averaging" and then invest in CALL
Options on the same or related
stock. As the manual notes, it is
possible to see the stock make a
moderate gain and still have the
player lose money on the option

because the expiration date is so
near.

UNFAIR CRITICISM
It has been suggested by some
gamers experience with the other
"stock market games now on the
market, that the game suffers from
a missing mechanism. Many who
are new to the strategies of
investments are disappointed because the possibility of "selling
short" is not available in the
simulation. This is undoubtedly
because "selling short" (selling stock
on credit that you don't actually
have) is an exotic strategy which
depends on a very hefty line of
credit. It seems superfluous to a
market which has PUT options. If the
investor feels a stock is headed for a
certain decline, he stands to make
much more money by playing the
less expensive PUT options (which
enables him to option for more total
shares) than taking the riverboat
gamble of "selling short" on the
expensive market value of stock
itself.

WISHFUL THINKING
DEPARTMENT
Because of the enormous amount
of data to be saved for each game
environment and the problem with
saving more than one game, I wish
that the program allowed for saving
onto a separate disk, similar to
several other programs. This would
make wonderful use of the potential
for 14 players to use the program
and compete against each other
on a continuous basis.
I also wish that more than one
player could buy and sell in the
same market. My profits and high
score in a Bull market may be very
poor compared to a friend's
moderate gains and relatively low
score in a bear market. The only
way we can actually compete is to
work in the same "game time"
frame. I realize this would probably
entail using both a game disk and
data disk, but it would be worth it.
Continued on p.40

ROBOTWAR: Tournament Results

possible situations in which his robot
might find itself and program accordingly, making the game great for
learning computer logic. Most robotwar designs are the end product of
months of refinements.

THE ROBOTS
ARC MAN — entered by Bill Logsdon
of Tulsa, OK. Arc Man travels in a wide
clockwise circle, varying his right hand
turns according to the distance from
the walls. Arc Man uses a vector
movement routine based on "a two
term Taylor's approximation of the
sine function".
Anaheim (CGW) — The people
here at COMPUTER GAMING WORLD
are still buzzing over the recently held
CGW ROBOTWAR TOURNAMENT in
which, as Howard Cosell would say,
"Armored automatons of Armageddon reduced each other to piles of
robotic refuse, fit only for recycling."
Twelve quarrelsome cybernetic
competitors were entered in the
competition (along with 3 fill-in
robots). In an exciting contest
DRAGON, by Doug Hogg of Los
Angeles, rolled away as the big
winner.
The competition was fierce with the
pre-tournament favorite, NORDEN B,
finishing third. NORDEN B, an improved
version of NORDEN+ who won last
year's tournament was tied for the
lead after the round robin but was
held at bay in the finals by the likes of
DRAGON, CORNER, and HOT ROD.
Three robots which came with
Robotwar, by Muse Software, were
used as fill-ins or "shills".
THE GAME
Robotwar, by Muse Software, is a
game in which players design robots
using a special robotwar computer
language not unlike BASIC. Once the
robots are designed and tested they
are put up against one another in
battle. As many as five robots can be
on the battlefield at one time, moving,
searching for one another, and firing
their cannon when they see an enemy
robot (all other robots are enemies).
Once a robot is on the battlefield the
player/designer has no control over
the actions of his creation. He must
anticipate, in the design stage, the

AROUND — another entry by Bill
Logsdon. Around goes around the
outer perimeter of the arena in a
counter-clockwise manner. In effect it
becomes a bottom robot, then a side,
then a top, etc.
BOTTOM — A fill in robot from the
original game. Bottom goes to the
bottom of the playing field then travels
back and forth scanning upward and
firing at any robots he sees.
CORNER — entered by David A.
Jones of Tulsa, OK. Corner heads for a
corner position (usually the upper
left) and, in that tuck position, can
maximize his scan and firepower by
reducing the area to be covered to a
90 degree arch. When damaged,
Corner steps out of the corner
momentarily to minimize damage
from repeat fire. Corner watches
closely for "edge" robots making their
way toward him (the bane of any
corner-type robot).
DIAMOND — Another Bill Logsdon
entry. Diamond remains stationary
until damaged. When hit he high-tails
it to another wall at an angle with the
overall pattern looking like a diamond.
He has a high speed tracking routine
that can destroy center moving
robots.
GRAVE — entered by Robert Hogg
(Doug Hogg's 8 year old son who
programmed it himself, although
Doug wrote down some code for
him). Grave goes back and forth
across the top firing downward. He
will stop when he sees a side robot
directly below him and fires continually until the other robot moves or
dies.

DRAGON — the tournament winner
by Doug Hogg of Los Angeles, circles
the screen just off the edge efficiently
strafing robots along the side. He will
also, in some situations scan into the
middle and attack center-type robots.
The secret in Robotwar is to survive.
Points are awarded for surviving rather
than for killing. If a robot can avoid
getting damaged he will win regardless of whether he inflicts a great deal
of damage (let the other guys slug it
out, I'll just stay here out of the way
and win). This design philosophy has
a flaw however. Obviously some firepower is needed, for eventually only
two robots will be left in a battle. A
passive robot is then doomed. Dragon
is a robot that is designed to minimize
damage. And, even though his firepower is not as effective as NORDEN B,
or CORNER, he does pack enough
punch to take out an opponent. His
pattern, just off the edge makes him
less likely to be damaged. He won't
collide with the edge and corner
robots, and is far enough from the
center to avoid direct run-ins with
center robots.
HOT ROD — A bottom robot that
travels left and right shooting upward
even if no target is detected. It checks
both to the right and left for other
bottom robots and will fire at same
until death of one or the other. The
random shots are more effective than
one might expect. When a robot is
spotted fire is very accurate.
Hot Rod was entered by Frank
Krogh of Los Angeles, Cal.
JAWS — Another entry by 8 year old
Robert Hogg. Jaws makes his way to
the bottom center of the field. Where
he is effective in hitting center robots
such as Norden.
MOVER — A fill-in robot that moves
when he is hit, It search 360 degrees.
NORDEN B — entered by Richard
Fowell of Palos Verdes Estates. A
refined version of last year's winner,
NORDEN+; Norden B has a very
effective tracking algorithm and is
impressive at hitting robots while
moving a high speeds. Norden B waits
a short time to allow side and corner
robots to clear the center then begins
an elliptical movement pattern that
changes when hit.

RANDOM — Another fill-in robot.
Random moves in a random fashion
firing if he sees another robot.
THOR II — entered by David
Meredith of Merrimack, NH. Thor II is
corner robot who heads for the nearest
corner. He often lost on slug-outs with
"Corner".
WILDMAN — entered by Neal Buck
of Tulsa, OK. The editor's favorite (for
it's colorful nature, certainly not for it's
ability to win). Wildman is a 100%
offensive robot (his victims certainly
thought he was offensive). When he
spots another robot he charges pellmell after it firing all the way. Robots
on the move could escape his
tracking about two thirds of the the
time, but the other one third of the
time they were in for real trouble.
Robots that did not move—died.
Unfortunately for Wildman, his offensive nature was his own demise as
he had no damage checking routine
which caused him to walk into certain
death more often than not.
ZIGZAG — entered by Algis Seskus
of Broken Arrow, OK. Zigzag moves in
a zig-zag fashion searching three
times on each leg of the zig-zag.

THE CONTEST
All robots competed in a round
robin in which each contestant robot
faced each other contestant an
equal number of times (24 battles for
each robot). The top 5 robots entered
the finals. There was a tie for the fifth
position between Corner and Arc
Man. Corner won the best of 7 playoff
to go to the finals. The finalists fought
25 battles against one another with
DRAGON coming out comfortably on
top. Congratulations to DRAGON and
it's designer Doug Hogg!
ROBOT "DRAGON"

BY DOUG HOGG

BEGIN
223 TO S
IF Y > 127 GOTO CHECKDOWN
IF X < 127 GOTO SLOWUP
GOTO SLOWRIGHT
CHECKDOWN
IF X > 127 GOTO SLOWDOWN
GOTO SLOWLEFT

SOUP
O TO K TO H
O - S TO V TO SPEEDY
GOSUB MOVEIT
BLOWUP
30 + R * 4 TO SPEEDY
GORIGHT
90 TO K
O TO V
S TO H TO SPEEDX
1000 * 3 TO J
GOSUB MOVEIT
SLOWRIGHT
O - R - 30 - 5 * 4 TO SPEEDX
GODOWN
180 TO K:
S TO V TO SPEEDY
O TO H
GOSUB MOVEIT
SLOWDOWN
O -- R - 30 - 5 * 4 TO SPEEDY
GOLEFT
270 TO K
O TO V
O - S TO H TO SPEEDX
10 TO I
IF 5 < W TO I
I TO W
GOSUB MOVEIT
SLOWLEFT
:30 + R * 4 TO SPEEDX
GOTO GOUP
MOVEIT
K - 8 TO L
K + 90 TO M
N -- 5 TO RADAR
K + 180 TO 0
24 - RADAR TO R
IF R > 0 N - 2 TO AIM
IF R
0 TO T TO SHOT
IF T = 1 DATA + 1 TO DATA
INDEX + 1 TO INDEX
• 4 1 TO INDEX
IF DATA < 2 K - 17 TO AIM
IF DATA > 1 K + 85 TO AIM
IF R < 24 205 TO SHOT
0 = H TO SPEEDX
= V TO SPEEDY
K + 203 TO N
1 TO 6 TO T
GOSUB MT
ENDSUB
LOOKBACK
O TO RADAR
O - RADAR TO R
> 0 0 TO AIM
IF R > 0 R + 27 TO SHOT
-256 -- R TO R
IF R < 0 > -105 ENDSUB
BACKSHOT
N - 4 TO N TO RADAR
25 - RADAR TO R
25 TO T
> 25 N - 1 TO AIM
IFR

MT
K TO RADAR
O - RADAR TO R
0 > -105 ENDSUB
0 K TO AIM
IF R > 0 R -10 TO SHOT
IF R > 0 1 TO DATA
L - 4 TO L TO RADAR
G - 1 TO G
< -2 ENDSUB
O - RADAR TO R
> 0 TO T
> 0 -675 * 3 / R + 20 + L TO AIM
IF R > 0 TO SHOT
0 0 TO DATA
IF DATA < 2 GOTO LOOKBACK
M TO RADAR
-15 + W TO F
O - RADAR TO R
> 110 J
R TO F
IF R
0 < 111 -3 TO F
M + F TO AIM
R + 24 TO SHOT
215 TO SHOT
GOTO MT

ROBOTWAR DISK
OFFER
Can't find an opponent for your
ROBOTWAR creations? Want to find
out how to make better robot
designs? Looking for new blood?
Then you will want to get CGW's
Robotwar diskette.
CGW's Robotwar Diskette contains the source code for all
entrants from our Second Annual
Robotwar Tournament (with the
exception of Norden B) including
the winner DRAGON. The disk also
includes last year's winner,
NORDEN+. Twelve robots in all.
To order send a check for $10.00
to COMPUTER GAMING WORLD,
P.O. BOX 4566,
ANAHEIM, CA 92803-4566.
California residents add 6% sales
tax. Allow 2-3 weeks for delivery.
ROBOTWAR is a trademark of Muse
Software. Robotwar runs on an
Apple II with 48K and Applesoft in
ROM.

Listen To The Mockingboard:
Sound & Speech For The Apple II

Thomas Cleaver
separate outputs which can be
plugged into a stereo system or
directly into speakers, I have found
that the signals are quite strong, so
that direct connection to speakers
gives plenty of volume. One of the
outputs provides sound effects, and
the other provides synthesized
speech. Both outputs have volume
controls. The board retails for S299
(talk is not cheap).

SOUND EFFECTS
You sit down before your computer and boot your new game disk. A
wizard materializes on the screen,
accompanied by a clap of thunder
from your eighty watt stereo sound
system. The mage points a bony
finger at you and asks in a voice like
the rustle of dry leaves, "Do you dare
accompany me to the Lair of the
White Worm?" You answer in a
quavering voice, "Yes, my liege.
Lead on." And the adventure begins.
What's this? Games that talk? And
respond to spoken English? Well, yes
and no. The above game is still a
dream, and it will not be a reality
until further hardware and software
advances are made.
Speech recognition by computers
is still in its infancy. Some progress
has been made in speaker-dependent voice recognition, but you
have to train the computer to
understand your voice, and massive
amounts of memory are required
just to recognize a few words.
Speaker-independent voice recognition, which would be required for
the game described above, is still
at least ten years away from being
practical.
But computer speech is here
today. Sparked by Texas Instruments
research into linear predictive coding (LPC), as used in
Speak-and-Spell, and Votrax research in phoneme synthesis, there are now several
speech peripherals that can be
purchased for personal computers.
The Mockingboard is one of them.
The Mockingboard Sound/Speech
I plugs into any of the peripheral
slots of the Apple II. It has two

You may ask, "Why do we need
special sound effects hardware
when we can get all the sound
effects we need through the Apple's
built-in speaker?" The things that
have been done in sound generation within the Apple are truly
amazing. The typical Joe Computerfreak doesn't realize the contortions
a programmer has to go through to
get a specific sound from Apple's
crummy little speaker. He must write
his code in machine language, and
he is limited to doing but two things:
pushing the speaker cone out and
pulling it back in; therefore he must
make each sound by "bit-banging"
— driving the speaker cone in or out
at precisely spaced times. And worst
of all, he must "integrate" the sound
effects with the rest of the program.
For example in an arcade game
program the programmer must
move an object on the screen,
bang the speaker, check to see if a
key has been pressed, bang the
speaker, check for object collisions
on the screen, bang the speaker,
etc. I have the greatest respect for
the Budge's and Gebelli's who can
make all this sound and motion
seem so smooth.
Special sound effects hardware,
such as is available in the Atari and
the Commodore 64, make this programming task much easier. You
just set up the sound you want, start
it running, then go back to your
display and operations program.
This sort of thing is possible in the
Apple only by use of additional
hardware, such as the Mockingboard, plugged into a peripheral
slot.
The sound effects channel in the
Mockingboard is based on the

General Instrument AY-3-8910 Programmable Sound Generator chip.
It contains three tone generators, a
noise generator, a mixer, and an
envelope generator. The frequencies
of the three tones can be very finely
controlled so that, for example, a
three-note chord could be produced. The noise generator can be
used to produce sounds like gunshots and explosions. The envelope
generator provides various amplitude modulation schemes for the
sounds; for example, a rising and
falling amplitude with noise as the
input will produce a sound like
waves on a beach.
Sweet Micro Systems, the manufacturer of the Mockingboard, provides a demo diskette to show off
the sound effects. They include
bomb, laser, pump, helicopter, train,
and several others. They are all fairly
well done, but they aren't much better than could be expected from
speaker bit-banging. The disk also
contains a music routine, which is a
bit better. It uses the Apple keyboard
as a piano.
There was no software which
showed how to program the sound
generator chip, how to edit sound
effects, or how to use the capabilities of the board in your own programs. There weren't even any
useful comment statements in the
demo programs.
To make matters worse, the accompanying documentation was of little
help in this respect. The instructions
for developing custom sound effects
were sketchy, at best, and were
directed to the machine language
programmer. A BASIC programmer
would be S.O.L. if he tried to use this
manual. By fooling around in
machine language I was able to
make a few rudimentary sound
effects, but I quickly determined
that a sound effects editor was a
minimum software requirement.

SPEECH EFFECTS
The speech channel of the Mockingboard is based on the Votrax SC01 Speech Synthesizer chip. It uses
Continued on pg.47

the
learning
game
This month we'll look at four Apple games suitable for
pre-schoolers. When reviewing software for young
children, I pay particular attention to three factors. Let's
look at these first to set some guidelines.
First is simplicity. It's confusing to have to press the
escape key in one place, the return key in another,
and the spacebar in a third. Better to have one key
serve the same function everywhere; this is an
important factor in what the ads call "userfriendliness". I call it simple common sense. Adults
cope better with poor design since they can read
instructions on the screen. For non-readers, the
program must be kept simple enough that they can
remember what to do. This usually means a menu — to
remind you what is available and to simplify (one
keystroke) the process of getting there. Clever use of
pictures and graphics can help too.
Another important aspect of software for kids is errortrapping. This is the ability of the program to ignore or
recover when you do something wrong. Children often
like to try something just to see what happens; this is
the primary way they learn about the world.
Sometimes they experiment within the context of the
program (and any good game for kids should allow
this), sometimes they'll experiment outside — like
hitting the RESET key "just for fun". This curiosity is good;
if you discourage it in any way, you discourage
learning. And a program that has to be re-booted is
certainly discouraging. When testing these games I
tried as many "experiments" as I could. I also gave
them to the kids with encouragement to try anything
that wouldn't damage the disks.
JUGGLES' RAINBOW
NAME:
Spatial concepts
TYPE:
Apple II+, 48K, 3.3
SYSTEM:
Diskette
FORMAT:
BACKUP:
$12 by mail
# PLAYERS: 1
$45.00
PRICE:
PUBLISHER: The Learning Company
Portola Valley, CA

BOP-A-BET
Alphabet
Apple II+, 48K, 3.3
Diskette
None
1
$34.95
Sunnyside Software
Fresno, CA

by Bob Proctor

My children (one is six and one eleven) and their
friends also help me evaluate the third important
aspect of these games: longevity. By this, I simply mean
how long any one child will stay interested in it. That
natural curiosity mentioned above will cause them to
play ANY game once. There is a tendency, though, to
grow bored with a game before the skills involved are
truly mastered unless there is something that motivates
them to keep playing. It has to be enjoyable and stay
enjoyable. This means you shouldn't do or say anything
which suggests failure.
Let's start with the game designed with the youngest
"users" in mind. This would be JUGGLES' RAINBOW from
The Learning Company. It uses brightly-colored
rainbows, butterflies and windmills plus lots of music
and will even keep infants entertained. It requires no
reading skills, anyone who can recognize the numbers
from 1 to 3 can use it without help. Option four on the
menu, the question mark, is a configuration screen
that lets anyone who CAN read turn off the sound or
the picture clues (thus forcing the player to read the
wordclues). Once you select a number, you don't have
to hit any specific key. The keyboard is divided into
banks of keys to teach the concepts of left, right,
above, and below. You can divide the keys with a strip
of yarn or paper —blue is best since the program uses
a blue bar to divide the screen.
When your child begins to learn the alphabet,
consider getting BOP-A-BET. This is a maze game where
you steer a boxing glove using four keys. You bop
MICRO MOTHER GOOSE
Pre-school arcade
Apple II+, 48K, 3.3 P or J
Diskette [DOS 3.3)
Copyable
1
$39.95
Software Productions
Columbus, OH

SPELLING BEE GAMES
Spelling
Apple II+, 48K, 3.3, P
Diskette
None
1 to 4
$29.95
EDU-WARE
Agoura, CA

letters in alphabetical order by pushing the space bar
and if you bop them out of sequence nothing
happens. The object is to bop as many as you can
within a time limit. When you boot the disk, there are
some questions that let you change the time limit, the
speed of the bopper, the keys used, and choose upper
or lower case. This part requires an older person who
can read but once started, four and five year-olds will
have no trouble.

Of the four, only MICRO MOTHER GOOSE is copyable.
The good people at Software Productions even provide
a label for your extra copy, which impressed me more
than the posters and stickers that also came with it. A
back-up copy of JUGGLES' RAINBOW is available by
mail for $12. This is much less convenient, but
reasonable compared to those that are copyprotected and offer no backup at all! That hardly
seems appropriate for software aimed at children.

MICRO MOTHER GOOSE will also entertain infants. It
allows you to select one of nine nursery rhymes; it plays
each tune while the words and some animated
graphics appear on the screen. The menu (only half is
shown) is well done — it has a distinctive symbol
alongside the words so that non-readers can use the
game once they get familiar with it. Many children will
know some of these rhymes, so seeing the words on the
screen may help in learning to read. However, only the
very young (with no concept of reading) want to see
the rhymes more than once, what older kids want to
do is play the three arcade games which are also part
of this package. These games are based on themes
from nursery rhymes and require paddles. The simplest
is Lamb Scram, where you help Mary get three lambs
through a hole in the hedge before the Big Bad Wolf
gets them. Then you have Splat!, wherein you catch
eggs as they fall off a wall. Finally you have London
Bridge-out, which is our old friend Breakout (or Brickout) in new clothes. Although much simpler than other
versions of this game, it is still the most difficult of the
three. These games are well done and should provide
kids in the three to six group with lots of fun — unless
older kids are playing something else, in which case
the younger crowd will want to play the same thing.

All of these games seem immune to inaccurate keypressing, although three of them have done nothing
about the RESET key. In JUGGLES' RAINBOW, The RESET
key restarts the current module, in the other three it reboots the disk. This may not be much of a problem with
late-model Apples, since they can be set up so that
CTRL and RESET must be pushed at the same time, but
owners of earlier Apples will have to give special
training or physically protect the RESET key.

The last game we'll look at this month is SPELLING BEE
GAMES from Edu-Ware. This is a set of four games which
share a common vocabulary and theme — each of
the words is represented graphically by a hi-res picture.
The games are Squadron, Skyhook, Puzzle, and
Convoy. Squadron requires two players and paddles;
each player flies an airplane to "shoot down" the word
that matches the picture at the bottom. The other
three games are all for one to four players. In Skyhook,
you see a picture and some scrambled letters; you use
the paddle to control a helicopter to pick up letters
and put them in the right place to spell the word. In
Puzzle, you get a few seconds to memorize six pictures
before they are concealed; players then take turns
guessing where the picture was that goes with the
word at the bottom. Convoy is a truck race in which a
picture appears at the top of the screen and players
take turns typing the next letter in the word; each
correct guess moves your truck forward a little. Note,
that Convoy is the only game that requires you to hit
the actual keys for each letter. There is a configuration
module which can be reached by pressing a "secret"
key from the menu. It allows parents or teachers to
select the vocabulary units used, There are 22 units on
the disk; they begin with simple two and three letter
words and get more complex, up to a third or fourth
grade level.
In terms of simplicity, three of these four games can
be used by the age groups for which they were
intended. BOP-A-BET would also qualify except for
those questions at the start which set up the game.
However, you also have to ask yourself if your children
(or students) can be entrusted with the only copy of a
$30 to $40 disk.

Of this month's four games, SPELLING BEE GAMES is
the only one that the play-test group asks for now that
testing is finished. Of course, this is due in part to their
average age level, which is too old to be enthralled by
nursery rhymes, but it is also a credit to the graphics
since the kids ask for it (sometimes) instead of any of
the arcade games we have. It is an excellent example
of the motivational value of games because it is similar
to, but much more popular than, Edu-Ware's SPELLING
BEE AND READING PRIMER which doesn't use the game
format.
The following abbreviations are used in the SYSTEM
requirements: P- paddles, J-joystick, 3.3.=DOS 3.3
Whenever an Apple II+ is specified, an Apple II with
Applesoft in ROM may be used.

Its time again for another issue of
Computer Gaming World and Microcomputer Mathemagic. First of all,
did you find a winning strategy for
the game of FIFTY? For those of you
tuning in for the first time (where
have you been?), this game is
played by two players who alternate
turns in picking a number. In each
case, the players choose from '1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6 and a running tally is kept. First
player to make the tally hit 50 wins.

multiples of 7, you will find this to be
the unique winning strategy.

In the last issue of CGW I gave one
computer listing of a program which
allows one to play against either a
human or computer opponent.
Recall that the computer opponent
plays first and the program prompts
for whether you wish it to play
somewhat randomly or completely
logically. (In the latter case, the
computer is unbeatable, as you will
see momentarily from a discussion
of strategy).

TABLE #1

If you played enough, you should
have discovered that whoever goes
first has a natural advantage in the
game, but this is not obvious at first.
In fact, when people first play, they
usually pick numbers randomly for
the first few turns. When the tally hits
the thirties, the action slows down as
the players begin to think: "What
should I pick now?".
This leads the player to examining
his optimum situations. When the
tally is getting close to around 40,
you would like to have the total be
43 (which is 7 less than 50, please
note) after your turn. Why 43, you
ask? Well, the opponent has to pick
at least 1 and at most 6. If he picks '1,
the total becomes 44 and you can
pick 6 on your next turn to win. On
the other hand, the most he can
pick is 6, for a total of 49 after his
turn, so he can't win. You can probably see now that no matter what
he picks, you can then win.
Okay, so what about the previous
turn? Well, by the same kind of reasoning, you would like the tally to be
36, which is 7 less than 43. Why? So
then no matter what your opponent
picks, you can make the total after
that turn become 43. Specifically, if
he picks x, then you pick 7-x. (If he
picks 1, you pick 6; if he picks 2, then
you pick 5, etc.)
If you trace this argument backwards, subtracting more and more

Whoever goes first can always win
by first picking 1, and thereafter,
whenever your opponent picks x,
you pick 7-x on the immediately following turn. This insures that at the
end of your turns the running totals
are 1, then 8, then '15, then 22, then
29, 36, 43 and finally, 50.

PLAYER #1 PLAYER #2
1
3
4
1
6
5
2
6
1
3
4
1
6
5
2

TOTAL
4
9
20
28
32
37
48
50

TYPICAL GAME IN WHICH COMPUTER (#1)
WINS BY THE STRATEGY (TRS-80 VERSION)

I still invite readers to consider the
questions raised last issue. For
instance, what happens if you alter
the game to include fewer choices,
such as only being able to choose
2,3,4,5 each time; or playing for
more points; or making the choice
of numbers vary each turn. (You
could let players choose 1 or 2 only
second turn; 1, 2, 3, or 4 on their third
on their turn, and T
son). he possibilities are quite endless, and I would
be glad to hear from readers about
interesting variations.

ported by other computers (although
Apples and some others have comparable commands, I have been
told), so I had to provide what I
could. Okay, enough about style for
now...Let's look at something new!

THE McDONALD'S
PERMUTED CHANGE
PROBLEM
Last issue I mentioned that I would
like to provide something of a programming challenge, and this is it.
First, the problem itself and its history. Approximately seven years
ago, while still living in New York
City, I went into a McDonald's restaurant and noticed the following
interesting incident. I ordered a
meal that cost $1.85. I handed the
counter person a ten dollar bill, and
noticed that my change, $8.15, had
the same exact digits as the price.
This led me to the question: Are
there other prices (other than $1.85
or $8.15) whose change from $10.00
contains the exact same digits as
the price itself?
My challenge to you is to write a
BASIC program to find all such prices. Send these to me and I will publish the best ones a few issues down
the road.
Next issue I will have some new
goodies for you. In the meantime,
send all your comments, questions,
suggestions, and so on to me
directly:

One other thing that I would like
to see are superior programs. These
might be programs which have better error catching routines, superior
displays, etc. In fact, I wonder how
many readers noticed my goof in
Microcomputer Mathemagic column
#1 (Vol. 2, #6) in which both program listings have prompts "Press
any key to continue" instead of
what I should have had, "Press
ENTER to continue". (I was confusing
INKEY$ with INPUT at the time,
evidently).

For personal replies, which I will be
pleased to make, it would help if
you would enclose a self-addressed
stamped envelope.

In a similar vein, surely some
reader can provide a nicer display
than the one I gave for FIFTY last
issue. The problem is to make a program applicable to and compatible with most major brands of computers. The original program used
the "print @" command for the TRS80 to obtain a nice display. Unfortunately, this command is not sup-

Dr. Michael W. Ecker is Assistant
Professor of Mathematics at the
Pennsylvania State University, the
Worthington Scranton Campus, in
the Scranton, PA. area. His ambition
is to be able to say that he is Associate Professor of Mathematics at
the Pennsylvania State University in
the Scranton, PA, area.

Dr. Michael W. Ecker
COMPUTER GAMING WORLD
Luzerne 8
Viewmont Village
Scranton, PA. 18508

EPIDEMIC: "An Apple (or PC) a day. . ."

Valerie Trott
DAY 3
US clean suits totally ineffective!!
The virus is too small and goes
right thru the filter units. . .worst
of all, the US HAS infected
Canada!

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Epidemic
TYPE:
Strategy
SYSTEM:
Apple, IBM-PC
FORMAT:
Disk
# PLAYERS: 1
PRICE:
$34.95
PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA
UNEDCOC (United Nations Emergency Disease Control Center) Mt
Olympus, Antarctica
DAY 1
Meteorites impacted last night in
the United States, Scandinavia,
and India, triggering raging
epidemics of a strange alien
disease in each region.
Disease rate in the US is the
lowest of the three, at 2.4 on the
1 to 5 scale, with 5 indicating
Pneumonic Plague level. We've
hit Scandinavia and India with
Gamma Globulin treatments.
DAY 2
Over 88 Million dead worldwide.
Epidemic in the US now 2.7 and
rising. Scandinavia Gamma
Globuinefctvslow
average, deathrate stable. Indian
epidemic is at stasis, and so will
not spread or escalate—a good
buffer zone.
Today we instituted a 5 day
"Clean Suit" policy in the US.
Effects should be felt immediately
to some effect and strongly
within 2 to 3 days,

In Scandinavia, the Gamma
Globulin treatments are having
only miniscule effect. . .and we
can't recall the mobile teams in
less than two more days!! They're
dying like flies!! ETA of the
Pheumonic Level in THREE DAYS!!
The only bright point is that India
has been cured!
DAY 6
This epidemic is getting out of
hand! US entered Pneumonic
Phase, 145 million dead, and the
disease has spread to Central
America. Western Europe and
China both getting worse, and
the Soviet Delegate is calling for
Nuclear Sterilization of North
America.
DAY 7
Greenland, Eastern Europe, and
the Soviet Union now infected!!
Mass panic spreading worldwide
as total deaths approach one
billion. Anti-Pneumonic Remedy
#4 failed in US, total destruction
of all sentient life in that region
expected in three days!!
DAY 9
We haven't got a chance. . .the
epidemic is too widespread. . .we've
tried everything„ . too late. . . feel
feverish, . .can't think clearly
. .why are there green and
purple spots on my hands?... .
can anyone out there hear
me???
Thus ended my first attempt at
Level Four, the easiest level of SSI'S
New introductory strategy game
Epidemic. The world is broken down
into fourteen geographical regions
which are menaced by a swarm of
meteorites carrying the deadly alien
microbes which, on its last swing
thru this part of space, wiped out
the dinosaurs!!
Each turn you'll view a world

status update, telling you how many
have died in each area, how long
before the regional epidemic
reaches Pnemonic Phase (becomes
airborne and even more deadly),
and whether the infection level is
rising or falling.
This update helps you formulate
your overall strategy, after which
you'll get a radar update (showing
locations of approaching meteorites) and finally a world map
update with a menu allowing you
to obtain detailed regional information, to initiate attempted
cures and/or fire missiles at incoming meteorites, and even to
nuke areas that are too far gone!
Unfortunately, you have a very
limited number of actions per turn.
At levels 4 and 3 (the two easiest)
you have only two options per turn,
while at level 2 and 1 (the hardest)
you have three options per turn. This
often leads to conflicts between
whether to treat an already infected
area or launch a missile at an
incoming 'target' to try and prevent
additional regional infections.
Your primary strategy should be
to create stasis zones (infection
level between 1.0 and 2.0) which
will prevent the spread of the
epidemic to other regions. If a
region slips past stasis and is fully
cured, you may regret it very quickly
when that region becomes reinfected and you have to start all
over again.
The best cure you have is Interferon. Unfortunately, you only have
one day's supply of Interferon per
epidemic per region, and you just
can't be everywhere at once. All
remedies except Interferon last for
more than one day — two to five
days is the range — and each has
its own effectiveness curve.
The catch is that any given
remedy can be more or less
effective than anticipated, and
once you start something, it has to
run its course before you can try
another remedy. For example, in
the game described above, when
the "clean suits" in the US were
Continued on p.46

COSMIC BALANCE (Cont.)
For ship to ship combat between
dreadnoughts, the following generalities should be useful in designing
new ships. A high technology ship is
usually stronger than more numerous lower technology ships. Crew
efficiency of one is adequate for
high technology ships. For a dreadnought with short range weapons,
about 15 to 20 percent of the total
space should be armor, and don't
skimp on shields. A ship with mostly
short range weapons needs lots of
protection in order to get in close,
hit hard, and get back out safely
again. Siege phasers are the most
economical short range weapon,
but you should also have about
one photon torpedo to drain shields,
and one plasma (if you can afford
it) to destroy armor. Give your ship
extra engines as you will need the
extra power to repair shields and to
change course when you take
damage. You should have about
five to ten marine detachments on
board as insurance against transporter ships like Ship B. You don't
need many because one surviving
crew or marine detachment can
operate the ship. You should have
about 12 to 16 belts as insurance
against ships like Ship A. All ships
must have a range of at least one if
you plan to use them in the new
strategic game.
A final word of caution: if the
situation looks desperate, don't be
ashamed to run away before the
dastardly Klingons breach the
shields. Discretion really is the better
part of valor. Even the immortal

John Paul Jones once said, "Give
me a fast ship, for I intend to sail in
harm's way!" Good luck and good
hunting!

Other projects being worked on at SSI include
a WWII European Theatre game which will cover
the war from England to Moscow. Land, sea, and
air units will play a role in this "monster game".
Gary Grigsby is working on an Eastern Front WWII
game which will run on the Apple and Atari.
Using the Guadalcanal game system, the game
will involve strategic and tactical movement
modes in a week-per-turn format.
Bruce Ketchledge ( Dneiper River Line—Avalon
Hill) is working on a Geo-political game for SSI. It
will involve economic, political, and military
elements and will run on the Apple and perhaps
the Commodore 64. Look for it this summer.
Several SSI games are being translated to the
Commodore 64 including BATTLE FOR
NORMANDY and COMPUTER BASEBALL. There is
still no projected date for the Atari 400/800
version of COMPUTER BASEBALL (problems with
getting the out-of-house programmer to deliver).

MILLIONAIRE (Cont.)

SUMMARY

INDUSTRY NEWS (Cont.)
Blue Chip Software (see the review of
Millionaire in this issue) has announced a new
commodity market simulation—TYCOON.
TYCOON will allow players to engage in complex
trading of futures contracts in gold, soybeans,
Treasury bills, foreign currency, pork bellies and
other commodities. It will be released first for the
IBM PC and followed by versions for the Apple,
CPM and CPM 86. The simulation will retail at
S79.95 for the Apple version and $99.95 for the
other versions.
PDI (Program Design, Inc.) has announced
that they have moved their headquarters. The
new address is: 95 East Putnam Ave., Greenwich,
CT06830.
There are four new releases from Avant-Garde
Creations for the IBM PC: AIR TRAFFIC
CONTROLLER, TERRAN JEOPARDY, FEDERATION,
and LAZER MAZE. All four games retail for $29.95
and all but the first require the Color Graphics
Adapter.
Coming soon from Sirius Software on ATARI disk
is the hi-res adventure game THE BLADE OF
BLACKPOOLE ( $39.95).
Strategic Simulations has moved. Their new
address is 883 Stierlin Rd. Bid. A-200, Mountain
View, CA 94043.
SSI has released the long awaited revised
version of COMPUTER AMBUSH. They have also
released their Battle of Britain game, FIGHTER
COMMAND. Both run on the Apple II. SSI will have
a number of April releases. RAPID DEPLOYMENT
FORCE-1985 which is the second release in the
"When Superpowers Collide" series (Apple);
NORTH ATLANTIC-1986 by Gary Grigsby (Apple);
KNIGHTS OF THE DESERT which covers the North
African Campaign in WWII. KOTD will run on the
Apple, TRS-80, and Atari (joystick control in the
Atari version). Other April releases will be COSMIC
BALANCE 2: THE STRATEGIC GAME for the Apple
and Atari; GALACTIC GLADIATORS for the IBM-PC
and the Atari.

MILLIONAIRE is a stimulating
experience for anyone who enjoys
the strategic decisions inherent in
high finance. Its system definition,
based on careful research and
continuous probability, makes the
game both realistic and fascinating.
The levels of expertise and their
varied options, along with the
potential for different market
environments, give the game an
assured longevity in the strategy
gamer's library.
ATARI ARENA (Cont.)
Garden, for instance, takes over a
minute to begin, and must be
rebooted to start with a new
garden. None of the games have a
pause command, None of them
record a high score.
The standards for cartridge games
have been established by games
like Star Raiders and Missile
Command. Broderbund is bringing
out at least Choplifter and Serpentine in cartridge form. Synapse
plans to release all their games in
cartridge, with Shamus already
available. Against competition such
as that, any company producing
cartridge software is going to have
to come up with solid, professional
products if they want to compete.
Have you heard? Atari is bringing
out an expanded Eastern Front on
a cartridge. The year is going to get
better.

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Championship Blackjack
TYPE:
Educational & Entertaining
SYSTEM:
IBM-PC
Disk
FORMAT:
# PLAYERS: 5-Card
6-Micro
PUBLISHER: PC Software
San Diego. CA

Blackjack lovers this is it! With
Championship Blackjack from PC
Software you can play under realistic conditions using the rules from all
the gambling funspots. Before going
into the details, a rundown of the
features and playing options available with Championship Blackjack
should be enough to convince you,
as it did me, that it is an outstanding
blackjack software package which
is even better than the hard-wired
setups you put your quarters into at
the casino while you're waiting in
line to see a dinner show.
The game options include:
• All allowable plays are supported,
including stand, hit, double, split,
resplit, insurance, and surrender;
• Single or multiple decks;
• Tournament and double exposure play;
• Choice of casino rules, including
Vegas Strip, Vegas Downtown,
Atlantic City, Tahoe, and Reno;
• Ability to set your own rules;
• Julian Braun's Basic and PointCount System strategies.
The game features include:
• Monochrome and color displays,
with sound;
• Menu-driven screens;
• Player statistics;
• Simulations.
The game is so complete that about
all you can't do is order cocktails
and look at the dealer's eyes when
he checks for blackjack.
The game will accommodate up
to six players and any of these can
be played by the computer itself.
Players automatically have their
moves checked against the basic
strategy developed by Julian Braun

and, additionally, player's moves
can also be checked against
Braun's Point-Count system. Poor
decisions based upon these systems, are then indicated by appropriate messages.
The general flow of the game is as
expected. Cards are shuffled, bets
are placed, hands are dealt, and
players make their decisions. What
makes this game an excellent
instructional tool, is that at the
upper left of the screen, the program displays the running count,
the true count (since you can't
actually see the shoe to see how
many decks are left), the recommended move using basic strategy,
and the recommended move using
the Point-Count system. And, if you
still can't make up your mind, there
is a help screen available to show
you all the options.
I played the game on an IBM
monochrome display and found the
graphics to be excellent. The screen
layout is similar to that green felt on
a blackjack table. Cards are dealt
face-up, down cards down, and hits
and splits are neatly overlapped.
Player's names, their current bankroll, and current bets are always displayed at their respective places on
the table. The statistics screen is very
helpful and lets you know at any
time how everyone is faring, this is
most important in tournament play
and when running simulations.
The only recommendation I have
for the developers of the game is an
added feature that will allow practice drills on such things as softstanding rules, soft-hitting rules, pair
splitting decisions, double down
decisions, and surrender decisions.
If you are a beginning blackjack
player, a hearty welcome to the
game. You won't find a more helpful
and enjoyable way of learning than
Championship Blackjack. If you're
an expert, counter, tournament
player, or professional, you will find
Championship Blackjack to be an
outstanding computer game.
Good luck, and see you at the
tables!
Jim Zegers

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:
Microbe
TYPE:
Action Adventure
SYSTEM:
Apple Dos 3.3.48k
FORMAT:
Disk
# PLAYERS: I to 10
AUTHOR:
Robert Clardy
PRICE:
$44.95
PUBLISHER: Synergistic Software
Renton. WA
Robert Clardy and Synergistic Software have done it again! As much
of a breakthrough as ODYSSEY was,
Clardy has outdone himself with
MICROBE. It's like nothing I've ever
played. Read on and find out why.
Do you remember the movie
"Fantastic Voyage"? The one where
a submarine was shrunk down to
microscopic size and injected into
the vein of a critically ill patient? The
tiny sub navigated the venous
system, fended off the attacking
antibodies and white cells, and
went on to clear the blood clot in
the brain.
MICROBE is based on a similar
scenario. Any of a number of things
can be wrong with the patient (but
it's always something in the brain).
You and your crew, starting in a leg
vein, must make your way to the
brain by passing through various
organs of the body. At a minimum,
you must pass through the heart
(twice), the lungs, the brain, and all
the connecting veins and arteries.
On your journey you may hook up to
the kidney to coat your ship with
antibody repellant, the liver to take
on more fuel, and the lung to replenish your air. You will be attacked by
germs, viruses, and the body's own
defense mechanisms.
If you play alone, you must take
on the roles of all the sub's personnel:
captain, navigator, pilot, technician,
and physician. And that will keep
you VERY busy. I like playing with
three or four others, with everyone
taking an appropriate role. The
captain runs the keyboard and
gives the orders. The navigator
keeps track of where in the body the
sub is. The pilot uses a game paddle
to steer the sub while looking at a
display of the sub's position; he must

avoid oncoming traffic (red and
white cells). The technician takes
care of repairs, keeps track of
inventory, and fires the laser, when
appropriate, while viewing a
stunning display out the front
window of the sub. The physician
monitors the patient and prescribes
drugs and other treatment.
All of the above is accomplished
in real time while frantically consulting manuals, reading the radar
scope, taking blood tests, etc. And
it's fun! But also, it's educational.
Anyone who plays this game can't
help but learn some anatomy,
physiology, and pharmacology. I
have been exposed to plenty of
programs that claimed to be educational games, but this is the
ONLY one that succeeds.
MICROBE is designed to work with
VOTRAX, ECHO, and MOCKINGBOARD
speech products. My version runs
with the Mockingboard, which adds
special sound effects and a talking
computer. I like these features in
MICROBE, but I'd like the game
even without them.
I thoroughly recommend MICROBE
to garners of every stripe for the
enjoyment it provides, and I recommend it to everyone else for its
educational content.
Tom Cleaver

BASIC INFORMATION
NAME:

Conquest (formerly Call to
Arms)
TYPE:
Strategy/Wargame
SYSTEM:
IBM PC 64K. with color
graphics card
FORMAT:
Disk (for one single-sided
disk drive)
# PLAYERS: 2-4 computer and/or
human
AUTHOR:
Mike Falkner

Risk fans rejoice! Your favorite
board game is now available for use
against one, two or even three

computer opponents. You no longer
have to scrounge around at odd
hours of the night hoping someone
will take your challenge. With the
aid of your PC you can choose to
fight in Europe of 1942 or Scotland
1750.
Like the popular board game,
CONQUEST is a strategy war game.
The object is to conquer territories
adjacent to countries which you
hold. CONQUEST has several enhanced features which are not in
Risk. Fast moving computer oppobeforit'syuncag.A nents provide only breathing time
fine text window displays all the
necessary information as battles
ensue. The graphics employed outline and color-in conquered territories quickly.
At the beginning of a turn, you are
allotted a certain number of armies.
You can deploy them wherever you
see fit. Troops not deployed are
stored for your next turn. Next, you
can either attack or finish your turn.
Each country is displayed with the
owner's color and the total amount
of occupying armies. After attacking
and defeating the enemy, you
decide how many troops to leave
and how many to move into your
new territory. After this decision, the
computer fills in the newly conquered land with your color. Attacking continues until you decide
to stop. For the last move of your
turn, you can pull troops away from
the front lines to be stored along
with your allotted armies for the next
turn. In this way, you can muster
strength for counter attacking or even
defending your front lines.
To start the game, you can
choose the number of armies to be
placed in each country. Three is
suggested, although the experienced player can decide to start
with up to nine. If you like to show off
your computer, you can have two,
three or four computer opponents
square off at each other. Any combination of human and/or computer
opponents up to four can play.
Ownership of countries at the start
of each game can be the same, or
you can opt to have the countries
randomly distributed. When time is
short and the war is still on, a "save"
feature permits you to continue at a
later time.
One major problem occurred
when I was loading in the European
map. After being prompted by the
computer, the map of Europe was
drawn in. Just before the countries
were colored in, I received an error

message stating "out of memory
2080". From that point, it was impossible to proceed. After contacting
Sirius I finally was lead to the easy
solution. It seems that because my
machine has an asynchronous communications card, Basic will automatically allocate a communications buffer when it boots up. So to
prevent this from happening, make
sure you type in Basica/ c:0 instead
of Basica (as the directions call for).
This will cause Basic to start up with 0
buffers. With this problem solved, I
had no trouble loading in the
European game.
All in all, CONQUEST is an enhanced version of a popular board
game. The several options of game
set-up provides variety that makes
the game life last after countless
use. Graphics and text window
display are done well. The documentation is adequate, although
the directions should address errors
that could occur with loading more
adequately. The gamer who enjoys
spending hours and hours on one
detailed battle may not appreciate
the ease and uncomplicated nature
of battle. However, most gamers will
enjoy the swiftness of execution and
the ebb and flow of battle. The
graphics used in drawing both
Europe and Scotland are clear and
well depicted, and the text displaybox provides important information
such as players turn, countries doing
battle and odds and outcome of
each battle. With the addition of
some sound routines, this game
could become a classic, As it stands,
CONQUEST is a very enjoyable game,
simple to learn and challenging
enough for the serious computer
gamer.
Mark Lacine

NAME:
Super Taxman 2
TYPE:
Maze-Chase
SYSTEM:
Apple II 48K
FORMAT:
Disk
# PLAYERS: 1-5
AUTHOR:
Brian Fritzgerald
PRICE:
$25.00
PUBLISHER: H.A.L. Labs
Riverside. CA

Taxman move over and make
way for the newest in eat-the-dots
games, Super Taxman 2.

the submarine's speed, damage
indicators, amount of air left, battery
charge, position of the submarine
relative to the sea bottom, and a
game clock.
The second screen is the Sonar
Scope. It looks, sounds, and works
like a real sonar scope. Two indicators are added to this screen; tonnage sunk and Hydrophone Chart.
The Hydrophone shows the player
which direction to steer to intercept
the convoy.

ST2 is described as a new improved
version of the original TAXMAN.
Actually it's a totally different version
of the classic maze games.
In this one, you're a little pieshaped tax-collector who has the
undesired job of collecting all the
money dots while trying to save his
hide from angry citizens. Sounds
pretty easy right? Well not so fast!
First there are four all-new mazes,
instead of the traditional one maze
game. And as if that wasn't enough,
in order to earn an extra man you
have to complete an ultra-fast challenge stage (every three mazes).
Gratuitously Brian Fitzgerald, the
program author, provided us with six
energy dots instead of the usual
four.
Other features include a levelselect option, that allows the player
to choose any of the ninty-nine levels at which to start, and a pause
function. For the young at heart, Mr.
Fritzgerald has given us five new
cartoons and some bouncy music.
The cartoons can be viewed before
the game and at various levels, The
music, on the other hand, pops up
throughout the game. Finally, as in
Taxman, Super Taxman gives the
black and white/color option.
The graphics are very well done,
and the animation is virtually flickerfree. Sound is an exact carbon of
Taxman.
Instructions are included with the
game, they're short but adequate.
Controls are user-definable keyboard. No Apple joysticks here but
for you true game players comes
the Gismo an inexpensive ($15, $10
with the coupon included with
Super Taxman) device which allows
the use of an Atari-type-joystick with
ST2.
The challenge of Super Taxman is
to use the energy dots wisely. It's not
always easy to do when you have
petty citizens on your tail. One strategy I found is to concentrate on finishing the maze rather than trying to
eat all the citizens when they turn
blue. Despite the fact that mazechase games have been overused,
ST2 is a nice little game.
Anthony Melendez

NAME:
Submarine Commander
TYPE:
Strategy/Action
SYSTEM:
Atari 16K Cartridge
# PLAYERS: 1
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Thorn EMI Video

It's World War II and you are in
command of a diesel submarine
somewhere in the Mediterranean.
Your mission: to destroy all enemy
merchant shipping in these waters.
You've tracked this convoy for ten
minutes and you're ready to strike.
Up periscope. The convoy's lead
ship is a destroyer. Fire one! Fire two!
You watch as both torpedoes strike
the ship and it begins to sink. Turning your attention to the second
ship, a tanker, you fire two torpedoes. Two hits! Suddenly your sub
shudders. You're under fire from the
second destroyer! Dive! Dive! Reduce
speed, stop all engines. You wait,
not daring to breathe. Finally, the
sound you dreaded most begins —
Depth Charges!!
This is the action in the Thorn EMI
Video game cartridge, Submarine
Commander. As Commander of a
WWII Submarine, the player must
sink all convoys in the area. The
player has a limited supply of fuel,
torpedoes, air, and charge in the
batteries. To recharge batteries, and
replenish air supply, the sub must
surface. Surface speed is faster than
underwater speed, but uses more
fuel. Scoring is based on the amount
of fuel left, torpedoes remaining,
and game time.
The game makes excellent use of
the Atari's graphic and sound
capabilities. It has three screens. The
first screen is a detailed map of the
Mediterranean, showing the submarine's position, positions of all convoys and land masses in the area.
Each screen has indicators showing
compass heading of the sub,
amount of fuel and torpedoes left,

The third screen is the most important. This is the periscope view. This is
where all the action takes place.
This screen shows clouds, water, and
the ships. As the ships enter the view,
they're black shapes. The closer they
get the more detailed they become.
When torpedoes are fired they
appear on screen and move toward
the target. A 3D effect is achieved
with your torpedoes receding in the
distance. When a torpedo strikes
a ship, the water billows up in the
explosion with excellent sound
effects as the ship slowly begins to
sink. Ships can also fire back as evidenced by flashes and sounds of
their guns. If the sub takes a hit, the
whole screen shakes.
There is one minor problem in the
game. Moving the submarine,
especially in the heat of battle is difficult to grasp. The sub doesn't turn
as fast as the player wants. This slows
down the action, but once the
player gets used to it, it isn't that
noticeable.
The game is in real time using the
joystick and keyboard. There are
nine levels of play with ships on levels seven thru nine possibly requiring
two hits to sink. There are four types
of ships: destroyers, tankers, cargo,
and PT boats.
The game ends when the sub runs
out of fuel, air, sinks, or the battery
charge is depleted; while scoring is
based on the length of the game
the tonnage sunk, and the amount
of fuel used. The user manual is very
good, covering all aspects of the
game. This game will appeal to
those who like arcade graphics
and sounds, but enjoy a sense of
wargaming.
Hosea Battles

ON VACA TION
Silicon Cerebrum and
Route 80 are on vacation.
Look for them again next
issue.

NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Battle for Normandy
Wargame
Apple, Atari 400/800,
TRS-80
FORMAT:
Disk or Tape
# PLAYERS: 1 or 2
PRICE:
$39.95
PUBLISHER: Strategic Simulations
Mountain View, CA

SSI's Battle for Normandy (BFN),
continues the design and development tradition of Tigers In The Snow
with additional refinements. Covering the initial Normandy landing
through the build-up prior to
Operation Cobra, the game takes
14 turns (June 6 through June 30) in
two day increments. Included are
air and naval firepower capabilities,
weather and logistical considerations. The game can be played
with two players or solitaire with the
computer acting as the "German"
player.
The regimental and brigade-sized
units cannot stack together, and
once a move is made the player is
committed to that move. A cycle of
rotation through available units for
movement continues five times in
order to select the sequence of
what units will move first. Unit
capabilities are displayed during
movement and combat, showing
designation, combat strength,
leadership and fatigue ratings,
supply condition, rated effectiveness, terrain stacked on, and
movement factors left during the
current turn. When units move into
an enemy unit's zone of control
they stop, but are not obliged to
attack (rigid zone-of-control).
Moving into an enemy unit's zone of
control consumes four movement
points unless moving directly from
one enemy zone of control to
another, which consumes eight
movement points.
Units must remain within two
hexes of a depot unit or beachhead
hex to remain supplied. Units that
are unsupplied receive deleterious

effects to movement, combat, and
fatigue ratings. General allocation
of available Allied amphibious
transport occurs once every turn
(two days), and such allocation
must choose between differing
percentages of amphibious (unit
transport), combat supply, general
supply, and fuel. Beachhead units
are quite vulnerable to attack, and
their loss will result in a shut-down of
that beachhead with a diminution of
general amphibious transport
capabilities.
The amphibious assaults in the
first turn will require one or two
divisions to be landed for each
beach defense to be cleared.
Beachhead units automatically land
first, followed by airborne landings
and ground units during the first
turn. As the invasion and build-up
continues, depot units can extend
the line of supply two hexes from
beachheads.
The menu presents a one or twoplayer option, along with options for
variable Allied and German
strengths in air and naval firepower,
transport capabilities, reinforcement
times, leadership and combat
ratings, and the ability of the
Germans to move the first day. An
average move takes about ten to
fifteen minutes, with about two to
three minutes used by the computer
in the solitaire version of play for
resolution of German movement
and combat. The sequence of play
is traditional — the Allies move and
then attack then Germans move
and attack, and finally the end of
turn results are displayed (with a
save game option).
As a historical simulation, BFN is a
great improvement over Tigers in
the Snow. The Normandy campaign
is sufficiently well documented to
provide correct orders of battle for
the level of units presented (regiments, brigades, and divisions).
Once again, as in Tigers, regiments
and brigades cannot stack together
or move through the same hex at
the same time. This last element, in
BFN is a contradiction of wellestablished unit frontages for the
period. Nevertheless, this game is a
generally good representation of
the Normandy landings and buildup.
The time used in the computer's
moves is a dramatic improvement
upon earlier SSI titles, having a
minimum of "dead time" as the
computer moves units and determines combat. No option is presented, unfortunately, for checking

at the end of a movement phase to
double-check with the player for
acceptance of that turn's movement. Overall, Battle for Normandy
is an enjoyable game that will allow
multiple playings and repeated
playings with equal satisfaction.
NAME:
TYPE:
SYSTEM:

Space Strike
Arcade
IBM PC. 64K, color
graphics adapter
FORMAT:
Disk
# PLAYERS: 1
AUTHOR:
Michael Abrash
PRICE:
$29.95
PUBLISHER: Datamost, Inc.
Chatsworth. CA
SPACE STRIKE is a Space Invaders
type game for the IBM-PC. As one
would expect, the object is to stop
the aliens who march across the
screen from reaching the bottom or
from destroying your space tank
(gun). Points are given for hitting the
alien saucers which travel quickly
across the screen from time to time.
High scores are saved to disk.
The strong points of the game
include the option of using either
keyboard or joysticks. Using the
keyboard is quite cumbersome and
not suggested if you want to achieve
any reasonable score. This is not the
fault of the programmer, but is
generally the rule for any arcade
game where agility is needed. The
author, however, has made it possible for you to change the playing
keys so that you can select the ones
that are the most convenient. You
also have the option to turn the
sound off and to freeze the game in
progress.
SPACE STRIKE is a simple but
effective game of Space Invaders.
Graphic quality for the aliens, space
creatures and missiles is fair. The
graphics displayed when an alien
ship is hit is first rate. The accompanying sounds add to the effect.
When hit, the alien spacecraft
fragments into many discernable
pieces which gently float down the
screen. The destruction of your
space tank is also finely illustrated.
Once hit, your craft fragments into a
mass of tiny pieces as it is strewn
about the screen.
In conclusion, SPACE STRIKE is a
new name for an old game. This
doesn't change the fact that it is a
well programmed, error-free game.
It is recommended to those who are
looking for a good quality Invaders
program.
Mark Lacine

ULTIMA II (Cont.)
As you travel through the time
periods you will visit villages, cities,
castles, dungeons, and towers where
you can purchase food, spells,
transportation, armour, and weapons. You can even stop in at the
local tavern to have a drink and
hear the local gossip or bribe the
barkeep for a hint.
You also have an entire solar
system to explore with each planet
having its own features and towns to
visit. You might even discover the
whereabouts of the mysterious
Planet X.

SUGGESTIONS
Your first quest upon entering
ULTIMA Ills to safely make your way
to the nearest settlement to arm
yourself against the nastier inhabitants that roam the world. You also
must not forget to make sure you
have enough food to last for awhile.
Otherwise you can die if you're too
far from a village and can't get
back in time for food. I found this out
the hard way.
I spent a lot of time the first few
tries making new player disks until I
was able to get close to the water
and board a frigate. (You need
"something" in your possession to
be able to board the frigate but it is
obtained by doing battle with the
inhabitants and should not take
long). It is difficult staying alive until
a frigate appears. However, once on
the frigate you patrol the shores of
the continents and attack the Ores,
Devils, and Balrons with the ships
guns. You will find that you lose little
or no hit points during the battle
and it doesn't take long to build up
your inventory of gold, possessions,
and experience points. The best
time period for this is the Pangea.
When you initially travel through
the time doors you end up being
stranded on one continent until a
frigate ventures close. This sometimes
took a while and I was determined
to find a solution to this lack of
transportation. Once you are on a
frigate you can get other frigates.
Instead of firing on hostile frigates,
head for land and dock your frigate.
Then board the hostile frigate. It will
become friendly. You now have two
frigates. In this manner any number
of frigates can be docked by the
different time doors. This can be very
helpful to you as you travel about.
When you press the "Z" key you
are shown the status of your characters attributes, experience points,
and inventory. You have to keep a

careful watch on five items, but four
of these items deserve special
attention. They are attributes,
torches, keys, and tools. You are
allowed to have 99 of each but go
just one point above and the total
resets to zero. It's not healthy to have
any one of your attributes go to zero,
let alone having to lose keys that are
very hard to come across. Experience
points were very important in ULTIMA
I and you strive to increase them but
in Ultima II they are not important
and if you get above 9999 the
counter will just reset to zero.
There are dungeons and towers
which are similar in detail to other
popular games but are not really
necessary areas to explore to win
the game. However, I did enjoy
mapping the levels and there were
definitely new twists added that I
have not experienced in other
dungeon-type games. It is very
expensive to reach the highest floor
in a tower or the lowest level in a
dungeon.
Remember to visit all time zones
and planets. Transact with everyone
you can, it is very easy to let the most
important contact slip through your
fingers if you are not careful.
There is one weapon you need
before you can effectively attack
Minax and that is the magical
quicksword ENILNO. The instructions
say you cannot buy it, you must earn
it. I had to buy it.
You use a lot of money in ULTIMA II
trying to get information so it is wise
to know where and how to get
restocked quickly.
My copy of Ultima II was one of the
first off the production line. When
you first build your character you are
allowed to spread 90 points between the five attributes. If you didn't
give at least 30 points to strength it
turned out you were not able to
wear either the reflector or power
armor. Without the reflector suit on
you could not venture out into
space. I was lucky and gave my
character 30 points initially and
never saw that problem. Although I
never was able to wear the power
suit which would have made me
less vulnerable to hits. This has been
corrected by Sierra On-line.
The game has a nice feature in
that it automatically saves your
character at certain points in the
game. Even this did not help me in
one instance, I had ventured out
into space with very little food and
was unable to get close to a village

to buy food without dying. At this
point in the game my character
had been very strong and I was able
to travel throughout the time periods
without too much trouble because
of the possessions and vehicles I had
accumulated. I hated to even think
that I would have to start over. I
found a partial solution for anybody
who gets in this predicament. Start a
new character on a new disk and
build him up so he has about 5000
hit points and the same amount in
gold. Somewhere in this new game
remove your new disk and put your
old disk into the drive. Press Q to
save. The computer will save your
new character on your old disk. You
will then still have use of whatever
frigates, planes, or shuttles that your
previous character used. I do not
know if this will work in all instances
and I recommend it only as a last
resort, it did save me a lot of time.
One thing you learn quickly while
piloting a shuttle is that you only
have one chance to land. If you do
not land on grass you die, no
exceptions. The shuttle will continue
to circle every planet until you press
a key so it is wise to allow it to initially
circle every new planet once before
you land so that you know what you
are getting into.
When you first get into combat
you start acquiring items that you
have no idea what they are used for.
You usually end up finding out the
hard way so watch your cursor every
chance you have during battle for
hints.
One of the most difficult item(s) to
find and obtain are the keys. Let me
just say that the initial few are costly
but there are ways to use these first
few to build up more than you will
need.

CONCLUSION
The world of ULTIMA II is vastly
improved over ULTIMA I. The villages,
castles, and towns are all unique;
the oceans and lakes even have
animated water. My only thought
as I finished the game was that very
little of this enormous work was
really utilized as being required to
complete the game. It was almost
as if this was only a small initial
quest to give you the lay of the
land and that additional scenarios
would be released, each one using
more of the game until the
"Ultimate" quest was finished.
Therefore I was not surprised at the
little ad that appeared at the
bottom of my screen at the
completion of this quest. It said
that.

ZORK! (Cont.)
START, RESTORE, AND SAVE (with up
to five different saves). For controlling the amount of detail given in
room descriptions there's BRIEF,
SUPERBRIEF, AND VERBOSE. And, for
making a printed transcript of your
adventure there's SCRIPT and
UNSCRIPT to turn a printer control on
and off.
Even the running problem of every
adventurer — getting killed —is
handled with finesse. Instead of
forcing you to start over at square
one (perhaps with a re-boot), Zork,
in most cases, scatters your possessions and reincarnates you near
where you began the adventure.
So that I don't lose my reviewer's
license, or my credibility, I guess I
should mention a few of Zork's
shortcomings. The trouble is that for
a game of its type Zork has no
serious flaws. If Zork does have a
flaw, it is that the empire is, perhaps,
a bit too fanciful — it lacks an
internally consistent theme. For
example, Zork I contains, among
other things, an Egyptian Tomb
room, a troll room, a Flood Control
Dam with electrical power, and the
Gates of Hades. Don't get me
wrong, these places are exciting to
discover, explore, and relieve of
their treasures; but what are they
doing in the same world? Of course,
not all adventurers would agree
with me that "organic unity" is
important, or even relevant.
There is one other feature of Zork
that I almost considered a flaw, but
am now not so sure. Unlike a wellmade play, or a well-written short
story, in which all pieces must move
the plot forward or contribute to the
whole, Zork has a few, but just a
few, puzzles that either don't have
solutions or that don't need to be
solved to reach the adventure's
conclusion successfully. I can't
decide whether these puzzles are
supposed to be red-herrings or cliff
hangers.
Zork is currently available on
several computers, which explains,
in part, the existence of an
organization called the Zork User's
Group (Z.U.G.): an independent
company licensed by Infocom.
Z.U.G. provides (sells) such
paraphernalia as clue booklets, guidemaps, a full color poster of Zork I (to
commemorate your visit) and even
souvenir buttons. Z.U.G. gives (and I
repeat) a special caution, that their
guidemaps reveal locations and
items that an adventurer may want

to discover for himself. With that in
mind, P didn't look at my Zork I
guidemap until I was confident I
had fully mapped out everything. I
must admit I took special delight in
comparing the accuracy of my
map (consisting of several sheets of
yellowed paper, Scotch-taped
together) with the official one
(nicely drawn and printed, of
course).
Zork is vast and intricate. I
counted over 100 interconnecting
rooms in Zork I alone. This means
that map making is imperative.
Examine everything. Remember
that, especially in mazes, there are
ten different directions (eight
compass directions, plus up and
down). Also, don't hesitate to reexplore old paths. Occasionally,
new passages open up as you solve
mysteries, or as events outside your
control (like earthquakes) occur.
Finally, even though Zork is a singleplayer adventure, don't go there
alone if you can help it. It is
definitely an adventure to be
shared and enjoyed.
0
EPIDEMIC (Cont.)
completely ineffective, I still had to
wait out the five full days of the
attempted cure. Which meant five
days of unhindered growth!
Once a region hits P-Phase
(Pneumonic level) your options
change from the eight standard
cures to the four Anti-Pneumonic
Remedies (APR's). Each of these
has a different percent chance of
success, but the effectiveness of the
remedy is inversely related to its
chance of working successfully. For
example, APR 4 has only a 20%
chance of actually working, but if it
does, the disease level will be
reduced by 80%. Conversely, APR 1
has an 80% chance of working, and
if it does, the disease level will be
reduced by 60%.
My feeling is that unless it is a last
ditch effort, APR 1 is the way to go.
Two successful applications of APR
1 will cure an area, while any nonfunctional APR will only waste your
turn option and let the disease run
merrily along its course.
The ultimate solution is to nuke a
region. As might be expected, this
will destroy all the microbes in the
region. It also has the rather
unpleasant side effect of destroying
all other life in the region as well,
but it will stop the spread of the
disease. Be careful about nuking

the US, USSR, and Europe, though,
since these areas control the missiles
which are your only chance to stop
the incoming meteorites. If you lose
your high-tech areas, the effectiveness of your missiles will plummet.
The only negative I found was
that at level one, the tracking of
eight individual radar targets
(incoming meteorites) was slightly
tedious. I don't have any suggestions as to how to streamline this,
and the additional meteorites do increase difficulty, but I got tired of
waiting out this phase at this level.
Also, if we could somehow have
been presented with a parameter
variation option, that would have
been nice. Perhaps we could vary
the number of meteorites, increase
or decrease the growth and spread
of disease, or move our command
post from region to region where it
might be susceptible to the disease.
In conclusion, Epidemic is a good
beginning level strategy game with
excellent graphics. The game provides a real challenge to constantly
better your score by curing the
world as fast as you can. It is easy to
learn and highly addictive. My
brother, a pure arcader came over
for Christmas dinner and played
four full games of Epidemic before,
during, and after the holiday feast.

REAL WORLD (Cont.)
used almost four thousand variables
to simulate 36 offenses against 24
defenses. However, the original version did not sell anywhere near my
expectations. The most reliable
advice I received admitted that the
MOCKINGBOARD (Cont.)
phonemes, 64 of them, to create
continuous speech. Phonemes are
fundamental speech sounds which
can be strung together to form
words. A typical five-letter word may
contain ten phonemes.
The demo diskette has a very
limited vocabulary. It speaks one
sentence and a few unconnected
words. The speech is easily understandable, but it sounds very
mechanical. The Cylons in Battlestar
Galactica were opera singers in
comparison. But it was speech. My
computer was talking!!
There was no software to help the
programmer create his own words,
and an examination of the BASIC
code for the demos provided no
help. The documentation was good
enough so that a determined
machine language programmer,
such as myself, could use it to
produce spoken words. I had a fine
time making the computer insult
anyone who happened to be
around.

THE MANUFACTURER
RESPONDS
My work with the Mockingboard
generated several questions which I
was not able to answer. So I called
Sweet Micro Systems to get them.
Mr. Rod Nakamoto, the designer of
the board, spoke to me. He said that
a utility disk was in preparation
which would contain a sound effects
editor, a phoneme editor, and a
method for saving phoneme strings.
This disk will be included free with
the Mockingboard, and those that
have already bought the Mockingboard will also be eligible to receive
the disk free. This answers much of
my criticism of the software and
documentation included with the
board, but I have not reviewed this
promised utility diskette, and I
therefore cannot attest to its quality.
Another product which is available
for the Mockingboard, and which
the manufacturer was kind enough
to send me, is the Text to Speech
Algorithm diskette ($39.95). It will
allow you to put English words into
BASIC statements so that the corn-

model was the most complete ever
done but that the lack of graphics
and sound effects made the game
a poor seller. In 1981 I rewrote part of
the program to create a second
edition that had Hi-Res graphics
and sound effects. However, without
totally discarding the original

puter will say them. It works very well,
however words have to be spelled
phonetically (spell chemistry with a
K).

BUT WHAT ABOUT GAMES?
If you are into games, but not into
programming, you may not care
about producing your own speech
or sound effects. You want to improve your gaming experience by
adding speech and better sound
effects. But you don't spend a lot of
money on hardware that the game
companies aren't going to support
with software. It's too soon to tell yet
if the Mockingboard will be well
supported with game software, but
at this writing two games are already
out: MICROBE, by Synergistic Software, which is reviewed elsewhere in
this issue, and THUNDERBOMBS by
Penguin. Sweet Micro Systems reports that the following games, soon
to be released, will use the Mockingboard:
Tactical Armor Assault (Avalon
Hill) Crime Wave (Penguin).

BUT SHOULD I BUY IT?
The Mockingboard is for you if
A) You are a gamer who can't
wait to have your computer start
talking.
B) You are a machine language
programmer who wants to fool
around with voice synthesis and
sound effects.
C) You are writing user-friendly
special purpose computer software
which would be significantly enhanced by providing user instructions in spoken English, e.g. an
automated bank teller.
The Mockingboard Sound/Speech
I is available in many computer
stores, or it can be ordered directly
from Sweet Micro Systems, 150
Chestnut Street, Providence, RI 02903,
for S299 + $2.50 shipping.

design, I couldn't do much to make
the game more attractive to the
mass market.
Needless to say, a simulation
game that includes color graphics
and sound will do much better than
one without such features. These
things must be designed into the
program from the start because of
their sizable memory needs and
their overall importance to the product's success. Since the realism of
a model is reduced as memory is
used for other things, there is a
trade-off involved here. If you concentrate on the model too completely you reduce your potential
audience. However, if you sacrifice
too much realism you end up with
an arcade game and those type
games have their own design constraints and problems. Thus, you
have to decide what the proper
balance of realism and playability is
to suit your subject, your audience
and your budget. I personally prefer
to write the kind of games I enjoy
playing and adjust my design as
needed to get the income I need.
Although this phase of game
design was called "Programming", I
haven't written a word about programming a computer. Computer
programming is to game design as
spelling and grammar are to writing.
They are tools to use in accomplishing your design not ends in themselves. Also, there are many people
more qualified than I am to write
about programming.
Next time we will cover the last
step in game design — PLAYTESTING.

R.I.D. was prepared with the help of SPEED STAT by SoftCorp International, Westerville, OH 800-543-1350
RID#6
There were 169 R.I.D.s turned in by press time for this issue. The breakdown of users was: Apple (58%); Atari (33%); Others (9%). The mean score for
RID #6 was 6.83 (our highest average yet). The scores of games evaluated in RID #6 were reduced by .46 to adjust them to the overall mean of 6.37
that has been adopted for RID score comparisons. The scores for RID #6 have been incorporated in the overall rating table below.
GAME RATINGS
The following table includes all games evaluated by our readers since May 1982. For a game to be included in this listing it must first have been
offered for rating in our regular RID rating system. Games offered for evaluation are those covered in the magazine and/or have a good sales record
during the time of evaluation. Once offered for evaluation the game must have been evaluated by a sufficient number of readers to be included in
the results. Any game not evaluated by at least 20% of the respondents owning the machine that the game runs on were not included in the results.
Games were rated on a scale of 1 (terrible) to 9 (outstanding). Respondents were asked to consider such things as PRESENTATION (graphics, sound,
packaging, documentation); GAME DESIGN (design, playability, interesting?), Life (does the game wear well?).
R.I.D. #7 (Use card provided)
On page 46 a number of games and articles are listed for evaluation. Please take time to evaluate these games and articles. Use the guidelines
above for game evaluation. Leave blank any game which you have not played enough to have formed an opinion.

